06GUANGZHOU16330
SHENZHEN AIRLINES PLANS TO SOAR
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO4024
RR RUEHAG RUEHCN RUEHDF RUEHGH RUEHIK RUEHLZ
DE RUEHGZ #6330/01 1520728
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010551Z JUN 06 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9645
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0326
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0017
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHDC
RUWMDUA/FAA WESTERN PACIFIC RGN HQ LOS ANGELES CA
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUANGZHOU 016330 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND EBA/TRA/AN ENGLE, DEMARS 
STATE PASS USTR FOR STRATFORD/WINTER/ALTBACH 
BEIJING FOR CRAIG REILLY 
TOKYO FOR FAA 
DOT FOR OFFICE OF INTL AVIATION OPPLER, BLOCH, GLATZ 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/MAC- DAS LEVINE, MCQUEEN 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/TD- ALFORD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON KTIA CH
SUBJECT: SHENZHEN AIRLINES PLANS TO SOAR 
 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016330  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
(U) THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE 
PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  During a recent meeting, Shenzhen 
Airlines Vice President Zhang Pei laid out the airline's 
ambitious expansion strategy.  Operating mostly Boeing 
aircraft, Shenzhen Air runs an efficient operation that has 
made it China's most profitable airline after flag carrier 
Air China.  However, its route network is relatively small 
and focused largely on South China.  Nonetheless, in ten 
years' time, Shenzhen Air plans to be operating a fleet of 
more than 150 aircraft across an extensive route network 
that will include numerous international routes, all while 
retaining the reputation for good service that has earned it 
top spot in passenger satisfaction surveys for the past 
eight years.  End summary. 
 
Company Profile 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (U) During a recent meeting with Consulate officials, 
Shenzhen Airlines Vice President Zhang Pei discussed the 
airline's expansion plans, and shared his views on the 
future of aviation in Shenzhen and the Pearl River Delta 
(PRD).  Shenzhen Air was founded in 1992 and its maiden 
flight took off on September 17, 1993.  Since then, the 
airline's fleet has grown from two to 35 aircraft, the vast 
majority of which (32) belong to the Boeing 737 family (300, 
700, 800 and 900 series).  The remaining three aircraft are 
Airbus planes: one A320 and two A319.  Shenzhen Air plans to 
add 13 new aircraft (seven Boeings and six Airbuses) to the 
fleet by the end of 2006, bringing the total to 48. 
According to passenger satisfaction surveys, Shenzhen Air 
has been the preferred airline in China during the last 
eight years. 
 
A Local Company 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Shenzhen Air prides itself in its origins as a "local 
company" (`difang gongsi'), organized and funded largely by 
the Shenzhen government and local enterprises.  The airline 
then underwent ownership reform, and Guangdong Development 
Bank (GDB) acquired a controlling 65% interest.  In 2005, 
GDB auctioned off its shares to two private companies, 
Huirun Investment and Yiyang (Bright Ocean) Group, for RMB 
2.72 billion (USD 328 million).  Air China (25%) and the 
Shenzhen government (10%) hold the remaining shares. 
 
A Young Company As Well 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Shenzhen Air employs more than 5,000 employees, about 
2,000 of them in its core business.  The remaining 3,000 
work in its upstream and downstream businesses, which 
include a catering service, travel agencies, and a hotel in 
downtown Shenzhen.  The average age of a Shenzhen Air 
employee is 27, and the airline has no more than 20 
employees over the age of 50. 
 
Not Just Shenzhen's Hometown Airline 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Shenzhen Air currently operates more than 80 
routes, the vast majority of them domestic.  As one would 
guess, the airline's main hub is in Shenzhen.  From the 
city's Bao'an International Airport, Shenzhen Air flies to 
over 45 domestic destinations.  Internationally, the airline 
has flown from Shenzhen to Kuala Lumpur and Seoul, but those 
flights are currently suspended.  It also plans to begin 
flights to Ho Chi Minh City in August.  (Note:  The 
suspensions were not mentioned during the meeting, and 
neither was the fact that the Ho Chi Minh flights were still 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016330  002 OF 004 
 
 
in the planning stage.  We found out these facts after 
calling the airline's hotline to ask why the Ho Chi Minh and 
Seoul flights -- but not the ones to Kuala Lumpur -- were 
omitted from the airline's online flight schedule.  End 
note.) 
 
¶6. (U) The airline also has operational bases in Guangzhou, 
Nanning (Guangxi), Wuxi (Jiangsu), and Shenyang (Liaoning), 
and plans to open one in Zhengzhou (Henan) this summer. 
These are all modest affairs, but the airline plans to use 
some of the new aircraft it will receive later this year to 
bolster these regional bases. 
 
Go West (And North And Abroad), Young Airline 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Meanwhile, the recent opening of a base in Shenyang 
highlights Shenzhen Air's intention of expanding its 
operations in China's northeast.  The airline hopes to open 
up new bases in the west of the country within the next 
three years. 
 
Shanghai, Here We Come 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Although South China will remain the airline's core 
area of operations, Shenzhen Air is poised to significantly 
"penetrate" the booming Yangtze River Delta (YRD), centered 
around Shanghai.  The airline recognizes that Shanghai's own 
two airports, Pudong and Hongqiao, are tough, saturated nuts 
to crack, and plans instead to aim at nearby airports, a 
strategy that has proved successful for low-cost carriers 
(LCC) in Europe and the United States.  To this end, the 
airline has acquired the airports in Nantong (Jiangsu) and 
Changzhou (Jiangsu), cities 60 and 100 miles away from 
Shanghai, respectively.  Meanwhile, its existing base in 
Wuxi is 80 miles away, and the airline plans to buy that 
airport as well. 
 
In Three Years, The Chinese LCC 
------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Turning to the airline's long-term plans, Vice 
President Pei explained that, under the leadership of 
President Li Kun (a former vice president at rival China 
Southern Airlines), Shenzhen Air set what is known as the 3- 
6-9 Strategy for expansion, marked by three-, six- and nine- 
year plans.  The three-year plan calls for an expanded fleet 
of 60-70 narrow-body planes, e.g., 737s, with a route 
network that would continue to focus on domestic 
destinations, plus those in nearby countries.  In Pei's 
words, the airline does not aspire to become China's "number 
one" during this period, but instead wishes to establish 
itself as the "LCC with Chinese characteristics." 
 
In Six, A Globally Known Brand 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) Looking ahead to the six-year mark, Shenzhen Air's 
plans take a decided turn for the ambitious.  By that time, 
it not only plans to be an intercontinental airline, flying 
to Europe and North America, but it plans to do so as a 
respected, well-known brand (`mingpai'), ostensibly moving 
away from the LCC tag. 
 
In Nine, First Choice In Air Travel 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Finally, in nine years, Shenzhen Air hopes to have 
a "global presence" and be passengers' "first choice," 
operating a fleet of 150-160 planes.  At that time, it plans 
to operate more than ten hubs in China, including one in 
Beijing, where it would focus its international operations. 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016330  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
Profiteers 
---------- 
 
¶12. (U) Shenzhen Air embarks on its path to glory from solid 
ground.  In the first quarter of 2006, Shenzhen Air's 
business revenue was the second-highest among Chinese 
airlines, after Air China.  This is not a small feat given 
Shenzhen Air's relatively low number of flights and its lack 
of profitable long-haul international routes.  With profits 
before tax of RMB 120 million (USD 14.94 million) in the 
first quarter, the airline is set to surpass its target of 
RMB 200 million (USD 24.9 million) for the whole year in 
less than half that time. 
 
The Secret Of Their Success 
--------------------------- 
 
¶13. (U) Rising fuel prices are the bane of Chinese airlines' 
existence, but in spite of that situation, Shenzhen Air has 
managed to keep its costs low and, in turn, its profits 
high.  Vice President Pei attributes the airline's success 
in this regard to two key factors:  One, the airline pays 
much more attention to effective flight planning than its 
domestic rivals.  While some companies establish flight 
routings and fuel loads only twice a year, at Shenzhen Air 
every flight is routed individually, taking into account its 
particular payload, as well as the current weather and the 
type of aircraft operated.  This gives the airline the 
opportunity to save at least some fuel on each flight. 
Meanwhile, personnel -- pilots, flight planners and 
dispatchers -- are given bonuses for saving fuel.  It is 
also standard company policy to tow aircraft while on land, 
rather than letting them taxi on their own power. 
 
Safety Is Tops 
-------------- 
 
¶14. (U) Despite the vital efforts to save fuel, Vice 
President Pei reiterated that there was no penalty imposed 
for a failure to save fuel or use more than was planned, in 
the interest of safety.  The airline is proud of its strong 
security record, and its incident rate stands at a low 0.2 
per million hours.  In its 13 years of operations, the 
airline has not suffered a single crash, and not one life 
has been lost during the course of its operations. 
 
Pilot Shortage 
-------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Shenzhen Air's preferred source for incoming 
pilots is the military, but in recent years the number of 
available flyboys has decreased, while competition for them 
has increased.  The airline also takes fresh graduates from 
flying school, often sending them on to more training, but 
at times this has not been enough to cover its demands, and 
it has resorted to hiring foreign pilots.  At the height of 
this practice, it had in its payroll 60 pilots from 16 
countries, but now the number is down to 19.  Intriguingly, 
Shenzhen Air's leading source for foreign pilots is Brazil. 
(Note:  This would make more sense if Shenzhen Air operated 
any Brazilian-made Embraer aircraft, but it does not.  End 
note.) 
 
Visa Woes 
--------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) Vice President Pei took advantage of the 
opportunity to comment on problem his company has allegedly 
faced because of current U.S. visa policies.  Pei claimed 
that many of his pilots bound for training in the United 
States have had their applications held up because of the 
need for further processing, causing grave inconveniences 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016330  004 OF 004 
 
 
for the airline, as the pilots must sometimes wait months 
for the next course to start.  Quick off the mark, the 
Canadian consul general in Hong Kong has made strong 
overtures to the airline, highlighting both the caliber of 
Canadian aviation academies and the relative ease of 
obtaining a Canadian visa.  (Note: Our consular section 
notes that, since the beginning of 2005, it has issued visas 
to 18 Shenzhen Air pilots.  With two SAO-related exceptions 
at the beginning of 2005, all were issued within two or 
three days of the interview.  This appears to be yet another 
example of public perceptions that are not in line with 
actual practices.  End note.) 
 
Delta Force 
----------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) Turning to a discussion on the future of air 
travel in Shenzhen, Pei opined that Bao'an Airport had very 
limited potential as an international gateway for 
passengers.  Hong Kong International Airport (HKIA), with 
its array of flights to every corner of the world, is easily 
accessible from Shenzhen and neighboring cities, and special 
arrangements in place obviate the need for passengers 
incoming from China and Macau to clear Hong Kong entry 
formalities before boarding a flight at HKIA.  Meanwhile, 
Guangzhou's Baiyun Airport still has formidable potential 
for growth in terms of handling capacity.  (Note:  In a 
later meeting with EconOffs (septel), Shenzhen Metro 
officials mentioned that future plans call for switching 
most of HKIA's China-bound flights to Shenzhen, allowing 
HKIA to focus on international flights solidifying 
Shenzhen's role as Hong Kong's aerial gateway to China.  End 
note.) 
 
¶18. (SBU) While turning the international passengers over to 
Hong Kong and Guangzhou, Shenzhen seeks to carve a niche as 
an international air cargo hub for the PRD.  Doing its part 
to help, Shenzhen Air is the majority shareholder (51%) in 
Jade Cargo International, a joint venture with Lufthansa and 
other German concerns, which is the first cargo airline in 
China with any foreign ownership.  Jade is set to being 
operations in July with two 747-400s, and it plans to bring 
the size of its fleet up to six by the end of 2007. 
 
Comment: Staying Aloft 
---------------------- 
 
¶19. (SBU) The projected growth of the Chinese aviation 
market reaches such heights that Shenzhen Air may well be 
operating 160 planes across a worldwide network by 2016, at 
the same time its rivals that survive consolidation 
experience comparable growth.  To accomplish this, however, 
the airline must continue of its path away from its roots as 
a strictly local airline.  The airline's expansion in the 
booming YRD and up-and-coming Sichuan will be key. 
Meanwhile, even if the plans prove a tad too ambitious for 
what is still one of China's second-tier airlines, its roots 
in the still-growing PRD and its reputation for good service 
should ensure that it remains a profitable, albeit 
relatively small, carrier. 
 
DONG