06GUANGZHOU16447
USDOC BIS Under Secretary McCormick Visit to South
Fri Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO5508
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #6447/01 1530614
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020614Z JUN 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9776
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 GUANGZHOU 016447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN, CELICO, DAS LEVINE 
USDOC FOR BIS/MCCORMICK 
STATE PASS USTR 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON BEXP ETTC ETRD PGOV PREL CH
SUBJECT: USDOC BIS Under Secretary McCormick Visit to South 
China 
 
 
THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT 
ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR RELEASE OUTSIDE U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CHANNELS.  NOT FOR INTERNET PUBLICATION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  While in Guangzhou, USDOC BIS Under 
Secretary David McCormick gave a speech at Huawei 
 
SIPDIS 
Technologies, Inc. Training Center, met with the Guangdong 
American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) Board of Governors, 
and conducted a site visit to True Temper Composite Material 
Products (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd, a golfing products 
manufacturer.  Huawei Vice President Fei Ming regaled U/S 
McCormick with claims of how open Huawei is, but stopped 
short of providing details in his responses to a number of 
inquiries.  Huawei employees attending U/S McCormick's 
speech showed they were interested in his opinions on how 
Huawei could do better in the face of globalization. 
Representatives of a number of American companies attending 
the AmCham dinner with U/S McCormick discussed their 
progress in China, tactics they have adopted to deal with IP 
violations, and touched on some other challenges such as 
port security and a new Chinese labor law.  The delegation's 
final stop in Guangzhou - the True Temper sports production 
line - revealed responsible and successful use of graphite 
composite materials in a market beneficial to U.S. exports. 
END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) During a visit to Guangzhou on May 18-19, Under 
Secretary of Commerce for Industry and Security David 
 
SIPDIS 
McCormick gave a speech at Huawei Technologies, Inc. 
Training Center, met with the Guangdong AmCham Board of 
Governors, and conducted a site visit to True Temper 
Composite Material Products (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd.  U/S 
McCormick became the first USG official to give a speech at 
Huawei. 
 
"Open" But With Chinese Characteristics 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Before the speech, Huawei Vice President Fei Ming 
hosted a lunch for U/S McCormick, during which Fei mentioned 
the claim that Huawei is China's "most open" company.  Fei 
recounted how Huawei never turns down requests by potential 
customers and partners as well as foreign officials who want 
to visit the company's headquarters in Shenzhen.  He also 
emphasized the fact that Huawei has more international 
partners than any other Chinese company.  Fei explained that 
in order to build brand recognition from scratch, Huawei had 
no choice but to open itself up to potential customers and 
partners who wanted to visit and make sure the company has 
the capacity to deliver on its promises. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  In the course of conversation, U/S McCormick 
raised a number of questions as follow-up to various stories 
reported in the media about Huawei over recent months.  In 
response to U/S McCormick's inquiry about the status of 
Huawei's reported intentions to acquire UK's Marconi, Fei 
stated that Huawei had made contact with Marconi but was 
unsuccessful in the acquisition.  He did not elaborate or 
provide any details on when or why Huawei's acquisition 
attempt failed.  U/S McCormick commented that he had heard 
Huawei was unique among Chinese companies in that it had a 
sizeable number of employees who were foreigners.  Fei 
explained that Huawei employs many foreigners in its 
overseas offices, but so far only Indian nationals have 
agreed to come to China to work at Huawei headquarters. 
(Note:  This seems to contradict Econoff's experience from 
talking to different Huawei officials at the various events 
in the past, who stated that foreigners working at Huawei 
headquarters come from India, Russia, Canada, the United 
States, and some European countries.  The delegation saw 
Caucasians at Huawei wearing employee badges during the 
visit and one even attended U/S McCormick's speech.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) U/S McCormick also brought up the issue of 
intellectual property (IP), noting that the media reported a 
few months ago that Huawei won a lawsuit against infringers. 
Fei remarked that the company has learned that the most 
successful countermeasure against IP infringers is to take 
them to court.  At the same time, Huawei is taking steps to 
intensify internal security measures to prevent leaks of IP 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016447  002 OF 005 
 
 
by employees and to make sure all its IP are patented on a 
timely basis.  According to Fei, in addition to the case 
reported in the media, Huawei is also involved in another 
two ongoing IP-related lawsuits.  However, he did not 
elaborate or provide any details other than the fact that 
both lawsuits were filed in Shenzhen. 
 
Globalization On Top Of Huawei Employees' Minds 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6. (U) In his speech to approximately 200 Huawei employees 
in an auditorium at the Huawei Training Center, U/S 
McCormick discussed the opportunities and challenges in the 
crucial areas of security, globalization, and technology 
revolution.  U/S McCormick stressed the importance of 
winning the War on Terror and stopping the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), while at the same time 
working to encourage legitimate high-tech trade, strengthen 
the protection of IP throughout Asia, and increase the flow 
of high technology to ensure continued innovation. 
 
¶7. (U) During the ensuing Q&A session, Huawei employees 
asked U/S McCormick for suggestions on how the company 
should change internally to meet the challenges brought 
about by globalization.  U/S McCormick reiterated his point 
about the importance of IP protection.  Huawei is arguably 
one of China's best known brands in the United States. 
Further progress would require the development of new 
proprietary technologies, so it would be in Huawei's 
interest to remain committed to the protection of IP. 
Huawei employees also asked U/S McCormick to comment on the 
impact globalization had on the Sino-U.S. relationship vis-- 
vis high tech trade and the future of export controls 
restrictions on dual-use technologies.  U/S McCormick noted 
that high tech trade benefits both countries, but it is 
usually hampered by poor IP protection and the risk of 
sensitive dual-use technology being diverted to military 
use.  Pointing to the creation of the Strategic Trade and 
High Technology Working Group at the most recent round of 
the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) 
talks, U/S McCormick remarked that while the U.S. and China 
may not always agree, they were at least candid with each 
other, so the new working group should help facilitate 
further dialogue, which should subsequently improve the 
bilateral trade in civilian high-tech goods and services. 
 
FedEx Creating Its Own Path 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) During a dinner with the Board of Governors for the 
Guangdong American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham), U/S 
McCormick outlined the Bureau of Industry and Security's 
(BIS) mission and briefly described the purpose of his trip 
to China.  AmCham President Harley Seyedin provided a 
general overview of the economic situation in South China, 
with an emphasis on the role played by U.S. companies. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Alex Yim, Managing Director of South China Region 
for Federal Express (FedEx), noted that there has been a 
significant shift recently in the responsiveness of the 
Chinese Customs officials he deals with.  According to Yim, 
the Central Government has been pushing China Customs to 
focus more on contributing to the economic development of 
the country.  To that end, China Customs has reached out to 
FedEx for assistance in creating benchmarks for a new model 
for customs clearance procedures that would help facilitate 
trade.  Later during the dinner, when U/S McCormick 
solicited the audience's input on why U.S. companies are not 
exporting more to China, Yim noted that in addition to the 
language barrier, many American companies do not bother to 
invest the resources necessary to research what specific 
types of products are in demand vis--vis the ever-changing 
purchasing power of the Chinese market.  Yim also recounted 
an example of how FedEx is working to resolve the problem of 
the serious shortage of airplane mechanics in China.  The 
company is cooperating with the University of Tianjin's 
Civil Aviation Department to develop and help fund a new 
curriculum to get more qualified airplane mechanics into the 
job market over the next few years. 
 
Export Controls Do Affect U.S. Companies In China 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016447  003 OF 005 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. (SBU) On the topic of U.S. export controls, Owen Ley, 
Managing Director of True Temper Composite Material Products 
(Guangzhou) Co., Ltd., commented that his company is very 
satisfied with how USDOC's export licensing process has 
shortened dramatically since two years ago when it took as 
long as seven months to obtain an export license.  Stella 
Liu of IBM China, Guangzhou Branch, noted that there is 
considerable local demand for high performance computers. 
Unfortunately, IBM cannot meet this demand because U.S. 
export control laws preclude the sale of such technologies. 
 
U.S. Companies Get Creative To Obtain Better IP Protection 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) In response to U/S McCormick's query on what 
results American companies are seeing in China's effort to 
increase IP protection, Yvonne Pei, Director of External 
Relations for Procter & Gamble (China) Ltd. (P&G), led the 
discussion by noting that for many years, an average of 20 
percent of P&G products in China were counterfeits.  Two 
years ago, that rate dropped to eight percent, but now it 
stands at approximately twelve percent.  Pei explained that 
the major difference between P&G's battle against 
counterfeits and that of Louis Vuitton (LV), for example, is 
that when Chinese consumers buy a fake LV bag, they know 
they are buying a counterfeit and are therefore doing so 
willingly.  With P&G products, however, there is no way for 
consumers to tell the counterfeit products from genuine ones 
because they are all sold at the same prices.  To make 
things even more complicated for P&G, unlike fake LV bags, 
there is a potential for counterfeit P&G products to cause 
physical harm to consumers.  Pei stated that while the 
Central and provincial governments are willing to contribute 
to the effort to fight IP violations, the problem is usually 
with the local protectionism found at the town and village 
levels.  This is often due to the fact that most 
counterfeiting factories employ large numbers of the local 
populations, therefore making it difficult to convince local 
authorities to close those factories. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Pei also noted that P&G is lobbying the Chinese 
government to change its laws to allow for factory 
production line equipment, in addition to molds, to be 
confiscated during raids.  She provided the example of how 
in the 150 raids conducted every month on factories making 
counterfeit P&G products, P&G has repeatedly seen the 
pattern of the same 20 factory owners simply moving their 
equipment to another location and continue producing 
counterfeits.  To help win over local government officials, 
P&G has developed the strategy of conducting research on the 
impact counterfeiting has on potential tax revenues, the 
results of which the company then presents to the local 
government authorities to enlist their assistance in putting 
counterfeiters out of business. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Seyedin suggested that instead of just continuous 
lobbying for more to be done, USG should also begin making 
public acknowledgements of some of the progress China has 
made so far in IP protection.  True Temper's Ley remarked 
that some of the success his company was able to achieve in 
the IP arena can be attributed to an adjustment in their 
marketing and advertising campaigns.  For example, when 
Chinese golfers learn that their performance on the golf 
course is directly related to whether they use genuine or 
counterfeit True Temper golf clubs, it is enough to convince 
them to stay away from the counterfeits and invest more to 
buy the genuine clubs.  Brian Ma, whose company -- Shenzhen 
Pacific Investment Co. Ltd. -- is putting together an 
investment project to set up a pharmaceutical company, 
mentioned that he has been working with U.S. patent holders 
to arrange for the legal transfer of certain IP's so that 
all parties can benefit. 
 
Other Challenges U.S. Companies Must Face 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Charles Hubbs of Guangzhou Fortunique Limited, a 
medical instruments manufacturing and consulting company, 
commented that while IP protection is an ongoing concern, he 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016447  004 OF 005 
 
 
and his clients have recently encountered a number of 
similar experiences with delays in clearing U.S. ports due 
to new security measures.  He remarked that many companies 
have reached a point where they are willing to pay 
additional fees to get their shipping containers inspected 
at loading so that the containers can get expedited 
clearance upon arrival at U.S. ports.  Hubbs also suggested 
that in order for American companies to be successful in 
China, they must establish a physical presence to show their 
customers that they are willing to stay in the China market 
on a long-term basis.  Seyedin recounted some of the 
proactive measures the French and Italian governments have 
taken to generate more export revenues.  One example Seyedin 
provided was how both of those governments actively 
recruited small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) to attend 
the annual SME Fair in China.  He suggested USG should look 
into similar efforts. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Pei remarked that P&G is the number one taxpayer 
for light industry in China and with every job the company 
creates, ten jobs are created upstream and ten jobs are 
created downstream.  Despite all its contributions to the 
Chinese economy, P&G, like other foreign-invested companies, 
now faces a new formidable challenge with a proposed labor 
law requiring them to deposit RMB 5,000 (approx. USD 625) 
per employee in an escrow account as unemployment insurance 
and to give all contractors permanent positions after one 
year of work.  Pei explained that considering P&G's size, 
the company would have to put out approximately USD 60-65 
million just for the escrow accounts and see their costs 
increase dramatically with the new requirement to turn 
independent contractors into permanent employees. 
 
Site Visit To True Temper:  A "Hole-In-One" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) While in Guangzhou, U/S McCormick also visited 
the True Temper Composite Material Products (Guangzhou) Co., 
Ltd. factory to inspect True Temper's use of composite 
materials for sports equipment production.  The graphite 
composite materials are made up of very fine carbon 
molecules that have dual-use capability in a number of 
military applications.  True Temper uses the light, durable 
composite material in their production of golf clubs, hockey 
sticks, and bicycle frames.  The Managing Director, Owen 
Ley, briefed the delegation that True Temper (headquartered 
in Memphis, Tennessee), is a medium-sized company at $120 
million revenue a year.  Of its approximately 1,000 
employees, 520 are located in Guangzhou.  Daily current 
production quantities are about 10,000 golf shafts, 1,000 
hockey shafts and 150 bicycle frames.  Notably, this company 
is owned by a U.S. private equity firm. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) U/S McCormick inspected the log and tracking 
system True Temper uses to manage its supplies of controlled 
composite materials.  Last year True Temper imported 64 
metric tons of U.S.-made high module graphite, a controlled 
item.  U/S McCormick seemed quite impressed with the 
professional management of the composite materials and the 
overall success of the company.  While the golf club 
industry in general usually has stable but low growth, True 
Temper grew by 60 percent in 2005 and currently has 90 
percent growth in 2006.  This growth had led to the creation 
of considerable purchases of U.S.-made products -- USD 15 
million in composite materials and USD 1.4 million in other 
supplies (such as paint, molds and heat transfers). 
 
¶18.  (SBU) True Temper's labor standards also seemed 
adequate.  The factory floor had plenty of space, light and 
air.  Most of the workers were wearing safety glasses and 
earplugs, while paint specialists wore special air- 
filtration masks.  The average worker made approximately RMB 
3,000 per month (USD 375), which is more than three times 
the minimum wage for Guangzhou (RMB 900 per month, or USD 
112).  However, workers must earn these wages with long 
hours.  Ley openly admitted that work shifts - particularly 
during the peak season in the spring and around Christmas - 
were ten hours a day, six days a week.  Such figures exceed 
national limitations of 36 overtime hours a month. 
 
¶19. (U) Both Embassy Beijing and U/S McCormick have cleared 
 
GUANGZHOU 00016447  005 OF 005 
 
 
this cable. 
 
DONG