06GUANGZHOU27723
Adapting to China's Situation": Self-Censorship by
Thu Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO2646
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #7723/01 2290659
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170659Z AUG 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0963
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 027723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SOCI PGOV CH
SUBJECT: "Adapting to China's Situation": Self-Censorship by 
Two Mainstream Newspaper Editors in South China 
 
 
(U) This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Recent discussions with editors of two 
prominent South China newspapers revealed a conformist 
attitude and a willingness to "go with the flow." Based on 
these two interviews, Congenoffs found that mainstream 
journalists must be willing to work within the system in 
order to survive, and in fact are often content to do so. 
End Summary. 
 
Self-Censorship as Routine 
-------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) On July 7 Congenoffs met with Luo Guiqing, the 
managing editor of the international news section in the 
Guangzhou Daily; and on July 26, Congenoffs met with Wu 
Jiasheng, editor-in-chief of the Fujian Daily.  (Note: There 
was FAO presence at the meeting with Wu, but not at the 
meeting with Luo.  End note.)  Both these newspapers, as 
dailies, function primarily as mouthpieces of the 
government, and as such represent the mainstream media 
outlets of Guangdong and Fujian respectively.  Both 
interviews were striking in that they revealed how 
thoroughly the practice of self-censorship has entered the 
routine habits of these mainstream journalists. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Luo admitted that he automatically practices self- 
censorship.  For example, he said that he would rarely print 
anything negative about religions, especially minority 
religions in China such as Islam.  The paper must always be 
careful with stories concerning Muslims or Muslim countries, 
said Luo, because the government is always concerned with 
"national unity," and China has a sizeable Muslim minority. 
Any topic that Chinese minorities might relate to must 
therefore be treated gingerly. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Wu also demonstrated this self-censorship tendency 
in his comments about Taiwan.  Based out of Fuzhou, the 
Fujian Daily naturally takes a special interest in Taiwan 
affairs.  Wu said that Taiwan is a "complicated issue," and 
his principal in dealing with it is to be "objective and 
fair." He said that when covering Taiwanese politics, the 
paper tries to report on speeches by all politicians 
objectively.  Yet Wu also made comments that revealed strong 
nationalist sentiment: while reporting on Taiwan, the Fujian 
Daily always tries to reflect the "blood ties" between 
Fujian and Taiwan, in an effort to show that Taiwan is part 
of China.  In addition, Wu said that the paper always "looks 
forward" to reunification.  These reporting angles are 
consistent with national policy towards Taiwan. 
 
Adapting to Reality 
------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) When asked whether young journalists ever tend to 
try to be bolder in their writing than older ones, Luo 
admitted that sometimes new graduates just starting their 
careers are "nave," and must be "quickly taught realities." 
(Luo himself studied in Scotland, has traveled to numerous 
countries, and speaks excellent English.)  This tendency is 
also common among Chinese journalists trained in Western 
journalism schools.  However, to keep their jobs at Chinese 
publications, they must "adapt to China's situation." Some 
give up and quit the profession.  For many, obtaining such a 
prestigious job may be worth compromising some ideals, since 
working in a mainstream news outlet is extremely 
competitive: according to Wu, each year the Fujian Daily 
runs recruitment campaigns at universities.  Typically they 
have thousands of applicants, shortlist about 100, and 10 to 
20 get the job. 
 
¶6. (SBU) When asked whether he was dissatisfied with the 
situation in China, Luo essentially shrugged his shoulders 
and indicated that he was willing to do what he must to have 
a successful career.  He said he is not very interested in 
"fighting the system," and added, "I know how to balance all 
these things." He explained that a good journalist is 
active, but not too bold, and practices "pragmatic 
idealism." 
 
¶7. (SBU) Behaving well can yield special privileges, 
including access to restricted information from the Chinese 
government.  In addition, as a highly-placed journalist with 
the approval of the government, Luo has opportunities that 
other journalists do not.  He is frequently invited to 
official functions, including events hosted by foreign 
diplomats, and he is often able to travel abroad. 
 
GUANGZHOU 00027723  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶8. (SBU) These ingrained biases show how thoroughly 
mainstream journalists have adopted the practice of self- 
censorship.  Both editors, as well as other journalists 
Congenoffs have met, mentioned that the government does not 
need to rigorously monitor the media, because journalists 
practice self-censorship automatically.  These editors said 
they have not attended any special training sessions in how 
to practice self-censorship.  It is not marked as a special 
or separate topic, but instead comes with the normal 
territory of journalism in China. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Luo is typical of highly-placed Chinese 
journalists: educated and worldly professionals who 
nevertheless are content to work within the restricted 
Chinese reporting environment.  Luo has numerous foreign 
acquaintances and is widely traveled, which might induce him 
to become somewhat disenchanted with the Chinese system. 
Yet it is this system that allows him to continue to meet 
these kinds of contacts and to travel abroad, offering him 
opportunities that a less cooperative journalist would not 
have.  End comment. 
 
MARTIN