07GUANGZHOU419
Natural Gas in South China (Part 2 of 2):  Chinese Taking
Tue Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO2432
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0419/01 0930311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030311Z APR 07
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5945
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHMA/AMEMBASSY MALABO 0001
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RHMCSUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 GUANGZHOU 000419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN 
USDOC FOR 1003/ITA/OUS/OC 
USDOC FOR 6310/ITA/TD/OIEM/KMURPHY/HBURROUGHS/KHOLLANDE R 
USDOC FOR 6000/ITA/TD/RPACE 
TRANSPORTATION FOR FEDERAL RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION/KROHN 
USDOE FOR OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY - MOURAD 
USDOE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS/DPUMPHREY/RSPRICE 
USDOE FOR FOSSIL POLICY AND ENERGY/MSMITH/ADUCCA 
USDOE FOR MSINGER/GRUDINS/JNAKANO 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, EB/TRA, AND EB/ESC/IEC 
STATE FOR AF/C 
STATE ALSO PASS USTR FOR CHINA OFFICE 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET EMIN ECON SENV KIPR CH
SUBJECT: Natural Gas in South China (Part 2 of 2):  Chinese Taking 
Control as Offshore Exploration Looks Promising 
 
REF: Guangzhou 418 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000419  001.2 OF 005 
 
 
THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED AND INCLUDES BUSINESS 
SENSITIVE INFORMATION.  IT SHOULD NOT BE DISSEMINATED OUTSIDE OF 
U.S. GOVERNMENT CHANNELS OR IN ANY PUBLIC FORUM WITHOUT THE WRITTEN 
CONCURRENCE OF THE ORIGINATOR.  IT SHOULD NOT BE POSTED ON THE 
INTERNET. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The Chinese government has renewed efforts to 
diversify the nation's energy mix and improve the environment by 
bringing anticipated large offshore gas reserves in the South China 
Sea (which had previously been ignored, vented or flared) to 
production.  As offshore oil and gas fields in the South China Sea 
look more promising, exploration blocks previously operated by 
foreign-run joint ventures, are increasingly being consolidated 
under China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) ownership. 
Overall, CNOOC continues to act less like a profit-seeking 
corporation and more inline with government desires to secure 
resources globally to quench China's growing energy thirst.  Despite 
healthy financial returns in the past, most Western exploration and 
production companies are finding newly offered projects to be higher 
risk (the full extent of which will not be known until exploration 
begins), technically difficult to complete, in deeper water, and 
with operating control solely by CNOOC. This is the second of two 
cables on the subject of natural gas in south China.  END SUMMARY. 
 
In the Past, Foreign Companies Dominated 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) CACT is a representative case of what foreign offshore oil 
and gas joint ventures are becoming today.  Originally started in 
1984, CACT was an equal partnership between AGIP (now ENI, the 
national oil company of Italy), Chevron, and Texaco to explore two 
blocks in the South China Sea.  After seven years of exploration and 
development, the JV started production with seven offshore platforms 
in 1991.  After 15 years, CNOOC exercised its option to purchase 51% 
of the venture in 1999 and the later merger of Chevron and Texaco 
adjusted the financial split to its current level - 51% CNOOC, 32% 
Chevron, and 16% ENI.  For the past 7 years, operator rights have 
rotated among the three partners yearly as has the overall project 
manager position. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Congenoff spoke to Mr. Maurizio Senese, Deputy Project 
Manager for CACT and the highest ranking manager from ENI in the JV, 
who stated management and engineering positions within the JV are no 
longer relinquished by CNOOC employees.  The overall management of 
the JV has shifted from a mix of American, British, and Italians to 
Chinese.  With the shift, the remaining Chevron and ENI management 
are largely ignored except when information needs to be passed back 
to respective company headquarters.  The need to use foreign experts 
is declining rapidly and CNOOC is currently seeking permanent 
operator rights so it can ensure that all production from the fields 
is directed to China.  Senese said that despite the fact that the 
CACT project was ENI's project with the highest rate of return in 
the world, the company will likely bow to Chinese pressure and 
financial incentives and sell their share in the project within the 
next few years. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Mr. David Lindsay, President of Devon Energy China, one of 
the largest U.S. energy companies active in the South China Sea, 
told Congenoff that Devon is currently involved in a joint venture 
with Husky Energy (a Canadian energy firm majority-owned by Hong 
Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing) and CNOOC in the Eastern South China 
Sea.  Following the trend described above, CNOOC recently purchased 
operator rights to the project in the Panyu field and Devon is now 
pursuing new exploration projects. 
 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000419  002.2 OF 005 
 
 
CNOOC Learns Quickly 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Mr. Senese commented that the number of foreign experts 
used in CACT projects had declined dramatically in the last few 
years.  CNOOC Engineers and managers alike are often put on multiple 
projects at one time so they can learn a broad range of skills. 
CNOOC employees are moved from one CNOOC joint venture to another in 
an attempt to gain knowledge of techniques from different foreign 
partners.  For depths up to 200 meters, Senese said that CNOOC is 
now competent and offshore joint ventures in these depths will 
continue to be bought out while new projects will be entirely owned 
and operated by CNOOC. 
 
Finances Don't Govern All 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Congenoff spoke with Dr. Ziqiong Zheng, China Area Manager 
for Baker Hughes Inteq - a large U.S. oil and gas services firm, who 
commented that in offshore exploration and production, intellectual 
property rights protection is a large challenge.  The Chinese oil 
services arms of CNOOC, Sinopec, and PetroChina are quick to copy 
drilling and logging technologies but so far the copied technology 
has yet to approach the original in quality.  Still, for 
Chinese-only offshore projects, Baker Hughes is at a disadvantage 
due to protectionism and favoritism.  Without changes in the 
business environment, it will suffer due to the diminishing role of 
international oil and gas companies in South China Sea projects. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Dr. Zheng notes that the China oil majors continue to favor 
Chinese-made or controlled equipment, even when it is less 
efficient.  He cited project examples where Baker Hughes technology 
was seemingly more expensive, costing $26000 USD per day compared to 
$10000 USD for similar Chinese-made equipment.  Since the Baker 
Hughes designed drilling system can run for 200 hours before needing 
to be changed out, a process that can take multiple days at great 
depths, compared to only 40 hours for the Chinese-made equivalent, 
the Baker Hughes option actually costs up to $2.5 million USD less 
and more importantly, can bring a deep-water well to production a 
year sooner.  Yet CNOOC and other Chinese oil majors routinely use 
their own service companies for drilling and often cite social 
stability as the reason. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Chinese oil and gas industry currently employs 1.2 
million people in China (down from a peak of 2 million) and 85% of 
these are in support services as varied as schools, hospitals, and 
food preparation.  Most Chinese managers are not willing to risk a 
few million dollars in savings on a project if the outcome can lead 
to large domestic layoffs and civil unrest.  Still, Dr. Zheng stated 
the future for foreign oil services companies in offshore projects 
may be brighter than it appears due to the increased government 
emphasis on bringing domestic offshore production of oil and gas to 
market quickly. 
 
South China Sea Prospects Look Bright... 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Both Mr. Senese and Dr. Zheng commented that the South 
China Sea is full of potential.  The South China Sea is divided by 
CNOOC into the Eastern South China Sea which encompasses the Pearl 
River Delta and waters to the south and east and the Western South 
China Sea which encompasses the waters west of the Pearl River Delta 
including those south and west of Hainan island.  So far, the 
Eastern South China Sea has primarily produced oil and the Western 
South China Sea has produced natural gas.  This is slowly changing 
as CNOOC is now attempting to send gas from its wells in the Panyu 
field in the Eastern South China Sea by pipeline through CACT's 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000419  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
existing platforms in the Huizhou field and then onward to the city 
of Zhuhai.  The pipeline from CACT's platforms to Zhuhai has been 
completed but a faulty Chinese-engineered jacket for a well (the 
largest ever designed by China for offshore use at 213 meters) on 
CNOOC's Panyu-30 platform was discovered last year and now is being 
replaced.  This has delayed the rest of the project by over a year. 
Once the project is completed, it will produce over 400,000 
tons/year of natural gas to be used to fire power plants in southern 
Guangdong province. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Mr. Senese showed Congenoff a set of maps depicting 
potential oil and gas fields in the South China Sea.  Based on 
current seismic data the finds could be huge as over 90% of expected 
fields have yet to be explored or developed.  Many of the fields 
currently in production are also small compared to the potential 
that lies in deeper water. 
 
¶11. (SBU) In June 2006, Husky Energy announced the discovery of one 
of the largest Chinese offshore natural gas deposits in the Liwan 
Field of the Western South China Sea.  The potential recoverable 
resource is estimated at between 4 and 6 trillion cubic feet of 
natural gas (77.8 to 116.7 million tons).  Mr. Lindsay stated that 
Devon owned exploration rights to the adjacent field and seismic 
data indicated analogous structures which could mean a similar size 
discovery.  These fields lie in depths of at least 1500 meters of 
water. 
 
Future Work with CNOOC Looks Less So 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) Mr. Senese stated that future foreign JVs with CNOOC would 
likely be on projects in depths of 1000 meters or greater.  He 
continued that CNOOC has the expertise for exploration at these 
depths but lacks experience in development and production as 
evidenced by CNOOC's faulty attempt at only a 213 meter jacket last 
year.  The phasing out of tax incentives for foreign firms and a new 
oil export tax may also affect international oil and gas firms' 
willingness to enter new joint ventures. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Mr. Lindsay commented that most of the new shallow-water 
blocks being offered were unattractive.  However he stated that when 
blocks do come up for offer relationships are extremely important. 
Unlike many other countries where blocks are put up for auction, in 
China, CNOOC negotiates individually with partners on each block 
based on precedence of expressed interest.  These negotiations often 
take a long time.  Dealing with CNOOC is further complicated by the 
company's decentralized structure.  CNOOC-Shenzhen handles Eastern 
South China Sea fields but CNOOC-Zhanjiang manages Western South 
China Sea fields.  For companies like Devon with interests in the 
East China Sea and Bohai Bay as well, the company must also deal 
with CNOOC-Shanghai and CNOOC-Tianjin respectively.  This can 
stretch a lightly-staffed international oil company thin. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Eni's Senese stressed relationships with CNOOC were also 
important in joint ventures.  He stated that Chevron's open lobbying 
against CNOOC during the company's bid for Unocal turned the company 
and its representatives into non-entities at CACT.  Devon's Lindsay 
also commented on the possible folly of a Conoco-Philips decision to 
take China to arbitration over a questionably legal windfall tax 
implemented on oil production last year.  While all international 
oil companies agreed the tax, which amounted to $12/BBL at peak oil 
prices, was questionable, the decision to formally fight it could 
hurt Conoco-Philips more in the long term. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Dr. Zheng agreed that the divided structure of CNOOC poses 
several challenges but also commented that the biggest obstacles for 
foreign companies are the lack of complete geological information on 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000419  004.2 OF 005 
 
 
blocks.  CNOOC often paints a rosy picture but most blocks that are 
opened for foreign participation are actually high risk or 
technically difficult to complete and the foreign partner often 
won't know the full extent of the risk until after a deal is struck. 
 Lindsay stated that his company looked at some of these 
opportunities as high risk but minimal investment, implying a 
willingness to cease exploration if early wells don't show results. 
 
Rigs are the Bottleneck 
----------------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) Mr. Senese, Dr. Zheng, and Mr. Lindsay all agree that the 
overall worldwide lack of drilling rigs is a major bottleneck to 
quicker exploration and development of the South China Sea.  With 
CNOOC purchasing a stake in the gas fields of Indonesia to support 
the CNOOC's Fujian LNG project, it has moved several of its own 
drilling rigs from the South China Sea.  Furthermore, when 
CNOOC-owned rigs become available, CNOOC wholly-owned projects are 
given preference to those of CNOOC JVs.  International oil firms are 
seeking rigs worldwide but with the major rig yards already at 
capacity for new production and high demand and commodity costs 
pushing up rig prices, the proven reserve threshold for new projects 
is also correspondingly higher.  As a result, CNOOC and others 
currently seem content to add extended-reach wells to existing 
platforms rather than develop entirely new fields in the South China 
Sea. 
 
CNOOC and China, Combining Efforts in the Developing World 
-------------------------- ------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) Mr. Lindsay has been in China for only one year, 
previously heading up Devon's operations in Equatorial Guinea.  He 
commented on the extreme difficulty of dealing with the government 
there.  Both Lindsay and Dr. Zheng mentioned the impact that the 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) can have in the developing 
world.  The government backing of national oil companies such as 
CNOOC compounds the problem.  In West Africa, CNOOC is able to link 
Chinese government financial and aid projects to preferential 
treatment on energy deals. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) While there are numerous promising fields in both the 
Eastern and Western South China Sea, increased ownership and control 
of projects by CNOOC will likely slow the rate at which these fields 
are explored and developed.  In the case of the potentially large 
natural gas finds off Hainan Island, billions of dollars worth of 
investment will be needed to bring the gas to market.  The cities of 
Zhuhai and Zhanjiang in Guangdong province will be likely hubs for 
offshore natural gas.  Current plans to connect Zhuhai to Guangzhou 
and Shenzhen via pipeline depend on completion of an LNG terminal 
that has yet to receive final approval or begin construction (see 
reftel) and completion of this pipeline will be in 2012 at the 
earliest.  Until then, the natural gas coming from the Eastern South 
China Sea will continue to be used almost exclusively for power 
generation in Zhuhai. 
 
¶19. (SBU) CNOOC, and China in general, are handling natural gas and 
other offshore exploration with a mercantilist approach.  The 
overriding goal is control of assets, technology, and resources. 
CNOOC is willing to use international oil majors and oil and gas 
service companies only when it needs the expertise and in these 
cases the company seeks to gain new technologies and skills as 
quickly as possible to minimize future dependence.  Using lucrative 
financial offers is still bringing in foreign partners and CNOOC 
continues to build relationships, sometimes with government help, 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000419  005.2 OF 005 
 
 
worldwide.  CNOOC also uses the threat of minimizing these 
relationships as a potential retribution for those companies who 
cross it as it attempts to gain further control of the offshore 
situation in China and other nations. Overall, CNOOC continues to 
act less like a profit-seeking corporation and more inline with 
government desires to secure resources globally to quench China's 
growing energy thirst. 
 
Note of Conversions 
------------------ 
 
¶20. (U) In this cable, the following conversion factors were used in 
computing equivalents: 
 
1 cubic meter natural gas = 35.3 cubic feet natural gas 
1 MMBtu = 27.993 cubic meters of natural gas 
51414 cubic feet of natural gas = 1 ton of natural gas 
 
GOLDBERG