09GUANGZHOU10
Black Pearl - The Threat of Water Pollution to Guangdong's
Thu Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO2017
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #0010/01 0080914
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080914Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0092
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0036
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 0007
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0007
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0007
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0015
RUEHGZ/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE 0043
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC 0032
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0028
RHMFIUU/HQ EPA WASHINGTON DC 0005
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC 0043
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC 0043
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI//J00/J2/J3/J5// 0006UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 GUANGZHOU 000010 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND OES/PCI 
EPA FOR OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ECON EAGR CH
SUBJECT: Black Pearl - The Threat of Water Pollution to Guangdong's 
Future 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. Not for release outside U.S. government channels. Not 
for internet publication. 
 
Ref: A) Guangzhou 712, B) Guangzhou 212 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The following is neither an overstatement nor is 
it hyperbole.  It is a fact.  The contaminated waters of the Pearl 
River and other water sources in Guangdong are as serious a threat 
to the region's health and economic sustainability as the decline in 
exports, the closure of small and medium enterprises and the 
increasing utilization of land for nonproductive reasons.  According 
to one study, more than ten percent of drinking water sources in the 
province failed to meet Chinese standards -- 24 percent in Guangzhou 
alone; local experts say these figures likely underestimate the 
severity of the problem.  Only about 50 percent of Guangzhou's 
sewage is treated.  Government efforts to ensure safe drinking water 
and minimize health related incidents fall well short as they do not 
adequately address elevated levels of contamination for organic 
compounds, nitrogen, pesticide residues, heavy metals and other 
toxic substances.  Water must be piped long distances because closer 
resources are too contaminated, oft-times the result of waste 
discharge being close to drinking water plants.  Smaller rivers and 
Pearl River tributaries are especially vulnerable and groundwater 
and river sediment are highly contaminated.  While it is hard to 
assess the impact of water pollution on human health here, it is 
clear that local residents in some heavily polluted areas are 
already displaying the effects including cancers, bone diseases and 
other disorders stemming from exposure to high levels of arsenic, 
cadmium and other toxins.  Serious steps are needed to address these 
looming health issues, but no comprehensive strategy has yet been 
devised.  End summary. 
 
An Abundant Resource, Heavily Abused 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Water is plentiful in the Pearl River Delta (PRD).  The delta 
is formed by the confluence of three major rivers which run into the 
South China Sea, with an average annual water flow of about 336.2 
billion cubic meters.  The area is also rich in rainfall, with 
annual precipitation of 1600-2200 millimeters. 
 
¶3. (U) However, after 30 years of rapid development and population 
growth, water quality has dramatically deteriorated.  Agriculture, 
mining, logging, shipping and household waste have all taken their 
toll, but industrial waste has been particularly devastating.  Many 
small, inefficient factories are spread out geographically, which 
means pollution is widespread and hard to control or mitigate. 
According to one report, there are 18,300 petrochemical factories in 
Guangzhou and 70% of them are located around the Pearl River.  About 
6,000 of them discharge more than 100 tons of waste water annually. 
Zhang Hongou, Director of the Guangzhou Institute of Geography, has 
predicted that pollution will lead to a drinking water shortage of 
1.8 billion cubic meters (or 32 percent of demand) in Guangdong by 
¶2010. 
 
Even Official Data Show Severity of Problem 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Officially released studies confirm that the level of water 
contamination in the Pearl River system is alarming.  According to a 
2007 provincial government report on the state of Guangdong 
environmental protection, more than ten percent of monitoring 
samples taken from drinking water sources in the Pearl River Delta 
failed to meet the Chinese government's standards for acceptable 
levels of contamination. Guangzhou and Shenzhen had the highest 
percentages among Guangdong cities of samples that failed to meet 
Chinese standards at 24% and 17% respectively.  Another study, not 
limited to drinking water sources, showed that samples from 35% of 
111 sections of major rivers in Guangdong were polluted.  Among 
them, 12.6, 8.1 and 14.4 percent were mildly, moderately and heavily 
polluted, respectively.  For Guangdong as a whole, monitoring data 
from major river estuaries leading to the South China Sea indicated 
that 42.7% were polluted.  According to an expert familiar with the 
monitoring system, water pollution data in the PRD would reflect 
more severe contamination if the monitoring sites were more 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000010  002 OF 005 
 
 
representative and if more pollutants were analyzed. 
 
Major Pollutants - Sewage, Heavy Metals, Fertilizer 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) According to a Guangzhou municipal government report, the 
city's total waste water discharge in 2007 was about 6.9 billion 
tons with 64.4% from residential sewage. Only about 50% of the 
city's sewage is treated.  The discharges of organic compounds as 
measured by chemical oxygen demand (COD), nitrogen, industrial toxic 
substances (volatile phenols, cyanide, arsenic, lead, mercury, 
cadmium and chromium) and petroleum compounds were 1,017,300; 
120,000; 53 and 367 tons, respectively.  (Note: Measurements of 
pollution are often treated as state secrets, and one knowledgeable 
contact told us that these figures are too low. End note.) 
Pesticide pollution and eutrophication are also serious problems due 
to abusive application of the pesticides and chemical fertilizers in 
agriculture.  Agriculture accounts for 70% of nitrogen pollution and 
50% of phosphorous pollution in the PRD.  Nitrate, nitrite, heavy 
metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) pollution are all 
high.  A 1999 Zhongshan University study of heavy metal 
concentrations in muscle tissue of fish in three different Pearl 
River Delta estuaries showed that 45, 50 and 44 percent of samples 
exceeded Chinese standards for zinc, lead and arsenic, respectively. 
 
 
Drinking Water - Government Efforts Failing So Far 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. (U) Governments at various levels in Guangdong have pledged to 
ensure the quality of drinking water in the province, but their 
efforts have not succeeded due to widespread of contamination of 
soil, local rivers and other surface waters and the continuous 
discharge of the industrial and residential waste water.  On October 
28, 2008, following an inspection of drinking water facilities, Wang 
Yang, Guangdong's Party Secretary, said that he would make sure that 
people had clean water to drink.  During the inspection, Zhang Hu, 
Director of the Guangdong Department of Water Management, 
acknowledged that the west channel of the Pearl River - the drinking 
water source for the Shimen water plant that was the site of the 
visit - was polluted with domestic sewage, industrial waste water 
and chemical fertilizers. 
 
¶7. (SBU) According to Pan Dalin, vice director of the Environment 
and Resource Protection Committee of the Guangdong People's 
Congress, many cities have to spend large amounts of money to get 
water from faraway locations because sources closer in are too 
heavily polluted.  For example, because of heavy contamination in 
the section of the Pearl River that runs through Guangzhou, the city 
pipes in water from the Shunde channel and the Dongjiang River more 
than 10 kilometers away.  Guangdong Department of Water Management 
officials told us that water quality is regularly monitored by 
various measures and treated to make sure drinking water is safe. 
But they admitted that this is only applied effectively at the large 
drinking water plants in Guangzhou.  The officials also said that 
they must resort to using polluted sources during droughts and other 
water shortages.  In 2008, in the Zhong Luotan area of Guangzhou, 41 
residents suffered severe nitrite poisoning symptoms because 
drinking water was contaminated by industrial waster water. 
 
¶8. (U) Efforts to ensure safe drinking water outside of Guangdong's 
major cities also fall short.  As in Zhong Luotan, 128 residents of 
Yangjiang Municipality in southern Guangdong exhibited nausea, 
vomiting and other symptoms in 2008 due to nitrite contamination in 
drinking water.  In Chikan town, in nearby Jiangmen Municipality, 
untreated waste water discharge from a factory with an 
electroplating workshop forced the closure of a drinking water plant 
in 2008.  Water had to be trucked in for 50,000 residents for five 
days.  The factory's waste discharge outlet was just 100 meters away 
from the inlet of the drinking water plant. 
 
¶9. (U) In addition to chronic sources of water pollution, industrial 
accidents and other environmental incidents have repeatedly caused 
severe levels of contamination in drinking water sources.  One 
researcher found that among 28 (officially-reported) drinking water 
contamination incidents in China between 2001 and 2008, six occurred 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000010  003 OF 005 
 
 
in Guangdong.  Examples of recent incidents include the following: 
 
--In September 2008, 20-30 tons of fish in the Liuxi River in 
Guangzhou municipality died due to water contamination.  According 
to government monitoring data, water quality of the Liuxi River, a 
major source for drinking water, meets Chinese standards.  According 
to local residents, large numbers of dead fish can be found in this 
section of the river three to four times per year.  Many residents 
blame industrial pollution from upstream factories. 
 
-- In 2005, a government-owned lead and zinc smelter, the third 
largest in China, illegally discharged cadmium-contaminated 
wastewater into the Beijiang River during "an overhaul of 
equipment."  The contamination increased concentrations of cadmium 
in the drinking water source for thousands of residents to more than 
10 times the Chinese national standard for drinking water. 
 
Smaller Rivers - Vulnerable and Suffering 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Smaller rivers and Pearl River tributaries are 
particularly vulnerable because lower water flow levels mean 
pollution is less easily diluted.  In addition to the Pearl River, 
there are 231 smaller rivers in Guangzhou Municipality with a 
combined length of 913 kilometers.  Due to untreated industrial and 
residential waste, many are badly polluted with black discoloration, 
foul odors and thick sediment that often contain toxic chemicals. 
The municipal government has acknowledged this problem and allotted 
more than USD 250 million to clean up 69 rivers totaling 121 
kilometers in length.  However, Zhao Sun, vice director of the 
Guangzhou Department of Water Resources told us that water quality 
measurements of rivers that are targeted by the program had shown 
basically no improvement, even though the city had built four waste 
water treatment plants and laid 763 kilometers of sewage pipes since 
¶1997.  One contact said the program had been hampered by corruption 
and pointed out that wastewater discharge was still high. 
 
¶11. (U) The mayor of Guangzhou, Zhang Guangning, has announced a 
major effort to clean up the heavily polluted rivers ahead of the 
Guangzhou-hosted 2010 Asia Games.  The city will reportedly budget 
USD 5.8 billion for water resource management.  Zhang said he would 
hold party secretaries and other district-level top officials 
responsible for cleaning up the rivers, announcing that they would 
swim in local rivers, just as he himself swims across the Pearl 
River every year to show its improved water quality.  (Note: Zhang 
did acknowledge that this year's swim was in waters more polluted 
than in previous years, though he did not offer any explanation why. 
 End Note.) 
 
¶12. (U) Some examples of smaller rivers with particularly serious 
levels of contamination include: 
 
--The Shijing River - On October 22, 2008, local media reported that 
deep-black water stretching for several kilometers from the Shijing 
River had flowed into the Pearl River, emitting a foul odor as the 
stronger currents of the Pearl stirred up the contaminated sediment 
in the Shijing.  Local residents complained that this phenomenon had 
occurred many times over the last two years. 
 
--The Guanlan and Shima Rivers - Local residents call the Guanlan 
River in Shenzhen and Shima River in Dongguan the black dragon 
rivers due to discoloration from industrial and residential waste. 
Zhang Lijun, former vice minister of China's State Environmental 
Protection Administration (forerunner of the Ministry of 
Environmental of Protection), was reportedly shocked by the scale 
and magnitude of pollution in the two rivers on a January 2007 trip 
to Dongguan to inspect emissions.  Even after mitigation efforts 
lasting several years and costing billions of renminbi, water 
quality in the two rivers is still poor.  The rivers' flows into the 
Dongjiang River had to be disrupted to prevent pollutants from 
contaminating an important source of the drinking water for 
Guangzhou, Hong Kong and other cities. 
 
--The Hengshui River - Researchers from South China Agricultural 
University in Guangzhou reported that even after diluting samples 
from the Hengshui River by a factor of 10,000, contamination was 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000010  004 OF 005 
 
 
still too high for aquatic life to survive in it for more than 24 
hours.  During periods of heavy rainfall, the toxic waters of the 
Hengshui extend as far as 100 to 200 kilometers downstream.  Under 
normal river-flow conditions, polluted waters typically extend 
nearly 50 kilometers downstream. 
 
Groundwater Contaminated Too 
---------------------------- 
 
¶13. (U) A 2006 survey by the Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences' 
Institute of Hydrogeology and Environmental Geology determined that 
groundwater in the PRD is also contaminated with heavy metals, 
organic chemicals, volatile phenols, nitrate, pesticides and other 
pollutants.  The problem is more severe near industrial zones and 
heavily polluted rivers.  One report from a Guangdong research 
institute indicated that lead concentrations of up to 0.15 parts per 
million (PPM) have been found in the province's well water.  This is 
at least 15 times the level permitted by China's drinking water 
standards. 
 
Sediment - What's Left Behind 
----------------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) The sediment underneath Guangdong's polluted surface waters 
has also shown extremely high concentrations of heavy metals, PAHs, 
pesticides and other pollutants. One study of sediments in 18 
smaller rivers in Guangzhou showed that average concentrations for 
arsenic, cadmium, mercury, lead, and chromium were 24.7, 3.0, 0.7, 
121.3, and 104.4, mg/kg respectively.  The average concentrations of 
arsenic and cadmium were 9 and 53 times higher than background 
concentrations. The maximum concentrations identified in the study 
samples were 34.7 mg/kg for arsenic and 4.8 mg/kg for cadmium.  In 
comparison, a 2008 EPA proposal to address arsenic-tainted soil in 
Minnesota called for clean-up of all soil with concentrations higher 
than 25 mg/kg.  These river sediments are still used in some areas 
as organic fertilizers leading the further soil contamination. 
Clean-up of contaminated sediment is particularly challenging; in 
the PRD it would take years and large amounts of resources. 
 
Future Mitigation Programs Face Obstacles 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) Some senior officials in Guangdong appreciate the severity 
of water pollution in the province and are serious about taking 
measures to reduce it.  Party Secretary Wang Yang's economic 
strategy for the province -- the "double transfer" policy -- is 
aimed in part at controlling environmental pollution.  Overall, the 
"double transfer" policy seeks to move labor-intensive, less 
efficient and heavily polluting industries out of the Pearl River 
Delta to less developed parts of Guangdong Province to make room for 
high-tech, high value-added and service industries.  As heavily 
polluting enterprises are moved, the government claims it will try 
to collocate them in special zones to make monitoring and mitigation 
easier and more efficient.  Some of these types of zones have 
already been established (ref B). 
 
¶16. (SBU) However, many local experts believe water pollution will 
continue to be a severe problem in the PRD for the near- and 
medium-term despite such efforts due to the following factors: 
 
--Large number of inefficient factories. 
--High percentage (50%) of residential sewage discharged without 
treatment. 
--Low efficiency of existing sewage treatment facilities. 
--Corruption among environmental monitoring officials. 
--High levels of soil contamination that will continue to migrate 
into to water sources (ref A) 
--Sediment contamination will continue to affect surface water even 
if other sources of pollution are mitigated. 
--Solid industrial waste which will continue to migrate into water 
sources, especially after flooding. 
--Low level of commitment from local officials focused on near term 
results 
--Continuing high levels of pollution from agricultural pesticide 
and chemical fertilizer run-off. 
--Lack of openness with environmental data. 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000010  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
A Critical Challenge for Guangdong 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) Comment: Drinking water is a major pathway for many 
pollutants and thus water pollution is a critical factor in human 
cumulative exposure to harmful chemicals.  Because there are no 
comprehensive studies of cumulative exposure in the PRD, it's hard 
to assess the impact of water pollution on human health here.  But 
it's clear that, for the population of the PRD and elsewhere in 
Guangdong, water pollution is greatly increasing human exposure to 
many harmful pollutants such as heavy metals, PAHs and pesticide 
residues.  In addition, the polluted water will further contaminate 
soil, vegetables, livestock and seafood through irrigation, flooding 
and food chains, leading to even higher cumulative exposure.  Local 
residents in some heavily polluted areas already display serious 
health effects, including cancers, bone diseases, and water 
poisoning from arsenic, cadmium and other toxins.  Further studies 
would likely reveal more long-term effects.  This problem will only 
worsen as economic and population growth continue if major action is 
not taken to address this serious threat to health and economic 
sustainability in Guangdong. End comment. 
 
GOLDBERG