07AITTAIPEI1988
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM
Wed Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1988/01 2411052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291052Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6585
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7182
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8438UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001988 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese- and English-language dailies 
August 29 gave significant reporting and editorial coverage to U.S. 
Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte's exclusive interview with 
the Hong Kong-based Phoenix TV on Taiwan's UN referendum Monday. 
Both the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" and the pro-unification 
"United Daily News," as well as the three English-language dailies 
-- "Taipei Times," "China Post," and "Taiwan News" -- all 
front-paged Negroponte's remarks that the push for the UN referendum 
is akin to a step toward Taiwan independence and is thus "a 
mistake."  All the papers also ran the response by Taiwan Foreign 
Minister James Huang, who voiced "deep regret" over Negroponte's 
remarks.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran an exclusive 
banner headline on page three that said "'Opposing Taiwan's UN 
Referendum,' [China's Taiwan Affairs Office Director] Chen Yun-lin 
Is Scheduled to Visit the United States in September." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, the "Free Talk" column 
in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" criticized U.S. Deputy 
Secretary of State John Negroponte's remarks and said he has let 
 
SIPDIS 
down American ancestors who sacrificed their lives in the U.S. war 
of independence.  A separate "Liberty Times" analysis interpreted 
Negroponte's remarks as Washington joining hands with Beijing to 
intimidate Taiwan.  An editorial in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" said Negroponte's interview reflected Washington's upset and 
desperation against President Chen Shui-bian.  An editorial in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" chimed in by saying that 
Negroponte's remarks signified that the United States has picked a 
tune with regard to Taiwan's UN referendum.  A "United Daily News" 
editorial lashed out at President Chen for his push for the UN 
referendum and called Negroponte's remarks an "ultimatum" for 
Taiwan.  A separate "United Daily News" analysis tossed off the 
question as to whether there is a "next step" for Washington to deal 
with Taiwan's UN referendum.  An editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post," on the other hand, 
suggested that Taiwan focus on joining smaller world organizations 
such as the International Monetary Fund.  End summary. 
 
A) "Have the American Superiors Forgot Their Origin?" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 720,000] wrote (8/29): 
 
"... Mounting voices are heard in the international community 
opposing Taiwan's bid to join the UN, and it is not surprising at 
all, since this is just a reflection of the reality of international 
politics.  What one can hardly imagine is that the United States has 
unexpectedly joined the opposition camp, and it has played the role 
of vanguard, with an attitude more proactive than that of China's. 
 
"The United States has downgraded its courtesy treatment for 
A-Bian's transit for this particular reason in an attempt to 
humiliate him deliberately.  But it seems that Washington still 
finds it unsatisfactory, so it had Deputy Secretary of State John 
Negroponte spout rhetoric on TV, openly opposing Taiwan's plan to 
hold a referendum on its UN bid under the name 'Taiwan' and calling 
the move a step towards a declaration of Taiwan independence.  Even 
though Taiwan, as a small country, cannot afford to offend, nor dare 
talk back to, the official remarks of this superior U.S. official, 
he should engage in introspection and ask himself:  How in the world 
is he able to face the ancestors who sacrificed their lives in the 
U.S. war of independence? ..." 
 
B) "U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Should Listen to Taiwan's Voices 
Cried out by 'Chthonic' Band" 
 
Washington correspondent Nadia Tsao noted in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (8/29): 
 
"Immediately following Chinese President Hu Jintao's recent public 
announcement that the only task of the People's Liberation Army is 
to fight Taiwan, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte 
warned on Hong Kong-based Phoenix TV that Taiwan's UN referendum is 
[a step towards] an alteration of the status quo and towards a 
declaration of independence.  For the Taiwan people, Washington 
seems to be joining hands with Beijing to intimidate Taiwan. 
 
"Negroponte emphasized that he was talking about this issue in the 
context of the solid friendship between the United States and 
Taiwan.  But even so, following mounting public opinion supporting 
Taiwan's UN bid, one cannot help but feel concerned about 
Washington's approach -- namely, whether the United States is trying 
to replace Beijing as an unwelcome voice in the campaign leading up 
to Taiwan's elections [next year], or even to [give] certain Taiwan 
political figures in Taiwan [an opportunity] to operate in reverse 
by playing the anti-U.S. card. ..." 
 
C) "A-Bian Toying with the Americans" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 530,000] 
 
 
editorialized (8/29): 
 
"The more the United States opposes the UN referendum, the more 
vigorous A-Bian gets.  The United States offered the lowest-ever 
courtesy treatment to A-Bian, nearly similar to humiliation, but 
A-Bian endured it gladly. For A-Bian during his previous trips to 
Central America, the allies were his secondary targets, while 
transiting major U.S. cities was his real goal.  Now A-Bian has 
given up on the United States, just as the United States has given 
up on A-Bian.  Bilateral relations have entered a new stage. 
 
"The deputy secretary of state of the United States said A-Bian's 
push for the UN referendum is 'a step towards a declaration of 
independence for Taiwan, towards an alteration of the status quo." 
What a great statement!  For a long period of time, Taiwan, the 
United States and China have each reserved the final say on how to 
define so-called 'Taiwan independence.'  Washington could deny 
China's definition, and for the United States, only its own 
definition counts.  As long as Washington does not believe Taiwan is 
moving toward independence, the United States can disregard it, no 
matter how others complain about it.  On the surface, this is 
strategic ambiguity, but in reality, it is hegemony.  Hegemonic 
power only cares about and regards its own argument as reasonable; 
all it wants is just to hold on firmly to the authority to control 
the situation across the Taiwan Strait. 
 
"The U.S. deputy secretary of state's remarks on Taiwan moving 
toward independence reflected the United States' upset and 
desperation against A-Bian on the one hand, and also the United 
States' lack of wisdom.  The United States can list plenty of 
reasons to oppose [Taiwan's] UN referendum, but it does not 
necessarily have to cite the grand [reason of] 'Taiwan 
independence.'  Using this reason exactly fits China's wishes. 
China can now quote the United States as saying that A-Bian is 
pushing for Taiwan independence and attempting to alter the status 
quo and, as a result, it can take action, and there is no reason for 
the United States to intervene. ..." 
 
D) "'Taiwan's UN Bid' Is for Domestic Consumption After All" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (8/29): 
 
"... Now the issue of 'Taiwan's UN bid' seems to have fallen into a 
dead end on the international stage.  It goes without saying that 
Taiwan is unable to enter the UN; nonetheless, the president visited 
other countries every year giving out a lot of money, but he could 
not even get a few sentences [supporting Taiwan's UN bid] included 
in the communique Taiwan signed with its allies during the summit. 
In addition, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte pointed 
out openly yesterday that Taiwan's 'UN referendum' is the first step 
towards Taiwan independence.  [His statement] signified that the 
United States has already picked a tune on this subject.  In other 
words, when all Taiwan's allies withdraw their support one by one at 
a time when the United States openly stated its opposition, will 
[Taiwan] be able to continue pushing its 'UN bid?'  Following the 
repetitive manipulations on 'Taiwan's UN bid' over the past few 
years, not only have we not seen more possibilities being exploited, 
but we have also seen [Taiwan's] leeway getting smaller and smaller. 
 Even [Taiwan's] initial diplomatic capital is being eroded rapidly. 
 In the end, it seems that the only thing Taiwan can do is to 
manipulate [the issue] at home for campaigning's sake!" 
 
E) "Ultimatum:  Does Taiwan Still Want the United States as Its 
Friend?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (8/29): 
 
"Prior to Chen Shui-bian's scheduled return to Taiwan from his trip 
[to Central America], U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte 
gave a sincere talk, in which every sentence he said was aimed at 
admonishing Chen to stop the 'UN referendum' before it is too late, 
not to take the risk of altering the cross-Strait status quo, and 
not to toy with the U.S. friendship.  In reality, this sounds 
exactly like an ultimatum. 
 
"Negroponte put up a higher posture and defined the 'UN referendum' 
as 'a step towards a declaration of independence of Taiwan, towards 
an alteration of the status quo."  Once this 'definition' was made, 
it was akin to setting a 'criterion of victory or defeat' for the 
confrontation between the United States and Chen.  If Washington 
allows Chen to push for the 'UN referendum,' it will be like showing 
weakness to Chen, sitting idly by and watching him as he pushes for 
Taiwan independence and alters the status quo.  In contrast, if the 
United States does not allow Chen to push for Taiwan independence 
and alter the status quo, it has to stop the 'UN referendum.' 
Negroponte's remarks were like a showdown with Chen, to see whether 
it is Chen or the United States that is able to carry on. 
 
 
"The fact that Negroponte accepted the interview with Hong 
Kong-based Phoenix TV, during which the only topic he spoke about 
was [Taiwan's] 'UN referendum,' was, without a doubt, meant to speak 
to the ears of the Chinese authorities.  China is opposed to 'de 
jure Taiwan independence' and 'changes in the status quo.'  Now that 
Negroponte regards the 'UN referendum' as 'a step towards a 
declaration of independence for Taiwan, towards an alteration of the 
status quo,' it is akin to showing that the United States has 
identified with the red line drawn by China, and that it will hold 
onto this 'red line' together with China in terms of the 'UN 
referendum.'  This paper has long since warned that Chen's 
'anti-China' manipulation has transformed into 'anti-U.S.,' and now 
the warning has been proved. ... 
 
"The angle that is most noteworthy during the interview was that 
Negroponte emphasized the friendship between Taiwan and the United 
States at the beginning and end of the interview.  He started by 
saying that 'Taiwan has no better friend than the United States,' 
and that the United States strongly supports Taiwan's democracy and 
economy, and it is committed to the defense of Taiwan through the 
Taiwan Relations Act.  But then he changed his tone by pointing out 
from various angles that the 'UN referendum' does not meet Taiwan's 
interests; [Negroponte] sounded as if the Taiwan authorities are the 
betrayer of its own interests, whereas the United States is the 
protector of Taiwan's interests.  In this vein, under Negroponte's 
structure, the 'UN referendum' that the Taiwan authorities are 
pushing is actually 'harmful to Taiwan,' while the United States' 
attempt to stop the 'UN referendum' is [out of] its 'love for 
Taiwan.'  Judging from this, it is evident that the United States 
wants to have a dialogue with the Taiwan people via this interview, 
in hopes that the Taiwan people will believe that Washington can see 
Taiwan's interests more clearly than Chen. 
 
"... The entire interview began with [the sentence that] 'Taiwan has 
no better friend than the United States' and ended with 
'(maintaining Taiwan-U.S. friendship) has to be done in a serious 
and responsible way.'  The entire question and answer section was 
threaded with two axes -- one is [Washington's] opposition to the 
'UN referendum' and the other emphasizes 'Taiwan-U.S. friendship.' 
Its overtones were:  Does Taiwan still want the United States as its 
friend? ... 
 
"Negroponte's 'ultimatum' has pointed out:  The United States will 
use the matter of whether it can stop the 'UN referendum' to test 
the United States' role in the chess game across the Taiwan Strait. 
If the United States fails to suppress the UN referendum, [it means 
that] it cannot keep Chen under control, and it is therefore unable 
to keep the DPP and Taiwan independence under control.  In that 
vein, it is unable to justify itself to China and is thus unable to 
maintain the cross-Strait policy that it 'opposes attempts by either 
side [of the Taiwan Strait] to change the status quo unilaterally.' 
The criterion to determine the confrontation between the United 
States and Chen is exactly that if Chen's 'UN referendum' wins, it 
means that Washington's cross-Strait policy of 'opposing attempts to 
change the status quo unilaterally' loses! 
 
"While transiting the United States, Chen receives the U.S. 
representative in his plane with a 'UN for Taiwan' sticker on his 
chest.  The move was akin to declaring war against the U.S. 
authorities openly.  Likewise, the U.S. authorities' move to have 
its deputy secretary of state offer the remarks on 'Taiwan's 
interests/U.S. friendship' prior to Chen's return to Taiwan can be 
viewed as a gesture to meet Chen head-on in battle. ..." 
 
F) "Other Than Making Strongly-worded Remarks, Will the United 
States Take the Next Step?" 
 
Washington correspondent Vincent Chang noted in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (8/29): 
 
"... The fact that the U.S. government chose to have John Negroponte 
step forward to make such remarks almost indicated that the 'Taiwan 
authorities' are irresponsible and are 'disturbing the situation 
across the Taiwan Strait.'  On the one hand, Washington intended to 
upgrade the level [of the official] who made the remarks in order to 
warn 'the Taiwan authorities,' and on the other hand, it has 
upgraded the [level] of the United States' 'crisis warning' in 
handling Taiwan's UN referendum. 
 
"The U.S. position of 'not supporting' Taiwan independence but not 
stating in public its 'opposition,' either, was originally an 
approach made in consideration of the major framework of the 
triangular relationship among the United States, China and Taiwan. 
Now that the United States has directly defined the single matter of 
Taiwan's UN referendum as a move 'toward Taiwan independence that 
the United States opposes,' it means that Chen Shui-bian does not 
need to declare Taiwan independence; and if the UN referendum is 
held, Washington will deem it as a move equivalent to a declaration 
 
of Taiwan independence.  As a result, the 'Four Nos' incantation 
that Washington has been using to box Chen in will then fall apart! 
 
"Negroponte's remarks were strong enough, but the outside world is 
most curious about and observing whether there will be a 'next step' 
for the United States.  This is a question that Washington often 
asks Chen, but the one that should be asked this question is perhaps 
the United States itself, which knows nothing but making 
strongly-worded remarks." 
 
G) "Fun with Numbers in Quixotic U.N. Bid" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (8/29): 
 
"... Joining the U.N. without the blessing of China is a virtual 
impossibility.  Next month a cluster of Taiwan's allies -- including 
Gambia, Swaziland, Tuvalu, Belize, Burkina Faso, Honduras, Kiribati, 
Malawi, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Sao Tome and Principe, and the 
Solomon Islands -- will try again to place Taiwan's U.N. bid on the 
assembly's agenda, though that's as far as it will get.  China is a 
permanent member of the U.N. Security Council with the power of 
final veto.  Taiwan's people host many hopes and aspirations for 
their country.  Some, no doubt, would support a hypothetical 
Taiwanese moon landing.  But pragmatism and realism is the way of 
logic and the way of progress.  Instead of the dreamy moon landing, 
Taiwan could, if it desired, realistically build satellites or even 
a robot space explorer.  And instead of the quixotic U.N. bid, 
Taiwan should more rightly focus on joining, and actively 
participating in, smaller world organizations like the IMF." 
 
WANG