07AITTAIPEI1945
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1945/01 2360907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240907Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6524
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7162
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8417UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001945 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage August 24 on the investigation into the explosion of a 
China Airlines passenger jet in Okinawa Monday; on President Chen 
Shui-bian's trip to Central America; and on Taiwan's general 
economic situation.  In addition, two Chinese-language dailies and 
three English-language dailies all carried an op-ed by AIT Director 
Stephen Young clarifying the United States' position on the use of 
ractopamine in pork and urging the Taiwan government to establish a 
standard for the use of this substance. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" lashed out at President Chen, 
saying he was merely trying to use the 'bogus Taiwan independence' 
and 'bogus anti-U.S.' elements in the UN referendum issue to 
establish his position as a standard-bearer in the Green camp so as 
to control and manipulate next year's presidential poll and the 
political situation afterwards.  An op-ed in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times," on the other hand, discussed DPP 
presidential candidate Frank Hsieh's visit to the United States in 
July.  The articles said Hsieh's Washington visit can be deemed a 
success, as he "certainly enhanced mutual understanding between 
Washington and Taipei."  End summary. 
 
A) "Genuine Opposition to the United States Is Phony Taiwan 
Independence!" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (8/24): 
 
"[Activists fighting for] Taiwan independence always strive to vie 
for support from the United States, so Taiwan independence 
[activists] cannot possibly be anti-U.S.  If someone calls for 
Taiwan independence verbally but boasts of himself as anti-U.S. and 
never hesitates to split with the United States, he must be a phony 
Taiwan independence [activist].  For Chen Shui-bian, he manipulated 
the 'UN referendum' into an 'anti-U.S.' [move], but both his [calls 
for] 'Taiwan independence' and 'anti-U.S.' were bogus.  Chen merely 
wants to use the 'bogus Taiwan independence' and 'bogus anti-U.S.' 
[elements] in the 'UN referendum' issue to establish his position as 
the standard-bearer in the Green camp so as to control and 
manipulate [next year's] presidential poll and the political 
situation afterwards. 
 
"Chen's 'anti-U.S.' [stance] is phony.  For example, he appeared to 
confront the United States sharply when swindling over the 'UN 
referendum' on the one hand.  But on other hand, he was showing 
goodwill to the United States when it comes to [the policy 
concerning] the use of beta agonists [in pork], a matter that 
involves actual trade and economic interests.  It is crystal clear 
that Chen is outwardly fierce but inwardly faint-hearted.  In his 
eyes, the United States could easily do Taiwan a favor without 
costing it anything by [supporting] the 'UN referendum,' while 
Taiwan can repay [the United States] with substantive trade and 
economic interests [generated by importing U.S.] pork containing 
beta agonists, [U.S.] beef with the mad-cow disease, and the arms 
deals.  But Chen's scenario fell short because the United States 
refused to trade. ... 
 
"Judging by the international situation, the United States' 
influence on Taiwan's survival is, to a certain extent, even greater 
than the factors concerning the island itself.  As a result, Taiwan 
has never been anti-U.S., and it is least possible for the Taiwan 
independence [activists] to be anti-U.S.  But the United States did 
not, and will possibly not give Taiwan a political blank check. 
Taiwan must act in concert with the United States' cross-Strait 
policy; so do Taiwan independence [activists].   Washington's 
current policy is to 'oppose any change in the status quo,' so it 
regards the 'UN referendum' as a move 'in attempt to alter the 
status quo.'  Thus, it became out of focus when Chen's 'UN 
referendum' turned out to be an 'anti-U.S.' movement. ... 
 
"Since 2000, the United States has gradually formulated the doctrine 
of 'opposing change in the status quo,' marking a new milestone for 
the cross-Strait situation.  Beijing's 'Anti-Secession Law,' which 
drew a red line on 'de jure independence,' can also be viewed as a 
move akin to tacitly recognizing that the 'Republic of China' is an 
acceptable part of the 'status quo.'  In addition, Chen's 'Four Nos 
and One Without' was also a pledge that endorsed the doctrine of 
'not changing the status quo.'  In reality, 'no change in the status 
quo' is a newborn development following decades of mediations and 
agitations among Washington, Beijing and Taipei, and can thus be 
viewed as a new principle prevailing the 'one act [i.e. the Taiwan 
Relations Act] and three [U.S.-China] communiques.' ... 
 
"Chen is a phony Taiwan independent [activist], and all he wants is 
to incite and make advantage of the Taiwan independence sentiments. 
Chen is also a phony anti-U.S. [person], and all he did was to use 
the anti-U.S. sentiments to stir up and ignite the emotions for 
Taiwan independence.  Chen's objective is to turn next year's 
 
presidential election into a political edict to 'endorse Taiwan 
independence,' an attempt to ensure that he can still control the 
situation after he steps down. ..." 
 
B) "Hsieh in Washington - an Appraisal" 
 
Li Thian-hok, a freelance commentator based in Pennsylvania, opined 
in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] (8/24): 
 
"... Despite the ambiguities and imperfections, Hsieh's Washington 
visit can be deemed a success. He certainly enhanced mutual 
understanding between Washington and Taipei. Overall, he gave the US 
policy elite a favorable impression as a pragmatic politician who 
may ease tensions with China and the US.  However, caution is in 
order.  The US policy establishment is split on the ultimate status 
of Taiwan.  Some want peaceful unification of Taiwan with China. 
Others want to preserve Taiwan's freedom until China's future 
direction becomes clearer, e.g., until the US feels confident that 
the modernization of the People's Liberation Army is not designed to 
expel US military forces from East Asia. 
 
"Gaining applause from the pro-China wing as a moderate may only 
mean that the panda huggers perceive that Hsieh will cooperate with 
any joint US-China effort to bring about a peaceful annexation of 
Taiwan by China. Hsieh would be well-advised to renounce Chen's 
'four noes' pledge on the grounds that no one, not even the 
president of Taiwan, has the right to unilaterally abrogate the 
people's basic right to determine their own future. 
A democratic Taiwan cannot long endure without evolving into a 
normal country by changing the national title and adopting a new 
constitution.  The 'four noes' make it impossible for Taiwan to move 
towards the status of a normal nation without endangering US support 
for Taiwan's survival. 
 
"Once it is made clear that Taiwan will never compromise on its 
sovereignty and democracy, those US officials and academics who 
value democracy and who appreciate the strategic importance of 
Taiwan as an indispensable link in the security of Japan as well as 
the US will be encouraged to resist Beijing's pressure to undermine 
Taiwan's existence as a free and democratic state.  An unequivocal 
commitment to defend Taiwan's sovereignty and democracy is required 
if Hsieh wants thousands of Taiwanese-Americans to return home to 
vote for him next March.  Only such commitment will enable Hsieh to 
fire up his pan green base and persuade light blue voters that only 
a free and independent Taiwan can ensure their life, liberty and 
prosperity.  To secure his victory, to preserve Taiwan's freedom and 
stability in East Asia and ultimately to deter a conflict between 
the US and China, Hsieh has no choice but to stand firm on the right 
side of history." 
 
YOUNG