07PARIS3251
MINIMUM SERVICE" LABOR REFORM BILL CHALLENGES FRANCE'S
Thu Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO8827
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHFR #3251/01 2140532
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020532Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9246
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 003251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EIND EINV ETRD ELAB PGOV FR
SUBJECT:  "MINIMUM SERVICE" LABOR REFORM BILL CHALLENGES FRANCE'S 
POWERFUL PUBLIC SECTOR UNIONS 
 
REF: (A) EMBASSY PARIS DAILY SIPERNET REPORT FOR JULY 30; (B) 
 
EMBASSY PARIS DAILY SIPERNET REPORT FOR JULY 31; (C) EMBASSY PARIS 
DAILY SIPERNET REPORT FOR AUGUST 1 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) A bill to be adopted by Parliament at the end of this 
summer's extraordinary session requires public transport providers 
to maintain minimum service during strikes -- a key campaign promise 
by President Nicolas Sarkozy (ref A).  Regarded as the most symbolic 
of Sarkozy's social reforms, this bill, which should become law on 
January 1, 2008, will strip the unions of their strongest weapon 
against public sector reform, potentially paving the way for other 
major changes in the French labor market and the role of labor 
organizations.  The labor unions' retaliatory action on July 31 (ref 
B), and their threat to disrupt the rugby World Cup this fall, 
signals union determination to push back against the challenge to 
their power this bill represents.  End Summary. 
 
What's in the bill 
------------------ 
¶2.  (U)  The four main requirements of the draft bill on "social 
dialogue and continuity of public service in public transportation" 
are: 1) that individual workers declare their intention to strike 
two days in advance or be subject to disciplinary action; 2) that 
unions notify the company in advance of any plan to issue a 
notification of strike action, but only after the failure of 
negotiations; 3) that workers not receive pay for strike days; 4) 
that the employer or the union call a meeting to vote by secret 
ballot -- rather than a show of hands -- on whether strike action 
should continue after a week. 
 
¶3.  (U)  The bill applies to transportation services defined by the 
government as "any company or government organization entrusted with 
a mission of public service for the regular transport of passengers 
who are not tourists."  Air and maritime transport are currently 
excluded.  However, the draft bill does not provide any minimum 
service requirements, and it is up to individual companies to create 
a contingency plan for minimum service by the end of the year.  The 
draft bill will be adopted by August 3, which marks the end of this 
summer's extraordinary session of the legislature. 
 
SNCF's reaction 
--------------- 
¶4.  (U)  The head of the national rail company SNCF, Anne-Marie 
Idrac, said that the legislation would be a "culture shock" for the 
organisation.  Notwithstanding the government's determination and 
rail workers unions' threatening response, she nonetheless was able 
to note a decline in disruptions to service over the past year. 
Idrac said that work days lost per worker had dropped from 0.7 last 
year to 0.13 for the first six months of this year.  She further 
announced a 100-million Euro investment in network upgrades, as well 
as the hiring of 1,000 extra workers, as a potential sweetener for 
the unions' acceptance of this reform.  (It is not yet clear whether 
these will be new positions, or merely replacements for staff who 
leave or retire.) 
 
Union responses 
--------------- 
¶5.  (U)  Prime Minister Francois Fillon said the bill was not an 
attack on French labor's sacrosanct right to strike, and argued that 
ordinary workers would benefit most.  "The right to strike is a 
fundamental right - the right to go to work, too."  However, unions 
disagree.  No less than eight trade unions (CGT, CFDT, FO, CFTC, 
SUD-rail, UNSA, CFE/CGC and FGAAC) have signed a unified declaration 
claiming that the right to strike is in no way negotiable.  They 
claim that 98 percent of all rail traffic disturbances are due to 
mechanical/technical problems rather than work stoppages.  The most 
extreme of these unions, SUD Rail and SNCF train drivers' federation 
FGAAC, announced after a meeting with the government that workers 
would continually give notice of strikes in an attempt to subvert 
any legislation.  The CGT, for its part, has asked 60 National 
Assembly members to challenge the draft bill before the 
Constitutional Council. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Many of these unions organized some 80 demonstrations 
throughout France on July 31; the 5,000 overall nationwide turnout, 
and somewhat desultory gathering behind the National Assembly in 
Paris, bespeaks the growing indifference of the French public and 
French employees to organized labor.  The leader of the 
Communist-backed CGT, Bernard Thibault, threatened to disrupt the 
rugby World Cup taking place in France in September and October.  He 
said that if his trade union did not reach agreement with the SNCF 
minimum service plan to be developed before the end of the year, his 
and other trade unions would interrupt train services to various 
World Cup destinations.  The decision of the Constitutional Council 
will ultimately decide the future and extent of future union 
protest.  (Comment: The low attendance of the demonstration 
organized in Paris on July 31, the first day of the reading of the 
 
PARIS 00003251  002 OF 002 
 
 
bill in the National Assembly, confirms that the days of French rail 
unions' power to bring the entire country to a standstill is not 
what it used to be. End comment.) 
 
The "right" to strike in public transport 
----------------------------------------- 
¶7.  (SBU)  In France, the right to strike is an individual right and 
does not necessarily require a strike call from a trade union. 
However, strike action in public transport must be announced ahead 
of time.  In practice, this requirement has often been by-passed by 
trade unions.  In order to avoid individual penalties for 
"unofficial strikes," trade unions have tended to issue continuous 
strike notices covering all employees at all times. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  To curb this trend, the Paris Public Transit Authority 
(Rgie autonome des transports parisiens, RATP), which runs the 
Paris metro and bus services as well as a part of the regional 
public transport network, has developed an in-house 
dispute-resolution system, which has helped significantly to reduce 
the number of strikes in recent years, especially short-notice 
walk-outs.  The French National Rail Company (Socit nationale des 
chemins de fer frangais, SNCF) reached a company-level agreement on 
this issue in 2003, but this has not prevented last minute strikes. 
 
 
Possible extension to other sectors? 
---------------------------------------- 
¶9.  (U) There have been strong indications that the government is 
thinking of extending its minimum service requirements in the 
transportation sector to other public services.  Prime Minister 
Fillon has stated that if the law works, it should be extended to 
include other public services, notably education.  The Senate, which 
adopted the minimum service draft bill earlier this month, 
introduced an amendment to that effect, but it was withdrawn by the 
National Assembly.  Jean-Frangois Cop, President of the UMP group 
in the National Assembly, confirmed that an extension of the minimum 
service was being considered when he raised the question of closing 
down schools in case of a strike. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  Quick to defend their prerogatives, a group of five 
teachers unions (FSU, Unsa Education, SGEN-CFDT, FAEN, FERC-CGT) -- 
the other major public service bastion -- immediately announced 
their intention to organize protests in the fall, although they said 
their focus would be on GOF plans to abolish teaching jobs through 
attrition.  (Prime Minister Fillon's recent announcement (ref C) 
that his original scheme not to replace half of the 450,000 civil 
servants scheduled to retire over the next five years had been 
revised downward may help curb future demonstrations by teachers, 
and prevent a much-feared merging of forces between transportation 
and teaching unions, the strongest bastions of opposition to change 
in France over the past 20 years.) 
 
Minimum service: an old debate in France 
---------------------------------------- 
¶11. (U) The draft bill on minimum service is a follow-up to a debate 
launched in 2003, when trade unions organized widespread industrial 
action to protest government plans to reform pensions and health 
insurance.  Then-President Jacques Chirac came out in favor of 
developing a minimum service initiative.  A group of experts, none 
of whom were drawn from trade unions, produced a report in July 2004 
supporting Chirac's initiative.  The shelved report called for many 
of the proposals contained in the current draft bill. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶12. (SBU) Minimum service is the first major social test of the 
Sarkozy presidency.  The bill intends to show the last pockets of 
resistance to reform in the public sector that they can no longer 
hang on to old prerogatives and wield the kind of power that brought 
the country to a standstill in 1995.  Further down the road, 
Sarkozy's success with the introduction of a minimum service -- 
emblematic though it may be -- will set the tone for other labor 
reforms.  Trade unions are aware that beyond a more regulated right 
to strike, what is at stake is the traditional role of France's five 
main trade unions.  As Elysee Chief-of-Staff Claude Gueant is keen 
to point out, French trade unions represent only between five and 
six percent of the workforce, hardly enough to lay  claim to 
representing people who work, let alone to disrupt the activities of 
those who want to work. 
 
Pekala