07PRETORIA2936
SOUTH AFRICA: PRODUCT SAFETY
Wed Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSA #2936/01 2341012
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221012Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1312UNCLAS PRETORIA 002936 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO EEB/TPP/ABT FOR P.SAXTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAGR ETRD TBIO SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: PRODUCT SAFETY 
 
REF: STATE 114788 
 
¶1.  In response to reftel, emboffs spoke with the South 
Africa Bureau of Standards, Department of Trade and Industry, 
International Trade Administration Commission of South 
Africa, South Africa Revenue Service and the Department of 
Health's (DOH) Directorate of Food Control regarding food and 
consumer product safety.  The DOH expressed an interest in 
further discussion on this topic.  South Africa's current 
procedures for product safety are highlighted below.  Post 
will continue to follow up with key officials in these 
departments to continue a dialogue on this issue. 
 
----------- 
Food Safety 
----------- 
 
¶2.  South Africa has a well-developed commercial agriculture 
and food production system.  Food Safety is regulated under 
at least fourteen government acts that are administered and 
enforced by several government authorities and assignees at 
the national, provincial, and municipal levels.  The 
Department of Health (DOH) is the primary food safety/control 
regulatory body, but coordinates closely with the National 
Department of Agriculture (NDA).  South Africa's agricultural 
and food exports generally meet international standards.  In 
addition to DOH and NDA, South Africa' exports must also meet 
standards established by South African Bureau of Standards 
and the Perishable Products Export Control Board with 
guidance from industry working groups. 
 
¶3.  South Africa is a relatively minor supplier of 
agricultural and food products to the United States.  In 
2006, U.S. imports of South African ag/food products were 
valued at 203 million USD, with seafood adding an additional 
31 million USD.  (Total U.S. ag/food imports last year were 
valued at 65.3 billion USD.)  Nearly 80 percent of the South 
African ag/food products imported by the United States are 
"consumer-oriented food items", predominantly fresh fruit (67 
million USD) and wine (42 million USD).  Other major products 
include processed fruits and vegetables, including juices (21 
million USD), sugar (20 million USD), and tree nuts (13 
million USD).  USDA works closely with South African 
exporters with regard to meeting U.S. plant and animal health 
standards. 
 
----------------------- 
Consumer Product Safety 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  South Africa is in the process of fine tuning its 
consumer and product safety regulatory systems.  Product 
safety is governed by several regulatory agencies depending 
on the product.  The South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) 
is the lead agency for public safety and consumer protection 
issues and is responsible for enforcement of compulsory 
minimum standards for the safety and performance of selected 
products that are considered inherently risky.  SABS 
standards, which are aligned with international standards 
when possible, cover products such as vehicles, electrical 
and electronic goods and components, chemicals, foods, and 
weapons.  Compulsory standards are applicable to all locally 
manufactured products, imported products, and products 
destined for export.  SABS enforces the compulsory standards 
through physical audits, market surveillance, and 
manufacturing plant inspections.  SABS has authority to issue 
sanctions ranging from cancellation of the sale of 
non-conforming products to destruction and prosecution. 
 
¶5.  The range of covered products can also be extended 
through a request to SABS with a subsequent assessment as to 
the dangers of the product to the public.  Other categories 
of products are regulated by various agencies, such as food 
products mentioned above, pharmaceuticals, which are governed 
by the Department of Health's Medicine Control Council, and 
fuel, oil and power products, which are regulated by the 
Department of Minerals and Energy. 
 
¶6.  The majority (60 percent) of SA exports to the U.S. are 
not consumer or food products, but consist of base metals, 
precious stones, and other mining related items.  Most of the 
consumer products that were exported to the U.S. last year 
fall within those categories monitored by SABS.  Manufactured 
products are 38 percent of SA's exports to the U.S. valued at 
15.6 billion rand (2.2 billion USD).  Vehicles constitute 11 
percent, chemical exports another 8 percent, and mechanical 
an electrical appliances 7 percent. 
 
¶7.  Products that fall outside of SABS or other regulatory 
agencies' purview are not regulated or standardized for 
safety concerns.  For example, defective toy products that 
have been recent subject of recalls in the U.S. are not 
governed by any regulations.  A draft Consumer Protection 
Bill (CPB) is in the middle of the legislative process, but 
due to delays and re-drafts, it likely will not be approved 
until latter 2008.  The CPB is designed to impose an 
obligation on manufacturers to ensure safe products and 
includes mechanisms for consumers to seek redress for 
manufacturing defects, a process for product recalls.  The 
CPB will also create a National Consumer Council to monitor 
consumer products in the market.  In addition, a draft 
Regulator for Compulsory Specification Bill is currently 
before Parliament, which would enable SABS to be more 
flexible in the application of standards (i.e., making 
exceptions for locally manufactured products being exported 
to countries with varying standards). 
 
------------------ 
Areas For Dialogue 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  South Africa faces many of the same concerns as the 
United States with regard to the safety of food and consumer 
product imports and may be willing to be a useful partner 
both bilaterally and multilaterally on the safety of these 
imports.  Compared to the rather rigorous standards for 
domestically produced food products and products destined for 
the export market, we believe that South Africa's controls 
over food imports are relatively weak.  In recent years, 
South Africa has encountered food safety problems related to 
chemicals, antibiotics and other contaminants in imported 
food products.  The limited range of consumer products 
governed by regulations is also an area in which a 
partnership may help to enhance overall consumer protection 
with both imported and exported products.  The DOH has 
already expressed a shared interest in pursuing further 
discussions.  Should SA be interested in pursuing potential 
cooperative programs, post would be interested in knowing if 
there are practical resources available to engage SA. 
Teitelbaum