04ADANA106
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY AUGUST 17, 2004
Fri Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM IZ TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY AUGUST 17, 2004 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for August 17, 
¶2004. Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
SABAH: A written announcement by the American Embassy in Ankara 
expressed that Turkey did not have a better friend than the 
United States in its twenty years of anti-PKK struggle. The 
announcement said any support to the terrorist organization by 
the Unites States was out of question. The announcement read 
"With various intelligence, diplomatic and financial measures we 
are engaged in an active effort to limit PKK's activities." In 
response to interpretations that the visit of U.S. Vice Consul 
Alicia Allison's to Diyarbakir Mayor was evidence of support to 
PKK, the announcement said "There can not be such a thing so far 
from the truth. American officials' visits to elected political 
representatives are among their ordinary diplomatic activities. 
In addition, Allison told her interlocutors to take a clear 
stance against PKK terrorism, and to avoid undertaking actions 
which could be perceived as supportive of PKK." 
RADIKAL, MILLI GAZETE, TERCUMAN, VAKIT: In Hakkari province, a 
remote-controlled mine planted on the road between Yuksekova and 
Esendere border gate with Iran, was detonated by GOT forces. 
Hakkari Governor Erdogan Gurbuz was going to use that route to 
meet his Iranian counterpart. 
EVRENSEL: On the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the PKK's 
armed struggle, some youth groups in Yuksekova, Hakkari 
province, set fires and shouted pro-PKK slogans. GOT forces did 
not intervene in the incident which lasted for an hour and was 
supported by local spectators. Similar activities were staged in 
Nusaybin, Mardin province, as well as in Van and Batman 
provinces. 
ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: A group from the Diyarbakir Free Citizen 
Movement tried to submit to the Diyarbakir Governor's office 
petitions signed by 30,600 persons stating that Abdullah Ocalan 
was the means for solving the Kurdish issue through peaceful 
ways. Police arrested 14 persons who were trying to deliver the 
petitions and attacked the group waiting outside. The crowd 
arrayed banners reading "Long Live President APO". 
ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: Heze Parastina Gel, (HPG - Peoples Defense 
Forces) announced that two soldiers were killed and three others 
were wounded during August 12 clashes with GOT forces in 
Semdinli, Hakkari province. An armored personnel carrier 
attempting to intervene in the incident ran over a five-year old 
child and killed him. HPG added that near Herinke village of 
Yuksekova, Hakkari province, an armored vehicle was destroyed 
and four soldiers in it were killed during the incident on 
August 14. HPG claimed that forty persons were detained 
following the incidents. 
ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: Gaziantep Security Directorate interrogated 
eight DEHAP members who had attended a press announcement 
concerning Abdullah Ocalan's isolation in detainment. In 
addition, 150 of 500 persons who had filed pro-Ocalan petitions 
with the Governor's office were interrogated for violating 
Assembly and Demonstration Marches Law. 
 
 
REID