04ANKARA4764
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Mon Aug 23 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004764 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
MONDAY, AUGUST 23, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Appeals Court Chairman: "I Will Not Resign" - Hurriyet 
(8/22) 
MIT Official Suspected of Mafia Connection - Sabah (8/22) 
Starbucks Coffee in Ankara - Milliyet (8/22) 
Ankara Prosecutor Seeks Permission to Try Railways Director 
- Hurriyet 
Bush Plans to go to Athens Despite Risk of Protests - 
Milliyet 
Turkomen Protest Against Kurds in Kirkuk - Milliyet 
Iran Postpones Opening of Nuclear Plant for One Year - 
Milliyet 
French FM Urges EU to Fulfill Its Promise to Turkey - 
Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
New Iraqi Ambassador Comes to Turkey - Cumhuriyet (8/21) 
US Tanks 300 meters from Shiite Shrine - Zaman 
Fighting in Najaf Continues - Radikal 
Judiciary to File Case Against Railway Director - Cumhuriyet 
Cabinet Reshuffle Expected in October - Cumhuriyet 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Putin Visit:  "Hurriyet" reports on the September 1-2 visit 
to Ankara by Russian President Putin, the first such visit 
by a Russian head of state in over 30 years.  According to 
the report, the number one item on Putin's agenda will be 
energy.  Specifically, the Russian President is expected to 
push for the construction of a pipeline through Turkish 
Thrace as a means to by-pass the congested Bosphorus 
shipping lanes.  Given Turkey's environmental concerns, 
however, "Radikal" reports that the Turkish side will likely 
propose an alternative pipeline from the Black Sea port of 
Samsun to the Mediterranean port at Ceyhan.  "Hurriyet" 
claims that the Russians are also considering a pipeline 
that would run through Bulgaria to Greece.  In addition to 
energy issues, Putin is expected to raise concerns about 
Turkish support for Chechen terrorist groups.  The Turkish 
side will likely counter with its concerns about Russian 
support for the terrorist PKK. 
 
Judiciary-Mafia Link:  Saturday's "Sabah" reported that high- 
level judiciary officials are angry at Supreme Court 
chairman Ozkaya for his failure to resign over allegations 
of contacts with mafia boss Alaatin Cakici.  Some officials 
have reportedly threatened to boycott the opening of the new 
judicial year on September 6, a ceremony at which Ozkaya is 
scheduled to preside.  Sunday's "Hurriyet" reported that 
Ozkaya continues to deny the allegations, and said he is 
determined to continue in his position until his mandatory 
retirement in three months time.  The paper added that 
Ozkaya has called for the entire text of his tapped 
telephone conversations with MIT officials to be revealed. 
Sunday's "Sabah" reports that the prosecutor has started an 
investigation of MIT official Kasif Kozinoglu for 
intervening on Cakici's behalf.  Cakici subsequently escaped 
from Turkey and was later apprehended by Austrian police. 
Cumhuriyet" draws attention to comments by Bar Association 
Chairman Ozdemir Ozok in support of Ozkaya. 
 
High-Speed Train Accident Case:  "Hurriyet" and "Cumhuriyet" 
report that the prosecutor asked for permission to file a 
case against Railways Director General Karaman for starting 
high-speed train service without completing the 
infrastructure for it.  38 people had lost their lives in 
the accident. 
 
French Support for Turkey's EU Bid:  "Zaman", "Vatan" and 
"Turkiye" report that French Foreign Minister Barnier urged 
to EU to `fulfill the promises' it has made to Turkey. 
Barnier said that Turkey's accession is very much in the 
EU's interest. 
 
Expected Cabinet Re-Shuffle in Turkey:  "Cumhuriyet" 
speculates that PM Erdogan will carry out an extensive 
cabinet reshuffle in October.  The cabinet reshuffle is 
expected to take place after the election of the new 
Parliament Speaker in October. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq; Fight against terrorism 
 
"Iraq and U.S. Mistakes" 
Ferai Tinc observed in the mass appeal Hurriyet (8/23): "It 
seems impossible for the coalition or the Iraqis to gain 
control of the situation in Najaf, whether through political 
or military means.  The CIA-sponsored Iraqi leader Allawi 
comes from an influential and powerful Iraqi family, but 
even he has failed to bring the situation under control. 
The Najaf resistance was initially presented as a terrorist 
group.  Time has now shown that it is a popular resistance 
movement.  This is only one of many mistakes made in Iraq, 
including the miscalculations of the Iraqi people and the 
Iraqi opposition.  The US provided all kinds of support to 
Ahmad Chalabi.  When the mistake was realized, it was 
already too late.  Support for Iranian-backed Al-Hakim was 
another big mistake.  The people of Iraq preferred an 
independent Shiite figure, i.e. Sadr, as opposed to the 
Iranian-backed Hakim. . Iraq is rapidly toward a period in 
which more conflicts are likely.  Looking for ways to 
establish a balance in the current situation is very 
difficult.  There is no authority in Iraq that can unite the 
complex interests of all groups   Can the US be this 
authority?  It is far too late for that.  American military 
forces cannot even establish full control over Baghdad, yet 
alone set up a lasting political structure." 
 
"Conquering Hearts and Minds" 
Ali Aslan wrote from Washington in the Islamist-intellectual 
Zaman (8/23): "The Bush administration sees many 
similarities between the Cold War and the ongoing war 
against terrorism.   However, the US has failed to invest 
politically, intellectually and financially on this issue. 
NSC Adviser Rice recently gave examples of how bright 
Americans who spoke Russian and other languages in the 
region were influential in the process of the demise of 
Soviet Union.  Yet today, Washington does not have a single 
government expert who knows Islamic culture well and speaks 
regional languages.  This goes for prominent American 
universities as well. . Rice also mentioned the 
administration's efforts to focus more on non-military 
issues such as tolerance, acceptance of the other, and 
encouraging political participation of community 
representatives.  The problem is that this approach remains 
on paper, because the military and security effort continues 
to dominate. . The US should start begin trying to win 
hearts and minds in the Islamic world.  Otherwise its 
policies, which have taken into account only terrorism and 
fanaticism, are doomed to fail." 
 
EDELMAN