04ANKARA4580
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, AUGUST 1-
Mon Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 13 ANKARA 004580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, AUGUST 1- 
15, 2004 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries about anti-TIP public 
information campaigns, post provides as examples the 
following TIP press reports.  Text of articles originally 
published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published August 15, 2004 by the International Herald 
Tribune and New York Times: 
 
     TITLE: Southeastern European Nations Unite to Battle 
     Sex Trafficking; By DAVID BINDER 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14 - Investigators from 
     Turkey and Romania teamed up recently to interview 
     victims of a sex-trafficking ring, resulting in the 
     arrest of five offenders. It was part of a stepped-up 
     cooperative effort against organized crime in Southern 
     Europe. 
     A prosecutor and a police officer traveled from 
     Bucharest to Spain to help shut down a Romanian 
     operation that had trafficked 40 women. 
 
     Sex trafficking victims from Moldova testified in a 
     Serbian court, resulting in prison terms for 14 
     traffickers. 
 
     Those and similar cases involving human trafficking 
     where cross-border cooperation has been a rarity are 
     the work of the Regional Center for Combating 
     Transborder Crime of the Southeast European Cooperative 
     Initiative in Bucharest. 
 
     In addition to operations aimed at interdicting 
     narcotics and contraband smuggling, the Cooperative 
     Initiative's Center, which opened in 2001 with 
     assistance from the United States, has conducted three 
     regional sweeps against traffic in human beings, mainly 
     of young women for sexual exploitation. 
 
     Southeastern Europe is a region where the International 
     Organization for Migration estimates that 200,000 women 
     are trafficked annually, including women from the 
     region and women brought there for the sex trade. The 
     center had help from the F.B.I. in training officials 
     to interview the victims. 
 
     Officials here and in the region say that the latest 
     sweep, by more than 1,000 police officers in June, has 
     raised cooperation against organized crime among 13 
     countries to new levels. They are Albania, Bosnia and 
     Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Hungary, 
     Macedonia, Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, 
     Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine. 
 
     "For the first time we have investigators from several 
     countries working together, we have prosecutors 
     involved, and victims crossing borders to provide 
     testimony without resort to legal assistance treaties," 
     said John F. Markey, a director of law enforcement 
     assistance programs for the State Department and the 
     principal American liaison for the regional center, 
     known as the SECI Center. 
 
     It "is unique in the world in terms of regional 
     cooperation against organized crime," he said, noting 
     that work was under way to replicate it for an area 
     from Southeastern Europe to Central Asia by another 
     United States-sponsored group comprising Georgia, 
     Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and Moldova. 
     The June sweep brought increases in most categories 
     used to measure success relative to the network's 
     previous operations: 594 victims identified; 86 victims 
     assisted; 133 victims repatriated; 545 traffickers 
     identified and 328 traffickers charged. 
 
     In addition, 120 requests for information on people 
     suspected of crimes were registered in the Bucharest 
     center from outlying law enforcement authorities from 
     across the region. In an analysis, Maj. Gen. Alexandru 
     Ionas, deputy director at the center, wrote, "This 
     trend is a clear sign that the mechanism of the task 
     force is fully at work and that countries rely more and 
     more on its information exchange facilities." 
 
     He called for "international tracing of criminal assets 
     and money laundering schemes." Some actions with regard 
     to assets are already occurring. In conjunction with 
     the sweep, Albanian state police officials in July 
     announced that they had seized assets valued at $4.3 
     million. END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published August 13, 2004 by the Prague Post: 
 
     TITLE: U.S. seeks solution to trafficking 
     BEGIN TEXT: Expert lauds efforts, decries drift toward 
     sex-trade legalization; By Dinah A. Spritzer; Staff 
     Writer, The Prague Post; (August 12, 2004) 
 
     Ambassador John Miller, director of the U.S. State 
     Department's Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking 
     in Persons, paid a visit to the Czech Republic at the 
     beginning of the month and met with trafficking 
     experts. Miller's office helps countries to curtail 
     forced labor and sexual slavery. His position was 
     created last year as part of an expansion of the U.S. 
     Trafficking Victim Protection Act. Passed in 2000, the 
     act provided stiffer penalties against human 
     traffickers and funding for assistance to victims of 
     modern-day slavery. On Aug. 6 Miller discussed with The 
     Prague Post the Czech fight against sexual slavery and 
     U.S. concern over the Czech government's aim to 
     legalize prostitution. 
 
     The Prague Post: The Czech Republic has been dubbed by 
     some as the brothel of Europe because of its booming 
     sex trade. Does that bother you? 
 
     John Miller: First of all, I am not in a position at 
     all to look at the Czech Republic that way. I have seen 
     a lot of other European countries that could make a 
     pretty good claim to that title. 
 
     TPP: Nonetheless, the number of sex clubs here has 
     dramatically grown in the last few years. Aren't you 
     concerned that they fuel trafficking? 
 
     JM: There is no question that when you have a brothel, 
     you have a demand for victims. Research indicates that 
     enormous percentages of the women involved are not 
     doing this of their free choice. The most recent survey 
     -- it's an American study by eight doctors -- looks at 
     854 women engaged in prostitution in nine countries, 
     ranging from Germany to Taiwan. That survey shows that 
     the overwhelming majority report being continuously 
     harassed, assaulted and raped. Eighty-nine percent want 
     to escape [from prostitution]. 
 
     TPP: You called it the oldest form of abuse, but don't 
     women have the right to be prostitutes? 
 
     JM: If most women are not getting into it by their free 
     choice, we have to acknowledge this fact. And if it is 
     associated with rape and assault and harassment, we 
     have to acknowledge that fact as well. For the most 
     part it is a human rights violation. 
 
     TPP: So is this what you're telling mayors in this 
     country: "Hey, I know you want to legalize 
     prostitution: Don't do it"? 
 
     JM: I haven't talked to any mayors. I wish I had. But 
     we feel making the state the chief pimp is not going to 
     help matters. We talked to NGOs [nongovernmental 
     organizations] and they privately said this is not 
     going to help the women involved. This is going to 
     stigmatize them as a class. It is going to create a 
     demand for more victims. It is going to invite 
     organized crime to extend their tentacles. 
 
     TPP: Jitka Gjuricova, the Interior Ministry expert on 
     prostitution, says the ministry "draws inspiration" 
     from countries where regulation of licensed 
     prostitution has proven to be an effective means in 
     fighting trafficking. 
 
     JM: She draws inspiration, let's be blunt about it, 
     from the Netherlands. If you look at the last decade in 
     the Netherlands, the number of [trafficking] victims 
     has quadrupled. They created a magnet for victims from 
     all over the world, particularly from Eastern Europe. 
     There is absolutely no evidence the Netherlands, this 
     inspiration for those who seek legalization, has 
     reduced trafficking in victims. It appears to be the 
     opposite. 
 
     TPP: How do you assess Czech efforts to curtail sexual 
     slavery? 
 
     JM: You now have a national action plan on trafficking. 
     You have an organized-crime unit with officers focusing 
     specifically on trafficking and this is something many 
     countries don't have. You are just in the process of 
     finishing a pilot project for victims, very advanced, 
     and the government officials I have talked to want to 
     expand it. 
 
     TPP: And the shortcomings? 
 
     JM: The Czech Republic is a Tier 1 [best-practices 
     country according to the U.S. Global Report on 
     Trafficking], [but] every government can improve. We 
     did notice there were 15 or 20 arrests last year of 
     traffickers, five convictions and then [only] one 
     person went to jail and the rest got suspended 
     sentences. There was an educational campaign a couple 
     of years ago in the schools but it ended and I think 
     there is something to be done there. And it has to be 
     directed not just at potential victims but at society 
     as a whole. There is a need to develop an attitude that 
     recognizes that such women are not criminals; they are 
     not a lower class; they are victims. 
 
     TPP: Does the U.S. fight against trafficking have any 
     real influence on what governments do? 
 
     JM: A year ago, in our Trafficking in Persons Reoprt, 
     we listed a host of countries in Tier 3, those not 
     making significant efforts to stop trafficking. 
     Included were some friends of ours, Greece and Turkey. 
     In the three months after the report came out, while 
     there was of course some criticism in these countries 
     of our report, nonetheless there were people of 
     goodwill who recognized this was a valuable tool. And 
     so in these countries you found increased efforts at 
     education, public service announcements directed at 
     potential victims. You found law-enforcement training 
     courses sensitizing police to look for victims, not 
     just treating them as illegal immigrants. You found 
     more arrests and prosecutions; you found more funding 
     for NGOs helping victims. The point is to see progress. 
 
     TPP: Many people object to the U.S. government acting 
     as a moral bully. What gives you the right to boss 
     other countries around? 
 
     JM: There is not a government in the world that 
     officially sanctions slavery. This is a universal 
     value. I do not apologize for the fact that maybe the 
     U.S. feels this value more acutely because of our 
     history with slavery. I do not apologize for the fact 
     that we take a leadership role on this. It is also not 
     just a case of the U.S. looking at the world. One of 
     the first things I did when I started this position was 
     to commission a report on the U.S. 
 
     TPP: What is the greatest weakness in the U.S. effort 
     to combat trafficking at home? 
 
     JM: Prosecutions. We have tripled them in the last two 
     years, but there is more to be done. We know there are 
     thousands [of victims] in the U.S. but the prosecutions 
     are in the hundreds. END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published August 10, 2004 by Turkey's Hurriyet News, 
page 6: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: TRABZON - Two Russian women, together with 
     their boy friends, went to a beach owned by the Trabzon 
     Security Directorate.  The two women started sunbathing 
     topless and behaved improperly with their boy friends. 
     When families complained, the two were taken out of the 
     site.  The Security then closed the beach to outsiders. 
     END TEXT. 
¶5. (U) Published August 8, 2004 by the India Tribune: 
 
     TITLE: INHUMAN CARGO 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: The plight of "aliens" languishing in jails 
     in Greece, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan was brought to 
     light after seven workers of Kuwait Gulf Links, a 
     transport company, were taken hostage in Iraq. Those 
     taken hostages had gone "legally" but the focus shifted 
     to the "aliens" who were considered "vulnerable" to 
     exploitation by companies engaged in Illegal 
     international trafficking. 
 
     Only last week, the first batch of 23 of the 106 Indian 
     youth, who had been languishing in the Teheran Gurdwara 
     from four weeks to three months, could return home 
     safely after attempts to sneak into Greece in the 
     Olympic year proved abortive. They were not only left 
     destitute but had become mental wrecks. Despite the 
     infamous Malta boat tragedy of December 25,1996, there 
     has been no let-up in the activities of mafia engaged 
     in human smuggling. It is not only the Doaba region of 
     Punjab that is targeted by the agents but also other 
     parts of the North, including Haryana. 
 
     In the Malta boat tragedy, 170 youth from Doaba, 88 
     Pakistanis and 149 Sri Lankans had drowned in the Malta- 
     Sicily channel after "donkey," the boat they were 
     travelling in, collided with a ship during a mid-sea 
     transfer. The police may have registered more cases 
     this year than last year against travel agents for 
     cheating, but it has not checked the "outflow of both 
     skilled and unskilled youth to western nations" by 
     illicit methods. Rather, the number of victims is 
     rising at an alarming rate. 
 
     Smuggling humans is a multi-billion dollar business. It 
     has been thriving because of the lack of economic 
     opportunities at home. "What do we do here? There are 
     no jobs and agriculture is not remunerative. We are 
     forced to take this risk," says Karnail Chand, a 29- 
     year-old from Kapurthala, who has been one of the 23 
     who returned from Teheran last week. 
 
     "It is a complex network which operates not only at the 
     village level in Punjab but also internationally. The 
     beneficiaries are too many. Right from the agents who 
     scout for youth lured by the greener pastures of the 
     West to immigration and police officials manning 
     international borders across the globe, all are part of 
     the network," says a senior Punjab police official, 
     maintaining that each victim has the "same horrid tale 
     of misery, hardship and suffering to tell." 
 
     A powerful nexus between collaborators or suppliers of 
     illegal immigrants from the region and those abroad 
     have spread their tentacles all round the globe and 
     turned the racket of into a thriving business. 
     Increasingly clever and clandestine methods employed by 
     the criminals, incredibly high profits involved and the 
     non-interference of other countries, which often 
     welcome the aliens as "refugees," are supporting 
     factors that contribute to this flourishing trade. 
     Investigations reveal that every year those indulging 
     in human trafficking ensnare no less than 25,000 able- 
     bodied youth from the region. Each one of them coughs 
     up anything between Rs 2.5 lakh and Rs. 20 lakh on 
     being promised an "entry" into Europe or North America. 
 
     "Last year, almost 90 per cent of the people from 
     Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq managed to sneak into Greece 
     and Italy. But this year, the success rate has been 
     only 9 to 10 per cent. In Greece, the authorities are 
     very strict because of the Olympics. They deport as 
     many as 1,000 "illegal immigrants" everyday," says 
     Balbir Chand, also a victim. 
 
     Harpal Singh, a youth from Doaba, says he had struck a 
     Rs1.75-lakh deal with a travel agent of Nakodar for 
     taking him to Greece. "It all started well. The agent 
     got us a visa for Jordan and put us up in a hotel for 
     seven days. Food was not provided but the agent used to 
     give us a few chappatis and some vegetable curry for 
     lunch and dinner each day. 
 
     "Then started the second and most humiliating phase. 
     Those who were not very ambitious settled down in 
     Jordan or Lebanon where they have to churn out 
     something between Rs 45,000 and 50,000 for a card to 
     work there against a salary of US $ 250 to 300 a month. 
     To get into Istanbul in Turkey, agents in Jordan charge 
     you anything between US $ 450 and 500. Tourist buses 
     take 15 to 16 hours to reach Istanbul." 
 
     "Sometimes, these buses are checked and "aliens" are 
     pushed and dropped on the Iran border. There are 
     several check posts and barriers. The aliens manage to 
     either cross into Iran or look for assistance to sneak 
     into Turkey again. 
 
     Since people in the border villages are poor, they also 
     lend a helping hand. Some Kurds even facilitate their 
     release from the border police, charging between US $ 
     250 and 400 and helping them reach the gurdwara in 
     Teheran. Others are pushed into Pakistan," reveals 
     another youth, who had managed to reach the gurdwara on 
     paying $ 250 dollars to a Kurd. 
 
     Until last month, the agents used to make the kabootars 
     (illegal immigrants) enter into Iraq from where they 
     would join groups of "donkeys" (illegal immigrants are 
     referred as donkeys in West Asia). But now this channel 
     has been closed. "We were in Baghdad for a few days 
     before we left for our next destination as donkeys," 
     discloses another victim, alleging that agents have tie- 
     ups with the police and other authorities. 
 
     Donkey, explains a victim, is the name given to a group 
     of aliens who are moved, mostly at night, either in 
     specially crafted light and medium transport vehicles 
     or made to walk through inhospitable terrains criss- 
     crossing international borders. These vehicles are 
     otherwise used for ferrying sheep and cattle. "If you 
     are a `donkey' then you should be prepared to wade 
     through snow, slush, mud and difficult terrain. 
     Sometimes, we had to walk for 24 hours at a stretch, 
     without food and water. Our ordeal continued for almost 
     three months till we, a group of eight people, managed 
     to reach the Iran border and a Kurd helped us to reach 
     the Teheran gurdwara," reveals a youth from Punjab. 
 
     "We managed to reach Greece from we were deported. In 
     all, we were eight Indians, 55 Pakistanis and 10 
     Bangladeshis. In Istanbul, Greece, Lebanon and even in 
     Jordan, the agents have set up open shops. For example, 
     the rates for reaching Greece from Lebanon or Turkey 
     vary. A truck-trailer at US$2,600 works out as the 
     cheapest mode of transport, while the speedboat or ship 
     at US $3,000 to 3,200 comes under the costly category. 
 
     "Money is taken only after one has reached the 
     destination," says Balbir Chand, who was deported from 
     Greece. "I was to pay US$450 on reaching Istanbul. 
     Since I was caught on the way, I did not pay anything." 
     In Turkey and Greece, the immigration officials are 
     strict. They take fingerprints and collect as much data 
     as possible to ensure that the alien does not attempt 
     to sneak into their country again. 
 
     "In one case, five aliens were fired upon after they 
     did not stop at a check barrier. A driver and an Indian 
     boy were killed in the firing, while the other three 
     occupants, all Pakistanis, were taken in custody. The 
     body of this boy is yet to reach his village in Doaba," 
     reveals Daljit Chand, also a victim. 
 
     Interestingly, not many of the victims or their parents 
     show any interest in filing criminal cases against the 
     agents because they apprehend a backlash or closing of 
     channel in future." When things improve and authorities 
     become lax, I may try again," says one of the victims, 
     a 23-year-old from Kapurthala. "I have nothing to do 
     here. No one is going to give me a job because I am a 
     school dropout. Even if I get a menial job in Europe, I 
     can support my family and parents back home. Doing the 
     same job in India, I cannot even support myself. END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published August 6, 2004 by the International 
Organization on Migration (Press Notes): 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: GEORGIA - "You Are Not For Sale" 
     Information Campaign Receives New Funding - The IOM 
     office in Tbilisi has launched the third stage of its 
     ongoing information campaign, aimed at raising 
     awareness on the dangers of human trafficking and 
     irregular migration from and through Georgia. 
 
     This two-year US$278,000 Dutch funded part of the 
     programme will allow IOM to expand its information 
     campaign in Georgian, English and Russian to include 
     awareness material on HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted 
     Diseases awareness to be distributed to potential 
     migrants and victims of trafficking. 
 
     The IOM information campaign "You Are not for Sale ", 
     launched in December 2001 with funding from the Dutch 
     Government, is helping to raise awareness about the 
     realities of travelling abroad for work and the dangers 
     associated with irregular migration. 
 
     Telephone hotlines, television and radio ads, campaign 
     posters in the underground, railway stations, airports 
     and other public places, and information meetings 
     throughout Georgia are providing up to date and 
     objective information on migration and alerting 
     potential migrants to the dangers of irregular 
     migration and trafficking. 
 
     IOM information centres in three Georgian cities 
     (Tbilisi, Kutaisi and Gurjaani) provide face-to-face 
     assistance to potential migrants, and encourage them to 
     verify job offers or information received before taking 
     the risk of moving abroad or paying money to mediators 
     who promise employment abroad.  A virtual centre where 
     people submit questions via the Internet to IOM 
     counsellors will also be set up. 
 
     The Turkish Embassy in Tbilisi is distributing 3,000 
     IOM brochures to visa applicants.  The brochures are 
     also being distributed at 11 border crossings, at the 
     passport agency and by NGOs. 
 
     Since July 2002, the IOM hotline has received some 
     7,000 calls.  The majority of the callers, females aged 
     between 20 and 40, are interested in finding seasonal 
     jobs abroad to support their families.  The second most 
     frequently asked question is visa procedures.  Other 
     questions include: legal migration opportunities, 
     opportunities to study abroad, asylum, and reliability 
     of employment offers. 
 
     The main destination countries for Georgian migrants 
     are Turkey, Greece, Russia, the United Arab Emirates, 
     the United States and Western Europe.  Migrant women 
     work as housekeepers and nannies; men work in 
     agriculture and construction.  In almost all cases the 
     work is illegal.  Many irregular migrants eventually 
     return home, but are forced to go abroad again in 
     search of work. END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published August 5, 2004 by Radio Free Europe: 
 
     TITLE: World: U.S. Diplomat Leads Charge Against Human 
     Trafficking; By Don Hill 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: The U.S. diplomat in charge of leading an 
     American worldwide campaign against what is called 
     "trafficking in people" says that no nation in the 
     world -- including the United States itself -- is doing 
     enough to combat the practice. Ambassador John Miller, 
     senior State Department adviser on people trafficking, 
     says the world must take a more serious stance on a 
     crime that is enslaving more than 800,000 people a year 
     -- mostly women and children. Miller is visiting the 
     Czech Republic this week in connection with a move 
     there to legalize prostitution. 
 
     Prague, 5 August 2004 (RFE/RL) -- Miller heads the U.S. 
     State Department's office to combat "trafficking in 
     persons," but the title, he says, is too mild for the 
     crime it describes. 
 
     "What we're talking about," he said, "is human 
     slavery." 
 
     A former congressman from the state of Washington, the 
     ambassador speaks on his chosen topic in language 
     atypical for politicians and diplomats. He told a press 
     briefing today at RFE/RL's Prague headquarters that 
     countries that treat people trafficking lightly are 
     allowing abductions, beatings, and rapes by the 
     thousands. 
 
     He said that he will urge the Czech government to move 
     cautiously as it considers proposed new legislation to 
     legalize and regulate prostitution. 
 
     "In our view, while it is important to treat the 
     victims [prostitutes] humanely, and while a good case 
     can be made, when you are talking about prostitution, 
     for de-criminalizing when it comes to the women 
     involved, the idea of legalizing the activities of the 
     customers, the pimps, the brothel owners, regulating -- 
     making the state the chief pimp -- our experience is 
     that will just be throwing oil on the fire," Miller 
     said. 
 
     Today marks the second day of Miller's three-day visit 
     to the Czech Republic. The ambassador said that early 
     in its transition from communism to a market economy, 
     the Czech Republic was what he calls a "source country" 
     for slaves -- women and children forced into 
     prostitution, and men into factory and farm labor in 
     other countries. But he said that has changed. 
     "We are not happy with what is going on in Russia. 
     They took some steps, they passed a new law with some 
     criminal provisions. They cooperated a little more 
     with NGOs. But overall the effort was weak and we 
     dropped Russia from Tier 2 to Tier on the watch list." 
     -- Ambassador John Miller 
 
     "As the Czech economy has grown, the nature of the 
     problem has changed," Miller said. "Today if we look at 
     trafficking in persons, or slavery, in the Czech 
     Republic, we are talking about the Czech Republic as a 
     destination country. People coming from Eurasia, 
     Eastern Europe to the Czech Republic, engaging, being 
     forced, into the various types of slavery. Although, 
     talking with the NGOs, it is clear that the leading 
     form of slavery in the Czech Republic is sex slavery." 
 
     Miller said he will advise the Czech leadership that, 
     in considering the legislation, they will be choosing 
     what kind of tourism they want their country to be 
     known for. He asked if Prague really wants to be famous 
     for, in his phrase, "sex tourism." 
 
     The United States has announced a fund of $120 million 
     for its antislavery program. And one of Miller's tasks 
     is to travel the world applying grants, advice, 
     pressure, and -- possibly -- threats of sanctions to 
     get other countries to take the issue seriously also. 
 
     Already, he said, the campaign has scored successes. He 
     said that Bosnia-Herzegovina, Georgia, Greece, 
     Kazakhstan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan -- among others -- 
     have taken actions that have moved them from his 
     office's list of countries who ignore the problem to 
     its list of countries that have taken significant steps 
     against it. 
 
     He said that Russia has moved in the opposite direction 
     and his office has re-listed it. He said his office now 
     considers Russia as belonging to the tier -- or level - 
     - of countries doing little or nothing to combat human 
     slavery. 
 
     "This [human trafficking] is a serious problem in 
     Russia. Russia is not only a destination country. 
     Russia is a source country, too, and it's a transit 
     country," Miller said. "We are not happy with what is 
     going on in Russia. They took some steps, they passed a 
     new law with some criminal provisions. They cooperated 
     a little more with NGOs. But overall the effort was 
     weak and we dropped Russia from Tier 2 to Tier on the 
     watch list." 
     Miller said he wants to persuade countries to adopt 
     stringent laws against abducting, smuggling, and 
     enslaving people. He said he hopes for comprehensive 
     antitrafficking programs including prohibiting, 
     punishing, and preventing this crime. He also wants, he 
     said, education to warn people of the dangers involved. 
     And to make evident to governments that enslaving and 
     trafficking human beings is a vile crime of major 
     proportions. END TEXT. 
¶8. (U) Published August 4, 2004 by the UN office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
 
     TITLE: KYRGYZSTAN: New passport to help combat human 
     trafficking 
 
BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA, 4 Aug 2004 (IRIN) - A new national 
passport has been introduced in Kyrgyzstan in a move to 
fight human trafficking and organised crime. The new 
travel document offers greater protection against 
forgery and is compatible with international standards, 
according to a migration official. 
 
"The new passport has sufficient levels of protection 
[against forgery]. It is not filled in by hand, as was 
the case before. It also has a digital photo, making it 
impossible to stick in someone else's photo," Bermet 
Moldobaeva, a programme coordinator for the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) in 
Kyrgyzstan, told IRIN from the Kyrgyz capital, Bishkek. 
 
The current national passport is filled in by hand, 
which prompts some border officials to scrutinise the 
document, especially if the handwriting is not clear. 
"It is a real hassle for me to travel with my passport 
because whenever I arrive in Moscow airport the border 
officials spend a certain amount of time checking my 
document, which was filled in with bad handwriting," 
Asylbek, a Kyrgyz national working in the Turkish 
capital, Ankara, told IRIN. 
 
     Their comments followed a recent presentation of the 
     new travel document in Bishkek. During the presentation 
     Kyrgyz President Askar Akaev said: "The creation of a 
     new national identity document is a major step in 
     strengthening state security, which testifies to the 
     active participation of the Kyrgyz Republic in 
     international efforts to build peace and combat 
     international terrorism, trafficking in human beings 
     and other organised crime." 
 
     The old Kyrgyz passport is not in compliance with 
     international standards, a fact the authorities feel 
     could contribute to human trafficking and terrorist 
     activities, and threaten national security. There have 
     been some unconfirmed reports that human traffickers 
     fly their Uzbek and Tajik victims via the southern 
     Kyrgyz city of Osh to the United Arab Emirates, Turkey 
     and other countries using forged Kyrgyz passports, 
     something deemed impossible with the use of new travel 
     documents, experts say. 
 
     "It will be impossible to forge the new passport 
     because the latest technology was used, [including] 
     several layers of seal, a special dye, personal data 
     imprinted on laminated covering, etc," Moldobaeva said. 
 
     Produced by the Moldovan company Registru, the new 
     passports are designed according to standards laid down 
     by the International Civil Aviation Organisation 
     (ICAO). Each will contain an identity number printed on 
     the biographical data page and repeated on all pages by 
     laser; a machine-readable code; a digital photographic 
     image of the holder; and special paper with watermarks, 
     which contain fluorescent fibres only visible by 
     ultraviolet light. 
     Meanwhile, the national passport issuing system has 
     changed. Under the new regulations, there is now a 
     special centre for issuing the documents. Units that 
     formerly issued passports cannot do so anymore. They 
     can only gather passport applications from the 
     population and send them to the new centre. There this 
     information will be checked and then put into the 
     database storing all the necessary information. 
 
     Moreover, in an effort to ensure better border control, 
     border-crossing points are set to be connected with 
     this database. "If people crossing the border present 
     this new passport it will be checked with the data 
     stored in the database. Thus, the receiver of that 
     passport and the person who presents the document at 
     the point will be checked. So, even if someone has 
     somehow forged the new passport he will be detected at 
     the border because there will be a photo of the initial 
     holder of the passport in the database," Moldobaeva 
     explained. 
 
     According to the Kyrgyz government agency for 
     information technology, citizens can apply for the new 
     travel document from 12 August. The IOM has provided a 
     US $1.6 million grant funded by the US State 
     Department's Bureau for International Narcotics and Law 
     Enforcement Affairs (INL) to help develop the new 
     passport infrastructure in the country. END TEXT. 
 
 
¶9. (U) Published August 3, 2004 by Turkey's Hurriyet News: 
 
     TITLE: "Police Saved the Sex Slaves" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Moldavian Daniela Yonichi was detained on 
     charges of selling young girls to men.  Yonichi 
     allegedly confiscated passports of young girls that she 
     brought from abroad with promises of employment, then 
     forced them into prostitution. 
 
     Two young Russian women were saved during the 
     operation. They had been marketed to men in a hotel 
     room that they were locked for months.  One of the 
     women is four months pregnant. 
 
     The two women embraced the police and cried.  After 
     taking their testimony the two will be sent back to 
     their country. 
 
     Police are after Mikhail, a Greek who reportedly is the 
     head of an international gang involved in women 
     trafficking. END TEXT. 
 
¶10. (U) Published August 3, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: POLICE CAPTURE 48 ILLEGAL MIGRANTS IN 
     GAZIOSMANPASA 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ISTANBUL (A.A) - 02.08.2004 - Police 
     captured 48 people of Pakistani, Indian and Bangladeshi 
     origin in the Gaziosmanpasa district of Istanbul on 
     Monday on charges of entering Turkey illegally. 
 
     Acting on a tip-off, police raided a house in 
     Gaziosmanpasa, capturing 48 migrants and a Pakistani 
     citizen who had helped those people enter Turkey 
     illegally. 
 
     Police said the Pakistani citizen was sent to prison 
     while the 48 migrants would be deported. END TEXT. 
 
¶11. (U) Published August 2, 2004 by Turkey's Milliyet News: 
 
     TITLE: The Prime Ministry Human Rights Presidency (HRP) 
     pulled a Turkish prostitute who applied for help from a 
     brothel and placed her in a shelter.  The Presidency 
     will find her a job and eventually will unite her with 
     her kids. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: S.C. (42) married her husband when she was 
     ¶15.  She fled and eventually got divorced.  She later 
     had to work as a prostitute to survive. 
 
     S.C. sent a letter in January to the Prime Ministry HRP 
     and requested help.  She noted that after her divorce, 
     her kids were taken away from her and she fell into the 
     trap of prostitution and meanwhile she was forced to 
     use drugs. 
 
     In her letter she wrote, "I want my kids.  I would like 
     to live freely in a civilized and clean society.  I'm 
     tired of fighting against those who sell me.  They made 
     me carry the stain of being a prostitute for 23 years. 
     Save me." 
 
     The Prime Ministry instructed the Social Services 
     Directorate to take action.  They took S.C. from Mersin 
     and put her in a shelter that is located in an 
     undisclosed place.  Meanwhile, works are underway to 
     help her find a job and get her son back from the 
     Mersin orphanage. 
 
     "Milliyet" visited her in the shelter. 
     S.C. told the reporter that she owed her new life to 
     the state and thanked the state officials.  She said 
     that she was forced to work at brothels in Istanbul, 
     Adana, Iskenderun and Mersin. 
 
     "Once you fall into the hands of pimps there is no way 
     out.  I got married when I was 15.  I could not get 
     along with my husband, so I fled.  A woman who promised 
     to help me pulled me into prostitution.  I suffered for 
     23 years.  I rebelled and tried to flee but each time 
     they found me.  My kids don't even call me 'mom.'  But 
     I've repented.  I would like to devote myself to my 
     kids and lead a clean life," she said. 
 
     She admitted that she made many mistakes and went on, 
     "All the bad things that I experienced occurred because 
     I was young, ignorant and nobody stood up for me. 
     Write everything openly.  Let my bad life be a lesson 
     to all young girls. 
 
     I enjoy gardening that is very relaxing.  Now I'm 
     looking for a job.  If a philanthropist person helps 
     me, I would be grateful.  Once I find a job I'll get my 
     13-year-old son Murat from the orphanage.  I would like 
     to work and earn my living." END TEXT. 
 
¶12. (U) Published July 30, 2004 by Turkey's BIA News Center 
in English: 
 
     TITLE: Van Women's Association activists apply for 
     shelter; BIA News Center; 30/07/2004 
 
     BIA (Van) - Members and leaders of "Van Women's 
     Association" petitioned to the remote southeast city of 
     Van Municipality urging that violence against women 
     stopped and a center for shelter and consultation 
     opened. 
 
     According to international standards, for every 7,500 
     persons there should exist one women's shelter. This 
     sums up at least to 8,000 shelters for the women of 
     Turkey whereas there exist only 9," explain the group 
     of 17 activists. 
 
     The "association" points to the fact that women are 
     forced to commit suicide and murdered under accusations 
     of acting against the traditional codes of honor. The 
     group recalled the case of Nemciye Aralin who was 
     burned to death by her husband in Van's Ozalp village 
     last week. 
 
          Women's demands 
 
          Van Women's Association urge that 
 
          * All municipalities in Turkey should open 
          shelters and the municipality of Van should take 
          the necessary steps, 
 
          * Precaution should be taken for all shelters that 
          are open and that will be opened, 
          * Shelters should function along the guidelines of 
          confidentiality and provide security and 
          psychological support, 
 
          * Shelters should remain under the supervision of 
          women's organizations who should be endowed with a 
          say in their management. (BB/MN/EK) 
 
¶13. (U) Published July 30, 2004 by Tbilisi 24 Saati in 
Georgian: 
 
     Title: Abkhazian Exiled Security Head on Smuggling, 
     Trafficking, Lost Uranium 
 
     [Interview with Levan Kiknadze, exiled head of 
     Abkhazian Security Service, by Nino Gomarteli; place 
     and date not given: "Kinds of Transnational Crimes in 
     Abkhazia"] 
 
     Begin FBIS Translated Text: [Gomarteli]  What kind of 
     smuggled goods are in circulation in the Abkhazian 
     conflict zone and how do they get in? 
 
     [Kiknadze]  According to our service's information, 
     there are several main smuggling routes.  These are the 
     Psou border, the sea, the Inguri line; the Caucasus 
     pass is also active in the summer. 
 
     As for the kinds of smuggled goods, it is cigarettes, 
     fuel, narcotics, and arms that are mainly being 
     smuggled; these are smuggled in through Abkhazia and 
     have very negative effects on the Georgian economy and 
     the environment in general.  Specifically, the movement 
     of these smuggled goods has completely criminalized the 
     area around Inguri, the guerillas and the local 
     population as well as the refugees, the Abkhazian side 
     itself and the peacekeeping forces. 
 
     [Gomarteli]  What have been the means used to combat 
     smuggling so far and what is the situation like now? 
 
     [Kiknadze]  Combating smuggling using administrative 
     means as was done in past years yielded no results: 
      The new government has now started implementing legal 
     measures along with the administrative ones against 
     major smugglers, organized criminal groups, local 
     government, and  members of the law enforcement 
     structures, which has had much better results so now 
     the indicators of smuggling are much lower. 
 
     [Gomarteli]  What information does your service have 
     regarding human trafficking in Abkhazia? 
 
     [Kiknadze]  We have a lot of serious materials about 
     how people are lost in Abkhazia.  These are mainly 
     citizens of the Russian nationality.  However, the 
     trafficking of people of Turkish nationality brought to 
     Abkhazia by deceit has increased in Abkhazia of late. 
      Numerous people have been searched for for a long time 
     now, mainly men who went to Abkhazia to spend holidays 
     or set up a small business and whose departure from the 
     territory has never been recorded anywhere.  I can even 
     tell you the names of some of them, for example, 
     Vladimir Fedorchenko, Nikolay Kazakov, and Nikolay 
     Kvortsov, who havbe been being searched for since 2002, 
     and this list is very long.  Of course, there have been 
     cases when women were taken to the territory that we do 
     not control who were then transferred to Turkey. 
 
     [Gomarteli]  What are the ways of smuggling arms, what 
     routes are there for this? 
 
     [Kiknadze]  Is it not smuggling when the de facto 
     government itself is importing arms?  Moreover, Russia 
     is helping it with this and that is why there is no 
     need to look for the routes of the arms inflow.  What 
     they need is being brought from Russia without any 
     problems. Incidentally, as soon as the situation in so- 
     called South Ossetia became tense, the import of arms 
     and heavy equipment to Abkhazia increased. 
 
     The point is that Abkhazia's de facto government does 
     not trouble itself by carrying arms through the passes 
     or putting them on the backs of donkeys as these are 
     being brought in by train, car, and airplane.  This has 
     been officially made legal.  The rest of the groups, 
     for example, Kishmaria, the Kvekvesiri brothers, and 
     the Kirtadze brothers, are mere performers who are 
     implementing the government's tasks and this is why no 
     one resists them. 
 
     [Gomarteli]  What is the drug smuggling and production 
     situation in Abkhazia?  According to information that 
     has been disseminated, there is a plant producing 
     narcotics that is functioning in Sukhumi; has this 
     information been confirmed? 
 
     [Kiknadze]  We have not been able to confirm that there 
     is such a plant in Abkhazia, but we have information 
     that there are small manufactories that have been 
     processing poppy and similar substances.  The demand 
     for it results from the fact that drug addiction in 
     Abkhazia in general is now on a big scale.  According 
     to the latest research, 25 percent of the population 
     consumes drugs and young women are the majority of 
     them.  It cannot be ruled out that heroin gets to 
     Abkhazia from Georgia as well, but it is from there 
     that we get poppy seeds. 
 
     There is a danger that radioactive materials could get 
     abroad from Abkhazia.  It is well known that before the 
     war in Abkhazia, uranium was being enriched in a 
     special Sukhumi Physics Institute laboratory; according 
     to our information, there was about 2 kg of enriched 
     uranium there.  During the conflict, in order to 
     prevent it from leaking, it was placed in a burial 
     facility.  This uranium was later lost.  Today, people 
     in Abkhazia are saying that they have no radioactive 
     materials.  The Georgian Government suggested carrying 
     out monitoring in order to investigate the situation 
     but was refused.  We think that there is a danger that 
     these materials will be transferred abroad. END TEXT. 
 
¶14. (U) Published July 29, 2004 by Belapan News Agency, 
Minsk (in Russian): 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED EXERPT: Minsk, 29 July: A shelter 
     for the victims of human trafficking is to open today 
     in Minsk. It will be established in the framework of a 
     project to counteract trafficking in women in Belarus, 
     jointly implemented by the EU and the United Nation's 
     Development Programme. 
 
     The shelter will be established on the premises of a 
     structural subdivision of the Minsk City Executive 
     Committee, and is designed for six to eight people. Its 
     location has not been made public. The shelter will 
     accept the first women in August. 
 
     The project is aimed at providing timely and 
     professional social, psychological, rehabilitation and 
     legal assistance and temporary accommodation to victims 
     of trafficking in women. 
 
     The shelter is to be funded by the European Commission. 
 
     A regulation on the rehabilitation centre for victims 
     of trafficking in women was signed by a representative 
     of the UNDP, Kevin McGrath, and the Chairwoman of the 
     Committee for Labour and Social Security of the Minsk 
     City Executive Committee, Iryna Alyakseyeva, in 
     February 2004. 
 
     Experts estimate that the annual turnover of human 
     trafficking in Belarus alone reaches 15m dollars. Women 
     from virtually all Belarusian cities are sold to 
     Russia, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, the Czech Republic, 
     Turkey, Greece, Italy, Spain and Lebanon. END TEXT. 
 
     [Passage omitted: working hours and contact information 
     of the shelter] 
 
¶15. (U) Published July 28, 2004 by Belapan News Agency, 
Minsk (in Russian): 
 
     BEGIN BBC Monitoring Service Translation:  HEADLINE: 
     BELARUS, TURKEY SIGN UP TO FIGHT HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND 
     ILLEGAL MIGRATION 
     BODY: Minsk, 28 July: Belarusian Interior Minister 
     Uladzimir Navumaw and his Turkish counterpart 
     Abdulkadir Aksu signed a memorandum of understanding 
     today between the interior ministries of Belarus and 
     Turkey to counter human trafficking and illegal 
     migration. 
 
     The document was adopted as a follow-up to the 
     cooperation agreement between the interior ministries 
     of Belarus and Turkey signed on 25 June, and sets forth 
     specific areas of cooperation to fight human 
     trafficking and illegal migration, Navumaw said. He 
     added that the parties had agreed to exchange 
     information and experts, conduct consultations, and 
     develop measures to help those who fall prey to human 
     trafficking and sexual exploitation. In addition, some 
     Belarusian law-enforcement officers will go through 
     training at the Turkish interior ministry. 
 
     (Passage omitted: Abdulkadir Aksu praises cooperation 
     with Belarus) END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN