04ANKARA4428
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Fri Aug 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 6, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
 
High Military Council Meetings Conclude - Hurriyet 
Turkey Launches A New Attack for EU Entry -Hurriyet 
British Intelligence Reveals Al-Qaida Plans to Attack 
Heathrow Airport - Milliyet 
Greece Accuses Turkey of Airspace Violations - Milliyet 
PKK Builds a Monument for Its Militant - Sabah 
Released Turkish Drivers Returned from Iraq - Turkiye 
Turkey Continues Trade with Iraq - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
General Buyukanit is the New Land Forces Commander - Radikal 
Released Turkish Drivers Urge All the Drivers Not to Go to 
Iraq - Radikal 
New Threats against Drivers Cooperating with the Coalition 
Forces in Iraq-  Cumhuriyet 
PM Objects to the Expulsion of Fundamentalist Officers - 
Cumhuriyet 
Turkish Government in Search of Security Measures for 
Turkish Drivers in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Oil Prices Threatens the Global Economy - Zaman 
DYP Chairman Agar Urges Turkish Military to Protect Turkish 
Drivers in Iraq - Zaman 
Strong Support from Belgium for Turkey's EU Membership - 
Zaman 
No Surprises at the High Military Council Decisions - Yeni 
Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
High Military Council Decisions:  Today's papers give 
details about the High Military Council Decisions. 
"Hurriyet" reports that Brig.Gen. Mehmet Kaya Varol, who had 
gathered intelligence about separatist and subversive 
persons and institutions giving support to the EU and the 
US, has been retired.  The General had asked local officials 
to gather information about artists, high society groups, 
satanists, Masons, minorities, and Internet groups.  All 
papers report that General Buyukanit, who was appointed Land 
Forces commander, will become the new Chief of General Staff 
in 2006, after the retirement of General Ozkok. 
"Cumhuriyet" notes that Gen. Sadik Ercan, who was head of 
the Special Forces during the detention scandal of Turkish 
officers in Northern Iraq last year, also will be retired. 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that 12 officers have been expelled 
from the military for being involved in fundamentalist 
activities, and PM Erdogan and Defense Minister Gonul 
registered their objections to this decision. 
 
Turkey's Lobbying for the EU:  "Hurriyet" reports that 
Turkey will launch a big attack in the autumn in support of 
its EU accession bid.  In October 4-5, foreign ministers of 
25 EU countries and 57 OIC countries will meet in Istanbul. 
This meeting is very important because it will be held right 
before the release of the EU Commission's enlargement report 
on October 6.  On October 18-20, the Greens in the European 
Parliament will hold a general assembly meeting in Istanbul. 
"Hurriyet" notes that the autumn attack will concentrate on 
countries like France and Austria that have reservations 
about Turkey's EU accession.  Universities, the business 
world, NGOs and politicians will support this attack.  On 
October 20, PM Erdogan will go to France to deliver a speech 
at the French Institute for International Relations and urge 
the French public to support Turkey's EU entry. 
 
Greek Allegations of Airspace Violations:  "Milliyet" 
reports that the Greek General Staff released a statement 
saying that on Wednesday Turkish warplanes penetrated Greek 
air space.  Greek anti-aircraft missile systems locked on 
the Turkish planes and four Greek jets forced the Turkish 
jets to leave Greek airspace.  Athens added that yesterday 
12 Turkish F-16 jets had violated Greek airspace seven 
times. 
 
Turkish Drivers in Iraq:  "Cumhuriyet" reports that 33 Turks 
died in Iraq in the first seven months of 2004.  Eleven of 
them were shot down, and the other 22 died in traffic 
accidents, work accidents or as a result of health problems. 
"Cumhuriyet" and "Vatan" report that Osman Alisan, 
theTurkish driver killed in Iraq, reportedly died because he 
was not able to recite verses from Koran.  Two released 
Turkish drivers urged the rest of the drivers not to go to 
Iraq. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Sudan; US Elections 
 
"The Reality About Sudan" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mass appeal Milliyet (8/6): "The 
Sudan case brings some facts to light.  It seems the 
conflicts related to race and religious differences are hard 
to control in Africa or anywhere else where the tribal state 
system remains.  In such countries the powerful side does 
whatever it wants and the oppressed side remains helpless. 
The outside world is also helpless because it fails to cope 
with this kind of situation.  The UN only has power to issue 
a resolution, as we saw in the Sudan case, yet no strength 
to have it implemented.  The issue of intervention, i.e., 
sending international troops to the conflict-ridden area 
remains controversial.  In the Sudan case, the international 
organizations which are supposed to pay attention (such as 
the African Union or the Organization of Islamic Conference) 
are just watching. ... The debates in the United Nations 
about helping Sudan give no hope.  Members of the UN act on 
their interests first rather than focusing on human despair. 
Russia sells arms to Sudan.  China has trade relations with 
Sudan.  The US, UK and France emphasize the strategic 
location of Sudan as well as oil resources.  The whole "my- 
interests-first" scenario in the UN overshadows humanitarian 
aid, which unfortunately constitutes the reality about 
Sudan." 
 
"The Difference of Kerry" 
Erdal Guven opined in the liberal-intellectual Radikal 
(8/6): "Whoever becomes the new president of the United 
States will have to cope with anti-Americanism on a global 
scale.  In this matter, Kerry seems to have more chance for 
success than Bush.  It remains to be seen to what extent he 
will be successful, although no breakthrough should ever be 
expected from him.  In fact, turning such a `chance' into a 
`reality' is tied to the US policy for Iraq.  We all know 
Kerry already expressed support for the US commitments in 
Iraq.  Yet he also added that he would do his best to 
include all allies of the US in this commitment.  At this 
point we don't know how he plans to achieve that. ... From 
Iraq to Kyoto, American policy is shaped by the 
consideration of national interests.  Unless US national 
interests are redefined under a new strategy concept, the 
difference of Kerry as opposed to Bush will remain only on 
the tactical basis." 
 
DEUTSCH