04ANKARA4815
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004815 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 25, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Halki Seminary Tops NSC Agenda - Hurriyet 
US Adds `TRNC' Bank to Money Laundering List - Hurriyet 
US Shortens Visa Processing for Turkish Cypriots - Hurriyet 
PKK Web-Site Says the Organization is Isolated - Milliyet 
Erdogan Calls Extraordinary Session to Discuss Draft Penal 
Code - Sabah 
PM Erdogan Phones Putin Prior to Turkey Visit - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
AKP Tries to Complete New Penal Code Before EU Report - 
Cumhuriyet 
El-Salvador Sends 80 More Troops to Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Israeli Interest in GAP Region Alarms Turkish Officials - 
Yeni Safak 
Turkish Parliament to Convene to Discuss Penal Code - Yeni 
Safak 
Court Trials Begin at Guantanamo - Zaman 
Assassination Attempt against Two Iraqi Ministers - Zaman 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ambassador Edelman's Visit to Black Sea Region:  Anatolian 
News Agency reports that US Ambassador Edelman met with the 
Governor and the Mayor of Samsun yesterday.  Responding to a 
question about PKK activities in Northern Iraq, the 
Ambassador said that `the US is very sensitive on the 
terrorism issue and that the United States is working 
jointly with Turkey in the fight against terrorism.  Asked 
whether he expected the United States to stage an operation 
against the PKK in the near future, the Ambassador said that 
the US is cooperating with Turkey in various ways against 
the PKK.  He added that the US is not expected to stage a 
military operation against the PKK soon, but said this did 
not mean that a military operation is excluded at some point 
in the future.  "Radikal" quoted Ambassador Edelman as 
saying that `we urged the EU to add the PKK/Kongra-Gel to 
their terrorist list.' 
 
US Shortens Visa Process for Turkish Cypriots:  "Hurriyet" 
reports that the US Embassy in Cyprus released a written 
statement saying that the visa procedures will be 
streamlined to allow Turkish Cypriots to receive their visas 
more quickly. 
 
AKP Government Plans to Amend Penal Code to Meet EU 
Requirements:  "Hurriyet" reports that the government will 
call an extraordinary parliament meeting on September 14 to 
pass a new Criminal Code before the release of the EU 
commission's enlargement report on October 6.  "Hurriyet" 
reports that the reform package will include heavier 
penalties for honor killings, an end to unauthorized 
virginity, changes to abortion regulations, penalties for 
sexual harassment in the work place, and stiffening of 
penalties for rape. 
 
NSC Meeting:  "Hurriyet" reports that the Halki Seminary 
issue will be on National Security Council's agenda during 
today's meeting.  The NSC will discuss various alternatives 
for meeting EU requests related to the seminary.  The NSC is 
also expected to discuss developments in Iraq and steps to 
end the economic isolation of northern Cyprus. 
 
Israeli Interest in the GAP Region:   "Yeni Safak" reports 
that Turkish intelligence and security officials are alarmed 
by increased Israeli interest in purchasing land in the 
Southeast.  An office in the Prime Ministry has reportedly 
started an investigation on the potential threat to Turkey's 
future posed by the foreign purchase of Turkish real estate. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq; Iran 
 
"The US is trying to rewrite history" 
Serdar Turgut argued in the mass appeal-sensational "Aksam" 
(8/25): "There is a concealed intention behind the US 
declaration of war against Iraq.  A recent story in 
"Newsweek" tells about the incredible amount of looting and 
smuggling of Iraq's historic heritage and antiquities.  It 
has been a `massacre' of history, and cannot be attributed 
to the looting that could be expected in such war 
conditions.  We should keep in mind that this area is the 
source of all monotheistic religions.  . The rulers of the 
global world have decided that now is the time to settle 
accounts.  The religious geography of the world in the 21st 
century is about to be reorganized.  It will not be 
surprising even if brand new mass religions emerge in this 
century. . The history of Iraq has now been erased, and it 
will be recreated mostly with lies.  That was the case 
thousands of years ago, and history is simply repeating 
itself.  Turkey is completely unprepared for all of this, 
because we failed to comprehend the ongoing historical 
process in its proper context. . Chaos and anarchy prevail 
in Iraq, but, given these circumstances, it would be wrong 
to conclude that the US has failed in the Iraq war.  The US 
wanted to have chaos, and so has created it.  But it is now 
about time to establish a new order out of the chaos." 
 
"Turkey and Iran's Nuclear Threat" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (8/25): 
"Developments in Iran's nuclear program coincide with 
improved bilateral relations between Turkey and Iran. 
However, international concern about the Iranian nuclear 
program and the possibility that Iran could produce nuclear 
weapons is also a part of Ankara's agenda.  Turkish 
diplomats and strategists are closely watching developments 
in this regard.  As one MFA official expressed, `Ankara has 
noted the Iranian explanation that its nuclear efforts are 
intended for peaceful use, such as the production of 
electricity.  We are trying to determine if this is the 
whole truth.'  Turkey does not consider Iran's nuclear 
capability as a direct threat.  But if Iran really obtains 
nuclear weapons, it will turn the balances in the Middle 
East completely upside-down and constitute a new ground for 
foreign intervention, including by the United States." 
 
EDELMAN