04QUITO2362
AMB. SIV PROMOTES UNGA AGENDA
Thu Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON PHUM KDEM AORC EC UNGA UN
SUBJECT: AMB. SIV PROMOTES UNGA AGENDA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 152009 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 2104 
     ¶C. QUITO 2106 
     ¶D. QUITO 2274 
     ¶E. SECSTATE 181382 
 
¶1.  Summary:  During a visit to Quito on August 21-22, U.S. 
Representative to ECOSOC Ambassador Sichan Siv raised UNGA 
demarche points (Ref A) and other multilateral issues with 
Amb. Fernando Flores Macias, DirGen for Multilateral Affairs. 
 Ambassador Siv also expressed disappointment with Ecuador's 
ECOSOC vote in favor of Cuba's ECOSOC resolution on July 22 
(Ref B), inquired about Ecuador's candidacy for leadership of 
the G-77, and explained U.S. views on the International 
Finance Facility.  Flores raised a recent GoE anti-terrorism 
seminar he had organized, was unresponsive on the Cuba vote, 
and vague about G-77.  He highlighted new GoE activity on 
TIP; otherwise his responses on UNGA issues tracked with 
previous responses (Ref C).  Flores also made several 
suggestions to improve the effectiveness of the First 
Committee.  End Summary. 
 
UNGA Demarche Issues 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  Ambassador Siv raised the Monterrey consensus that each 
country has primary responsibility for its own economic and 
social development and importance of mobilizing domestic 
resources in the private sector for development.  He 
expressed fundamental USG concerns with the practicality of 
global taxation and said the U.S. could not support 
mechanisms such as the International Finance Facility. 
Flores agreed and noted the consensus encouraged regional and 
sub-regional collaboration on development, which Ecuador 
intends to pursue within GRULAC and the Andean community. 
Siv asked about GoE views on human cloning.  Flores said the 
GoE was studying the issue with the help of scientific 
experts and did not yet have a position.  Ambassador Siv 
emphasized USG commitment to strengthen collaboration to 
combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  Flores welcomed USG 
interest and expressed GoE commitment to address the issue, 
highlighting the August 18 announcement of a Presidential 
decree addressing TIP and other related problems (Ref D) 
Ambassador Siv made the point that democracies form the 
majority in UN bodies and by working together could have a 
profound impact on the operation of those bodies.  Reducing 
the number of Middle East resolutions also remains a U.S. 
priority.  Flores agreed that democracies should collaborate 
to improve the operation of UN bodies. 
 
Improving the First Committee 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Flores told Ambassador Siv that the GoE agrees with the 
U.S. view (conveyed to him with delivery of the U.S. note 
verbale on August 20 by PolOff, per Ref E), that 
revitalization of the UNGA, including the First Committee is 
of vital importance.  He elaborated practical suggestions the 
GoE will propose, including: 
 
-- limiting congratulations and greetings to the beginning of 
the session. 
 
-- limiting sessions to address single themes, except in 
general debate. 
 
-- treat some recurring themes bi- or tri-annually. 
 
Flores emphasized that the GoE believes it is essential to 
ensure greater follow-up of UN resolutions to enhance 
effectiveness. 
 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
¶4.  Asked by Ambassador Siv about the GoE candidacy for 
leadership of the G-77, Flores said only that the leadership 
issue should be sorted out soon within the GRULAC group.  He 
was more eager to raise the GoE's ongoing efforts to combat 
terrorism, highlighting a recent GoE seminar involving 
experts from Vienna and the OAS (which he had organized). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  Flores' vague response on G-77 might indicate lack of 
confidence that Ecuador will eventually be selected as the 
GRULAC candidate. 
LEDAHAWSKY