07STATE150704
VOTING INSTRUCTIONS: UN SECURITY COUNCIL
Wed Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO3550
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHC #0704/01 3040221
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 310204Z OCT 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 9326
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 150704 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO SU
SUBJECT: VOTING INSTRUCTIONS: UN SECURITY COUNCIL 
RESOLUTION EXTENDING THE UNMIS MANDATE 
 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  The Department authorizes 
USUN to sponsor and vote in favor of the text in paragraph 
2 for the United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolution 
extending the mandate of the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS). 
The Department instructs USUN to consult with Washington 
on any substantive changes. 
 
¶2.  PP 1.  Recalling all its resolutions and presidential 
statements concerning the situation in the Sudan, 
 
PP 2.  Recalling also its previous resolutions 1674 (2006) 
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which 
reaffirms, inter alia, the relevant provisions of the 
United Nations World Summit Outcome document, 1612 (2005) 
of 26 July 2005 on children in armed conflict, 1502 (2003) 
on the protection of humanitarian and United Nations 
personnel, 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security, 
 
PP 3.  Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty, 
unity, independence, and territorial integrity of the 
Sudan and to the cause of peace, 
 
PP 4. Urging the parties to meet their outstanding 
commitments to implement the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, and noting in particular the delay in achieving 
the full and verified redeployment of forces by 9 July 
2007 and urging such redeployment, and the need for 
further progress in the demarcation of the North-South 
border and the implementation of the Resolution of the 
Abyei Conflict, 
 
PP 5.   Recalling the commitment of the international 
community to support the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
process, including through development aid, and calling 
upon donors to support implementation of the Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement, including by putting in place the Oslo 
Conference pledges of 2005, 
 
PP 6.   Urging the Government of National Unity to 
take all necessary steps to prepare for the conduct of 
free and fair elections, including by committing their 
share of necessary resources for the conduct of a national 
census, and further urges the international community to 
provide technical and material assistance for electoral 
preparations, including for the national census, 
 
PP 7.  Welcoming the continuing organized returns of 
internally displaced persons from Khartoum to Southern 
Kordofan and Southern Sudan and that of refugees from 
countries of asylum to Southern Sudan and encouraging the 
promotion of efforts, including the provision of necessary 
resources to the Office of the UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees and implementing partners, to ensure that such 
returns are sustainable, 
 
PP 8. Commending the work of the United Nations Mission in 
Sudan ("UNMIS") in support of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, and commending the continued commitment by 
troop-contributing countries in support of this mission, 
 
PP 9.  Welcoming the Secretary-General's appointment of 
Ashraf Qazi as his special representative for UNMIS and of 
Ameera Haq as his deputy special representative for 
humanitarian coordination, 
 
PP 10. Reiterating its concern over the restrictions and 
all the impediments placed on the movements of UNMIS 
personnel and materiel, and the adverse impact such 
restrictions and impediments have on UNMIS' ability to 
perform its mandate effectively and on the ability of the 
humanitarian community to reach affected persons; and 
calling upon all the parties to abide by its international 
obligations in this regard, as well as those set out in 
the Status of Forces Agreement, 
 
PP 11.  Commending UNMIS's efforts in Darfur and its 
facilitation of United Nations -African Union Mission in 
Darfur's (UNAMID) assumption of responsibility for 
peacekeeping in Darfur, 
 
PP 12.  Recognizing that successful implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is [essential] to 
resolution of the crisis in Darfur and to sustainable 
peace and stability in the region; condemning the acts of 
violence perpetrated by all sides: and calling for the 
rapid deployment of the UN Light and Heavy Support 
Packages for the African Union Mission in Sudan, the full 
 
STATE 00150704  002 OF 003 
 
 
deployment of UNAMID and the protection of humanitarian 
workers, 
 
PP 13.  Taking note of the reports of the 
Secretary-General on Sudan dated 23 October 
 
SIPDIS 
2007 (S/2007/624) and on children and armed conflict in the 
Sudan dated 29 August 2007 (S/2007/520), and the report of 
the Security Council following its June 2007 mission to 
the Sudan. 
 
PP 14.  Determining that the situation in the Sudan 
continues to constitute a threat to international peace 
and security, 
 
OP 1.  Decides to extend the mandate of UNMIS until 30 
April 2008, with the intention to renew it for further 
periods; 
 
OP 2.  Requests the Secretary-General to report to the 
Council every three months on the implementation of the 
mandate of UNMIS, progress on implementation of the CPA, 
and respect for the cease-fire, 
 
OP 3.  Stresses the importance of full and expeditious 
implementation of all elements of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, the N'djamena Humanitarian Cease-fire 
Agreement, the Darfur Peace Agreement, and the October 
2006 Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement, calls for all the 
parties to respect their commitments to these agreements 
without delay, 
 
OP 4.  Stresses the critical role of the Assessment and 
Evaluation Commission in overseeing and reporting on 
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and 
calls for the strengthening of the Commission's autonomy 
and looks forward to the production of the interim report 
and recommendations of the Commission in January 2008. 
 
OP 5.  Calls for all parties to agree immediately to full 
unrestricted UNMIS monitoring and verification in the 
Abyei region, without prejudice to the final agreement on 
the actual borders between the two sides, 
 
OP 6.  Urges UNMIS to continue its efforts consistent with 
its mandate to assess progress in redeployment of forces, 
in particular in the areas of Unity, Upper Nile, South 
Kordofan, Abyei, and Blue Nile, and to reinforce its 
ability to assist the parties in reducing tension in areas 
of potential conflict between them and further urges the 
parties immediately to speed up efforts towards the 
completion of redeployment of forces, 
 
OP 7.  Calls on the parties to take steps to reduce 
tensions in the Abyei region, including by redeploying 
their forces away from the disputed 1 January 1956 border 
and by implementing an Interim Administration and agreeing 
upon boundaries, and expresses support for UNMIS, 
consistent with its mandate and in accordance with the 
CPA, to assist the parties in monitoring such arrangements 
as they may make in this regard, including by deploying 
UNMIS personnel to areas from which forces may be 
withdrawn, 
 
OP 8.  Recalls UNMIS' mandate to liaise with bilateral 
donors on the formation of Joint Integrated Units ("JIU"), 
requests UNMIS to come up with a plan of support with the 
Joint Defense Board and further urges donors to offer 
support, via UNMIS, to enable the full establishment of 
JIUs as soon as possible and further urges UNMIS to assist 
in voluntary disarmament and weapons collection and 
destruction efforts in implementation of plans under the 
CPA for disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration, 
 
OP 9.  Urges UNMIS, consistent with its mandate and in 
coordination with the relevant parties, to increase its 
support for the National Disarmament, Demobilization and 
Reintegration Co-ordination Council and the Northern and 
Southern DDR Commissions and further urges donors to 
respond to calls for assistance from the joint UN DDR 
Unit. 
 
OP 10.  Recalls UNMIS's mandate to provide guidance and 
technical assistance to support the preparations for the 
conduct of elections and referenda provided for by the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and urges UNMIS to continue 
its efforts in this regard, including by providing 
technical and logistical support to the national census, 
and in coordination with the Government of National Unity 
and with other relevant United Nations offices, 
 
OP 11.  Calls for UNMIS to support reconciliation in all 
its aspects, emphasizing the role of women and civil 
 
STATE 00150704  003 OF 003 
 
 
society and to work with UNDP and other agencies, 
 
OP 12.  Calls upon the parties to the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement and the communiqu,, signed between the United 
Nations and the Government of National Unity in Khartoum 
on 28 March 2007 to support, protect, and facilitate all 
humanitarian operations in the Sudan, 
 
OP 13.  Recalls UNMIS' role in facilitating the deployment 
of the UN Light and Heavy Support Packages for AMIS, and 
calls upon the Government of National Unity and all other 
parties to cooperate fully with this deployment, and with 
the deployment of all components of UNAMID, 
 
OP 14.  Calls upon the Government of National Unity to 
cooperate fully with all UN operations within its 
territory in the implementation of their mandates, 
 
OP 15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take 
the necessary measures to ensure full compliance in UNMIS 
with the United Nations' zero-tolerance policy on sexual 
exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council informed, 
and urges troop-contributing countries to take appropriate 
preventive action including pre-deployment awareness 
training, and other action to ensure full accountability 
in cases of such conduct involving their personnel; 
 
OP 16.  Expresses its readiness to consider a general 
review of the mandate of UNMIS, and in that connection, 
requests the Secretary-General, in his next three-month 
report to the Council, to include: 
 
(a) an assessment of progress in implementation of plans 
under the CPA for disarmament, demobilization and 
reintegration, and to set out the key points of a strategy 
for achieving further progress, including benchmarks 
against which such progress can be measured and, 
specifically, the role of UNMIS at the various stages of 
implementation, and 
 
(b) an assessment of whether any changes to UNMIS's 
mandate may be needed to strengthen its ability to 
facilitate implementation of the CPA. 
 
OP 17.  Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
RICE