08STATE124111
SYG'S REPORT ON UNSCR 1701 IMPLEMENTATION:
Sun Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4111 3282249
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232242Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 124111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL LE IS SY
SUBJECT: SYG'S REPORT ON UNSCR 1701 IMPLEMENTATION: 
GUIDANCE FOR THE NOVEMBER 25 UNSC BRIEFING 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message.  USUN is authorized to 
draw from points in para 2 below during the briefing on 
the Secretary General's report on implementation of UNSCR 
1701 scheduled for November 25. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points. 
 
-- I would like to thank the Secretary General for his 
latest report on implementation of Security Council 
resolution 1701 on the situation in the Middle East. 
 
-- We welcome this report, and its strong reaffirmation of 
the international community's support for the sovereignty, 
unity, territorial integrity, and political independence 
of Lebanon within its internationally-recognized borders 
and under the exclusive authority of its Government. 
 
-- The Secretary General has taken a realistic approach in 
his report, underscoring the need for greater progress on 
all of the key issues required for a permanent ceasefire 
and long-term solution. 
 
-- Of particular import is his emphasis on the porous 
nature of the Lebanon's border with Syria and the 
continuing potential for breaches of the arms embargo. 
Full implementation of the embargo is an indispensable and 
fundamental provision of resolution 1701 that must be 
observed immediately, comprehensively and without 
exception.  Regional parties that maintain ties with 
Hizballah and other groups in Lebanon are obliged to 
respect and abide fully by its provisions. 
 
-- Unfortunately, there are persistent reports of breaches 
of the arms embargo along the Lebanon-Syria border.  As 
the Secretary General points out, there has still been no 
decisive impact on Lebanon's overall border security and " 
this situation renders Lebanon's borders as penetrable as 
was the case one year ago."  While it is a positive sign 
that many stakeholders are taking note of this problem, we 
look forward to real progress on the ground in the near 
future. 
 
-- The Secretary General is also right to express his 
clear concern over the continued maintenance by Hizballah 
of a substantial military capacity distinct from that of 
the Lebanese State.  Two years after the international 
conflict instigated by Hizballah, the rearmament of this 
group remains the most important matter for the Council to 
consider in Lebanon with regard to its duty to safeguard 
international peace and security. 
 
-- As the Secretary General points out, Hizballah's 
maintenance of a separate military is in direct 
contravention of both UNSCR 1701 and 1559(2004).  This 
poses a continuing risk to the sovereignty of the State. 
Events in Lebanon in May of this year demonstrated yet 
again the serious threat that armed groups outside of the 
control of the State post to the stability of Lebanon. 
 
-- While we note the Secretary General's satisfaction at 
the completion of the prisoner exchange as encouraged in 
UNSCR 1701, it is worth noting that this exchange was not 
between two legitimate governments, but between Israel and 
an internationally recognized terrorist organization. 
 
-- The lack of control over arms smuggling across the 
Lebanese-Syrian border is connected to Hizballah's efforts 
to further upgrade its military power.  Both these trends 
must be reversed in the interest of international peace 
and security both within Lebanon and with respect to its 
neighbors. 
 
-- In the report, The Secretary General notes Israel's 
statement on the connection between overflights of 
Lebanese territory and the lack of enforcement of the arms 
embargo.  While we do not excuse violations of the Blue 
Line, we can understand the compelling interest that 
Israel has in gaining information on Hizballah's 
rearmament efforts so that it can maintain its own 
security and avoid another outbreak of violence. 
 
-- We would also like to take this opportunity to 
reiterate our support for the decision by Syria and 
Lebanon to establish full diplomatic relations, and look 
forward to the implementation of that accord within the 
next month as they have declared.  Full normalization must 
also include delineation of the Lebanese-Syrian border, as 
both sides have agreed. 
 
-- Similarly, we welcome the Secretary General's intention 
to strengthen the diplomatic process aimed at dealing with 
the issues of northern Ghajar, and we applaud his 
intention to strengthen the diplomatic process aimed at 
dealing with the issue of the Shab'a Farms area, the 
status of which can only be resolved via border 
delineation by Lebanon and Syria.  We urge him to engage 
directly with Israel, Lebanon and Syria on these issues. 
 
-- We welcome the Secretary General's call for all parties 
to refrain from statements and actions that could serve to 
increase tension, and remain concerned about Hizballah's 
unacceptable efforts to rearm both north and south of the 
Litani and consistent aggressive rhetoric against Israel. 
 
-- Finally, noting Israel's continuing concern about 
Hizballah rearming south of the Litani river, we reiterate 
our support for the United Nations Interim Force in 
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and welcome the clear progress on 
furthering cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese 
Armed Forces (LAF), which is aimed at addressing this 
issue. 
 
-- We also strongly support the work of the UN Independent 
Investigative Commission and look forward to the opening 
of a Special Tribunal for Lebanon. 
 
End talking points. 
RICE