08STATE123081
OPPOSING UNGA RESOLUTIONS WITH ANTI-ISRAEL BIAS
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO5245
OO RUEHAP RUEHBC RUEHDT RUEHGI RUEHGR RUEHKN RUEHKR RUEHMJ RUEHMR
RUEHPA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHYG
DE RUEHC #3081/01 3250206
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200158Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 3885
INFO RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 3725UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 STATE 123081 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNGA IS PA LE SY
SUBJECT: OPPOSING UNGA RESOLUTIONS WITH ANTI-ISRAEL BIAS 
 
-------------------------- 
SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST 
-------------------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Posts are requested to approach highest 
appropriate officials in host governments in pursuit of 
the following objectives: 
 
-- to pursue reduction in the overall number of one-sided 
UN General Assembly resolutions on the Middle East; and, 
 
-- to defeat three resolutions reaffirming the existence 
and activities of the "Committee on the Exercise of the 
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People," the " 
Division for Palestinian Rights within the UN 
Secretariat," and the "Special Committee to Investigate 
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the 
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied 
Territories." 
 
Posts may draw on the background in paragraphs 3-5, the 
listing of resolutions in paragraph 6 (which may be left 
as an aide memoire), and talking points in para 13 in 
making this demarche.  As indicated in paragraphs 7-12, 
countries that have previously voted "yes" should be urged 
to vote "no," or at least abstain or absent themselves 
from the voting.  Those that have abstained or been absent 
should be urged to vote "no."  Chiefs of Mission may 
exercise discretion in determining what method to use in 
conveying firm U.S. opposition to these one-sided 
resolutions in order to elicit the most constructive 
possible outcome.  All posts are encouraged to make U.S. 
opposition to such resolutions a standard part of our 
regular dialogue with host governments about UNGA matters 
and the Middle East. 
 
----------------------------- 
POINT OF CONTACT AND DEADLINE 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Responses are requested by opening of business 
EST, Monday, November 24.  In replies to the Department, 
please indicate at what level the demarche was delivered 
and slug responses for IO/UNP Andrew Morrison and the 
appropriate regional coordinator. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶3. (U) Each fall, when the UN General Assembly meets, a 
disproportionate number of one-sided resolutions related 
to the Middle East are considered and adopted.  At the 
62nd UNGA in 2007-8, for example, of 278 resolutions 
adopted, 21 had as their main focus explicit criticism of 
Israeli actions and/or support for the Palestinian people 
with a criticism of Israeli actions clearly implied. 
This, despite the fact that the situation in the Middle 
East is reviewed in monthly briefings in the Security 
Council and periodic reports of the Quartet (UN, U.S., 
Russia, EU), and that negotiations between the two sides 
are underway.  This year, starting on November 24-25 and 
continuing throughout December, a similar number of 
redundant, one-sided resolutions -- essentially identical 
to those presented last year -- will again be considered. 
 
¶4. (U) The U.S. sees no contradiction between support for 
the Palestinian people and support for Israel.  Our 
clearly stated goal is for there to be two democratic 
states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace 
and security.  We back up our policy with substantial 
diplomatic support for both sides consistent with the 
process launched in Annapolis in November 2007, and 
significant financial support to the Palestinian Authority 
and to Palestinian refugees, for whom the U.S. is the 
largest single-state donor.  The U.S. views the UNGA's 
extraordinary, one-sided fixation against Israel as deeply 
corrosive and harmful to balanced, good-faith efforts to 
achieve a just and lasting peace. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The USG has two long-term goals with respect to 
the UNGA's handling of this issue.  First, we seek a 
reduction in the overall number of these resolutions, 
which can come as countries join us in realizing their 
redundancy and starting to vote against or abstain on at 
least some of them.  Second, we seek to defeat three 
 
STATE 00123081  002 OF 006 
 
 
resolutions in particular that reaffirm the existence and 
activities of three UN bodies which -- unlike any others 
in the UN system -- have as their inherent purpose the 
promotion of a culture of bias against one UN member 
state, (i.e., Israel).  These three bodies are the 
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the 
Palestinian People; the Division for Palestinian Rights 
within the UN Secretariat; and the Special Committee to 
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights 
of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied 
Territories.  Not only do these bodies consume UN 
resources while making no useful contribution to Middle 
East peace and the two-state solution, they also help 
create what amounts to a self-perpetuating echo chamber, 
helping to justify the UNGA's continuing disproportionate 
fixation on this issue.  Gradually, an increasing number 
of member states have been abstaining on these three 
resolutions. 
 
------------------------ 
UNGA Resolutions in 2007 
------------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) In 2007 the UNGA passed fourteen resolutions 
explicitly criticizing Israel, plus seven expressing 
support for the Palestinian people vis-a-vis their 
relationship to Israel.  (To place this in context, only 
six other UNGA resolutions explicitly criticized specific 
member states -- North Korea, Iran, Belarus, Burma, 
Armenia and the U.S.)  Posts may provide the following 
list of resolutions to host-country interlocutors as a 
non-paper: 
 
Resolutions of the 62nd UNGA explicitly critical of 
Israel: 
 
-- Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli 
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian 
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories 
(62/106); 
 
-- Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine 
(62/83); 
 
-- Jerusalem (62/84); 
 
-- The Syrian Golan (62/85); 
 
-- The Occupied Syrian Golan (62/110); 
 
-- Permanent Sovereignty of the Palestinian People in the 
Occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, 
and of the Arab Population in the Occupied Syrian Golan 
over their Natural Resources (62/181); 
 
-- Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the 
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 
1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including 
East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab territories 
(62/107); 
 
-- Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory, including East Jerusalem and the Occupied 
Syrian Golan (62/108); 
 
-- Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the 
Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 
including East Jerusalem (62/109); 
 
-- Palestinian Refugees' Property and their Revenues 
(62/105); 
 
-- Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (62/104); 
 
-- Oil Slick on Lebanese Shores (62/188); 
 
-- Financing the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 
(62/265) (Note: Out of seventeen UNGA resolutions funding 
peacekeeping operations, including the forces for Darfur 
and the Congo, only this one criticizes the actions of a 
UN member state); 
 
-- The Risk of Nuclear Proliferation in the Middle East 
(62/56) (Note: Israel is the only state mentioned by 
name.) 
 
Resolutions of the 62nd UNGA expressing support for the 
Palestinian people: 
 
 
STATE 00123081  003 OF 006 
 
 
-- Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of 
the Palestinian People  (62/80) 
 
-- Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat 
(62/81) 
 
-- Special Information Programme on the Question of 
Palestine of the Department of Public Information of the 
Secretariat (62/82) 
 
-- Assistance to the Palestinian People (62/93) 
 
-- Assistance to Palestinian Refugees (62/102) 
 
-- Persons Displaced as a result of the June 1967 and 
Subsequent Hostilities (62/103) 
 
-- The Right of the Palestinian People to 
Self-Determination (62/146) 
 
¶7. (U) The 2007 voting record in the 62nd UNGA on the key 
resolutions reaffirming three UN bodies were as follows: 
 
-- Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of 
the Palestinian People (resolution 62/80), approved 109-8, 
with 55 abstentions; 
 
-- Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat 
(resolution 62/81), approved 110-8 with 54 abstentions; 
 
-- Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli 
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian 
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories 
(resolution 62/106), approved 93-8 with 74 abstentions. 
 
¶8. (U) In 2007, the following countries voted in favor of 
all three key resolutions listed in paragraph 6: 
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua-Barbuda, Azerbaijan, 
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, 
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, 
Burma, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chile, China, 
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, 
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, 
Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's 
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, 
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, 
Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint 
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Suriname, Syria, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, 
and Zimbabwe. 
 
¶9. (U) In 2007, the following countries voted against 
these same three key resolutions: Australia, Canada, 
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, and 
the United States. 
 
¶10. (U) In 2007, the following countries abstained or were 
absent for the votes on all three resolutions: 62/80, 
62/81 and 62/106: Albania, Andorra, Belgium, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Colombia, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Estonia, Equatorial Guinea, 
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, 
Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Republic of Korea, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, 
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Moldova, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, 
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome, 
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Ukraine, United 
Kingdom, and Vanuatu. 
 
¶11. (U) The following countries had mixed voting records 
in 2007: 
 
Argentina, Bahamas, Cape Verde, Costa Rica, Cyprus, El 
Salvador, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Liberia, Malta, 
Mexico, Philippines and Swaziland -- Yes on 62/80 and 
62/81; abstained or absent on 62/106. 
 
Dominica -- Absent on 62/80 and 62/81; Yes on 62/106. 
 
Armenia -- Yes on 62/80 and 62/106; abstained on 62/81. 
 
 
STATE 00123081  004 OF 006 
 
 
Panama, Uruguay -- Abstained on 62/80 and 62/106; Yes on 
62/81. 
 
¶12. (U) Note: In addition to the 17 Non-Aligned Movement 
(NAM) members who abstained on resolution 62/106 in 2007 
(i.e., Bahamas, Cameroon, Colombia, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, 
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Mongolia, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, 
Thailand, and Vanuatu), ten other NAM states occasionally 
abstained on the same resolution over the period 
2003-2006, though not all at the same time: 
 
-- Antigua and Barbuda, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, 
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Jamaica, Rwanda, 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Uganda. 
 
Posts in these nations may wish to make a special effort 
to encourage host governments to resume abstaining on this 
and other resolutions.  Other posts in the Caribbean, 
Central African and Pacific island areas in which most of 
these 27 recent NAM abstentions were concentrated may wish 
to encourage host governments to join with neighboring NAM 
nations in abstaining or at least absenting themselves 
from the vote on these resolutions.  End Note. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
ADDITIONAL BACKGROUND ON MIDDLE EAST SITUATION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶13. (U) Begin Talking Points: 
 
-- With respect to the situation in the Middle East, the 
U.S. has clearly stated our policy that there should be 
two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side 
by side in peace and security.  We back up our policy by 
substantial diplomatic support for both sides consistent 
with the process launched in Annapolis in November 2007, 
and significant financial support to the Palestinian 
Authority and to Palestinian refugees, for whom the U.S. 
is the largest single-state donor. 
 
-- We see no contradiction whatsoever between support for 
the Palestinian people and support for Israel.  Both sides 
need support to be able to take the steps necessary for a 
just and lasting peace. 
-- Each year, therefore, we are appalled and discouraged 
as the UN General Assembly unhelpfully takes up a 
disproportionate number of resolutions related to the 
Middle East, all unbalanced by their explicit or implicit 
one-sided criticism of Israel. 
 
-- These resolutions are repetitive and unbalanced, and 
are completely unlike the UNGA's action with respect to 
any other member state, geographic area or issue.  They 
place demands on the Israeli side while failing to 
acknowledge that both sides have obligations and must take 
difficult steps towards peace. 
 
-- The U.S. accepts the principle that the UNGA may look 
into the practices of individual states.  However, last 
year the UNGA adopted only six resolutions specifically 
critical of member states other than Israel.  We supported 
some of these resolutions and opposed others.  Four 
focused on severe human rights abuses in North Korea 
(62/167), Iran (62/168), Belarus (62/69), and Burma 
(62/162); one called for Armenia to end its occupation of 
Azerbaijani territory (62/243); and one called for the 
U.S. to end its embargo of Cuba (62/3). 
 
-- Last year, the UNGA adopted 14 resolutions specifically 
critical of Israel and seven expressing support for the 
Palestinian people vis-a-vis their relationship to 
Israel.  It is set to do so again this year.  All told, 
these 21 resolutions took up 61 pages of text, compared to 
20 pages for the resolutions criticizing the six other 
states. (The list at para 4 may be provided as a 
non-paper.) 
 
-- Whatever the merits of the issue, this represents an 
extraordinarily disproportionate and unjustified focus on 
one member state.  The situation in the Middle East is an 
important matter, but looked at in relation to the overall 
problems facing the planet, this matter does not warrant 
three-quarters of the time and energy the UNGA devotes to 
critical review of the actions of member states. 
 
-- Just as serious as their disproportionality, the 
resolutions serve more to undermine than to assist the 
ongoing negotiations and the credibility of the UN: 
 
 
STATE 00123081  005 OF 006 
 
 
-- They undermine the institutional credibility of the UN, 
which as a member of the Quartet (U.S., EU, UN, Russia), 
must be seen by both sides as an honest broker in 
facilitating a resolution to the Middle East conflict. 
 
-- They have no positive effect in helping achieve a just 
resolution of the conflict.  Indeed, they can have a 
serious corrosive affect both by convincing many on the 
Israeli side that they will be treated unfairly by the UN 
no matter what concessions they offer, and by convincing 
extremist elements on the Palestinian side that they will 
not be criticized no matter what they do, up to and 
including terrorist attacks targeting civilians. 
 
-- They presuppose the outcome of permanent status issues, 
such as the right of return, checkpoints and settlement 
activity, that properly belong in ongoing bilateral 
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians, 
thus making it more difficult to resolve such issues. 
 
-- They add nothing to the far more detailed and 
up-to-date monthly discussions of the Security Council on 
the situation in the Middle East. 
 
-- For these reasons, we call on all member states to join 
us in instructing Missions in New York to vote against or 
abstain on these resolutions, or at least to absent their 
delegations when they come up for a vote. 
 
-- We will take note of and be most appreciative of any 
change of vote from "yes" to abstain or not voting, or 
from abstain to "no" that your country may be able to 
effect.  For those already joining us in opposition to 
these resolutions we reiterate our thanks. 
 
-- Of particular concern to the U.S. are three resolutions 
extending three UN bodies, established more than a 
generation ago, which do not contribute to the achievement 
of peace in the region: the Committee on the Exercise of 
the Inalienable rights of the Palestinian People; the 
Division for Palestinian Rights; and the Special Committee 
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human 
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the 
Occupied Territories. 
 
-- These bodies perpetuate the perception of an inherent 
UN bias inconsistent with support for the Roadmap, which 
properly demands actions from both sides, not just Israel. 
 
-- The time has come for the UN General Assembly to review 
these entities in light of their actual contribution, or 
lack of contribution, towards a solution for the conflict 
in the Middle East.  The General Assembly can best play a 
role in supporting peace in the region by demonstrating a 
balanced approach to the parties to the conflict. 
 
-- Over the past several years, support for these 
resolutions has eroded.  Last year, over 75 countries 
voted "no" or abstained on all three resolutions.  For the 
vote on the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli 
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian 
People, the combined "no" votes and abstentions almost 
equaled the "yes" of 90.  Clearly, there is no longer 
anything close to consensus support for these bodies. 
 
-- (For Ankara only) The Government of Turkey deserves 
special praise for its efforts in facilitating indirect 
talks between Syria and Israel on the Golan and other 
issues.  To maintain its impartiality (and the undisputed 
appearance of impartiality) in this role, Turkey should 
abstain on all Golan-related UNGA resolutions, and 
encourage other states to join it in so doing. 
 
-- (For Valetta and Nicosia Only) Your country is one of 
only two in the EU that participate in the Committee on 
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian 
People.  We urge you to consider discontinuing your 
membership, which does not contribute to a balanced or 
constructive UN role in the Middle East Peace Process. 
 
-- (For Nassau, Ouagadougou, Santo Domingo, San Salvador, 
Guatemala City, Port-au-Prince, Tegucigalpa, Monrovia, 
Mexico City, Abuja, Panama City, Lima, St Lucia and 
Montevideo Only) Earlier this year we discussed with your 
Head of State/Foreign Minister the dissonance between our 
two countries' close relationship and our lack of voting 
coincidence with each other at the UN.  The resolutions 
noted above are among the important votes on which we have 
been hoping for an improvement in this voting coincidence. 
 
 
STATE 00123081  006 OF 006 
 
 
 
End Talking Points. 
 
¶14. Tripoli minimize considered. 
RICE