08STATE64671
INVITATION TO JUNE 19 ROUNDTABLE ON ZIMBABWE
Mon Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0010
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4671 1681908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 161905Z JUN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 064671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL UNSC XA ZI
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO JUNE 19 ROUNDTABLE ON ZIMBABWE 
 
 
¶1.  This is an immediate action request.  USUN is requested 
to immediately pass the invitation in para 2 below to SYG 
Ban; the invitation in para 3 below to UNSC members; and the 
invitation in para 4 below to the UN missions of the 
following African states:  Senegal, Uganda, Kenya, Ghana, 
Nigeria, Morocco, Angola, the DRC, Mauritius, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Botswana, Swaziland, Lesotho, Uganda, Lesotho, 
Swaziland, Botswana, Madagascar, Malawi, Tanzania, and 
Zambia.  The invitations should go out under Ambassador 
Khalilzad,s signature.  The agenda for the roundtable is 
contained in para 5 below.  End Action Request. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of invitation to Secretary General Ban: 
 
I would like to invite you to participate in a roundtable 
discussion on Zimbabwe that Secretary Rice will co-host with 
Burkina Faso Foreign Minister Djibril Bassole on June 19 from 
11:30 a.m. until 12:10 p.m.  We would welcome your speaking 
on the humanitarian and electoral assistance efforts of the 
United Nations in Zimbabwe.  The proposed agenda is attached. 
 
The United States is committed to working with the United 
Nations and African leaders and institutions to address the 
crisis in Zimbabwe.  We believe that high-level international 
attention is needed to support UN and regional mediation 
efforts and to put pressure on the Government of Zimbabwe to 
end its campaign of violence and intimidation and permit a 
free and fair Presidential run-off election on June 27. 
 
We hope this roundtable discussion can contribute a better 
understanding of the political and humanitarian situation in 
Zimbabwe and help direct our future efforts to promote the 
welfare of the Zimbabwean people and the stability of 
Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
¶3.  Begin text of invitation to UNSC members: 
 
I would like to invite you to attend a roundtable discussion 
on Zimbabwe that Secretary Rice will co-host with Burkina 
Faso Foreign Minister Djibril Bassole on June 19 from 11:30 
a.m. until 12:10 p.m.  The proposed agenda is attached. 
 
The United States is committed to working with the United 
Nations and African leaders and institutions to address the 
crisis in Zimbabwe.  We believe that high-level international 
attention is needed to support UN and regional mediation 
efforts and to put pressure on the Government of Zimbabwe to 
end its campaign of violence and intimidation and to permit a 
free and fair Presidential run-off election on June 27. 
 
We believe the Security Council must be involved in 
supporting a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Zimbabwe 
for the benefit of the people of Zimbabwe and peace and 
security in the region.  We hope this roundtable discussion 
can contribute to a better understanding of the political and 
humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe and help direct our future 
efforts to advance the welfare of the Zimbabwean people and 
the stability of Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
¶4.  Begin text of invitation to the Permanent Representative 
of Senegal, Uganda, Kenya, Ghana, Nigeria, Morocco, Angola, 
the DRC, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Botswana, Swaziland, 
Lesotho, Uganda, Lesotho, Swaziland, Botswana, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Tanzania, and Zambia. 
 
I would like to invite you to attend a roundtable discussion 
on Zimbabwe that Secretary Rice will co-host with Burkina 
Faso Foreign Minister Djibril Bassole on June 19 from 11:30 
a.m. until 12:10 p.m.  The proposed agenda is attached. 
 
The United States is committed to working with the United 
Nations and African leaders and institutions to address the 
crisis in Zimbabwe.  We believe that high-level international 
attention is needed to support UN and regional mediation 
efforts and to put pressure on the Government of Zimbabwe to 
end its campaign of violence and intimidation and to permit a 
free and fair Presidential run-off election on June 27. 
 
We hope this roundtable discussion can contribute a better 
understanding of the political and humanitarian situation in 
Zimbabwe and its impact on the region and help direct our 
future efforts to promote the welfare of the Zimbabwean 
people and stability in Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
¶5.  Proposed Agenda for Roundtable 
 
11:30 a.m.  Roundtable begins; Secretary Rice makes 
introductory remarks 
 
11:35 a.m.  Foreign Minister Bassole makes introductory 
remarks 
 
11:40 a.m.  Secretary General Ban briefs on UN humanitarian 
and electoral assistance 
 
11:45 a.m.  Remarks by representatives from regional 
organizations 
 
11:55 a.m.  International NGO representative briefs on the 
humanitarian situation 
 
12:00 p.m.  Invited guests may make remarks 
 
12:10 p.m.  Event closes 
 
 
¶6. Tripoli minimize considered 
RICE