08STATE49794
SOMALIA--TALKING POINTS FOR MAY 12 BRIEFING BY
Fri May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0215
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #9794/01 1302238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 092232Z MAY 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 1712
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 7640UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 049794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA--TALKING POINTS FOR MAY 12 BRIEFING BY 
U/SYG HOLMES 
 
¶1.  USUN is instructed to draw from the following talking 
points for the May 12 UN Security Council briefing on 
Somalia by Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs 
and Emergency Relief Coordination Sir John 
Holmes.  Begin points: 
 
-- We would like to thank U/SYG Holmes for his informative 
briefing on the humanitarian crisis in Somalia. 
 
-- The United States remains gravely concerned about the 
humanitarian situation in Somalia, especially in 
south-central Somalia. There are 1.5 million people in need 
of assistance in Somalia.  More than 60 percent of the 
population of Mogadishu have left the city with some areas 
being completely vacated.  Over 300,000 Somalis have sought 
refuge in Kenya, Ethiopia, Djibouti, and Yemen.  Delivery of 
humanitarian assistance has been hampered by insecurity, 
roadblocks, and interference from the TFG, extremists, and 
clan rivalries. The insecurity coupled with worsening drought 
conditions make Somalia one of the worst humanitarian crises 
in the world today. 
 
-- In FY 2007, the United States Government provided 
approximately $7.1 million in earmarked funds to address the 
needs of Somali refugees in the Horn of Africa and Yemen. We 
also provided $4.8 million for the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International 
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) operations in Somalia.  In 
this fiscal year, we have received $10 million in emergency 
funds to respond to the Somalia crisis. 
 
-- Ultimately, the humanitarian situation in Somalia can only 
be addressed with a lasting political and security sector 
solution, which we believe should be based on the 
Transitional Federal Charter. 
 
-- Therefore, we continue to support the efforts by the 
Special Representative to the Secretary General for 
Somalia, Ahmedou Ould-Adballah, and the Somalia Prime 
Minister Nur "Adde" Hassan Hussein to reach out to the 
opposition.  It is extremely important that this dialogue 
continue with the goal of moving towards national elections. 
Member states with ties to Somalia should press all parties 
to reject violence and embrace dialogue. 
 
-- Likewise, we again call on the UN Secretariat to continue 
contingency planning, beyond those laid 
out in the SYG's March 14 report, for deployment of a UN PKO 
under less than ideal circumstances.  These contingency plans 
should present options, based on the area of responsibility 
and mission mandate, for the Council's consideration.  We 
understand the challenges in planning peacekeeping operations 
when security realities on the ground are so unstable and 
unpredictable, but the people of Somalia cannot wait for the 
"ideal" security situation for the UN to take a 
leadership role in the security of Somalia. 
 
-- The United States commends AMISOM for its efforts to 
secure and stabilize Somalia even while extremist elements 
in the country continue to target its forces.  We would once 
again like to praise the bravery of the 1850 Ugandans 
and 850 Burundian peacekeepers currently stationed in 
Somalia.  We urge all AU members who have made public 
commitments to the mission to fulfill their pledge and deploy 
as soon as possible.  We urge all member states to 
provide financial resources, personnel, equipment, and 
logistical support so these forces and future troop 
pledges can deploy as soon as possible.  The United States 
welcomes the idea of a high-level donors conference for 
AMISOM to be held in New York in the upcoming months as laid 
out by the Secretary General in his April 23 letter 
to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission. 
 
--  The United States fully supports the relocation of the UN 
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), as well as other 
essential members of the UN Country Team, from Kenya to 
Somalia as soon as possible.  We agree with the 
recommendations of the SYG in his March 14 report that the UN 
Department of Safety and Security (DSS) start planning 
for the relocation of UNPOS and UN Country Team elements back 
to Somalia.  The return of UNPOS and parts of the UN 
Country team can help alleviate the humanitarian situation in 
Somalia. 
 
-- We support the idea outlined in the strategic assessment 
portion of the SYG's March 14 report that calls 
 
STATE 00049794  002 OF 002 
 
 
for the formulation of a joint planning unit that could 
coordinate an integrated strategy.  However, we emphasize 
the need to maintain the neutrality of UN humanitarian 
operations in any enhanced coordination mechanism among UN 
programmatic activities. 
 
-- We applaud the efforts of the UN and NGO communities to 
operate in very dangerous circumstances to provide 
assistance to the citizens of Somalia.  We continue to be 
concerned that their efforts remain hampered by 
insecurity, roadblocks, and inter-clan conflict.  We call on 
all parties to facilitate humanitarian access for the 
delivery of life-saving aid to those in need. 
 
-- The United States believes the scourge of piracy off the 
Somalia coast is also hindering efforts to alleviate 
the humanitarian situation in Somalia.  We continue to work 
with our colleagues in the Council on a resolution to 
combat Somalia piracy.  We hope you will support this effort 
so we can pass this important resolution this 
month. 
 
end points 
RICE