08STATE9284
GUIDANCE FOR JANUARY 30 UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON THE
Wed Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9284 0300017
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300015Z JAN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 009284 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
NSC FOR KARA MCDONALD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPAL IS LE
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR JANUARY 30 UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON THE 
MIDDLE EAST 
 
REF: DE OTALVARO/PHEE E-MAIL OF 18 JAN 08 
 
¶1. (SBU) USUN is instructed to draw from the points in 
paras. 2-9 below in making its statement at the January 30 
UNSC debate on the Middle East.  Please select the point 
in para. 2 that describes the outcome of the discussion on 
the PRST on Gaza, and follow with the rest of the points 
in para. 3 et. seq.  For additional details on the four 
tracks for the political process launched at Annapolis, 
the Lebanon tribunal, and the elections in Lebanon, refer 
to ref e-mail. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Points:  If we achieve required changes to 
PRST and can join consensus: 
 
"Mr. President, I want to thank you for your leadership 
during the discussions on the situation in the Middle East 
last week, which resulted in a Presidential Statement upon 
which we could all agree.  It is clear that all on this 
Council share a deep concern over the situation in Gaza. 
We are concerned about the ongoing and unacceptable firing 
of rockets and mortars into Israel from Gaza.  We are also 
concerned about the economic and humanitarian situation in 
Gaza, recognizing the importance of continued humanitarian 
access and assistance, and welcoming Israel's commitment 
to minimize the impact of its actions on innocent 
civilians there." 
 
If other states do not agree with us on PRST and we have 
to break consensus on it: 
 
"We regret that the Council was unable to reach a 
consensus on a Presidential Statement on the Middle East. 
The draft statement was unbalanced, placing demands on 
Israel while failing to call on Hamas to cease its acts of 
provocation and take the steps necessary to achieve 
genuine progress towards realizing the vision of two 
democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living 
side-by-side in peace and security." 
 
¶3. (SBU) "Terror groups in Gaza continue to target 
innocent Israeli citizens with rocket fire on a daily 
basis.  This rocket fire is unacceptable and it must stop. 
Hamas, having violently and illegitimately seized power in 
Gaza last June, bears responsibility for putting an end to 
this and other terror activities in and emanating from 
Gaza, which pose a danger to Israel and undermine the 
aspirations of the Palestinian people and the efforts of 
their legitimate government.  Most recently, Hamas 
orchestrated attacks on the border between Gaza and Egypt, 
resulting in tens of thousands of Gazans surging into 
Egypt in an uncontrolled manner, destabilizing the region 
by potentially facilitating access for terrorists into 
Egypt and the transfer of armaments into Gaza. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Clearly Hamas' actions are at odds with the 
Palestinian people's aspirations for freedom and 
statehood.  A Palestinian state will never be born of 
terror and violence.  These aspirations can only be 
realized through negotiations and peaceful means.  We call 
upon Hamas to end the daily rocket attacks on Israel from 
Gaza and relinquish its illegitimate control of Gaza to 
the Palestinian Authority, under the legitimate leadership 
of President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad.  In the 
meantime, we will not abandon the people of Gaza.  We will 
continue to provide humanitarian aid to help meet the 
basic needs of Gazans, and we continue to view Gaza as an 
integral part of a future Palestinian state. 
 
¶5. (SBU) These troubling developments will not discourage 
the United States' commitment to President Bush's vision 
of two states living side-by-side in peace and security, 
and should not discourage the Council from its commitment 
to the long-term goal of establishing a Palestinian state 
that is peaceful, democratic, and viable. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Israel and the Palestinians are forging ahead 
with the political process launched at Annapolis, and the 
United States and other members of this Council and the 
Quartet must continue to support their efforts.  As 
President Bush said in Jerusalem, we are working to 
support progress on four tracks. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Mr. President, we hope that the momentum from 
reaching an agreement on Roadmap implementation in 
Annapolis, and achieving financial support for Palestinian 
institution building and economic reform in Paris, will 
continue to build and give way to the creation of a 
Palestinian state that is a homeland for the Palestinian 
people, just as Israel is a homeland for the Jewish 
people. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Turning to Lebanon, the U.S. strongly condemns 
the terrorist bombing in Beirut last week that killed 
Lebanese Internal Security Forces Captain Wissam Eid and 
many other Lebanese.  We extend our condolences to the 
families of the innocent Lebanese killed in this brutal 
attack.  This bombing, the latest in a series of terrorist 
attacks targeting those who are working to secure 
Lebanon's independence and sovereignty, is a part of the 
continuing assault on Lebanon's institutions. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Like the previous assassinations and bombings, 
this was an attack on Lebanon's democracy and on all those 
working to secure Lebanon's unity, independence, and 
prosperity.  The United States will not falter in our 
support for the 
democratically-elected Lebanese government.  We appreciate 
the UN's efforts to rapidly stand up the Special Tribunal 
for Lebanon, which will hold accountable those responsible 
for the assassination of Former Prime Minister Hariri and 
other related crimes.  We urge members of the Council and 
UN member states to provide financial assistance to allow 
the Tribunal to continue its important work.  Finally, we 
renew our call for the immediate election of a new 
President in accordance with Lebanon's constitution and 
call upon Syria, Iran, and their allies end their 
interference in and obstruction of Lebanon's democratic 
process. 
RICE