09STATE129239
SUDAN: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR DECEMBER 21 DEBATE ON
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9239 3520245
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180243Z DEC 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 129239 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SU XA XW
SUBJECT: SUDAN: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR DECEMBER 21 DEBATE ON 
MBEKI REPORT 
 
REF: USUN 1095 
 
-------------------------- 
Summary and Action Request 
-------------------------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  USUN may draw from the points and questions in 
paragraph three for the December 21 Security Council 
briefing and debate on the Mbeki Report.  The U.S. aims 
to 
support the objectives of the Mbeki report, but also 
point 
out that some of the Mbeki Report's recommendations may 
not advance those objectives. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The African Union Peace and Security Council 
(PSC) mandated an AU High-Level Panel on Darfur, which is 
chaired by former President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki , 
to examine issues of accountability, combating impunity, 
peace and reconciliation in Darfur.  The Panel completed 
its work in early October and presented its report to the 
PSC in Abuja on October 29.  Former President Mbeki is 
scheduled to present the report to the UN on December 21. 
 
--------------- 
Building Blocks 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Begin Points: 
 
-- I would like to begin by thanking President Thabo 
Mbeki 
for taking the time to brief us on the African Union 
High-Level Panel on Darfur's (AUPD) report on the 
situation in Darfur.  We are also honored to have the 
Chair of the African Union, Jean Ping, and the AU 
Commissioner for the Peace and Security Council, Ramtane 
Lamamra, here with us today, as well as Secretary-General 
Ban Ki-Moon. 
 
-- The presence of these eminent statesmen signals to the 
world not only the importance that the international 
community places on resolving issues in Sudan, but more 
importantly African partnership in reaching peaceful 
solutions for crises in Africa.  We therefore strongly 
support the idea of African solutions to African 
problems.  We also welcome the acknowledgment in the 
report that the problems in Sudan are of such magnitude 
that no single party can solve them alone.  We must all 
work together, and with the stakes this high, we cannot 
afford to fail. 
 
- A Comprehensive Approach 
 
-- The African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur (AUPD) 
characterizes the conflict in Darfur as "Sudan's crisis 
in 
Darfur" rather than "the Darfur crisis."  We agree with 
this characterization, and we also agree that problems in 
Sudan must be addressed comprehensively and cannot be 
considered in isolation from one another.  The United 
States strategy in Sudan is clear on this point. 
 
-- The United States is pursuing three core objectives in 
Sudan: (1) ending the conflict, gross human rights 
abuses, 
war crimes and genocide in Darfur; (2) implementing the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement resulting in either a 
united 
and peaceful Sudan after 2011, or an orderly path toward 
two separate and viable states at peace with each other; 
and (3) ensuring that Sudan does not provide a safe haven 
for terrorists. 
 
- UNAMID 
 
-- Civilians continue to be casualties of conflict in 
Sudan, reminding us of how vital UNAMID's presence in 
Darfur remains.  UNAMID has made a difference on the 
ground, and as I have said before, we know this comes at 
a 
high cost.  I would like to express on behalf of the 
United States our deepest condolences to the families of 
the five Rwandan peacekeepers who were killed on December 
4 and 5 in the line of duty while distributing water to 
internally displaced persons.  I would also like to 
extend 
condolences to Government of Rwanda.  These direct 
attacks 
on peacekeepers are reprehensible, and the perpetrators 
must be brought to justice. 
 
-- We believe that UNAMID must be fully deployed and 
fully 
equipped, particularly given the volatility of the 
situation in Darfur.  We support the call for troop 
contributing countries and other UN Member States to 
expeditiously provide the balance of forces and assets, 
including helicopters, which are required for UNAMID's 
efforts to protect civilians. 
 
-- We also welcome the proposal to strengthen the 
civilian 
component of UNAMID's role.  Accelerating the training 
for 
community police services for IDPs in camps and those 
returning to their villages of origin would be another 
step to help promote peace and security in Darfur, and 
one 
that we would fully support. 
 
-- UNAMID has played an essential role in ensuring 
security for humanitarian assistance providers in Sudan. 
We believe that UNAMID should continue to provide this 
support, however, we are concerned that if UNAMID is 
given 
a greater role with respect to humanitarian assistance 
operations themselves, this might detract from UNAMID's 
capacity to carry out its primary responsibility to 
protect civilians. 
 
- Mediation 
 
-- With respect to the Joint UN/AU Mediation efforts, we 
continue to strongly support Joint Chief Mediator Djbril 
Bassole.  There can be no military solution to conflict 
in 
Darfur.  I believe that we all can agree that only a 
comprehensive political solution can end Darfur's 
marginalization and provide Darfur with a voice in 
national political processes.  We encourage the African 
Union to continue supporting this process, and we 
reiterate our call to all parties to come to the 
negotiating table. 
 
- Accountability 
 
-- The United States strongly supports accountability for 
perpetrators of genocide, war crimes and gross human 
rights abuses in Sudan.  We welcome efforts to strengthen 
Sudan's national legal system because we recognize that 
Sudanese institutions will need to play a part in 
ensuring 
accountability for such perpetrators.  However, these 
efforts will take time, and they will not succeed unless 
they are backed by the political will to bring 
perpetrators to justice.  The Security Council referred 
the matter to the International Criminal Court and we are 
monitoring the progress of the related cases.  For this 
reason, the United States does not support deferring ICC 
action under Article 16 of the Rome Statute, and we 
continue to insist that the Government of Sudan cooperate 
fully with the ICC as required by UNSC resolution 1593 
(2005). 
 
- Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
 
-- Let me say a few words about implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, because this is the second 
critical element in the United States strategy on Sudan. 
The parties recently reached agreement on legislation 
that 
helps pave the way for holding the January 2011 referenda 
and undertaking the Popular Consultation process in Blue 
Nile and Southern Kordofan states. While progress on 
these 
issues is a positive sign, the parties must still reach 
agreement on the appropriate use of census results in 
upcoming elections, and amendments to national security 
legislation. All of us must also continue to push for 
other issues crucial to full CPA implementation such as 
demarcation of the North-South border, implementation of 
the July 2009 Permanent Court of Arbitration decision on 
Abyei, and further implementation of resource 
sharing-arrangements. 
 
- Elections 
 
-- Finally, we agree that it is important for Sudanese 
citizens in Darfur to be able to participate in 
elections.  We believe that elections are an important 
milestone in the implementation of the Comprehensive 
Peace 
Agreement (CPA).  It is essential that there be 
sufficient 
security and safety to permit the voting population to 
cast their ballots in an environment free of insecurity 
or 
retribution, and we urge all parties to the CPA to take 
action now to ensure such security exists.  It is also 
essential that civil liberties, including freedom of 
expression, be respected so that persons can peacefully 
engage in an exchange of ideas. 
 
- Conclusion 
 
-- The task before us is enormous; the timeline for 
accomplishing this task is compressed.  With less than 
four months until elections and one year away from the 
referenda, there is much work to be done.  Success will 
require all of us to work together and to speak with one 
voice to the parties in Sudan.  Let me close by again 
saying that we are honored to have our partners here with 
us today.  The more we can work together, the greater our 
chances of success. 
 
-- Thank you, Mr. President. 
CLINTON