09STATE60568
SENEGAL -- 2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND
Thu Jun 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0568 1622340
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 112311Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY DAKAR IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 060568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP ELAB KCRM KPAO KWMN PGOV PHUM PREL SMIG SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL -- 2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND 
       DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 59732 
     ¶B. (B) STATE 005577 
 
¶1. This is an action cable; see paras 5 through 7 and 10. 
 
¶2. On June 16, 2009, at 10:00 a.m. EDT, the Secretary will 
release the 2009 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report at a 
press conference in the Department's press briefing room. 
This release will receive substantial coverage in domestic 
and foreign news outlets.  Until the time of the Secretary's 
June 16 press conference, any public release of the Report or 
country narratives contained therein is prohibited. 
 
¶3. The Department is hereby providing Post with advance press 
guidance to be used on June 16 or thereafter.  Also provided 
is demarche language to be used in informing the Government 
of Senegal of its tier ranking and the TIP Report's imminent 
release.  The text of the TIP Report country narrative is 
provided, both for use in informing the Government of Senegal 
and in any local media release by Post's public affairs 
section on June 16 or thereafter.  Drawing on information 
provided below in paras 8 and 9, Post may provide the host 
government with the text of the TIP Report narrative no 
earlier than 1200 noon local time Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, 
EUR, and NEA countries and OOB local time Tuesday June 16 for 
SCA and EAP posts.  Please note, however, that any public 
release of the Report's information should not/not precede 
the Secretary's release at 10:00 am EDT on June 16. 
 
¶4. The entire TIP Report will be available on-line at 
www.state.gov/g/tip shortly after the Secretary's June 16 
release.  Hard copies of the Report will be pouched to posts 
in all countries appearing on the Report.  The Secretary's 
statement at the June 16 press event, and the statement of 
and fielding of media questions by G/TIP,s Director and 
Senior Advisor to the Secretary, Ambassador-at-Large Luis 
CdeBaca, will be available on the Department's website 
shortly after the June 16 event.  Ambassador de Baca will 
also hold a general briefing for officials of foreign 
embassies in Washington DC on June 17 at 3:30 pm EDT. 
 
¶5. Action Request: No earlier than 12 noon local time on 
Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, EUR, and NEA posts and OOB local 
time on Tuesday June 16 for SCA and EAP posts, please inform 
the appropriate official in the Government of Senegal of the 
June 16 release of the 2009 TIP Report, drawing on the points 
in para 9 (at Post's discretion) and including the text of 
the country narrative provided in para 8.  For countries 
where the State Department has lowered the tier ranking, it 
is particularly important to advise governments prior to the 
Report being released in Washington on June 16. 
 
¶6. Action Request continued:  Please note that, for those 
countries which will not receive an "action plan" with 
specific recommendations for improvement, posts should draw 
host governments' attention to the areas for improvement 
identified in the 2009 Report, especially highlighted in the 
"Recommendations" section of the second paragraph of the 
narrative text.  This engagement is important to establishing 
the framework in which the government's performance will be 
judged for the 2010 Report.  If posts have questions about 
which governments will receive an action plan, or how they 
may follow up on the recommendations in the 2009 Report, 
please contact G/TIP and the appropriate regional bureau. 
 
¶7. Action Request continued: On June 16, please be prepared 
to answer media inquiries on the Report's release using the 
press guidance provided in para 11.  If Post wishes, a local 
press statement may be released on or after 10:30 am EDT June 
16, drawing on the press guidance and the text of the TIP 
Report's country narrative provided in para 8. 
 
¶8. Begin Final Text of Senegal,s country narrative in the 
2009 TIP Report: 
 
----------------------------- 
Senegal (TIER 2 Watch List) 
----------------------------- 
Senegal is a source, transit, and destination country for 
children and women trafficked for the purposes of forced 
labor and commercial sexual exploitation.  Trafficking within 
the country is more prevalent than trans-border trafficking 
and the majority of victims are children. Within Senegal, 
religious teachers traffic boys, called talibe, by promising 
to educate them, but subjecting them instead to forced 
begging and physical abuse.  A 2007 study done by UNICEF, the 
ILO and the World Bank found that 6,480 talibe were forced to 
beg in Dakar alone. Women and girls are trafficked for 
domestic servitude and commercial sexual exploitation -- 
including exploitation by foreign sex tourists -- within 
Senegal.  Children are also trafficked for forced labor in 
gold mines within Senegal.  Transnationally, boys are 
trafficked to Senegal from The Gambia, Mali, Guinea-Bissau, 
and Guinea for forced begging by religious teachers. 
Senegalese children are trafficked to Mali, Guinea, and 
possibly other West African countries for forced labor in 
gold mines.  Senegalese women and girls are trafficked to 
neighboring countries, the Middle East, and Europe for 
domestic servitude and possibly for sexual exploitation. 
Women and girls from other West African countries, 
particularly Liberia, Ghana, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria may be 
trafficked to Senegal for sexual exploitation, including for 
sex tourism. 
 
The Government of Senegal does not fully comply with the 
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking;however, 
it is making significant efforts to do so, despite limited 
resources.  The government continued to demonstrate a strong 
commitment to protecting child trafficking victims during the 
year by providing them with shelter, rehabilitation and 
reintegration services.  Despite these overall significant 
efforts, the government did not show progress in prosecuting, 
convicting, and punishing trafficking offenders over the last 
year; therefore, Senegal is placed on Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
Recommendations for Senegal:  Intensify efforts to prosecute 
and convict trafficking offenders; ensure that the Ministry 
of Interior,s Special Commissariat Against Sex Tourism and 
the Tourism Ministry,s sex tourism police unit arrest 
suspected sex tourists and rescue their victims; and increase 
efforts to raise awareness about trafficking. 
 
Prosecution 
----------- 
The Government of Senegal demonstrated insufficient 
anti-trafficking law enforcement efforts during the year. 
Senegal prohibits all forms of trafficking through its 2005 
Law to Combat Trafficking in Persons and Related Practices 
and to Protect Victims.  The law,s prescribed penalties of 
five to 10 years, imprisonment for all forms of trafficking 
are sufficiently stringent and commensurate with penalties 
prescribed for rape.  The government reported that it 
arrested two religious teachers for abusing boys they had 
trafficked for forced begging.  The government did not report 
any additional arrests, prosecutions, or convictions of 
trafficking offenses. During the year, the Ministry of 
Justice,s Center for Judicial Training conducted a 
UNICEF-funded training for police, gendarmerie, and 
immigration officials to educate them about trafficking. 
Although the government in 2007 activated two special police 
units to combat child sex tourism, one within the Interior 
Ministry and the other within the Tourism Ministry, these 
units did not report any law enforcement actions against 
foreign pedophiles.  The Ministry of the Interior, through 
its Bureau of Investigations, continued to work with Interpol 
to monitor immigration and emigration patterns for evidence 
of trafficking. 
Protection 
------------ 
The Government of Senegal sustained solid efforts to protect 
trafficking victims over the last year.  The government 
continued to operate the Ginndi Center, its shelter for 
destitute children, including trafficking victims.  While the 
Family Ministry, which funds and operates the Center with 
support from international donors, began using a donor-funded 
computerized database to track trafficking victims in 2006, 
the center recently stopped using the database due to lack of 
funds.  The center, which has the capacity to house 60 
children at a time, assisted 949 foreign and Senegalese 
destitute children, including trafficking victims, over the 
last year.  With international organization and NGO 
assistance, 807 children were reunited with their families 
and 69 were trained in vocational centers located in the 
Ginndi center.   The government also continued to operate its 
free child protection hotline out of the Ginndi Center.  In 
the last year, the hotline received 17,501 calls, though it 
is not known how many of these calls related to human 
trafficking.  The government also sometimes referred 
trafficking victims to NGOs for care on an ad hoc basis.  The 
government espoused a policy of encouraging victims to assist 
in trafficking investigations or prosecutions in part by 
permitting closed door victim testimonies during trafficking 
prosecutions.   The government did not report, however, that 
it encouraged any victims to assist in prosecutions during 
the last year.  The government provided legal alternatives to 
the removal of foreign victims to countries where they faced 
hardship or retribution.  Trafficking victims had the option 
of remaining temporarily or permanently in Senegal under the 
status of resident or refugee. Victims were not 
inappropriately incarcerated or fined for unlawful acts 
committed as a direct result of being trafficked. 
 
Prevention 
----------- 
The Government of Senegal made modest efforts to raise 
awareness about trafficking during the reporting period.  As 
part of its program against the worst forms of child labor, 
the Family Ministry continued to conduct donor-funded 
workshops and roundtables in Mbour, Dakar and other areas of 
the country to raise awareness about forced child begging, 
child domestic servitude, and child prostitution.  In 2008, 
the Family Ministry collaborated with the ILO and the 
Governments of Mali, Cote d,Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, 
and Burkina Faso to implement a 12-month regional 
anti-trafficking project.  The project collected information 
on the parameters of regional trafficking and organized 
donor-funded anti-trafficking workshops for 60 police, 
gendarmerie, and customs officials from the participating 
countries.  In December 2008, project participants released a 
document listing 68 best practices to combat trafficking in 
the region.  The government did not take steps to reduce 
demand for commercial sex acts in Senegal.  The government 
did not take measures to ensure that its nationals who are 
deployed abroad as part of peacekeeping missions do not 
engage in or facilitate trafficking. 
 
 
¶9. Post may wish to deliver the following points, which offer 
technical and legal background on the TIP Report process, to 
the host government as a non-paper with the above TIP Report 
country narrative: 
 
(begin non-paper) 
 
-- The U.S. Congress, through its passage of the 2000 
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended (TVPA), 
requires the Secretary of State to submit an annual Report to 
Congress.  The goal of this Report is to stimulate action and 
create partnerships around the world in the fight against 
modern-day slavery.  The USG approach to combating human 
trafficking follows the TVPA and the standards set forth in 
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the 
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime (commonly known as the "Palermo Protocol").  The TVPA 
and the Palermo Protocol recognize that this is a crime in 
which the victims, labor or services (including in the "sex 
industry") are obtained or maintained through force, fraud, 
or coercion, whether overt or through psychological 
manipulation.  While much attention has focused on 
international flows, both the TVPA and the Palermo Protocol 
focus on the exploitation of the victim, and do not require a 
showing that the victim was moved. 
 
-- Recent amendments to the TVPA removed the requirement that 
only countries with a "significant number" of trafficking 
victims be included in the Report. Beginning with the 2009 
TIP Report, countries determined to be a country of origin, 
transit, or destination for victims of severe forms of 
trafficking are included in the Report and assigned to one of 
three tiers.  Countries assessed as meeting the "minimum 
standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking" 
set forth in the TVPA are classified as Tier 1.  Countries 
assessed as not fully complying with the minimum standards, 
but making significant efforts to meet those minimum 
standards are classified as Tier 2.  Countries assessed as 
neither complying with the minimum standards nor making 
significant efforts to do so are classified as Tier 3. 
 
-- The TVPA also requires the Secretary of State to provide a 
"Special Watch List" to Congress later in the year. 
Anti-trafficking efforts of the countries on this list are to 
be evaluated again in an Interim Assessment that the 
Secretary of State must provide to Congress by February 1 of 
each year.  Countries are included on the "Special Watch 
List" if they move up in "tier" rankings in the annual TIP 
Report -- from 3 to 2 or from 2 to 1 ) or if they have been 
placed on the Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
-- Tier 2 Watch List consists of Tier 2 countries determined: 
(1) not to have made "increasing efforts" to combat human 
trafficking over the past year; (2) to be making significant 
efforts based on commitments of anti-trafficking reforms over 
the next year, or (3) to have a very significant number of 
trafficking victims or a significantly increasing victim 
population.  As indicated in reftel B, the TVPRA of 2008 
contains a provision requiring that a country that has been 
included on Tier 2 Watch List for two consecutive years after 
the date of enactment of the TVPRA of 2008 be ranked as Tier 
¶3.  Thus, any automatic downgrade to Tier 3 pursuant to this 
provision would take place, at the earliest, in the 2011 TIP 
Report (i.e., a country would have to be ranked Tier 2 Watch 
List in the 2009 and 2010 Reports before being subject to 
Tier 3 in the 2011 Report).  The new law allows for a waiver 
of this provision for up to two additional years upon a 
determination by the President that the country has developed 
and devoted sufficient resources to a written plan to make 
significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with the 
minimum standards. 
 
-- Countries classified as Tier 3 may be subject to statutory 
restrictions for the subsequent fiscal year on 
non-humanitarian and non-trade-related foreign assistance 
and, in some circumstances, withholding of funding for 
participation by government officials or employees in 
educational and cultural exchange programs.   In addition, 
the President could instruct the U.S. executive directors to 
international financial institutions to oppose loans or other 
utilization of funds (other than for humanitarian, 
trade-related or certain types of development assistance) 
with respect to countries on Tier 3.  Countries classified as 
Tier 3 that take strong action within 90 days of the Report's 
release to show significant efforts against trafficking in 
persons, and thereby warrant a reassessment of their Tier 
classification, would avoid such sanctions.  Guidelines for 
such actions are in the DOS-crafted action plans to be shared 
by Posts with host governments. 
 
-- The 2009 TIP Report, issuing as it does in the midst of 
the global financial crisis, highlights high levels of 
trafficking for forced labor in many parts of the world and 
systemic contributing factors to this phenomenon:  fraudulent 
recruitment practices and excessive recruiting fees in 
workers, home countries; the lack of adequate labor 
protections in both sending and receiving countries; and the 
flawed design of some destination countries, "sponsorship 
systems" that do not give foreign workers adequate legal 
recourse when faced with conditions of forced labor.  As the 
May 2009 ILO Global Report on Forced Labor concluded, forced 
labor victims suffer approximately $20 billion in losses, and 
traffickers, profits are estimated at $31 billion.  The 
current global financial crisis threatens to increase the 
number of victims of forced labor and increase the associated 
"cost of coercion." 
 
-- The text of the TVPA and amendments can be found on 
website www.state.gov/g/tip. 
 
-- On June 16, 2009, the Secretary of State will release the 
ninth annual TIP Report in a public event at the State 
Department.  We are providing you an advance copy of your 
country's narrative in that report.  Please keep this 
information embargoed until 10:00 am Washington DC time June 
¶16.  The State Department will also hold a general briefing 
for officials of foreign embassies in Washington DC on June 
17 at 3:30 pm EDT. 
 
(end non-paper) 
 
¶10. Posts should make sure that the relevant country 
narrative is readily available on or though the Mission's web 
page in English and appropriate local language(s) as soon as 
possible after the TIP Report is released.  Funding for 
translation costs will be handled as it was for the Human 
Rights Report.  Posts needing financial assistance for 
translation costs should contact their regional bureau,s EX 
office. 
 
¶11. The following is press guidance provided for Post to use 
with local media. 
 
Q1:  Why has Senegal been downgraded to  Tier 2 Watch List? 
 
A:  The Government of Senegal does not fully comply with the 
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking; 
however, it is making significant efforts to do so, despite 
limited resources.  The government continued to demonstrate a 
strong commitment to protecting child trafficking victims 
during the year by providing them with shelter, 
rehabilitation and reintegration services.  Despite these 
overall significant efforts, the government did not show 
progress in prosecuting, convicting, and punishing 
trafficking offenders over the last year; therefore, Senegal 
is placed on Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
 
Q2:  What progress has Senegal made in the last year? 
 
A:  The government reported that it arrested two religious 
teachers for abusing boys they had trafficked for forced 
begging.  During the year, the Ministry of Justice,s Center 
for Judicial Training conducted a UNICEF-funded training for 
police, gendarmerie, and immigration officials to educate 
them about trafficking.  The government continued to operate 
the Ginndi Center, its shelter for destitute children, 
including trafficking victims. The center, which has the 
capacity to house 60 children at a time, assisted 949 foreign 
and Senegalese destitute children, including trafficking 
victims, over the last year.  With international organization 
and NGO assistance, 807 children were reunited with their 
families and 69 were trained in vocational centers located in 
the Ginndi center.   The government also continued to operate 
its free child protection hotline out of the Ginndi Center. 
In the last year, the hotline received 17,501 calls. 
 
Q2:  How can Senegal further the fight against trafficking in 
persons? 
 
A:  Intensify efforts to prosecute and convict trafficking 
offenders; ensure that the Ministry of Interior,s Special 
Commissariat Against Sex Tourism and the Tourism Ministry,s 
sex tourism police unit arrest suspected sex tourists and 
rescue their victims; and increase efforts to raise awareness 
about trafficking. 
 
 
¶12. The Department appreciates posts, assistance with the 
preceding action requests. 
CLINTON