09STATE101294
CIVIL NUCLEAR COOPERATION WITH TUNISIA:
Tue Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1294 2721748
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291728Z SEP 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 101294 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC KNNP IAEA ENRG TRGY TS
SUBJECT: CIVIL NUCLEAR COOPERATION WITH TUNISIA: 
CONDITIONAL USG RESPONSE TO GOT PROPOSAL 
 
REF: 08 TUNIS 1193 
 
 
¶1. (U) THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST:  Please see para 8. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Government of Tunisia (GOT) has 
expressed interest in consultations with USG nuclear experts 
as part of a study it is conducting on the feasibility of 
achieving nuclear power on its territory by 2023.  Since past 
GOT follow-through in this sector has been highly 
inconsistent, Department believes that a prerequisite for 
engagement on this issue would be the establishment of 
reliable channels of communication, both in Washington and in 
Tunis.  This cable includes a proposed path forward for civil 
nuclear cooperation, which could be carried out on the 
condition of tangible signs of GOT interest beginning with 
the establishment of working-level points of contact for this 
issue.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (SBU) BACKGROUND:  In November 2008, former Special Envoy 
for Nuclear Nonproliferation Jackie Wolcott led an 
interagency, expert-level delegation to Tunis to discuss 
prospects for civil nuclear cooperation (reftel).  Despite 
confirmation difficulties with GOT officials, at the last 
minute a set of productive meetings was arranged with the 
Ministry of Higher Education, the Nuclear Science Research 
Center, the Ministry of Public Health, and the state-owned 
utility (STEG). 
 
¶4. (SBU) During these meetings, GOT officials confirmed that 
Tunisia would soon undertake a feasibility study with an eye 
on constructing a first nuclear power plant by 2020-2023. 
Tunisian officials also requested that the USG organize a 
seminar early in 2009 on options and opportunities for civil 
nuclear cooperation with the United States.  Similar seminars 
had been held recently with Canada, South Africa, and France. 
 As a first step in this direction, Department proposed a 
videoconference for early January 2009, during which USG 
experts would have briefed Tunisian counterparts on U.S. 
nuclear policies, technologies, and civil cooperation 
programs.  Unfortunately, the GOT never responded to this 
invitation. 
 
¶5. (U) On September 7, 2009 the GOT sent a diplomatic note 
formally requesting consultations with U.S. experts to better 
understand U.S. technology and to learn how they can benefit 
from U.S. experience in this sector.  Tunisia is proposing a 
"study day" to take place between now and April 2010. 
Subsequently, the Tunisian Ambassador to the United States, 
Habib Mansour, requested a meeting with Department officials 
to encourage a positive USG response to this request. 
 
¶6. (SBU) On September 23, 2009 ISN A A/S Eliot Kang met with 
Ambassador Mansour to discuss prospects of civil nuclear 
cooperation.  Given the past communication difficulties, Kang 
stated that a prerequisite for engagement on this issue would 
be the establishment of reliable channels of communication, 
both in Washington and in Tunis.  It was agreed that ISN/NESS 
would draft a proposed agenda for preliminary civil nuclear 
consultations, which could be carried out in the event that 
the GOT takes the concrete step of establishing a working 
level points of contact. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  The difficulties in arranging meetings 
last November, and the disinterest shown to the 
videoconference invitation this past January, reinforce 
Department's view that senior GOT officials are hesitant to 
reach out to the USG for assistance in this sector despite 
great interest at the working level.  The emergence of this 
recent formal request could represent a softening of this 
position prompted by sustained interest in nuclear power and 
a realization that U.S. technology and expertise are too 
valuable a resource to ignore.  Department recommends an open 
mind on the prospects of bilateral cooperation tempered with 
a degree of wariness in the absence of clear signals of 
commitment on the part of the GOT.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8. (U) ACTION REQUEST:  Post is requested to transmit the 
below contents via diplomatic note to the appropriate GOT 
officials.  Department will transmit a parallel diplomatic 
note to the Tunisian Embassy in Washington, DC. 
 
BEGIN DIPLOMATIC NOTE: 
 
Appropriate salutation 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Republic of Tunisia and has the honor to refer to its note of 
September 7, 2009 regarding interest of the Ministry of 
Industry, Energy, and Small and Medium Enterprises, in 
cooperation with the United States for the organization of 
study days in the field of nuclear energy.  As evidenced by 
the November 2008 visit by Ambassador Jackie Wolcott and U.S. 
nuclear experts, as well as the invitation for a January 2009 
videoconference on "U.S. Nuclear Power Policies, 
Technologies, and Civil Nuclear Cooperation Programs," the 
United States Government is willing to explore prospects of 
civil nuclear cooperation with the Government of Tunisia. 
 
The civil nuclear sector stands out among others due to its 
high level of complexity and its unique considerations for 
safety, security, and nonproliferation.  As a result, 
cooperation in this sector involves many parties from 
numerous areas of the United States Government.  Coordination 
is therefore a challenge. 
 
For this reason, prior to any further engagement with the 
Government of Tunisia, the United States requests the 
establishment of working-level points of contact from the 
Government of Tunisia, with whom experts in the U.S. 
Department of State and officials at the U.S. Embassy in 
Tunis can correspond.  Based on many years of experience with 
a large number of cooperative partners, the United States 
Government believes a clear path of communication is required 
prior to the commencement of cooperation in this sector. 
 
Provided that working-level points of contact can be 
established, the United States Government would be prepared 
to assemble an expert delegation with representatives of the 
Department of State, the Department of Energy (DOE), the 
National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), and the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) for consultations before 
April 2010.  These meetings could be held in Tunis or 
Washington, or the exchange could take place via 
videoconference.  A proposed agenda would include the 
following: 
 
-- Welcome and introduction (State) 
-- Status report on new nuclear power plants in the U.S. (NRC) 
-- Introduction to U.S. reactor technologies (DOE, NRC) 
-- General overview of the NRC reactor licensing process (NRC) 
-- Brief overview of NRC cooperation programs (NRC) 
-- Brief overview of DOE cooperation programs (DOE) 
-- Brief overview of NNSA cooperation programs (NNSA) 
 
The Embassy point of contact for these consultations will be 
Economic Officer Isabel Rioja-Scott, tel 71-107-460.  The 
Embassy respectfully requests that the Ministry put Ms. 
Rioja-Scott in touch with an appropriate counterpart in the 
Government of Tunisia so that we can begin mapping out a 
practical plan for bilateral cooperation on this issue. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this occasion to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
the Ministry of Industry, Energy, and Small and Medium 
Enterprises of the Republic of Tunisia the assurance of its 
highest consideration. 
 
END DIPLOMATIC NOTE. 
 
¶9. (U) Department thanks Post for its assistance in this 
matter.  Department point of contact for working-level civil 
nuclear cooperation with Tunisia is Marc Humphrey (ISN/NESS, 
202-647-6103, humphreyma@state.gov). 
CLINTON