09STATE52919
ACTION PLAN FOR AFGHANISTAN
Fri May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
R 221851Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY KABUL 
AMEMBASSY BANGKOKUNCLAS STATE 052919 
 
 
FOR D/AMB RICCIARDONE AND CKO LIVELY, BANGKOK FOR RIMC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT AADP KRIM AF
SUBJECT: ACTION PLAN FOR AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF:  KABUL 1090 
 
 
¶1. We've heard you, we're engaged and taking action.  As 
CIO Swart discussed with AmEmbassy Kabul leadership last 
week, we understand the challenges and high level impact 
of Mission Afghanistan.  Going forward, we will continue 
to work closely with you, doing everything possible to 
provide both winning knowledge management and better 
information integration among our diplomatic, development 
and defense initiatives in Afghanistan.  In response to 
reftel we have undertaken the following: 
 
IMPROVED INFORMATION SHARING AND COLLABORATION 
 
¶2. A proposed four-person joint IRM and RM/IRP team will 
visit Embassy Kabul on 1-5 June and will provide Embassy 
staff and the country team hands-on training on several 
technologies, most of which are currently accessible to a 
majority of USG personnel in Afghanistan.  These 
collaboration tools include the Communities@State blogs, 
Diplopedia, Intellipedia, Net-Centric Diplomacy, 
SharePoint, uGov mail, and a common user authentication 
tool known as Intelink Passport.  The team will also host 
a series of focus groups on knowledge management issues, 
including existing PRT business processes and identify 
mechanisms to improve the overall availability and 
retention of PRT reporting data currently managed thru 
commercial internet services. 
 
¶3. The Department understands Kabul's requirement for in- 
country interagency collaboration.  We recognize that 
latency and performance issues make using the central 
SharePoint environment unsatisfactory for Kabul's 
requirement.  To address this issue, we are looking at a 
local installation of SharePoint with Groove integration 
(in Kabul), managed by IRM's SharePoint team. 
 
¶4. Although we recognize there are latency issues for 
Mission Afghanistan, there is a resource that is already 
available to manage data across agencies -- "IPOG" -- the 
Iraq Policy Operation Group.  IPOG is an NSC mandated 
Secretariat that maintains interagency strategic planning 
and implementation matrices and other databases.  IPOG has 
proven effective in providing the communication tools to 
make sure the interagency is kept fully informed; these 
tools include robust and active SharePoint sites on both 
OpenNet and on ClassNet.  IPOG can support the U.S. 
Mission in Afghanistan and Washington backstop offices by 
providing program assistance, information technology, and 
administrative support of interagency meetings.  These 
services are available now in support of U.S. Mission 
Afghanistan and Washington offices via a modification of 
the existing contract.  The services provided now could be 
expanded for additional support. 
 
IT INFRASTRUCTURE AND COMMUNICATIONS 
 
¶5. Globecomm Systems, Inc. (GSI) engineers will travel to 
Kabul June 10-14.  The team will assess the current status 
and connectivity of Embassy Kabul's GSI VSAT satellite 
terminal.  As well as determine connectivity needed to 
support the civilian increase and projected multiple 
building construction/expansions.  The team will also 
survey connectivity (current and planned) for embassy 
trailers/residences to include Internet solutions for 
MoraleNet, maintenance, help desk, and on-site technical 
support.  Proposals and cost estimates for connectivity 
upgrades are to be determined based on the survey results. 
 
¶6. The team will also determine the requirements for PRT 
sites, including satellite service requirements and 
potential solutions for OpenNet connectivity. 
 
¶7. Support requirements for the two new proposed mission 
locations(Herat and Mazar) after the initial MIPC 6-month 
deployment will also be discussed, including satellite 
bandwidth requirements for OpenNet, ClassNet, voice, and 
VTC. 
 
¶8. A RIMC representative will travel to post to assist 
with the development and completion of a scope of work to 
address the physical infrastructure expansion.  Our 
objective is a scope of work that allows the development 
of an accurate bill of materials, labor estimates, and 
addresses not only the immediate needs, but positions the 
post for the numerous expansions scheduled over the next 
12 months. 
 
¶9. To better coordinate efforts please address your 
requirements to D/CIO and CKO, Janice Fedak, who will 
collect, coordinate, and track all activities.  We look 
forward to working with Mission Afghanistan as we refine 
our plans to move forward based on the results of the 
above trips. 
 
 
CLINTON