09STATE62907
ASSIGNMENT AFGHANISTAN: ONE OF OUR HIGHEST FOREIGN
Wed Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
R 172258Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS STATE 062907 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER AMGT AF
SUBJECT: ASSIGNMENT AFGHANISTAN: ONE OF OUR HIGHEST FOREIGN 
POLICY PRIORITIES 
 
¶1.  Afghanistan is receiving the high-level policy attention 
needed to safeguard America's security and rebuild that war- 
torn country.  As President Obama said, "We are in Afghanistan 
to confront a common enemy that threatens the United States, 
our friends and allies, and the people of Afghanistan."  The 
work we do here ensures our nation's security. But we need 
your help. Our Mission is rapidly expanding and we need the 
Service's best and most dedicated personnel in order to 
succeed. 
 
¶2.  This is a pivotal period in the history of Afghanistan and 
a critical time to be part of Mission Afghanistan.  We are not 
looking for warm bodies to fill positions; we need the best of 
the best.  The hours are long, the work is hard, the 
conditions are tough, but the satisfaction will be greater 
than anything you have experienced in your career.  The 
Afghans are truly inspirational.  The challenges of helping 
them bring their country back from the brink, ensuring 
stability and security for their countrymen and ours, 
promoting justice, stimulating licit economic activity and 
attracting young people into legitimate employment are complex 
and difficult.  This effort requires a very diverse and 
dedicated workforce in Mission Afghanistan.  And that's why we 
need our best. 
 
¶3.  Our people choose the most challenging assignments in our 
service for a complex mix of reasons.  We all balance several 
factors - policy impact, professional development, family 
support, financial incentives, and career goals.  And one more 
- the deeper motivation to serve in the most important venue, 
at the most important time, and under some of the toughest 
living and working conditions in the Foreign Service.  We need 
people to serve in Afghanistan who are able to manage 
independently, work and live collegially, expect a heavy 
workload, have relevant substantive experience, and are highly 
motivated to contribute to making history. 
 
¶4.  Our mission presence is growing, not only in Kabul, but 
across the countryside as our focus on the provinces expands. 
Our watch words are "Unity of Effort" and "Whole Government". 
We are bringing all aspects of our operations - military, 
diplomatic, and development assistance - into closer 
integration to develop synergy and to create and exploit 
opportunities. Officers and staff of all levels and 
specialties have opportunities to play key roles in this 
effort, whether reporting on local governance issues at the 
grassroots level, ensuring people, equipment, material and 
information get to where they need to be on time, or looking 
strategically at USG goals.  Every person, every position, is 
important. 
 
¶5.  We ask that you seriously consider that now is the time 
for you to step up and make a difference.  We will not lose in 
Afghanistan, but we cannot afford not to win.  Some of our 
best people have come to serve in Afghanistan; some of them 
repeatedly.  To succeed, all who serve here must be our best 
in their specialties.  Each member of the team here bears much 
more than her or his responsibility in an ordinary U.S. 
diplomatic mission. 
 
¶6.  For more information on bidding on Afghanistan, check out 
Assignment ? Afghanistan on the State Department Intranet 
Homepage.  For information about life and work in Afghanistan, 
check out our CLO Sharepoint site at: 
http://sca.p.state.sbu/sites/kabul/clo/defaul t.aspx 
 
¶7. Minimize Considered. 
 
 
CLINTON