09STATE104737
SOMALIA: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR OCTOBER 8 BRIEFING
Wed Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4737 2802306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 072246Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 104737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM PHSA EWWT KCRM SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR OCTOBER 8 BRIEFING 
 
¶1.    Action Request:  USUN should draw from the building 
blocks in paragraph 2 below in drafting the statement for the 
UN Security Council briefing on Somalia on October 8, 2009. 
End action. 
 
¶2.    Begin building blocks: 
 
     Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to begin by 
thanking Special Representative Ould-Abdallah for his 
continued dedication in monitoring and reporting on the 
situation in Somalia. 
 
Security Situation/Insurgent Attacks 
 
     While the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) must 
focus on long-term governance issues, it is clear that 
Somalia,s immediate challenge remains the security 
situation.  Many of the other challenges Somalia faces stem 
from or are exacerbated by the continuing insecurity in 
Somalia, including the humanitarian crisis and piracy. 
 
     The United States strongly condemns the September 17 
suicide attacks against the African Union Mission in Somalia 
(AMISOM) headquarters which killed 21 people.  The United 
States was deeply saddened to learn of the deaths of members 
of the AMISOM force resulting from this attack.  On behalf of 
the United States, I would like to express my condolences to 
the Ugandan and Burundian people for those lost, and my hopes 
for a quick recovery for those wounded in the attack. 
 
     Piracy is without question a symptom of, as well as a 
contributing factor to, the instability and insecurity in 
Somalia; without stability in Somalia, there can be no 
durable resolution of the piracy problem. Not only must 
efforts to combat piracy be strengthened and broadened in 
scope, but efforts to stabilize Somalia must be significantly 
increased to provide a long-term solution to the piracy 
epidemic. 
 
 
TFG Efforts 
     Despite the challenges it faces, the United States is 
encouraged by the TFG,s institution-building initiatives. 
 
     We are strongly supportive of the High Level 
Committee,s efforts to advance implementation of the 
Djibouti Agreement, and welcome the TFG,s efforts to work 
with the international community to address the issue of 
insecurity through the Joint Security Committee. 
 
Support for TFG and AMISOM 
     The international community has a stake in the survival 
of the TFG and in the defeat of al-Shabaab and other 
extremist groups, particularly those affiliated with 
Al-Qaida.  Al-Shabaab and other extremists perpetuate 
violence in an attempt to intimidate the Somali people into 
submission, and imperil the TFG. 
 
     AMISOM,s personnel are to be commended for their 
heroism and their spirit of sacrifice in their mission in the 
cause of peace.  The United States continues to be a strong 
supporter of funding a logistical support package for AMISOM, 
and will continue to provide equipment and training to AMISOM 
Troop Contributing Countries.  The United Nations Support 
Office for AMISOM continues to provide critical supplies and 
equipment to AMISOM troops.  AMISOM is playing an important 
role in Somalia, and the United States commends those nations 
which have contributed thus far, especially Uganda and 
Burundi. 
 
     We call on all donors to follow through on their 
pledges made to the TFG and AMISOM at the international 
donors conference in April, six months ago. 
 
Humanitarian Situation 
     The security situation in Somalia is contributing to 
the worsening humanitarian situation, a trend which we cannot 
condone or accept.  The ongoing violence imperils the 
delivery of critical food and other humanitarian aid to the 
3.8 million Somalis who require assistance. 
 
     Ongoing violence is also contributing to the growing 
refugee influx into Kenya, with some 300,000 Somali refugees 
now dangerously crowded into camps originally designed for 
90,000.  The USG, in concert with UNHCR and other donors, has 
urged the Government of Kenya to allocate additional land for 
Somali refugee camps. 
 
     The United States denounces the violence against 
humanitarian agencies and staff, which jeopardizes the 
mission of these groups to provide aid intended for 
vulnerable groups such as women and children.  We also call 
for the immediate and unconditional release of those aid 
workers still held by armed groups in Somalia. 
 
     Humanitarian access in Somalia is very much constrained 
by security, and even piracy.  The United States remains the 
largest bilateral donor of humanitarian assistance to 
Somalia, having provided more than $150 million in food and 
non-food emergency assistance this past fiscal year.  We urge 
the international community to contribute to the Consolidated 
Appeal for Somalia. 
 
     We condemn those that seek to divert or prevent aid 
from reaching the Somali people that need it most, and 
support the United Nations, efforts to ensure that 
assistance reaches those for whom it intended. 
 
     In particular, we are deeply concerned about reports of 
diversion by al-Shabaab, which not only hurts the people of 
Somalia but strengthens al-Shabaab in its war against the 
TFG.  Based on these reports, we reviewed our emergency 
programs to make sure that we are doing everything we can to 
help the people of Somalia and prevent diversions. 
 
     Our review concluded that our standing policy that 
prohibits assistance from going to al Shabaab is appropriate, 
and that our implementing partners should exercise increased 
due diligence to avoid diversions in Somalia. 
 
Eritrea and Outside Actors 
 
     The United States remains deeply concerned about 
Eritrea,s destabilizing actions in the region.  The 
detrimental effects of its actions are clearly observed in 
Somalia.  The Somalia Sanctions Committee,s Monitoring Group 
has reported that Eritrea has provided political, financial, 
and military support to armed opposition groups in Somalia. 
 
     We remain willing to engage the Eritrean government 
should it stop destabilizing the Horn of Africa. 
 
     Thank You, Mr. President. 
 
 
IO/FO:      GAnderson 
CLINTON