09STATE17766
POINTS FOR OPEN DEBATE ON UNSCR 1830 (UNAMI)
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7766 0570313
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 260257Z FEB 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 017766 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
USUN FOR GERMAIN AND KUJAWINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: POINTS FOR OPEN DEBATE ON UNSCR 1830 (UNAMI) 
 
¶1. (U) USUN should draw from the points in para 2 during 
the open debate on UNSCR 1830 (UNAMI) in the Security 
Council on February 26. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Begin points: 
 
------- 
General 
------- 
 
-- The end of the MNF-I mandate on December 31 of last year 
marked a new beginning for Iraq and its relationship with the 
United Nations and the international community. [Note: UNSCR 
1790 did not expire, only the MNF-I mandate contained within 
it] 
 
-- A new Iraq -- committed to democratic rule, to a policy 
of peace and cooperation with its neighbors and with the 
 
wider international community -- has emerged.  We welcome 
and applaud the new Iraq as a friend and as a partner. 
 
-- The sovereign government of Iraq continues to look to 
the international community for support.  We all still 
have an important role to play.  This is particularly true 
in: helping Iraq strengthen its democratic institutions, 
building capacity in its workforce and institutions of 
government, strengthening the rule of law, and in 
developing peaceful and productive relations with all its 
neighbors. 
 
-- It is also true in dealing with Iraq's displaced 
citizens.  The international community must continue to 
assist Iraqi refugees and internally displaced persons, 
support efforts to facilitate their safe return home, and 
take in or resettle those who are most needy and 
vulnerable. 
 
-- The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) 
has played and will continue to play a vital role in these 
endeavors.  Under the leadership of Special Representative 
of the Secretary General Staffan de Mistura and at the 
invitation of the Iraqi government, UNAMI has expanded and 
enhanced its presence in Iraq.  It is assisting with such 
vital issues as national reconciliation, disputed internal 
boundaries, the planning and holding of free and fair 
elections, and the provision of assistance to vulnerable 
groups, including refugees and internally displaced 
persons. 
 
-- The United States wholeheartedly welcomes and supports 
UNAMI's work and congratulates its entire staff on their 
accomplishments. 
 
--------- 
Elections 
--------- 
 
-- To cite one notable example of UNAMI's contributions, 
let me turn to the recent provincial elections, in which 
the Iraqi people elected new provincial councils in 14 out 
of 18 provinces.  The elections were a significant 
milestone for Iraqi democracy.  Participation in the 
elections was high.  All major parties and communities 
participated.  There were no boycotts and no significant 
violence.  There were no major disruptions and citizens 
 
across Iraq voted freely and peacefully.  The elections 
were inclusive and legitimate. 
 
-- The Independent High Electoral Commission and the 
government and people of Iraq deserve the greatest credit 
for this exercise in peaceful political change.  UNAMI 
played an important supporting role in this endeavor, 
providing technical assistance and advice based on 
longstanding UN experience.  All of us can be proud of 
what they accomplished. 
 
-- International attention now turns to national 
elections, which are expected to be held late this year 
or very early next year.  UNAMI again will play a vital 
supporting role. 
 
--------- 
U.S. Role 
--------- 
 
-- As I noted earlier, the United States remains fully 
committed to assisting the 
development of 
a democratic nation in which all communities participate 
in political, social and economic life and whose human and 
civil rights are protected -- a nation at peace with its 
neighbors and the wider international community. 
 
-- The time has come to reduce our military presence in 
Iraq.  Our bilateral Security Agreement requires U.S. 
combat troops to withdraw from Iraqi cities no later than 
this summer.  The process of withdrawing U.S. forces will 
proceed thereafter, in consultation and with the support 
of the Government of Iraq, and consistent with the 
Security Agreement, which calls for the withdrawal of all 
U.S. forces by the end of 2011. 
 
-- That reduction in no way diminishes our long-term 
commitment to a stable, democratic Iraq that is a force 
for peace in the region.  Indeed, we have signed a broad 
agreement with Iraq which sets out a program of long-term 
cooperation in fields as diverse as education, trade, 
technology and energy.  We and the government of Iraq 
already are working to make that vision a reality and to 
establish a strong foundation for cooperative and mutually 
beneficial relations. 
 
 
-- That is our commitment to the new Iraq. 
 
----- 
Close 
----- 
 
-- Together, we can responsibly advance the cause of Iraqi 
sovereignty without undermining the imperative of Iraqi 
security. 
 
-- I would like to take this opportunity once again to 
congratulate UNAMI for its accomplishments in Iraq.  The 
United States will continue to offer its full support to 
UNAMI and to encourage all countries to lend their support 
as well. 
 
END POINTS 
CLINTON