09STATE61065
GERMANY -- 2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND
Fri Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO7834
OO RUEHAG
DE RUEHC #1065/01 1631920
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121857Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN IMMEDIATE 1790
INFO RUEHAG/AMCONSUL HAMBURG IMMEDIATE 1068
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT IMMEDIATE 1854
RUEHMZ/AMCONSUL MUNICH IMMEDIATE 4066UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 STATE 061065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP ELAB KCRM KPAO KWMN PGOV PHUM PREL SMIG GM
SUBJECT: GERMANY -- 2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 59732 
     ¶B. (B) STATE 005577 
 
 ¶1. This is an action cable; see paras 5 through 7 and 10. 
 
¶2. On June 16, 2009, at 10:00 a.m. EDT, the Secretary will 
release the 2009 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report at a 
press conference in the Department's press briefing room. 
This release will receive substantial coverage in domestic 
and foreign news outlets.  Until the time of the Secretary's 
June 16 press conference, any public release of the Report or 
country narratives contained therein is prohibited. 
 
¶3. The Department is hereby providing Post with advance press 
guidance to be used on June 16 or thereafter.  Also provided 
is demarche language to be used in informing the Government 
of Germany of its tier ranking and the TIP Report's imminent 
release.  The text of the TIP Report country narrative is 
provided, both for use in informing the Government of Germany 
and in any local media release by Post's public affairs 
section on June 16 or thereafter.  Drawing on information 
provided below in paras 8 and 9, Post may provide the host 
government with the text of the TIP Report narrative no 
earlier than 1200 noon local time Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, 
EUR, and NEA countries and OOB local time Tuesday June 16 for 
SCA and EAP posts.  Please note, however, that any public 
release of the Report's information should not/not precede 
the Secretary's release at 10:00 am EDT on June 16. 
 
¶4. The entire TIP Report will be available on-line at 
www.state.gov/g/tip shortly after the Secretary's June 16 
release.  Hard copies of the Report will be pouched to posts 
in all countries appearing on the Report.  The Secretary's 
statement at the June 16 press event, and the statement of 
and fielding of media questions by G/TIP,s Director and 
Senior Advisor to the Secretary, Ambassador-at-Large Luis 
CdeBaca, will be available on the Department's website 
shortly after the June 16 event.  Ambassador de Baca will 
also hold a general briefing for officials of foreign 
embassies in Washington DC on June 17 at 3:30 pm EDT. 
 
¶5. Action Request: No earlier than 12 noon local time on 
Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, EUR, and NEA posts and OOB local 
time on Tuesday June 16 for SCA and EAP posts, please inform 
the appropriate official in the Government of Germany of the 
June 16 release of the 2009 TIP Report, drawing on the points 
in para 9 (at Post's discretion) and including the text of 
the country narrative provided in para 8.  For countries 
where the State Department has lowered the tier ranking, it 
is particularly important to advise governments prior to the 
Report being released in Washington on June 16. 
 
¶6. Action Request continued:  Please note that, for those 
countries which will not receive an "action plan" with 
specific recommendations for improvement, posts should draw 
host governments' attention to the areas for improvement 
identified in the 2009 Report, especially highlighted in the 
"Recommendations" section of the second paragraph of the 
narrative text.  This engagement is important to establishing 
the framework in which the government's performance will be 
judged for the 2010 Report.  If posts have questions about 
which governments will receive an action plan, or how they 
may follow up on the recommendations in the 2009 Report, 
please contact G/TIP and the appropriate regional bureau. 
 
¶7. Action Request continued: On June 16, please be prepared 
to answer media inquiries on the Report's release using the 
press guidance provided in para 11.  If Post wishes, a local 
press statement may be released on or after 10:30 am EDT June 
16, drawing on the press guidance and the text of the TIP 
Report's country narrative provided in para 8. 
 
¶8. Begin Final Text of Germany,s country narrative in the 
2009 TIP Report: 
 
-------------------------------- 
Germany (TIER 1) 
 
Germany is a transit and destination country for men and 
women trafficked for the purposes of commercial sexual 
exploitation and forced labor.  Victims were trafficked to 
Germany from other parts of Europe, Africa (primarily 
Nigeria), Asia, and the Western Hemisphere.  Approximately 
one-quarter of sex trafficking victims were German nationals 
trafficked within the country.  In 2007, the latest year for 
 
STATE 00061065  002 OF 005 
 
 
available trafficking statistics, declines in the number of 
Czech, Romanian, and Polish victims were observed as well as 
increases in the number of Bulgarian, Hungarian, and Nigerian 
victims.  Twelve percent of trafficking victims were younger 
than 18 years old.  The majority of identified sex 
trafficking victims were exploited in bars and brothels. 
Reported incidents of forced labor occurred mainly in 
restaurants, catering, and the domestic work and agriculture 
sectors. 
The Government of Germany fully complies with the minimum 
standards for the elimination of trafficking.  Germany 
increased identification of forced labor victims and labor 
trafficking investigations during the reporting period.  Sex 
trafficking investigations also increased, but available 
statistics indicate that just 30 percent of trafficking 
offenders sentenced to prison did not receive suspended 
sentences.  Statistics indicate that, in 2007, three labor 
trafficking offenders received suspended prison sentences, 
and five others convicted for labor trafficking received 
fines or other administrative punishments.  However, in cases 
where perpetrators were convicted on multiple charges, 
statistics only include convictions under the charge which 
has the highest possible maximum sentence.  Therefore, 
available statistics do not capture the full extent of 
trafficking convictions and sentences in Germany. 
Recommendations for Germany: Explore ways, within the 
parameters of the German judicial system, to increase the 
number of convicted traffickers who are required to serve 
time in prison; continue to improve efforts to identify and 
combat labor trafficking; ensure forced labor and child 
victims, access to appropriate assistance and protection; 
standardize victim assistance measures and government-civil 
society cooperation across the 16 federal states; and 
strengthen awareness campaigns targeting beneficiaries of 
forced labor and clients of the sex trade, particularly in 
the most frequented red light districts. 
Prosecution 
------------- 
The German government demonstrated adequate law enforcement 
efforts during the reporting period.  Germany prohibits all 
forms of trafficking; trafficking for sexual exploitation is 
criminalized in Section 232 of its Penal Code, and forced 
labor is criminalized under Section 233.  Prescribed 
punishments range from six months, to 10 years, 
imprisonment and are sufficiently stringent and commensurate 
with penalties prescribed for other grave crimes.  It is 
common practice for judges to suspend prison sentences of two 
years or less for all crimes, including trafficking.  Judges 
often give suspended sentences to first-time trafficking 
offenders.  German authorities completed 454 sex trafficking 
investigations in 2007, a 29 percent increase from 2006, and 
initiated 92 labor trafficking investigations, an 18 percent 
increase from 2006. 
 
In 2007, the most recent year for which data were available, 
authorities prosecuted 155 persons under Section 232 and 13 
under Section 233 ) for a total of 168, compared to a total 
of 193 prosecutions in 2006.  The government reported 133 
trafficking convictions, a slight decrease from 150 in 2006. 
In those cases where trafficking offences carried the most 
severe sentences, only 30 percent of those sentenced to 
prison did not receive a suspended sentence, compared with 38 
percent in 2006.  None of the eight trafficking offenders 
convicted under the labor trafficking statute in 2007 was 
required to serve jail time*five received fines or 
administrative punishments, and three received suspended 
prison sentences. 
 
In 2008, two German men were convicted in a Lower Saxony 
court of kidnapping, hostage taking, rape, and trafficking 
and sentenced to 12.5 and 14 years in prison, respectively, 
for crimes committed against two German women and a Bulgarian 
student.  Separately, a Polish couple was convicted of and 
sentenced to five and a half years and three years and three 
months, imprisonment, respectively, for persuading, under 
false pretenses, young Polish women to travel to Germany 
where they were forced into prostitution.  Police and NGOs 
jointly organized specialized seminars for investigating 
officers, victim protection officials, and prosecutors as 
well as workshops in source and transit countries during the 
reporting period. 
 
Protection 
----------- 
The German government sustained its victim assistance efforts 
over the last year.  State governments funded dozens of NGOs 
that provided shelter, assistance, and facilitated protection 
for victims of trafficking. The Federal Family Ministry fully 
funds the umbrella organization representing 36 NGOs and 
counseling centers that assist trafficking victims.   The 
 
STATE 00061065  003 OF 005 
 
 
vast majority of these NGOs focused on adult, female victims. 
 Formal victim referral mechanisms existed in 12 out of 16 
German states.  Authorities identified 689 sex trafficking 
victims in 2007, compared with 775 in 2006, and 101 victims 
of forced labor in 2007, an increase from 83 in 2006. 
Despite government encouragement of victims to cooperate in 
anti-trafficking investigations, many victims stated that 
their willingness to cooperate with authorities was 
negatively impacted due to threats or influence from 
traffickers.  Victims are given a 30-day reflection period. 
The government provided legal alternatives to victims, 
removal to countries where they may face hardship or 
retribution.  These measures included temporary residence 
permits for the duration of trial proceedings as well as 
long-term residence permits to victims in certain 
circumstances, such as when the victim faced severe threats 
in the country of origin.  Prosecutors have the right to 
order protective measures, such as police protection, for the 
duration of trials.  State governments also provided 
additional assistance to victims; for example, the 
Baden-Wurttemberg government provided approximately $126,000 
in 2008 to victims of forced prostitution.  In early 2009, 
the federal police published a guidance brochure for police, 
judges, prosecutors, and other officials on providing 
professional assistance for sex trafficking victims. 
 
Prevention 
----------- 
The government continued efforts to prevent human trafficking 
during the year.  The government sustained funding for 
NGO-produced public awareness campaigns in Germany and abroad 
including websites, postcards, telephone hotlines, pamphlets, 
and flyers.  A Berlin NGO, funded largely by the Berlin 
Senate, operated awareness websites directed at clients of 
the sex trade.  There were no known public awareness 
campaigns specifically targeting the potential clients in 
some of Germany,s best known red light districts, such as 
the one in Hamburg.  In 2008, the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Affairs began development of a pilot project to train 
professional groups to help combat forced labor.  The German 
government produced a public report on human trafficking in 
Germany including detailed statistics from 2007 on victims 
and investigations.  A Kiel court in July 2008 sentenced a 
German citizen arrested in Cambodia on charges of sexual 
abuse of children to six and a half years, imprisonment. 
Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, and the Philippines are the 
primary destination for German child sex tourists.  The 
government provided trafficking awareness training to 
commanders of German military units deployed to international 
peacekeeping missions on how to sensitize subordinates to 
human trafficking. 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶9. Post may wish to deliver the following points, which offer 
technical and legal background on the TIP Report process, to 
the host government as a non-paper with the above TIP Report 
country narrative: 
 
(begin non-paper) 
 
-- The U.S. Congress, through its passage of the 2000 
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended (TVPA), 
requires the Secretary of State to submit an annual Report to 
Congress.  The goal of this Report is to stimulate action and 
create partnerships around the world in the fight against 
modern-day slavery.  The USG approach to combating human 
trafficking follows the TVPA and the standards set forth in 
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the 
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime (commonly known as the "Palermo Protocol").  The TVPA 
and the Palermo Protocol recognize that this is a crime in 
which the victims, labor or services (including in the "sex 
industry") are obtained or maintained through force, fraud, 
or coercion, whether overt or through psychological 
manipulation.  While much attention has focused on 
international flows, both the TVPA and the Palermo Protocol 
focus on the exploitation of the victim, and do not require a 
showing that the victim was moved. 
 
-- Recent amendments to the TVPA removed the requirement that 
only countries with a "significant number" of trafficking 
victims be included in the Report. Beginning with the 2009 
TIP Report, countries determined to be a country of origin, 
transit, or destination for victims of severe forms of 
trafficking are included in the Report and assigned to one of 
three tiers.  Countries assessed as meeting the "minimum 
 
STATE 00061065  004 OF 005 
 
 
standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking" 
set forth in the TVPA are classified as Tier 1.  Countries 
assessed as not fully complying with the minimum standards, 
but making significant efforts to meet those minimum 
standards are classified as Tier 2.  Countries assessed as 
neither complying with the minimum standards nor making 
significant efforts to do so are classified as Tier 3. 
 
-- The TVPA also requires the Secretary of State to provide a 
"Special Watch List" to Congress later in the year. 
Anti-trafficking efforts of the countries on this list are to 
be evaluated again in an Interim Assessment that the 
Secretary of State must provide to Congress by February 1 of 
each year.  Countries are included on the "Special Watch 
List" if they move up in "tier" rankings in the annual TIP 
Report -- from 3 to 2 or from 2 to 1 ) or if they have been 
placed on the Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
-- Tier 2 Watch List consists of Tier 2 countries determined: 
(1) not to have made "increasing efforts" to combat human 
trafficking over the past year; (2) to be making significant 
efforts based on commitments of anti-trafficking reforms over 
the next year, or (3) to have a very significant number of 
trafficking victims or a significantly increasing victim 
population.  As indicated in reftel B, the TVPRA of 2008 
contains a provision requiring that a country that has been 
included on Tier 2 Watch List for two consecutive years after 
the date of enactment of the TVPRA of 2008 be ranked as Tier 
¶3.  Thus, any automatic downgrade to Tier 3 pursuant to this 
provision would take place, at the earliest, in the 2011 TIP 
Report (i.e., a country would have to be ranked Tier 2 Watch 
List in the 2009 and 2010 Reports before being subject to 
Tier 3 in the 2011 Report).  The new law allows for a waiver 
of this provision for up to two additional years upon a 
determination by the President that the country has developed 
and devoted sufficient resources to a written plan to make 
significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with the 
minimum standards. 
 
-- Countries classified as Tier 3 may be subject to statutory 
restrictions for the subsequent fiscal year on 
non-humanitarian and non-trade-related foreign assistance 
and, in some circumstances, withholding of funding for 
participation by government officials or employees in 
educational and cultural exchange programs.   In addition, 
the President could instruct the U.S. executive directors to 
international financial institutions to oppose loans or other 
utilization of funds (other than for humanitarian, 
trade-related or certain types of development assistance) 
with respect to countries on Tier 3.  Countries classified as 
Tier 3 that take strong action within 90 days of the Report's 
release to show significant efforts against trafficking in 
persons, and thereby warrant a reassessment of their Tier 
classification, would avoid such sanctions.  Guidelines for 
such actions are in the DOS-crafted action plans to be shared 
by Posts with host governments. 
 
-- The 2009 TIP Report, issuing as it does in the midst of 
the global financial crisis, highlights high levels of 
trafficking for forced labor in many parts of the world and 
systemic contributing factors to this phenomenon:  fraudulent 
recruitment practices and excessive recruiting fees in 
workers, home countries; the lack of adequate labor 
protections in both sending and receiving countries; and the 
flawed design of some destination countries, "sponsorship 
systems" that do not give foreign workers adequate legal 
recourse when faced with conditions of forced labor.  As the 
May 2009 ILO Global Report on Forced Labor concluded, forced 
labor victims suffer approximately $20 billion in losses, and 
traffickers, profits are estimated at $31 billion.  The 
current global financial crisis threatens to increase the 
number of victims of forced labor and increase the associated 
"cost of coercion." 
 
-- The text of the TVPA and amendments can be found on 
website www.state.gov/g/tip. 
 
-- On June 16, 2009, the Secretary of State will release the 
ninth annual TIP Report in a public event at the State 
Department.  We are providing you an advance copy of your 
country's narrative in that report.  Please keep this 
information embargoed until 10:00 am Washington DC time June 
¶16.  The State Department will also hold a general briefing 
for officials of foreign embassies in Washington DC on June 
17 at 3:30 pm EDT. 
 
(end non-paper) 
 
¶10. Posts should make sure that the relevant country 
narrative is readily available on or though the Mission's web 
 
STATE 00061065  005 OF 005 
 
 
page in English and appropriate local language(s) as soon as 
possible after the TIP Report is released.  Funding for 
translation costs will be handled as it was for the Human 
Rights Report.  Posts needing financial assistance for 
translation costs should contact their regional bureau,s EX 
office. 
 
¶11. The following is press guidance provided for Post to use 
with local media. 
 
Q1: Why was Germany given a ranking of Tier 1? 
 
A: The Government of Germany fully complies with the minimum 
standards for the elimination of trafficking. 
 
Q2: What progress has Germany made in the past year? 
 
A:  Germany increased identification of forced labor victims 
and labor trafficking investigations during the reporting 
period.  The number of sex trafficking investigations during 
the reporting period also increased. 
 
Q3. What can Germany do to improve its fight against 
trafficking in persons? 
 
A:   To improve its anti-trafficking performance, the 
Government of Germany could: explore ways, within the 
parameters of the German judicial system, to increase the 
number of convicted traffickers who are required to serve 
time in prison; continue to improve efforts to identify and 
combat labor trafficking; ensure forced labor and child 
victims, access to appropriate assistance and protection; 
standardize victim assistance measures and government-civil 
society cooperation across the 16 federal states; and 
strengthen awareness campaigns targeting beneficiaries of 
forced labor and clients of the sex trade, particularly in 
the most frequented red light districts. 
 
 
¶12. The Department appreciates posts, assistance with the 
preceding action requests. 
CLINTON