09STATE129518
DEMARCHE: REQUEST TO THE GOVERNMENTS OF
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0710
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #9518/01 3521858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181857Z DEC 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHBW/AMEMBASSY BELGRADE IMMEDIATE 1032
RUEHKA/AMEMBASSY DHAKA IMMEDIATE 2366
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE 1545
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 129518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BG KPKO LY MARR YI
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE: REQUEST TO THE GOVERNMENTS OF 
BANGLADESH, LIBYA, AND SERBIA FOR CONTRIBUTION OF 
HELICOPTERS TO THE UN/AU MISSION IN DARFUR (UNAMID) 
 
SUMMARY 
-------------- 
 
¶1.  Summary. This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 
¶7.  Department requests the assistance of Embassies Belgrade, 
Dhaka, and Tripoli in obtaining a commitment from their host 
governments to provide helicopters to the AU/UN Mission in 
Darfur (UNAMID). The mission is looking for up to 18 medium 
transport utility helicopters, with a goal of 6 helicopters 
per sector and operating crews for deployment to UNAMID at 
the earliest possible time.  The helicopters would be 
utilized for mission critical activities in Darfur, and 
permit UNAMID to improve operational capability in fulfilling 
its mandate.  End Summary. 
 
OBJECTIVES 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  Department instructs Embassies Belgrade, Dhaka, and 
Tripoli to pursue the following objectives: 
 
--Impress upon the host governments there is a critical need 
for 18 medium utility helicopters and crews for deployment to 
UNAMID, without which the mission cannot meet its operational 
goals and objectives.  The requirement is for military 
elements to ideally consist of six operational, rotary wing 
aircraft with the capability to deploy anywhere within 
Darfur, with each aircraft providing up to 40 flying hours 
per month.  The unit must be self-sufficient in all 
categories, except fuel, for the first 90 days of deployment. 
 The aviation unit must deploy with support and maintenance 
elements. UN Force Generation Services can provide additional 
details on unit requirements; 
 
--Persuade the host governments to identify and donate to 
UNAMID UN-certifiable medium transport helicopters on a 
UN-reimbursable basis, or determine if there is any interest 
by the respective governments in providing these assets; 
 
--Encourage officials of the host government's Foreign 
Ministry and Ministry of Defense, as appropriate, to initiate 
discussions as soon as possible with officials within the 
United Nations, Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) 
and Department of Field Support to commence negotiations 
leading to the deployment of the helicopters and operating 
crews. 
 
 
REPORTING DEADLINE 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  Embassy should report results of efforts by cable to Erin 
Whitney, IO/PSC by January 5, 2010. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  Since inception, UNAMID has unsuccessfully sought to 
acquire utility helicopters for the mission.  The concept of 
operations calls for 18 medium transport helicopters to 
perform essential mission functions.  Despite the best 
efforts of DPKO and the international community, UNAMID has 
been unable to obtain the necessary helicopters.  The 
operating conditions in Darfur are some of the harshest for 
UN peacekeepers, with poor roads, poor airfields, and a 
brutal climate.  Air transportation, particularly during the 
rainy season when all movement is severely curtailed, is the 
only viable mode of transportation. 
 
¶5.  The concept of operations calls for each UNAMID sector to 
have one military helicopter operating 24 hours per day, 7 
days per week, although the Government of Sudan has not yet 
granted clearance for night flights.  A major use for the 
helicopters would be for medical and casualty evacuations. 
Given the operating conditions in Darfur for UNAMID troops, 
the large internally displaced population in camps, and their 
fragile health, welfare, and security conditions, it is 
essential to have reliable medical transport capabilities 
whenever needed.  The helicopters will also be used to 
enhance the safety and security of UNAMID troops, including 
for troop transport and re-supply, to conduct patrols and 
search and rescue operations, and to investigate and monitor 
reports and incidents of conflict within UNAMID,s area of 
operations. 
 
STATE 00129518  002 OF 002 
 
¶6.  The ability for UNAMID to fulfill its mandate is dictated 
by the level of contributions of member states.  UNAMID must 
be capable of rapid mobility over vast distances and 
difficult terrain.  Given the lack of adequate roads, this 
mobility cannot be achieved without the helicopters. 
UNAMID,s area of operations covers almost 200,000 square 
miles ) an area larger than California.  The 18 medium 
transport utility helicopters are a key enabler to mission 
success, increasing the mobility and operational impact of 
the mission. 
 
¶7.  Action request.  Embassies Belgrade, Dhaka, and Tripoli 
are requested to approach their respective host governments 
at the highest appropriate level to obtain a commitment to 
donate up to 18 medium transport helicopters to UNAMID for 
service in Darfur.  If any host government responds 
positively to this request, Department requests Embassies to 
obtain assurances from the host government that the 
helicopters to be offered to UNAMID are, or will be, 
UN-certifiable prior to or immediately after delivery to 
UNAMID.  Please inform the Department if a firm commitment is 
not immediately forthcoming but interest in exploring the 
option is exhibited by the host government.  Department 
requests the involvement of each Embassy's Defense Attache's 
Office in this effort.  Department appreciates the assistance 
from Embassies Dhaka, Tripoli, and Belgrade. 
 
--Please note that follow on assessments may be conducted 
should the host government identify equipment for use in 
UNAMID that does not meet UN standards.  These assessments 
will determine if upgrades are possible, or if the US can 
engage with the UN to accept minimal differences in their 
stated requirements.  Troop Contributing Countries may engage 
in a dry lease arrangement with the UN in which the UN 
provides for equipment maintenance. 
 
 
End action request. 
 
POINT OF CONTACT 
---------------- 
 
¶9.  Please contact Erin Whitney at (202) 736-7740 or Thomas 
Brown at (202) 736-7789 or via e-mail for any necessary 
further background information or argumentation to meet our 
objectives. 
 
¶10. Tripoli minimize considered. 
CLINTON