09STATE43724
WESTERN SAHARA: USUN VOTING INSTRUCTIONS AND EOV
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3724 1200308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300248Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 043724 
 
SIPDIS, GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM KPKO AG MO WI XA XY
SUBJECT: WESTERN SAHARA: USUN VOTING INSTRUCTIONS AND EOV 
ON MINURSO MANDATE RENEWAL 
 
REF: A. STATE 37154 
     ¶B. STATE 37840 
 
¶1. This is an action request, see paragraph two. 
 
¶2.  ACTION REQUEST: On April 30, 2009, the UN Security 
Council will vote on a resolution renewing the mandate of 
the UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara 
(MINURSO).  USUN is authorized to vote in support of the 
resolution, included in paragraph three, and draw from 
the 
points in paragraph four in delivering the U.S. 
Explanation of Vote (EOV).  USUN should refer any 
substantive changes to the text of the resolution to the 
Department. 
 
¶3.  BEGIN TEXT OF RESOLUTION: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling all its previous resolutions on Western Sahara, 
 
Reaffirming its strong support for the efforts of the 
Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy to implement 
resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007) and 1813 (2008), 
 
Reaffirming its commitment to assist the parties to 
achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political 
solution, which will provide for the self-determination 
of the people of Western Sahara in the context of 
arrangements consistent with the principles and purposes 
of the Charter of the United Nations, and noting the role 
and responsibilities of the parties in this respect, 
 
Reiterating its call upon the parties and States of the 
region to continue to cooperate fully with the United 
Nations and with each other to end the current impasse 
and 
to achieve progress towards a political solution, 
 
Taking note of the Moroccan proposal presented on 11 
April 
2007 to the Secretary-General and welcoming serious and 
credible Moroccan efforts to move the process forward 
towards resolution; also taking note of the Polisario 
Front proposal presented 10 April 2007 to the Secretary- 
General, 
 
Taking note of the four rounds of negotiations held under 
the auspices of the Secretary-General, and welcoming the 
progress made by the parties to enter into direct 
negotiations, 
 
Welcoming the agreement of the parties expressed in the 
Communiqu, of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary- 
General for Western Sahara of 18 March 2008 to explore 
the establishment of family visits by land, which would 
be in addition to the existing programme by air, and 
encouraging them to do so in cooperation with the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 
 
Stressing the importance of making progress on the 
humanitarian dimension of the conflict as a means to 
promote transparency and mutual confidence through 
constructive dialogue and humanitarian confidence- 
building 
measures, 
 
Welcoming the commitment of the parties to continue the 
process of negotiations through United Nations-sponsored 
talks, 
 
Noting the Secretary-General's view that the 
consolidation 
of the status quo is not an acceptable outcome of the 
current process of negotiations, and noting further that 
progress in the negotiations will have a positive impact 
on the quality of life of the people of Western Sahara in 
all its aspects, 
 
Welcoming the appointment of the Secretary-General's 
Personal Envoy for Western Sahara Ambassador Christopher 
Ross, and also welcoming his recent visit to the region 
and ongoing consultations with the parties, 
 
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 
13 April 2009 (S/2009/200), 
 
¶1. Reaffirms the need for full respect of the military 
agreements reached with the United Nations Mission for 
the 
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) with regard to the 
ceasefire; 
 
¶2. Welcomes the parties' agreement with the Personal 
Envoy's suggestion to hold small, informal talks in 
preparation for a fifth round of negotiations, and 
recalls 
its endorsement of the previous report's recommendation 
that realism and a spirit of compromise by the parties 
are 
essential to achieve progress in negotiations; 
 
¶3. Calls upon the parties to continue to show political 
will and work in an atmosphere propitious for dialogue in 
order to enter into a more intensive and substantive 
phase 
of negotiations, thus ensuring implementation of 
resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007) and 1813 (2008) and 
the success of negotiations; and affirms its strong 
support for the commitment of the Secretary-General and 
his Personal Envoy towards a solution to the question of 
Western Sahara in this context; 
 
¶4. Calls upon the parties to continue negotiations under 
the auspices of the Secretary-General without 
preconditions and in good faith, taking into account the 
efforts made since 2006 and subsequent developments, with 
a view to achieving a just, lasting and mutually 
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the 
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in the 
context of arrangements consistent with the principles 
and 
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, and noting 
the role and responsibilities of the parties in this 
respect; 
 
¶5. Invites Member States to lend appropriate assistance 
to 
these talks; 
 
¶6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security 
Council informed on a regular basis on the status and 
progress of these negotiations under his auspices and 
expresses its intention to meet to receive and discuss 
his 
report; 
 
¶7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a report on 
the situation in Western Sahara well before the end of 
the 
mandate period; 
 
¶8. Urges Member States to provide voluntary contributions 
to fund confidence- building measures that allow for 
increased contact between separated family members, 
especially family visits, as well as for other 
confidence-building measures that may be agreed between 
parties; 
 
¶9. Decides to extend the mandate of MINURSO until 30 
April 
2010; 
 
¶10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take 
the 
necessary measures to ensure full compliance in MINURSO 
with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual 
exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council informed, 
and urges troop-contributing countries to take 
appropriate 
preventive action including pre-deployment awareness 
training, and other action to ensure full accountability 
in cases of such conduct involving their personnel; 
 
¶11. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
END RESOLUTION. 
 
¶4. BEGIN U.S. EXPLANATION OF VOTE: 
 
-- The United States fully supports the Secretary-General 
and Ambassador Ross in their efforts to find a peaceful, 
sustainable, mutually-agreed solution to the Western 
Sahara conflict. 
 
-- This conflict has gone on too long, and it, as well as 
poor relations between Morocco and Algeria, has prevented 
regional cooperation on urgent and emergent issues facing 
North Africa. 
 
-- We welcome the appointment of Ambassador Chris Ross to 
serve as the Secretary-General's Personal Envoy for the 
Western Sahara.  Ambassador Ross is a seasoned diplomat 
with extensive experience in the region.  He has our full 
support. 
 
-- We welcome the fact that, during Ambassador Ross' 
recent trip to the region, all of his interlocutors 
confirmed their commitment to cooperate with the United 
Nations to reach a solution to the Western Sahara 
conflict 
as soon as possible. 
 
-- We concur with Ambassador Ross' assessment that 
informal preparatory talks may help pave the way for more 
substantive formal talks.  We are glad the parties have 
agreed to meet informally.  We encourage all involved to 
come to the table without preconditions. 
 
-- Given the current situation on the ground and 
Ambassador Ross' continuing efforts, we agree the 
presence 
of MINURSO remains indispensable and support renewing 
MINURSO's mandate for another 12 months. 
 
END U.S. EXPLANATION OF VOTE. 
CLINTON