09STATE88783
DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO LIBYAN AMBASSADOR:
Tue Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0913
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #8783/01 2372252
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 252234Z AUG 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE 9296S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 088783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/24/2019 
TAGS: PREL PHUM LY
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO LIBYAN AMBASSADOR: 
ENCOURAGING A  MEASURED RESPONSE TO MEGRAHI,S RELEASE 
 
REF: A. STATE 86640 
     ¶B. TRIPOLI 683 Classified By: Classified by: NEA Assistant Secretary Jeffrey Feltman for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) SUMMARY -------

¶1. (S) NEA Assistant Secretary Jeffrey Feltman delivered reftel demarche regarding the release of Abdel Basset Ali Mohamed al-Megrahi to Libyan Ambassador Ali Aujali on August 20, concurrent with the Scottish Executive's announcement of the decision to issue Megrahi,s release on compassionate grounds and his return to Libya. A/S Feltman warned Aujali that a "hero's welcome" for Megrahi could hinder the bilateral relationship. Aujali said Megrahi's return should not be viewed as a "political victory" for Libya. He added that the Libyan government does not intend to link Megrahi's return to celebrations on September 1, the fortieth anniversary of Libyan Leader Muammar Qadhafi,s rule. A/S Feltman said that a "hero's welcome" for Megrahi would negatively impact Qadhafi,s first visit to the United States to participate in the United Nations General Assembly.

Megrahi's Return to Libya -------------------------

¶2. (S) NEA Assistant Secretary Feltman delivered reftel points to Libyan Ambassador Aujali on August 20 just as Abdel Basset Ali Mohamed al-Megrahi's plane was touching down in Tripoli. A/S Feltman stressed to Aujali that the return of Megrahi is a very sensitive matter, given the number of American victims and families whose lives were destroyed by Megrahi,s actions. He urged the Libyan government to take this into account when considering how to treat Megrahi upon arrival and throughout the duration of his life in Libya. A/S Feltman warned Aujali that a "hero's welcome" for Megrahi could hinder the bilateral relationship. He noted that the Charge at U.S. Embassy in Tripoli delivered the same message to Foreign Minister Musa Kusa on August 20.

¶3. (S) A/S Feltman said that any action by the Libyan government to publicly pardon Megrahi for his crimes will increase the negative reaction of the American people. He asked that the Libyan government enforce the terms of Megrahi's life sentence by ensuring he remain in prison or under house arrest and underscored that the less attention Megrahi receives in Libya, the better for the bilateral relationship. A/S Feltman urged Aujali to press the Libyan government to carefully consider the government's public response to Megrahi's eventual death and the scope of publicity it might receive. Aujali said that he would pass A/S Feltman's message to his government. He stressed that Megrahi's return should not be viewed as a "political victory" for Libya. Aujali dismissed suggestions that the Libyan government intended to link Megrahi's return to celebrations on September 1, the fortieth anniversary of Libyan Leader Qadhafi's rule, questioning the source of such a link.

Qadhafi at UNGA ---------------

¶4. (S) A/S Feltman underscored that a "hero's welcome" for Megrahi would negatively impact Qadhafi debut visit to the United States in September to participate in the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA. He urged that the Libyan government think carefully about the type of statements Qadhafi will make in New York. A/S Feltman said that Americans are closely watching Megrahi's reception in Libya and stressed that they will also follow Qadhafi's actions at the UNGA. He added that the potential of the bilateral relationship has not yet been realized and that the USG hopes Qadhafi,s visit to New York will promote progress and not hinder it.

¶5. (S) Aujali said that Qadhafi's first visit to the U.S. is an historic and important moment for Libya. He noted that Qadhafi's brief exchange with President Obama at the G8 in Italy was positive and stressed the importance to Libya of building STATE 00088783 002 OF 002 on it through a meeting between Qadhafi and President Obama at the UNGA. Aujali stressed that such a meeting would be "very important" for the U.S.-Libya relationship, while acknowledging that there will be opposition from Congress and the families of the Pan Am victims.

Human Rights Dialogue ---------------------

¶6. (S) A/S Feltman expressed his gratitude to the Libyan government, and particularly FM Kusa, for hosting the August 18 discussion between U.S. and Libyan officials on human rights. A/S Feltman said he is pleased that the dialogue was constructive and welcomed Libya,s willingness to engage in the dialogue as a demonstration of Libya,s commitment to the bilateral relationship. Aujali looked forward to a subsequent meeting in six months to continue the dialogue.

¶7. (U) Tripoli minimize considered. CLINTON