09STATE95932
Guidance: Middle East Consultations, September
Tue Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5932 2582110
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152051Z SEP 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHMK/AMEMBASSY MANAMA IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 095932 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS KPAL
SUBJECT: Guidance: Middle East Consultations, September 
17 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request. USUN may draw from para 
2 elements when making its intervention during the 
upcoming Middle East consultations in the Security 
Council on September 17.  The Department may send follow- 
on instructions revising these elements, in order to 
capture the nuance of the evolving situation; Mission 
should be alert for these possible revisions. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin elements: 
 
I thank Under Secretary-General Pascoe for his report. 
 
Advancing the cause of peace in the Middle East has been 
a major objective of the United States.  President Obama 
has redoubled our commitment, seeking a comprehensive 
settlement, including peace between Israel and the 
Palestinians, Israel and Syria, and Israel and Lebanon. 
We are working to create the context for a prompt 
resumption and early, successful conclusion of 
negotiations between the parties.  I cannot overemphasize 
the importance of negotiations resuming as soon as 
possible. 
 
A comprehensive settlement must be based on the two-state 
solution, with Israel and an independent and viable 
Palestine living side-by-side in peace and security.  We 
look forward to meeting with all of the parties, key 
members of the international community, and the Quartet 
in coming weeks to uphold our shared responsibility to 
advance this objective.  The Quartet remains the most 
effective instrument for marshaling the international 
community's diplomatic efforts in support of Middle East 
peace. 
 
All parties have responsibilities to ensure progress. 
For Israel, President Obama continues to urge that 
settlement activity stop.  As we noted on September 4, 
the United States does not accept the legitimacy of 
continued settlement expansion.  We know that the 
Secretary General shares these sentiments.  We appreciate 
Israel's stated intent to place limits on settlements, 
and will continue to discuss this issue with Israel. 
 
The Palestinians also have responsibilities to create the 
environment for peace.  These responsibilities include 
continuing to improve security, ending incitement, and 
dismantling the infrastructure of terrorism.  They also 
include refraining from actions and speech that make 
negotiations more difficult, including support for one- 
sided criticism of Israel in international fora.  As we 
approach the UN General Debate and 64th General Assembly, 
we call on our Palestinian colleagues to help us to 
create a healthier, less rhetorically-charged 
environment. 
 
We urge all Arab states to encourage progress in the 
spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative, and call on them to 
take steps towards building relations with Israel, 
including modulating harsh rhetoric in international 
organizations and other fora.  Arab governments should 
support the Palestinian Authority under President Abbas, 
both politically and financially, thus helping to improve 
conditions for all Palestinians throughout the West Bank 
and Gaza.  We are encouraged by recent calls in the 
region to assist the Palestinians in fulfilling their 
legitimate aspirations and for overcoming the animosities 
of the past. 
 
Israel has also begun to take steps to improve conditions 
for Palestinians.  It has removed key checkpoints and 
eased conditions at others, and withdrawn troops to the 
outskirts of four cities.  If sustained and expanded, 
this change should improve Palestinian freedom of 
movement, economic development, and overall quality of 
life.  These steps should be duly noted and encouraged in 
the General Assembly's discussion of the Middle East this 
fall. 
 
The Palestinian Authority has also made progress.  We 
welcome its development of a detailed, two-year plan to 
develop institutional capacity.  We hope the plan will 
complement negotiations by ensuring that the institutions 
of Palestinian governance will be in place to support 
implementing a peace agreement.  Palestinian progress on 
security is also welcome.  Nearly 2000 security personnel 
have completed training in Jordan and are deployed in the 
West Bank, with another 500 in training.  Along with 
efforts to promote the rule of law, this efforts helps 
demonstrate that Palestine will in the future be a viable 
and responsible state that serves its people and is a 
good neighbor to all states in the region. 
 
Unfortunately, Hamas' behavior continues to fall far 
short of the principles outlined by the Quartet: 
renunciation of violence, recognition of Israel, and 
acceptance of previous agreements between the parties, 
including the Roadmap.  These commitments are the bedrock 
of any negotiations and the only way to realize 
legitimate Palestinian aspirations for statehood.  If 
Hamas wishes to play a constructive role, it will make 
clear that it accepts these principles. 
 
All UN members have a responsibility to prevent the 
illicit arms smuggling into Gaza, lest Hamas further 
restock its arsenal and spark another conflict.  We 
support reopening crossings with an appropriate 
monitoring regime consistent with Resolution 1860 and 
based on the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. 
 
Turning to Lebanon, we are deeply concerned about the 
attacks on Friday, September 11, which were a clear 
violation of the cessation of hostilities called for in 
UN Security Council resolution 1701.  This incident, 
along with the explosion of the Hizballah weapons depot 
on July 14, highlight the urgent need to bring arms in 
Lebanon under control of the state and the need for the 
international community to remain fully committed to 
supporting UNIFIL and its mission.  Regardless of the 
ultimate outcome of that investigation, we remain 
extremely concerned about the role that Hizballah is 
playing in Lebanon and its efforts to rearm in direct 
contravention of various Security Council resolutions. 
The group continues to pose a threat to peace and 
stability in Lebanon and the region. 
 
With patience and determination, we can assist all people 
in the region to realize the peace and stability they 
deserve. 
 
If raised (provided release of the Goldstone report to 
HRC members): As a member of the Human Rights Council, we 
have received a copy of Justice Goldstone?s report on the 
Gaza conflict.  It is a lengthy report, and we will 
review it carefully.  As we have stated previously, prior 
to U.S. membership, the UN's Human Rights Council set 
forth a one-sided and unacceptable mandate for this fact- 
finding investigation.  We note Justice Goldstone has 
expressed his intent to cover abuses on all sides of this 
conflict in an impartial fashion.  We also note that the 
Government of Israel is conducting its own investigations 
into actions in Gaza. 
 
End elements. 
CLINTON