10STATE14946
GUIDANCE: CONSULTATIONS ON HAITI, FEB 19
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4946 0500200
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 190158Z FEB 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 9886
INFO RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE IMMEDIATE 0862UNCLAS STATE 014946 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
USUN PLEASE PASS JEFF RENEAU AND ELLEN GERMAIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID HA
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: CONSULTATIONS ON HAITI, FEB 19 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message.  Please see paragraph 
three. 
 
¶2. (U) Mission may draw on the points at paragraph three for 
the February 19 Security Council consultations on Haiti. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin points: 
 
-- I would like to extend our thanks to Under-Secretary 
General Le Roy and Under-Secretary General Holmes for their 
briefings earlier today. 
 
-- Additionally, I would like to thank the team led by 
Under-Secretary General Le Roy and Under-Secretary General 
Malcorra for their productive visit yesterday to Washington. 
We appreciated hearing UN views on coordinating the 
transition from immediate relief operations to recovery and 
reconstruction activities over the medium and long-term.  We 
are all interested in the continued resumption of a full 
array of operational responsibilities by the Government of 
Haiti and by MINUSTAH as they strengthen their respective 
capacities in the wake of the earthquake. 
 
-- The devastating scale of the disaster that has befallen 
the Haitian people makes it clear that the international 
community, working closely with the Government of Haiti, the 
United Nations, and international financial institutions, 
must provide a significant contribution to Haiti's rebuilding 
for the foreseeable future. 
 
-- Our imperative is to help a member of the community of 
nations in dire need.  In doing so, we are respectful of 
Haitian sovereignty; we are aligning our efforts with those 
of the Haitian government; and we are mindful that the 
ultimate recipients of our assistance are the Haitian people, 
who therefore must be involved in the rebuilding effort - 
both within Haiti and in the Diaspora. 
 
-- Under the leadership of the Government of Haiti, and with 
a key role by the United Nations, we all must coordinate our 
efforts with national, international and regional 
organizations of the Americas, international financial 
institutions and a broad range of partners, to the benefit of 
the Haitian people. 
 
-- We stand with Haiti for the long term. We consider an 
initial 10-year commitment to be essential, as is a concerted 
effort to build Haiti's capacity, which should be a 
cornerstone of our joint approach. 
 
-- While we speak of a long-term commitment, we recognize 
that stability and human security are necessary preconditions 
to the rebuilding of Haiti. 
 
-- As we move forward, we want to ensure that various 
planning processes are fully coordinated and that all 
humanitarian, relief, and security requirements are properly 
understood and resourced. 
 
-- Over 30 nations to date, including the United States, have 
offered military or police personnel in support of MINUSTAH 
operations.  This outpouring of support is commendable, and 
we hope that member states will provide MINUSTAH with 
additional self-sustaining formed police units.  It will be 
important to facilitate the deployment of new police and 
military assets into MINUSTAH, especially as national forces 
from the United States and elsewhere draw down. 
 
 
-- Following the most recent assessments, OCHA has issued a 
revised appeal of 1.4 billion dollars, which means, as of 
February 17, the UN Flash Appeal was funded at 47 percent, 
with 673 million dollars of confirmed donations.  The United 
States has spent over 600 million dollars on relief efforts 
so far.  We strongly encourage other nations to support the 
assessed needs outlined in this second appeal to the maximum 
extent possible. 
 
-- The United States is also pleased to be co-hosting with 
the United Nations an international conference on March 31st 
that will help the Government of Haiti to mobilize resources 
for early recovery and longer-term reconstruction and to 
forge an agreed path forward for its rebuilding with the 
support of key donors and other partners. 
 
End points. 
 
Minimize considered. 
CLINTON