05BAGHDAD4782
IRAQ MEDIA SUMMARY NOVEMBER 19-26, CAIRO
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 004782 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC PGOV IZ
SUBJECT:  IRAQ MEDIA SUMMARY NOVEMBER 19-26, CAIRO 
STIMULATES NATIONAL DIALOG, GOVERNMENT READY FOR 
DIALOG WITH RESISTANCE; TALABANI FIRST IRAQI 
PRESIDENT IN TEHRAN IN THREE DECADES 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary and Comment.  This week the Iraqi 
press zeroed in on the Cairo Conference and spinoff 
topics.  The Cairo Conference in fact prompted 
Iraq's first real public debate about resistance and 
terrorism, the coalition presence, and de- 
Ba'athification.  Cairo seems also to have 
stimulated a more productive dialog among the 
government and opposition, as the Sunni hardline 
Association of Muslim Scholars said it would accept 
UN peacekeepers and Iraq's President proposed dialog 
with the armed resistance. 
 
¶2.  The role of Iraq's neighbors in securing its 
borders was a theme that media played out along 
ethnic/sectarian lines.  Sunni sympathists 
downplayed criticisms of Syria that ran in the Shia 
(and Kurdistan Democratic Party) press.  Sunni press 
also gave more comprehensive coverage to the first 
visit to Tehran by an Iraqi President in 30 years, a 
visit largely glossed over by a Shia/Kurdish 
government that likely wants to downplay ties to 
Iran.  No pro-government press carried Iranian 
accusations that Washington was creating instability 
in Iraq. 
 
¶3.  Reflecting the Cairo communique and perhaps 
debate in the U.S., Iraqi media devoted great 
attention to the coalition presence.  Pro-government 
channels reassured viewers of continued coalition 
support and praised a more capable Iraqi force. 
Sunni/opposition outlets took a more negative view 
and also kept a spotlight on detainee abuse. 
Finally, editors, websites, and cartoonists 
lampooned Iraq's leadership, reflecting popular 
discontent with the government.  End Summary and 
Comment. 
 
Iraqis Build Up, Coalition Draws Down 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  This week Iraq-based media speculated 
widely about possible coalition force drawdowns and 
growing Iraqi force capabilities.  Al-Zaman on 
November 23 noted, "Khalilzad hinted at the 
possibility of a partial withdrawal of U.S. forces 
next year but ruled out early full withdrawal before 
Iraqi security forces can assume full 
responsibility."  Al-Sharqiya the same day quoted a 
Fox News report:  "U.S. Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice said that conditions for reducing 
the number of US troops deployed in Iraq could be in 
place fairly soon." 
 
¶4.  (U)  Media outlets played up increased capacity 
of Iraqi forces as a way to Iraqi Defense Forces 
taking control of bases:  "U.S. forces handed over a 
presidential complex in Tikrit to Iraqi forces in a 
ceremony attended by U.S. ambassador and the U.S. 
Commander in Iraq."  Publicly-financed television al- 
Iraqiya focused on the possibilities of troop 
withdrawals, but stressed continued coalition 
support:  "Italy intends to pull out of Iraq by 
January 2006, but the gradual withdrawal does not 
mean abandonment."  Several outlets, including Ahmad 
Chalabi's al-Mutamar, touted equipment upgrades for 
the Army:  "Iraqi Army Receives 77 Tanks, 34 Armored 
Vehicles from NATO." 
 
¶5.  (U)  Factual, graphic coverage of daily attacks 
continued, with the larger incidents leading the 
news most nights.  On November 19, al-Sharqiya 
reported "two bombers have blown themselves up among 
worshippers at two Shia mosques in Khanaqin 
martyring 75 people and wounding more than 85."  On 
November 23, al-Sharqiya reported that a car bomb 
killed at least 12 people and wounded 28 in an 
attack in Kirkuk.  TV, print, and radio (both 
political and independent outlets) reported at least 
a dozen other attacks, with casualties among Iraqi 
forces, civilians, and the coalition. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Al-Iraqiya TV carried more upbeat news, 
including a November 22 press conference by MOD BG 
Abdulaziz Mohammed Jasim, who reported "Operation 
Steel Curtain ended and all Iraqi cities in the west 
are now safe. . .  Joint forces from both MNF-I and 
the Iraqi military lost 10 soldiers while 57 were 
wounded.  136 terrorists were killed, one wounded, 
256 detained, 47 weapons caches seized and 123 IEDs 
destroyed."  Increasingly, the media is showing 
Iraqi officials taking the lead to "manage" their 
own stories. 
 
Iran, Syria Focus Varies 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Leaders zeroed in on the role Syria and 
Iran play in Iraq's security.  Iraq's President 
Talabani distanced himself from criticism being 
leveled at Syria by his colleagues, National 
Security Advisor Rubai'e and Foreign Minister 
Zebari.  (To wit:  "National Security Advisor 
Mowafaq Al Rubai'e demands Syria stop terrorist flow 
to Iraq," Radio Republic of Iraq; "Foreign Minister 
Zebari:  Syria is the main channel for suicide 
bombers," al-Jazeera; Talabani:  "Iraqi officials 
made a mistake by attacking Syria," al-Sharqiya). 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Meanwhile, Talabani gained the spotlight 
this week as the first Iraqi president to visit in 
over 30 years.  Kurdish news outlets played down the 
visit (which may not be popular among Iran's Kurdish 
population); thus the low-key coverage,  "Talabani 
met grand Ayatollah Ali Khamen'i and reviewed the 
political process and the security situation in 
Iraq," in the PUK paper al-Ittihad.  Sunni and Shia 
outlets on the other hand highlighted economic 
cooperation and Iran's pledges to play a positive 
role on security ("Talabani expressed confidence 
 will assist in combating terrorism. 
The Iranian president denied accusations that his 
regime is using Iraq to launch indirect war against 
 and London," was the line taken by 
Sunni-leaning al-Mashriq.  All Iraqi outlets shied 
away from reporting Khamenei's statements -- carried 
by Iran's al-Alam and al-Jazeera -- that the U.S. 
was the most destabilizing force in Iraq. 
("Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamen'i 
urged Iraqis to ask for a US withdrawal timetable, 
stressing that the US is responsible for Iraq's 
suffering," al-Jazeera.) 
 
Cairo Conference 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (U)  All media covered the Cairo conference in 
detail.  Analysis on November 22 varied, but most 
outlets reported discussants had agreed to establish 
a timetable for coalition withdrawal and agreed on a 
definition of resistance:  Al-Sharq al-Awsat: 
"Cairo Conference Participants Agree To Draft A 
Withdrawal Schedule And To Refuse Terrorism.  The 
Iraqi Accord Conference final statement includes . . 
. a definition of terrorism and a drew distinction 
between terrorism and 'resistance.'  It agreed that 
resistance is a right for all people."  Most papers 
highlighted U.S. embassy comments on the statement: 
"U.S. Embassy Objects to Resistance Item in 
Communiqu," (al-Zaman) and quoted unnamed sources 
saying "any statement legitimizing killing any 
coalition member is unacceptable." 
 
¶9.  (U)  Al-Mashriq reported that the Cairo 
communique demanded a timetable for the withdrawal 
of foreign forces and confirmed that "resistance" is 
a legal right of the people, but also noted that 
participants agreed terrorism does not constitute 
'legal resistance.'"  Radio Free Iraq reported that 
"delegates also agreed on the need to release "all 
prisoners not convicted by a court" and to 
investigate all "allegations of torture and bring 
those responsible to justice."   The KDP party paper 
noted Kurdish "reservations about some clauses:  "at 
first there was no mention of the existence of a 
federal democratic system; another reservation 
concerned a special clause on resistance," most 
other reporting was neutral or positive. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The Iraqi media tested its limits with 
speculations about disagreements and walkouts in 
Cairo, but remained diplomatic in tone.  On November 
21, Al-Arabiya TV remarked on Prime Minister 
Ja'feri's decision to leave early:  "I will keep my 
aide to represent my bloc; the government only 
intended to attend the opening session."  Al-Iraqiya 
TV noted reports of Ja'afari's departure in protest 
were false.  There was colorful commentary in anti- 
coalition al-Furat that demonstrated the sectarian 
nature of political faultines:  "Shia and Kurdish 
delegates stormed out of the conference.  The 
SUBJECT:  IRAQ MEDIA SUMMARt@67H|EADY FOR 
DIALOG WITH RESISTANCE; TALABANI FIRST IRAQI 
PRESIDENT IN TEHRAN IN THREE DECADES 
 
group returned . . . after Christian Ibrahim Menas 
al-Youssefi apologized for comments. . . which a 
Sunni delegate said were struck from the record. 
Youssefi had accused delegates of being US stooges 
saying the entire Iraqi political process was 
illegitimate.  Storming out of the meeting, Shia 
legislator Jawad al-Maliki said such comments 
insulted all Iraqis who voted for the 
constitution." 
 
¶11.  (U)  Editorials were mixed:  in opposition 
newspaper Al-Furat, Daoud Al-Farhan wrote:  " . . 
.there is a general consensus that the final 
statement represents harmony among participants.  I 
think that this is a success, however, Iraqis do not 
care . . .  [they] want immediate solutions to stop 
bloodshed, insecurity, assassinations, arrests, 
executions, night raids and the lack of services. 
The final statement  . . . should have strongly 
recognized the Iraqi resistance."  In contrast, pro- 
government, PUK paper al-Ittihad ran a column by 
Abdul Hadi Mahdi:  "The meeting at such a difficult 
time in Iraq represents a positive step.  It is very 
important to put an end to violence. . . The Cairo 
Conference conveys a message that it is impossible 
to move backwards." 
 
Sunni Rejectionists Consider UN Peacekeeping 
Force, Government Reaches out to Resistance 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U)  Pan-Arab daily al-Sharq al-Awsat continues 
to take the lead among dailies covering Iraq for the 
intellectual elite.  Politicians increasingly use it 
and al-Arabiya to debut their views regionally. 
Thus, on November 22, the paper ran an interview 
with hardline Sunni oppositionist Shaykh Harith al- 
Dari, chairman of the Association of Muslim Scholars 
(AMS), in which the normally bombastic Shaykh showed 
an openness to UN peacekeepers:  "If there is a UN 
schedule for the departure of occupation forces, 
then there would be no harm if some UN peacekeeping 
forces entered Iraq." 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  While Sunni hardliners changed their 
tune slightly, the government pried public debate 
wide by opening the door to dialog with the 
resistance.  Al-Bayyna Al-Jadeeda ran a Reuters 
report November 21 noting with President Talabani's 
remarks in Cairo:  "If those who call themselves 
Iraqi resistance wish to contact me, I'd welcome 
them.  I will not refuse to meet any Iraqi, even if 
I don't agree with their statements."  Al-Dustoor 
also reported this week "Iraq's VP "Abdul Mahdi 
Announces Government Readiness to Facilitate the 
Process for Anyone Who Wants to Put Down Their 
Weapons."  The AMS on November 20 welcomed 
Talabani's gesture, according to reports carried on 
al-Iraqiya, al-Arabiya, and al-Jazeera. 
 
Detainees 
--------- 
 
¶14.  (U)  Media continued to highlight apparent 
abuse by Ministry of Interior officials at the 
Jadriya detention center.  Al-Adalah (associated 
with ruling Shia coalition) criticized 
"exaggerations of abuse."  But other media, 
including government-funded al-Iraqiya, (usually pro- 
government) showed some public skepticism remains: 
"Iraqis in Baghdad protested the mistreatment of 
detainees.  They demanded . . . the removal of 
ministers of defense and interior."  Meanwhile, al- 
Sabah noted that the Deputy Minister of Interior 
promised "Investigation into Jadriya Bunker to 
Conclude in Two Weeks."  Al-Ittijah al-Akhar, an 
opposition paper, devoted a full page to reported 
human rights violations by "the Interior Ministry 
and Badr militants." 
 
Good Government 
--------------- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Editorialists, websites and cartoonists 
focused on corruption and weak leadership, often 
targeting the Ja'aferi government.  German-based 
independent website "kitabat.com" on November 21 
observed "much criticism has been directed at the 
current government's performance just as political 
entities have launched campaigns. . . .  Some 
politicians might believe that harshly criticizing 
the government or the political system will help 
them, but they are wrong.  Iraqis want transparency 
and national programs that contribute to the 
prosperity of the new Iraq, provide employment based 
on patriotism, competence, and loyalty, and favor 
public over personal interests." 
 
KHALILZAD