05BAGHDAD3659
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION;
Tue Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003659 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION; 
BAGHDAD 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of the daily newspapers on September 6, 
¶2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "In Response to the Statements by the Secretary General 
of the Arab League" (Al-Adala, 9/6) 
¶B. "The Constitution and the Last Chance" (Al-Fourat, 9/6) 
¶C. "About Constitutional Education" (Al-Sabah al-Jadeed, 
9/6) 
¶D. "How to Promote Science in the Draft Constitution" (Al- 
Sabah, 9/6) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "In Response to the Statements by the Secretary General 
of the Arab League" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published a page-four 
column by Dr. Raghad Ali about the Arab world's concerns 
over the Iraqi constitution) 
 
"The media is rife with reports of the Arab League Secretary 
General's, Amr Musa, concerns over the Iraqi constitution 
article that states Arabs in Iraq are part of the Arab 
nation. In fact, the Arab League has the right to its 
opinion concerning Iraq because Iraq is a founding member of 
the Arab League. Amr Musa opposes that article perhaps 
because he wants to utter his own point of view. However, we 
are surprised to see the Arab League suddenly show concern 
over Iraqi affairs. The Arab League should have apologized 
to the Iraqi people because its attitudes toward them have 
been disappointing. 
 
"The Arab League should have, at the very least, condemned 
what is happening in Iraq rather than insisting on Arabism. 
Arabism is no more than a hollow word in Arab constitutions. 
That Arabism has paid no attention to Saddam's crimes and 
the current terror in Iraq. The Arab League has not 
condemned terrorist attacks that have killed innocent Iraqis 
while at the same time it has kept sending condemnations 
over the killing of Palestinians. Does the Arab League 
regard other Arab children as innocent while Iraqi children 
as traitors? I do not know why the Arab League does not show 
its readiness to assist Iraq in its current disastrous 
conditions; the Arab League should help us because we are 
brothers in Arabism. But I think that we are brothers, at 
least in theory, because Arab leaders care about bombastic 
slogans and words. History reveals that the Arabism Amr Musa 
wants for Iraq is the same Arabism that supports all types 
of tyranny and represents the terror of the former regime. 
In addition, it is the same Arabism that is represented in 
Arab media outlets, distorts facts, publicly provokes 
sectarianism, and labels terrorism `true resistance.'" 
 
¶B. "The Constitution and the Last Chance" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti coalition, published a page- 
two editorial by Majed Fadhel Al-Zaboon on the Iraqi 
constitution) 
 
"I think that there is enough time to work out the 
disagreements among political parties. We can reach a 
solution to the crisis (between those who accept the draft 
constitution and those who reject it) so that they can 
negotiate and come to a consensus which can be unanimously 
accepted by the majority in the upcoming referendum. It is 
very important to reach agreement lest we begin again from 
zero. The approval of the draft constitution by a minority 
will create new obstacles in the political process and that 
is why we should work hard to unify. We must make use of the 
next few days and weeks to make the political and 
constitutional process successful so it's approved by the 
overwhelming majority of the Iraqi people." 
 
¶C. "About Constitutional Education" 
(Ismaeel Zayyer wrote this front-page editorial in the 
independent Al-Sabah al-Jadeed) 
 
"Recently, we started hearing political experts say that the 
Iraqi people do not understand anything about the 
constitution they'll vote on in the upcoming referendum. 
Their evidence is either slick or represents their ignorance 
and tendency to generalize. Moreover, if there were evidence 
countering theirs they would use techniques and linguistic 
maneuvers to avoid embarrassment. If we examine the 
educational process for the Iraqi people we can conclude 
that there are daily programs on satellite TV channels that 
deal with the constitution as well as discussions, symposia, 
workshops and detailed written information chronicled in 
print. 
 
"Some newspapers allocate one or two pages just for the 
constitution and one can easily see the posters and 
billboards that deal with the constitution, explain it, or 
urge people to participate in the voting . We might need to 
thank the United Nations for their efforts in disseminating 
the constitution's principles to the people and also the 
Supreme Independent Committee. Actually, there are some 
people who only want us to see the negative so we need to 
make clear our calls to our people and encourage them to 
become more aware of allegations in the media. The 
frightening thing is that negative campaigning may end up 
forcing people to boycott the election." 
 
¶D. "How to Promote Science in the Draft Constitution" 
(Sarhan Mehna wrote this editorial, on page 25, for the pro- 
coalition Al-Sabah) 
 
"It is essential for any constitution to be based on science 
as well as societal norms, history, religion, economic 
resources and the potential of humanity. 
 
"It is quite clear in the draft constitution that a 
referendum is set for October 15th. Article 35 deals mostly 
with science and specifically science education, while the 
third section holds the government responsible by asserting, 
`Scientific research is encouraged for peaceful purposes to 
serve humanity, embrace creativity, evolution and all 
aspects of aptitude.' This implies a huge responsibility to 
promote the, dilapidated, state of education in our country. 
 
"The expression `scientific research is encouraged for 
peaceful purposes' would never enable Iraq to make any 
traditional weapons to defend its borders. It will be forced 
to be armed completely with foreign weapons despite the 
capabilities of scientists who have studied, trained, and 
produced a lot of traditional weapons that are not banned 
internationally. This constitutional article might limit a 
lot of useful scientific research in the future, under the 
pretext of dual usage, as was the case in Saddam's time when 
some materials were banned while the country was under 
embargo. 
 
"The expression `to serve humanity' in the same article 
would give us the chance to conclude that scientific 
research in Iraq would be limited and would contribute to 
helping foreigners before helping the people of this country 
first. Therefore the first part of article three should be 
formulated as follows: `The country encourages scientific 
research for peaceful and conventional defensive purposes 
that are not banned internationally and in a manner that 
will promote Iraq and serve humanity.' 
 
"The last part of the article will ensure benefit from past 
research. A lot of time and money were spent in Saddam's era 
and just because he dominated people doesn't mean we should 
have to sacrifice our expertise through a draft constitution 
that is difficult to change. The first responsibility of 
government is to organize and establish disciplined rules 
about education across the spectrum; it's actually no 
development without knowledge and no knowledge without 
education." 
Khalilzad