05BAGHDAD4780
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - November 29, 2005
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 004780 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - November 29, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions of establishing a new, effective 
government and the importance of Saddam Hussein's trial are 
the major editorial themes of Iraqi, Arabic language 
websites on November 29, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "Closing the Gap" (Iraq 4 All News, 11/29) 
¶B.   "Trying Saddam . Trying History ." (Kitabat, 11/29) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Closing the Gap" 
(Editorial by Fatih Abdul Salam - Iraq 4 All News - 
http://www.iraq4all.org/viewnews.php?id=11000 - Independent, 
based in Denmark) 
 
"Talk has circulated in Iraqi political gatherings about a 
technocratic government that would include academic and 
scientific experts.We have witnessed that ministerial 
positions were given to those who carried high scientific 
certificates-in order to end any discussion about an absence 
of educated people in the ministries. But giving the 
`ministerial post' to someone does not mean that technocrats 
can run the state; in other words, it does not mean that his 
scientific experience will match his ministry. Many framed 
certificates moved suspiciously from foreign universities to 
walls in bedrooms or guestrooms without their bearers 
understanding what is going on in reality. 
 
"Maybe people who own those kinds of certificates are the 
main hindrance in their ministries. Even if we suppose the 
minister is well-trained scientifically, where could he lead 
his ministry if its structure is dictated by parties that 
lack qualifications? 
 
"Have we forgotten that Saddam's government included at 
least nine people who had received higher education? .Let's 
hope that civil society organizations and the media educate 
people about the fact that a technocratic government cannot 
[necessarily] save the country from its problems." 
 
¶B. "Trying Saddam . Trying History ." 
(Editorial by Emad Risen - Kitabat - "Writings" - 
http://www.kitabat.com/i10529.htm - Independent, based in 
Germany) 
 
"The tyrant's trial is on, and faces of his regime's victims 
are smiling; mothers of martyrs are smiling as they face 
television screens that show this historic trial, awaited by 
all free and honorable human beings. If Saddam was part of 
our painful history, we should review this entire history. 
And if Saddam committed mistakes, we should seek the causes 
of these mistakes. The important question remains: have we 
Iraqis reviewed ourselves and our past? Or do we want to 
overlook this past and just occupy ourselves with claims of 
triumph and end the story.the story of bloodshed, hunger, 
suppression, and pain? 
 
"Iraqis should try themselves before trying the tyrant who 
ruled Iraq with steel and fire. This was a tyrant that did 
not appear from oblivion to seize power. Saddam ruled Iraq 
with a culture of death, suppression, and discrimination in 
all respects-mentally, socially, politically, and even 
economically. This culture still stands today, and it 
generated many dictatorships and wars for a long time. 
 
"We should review our past, our culture, and even our sacred 
beliefs and way of life. In brief, we should change the way 
we see life and begin reconciling with ourselves, promoting 
love instead of hate, inclusion instead of exclusion. 
 
"Our Islamic heritage provides us with an opportunity to 
overcome many of the crises facing us today with a loving 
spirit. We should include others in our lives and allow 
criticism to direct our path towards the right choice. This 
is the only way we can avenge the martyrs who sacrificed 
themselves for their country. [We] should review everything, 
starting with the culture that produced dictatorship to our 
most sacred beliefs. It is the beginning of the path the 
will lead us to a peaceful way of life far from sites of 
execution, where our hopes and words were hanged to death." 
 
KHALILZAD