05BAGHDAD3028
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ ELECTIONS SECURITY LAW;
Thu Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, 
INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ ELECTIONS SECURITY LAW; 
BAGHDAD 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The major themes in the daily newspapers on 
July 21 were the Sunnis withdrawal from the constitutional 
committee, the constitutional committee's preparations for 
the referendum and drafting the constitution, and the 
latest developments of the security situation. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "Electoral districts" (Al-Adala, 7/21) 
¶B. "Patient Iraqis and the marginalized law" (Ad-Dustoor, 
7/21) 
 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "Electoral districts" (7/21) 
 
Al-Adala (affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim) 
published a third-page editorial by Ali Khalif about the 
upcoming elections: 
 
"Our government made a legitimate demand when it requested 
that all Iraqis participate in the electoral process and 
vote.  Everyone in Iraq should see the wisdom of this 
request and work to make our elections successful.  Last 
January, Iraq had a great election.  It was based upon the 
principle that Iraq is one electoral district. 
 
However, there are some groups that doubt the fairness of 
our January elections.  They maintain that because many 
Iraqis didn't participate in that election it wasn't a 
success.  For this reason, many political groups have 
called for splitting Iraq up into multiple electoral 
districts. In this way, they maintain, all provinces will 
be represented and nobody can thwart the upcoming 
elections. 
 
This will equalize all provinces because it will put an end 
to the issue of majority and minority representation. Each 
province will have its spokesperson represented in the 
national assembly.  These representatives will have a voice 
in affairs of the government and parliament. They will be 
able to put pressure on the government in the name of the 
people they represent. 
 
In this way, we will be able have fair representation in 
the national assembly. Meanwhile, we have to keep in mind 
that each province must be represented according to its 
population. This system will ensure full participation and 
fairness in elections." 
 
¶B. "Patient Iraqis and the marginalized law" (7/21) 
 
Ad-Dustoor (independent) published a front-page editorial 
by Bassem Al-Sheikh about the current Iraqi situation: 
 
"According to the latest poll, there are about 23 
intelligence agencies deployed in Iraq to destroy the 
country and kill Iraqi people. 
 
Iraq used to have Articles 156 through 228 of the "Law of 
Penalties" to protect them from such agencies, but Paul 
Bremer suspended that law in one of his resolutions. 
 
The articles in question states that anyone proved to be 
involved in treason, espionage, information leaks, 
providing assistance or consultation to any foreign group 
to wage war on Iraq will be strictly punished. 
 
This order was judged unjustifiable after the alleged power 
transfer to Iraqis.  Yet, its suspension has made Iraq an 
open field for intelligence agencies of all kinds from all 
countries. 
 
Bremer's order has fed terrorism and helped make it grow. 
Due to the absence of strong governments in the region our 
neighbors have seized this opportunity and destroyed Iraq 
mercilessly while our politicians are protected from the 
law. 
 
Saddam did not draft the "Law of Penalties."  It was 
drafted eighty years ago. It seems that our politicians do 
not care about the dangers of ignoring those important 
articles. Ignoring them will lead to terrorism that targets 
Iraq's national, scientific and religious symbols. In 
addition, it will disrupt Iraq's security, its unity, its 
religion and its identity. Iraq's new politicians, who came 
with the foreign troops, protect themselves from the Iraqi 
law-by ignoring it. 
 
Our officials discount the idea that strong security can 
only be achieved by the presence of a strong and punitive 
law.  They are busy with security issues.  They treat the 
symptoms of terrorism rather than eradicate its causes. 
These intelligence agencies and their secret organizations 
have and will establish positions in Iraq.  They will have 
strong lobbies in the government that cannot be ignored. 
The executive apparatuses must be effective in their 
performances to achieve security.  However, the patient 
Iraqi has nothing to do but pray to god and the national 
assembly.  The patient Iraqi hopes that the national 
assembly will be an effective legislative institution that 
can maintain security. This can only be done by activating 
suspended articles and drafting new ones. May god keep Iraq 
from spies and traitors." 
 
SATTERFIELD