05BAGHDAD3568
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION;
Thu Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ BAGHDAD
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION; 
BAGHDAD 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of the daily newspapers on August 30, 2005. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "The National Assembly Bypasses its Dissolution" (Al- 
Sabah, 8/30) 
¶B. "Ask Washington and No One Else" (Az-Zaman, 8/30) 
¶C. "Our Constitution and the Arabs" (Al-Sabah, 8/30) 
¶D. "The Liberation of Iraq's Sunnis" (Asharq al-Awsat, 8/30) 
¶E.  "Successful Bet" (Al-Adala, 8/30) 
¶F.  "Welcome Is Not Enough" (Al-Bayyan, 8/30) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The National Assembly Bypasses its Dissolution" 
(Al-Sabah (Iraqi Media Network, pro-coalition) published a 
page-two editorial by Adel Abdullah about the National 
Assembly's endorsement of the draft constitution) 
 
"There are some groups that have disputes with the drafting 
of the constitution and which are trying to dissolve the 
National Assembly. This option may be the result of the 
failure of the constitutional committee to reach harmony on 
the constitution. But, first, we have to know what the real 
reasons and interests behind these attempts are. The Kurds 
generally will not be affected if the National Assembly were 
to be dissolved. Sunni Arabs do not care about that issue 
because they do not have enough representation in the 
National Assembly. Regarding American interests, the U.S. 
has two goals in Iraq. The first goal is connected with 
American strategic interest and this was achieved through 
the occupation of Iraq. On the other hand, the second goal 
still remains unaccomplished because it was connected to the 
search for WMD and establishing democracy in Iraq. Whether 
or not the second goal is achieved the U.S. has nothing to 
lose. As a result, the only loser in the dissolution of the 
National Assembly will be the United Shiite Alliance and its 
current government. Only Shiite political parties that 
participated in this government will suffer from the 
bitterness of this loss. In fact, we do not have any time to 
waste to prevent the dissolution of the national assembly 
because the groups that are working to achieve this may 
succeed. Therefore, we have to look for a way to reach 
harmony among all these groups. Otherwise, the dissolution 
of the National Assembly means that all great efforts to 
build new Iraq will be demolished. The UIA's (United Iraqi 
Alliance) government must work now with some of those groups 
in order to develop a new strategy to prevent the 
dissolution of the National Assembly in case the 
constitution is rejected in the referendum." 
 
"Ask Washington and No One Else" 
(Az-Zaman (independent and anti-coalition) published this 
back-page editorial by Fateh Abdul Salam) 
 
"President Bush addressed U.S. soldiers in Iraq and told 
them that they have to endure more sacrifices in Iraq. He 
gave this speech two days ago and this statement shows that 
he continues to offer the same policy in Iraq regardless of 
the continued bloodshed of American soldiers. At the same 
time, the Chief of Staff Gen. Myers blames American 
politicians for not paying attention to the dangers of the 
security situation in Iraq. Before that, Bush personally 
intervened to save the Iraqi constitution draft. However, it 
seems that the results do not correspond with the plan to 
accomplish the American mission in Iraq. Why does Washington 
feel embarrassed and worried? Does it think that casualties 
are not high? Has Washington discovered that Iraqi officials 
are ignorant about their country's future? Has Iraq's future 
become unclear for Iraqi and Americans too? Does the 
decision to withdraw require suitable timing to announce? I 
think that the Americans are better than Iraqi officials in 
describing situations in the country because they are 
deployed throughout Iraq and they do not live inside the 
Green Zone like Iraqi officials. What will happen to the 
constitutional process and what is the result of it? If you 
want to know you better ask Washington because it has a true 
understanding of the Iraqi scene. Do not ask Iraqi officials 
because they are ignorant and they do not have an accurate 
analysis of  Iraq's reality." 
 
"Our Constitution and the Arabs" 
(Al-Sabah (Iraqi Media Network, pro-coalition) published a 
page-three editorial by Sattar Jabar) 
 
"Amr Musa threatens, Saudi Arabia has reservations, Syria 
sends car bombs, Amman plans to bring Ba'athists back to 
power in Iraq, and Qatar gets ready to launch a media 
uprising against Iraqis who drafted their constitution with 
their own blood. Those groups described our constitution as 
the American constitution despite the fact that most of them 
did not even have a look at it. We did not see any of our 
Arab brothers congratulate us for completing the draft of 
our constitution. They did not say this constitution 
represents all Iraqis. In fact, they tried to thwart the 
drafting of this constitution. But, the time of freedom has 
come and freedom has a very expensive cost that we must pay 
in order to end the era of dictatorship in Iraq. Arabs have 
sold their honor and dignity in order to be friends with 
Washington and Israel. On the other hand, we selected our 
friends voluntarily because we wanted a friend that could 
help us cure our chronic diseases. It is an honor to 
befriend anyone who helps our country and we reject anyone 
who wants to steal our wealth and make our lands a 
battleground. Today, the Iraqi people have become the 
landlords of the Middle East because they refused 
dictatorship. Our constitution does not contain any further 
tyrannical principles of the Ba'ath Party because it is a 
constitution of free but poor people, who will spread peace 
throughout an Islamic world that is still suffering from 
dictatorship and tyranny." 
 
"The Liberation of Iraq's Sunnis" 
(Asharq al-Awsat (independent, London-based, Saudi owned) 
published a page-eight editorial by Ahmad Al-Rub'ee on Sunni 
Arabs in Iraq) 
 
"We regret that a small group in Iraq succeeded in 
kidnapping Sunnis Arabs and speaking in their names. This 
has lead to difficulties and the country will pay a high 
price for them. We truly regret that in some of those Sunni 
regions, they held demonstrations, raised the dictator's 
photos, and at least some of the Sunni representatives have 
worked against criminalizing the former Ba'ath Party. 
 
We feel sorry that they now have a spokesperson who speaks 
for them but claims that he represent all Sunnis (the 
educated, the activists, politicians, academics, and tribal 
members). 
 
We feel sorry that it's the extremists who occupy most of 
the Sunni mosques and that they make efforts to turn their 
Friday's prayers into provocative calls to violence. Those 
who claim that they are representing the Sunnis are 
deceiving us; they are talking against the occupation force 
but they are encouraging violence against Iraqis. They talk 
about federalism as if it will divide Iraq but they are 
confused about the differences between democratic federalism 
and sectarianism federalism which would divide Iraq;s 
regions according to ethnicities. 
The real Sunni representatives should raise their voices; 
they must not allow others to scare Sunnis or to mislead 
them about the coming referendum process as they did before 
when they called for a boycott of the election process and 
deprived their fellow Sunnis from having enough 
representatives in the parliament. Those Sunni minorities 
are responsible for diluting the political equation here in 
Iraq. They speak in the name of democracy and freedom but 
they want to take us back to the dictatorial past and they 
are now the echo of terrorism." 
 
 "Successful Bet" 
(Al-Adala (affiliated with SCIRI) published a page-four 
editorial by Dr. Ali Khalif about the constitution) 
 
"Although some people have reservations about some articles 
in the draft constitution, which considered an important 
factor for the success of the constitutional process, 
because it is impossible to satisfy everyone in a country 
like Iraq that has different sects. It is necessary to 
ensure Iraqi groups, particularly those who had suffered 
unjustly, that this will never happen again. This can only 
be accomplished through a permanent constitution that 
preserves all Iraqis' rights. 
 
The moribund Ba'ath Party followers who demonstrated 
carrying the tyrant's picture as a symbol of the rejection 
of the draft constitution, were negligent respecting the 
feelings and memories of the mass grave victims. We are not 
against the democratic tradition of freedom of opinion, but 
we do not hurt others' feelings by raising picture of a 
criminal who is waiting for punishment of justice. 
 
This historical accomplishment, the drafting of a 
constitution, deserves more time for discussion and 
reflection and it will be presented to the people for a 
vote. The progressive wheel is moving forward will not be 
stopped by terrorists because these great Iraqi people who 
defeated the terrorists on election day will defeat them 
again on referendum day." 
 
"Welcome Is Not Enough" 
(Al-Bayyan (affiliated with the Islamic Al-Dawa Party) 
published a page-four editorial by Zainab Al-Khafaji about 
the world's welcoming of the ratification of the Iraqi draft 
constitution) 
 
"After approving the draft constitution the international 
community expressed its welcoming of this step as an 
important Iraqi accomplishment. By all measures the 
international efforts does not fits Iraq's need of more 
support to enhancing democracy. 
 
International organizations should perform their duties 
toward this humanitarian experience, they should offer help 
and support because words are not enough for this democratic 
change happening in Iraq. 
 
Iraq has many issues: the deterioration of security due to 
terrorist attacks, the issue of the deterioration of 
services, and the oil-for-food issue that is still 
unsettled, to resolve in order to ensure the rights of 
Iraqis. These and other issues need international help and 
hard work, not only a formal international welcoming." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khalilzad