05BAGHDAD3533
Special Media Reaction Report - Opinions on the
Mon Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 003533 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: Special Media Reaction Report - Opinions on the 
Iraqi Draft Constitution 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the draft constitution was the major 
editorial theme of the daily newspapers on August 29, 2005. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "Achievement and Victory" (Al-Bayyan, 8/29) 
¶B. "The Draft Constitution at the National Assembly" (Ad- 
Dustoor, 8/29) 
¶C. "The Announcement of a Distinguished Day in Iraq" (Al- 
Taakhi, 8/29) 
¶D. "Iraq Before and After the Constitution" (Az-Zaman, 8/29) 
¶E. "About the Endorsement of the Draft Constitution" (As- 
Sabah al-Jadeed, 8/29) 
¶F. "Iraqi Islamic Party's Al-Hashimi Outlines Position on 
Draft Constitution" (Al-Jazeera TV, 8/29) 
¶G. "Sunni Leaders Reject Draft Constitution" (Al-Sharqiyah 
TV, 8/29) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Achievement and Victory" 
Al-Bayyan (affiliated with the Islamic A-Da'wa Party led by 
Al-Ja'afari) published a front-page editorial about the 
constitution: 
 
"Yesterday, the Iraqi people felt pleased about the 
endorsement of the draft constitution. This ratification 
came after three days of discussions and meetings to solve 
all pending issues. After that, we are now waiting for 
referendum day. All the political parties and blocs in the 
National Assembly have made concerted efforts to ensure that 
all Iraqi sects participated in the constitutional process. 
They gave those who boycotted elections a chance to 
participate in this process for the sake of drafting a 
united constitution. 
 
However, some groups tried to impose their conditions at the 
expenses of others and this has led to a delay in settling 
pending issues. It was possible to solve these issues 
through voting in the National Assembly yet the 
parliamentary blocs ignored that option and preferred 
negotiating in a way that satisfied all groups. We think 
that the endorsement of the draft constitution is a 
significant achievement and victory for the Iraqi people 
because this constitution was drafted by Iraqis and ratified 
by the peoples' representatives. This represents a victory 
because it is a big strike against the terrorists. This 
victory has reinforced the political process and moved Iraq 
forward on a new historic stage." 
 
¶B. "The Draft Constitution at the National Assembly" 
Ad-Dustoor (independent) published a front-page editorial by 
Bassim Al-Sheikh about the constitution: 
 
"The national assembly approved the completed draft of the 
permanent constitution yesterday with reservations of the 
fifteen Sunni members. After the approval of the draft, they 
started to debate and negotiate and will continue until the 
upcoming referendum on October 15, 2005, when Iraqis will 
take responsibility and make a final decision. Voting "Yes" 
or "No," all Iraqi sects will engage in the decisive moment 
to move their country to a bright new future. 
 
All those who criticize the viewpoints and reservations 
between political leaders and constitution drafting members 
are wrong, this is how Iraqis should discuss and decide 
their future-through democracy and freedom. Now we can 
express our opinions and thoughts and we can reject and 
discuss things freely. 
 
All political leaders should work on behalf of the Iraqi 
national compact, not to gain private benefits. We are 
working hard to make this political process succeed and to 
defeat those who tried their best to terminate Iraqi dreams. 
The final outcome will be decided by good Iraqis who 
sacrifice themselves for the freedom of their country. Now 
that the draft constitution is complete (from the 
legislative angle) we will move to the public referendum 
stage to get real and final and approval for Iraq's new 
permanent constitution." 
¶C. "The Announcement of a Distinguished Day in Iraq" 
Al-Taakhi (affiliated with the Kurdistani Democratic Party 
led Masood Barazani) published a front-page editorial by 
Sa'ad Badr Khan about the constitution: 
 
"Yesterday, the Iraqi draft constitution was finally 
announced. Thus, Iraq approaches another step forward in the 
constitutional process--after this the draft is to be 
approved by the Iraqi people. The constitution is the most 
dangerous document in a society. It's a document that 
organizes relationships between rulers and the people and it 
outline the main authorities within the community. 
Unfortunately, Iraq has gone decades without having a 
constitution because the dictator Saddam considered it 
merely a piece of paper that could be ripped at anytime. 
That is how Saddam governed the country without a 
constitution. The Kurdish people have struggled for the sake 
of establishing democracy in Iraq and to guarantee their 
legitimate rights. Therefore, the Kurds want an Iraqi 
constitution that can guarantee and safeguard Kurdish rights 
as a legitimate segment of people in Iraq. Without a doubt, 
the drafting of the constitution was a very difficult task 
and it would not have been accomplished without the bone 
fide efforts of patriotic politicians. The Kurdish 
leadership has played a big role in making this draft 
successful through opening the door to dialogue among 
different Iraqi groups. We are excited about the 
accomplishment of the draft constitution but at the same 
time, we must remember that the Kurds have approved this 
constitution despite the fact that it does not completely 
satisfy Kurdish ambitions. The Kurds have the right to self- 
determination. Although there are some issues (such as the 
status of Kirkuk) that remain to be solved we will never 
give up our demands. We hope that all Iraqis will approve 
the draft constitution so that they can live new lives based 
on democracy and justice. The 28th of August will always be 
a historic day in Iraq's history." 
 
¶D. "Iraq Before and After the Constitution" 
Az-Zaman (independent, anti coalition) published a page-five 
editorial by Jassem Murad: 
 
"Will the constitution stabilize the security, political, 
economic and humanitarian situation in Iraq? In fact, all 
political parties bet on the elections and said that these 
elections would bring peace and stability back to this 
country. Those elections were successfully held in spite of 
terrorists' plans that attempted to thwart them. However, 
those elections could not stabilize the situation in Iraq. 
The situation has actually worsened and the post election 
period led to a plurality of political parties scattered on 
the Iraqi map. If this is the post election period, then how 
can we imagine what will happen after the constitution's 
ratification? Can this constitution solve our crises? We 
could say yes if there were a national Iraqi leadership that 
could move Iraq forward and away from sectarianism but the 
reality shows that the constitution cannot solve our crises 
because we have to understand these crises open-mindedly and 
transparently. We have to reinforce the notion of national 
dialogue to isolate terrorists from those who want to 
participate in the political process. In addition, we must 
work hard to improve public services and start 
reconstruction projects to end unemployment in Iraq. And we 
have to make citizens feel they are protected by the 
government. By accomplishing these conditions, the post 
constitutional period may witness a historic move in our 
lives. Otherwise, crises will not be solved and they will 
continue until they make people explode against the 
government." 
 
¶E. "About the Endorsement of the Draft Constitution" 
As-Sabah al-Jadeed (independent) published a front-page 
editorial by Ismael Zayyer: 
 
"Iraqis deserve to celebrate the completion of their 
permanent draft constitution, a good initiative for Iraqis 
to open closed doors. Iraqis reached a final accord after 
hard and peaceful efforts and dialogue among all political 
groups to reach a final agreement freely and with no air of 
injustice. 
 
We may have different points of view and opinions but we are 
all a unified nation, a land and country with one 
significant Iraqi soul throughout. 
 
We agree with all those who have their own ideas and views 
concerning the constitution, they have a right to express 
their choices the way they want through the media. Today we 
celebrate our success, but we should be aware that this is 
the first step in the democratic process, and we must work 
hard and prepare for the next step--the upcoming referendum 
on the draft constitution. 
 
If Iraqis accept or reject the draft constitution freely in 
the upcoming referendum process we must respect that. What 
is more important is that we have a truly free and fair 
referendum with polling boxes far removed from Iraq's 
presidential guards,  private guards, and the security and 
intelligence apparatus because we now have national dialogue 
and freedom." 
 
¶F. "Iraqi Islamic Party's Al-Hashimi Outlines Position on 
Draft Constitution" 
Al-Jazeera TV carries live a news conference, in Baghdad, by 
Tariq al-Hashimi, secretary general of The Iraqi Islamic 
Party, on the party's position on the draft constitution. 
 
"All I can say is that the draft constitution was submitted 
in the absence of the principle of agreement which 
constituted the basis for the Iraqi Islamic Party's 
participation in becoming a partner in drafting the 
constitution.  Regretfully, this draft constitution does not 
reflect our aspirations, concerns of Iraqis, nor fulfills 
our legitimate and national principles, as much as we had 
hoped it would.  It is an incomplete draft and the party 
continues to have reservations over many of the issues 
enshrined in it which continued up until yesterday to be a 
subject of conflict and disagreement among negotiating 
parties.  This is the opinion of the Iraqi Islamic Party. 
The party, through all possible political efforts, will not 
hesitate to amend these paragraphs until they become 
compatible with the country's higher interests and the 
concerns of Iraqis in the present and the future.Not the 
entire draft is bad.  It includes good and bad elements. We 
shall confront the elements which we continue to believe 
that it would be in the interest of the country and Iraqis 
to change now or in the future.The Islamic Party contests 
this draft constitution, but does not reject it in part and 
parcel" 
 
¶G. "Sunni Leaders Reject Draft Constitution" 
Al-Sharqiyah TV in Arabic 28 Aug 05, News conference by Abd- 
al-Nasir al-Janabi and Salih al-Mutlaq, members of the Iraqi 
National Dialogue Council. 
"..we do not believe that what was achieved rises to the 
level of the requirements which fulfill the Iraqi people's 
aspirations. We ended up with disagreement on key points 
which cannot be ignored in any way whatsoever. We believe 
that ignoring them will lead to partitioning Iraq -- land, 
people, and identity. Therefore, we announce that we do not 
accept and even reject the draft constitution paragraphs on 
which no agreement was reached. This renders the draft 
illegal.We also call on the Arab League, the United Nations, 
and all international community institutions to intervene 
and prevent the passage of this draft and to rectify the 
clear flaws in it. We, however, will continue to be a vital 
part of the political process and will work very hard and 
sincerely along the path aspired for our beloved Iraq, 
beginning with our active participation in the next 
elections, regardless of how the draft constitution will end 
up.The constitution must either be accepted or rejected as a 
whole. If a single point in the constitution is 
unacceptable, voters will reject the constitution 
altogether.We believe that the Iraqi citizen will reject 
this draft because of the presence of these controversial 
points.I think that if this constitution passes as it is, it 
will worsen everything in the country and it will increase 
the violence in the country. But at the same time we are 
asking through these channels all the Iraqis to express 
their views in a very peaceful way and be away from the 
violence."