05BAGHDAD5125
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Mon Dec 26 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261637Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 005125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials were Iraq's 
parliamentary elections and the formation of the forthcoming 
government. 
 
Independent Az-Zaman published a second-page column entitled 
"The National Assembly, Government and the End of Service," 
in which the author criticizes government performance and 
decision-making. The editorial argues that security and 
basic services have deteriorated during the current 
government's term in office. In contrast, the SCIRI- 
affiliated Al-Adala published a third-page editorial 
entitled "Economic Success," which focuses on the economic 
accomplishments of the current government and praises the 
role of Vice President Adel Abdul Mahdi for taking the lead 
in canceling most of Iraq's debts when he served as Finance 
Minister under Allawi's government. 
 
Independent Al-Mashriq published a back-page editorial 
entitled "Voice.Action and a Man Worried about Iraq," in 
which the author contends that it is better for Iraq at the 
current stage to be led by moderate politicians. 
 
Independent Democratic Al-Wifaq published a front-page 
editorial entitled "Can the Next Government Adopt an Iraqi 
National Program?" The article highlights the Iraqi 
elections and current political developments in the country, 
discussing the formation of the new parliament and the 
political conflicts likely to emerge. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Our Attitude Regarding Election Results" (At-Taakhi, 
12/26) 
¶B. "Ali Baba's Cave" (Al-Fourat, 12/26) 
¶C. "The Language of Blood" (Al-Bayyan, 12/26) 
¶D. "A Good Lesson" (Rayat Al-Arab, 12/26) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Our Attitude Regarding Election Results" 
(At-Taakhi, affiliated with the KDP, led by Masood Al- 
Barzani, published a front-page editorial by editor in chief 
Dr. Badr Khan Al-Sindi about the Kurdish perspective 
regarding preliminary election results. The editorial reads 
in part) 
 
"The Kurdish attitude has always been sensible and very 
determined to make the electoral process successful. The 
Kurdish attitude proved again to be moderate and capable of 
correcting mistakes. The Kurdish opinion concerning 
establishing a [broad-based] national unity government 
represents the best solution for the new Iraq." 
 
¶B. "Ali Baba's Cave" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti-coalition, published a back- 
page editorial by Dawoud Al-Farhan about U.S. Vice President 
Dick Cheney's recent visit to Iraq. The editorial reads in 
part) 
 
"Like the thieves who sneaked into Ali Baba's cave, U.S. 
Vice President Dick Cheney paid a surprise visit to Iraq. 
Moreover, the Iraqi president and prime minister were sent 
to a meeting with the U.S. ambassador; they were surprised 
to see Cheney sitting in the meeting room. Iraq is the only 
country that does not know who will be visiting in advance. 
Unfortunately, Iraqis were unable to welcome Cheney because 
they found out about it after he had left the country. I 
think Cheney should have visited the cities of Tal Afar, 
Fallujah, Qaim and Ramadi to see what the U.S. forces did. 
Additionally, he should see how Iraqi human rights have 
prospered under the `American Liberation.'" 
 
¶C. "The Language of Blood" 
(Al-Bayyan, affiliated with the Islamic Ad-Dawa Party, led 
by Al-Ja'fari, published a fifth-page editorial by Salim 
Rasoul about election complaints. The editorial reads in 
part) 
 
"Some political entities think that they deserve 
more.regarding [parliamentary] seats. For this reason, they 
submitted complaints to the IECI. But it is important to 
remember that nobody has the authority to interfere with the 
IECI's work. Those complaints used the language of blood. 
This should be rejected because it is at odds with the 
principles of good citizenry. We heard some Iraqi 
politicians threaten to shed blood if their demands were not 
implemented. In fact, the election was considered honest 
according to the United Nations' representatives. Those 
representatives said that the number of complaints submitted 
to the IECI do not justify repeating the election. It seems 
that there are still groups that believe in the culture of 
the Ba'th Party, which marginalized and eliminated 
opponents." 
 
¶D. "A Good Lesson" 
(Rayat Al-Arab, affiliated with the Arab Nationalist Trend 
in Iraq, published a front-page unattributed editorial about 
the election. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"The preliminary results of the election shocked most of the 
electoral lists, except the UIA and the Kurdish Coalition, 
both of which knew how to win the election. Those two 
entities control the security in the country and they both 
have armed militias. In addition, they have the capabilities 
to intimidate and deceive voters. Those who have been 
shocked by the results of the election must learn an 
important lesson. We believe that the electoral process and 
its mistakes are a useful experiment from which to learn. 
But is it a good time to learn from these lessons? Do we 
have to use more time, which will result in more sacrifices 
and more blood so that we can be awakened? The answer to 
this question will emerge in the forthcoming days." 
 
KHALILZAD