05BAGHDAD4409
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Wed Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
REFERENDUM, NATIONAL RECONCILATION, AMR MUSA, INSURGENCY; 
 
BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, 
National Reconciliation, Amr Musa, and the Insurgency were 
the major editorial themes of the daily newspapers on 
October 26, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Following the Approval of the Constitution" (Al-Mada, 
10/26) 
¶B. "A Wave of Violence Following a Relative Lull" (Al- 
Ittihad, 10/26) 
¶C. "The Lock and the Key" (Al-Fourat, 10/26) 
¶D. "Congratulations to All for the Permanent Constitution" 
(Al-Bayyan, 10/26) 
¶E. "Curtail Your Happiness and Be Patient about Your 
Suffering" (Al-Mashriq, 10/26) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Following the Approval of the Constitution" 
(Al-Mada, independent, no-bias, published this front-page 
unattributed editorial) 
 
"Finally, the majority of people approved the first Iraqi 
constitution presented to a public referendum for the first 
time in the history of Iraq. Excluding the talk about the 
good and the bad in this constitution, the most important 
thing now is how to deal with the period following the 
constitution's approval. 
 
"The latest amendment provided a chance to make some changes 
to the approved constitution, which is an opportunity for 
everybody to prepare for the December election-to win a seat 
in the new representative council in order to become more 
politically active and contribute to amendments by certain 
factions. 
 
"It was impossible to draft a constitution that satisfies 
all Iraqi interest groups. This caused reservations among 
certain groups who objected to specific articles they felt 
opposed their beliefs. Certainly, as is the case throughout 
the world, the constitution will endure a process of 
revision that satisfies present concerns. The most important 
thing in the referendum process is people's beliefs in 
expressing their opinion through ballot boxes. This process 
is furthering our democratic education and lessening the 
influence of political parties. 
 
"Therefore, all political parties (within the government and 
the opposition) should respect the people's democracy and 
invest in it to establish the kind of democracy everyone can 
be proud of." 
 
¶B. "A Wave of Violence Following a Relative Lull" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK led by Jalal Talabani, 
published this page-three editorial by Abdul Hadi Mahdi) 
 
"There has been a relative lull since referendum day and the 
Secretary General of the Arab League's visit but this quiet 
 
SIPDIS 
is deliberate and not the first time that silence is 
followed by violence. 
 
"On the evening of October 24, explosions occurred in the 
capital Baghdad and put the security forces in front of 
questions about how such violations are allowed to occur. 
What happened in Al-Firdus Square does not correlate with 
announced statements about the development of abilities and 
control of our security forces. 
 
"Alertness and preparedness must always be the slogan for 
the security forces. The glory of victory should not lead to 
unexpected disaster. A few days of calm in a month does not 
mean that attackers have given up and quit. On the contrary, 
attention should be focused during these periods because 
enemies are waiting for inattention to seize the initiative 
in order to attack and cause more victims. 
 
"According to observers, the attack is a message from gunmen 
that they dismiss the Arab League's initiative to hold a 
conference on national reconciliation. Observers predict 
such reconciliation will enhance security and save the 
country from violence. We want the police and army to be 
more responsible during this stage--for the sake of Iraq and 
Iraqis." 
 
¶C. "The Lock and the Key" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti-coalition published this back- 
page editorial by Dawoud Al-Farhan) 
 
"The Arab media has unanimously agreed that Amr Musa, 
Secretary General of the Arab League, is a `political 
 
SIPDIS 
magician.' In a precise mission he gathered together 
disparate Iraqi political and national elements which, 
hitherto, refused to acknowledge his initiative. I would 
like to remind my readers of some of the comments 
characterizing Amr Musa. The Saudi writer Abdul Rahman Al- 
Rashid wrote, `A magical personality capable of managing 
difficult and contradictory assignments and succeeding in 
resolving them all. If he visits Iraqi more often he will 
accomplish great achievements-more than any Arab summit can 
achieve.' 
 
"The Lebanese journalist, Abdul Wahab Badrkhan, wrote, 
`Without the strong American persuasion for the vital role 
of the Arab League, Amr Musa would not be in Baghdad.this is 
the beginning of more difficulties ahead because the enemies 
of reconciliation are many.' 
 
"An Egyptian writer praised Amr Musa for his braveness, 
consistency and presence in Baghdad under such bad security 
circumstance. He added that Musa deserves double 
congratulations for his successful start in persuading some 
Iraqi national elements who have certain doubts about the 
Secretary General's impartiality. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
"This important achievement makes us optimistic about the 
future of our Iraq, it means that all Iraqi political and 
national elements (despite different ambitions and goals, 
and in spite of a military occupation in Iraq) have common 
hopes for Iraq. However, the Secretary General should be 
aware that the Iraqi political platforms he encountered in 
Baghdad, Najaf, Arbil, and Sulaymaniyah may change before 
the preliminary meeting in Cairo. Iraqis now have a million 
political leaders who think we should listen to and obey 
them. We recognize that Amr Musa managed to sidestep the 
difficulties in his mission, such as impossible conditions 
requested by some religious factions and political 
parties-he declared that all should draw a decisive line 
between violence and reconciliation in Iraq. 
 
"The conspiracy theories of a few Iraqi government officials 
were dispelled when Musa met with the grand Ayatollah in 
Najaf, Kurdish leaders in the North, the Muslim Scholars' 
Association, the National Dialogue Council, Dr. Iyad Allawi 
and other political and independent Iraqi figures. He 
listened to all points of view but nevertheless, the Al-Sadr 
group boycotted their meetings with him under the demand 
that the League condemn violence in Iraq-but we are aware of 
their opportunism in the political process. 
 
"I am not defending the Arab League by saying that they 
condemned violence against innocent Iraqis several times. 
Indeed I have levied blame on the Arab League for their hazy 
attitude opposing military operations in the provinces that 
reject the occupation of Iraq. We praised Musa when he 
refused to reside in the Green Zone, rejected a proposed 
American security detail, and refused to land his plane in 
an American military base. 
The question is, since Musa visited Baghdad, Najaf, Arbil 
and Sulaymaniyah, why didn't he visit Fallujah, Ramadi, and 
Samara where he could find the key to unlock the problem." 
 
¶D. "Congratulations to All for the Permanent Constitution" 
(Al-Bayyan - affiliated with Ad-Dawa (led by Al-Ja'fari), no 
bias, published this front-page unattributed editorial) 
 
"Iraq has entered a new stage by ratifying the permanent 
constitution in a fair and democratic manner, witnessed by 
all. Iraqi citizens voted to express their opinions in all 
governorates, some voted yes and others no. Regardless of 
the outcome, the important thing is participation which 
underscores a belief in the political process. 
"Accordingly, the ratification was a successful 
demonstration of the democratic process. It illustrated 
Iraqi interest in the constitution, which preserves the 
rights and freedom of all sects and ensures the peaceful 
transfer of power through citizen involvement, the 
decentralization of power, and an end to discrimination. The 
day the constitution was ratified was a pleasant occasion 
for Iraqis and will remain so for coming generations because 
it represents a guarantee for the future. 
 
"This accomplishment by the Iraqi people was a result of 
continued and faithful efforts on behalf of the TNA, 
political parties, the Iraqi government, and the marje'ia 
[Shi'a religious authorities] who assured the broad 
participation of all Iraqis regardless of their sects or 
beliefs. 
 
"So, we would like to congratulate our people for this basic 
and blessed step, which raised the name of Iraq to the level 
of civilized countries which have constitutions that 
represent the wishes of the people. Congratulations to all 
who participated regardless of their votes, because it was 
important for the progress, prosperity and development of 
Iraq." 
 
¶E. "Curtail Your Happiness and Be Patient about Your 
Suffering" 
(Al-Mashriq- independent, anti-coalition, Sufi-leaning, 
published this front-page editorial by Dr. Hamid Abdullah) 
 
"There is no difference between Iraqis who voted for or 
against the constitution, the important thing is that Iraqis 
achieve victory toward violence. Iraqis must be victorious 
against factions trying to weaken and divide them by killing 
the smiles of their children, destroying schools, closing 
factories, transforming streets into venues for battle, and 
forcing citizens to hide in their houses to avoid security 
cordons, robbery, beheadings and assassinations. 
 
"We have lived through the whole stage of the political 
process and concluded that our conditions have only 
worsened. The Governing Council was formed and then worked 
under the supervision of the decent guy (Paul Bremer) but as 
soon as members received their shares from a divided Iraq 
they began to disclose sensitive issues and criticized 
Bremer who answered them quietly, explaining to them that he 
gave them their shares of Iraq's oil revenues and funds 
meant for the reconstruction of Iraq. Then he took his share 
and left Iraq! 
 
"Later the Iraqi Interim Government was formed but the 
bloodshed proliferated and violence increased. Then the 
elections were held and only some participated while others 
boycotted-some political blocs won and others lost, but life 
has deteriorated and Iraq has begun to regress. The elected 
Transitional National Government was formed but Iraq's slide 
backwards accelerated. Frankly, it looks to be a race--but 
one run backwards. 
 
"And now, the constitution has passed and those who voted 
for it won while those who voted against it lost. The Iraqi 
people have become more scared and anxious than even during 
the period that preceded the referendum. So, should we be 
pleased or pray to God to protect us from the success of the 
constitution? Following the other successes, bad luck and 
danger has befallen Iraqis more than if they had failed. 
 
"Iraqis who were pleased with their success should check 
their happiness. Iraqis who were disturbed by this success 
should be more patient-things aren't stable and nothing can 
continue forever. We pray to God to improve our conditions 
according to what he wants-not what we want." 
 
SATTERFIELD