05BAGHDAD4173
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Mon Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 004173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ BAGHDAD
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
REFERENDUM, ARAB LEAGUE; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, and the 
Arab League were the major editorial themes of the daily 
newspapers on October 10, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Arab League's Role in Supporting Iraq" (Al-Jaridah, 
10/10) 
¶B. "Will the Arab League Succeed in its Mission?" (Al- 
Ittihad, 10/10) 
¶C. "The Constitution: Between A Corrupted Past & Hopeful 
Present" (Al-Muatamar, 10/10) 
¶D. "Transitional Iraq, Permanent Constitution!" (Al-Mashriq, 
10/10) 
¶E. "Errant Plans" (Al-Bayyan, 10/10) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Arab League's Role in Supporting Iraq" 
(Al-Jaridah, affiliated with the Arab Socialist Movement, 
published this front-page unattributed editorial) 
 
"Iraq has been eager to attend Arab League conferences and 
meetings since the downfall of the former regime because 
Iraq is part of its Arab neighborhood. After the former 
dictatorial regime was toppled, the Arab League failed to 
adopt a positive stance toward Iraq's situation; the former 
regime damaged Iraq's relationship with the Arab League and 
for this reason the League should have played a positive 
role in the new Iraq. It should have called for all Arab 
countries to open embassies in Baghdad in spite of the 
deterioration of the security situation. 
 
"Concerning the military and security situation, many armed 
groups have infiltrated Iraq and destabilized the country. 
In addition, these groups have attempted to split the Iraqi 
people by conducting attacks that lead to the killing of 
dozens of innocent civilians. Despite all of these attacks, 
the Arab League has done nothing. Moreover, the Arab League 
should have called for Arab countries to cancel the debts 
Iraq owes them. We have noticed that most of non-Arab 
countries have canceled Iraq's debts while the country is 
still suffering under the burden of heavy Arab debt 
arrangements, which have weakened the Iraqi economy. Without 
a doubt, the negative attitudes of some Arab countries 
concerning security and the political and economic situation 
in Iraq have given Iraqis reservations about the Arab 
League's role in this country. As a result, Amr Musa's 
mission will not be easy under the current conditions. But, 
can the Arab League's delegation achieve national 
reconciliation in Iraq amongst some political, sectarian and 
religious groups? 
 
"We hope that Amr Musa will be successful in his mission to 
unite different Iraqi groups and we believe that it is a big 
mistake to marginalize any group from the political process. 
It is important for all Iraqi groups to participate in the 
rebuilding of the new Iraq and achieve peace. We think that 
harmony is the best way to make the political process 
successful. At the same time, we believe that Iraq must 
reinforce its relationships with the Arab League and the 
Arab world and for this reason we hope that the visit of the 
Arab League to Baghdad will help to reinforce Iraq's Arab 
and regional relationships. 
 
"We have heard that Amr Musa will work to achieve national 
reconciliation in Iraq. We do support this initiative but at 
the same time we think it necessary to reject sectarianism 
and ethnic power sharing. We must agree to have a national 
project in which all patriotic groups participate to 
accomplish national reconciliation. In any case, does Amr 
Musa have answers to these questions and will Iraqi 
political groups respond to his initiative?" 
 
¶B. "Will the Arab League Succeed in its Mission?" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK, published this page- 
three editorial by Abdul Hadi Mahdi) 
 
"The Arab League's delegation has arrived in Baghdad to hold 
talks and meetings with different Iraqi groups in order to 
achieve reconciliation through a national conference. This 
delegation also paves the way for the Secretary General of 
the Arab League, Amr Musa, to visit Iraq. 
 
"The Iraqi people are asking with whom we reconcile. The 
Arab League has not clarified or given any details on this 
issue. The Iraqi people have become divided into two 
factions concerning Amr Musa's visit. There are Iraqis who 
welcome this visit and at the same time there are Iraqis who 
reject it due to the Arab League's positions and statements 
on the new Iraq's situations. We all know that the Arab 
League has shown no encouragement or welcoming of Iraqi 
activities since the downfall of the former regime. If today 
the Arab League wants to play the role of mediator it must 
be neutral. 
"The current visit has come at a sensitive time where the 
Iraqi people are getting ready to vote on their new 
constitution. If this visit had come during the period of 
the drafting of the constitution, it would have been 
important and possible to achieve some goals. But, we were 
astonished when we heard Amr Musa say to the BBC Radio that 
Iraq is in danger of a civil war and the situation is very 
tense. He added that he cannot let Iraq suffer from division 
or disagreements and that there are groups and interests 
trying to tamper with the future of Iraq. This is exactly 
what Amr Musa said although he stated that he wants to 
achieve national reconciliation in Iraq, as if Iraqis were 
incapable of accomplishing such a thing. In fact, we would 
like to know which groups will participate in the 
reconciliation. Will those who slaughtered innocent Iraqis 
on a daily basis and destroyed Iraq's infrastructure 
participate in this reconciliation? What does the Arab 
League regard as terrorist attacks in Iraq? Has the Arab 
League officially condemned these operations-even once? 
Frankly, if the Iraqi people have not reached a state of 
civil war in spite of the difficult conditions following 
April 9, 2003 then how can they have a civil war now? 
 
"Perhaps Amr Musa knows he will fail in his mission in Iraq 
and for this reason he began making such statements to 
justify his failure and blame Iraqi groups. He certainly 
knows that such statements will make some Iraqi political 
groups unresponsive to his initiatives. We want to know why 
the Arab League remained silent in the past. Why hasn't it 
given any assistance to the Iraqi people? Does Amr Musa's 
statement threaten to ignite a civil war in Iraq?" 
 
¶C. "The Constitution: Between A Corrupted Past & Hopeful 
Present" 
(Al-Muatamar, affiliated with the Iraqi National Congress 
led by Ahmad Al-Chalabi, published this page-fifteen 
editorial by Muslim Al-Mi'mar) 
 
"After the downfall of the dictatorial regime, all types of 
oppression ended. Now, we have freedom of expression, 
religion and social freedom. Tyranny in Iraq is over and it 
will never return. Today is the time for the new Iraqi state 
and the new constitution. The new Iraqi constitution is 
considered to be the first constitution drafted by the hands 
of Iraqis, written by people who were elected, through 
ballot boxes, to the National Assembly. Thus, this 
constitution will guarantee equality and rights for all 
Iraqis. This constitution will ensure that there will be no 
more dictators because the people are the only ones with 
authority to decide the future of their country. 
 
"The current draft constitution, which will be put to vote 
on October 15, satisfies the majority of our ambitions. At 
the same time, we will not say that it is perfect because it 
has some shortcomings. However, we must call for solidarity 
and unity so that we can put an end to any attempts to harm 
this country. 
 
"The entire world has seen millions of Iraqis head to 
polling centers to participate in the January 30 elections. 
Now, it is time to work to decide the future of this country 
through our participation in the referendum on October 15. 
We hope that all the Iraqi people will vote for the 
constitution because it will build Iraq's future and 
guarantee justice for all Iraqis." 
 
¶D. "Transitional Iraq, Permanent Constitution!" 
(Al-Mashriq, independent, anti-coalition, published this 
page-three editorial by Dr. Hameed Abdullah) 
 
"Suddenly Iraq has become transitional in everything: 
regime, government, parliament, regulations, laws, police, 
army, and perhaps even its flag or borders. Talking about 
sovereignty and independence is now considered forbidden 
because it disturbs our new Iraqi politicians. I remember 
one of those politicians that recently came to Iraq [from 
exile] who was asked by a journalist, `How will you bring 
independence to Iraq following the ouster of Saddam's 
regime?' He answered, `We will return independence and 
sovereignty to Iraq even if we have to pay through 
bloodshed,' stressing, `Our lives will be the price paid for 
Iraq's independence". 
 
"This constitution, which has been the cause of 
disagreements, discussions, car bombs, infighting, and 
conflicts, is considered the only permanent document in a 
country of a transitional government and parliament. A 
country that has an unknown future; therefore if you 
(Iraqis) feel hungry eat the constitution, if you feel 
frightened keep the constitution at home because it will 
bring safety to you, if there is a shortage in gas and fuel 
the constitution will grant you heating in winter, if you 
miss your food rations just remember that you have a 
constitution that will protect your rights and fill your 
empty stomachs... 
 
"It is not so important that Iraq has security and stability 
as much as that we can tell the world that we have a 
constitution drafted with blood and ink. We are the model 
for our neighbors, who are exporting terror, or any country 
that exports gas and kerosene, or any country that exports 
dates and melons--after our country has become an empty 
desert!" 
 
¶E. "Errant Plans" 
(Al-Bayyan, affiliated with the Al-Dawa Islamic party led by 
Al-Ja'afari, published this front-page unattributed 
editorial) 
 
"In a step similar to their last one, the so-called 
`marginalized' [i.e. Sunnis] have again announced their 
rejection to the constitution. So through this step, Iraqis 
again understand that this group is insistent on abstaining 
from the political process. Months ago they told the 
political blocs that they, the marginalized, represent all 
boycotters, therefore they should participate in the 
drafting of the constitution [i.e. because they claim they 
were forced to boycott the previous elections and didn't do 
so willingly]. So the political blocs in the TNA have 
responded to that claim in order to achieve as much 
agreement on the constitution as possible. 
 
"A lot of discussions have occurred and many changes have 
been made to the draft resulting in near agreement on it, 
and yet this group [the marginalized] returned to raise new 
objections which led to a delay in the draft. It has become 
clear that this group will reject the draft or impose their 
unacceptable conditions on everyone else. As a result the 
TNA approved the draft for referendum. 
 
"This group [the marginalized] should have taken the 
opportunity to participate in the political process and play 
a positive role by urging people to vote. Or they should 
have demonstrated to the people their real reasons for 
rejecting the draft constitution. Moreover, we understand 
that this group is not representative of general Sunni 
opinion, because many Sunnis have expressed their desires to 
participate in the referendum; they consider this draft to 
be the only guarantee for all Iraqis' rights. 
 
"We believe that this rejection will not change the fact 
that all Iraqis will vote `yes' to the draft constitution. 
So this vote will be a slap in the face of terrorists by 
challenging them. 
We also believe that rejection by the boycotters will yield 
a similar destiny [as in the January elections]." 
 
KHALILZAD