05BAGHDAD4026
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - September 28, 2005
Thu Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - September 28, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion of poor security, sectarian division, 
and corruption were the major editorial themes of Iraqi, 
Arabic language websites on September 28, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "The Government Prepares and Zarqawi Executes" (Sawt Al- 
  Iraq, 9/28) 
¶B. "Arab Constitutions and the Foundation of Sectarianism" 
(Modern Discussion, 9/28) 
¶C. "A Citizen's Cry: Who Set Them Free?" (Iraq of Tomorrow, 
9/28) 
¶D. "Against Division" (Independent Iraqi News Agency, 9/28) 
 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Government Prepares and Zarqawi Executes" 
(Editorial by "The Son of Iraq" - Sawt Al-Iraq - 
http://www.sotaliraq.com/articles-iraq/nieuws .php?id=16265 ) 
 
"The latest achievement of the elected government that 
serves the Iraqi people was its decision to search all 
houses, shops, and factories in Baghdad in pursuit of 
unauthorized weapons. 
 
"The government has started this campaign in some districts, 
confiscating personal weapons used to protect life and 
property despite the government's failure to provide 
security for the people and for itself. The government says 
there is no need for such weapons because the security 
situation in Iraq is better than Sweden or Dubai and, 
therefore, people have no need for weapons; after all, 
criminals, abductors, terrorists, and slaughterers are 
nowhere to be found in the country. 
 
"The Minister of Interior says the campaign will continue 
and Iraqis should not attempt to hide their weapons because 
search operations will be carried out using highly 
technological equipment-a very nice speech by a minister who 
is protected by Iraqi and foreign armies that cost the state 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, and who is moving around 
in a $160,000 armored vehicle. This leads us to the 
question: How will citizens protect themselves given the 
inability of the government to defend them? Who will guard 
shops and factories if guards are stripped of their weapons? 
Should Iraqis go back to using daggers and clubs in the face 
of machine guns and car bombs that are used by terrorists, 
militias, and Iraqi policemen's kidnapping gangs? 
 
"What has the government done about weapons owned by 
militias and terrorist organizations? Can its frightened 
forces enter cities like Latifiya, Ramadi, Qaim, Dora, and 
others to confiscate weapons there? Or is this government 
similar to the previous regime that only had authority over 
harmless citizens? 
 
"Protection for the Prime Minister costs $300,000 per month, 
while other government protection services drain billions of 
dollars each year that should have gone to reconstruction 
projects. And they all use unauthorized weapons, so how 
could the Prime Minister, the Interior Minister, and the 
whole weak government dare attempt to confiscate one piece 
of weaponry from a foreign bodyguard? Can an Iraqi afford 
$300,000 a month protection to secure his life and that of 
his family? Are militias' weapons authorized? Are 
terrorists' weapons authorized? Are Sadr's movement's 
weapons authorized? And can an ordinary Iraqi enter the 
heavily fortified Ministry of Interior to obtain a license 
for a weapon to protect his family and property? 
 
"To the Iraqi government, I would like to say that the blood 
of Iraqis killed by terrorists is on your hands; the money 
stolen from Iraq is your sin; and the mourning of Iraqi 
women is your guilt. You have proven worse than the ousted 
regime. Today we witness governments with no wisdom, police 
with no conscience, and a price on the heads of Iraqis that 
is cheaper than the price of a kilogram of meat." 
 
¶B. "Arab Constitutions and the Foundation of Sectarianism" 
(Editorial by Mohammed Al-Hanafi - Modern Discussion - 
http://www.rezgar.com/debat/show.art.asp?aid= 46625 ) 
 
"The talk these days is about the Iraqi constitution and the 
legitimization of sectarianism in Iraq, which should be 
confronted by Iraqis, Arabs, and humanity to overcome 
obstacles in the path of development. Nations should be 
brought together based on international law and human rights 
conventions. 
 
"Iraqis are not the only ones threatened by a constitution 
that legitimizes sectarianism; all Arabs face the same 
threat, especially when a capitalist world seeks to incite 
sectarian and ethnic unrest and tear apart the unity of Arab 
countries. What is happening in Iraq is quite obvious; it 
can be achieved in any country where the introduction of 
capitalism justifies the imposition of economic, political, 
and military dominance. It is quite easy to understand why 
emphasizing sectarianism in constitutions has become a main 
interest of capitalist regimes: it guarantees uncontested 
control over the world's wealth in the third millennium. 
 
"So will Arabs unite with Iraq as it faces this sectarian 
constitution? And will they take notice of the exploitation 
of Islam in Arab constitutions-constitutions that permit the 
formation of sectarian-based political parties? 
 
"What is taking place in Iraq threatens all Arabs. The 
threat of sectarian unrest extends throughout the Arab 
homeland, from East to West, and from the Gulf region to the 
Atlantic Ocean." 
 
¶C. "A Citizen's Cry: Who Set Them Free?" 
(Editorial by Hamza Al Shemkhi - Iraq of Tomorrow - 
http://www.iraqoftomorrow.org/viewarticle.php ?id=32785 ) 
 
"An Iraqi citizen called Al Iraqiya television on September 
12, 2005 and demanded the channel inform the Iraqi 
government and the Minister of Interior of the violations in 
Hilla's security organizations. 
 
"He said a number of terrorists and criminals were displayed 
on an Al Iraqiya television program confessing to crimes, 
terrorism, and sabotage operations against the Iraqi people. 
Days after they had been displayed on television, they were 
released without punishment. Citizens were curious about 
this incident, as they were not given an explanation for the 
detainees' release. Who is behind that decision that turned 
terrorists into innocent civilians? 
 
"The people of Hilla discovered that money played a role in 
freeing those killers; bribes were paid to corrupt employees 
working in the security and military organizations- and even 
the ministries. 
 
"Incidentally, the citizen who called the channel mentioned 
on air the names of the terrorists who were released; he 
mentioned the names of their cities and their residences. 
Isn't it a crime against Iraq and Iraqis to set free those 
who were involved in killing, kidnapping, and destroying the 
country? 
 
"We need an immediate response to this question. Who is 
responsible for setting those killers free? Have terrorists 
turned into innocent civilians?" 
 
¶D. "Against Division" 
(Editorial by Ja'afar Mohammed Ahmed - Independent Iraqi 
News Agency - http://www.normal.iraq- 
ina.com/showarticles.php?id=1415 ) 
 
"Saudi Foreign Minister Saud Al Faisal's warnings of Iraq's 
dissolution and his accusation that America's occupation is 
deepening sectarian divisions were based on an in-depth 
study of Iraq's reality under American occupation, which 
follows the policy of `divide and rule.' 
 
"What is presently taking place in Iraq is the prologue to 
division, an emphasis on sectarian division that will 
undermine its Arab nature and unity. This is a concern for 
all, especially neighboring countries. The December election 
will not succeed in unifying Iraq. The possible division of 
Iraq into a Kurdish state in the north, a Sunni state in the 
center, and a Shiite state in the south will drag other 
countries in the region into conflict, which will create a 
very dangerous situation and dangerous consequences. 
 
"France hinted that Iraq might slip onto the verge of 
division. And French Foreign Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy 
announced that France wishes to hold an international 
conference on Iraq to prevent its division. 
"Despite all the explosions, sectarian conflict, and 
fighting in Iraq, and while the occupation moves here and 
there, striking, torturing, and supporting and oppressing 
whomever it chooses, the Arab and Islamic world does not 
take action. 
 
"Iraq needs a strong stance to save it from this hell and to 
liberate it from the occupation that the entire world has 
rejected. Iraq needs an Arab stance to support and protect 
it from the risk of division; it needs support to 
reestablish its national unity and clear out the occupation 
that is causing the tension." 
 
KHALILZAD