05BAGHDAD5072
AMBASSADOR KHALILZAD'S FIRST
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 005072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I, USUN, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PGOV PNAT PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  AMBASSADOR KHALILZAD'S FIRST 
MEETING WITH MINISTER OF MUNICIPALITIES AND 
PUBLIC WORKS 
 
¶1. (U) Action request, para seven. 
 
¶2. (U) BEGIN SUMMARY. Ambassador Khalilzad and IRMO 
Director Speckhard met with Minister Nasreen Berwari, 
Iraq Minister of Ministry of Municipalities and Public 
Works (MMPW), on December 10 to discuss several 
substantive issues.  Ms. Berwari suggested that the USG 
should help Iraq to obtain infrastructure project 
financing from Japan and the World Bank.  Ms. Berwari 
briefly talked about constitutional concerns.  Given 
the devolution of power to the provinces, she said the 
MMPW should focus on strategy and the provincial 
governments on project implementation.  She also 
requested USG support for her application for a 
position within the UNDP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (U) Minister Berwari, the head of the Ministry of 
Municipalities and Public Works (MMPW) since 2003, said 
Iraq has tremendous unmet needs for infrastructure 
reconstruction and institution capacity building.  USG 
funds will not be enough to address all of these needs, 
so the MMPW is pursuing Government of Japan and World 
Bank financing.  Ms. Berwari said that sound master 
plans and feasibility studies are key to obtaining 
other donor financing and requested additional USG 
support to prepare such documents. (Comment. The USG is 
preparing three standard design packages for water 
treatment plants for the MMPW that can easily be 
modified for other projects not financed by the USG. 
By using these standard designs, the MMPW will be 
better positioned to seek international donor financing 
for new projects or to complete on-going projects. End 
Comment.) 
 
¶4. (U) The Minister also discussed the role of the 
governorates in project implementation under the new 
constitution.  Given the devolution of authority to the 
provinces, Ms. Berwari said the MMPW should focus on 
policy and strategic planning and the governorates on 
project implementation and follow-up.  She expressed 
concern about decentralization and highlighted the need 
for the Provincial Reconstruction Teams to coordinate 
across levels of government to ensure success. 
 
¶5. (U) The Minister raised two areas of concern with 
respect to the new constitution: provisions affecting 
women's rights, especially as they relate to judicial 
proceedings, and provisions related to federalism.  She 
asserted that the Kurds want to retain the provisions 
on federalism, but hope to revert to the provisions on 
judicial proceedings that were in effect before the new 
constitution was adopted by referendum on October 15, 
¶2005. 
 
¶6. (U) The Minister discussed her recent application to 
the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) for the 
position of Director of the Regional Bureau for Arab 
States.  (The Bureau is the headquarters for UNDP 
offices in 17 countries that provide development 
assistance in the Arab region.)  She is requesting USG 
support for her application. (Comment.  Ambassador 
Khalilzad believes that Ms. Berwari is a good candidate 
for the position, iven he prior experience with the 
UN Human Settlements Program, the UN Office of the 
Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq, and the Iraq Relief 
Coordination Unit of the UN Department of Humanitarian 
Affairs, as well as her experience as Minister of MMPW 
and her commitment to reform.  Ms. Berwari, however, 
has been the subject of a recent investigation by the 
MMPW Inspector General, who claims that she directed 
Ministry contracts to a specific company.  Ms. Berwari 
asserts that she has evidence to prove her innocence 
and that the charges are politically motivated.  Given 
that the case is in the early stages, we cannot make a 
final assessment at this time.  End comment.) 
 
¶7. (U) Action Request.  Ambassador requests Washington 
consider Ms. Berwari's request for support in her 
candidacy, taking into consideration the ongoing 
investigation. 
 
Khalilzad