06BAGHDAD59
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Mon Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials included the 
recent terrorist attacks in Ramadi and Karbala, economic 
crises, government formation, and the recent agreement 
between the PUK and KDP. 
 
In its front-page editorial entitled "The Announcement of 
Unity Is a Great Event," KDP-affiliated At-Taakhi lauds the 
agreement between the KDP and PUK, which unites the two 
Kurdish administrations in the Kurdistan region. 
Independent As-Sabah Al-Jadeed published a front-page 
editorial by editor-in-chief Ismael Zayyer highlighting 
current political negotiations, recent terrorist attacks, 
and the preparations for forming the new government. 
 
Other independent papers focused on the country's political 
and economic obstacles, with Az-Zaman's back page column 
discussing the political process since the downfall of the 
former regime, and Al-Mashriq's front-page editorial 
discussing the current fuel crisis. The author considers the 
observation that Iraq's situation deteriorates following 
each political achievement. Independent Al-Mada also assumes 
a somber tone in its third-page column entitled "Successive 
Crises and Tyrannical Decisions," by Tarek Al-Jiburi, who 
bemoans the relative dearth of fuel, electricity, employment 
and potable water in Iraq. The author suggests that the 
Iraqi government has intentionally harmed Iraqi citizens by 
remaining silent since April 9th, 2003.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Playing with Blood" (Dar As-Salam, 1/8) 
¶B. "The People Know" (Al-Adala, 1/8) 
¶C. "Cost" (As-Sabah, 1/8) 
¶D. "For the Sake of Ending Terrorism" (Al-Ittihad, 1/8) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Playing with Blood" 
(Dar As-Salam, affiliated with the Iraqi Islamic Party, 
published a front-page unattributed editorial about the 
recent terrorist attacks in Karbala and Ramadi. The 
editorial reads in part) 
 
"We were surprised to hear some groups accuse specific 
political parties of being behind the criminal events that 
took place in Karbala and Ramadi. These accusations widen 
the divisions among Iraqis and make it difficult to know who 
benefited from those crimes. At the same time, there are 
demands that the government's security forces intensify 
their operations without restriction. It seems that the 
accusations are attempts to win political benefit at the 
expense of innocent blood. Iraqis have the right to know why 
these accusations were associated with the current political 
crisis that began after the election fraud was revealed. 
This is merely playing with fire and blood, and it resembles 
an adventure more than a political process." 
 
¶B. "The People Know" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published a third-page 
editorial by Ali Khalif about Iraq's political scene. The 
editorial reads in part) 
 
"We are not surprised to see some groups release statements 
that provoke terror. We noticed that some political figures 
are two-faced, but the Iraqi people discovered these types 
of politicians before the election. For this reason the 
overwhelming majority of Iraqis voted for their real 
representatives. The political scene after the election 
shows that there are groups in Iraq that do not believe in 
democracy or ballot boxes. In any case, the determination of 
Iraqis will be stronger than any other tyrant because our 
people know what they want and they expressed this wish 
during the great Election Day." 
 
¶C. "Cost" 
(As-Sabah, Iraqi Media Network, government financed, 
published a front-page editorial by editor in chief Muhammad 
Abdul Jabbar about Iraq's economic situation. The editorial 
reads in part) 
 
"The needs of the people cannot be satisfied by donations. 
In Iraq, there are three kinds of citizens: government 
employees, private sector employees, and the unemployed. 
Salaries of government employees must be based on the real 
cost of living in the country. On the other hand, the 
unemployed have no solution for their problem. Recently, the 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs began presenting 
financial donations to the unemployed. But these donations 
cannot cover the costs of the basic standards of living. If 
we want to find solutions to the salary problems of 
government employees and to the problem of the unemployed, 
we first have to calculate the real costs of a good life." 
 
¶D. "For the Sake of Ending Terrorism" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK, published a front-page 
editorial by editor in chief Faryad Rawanduzi about the 
recent terrorist attacks in Iraq. The editorial reads in 
part) 
 
"Terrorists have increased their crimes against the Iraqi 
people. This time they attacked funerals, shrines, and 
mosques. Theses terrorist operations come after the 
terrorists realized that the political process in Iraq is 
progressing. These operations represent a proclaimed battle 
against the Iraqi people and their dreams to establish a 
democratic, federal country. Hence, the political 
participation of all Iraqi sects and groups can bring an end 
to terrorism in Iraq. Terrorism has become a principal 
obstacle facing the progress of this country. For this 
reason, we have to save Iraq, the region, and the entire 
world from the evils of terrorism and terrorists." 
 
KHALILZAD