07BAGHDAD561
IRAQI PRESIDENCY STATEMENT ON KEY PRIORITIES
Sat Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1067
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0561/01 0481916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171916Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9698
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000561 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQI PRESIDENCY STATEMENT ON KEY PRIORITIES 
 
¶1.  The following statement was posted on the Iraqi 
Presidency's website ( www.iraqipresidency.net ), dated 
February 15 (posted February 16), following a meeting between 
the three-member Presidency Council and Prime Minister 
Al-Maliki.  The statement lists priority issues on which 
senior GoI officials seek to cooperate, some of which have 
been associated with the concept of a "moderate front" of 
cooperation among Iraq's top leaders.  The issues include 
security, economic legislation, DeBa'athification, 
constitutional review, strengthening the judiciary, and 
easing the plight of Iraqi refugees. 
 
¶2.  BEGIN TEXT (INFORMAL EMBASSY TRANSLATION): 
 
Statement of the Presidency Council 
 
In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful. 
 
A meeting was held by the Presidency Council headed by His 
Excellency President Jalal Al-Talabani and attended by the 
Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki.  The meeting was attended by 
the two Vice Presidents, Mr. Adel Abdul Mahdi and Mr. Tariq 
Al Hashimi to discuss the political and security situations, 
services, the future of the political process, plans for 
national reconciliation, and progress of the constitutional 
process.  In-depth discussions of all political issues 
confronting the country were held; the following matters were 
especially emphasized: 
 
1 -- The importance of supporting the security plan (named) 
"Law Enforcement" and restoring the prestige of the State, 
restoring order, combating terrorism whatever its source, as 
well as sabotage and illegal activities in a way that allows 
the restoration of security and calm and confidence to the 
citizens and allows them to pursue normal life, preventing 
murder and forced immigration, and returning the displaced to 
their homes in addition to the return of properties, mosques, 
Al-Hussainiyats (Shia religious community centers) and 
interests to their owners.  The meeting praised the role of 
our brave Armed Forces and its sacrifices and appealed to 
strictly adhere to professionalism and neutrality and respect 
for human rights, while stressing the importance of the 
solidarity of the Iraqi people and political forces, standing 
(together) in one line against the enemies of the country and 
the homeland. 
 
2 -- Calling on the Policy Council for National Security to 
convene in the coming days to discuss sensitive and basic 
matters the country is facing. 
 
3 -- Working with the Council of Representatives (CoR) on 
amendments and ministerial reforms supporting the National 
Unity Government of PM Al-Maliki and improving the 
performance of the government in serving citizens. 
 
4 -- Completing necessary legislation and issuing needed 
administrative instructions to activate the principal laws 
for launching economic renaissance, particularly laws on 
investment, oil, and gas to guarantee a just sharing of 
resources. 
 
5 -- To proceed with the Plan of National Reconciliation and 
review of the DeBa'athification Law and decisions taken by 
the (DeBa'athification) Commission in a way that guarantees 
justice, objectivity and transparency and achieves the 
principles of accountability and the necessary reconciliation 
to deal with the legacy of the past and look forward to a 
future that achieves national unity and ends all forms of 
disunity and division among citizens. 
 
6 -- To cooperate with the Iraqi CoR to amend the 
constitution in a way that strengthens the principle of 
national agreement and strengthens constitutional and 
democratic institutions in the country. 
 
7 -- To deal with other pending constitutional issues such as 
the requirements of article 140, the governorates and their 
borders, the election of provincial councils, the regions, 
the flag, the national anthem, and the Federal Council in a 
way that realizes the stability of the political system in 
the country in order for it to go forward with the tasks of 
construction and building, ending the age of backwardness, 
tyranny and despotism. 
 
8 -- To strengthen the role of the judiciary and human 
rights, and strive to liquidate the vestiges of the former 
period by releasing all those proven innocent while enhancing 
the ethics of amnesty without any flexibility in dealing with 
those violating law and order. 
 
9 -- To address the worsening situation of Iraqi refugees, 
especially in neighboring countries, and to adopt urgent 
policies to fulfill their urgent humanitarian needs and to 
 
BAGHDAD 00000561  002 OF 002 
 
 
prepare the objective circumstances to facilitate their 
return to Iraq as soon as possible. 
 
10 -- The meeting sought to set timelines and timed programs 
related to the aforementioned paragraphs in a way that 
guarantees continuity of the momentum with which the security 
plan "Law Enforcement" began.  The above-mentioned leaders 
committed to continue working within the framework of their 
executive functions and constitutional responsibilities as 
political leaders, in cooperation with legislative and 
judicial authorities and the various political forces and 
figures. 
 
Baghdad -- February 15, 2007 
 
END TEXT OF STATEMENT. 
 
KHALILZAD