07BAGHDAD1143
Embassy-sponsored "Women for a Unified Iraq" Luncheon Draws
Mon Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1917
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1143 0921447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021447Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0515
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 001143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KWMN SCUL IZ
SUBJECT: Embassy-sponsored "Women for a Unified Iraq" Luncheon Draws 
Over 100 Activists 
 
1.(U) SUMMARY: On March 25, the US and UK Embassies co-hosted a 
luncheon to honor International Women's Day (March 8) and 
International Women's History Month (March).  Over 100 Iraqi 
political and civil society leaders, both male and female, attended 
the luncheon, which included speeches by Ambassador Khalilzad, UK 
DCM Matthew Lodge, and Minister of State for Women's Affairs Fatin 
Abd al-Rahman.  USAID Director Bambi Arellano announced a PAS small 
grant competition emphasizing projects focusing on educational and 
economic development opportunities for women and children. 
Attendees included parliamentarians, ministers, NGO leaders, local 
government representatives and professional civil service employees. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
Reactions 
---------- 
 
(U) MAJ Angham Ahmed, the highest ranking woman in the Iraqi 
military said the event was the first time she was able to reach out 
to parliamentarians and other senior Iraqi officials.  MAJ Angham, 
in full military uniform, said that she was amazed by how interested 
the ministers and CoR members were in her experiences and noted that 
this hadn't been the case in the past.  She left the event with 
meetings set up the following week to further discuss her ideas 
about recruitment of women and equal access to educational and 
training opportunities in the military. 
 
(U) Women's rights activist and Al-Amal NGO leader Hanaa Edwar said 
that the NGO community is well aware that the international funding 
for NGOs is "drying up."  She thanked the Embassy for holding this 
event, noting, "while the funds may be diminishing, it's good to see 
that your support is not!"  She said that the most positive aspect 
of the gathering was the opportunity for NGOs to mix with government 
officials, since "many government officials are still skeptical and 
suspicious of NGOs."  Edwar appealed for the international community 
to host more such events, to continue to build trust between civil 
society and government and to give NGOs important advocacy 
opportunities. 
 
(U) Salma Jabbo, head of the Widows Training and Rehabilitation 
Center, said that the small grants program was especially helpful to 
smaller groups and those who work on vocational training.  "These 
are programs that the international community just isn't funding now 
- they focus on training, but not on developing vocations," she 
said.  She acknowledged that the grants were small and that she 
would still need to seek additional funding even if awarded one, but 
said that her organization is small enough that $25,000 could keep 
it operating for three months, the length of time needed to complete 
a full training course. 
 
(U) Although post initially debated about the decision to include 
both female and male participants, Ministry of Interior police 
officer Saad Mean, formerly of the MOI IG office, was glad that men 
were included on the guest list.  He said, "there is still much to 
do, but these kinds of events will help to build social and cultural 
support for increased interaction between men and women who share 
the same goal: improving the situation for Iraqi women." 
 
(U) All participants were encouraged to visit a table set up by 
Cultural Affairs where English and Arabic publications were 
displayed and distributed.  Most attendees left with an armload of 
USG books, on topics from civic education to business English.  One 
government official told poloff that he would take the books to his 
daughter, a high school student, to improve her English.  Another 
NGO leader, who looked to have at least two copies of each 
publication, said that she would display them in the reception area 
and staff room of her organization, and would look over the 
materials to see what she could incorporate into her trainings.