07BAGHDAD2724
IRAQ'S RAILROAD
Thu Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1538
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2724 2280217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160217Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2809
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002724 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAIR PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  IRAQ'S RAILROAD 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: According to a July 25 report by the United States Army 
Corp of Engineers (USACE), the Iraqi Republic Railway (IRR) is 
assessed as functional and currently transports grain, petroleum and 
refined oil products in southern Iraq, cargo from Syria, excluding 
Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) and a limited passenger service from Baghdad to 
Hilla. Unfortunately, apart from these limited and local uses, the 
IRR remains severely underutilized due to significant security 
threats to infrastructure and employees.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------- 
Iraqi Republic Railway 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. The Iraqi Republic Railway (IRR) system, comprising of five 
principal routes and 111 railway stations, is one of the most 
extensive in the region. It consists of approximately 2,400 
kilometers of track.  Nearly all of Iraq's major cities lie on or 
near the rail network, and a number of important mines and 
industrial centers are also served by the railway. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Problems Plaguing all Main Routes 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Sabotage and looting efforts against trains; interdiction of 
military, commercial and humanitarian supplies; Improvised Explosive 
Device (IED) attacks against rail lines and infrastructure; and 
murder and intimidation of railroad workers and their families 
thwart maximum utilization and further development of the IRR. 
 
¶4. A key function of the northern route is movement of Heavy Fuel 
Oil (HFO) from the Bayji Refinery north into Syria with a final 
destination in Turkey. Threats against IRR personnel and their 
families; however, have halted rail shipments for at least three 
consecutive months already this year.  Other northern route rail 
operations are functioning, moving mostly consumer goods.  For 
example, the Mosul to Rabiyah lines are transporting cargo from 
Syria. 
 
¶5. Along the southern route, an important commodity moved is grain. 
Oil from the southern provinces is transported to the port of Umm 
Qasr. Petroleum products are also moved along this route from the 
Doura Refinery to the Mussayib Power Plant and other destinations. 
The southern route faces real security threats as evidenced by 
several IED attacks this year in February and again in July. The 
attack damaged the Latifiya Bridge, near Iskandariya. The bridge has 
since been repaired, but to substandard conditions, prohibiting 
trains from operating at normal speeds when traversing the bridge. 
 
¶6. The western route faces several impediments.  Due to track damage 
in the Ramadi and Falluja areas, service from Baghdad to Haqlaniya 
is non-existent.  The IRR has solicited bids to engage contractors 
to repair the tracks, but an award has yet to happen.  Additionally, 
transit by rail west from Baghdad requires using the Baghdad to 
Bayji leg and then the Bayji- Haqlaniya- Al Qaim legs.  Continuity 
has been interrupted by blockages at Samarra and Barwanna. 
Currently, we understand that trains are not permitted to pass over 
the bridge at Samarra because of threats to a dam sharing the same 
route over which a ighway and rail line are carried. 
 
--------------------------- 
Overcoming Railway Problems 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. Efforts to establish sufficient security are underway by the 
Iraqi Army (IA) and other security forces.  A microwave 
communications system is being constructed for the IRR that will be 
relatively impervious to insurgent activity.  Under the current 
railroad signaling system, copper wires have been stripped and radio 
and electronic signal equipment have been stolen, often times 
rendering the system useless. 
 
¶9. The USG has undertaken 97 railroad projects valued at nearly $35 
million.  Ninety-six of the projects have been completed leaving 1 
currently in progress.  Al Muthanna province has received the 
largest amount of that funding, slightly more than $10 million.  The 
desert, western province of Al Anbar; however, has received the 
greatest number of projects in any given province - 25. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. The railway has traditionally been an integral component of the 
transportation infrastructure in Iraq.  The IRR, if fully 
functional, would help to create economic stability through 
passenger and freight movement.  As the young Government of Iraq 
(GOI) endeavors towards a secure and stable country, the IRR's 
potential hinges on the security of railroad personnel and 
elimination of direct attacks on railroad infrastructure.