08BAGHDAD3051
BAGHDAD REQUESTS PARTICIPATION IN THE RHYTHM ROAD AMERICAN
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #3051/01 2661427
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221427Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9543
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO ECA/PE/C/CU, NEA/PPD, NEA/I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL IZ
SUBJECT:  BAGHDAD REQUESTS PARTICIPATION IN THE RHYTHM ROAD AMERICAN 
MUSIC ABROAD PROGRAM'S NEW SEASON 
 
REF: State 090853 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Baghdad requests participation in the Rhythm Road 
American Music Abroad Program during the winter of 2009, preferably 
at the end of February.  Post would like to host a Jazz quartet, for 
a total of six programming days. Our audience will consist of 
important mission contacts, including some our strongest NGO 
partners both in Baghdad and in the provinces who have limited 
access to live American cultural performances. End summary. 
 
PROGRAM OVERVIEW 
 
¶2. (U) Post proposes a six-day program, not counting travel days, 
featuring the group on tour both performing and conducting 
educational workshops in a variety of venues. Day 1 will start with 
a presentation at the University of Baghdad's School of Music to 
illustrate different jazz styles to the students. Later that day, 
the group will link up with the Tawasin Cultural Assembly to trade 
ideas in a fusion working session combining jazz with traditional 
Iraqi music. On Day 2, the group will fly to Najaf Province where 
they will give a workshop to the students of Kufa University 
followed by a concert performance in the city of Najaf later that 
day. On Day 3, the group will fly to Anbar Province for a workshop 
demonstration and performance at a local middle or high school and 
then return to Baghdad that same day. On Day 4 the group will 
co-present, with the Tawasin Assembly, a workshop and performance 
for disabled youth connected with the Iraq Handicapped Society. The 
rest of the day and all of Day 5 will be a practice session with the 
Tawasin Assembly preparing for the final large scale public concert, 
which will be held on Day 6 at the Al-Rasheed Hotel in the 
International Zone in Baghdad. Post's preferred week for this 
schedule would be beginning on Monday, February 23rd but we can push 
it forward to the first week of March, if necessary. 
 
- 
PUBLIC DIPLOMACY THROUGH CULTURAL EXCHANGE 
- 
¶3. (U) The American-Iraq relationship is steadily transforming into 
a more normal bilateral relationship based upon cultural, economic 
and political ties. Cultural exchange, including bringing American 
performers to Iraq, is a key component of this transformation.  Post 
has not taken advantage of the Rhythm Road program previously. 
However, with a progressively more stable security environment, we 
believe this is the right time to bring American performers to 
Baghdad and the provinces to showcase American culture. A direct 
exposure to American arts is critical to creating mutual 
understanding between the citizens of the United States and Iraq. 
 
- 
INVOLVING YOUNG AND DISABLED PEOPLE 
- 
¶4. (U) Iraq has two generations of youth whose major understanding 
of life is through the lens of violence and war. The physical and 
psychological legacy of this history is evident in many of the young 
people here. There is an opportunity for the Embassy to provide an 
outlet for mending bodies and minds through music. We intend to host 
performances and workshops with college level as well as younger 
students. We also are directing attention to those young people who 
are disabled and who have limited options in encountering 
interactive cultural programming and meeting Americans. 
 
- 
INVOLVING LOCAL MUSICIANS 
- 
¶5. (U) Due to Iraq's political isolation during much of the last 
thirty years, intellectual, educational and cultural exchanges have 
been severely limited. Iraq's unique musical traditions have not 
been widely exposed to Western audiences and vice versa. With a new 
openness in cultural expression occurring in the country, there is a 
desire from Iraqi performers to seek out new forms of musical 
identity and the blending of jazz and traditional music is a 
potential realization towards this ideal. Tawasin Cultural Assembly 
is one of Baghdad's premier arts organizations and the Assembly's 
musicians would be essential agents in helping the Embassy traverse 
boundaries to more dynamically interact with local audiences. 
 
- 
ITINERARY 
- 
¶6. (U) The proposed itinerary follows: 
 
-- Sunday, February 22: Quartet arrives Baghdad. 
 
-- Monday February 23: Presentation to students at the University of 
Baghdad followed by a private working session with the Tawasin 
Cultural Assembly. 
 
-- Tuesday, February 24: Flight to Najaf province and presentation 
 
to students at University of Kufa followed by a performance in 
Najaf. 
 
-- Wednesday, February 25: Flight to Anbar province and performance 
at local school. Flight to Erbil province. 
 
-- Thursday, February 26: Workshop and performance for students held 
in conjunction with Kurdish musical faculty in Erbil or the American 
University Iraq-Salmaniya. 
 
-- Friday, February 27: Return to Baghdad to host workshop and 
performance with Tawasin Cultural Assembly for disabled children 
followed by private working session and practice with Tawasin 
members. 
 
-- Saturday, February 28: General performance with Tawasin Cultural 
Assembly at the Al-Rasheed Hotel in Baghdad. 
 
-- Sunday, March 1: Quartet leaves Baghdad for next post. 
 
- 
POST SUPPORT 
- 
¶7. (U) Post is prepared to generate the audience, build partnerships 
with local co-hosting organizations, provide translation, lodging, 
meals, security, in-country transportation and address all technical 
aspects associated with this program. For planning purposes, post 
will need a list of musicians, baggage including 
instruments/equipment, with weights as soon as it is available. 
 
 
CROCKER