08BAGHDAD572
VP ADEL RETURNS PROVINCIAL POWERS LAW TO COR:
Wed Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO8733
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0572 0581449
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271449Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5936
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000572 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: VP ADEL RETURNS PROVINCIAL POWERS LAW TO COR: 
LETTER AND PRESS STATEMENT 
 
¶1.  On February 26, Vice President Adel Abdel Mehdi, acting 
in his capacity as a member of the GOI Presidency Council 
empowered to ratify or reject legislation passed by Iraq's 
Council of Representatives (CoR) within a prescribed period 
of review, formally notified the CoR Secretariat in writing 
of his objection on constitutional grounds to the draft 
Provincial Powers law, one of the three legislative items 
passed by the CoR on February 13 as part of an omnibus 
package.  We will analyze possible ramifications of this 
development and suggest an appropriate USG response septel. 
This cable contains unofficial translations of the operative 
portions of Adel's objection letter and the CoR Secretariat's 
press statement regarding this development. 
 
¶2. Begin unofficial translation of Adel's objection letter: 
 
We would like to inform you of our objection to the draft 
Provincial Powers Law which has been passed in the parliament 
session number 54 on February 13, 2008, the second 
legislative chapter/second legislative year/first election 
term, and pursuant to the powers authorized under the 
permanent constitution/article 138/fifth.  Our objection is 
based on our belief that many of its articles are either 
ambiguous, need to be clarified, or might be in violation of 
constitutional provisions which give wide powers to the 
provinces to build the federal and decentralized system, yet, 
on the contrary, the draft law may be heading towards 
increased central government authority in violation of the 
constitution. 
 
This law violates most of the articles mentioned in the 
fourth section of the constitution, especially the two 
articles 114 and 115, and violates article 122 regarding the 
broad administrative and financial authorities that the 
provincial government council is not being subjected to the 
control or supervision of any ministry or any ministerial 
related entity and has an independent financial budget.  It 
also did not include details; even referring to the many 
articles of the constitution which gave the provinces 
specific rights.  Reviewing the constitution articles 105, 
106, 110, 112, 113 and others shall bring out the fact of the 
matter. 
 
The legal experts in our office are currently studying all 
the alternative proposals and details and shall, within a few 
days, submit a complete document of the articles objected to, 
as well as suggestions of required amendments. 
 
Our position on the law does not deny many of the positive 
issues contained therein.  We particularly support what the 
parliament had endorsed regarding provincial council 
elections to take place by the beginning of October. 
 
Therefore, we would like to inform the CoR Presidency of our 
objection.  Note that this law will not go into effect until 
after the provincial elections, as the parliament is enjoying 
a legislative holiday and the preservation of the election 
date will allow the responsible bodies to continue its work 
to abide the stated deadlines, which would not pose any 
obstruction to the schedule agreed upon. 
 
End unofficial translation of Adel's letter. 
 
¶3. Begin unofficial translation of CoR Secretariat Press 
Statement: 
 
On February 17, the CoR Secretariat sent to the Presidency 
Council the following draft laws that had been passed by the 
CoR: the 2008 GOI Budget, the General Amnesty Law, and the 
Provincial Powers Law. 
 
The Presidency Council has ratified the 2008 GOI Budget and 
the General Amnesty Law and has sent the items to the 
Ministry of Justice to be published in the official GOI 
Gazette.  However, the Council did not reach consensus 
regarding the draft Provincial Powers Law.  A formal 
objection letter was presented pursuant to Article 138 of the 
Constitution and the draft law was returned to the CoR for 
constitutional review of the provisions cited in the 
objection letter. 
 
However, the Presidency Council unanimously supports 
adherence to the scheduled date of holding provincial 
elections by October 1, 2008.  The formal objection does not 
pose any obstacle to adherence to this proposed date, 
particularly because the Provincial Powers Law will not in 
any event take legal effect until after such elections are 
conducted. 
 
End unofficial translation of CoR Press Statement. 
CROCKER