08BAGHDAD3081
ADVANCING CIVIL SERVICE REFORM IN IRAQ
Wed Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0632
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3081/01 2681450
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241450Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9589
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PGOV PREL ECON SOCI PINS SNAR ENRG EPET
IZ 
 
SUBJECT:  ADVANCING CIVIL SERVICE REFORM IN IRAQ 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The Prime Minister is leading a new Civil 
Service Reform Committee to overhaul federal personnel 
management in Iraq.  The Iraqi Government has requested USG 
help to make this happen.  The goals are to have merit- 
based appointment and promotion; performance management, 
grading, and pay systems; human resource management, and 
new job descriptions and classifications. When enacted, 
this will professionalize the civil service, improve 
transparency, while also reducing corruption. END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
BACKGROUND 
-------------------------------- 
¶2.  Article 107 of the Iraqi Constitution requires the 
creation of a Federal Civil Service Commission, which makes 
civil service reform a key priority for the Government of Iraq 
(GoI). As a part of this obligation, Iraq made commitments 
to the international community to overhaul the current 
civil service system.  The goal of this reform is to 
institute a comprehensive federal civil service based on 
professionalism, integrity, and non-partisanship; and to 
lessen the opportunities for corruption and favoritism in 
government employment. 
 
----------------------------- 
REQUEST FOR USG HELP 
----------------------------- 
¶3.  The USAID-funded Tatweer project is providing technical 
assistance with capacity-building to key Iraqi ministries 
and national institutions.  As part of this effort, 
USAID/Tatweer worked with the Prime Minister's office to 
establish a high level committee dedicated to this 
important undertaking. Thamir Abbas Ghadban, Chairman of 
the Prime Minister's Advisory Commission, stated: "We 
highly appreciate your project's efforts and support of 
administrative reform in Iraq." 
 
a.  The Prime Minister issued an executive order formally 
establishing an Inter-Ministerial Civil Service Reform 
Committee (the Committee) comprised of representatives from 
the Prime Minister's office, the Ministry of Justice (Shura 
Council), the Ministry of Planning, and the Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
b.  "There will be no sustainable and lasting reform 
without a sound civil service reform. Iraq civil service 
reform has been neglected for decades, but now with USAID's 
help we are rebuilding a new civil service system on solid 
ground," said Dr. Ghazi Al-Abudi, Chairman of the Civil 
Service Reform Committee. 
 
c.  The formation of the Committee marks a notable 
milestone in Iraq's progress toward a new civil service 
system.  The Committee is charged with establishing the 
Federal Civil Service Commission and is working on a new 
civil service law in accordance with international best 
practices in this field. 
 
d.  In response to the GoI request, USAID/Tatweer's Civil 
Service Program will continue supporting the Commission's 
goals by providing training and expert counsel in the areas 
of civil service and legislation.  Public outreach and 
education interventions are planned for the near future so 
various public sectors and the public at large are 
kept informed about the progress of civil service reform 
efforts in Iraq. 
 
-------------------------------- 
MEASURABLE PROGRESS 
-------------------------------- 
¶4.  As an important step toward creating the Federal Civil 
Service Commission, a draft law was finalized and sent to 
the Council of Ministers for approval. The Council of 
Ministers approved the draft and forwarded it to 
Parliament where it is being debated through a second 
reading prior to enactment.  The Federal Civil Service 
Commission will be responsible for implementation and 
development of a professional civil service system based on 
merit and transparency according to the new legislation at 
the federal and provincial levels. 
 
---------------------------------- 
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 
---------------------------------- 
¶5.  The Committee is working to introduce merit-based 
appointments and promotions; performance management, grading, 
and pay systems; human resource management; and new job 
descriptions and classifications.  Important progress has 
been realized on this level.  Once the draft law is 
 
BAGHDAD 00003081  002 OF 002 
 
 
finished, the Committee will distribute to all 
ministries and GoI agencies for review before 
submission to the Council of Ministers for approval and 
presentation to Parliament for enactment.  When enacted, 
this will prove to be a major anticorruption and 
transparency advance for the GoI.  The GoI's 
confidence and trust in the USAID/Tatweer assistance also 
demonstrates real Iraqi buy-in towards a positive agenda to 
institutionalize sustainable capacity-building and deter 
corruption. 
 
 
 
CROCKER