08BAGHDAD1091
CHALABI'S PROVISION OF SERVICES COMMITTEE - APRIL 1
Tue Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO6433
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1091 0991529
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081529Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6742
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 001091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: CHALABI'S PROVISION OF SERVICES COMMITTEE - APRIL 1 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Discussion at Dr. Chalabi's April 1 Provision of 
Services Committee meeting was primarily divided between potable 
water (for a third straight week), and the fallout from the previous 
week's fighting in Sadr City.  Key topics included an electrical 
outage at the Karkh Water Treatment Plant, essential service 
delivery in Sadr City, and Amanat control over ongoing 
infrastructure projects in Baghdad.  The meeting commenced and 
concluded with a discussion on the importance of solving the water 
scarcity issue.  In addition to Embassy personnel, representatives 
from the Ministry of Trade (MoT), Baghdad Water Authority (BWA), 
Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) also attended, along with Deputy 
Mayor Na'im, and Dr. Falahi. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Outage at Karkh Water Treatment Plant 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  Dr. Chalabi began the meeting with a discussion on reports of an 
outage at the Karkh Water Treatment Plant.  According to these 
reports, Coalition Forces in the area were allegedly digging a hole 
on the grounds of the plant and cut an 11 kv line providing power to 
the Plant.  The BWA representative then indicated that Coalition 
Forces should stay off the grounds of the Plant, and always 
coordinate with Plant management when digging any holes.  MG Snyder 
reported that coordination between the Amanat, U.S. contractors, and 
Plant Management was adequate during his visit two weeks prior.  BG 
Milano concluded the discussion by affirming U.S. support for the 
Karkh Water Treatment Plant project, and indicated he would 
investigate the matter further for next week's meeting. 
 
¶3.  Dr. Chalabi used this topic to reiterate the importance of 
potable water issues in Baghdad, and directed an invitation to the 
General Manager for the Plant, for next week's meeting. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Essential Service Fallout from Conflict in Sadr City 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  From the Karkh Treatment Plant, Dr. Chalabi next turned to the 
status of essential services in Sadr City, given recent events in 
the area.  After expressing a desire to tour Sadr City as soon as 
possible, he then gave a rundown of Ministerial aid, which will 
include medical supplies from the Ministry of Health, and fuel 
trucks from the Ministry of Oil. 
 
¶5.  Subsequent discussion centered on issues relating to the curfew 
in Sadr City and outlying areas.  According to Deputy Mayor Na'im, 
Ministerial officials, as well as Amanat employees are unable to 
come to work due to the curfews, which may be affecting the delivery 
of essential services in some areas.  Dr. Chalabi noted that actions 
must be taken to alleviate the isolation of some citizens, as the 
current status will only exacerbate the security situation. 
Additionally, when citizens attempt to leave certain areas, they 
face long lines at BOC ID checkpoints, leaving them vulnerable to 
attacks. 
 
¶6.  Discussion on this topic concluded with various calls for 
humanitarian supplies in the Sadr City and Rusafa districts.  Dr. 
Chalabi mentioned that the Ministry of Health and Red Crescent 
should take charge of this particular issue. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Control of Water Compact Units in Abu Nawass 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  A very brief discussion again centered on illegal tapping into 
potable water lines.  The BWA representative indicated that these 
violations resulted in the loss of 15-20% of the output from Karkh 
Treatment Plant.  Chalabi made a distinction between people tapping 
into the lines to obtain drinking water, which he thought was 
excusable, and farmers tapping into them to irrigate their fields, 
which he thought should be prevented.  He is interested in finding 
alternative sources of untreated water for irrigation. 
 
¶8.  Dr. Chalabi next turned to the control of Water Compact Unit 
(WCU) installation within the Baghdad Amanat.  Deputy Mayor Na'im 
indicated that the Amanat is working to connect these units (Note: 
WCU's were purchased with USG funds.  End Note.) to the potable 
water network, however was waiting on U.S. direction.  MG Snyder 
reported that the Amanat had asked that these projects cease, in 
order for the Iraqi government to take control of the project. 
Although the Deputy Mayor briefly claimed these were two separate 
sets of WCU's, Dr. Chalabi as well as BG Milano agreed that the 
Amanat should take control over WCU installation.  Dr. Chalabi 
directed a memo to be written on the topic.  The Amanat will provide 
the list of projects, while BG Milano will draft a memo 
relinquishing USG responsibility over these projects. 
 
Butenis