08BAGHDAD3318
AL-KUT CELEBRATES EID WITH PLAY HIGHLIGHTING RULE
Tue Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO5432
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3318 2881538
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141538Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9953
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003318 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SCUL KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: AL-KUT CELEBRATES EID WITH PLAY HIGHLIGHTING RULE 
OF LAW, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
(U)  This is a PRT Wasit reporting cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary: The cast of the popular Iraqi TV sitcom 
Mud House performed a free outdoor public play in downtown 
al-Kut, sponsored by PRT Wasit, as part of the Eid 
celebrations on October 1st, 2nd, and 3rd.  The hour-long 
play, a secular patriotic performance, hammered away at the 
themes of human rights, democracy, and the upcoming Iraqi 
provincial elections.  Each performance was prefaced by a 
lecture on human rights and democracy given by one of Wasit's 
most respected law professors.  Members of the provincial 
government, Iraqi police, U.S. forces, and the PRT, along 
with thousands of Wasit citizens and their children freely 
mingled at these early evening events.  The lecture and play 
were covered by multiple Iraqi media outlets, including 
Iraqiya, Sharqia, Massar, and Salam TV.  End summary. 
 
PRT sponsors play for all comers 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The Mud House actors, from a popular Iraqi TV 
sitcom filmed in Wasit Province, drew overflow crowds to each 
of the three Eid performances.  Supported by the PRT, with 
the request that the play involve the themes of rule of law 
and democracy, the actors presented a compelling, often 
hilarious, but ultimately tearful patriotic performance. 
Remarkable for its inclusiveness, the audience of over 4,000 
included Iraqis from all walks of life.  Young men sporting 
their finest new Eid clothing jockeyed for the best seats 
with tribal sheikhs in full traditional robes and families 
with small children.  The Provincial Governor, the Chief of 
Police and an American Army Division Commander also attended 
this very public open air theater.  At one point late in the 
show, as interest and humor peaked, dozens of children, 
clearly unconcerned at the American military presence at the 
event, moved forward to a position between the American 
Division Commander and the stage.   In a particularly 
reassuring sign of improved security, several PRT and 
military interpreters brought their families including young 
children to the event and publicly introduced them to their 
coworkers from the PRT and American military units. 
 
Human Rights and Rule of Law 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The events opened with a short introduction to the 
history of Human Rights and Rule of Law by Professor Sattar 
Sharhan of the Wasit College of Law.  Starting with the 
signing of the Magna Carta and working through the American 
and French Revolutions, the professor finished by emphasizing 
the rights of individuals and minorities guaranteed by the 
new Iraqi constitution.  He explained how these 
constitutional rights have challenged some of Iraq,s less 
democratic neighbors, who, fearing that their own people also 
may demand these rights, are trying to destabilize Iraq.  He 
praised the people of Iraq, especially the tribal leaders in 
the west and the Iraqi security forces, who stood up to these 
challenges and fought for Iraq and human rights. The actors 
followed up on this theme with their play &Iraq is Not for 
Sale.8  The well-known cast pulled no punches in declaring 
that Iraq and its candidates for election were not for sale 
to foreign influences.  The play ended with the cast holding 
an Iraqi flag and reciting a patriotic poem about the 
people,s love for and their willingness to sacrifice for 
Iraq. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Comment:  The huge turnout of citizens to this 
outdoor event, held on the grounds of the al-Kut Tourist 
Hotel, the venue of intensive combat between Coalition forces 
and Jaysh al-Mahdi during the Sadr uprising of April 2004, is 
a strong indication that security prevails and a return to a 
more normal life clearly has begun in Wasit.  That a 
prominent law professor as well as the famous actors of Mud 
House were willing to challenge militias and terrorist 
organizations and put their public officials on notice that 
the elections are not for sale in this decidedly public forum 
speaks highly not only for the courage of these individuals, 
but also for the improved security situation that allowed 
these events to take place.  End comment. 
CROCKER