09BAGHDAD2580
CONFERENCE ON IRAQ'S ANTI-CORRUPTION STRATEGY
Sun Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO5178
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2580/01 2700407
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270407Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4837
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002580 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KCOR ECON IZ
SUBJECT:  CONFERENCE ON IRAQ'S ANTI-CORRUPTION STRATEGY 
 
REF:  BAGHDAD 2520 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  Leaders of Iraq's main anti-corruption 
institutions held a conference with UNDP project managers and 
officials of the UN Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Amman 
September 7-10 to put finishing touches on Iraq's national strategy 
for compliance with the UN Convention against Corruption.  The GOI 
expects to unveil the strategy in late October, and it will provide 
donors a good framework for aid programs in anti-corruption and 
other areas.  ACCO is convening a NGO forum September 28 to promote 
NGO involvement in anti-corruption efforts, consistent with precepts 
of Iraq's new strategy.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Following up on meetings last April with UNODC and UNDP 
officials, Iraqi anti-corruption officials and NGO's met in Amman 
September 7-10 to refine Iraq's emerging anti-corruption strategy 
(Ref A).  Representatives from Iraq's Board of Supreme Audit (BSA), 
the Commission on Integrity (COI), Inspectors General from key 
ministries, the Central Bank, the Council of Representatives and 
elements of civil society attended the workshop.  Ali al-Alaq, the 
Secretary General of Iraq's Council of Ministers who chairs the 
Joint Anti Corruption Committee for the Prime Minister also 
attended, along with Embassy Anti-Corruption Coordinator and staff 
members. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Iraqis convened six working groups to flesh out ideas 
on:  improving protection for witnesses and whistleblowers; crafting 
codes of conduct (including creating conflict of interest guidelines 
for public officials); improving Iraq's civil code and rules on 
political party finances; and clarifying terms of political 
appointments in public service.  UN officials provided feedback and 
finalized with Iraqi principals a new draft strategy, mechanisms for 
implementation, and roll-out plans for Iraq's governorates.  The 
committees also recommended that Iraq improve transparency of 
political party and campaign financing and create firewalls between 
government institutions and political party operations. 
 
Key Challenges 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The draft strategy focuses extensively on improving 
cooperation among ministries, improving the legal framework and 
regulations governing Iraq's public workforce, and increasing 
citizen awareness of government actions, including budgeting.  It 
prescribes 18 areas for corrective action designed to secure Iraq's 
compliance with UNCAC.  These include promoting a market economy; 
implementing civil service reform; improving media coverage of 
judicial process in corruption cases; executing reforms to the 
judicial and financial systems, including enhanced budget 
transparency; more transparent public procurement; and new education 
and media initiatives. 
 
Keeping the Public on Board 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Participants noted the challenges of focusing public 
attention on the new strategy, once unveiled.  UNDP Director in 
Amman Paolo Lembo stressed the importance of public awareness 
campaigns to gain buy-in from Iraqis, a theme echoed by Iraqi NGOs 
that attended. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Commission on Integrity head Judge Raheem al-Ugaily told 
Iraqi media at the conference that anti-corruption is a "new 
concept" that needs constant outreach to both government and 
society.  He said international assistance was critical and stressed 
the need to secure passage of key legislation (e.g., the proposed 
comprehensive anti-corruption law) for thorough implementation of 
the strategy.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  In his statement at the conference, COM SecGen Alaq 
expressed satisfaction with the discussion, saying they had advanced 
anti-corruption efforts and promoted strengthening of Iraq's 
Qanti-corruption efforts and promoted strengthening of Iraq's 
institutional capacity.  Alaq thanked the UN and US for their 
support, and agreed with Ugaily that international inputs were 
critical to success of the effort.  While Iraqi leaders had 
developed a "strategic framework" he noted, "we still need the 
support of the organizations that have the expertise in this area to 
help guide outcomes." 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  The conference brings to fruition a months-long 
effort by the GOI to devise a strategy that, if implemented 
effectively, will result in substantial progress toward Iraq's 
long-term goal of fashioning a strong anti-corruption regime.  The 
draft strategy, while still subject to some alterations in the next 
month, offers a fairly honest assessment of key challenges and will 
help both the GOI and donors better consolidate efforts.  The 
conference was noteworthy for the presence of NGOs as well as the 
three independent anti-corruption agencies, parliament and the 
council of ministers.  ACCO is convening a forum September 28 to 
promote NGOs' involvement in anti-corruption efforts consistent with 
the new strategy and UNCAC provisions. 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00002580  002 OF 002 
 
 
HASLACH