09BAGHDAD2685
IRAQ CULTURAL HERITAGE PROJECT: CAPACITY BUILDING
Tue Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0993
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2685 2791003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061003Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4966UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002685 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO OEXC PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ CULTURAL HERITAGE PROJECT: CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
¶1. Summary:  Capacity building is one of the main objectives of the 
Iraq Cultural Heritage Project (ICHP), a key program in section IV 
of the Strategic Framework Agreement.  Six conservators working for 
the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) at the Iraq 
National Museum spent six months at the Field Museum of Natural 
History in Chicago taking part in the ICHP-funded "Conservation of 
Archaeological Materials" course.  They learned modern methods of 
conserving archaeological material, including organic and 
non-organic preservation techniques.  They will now be able to 
perform paper and textile conservation at the Iraq National Museum 
themselves.  End summary. 
 
------------------ 
Background on ICHP 
------------------ 
 
 
¶2. The Iraq Cultural Heritage Project (ICHP)has three main goals: 
providing improvements at the Iraq National Museum, establishing a 
conservation institute in Erbil, and providing professional 
development and capacity building training for the SBAH staff.  Two 
of the participating institutions providing training are the Field 
Museum of Natural History in Chicago and the Oriental Institute at 
the University of Chicago.  They are providing three six-month 
courses for six students each: two on conservation of archaeological 
materials and a course on management of archaeological collections. 
The first class of six students participated in the initial course 
from March 24 to September 26, 2009.  PAS Baghdad conducted a 
debriefing session with the participants on October 4. 
------------------ 
Successful Program 
------------------ 
 
¶3. All six participants returned to Iraq after their training in 
Chicago with enthusiastic reviews.  They each enjoyed different 
aspects of the course, but collectively found the hands-on workshops 
most useful.  The training they received made them realize that 
"there is at least a 100-year gap of knowledge between Iraq and the 
rest of the world."  The participants were honored to be part of the 
first wave of Iraqis stepping in to rectify the situation.  They 
were confident they would be able not only to apply the skills they 
learned at their jobs at the Iraq National Museum, but also to share 
their knowledge with their colleagues.  One subject they all kept 
stressing was the friendliness of all Americans they met.  They were 
able to establish professional ties, but also made friends with 
students housed at the university. 
 
-------------- 
A few concerns 
-------------- 
 
¶4. While all participants felt they gained invaluable knowledge, 
they expressed concern that the equipment they trained on in Chicago 
is not available at the Iraq National Museum.  However, they hope to 
be able to adapt the skills they learned in the U.S. to the current 
situation in Iraq.  They all felt six months was too long to be away 
from home and wondered if shorter three month courses could be 
offered that focused on specific topics, such as conservation of 
wood and leather.  More than once they mentioned experiencing 
"culture shock," mostly because of the size of the buildings, the 
price of food and necessities, and the diversity of the population. 
 
 
¶5. Comment: The participants appreciated ICHP making such a course 
possible.  They are eager to apply their recently acquired skills, 
especially conservation of paper and textile.  Prior to the course, 
paper and textile conservation was sub-contracted outside the SBAH 
offices.  Thanks to this training, paper and textile conservation 
now can be performed at the Iraq National Museum by SBAH staff.  End 
comment. 
 
HILL