09BAGHDAD2827
GOOGLE IMAGES THE IRAQ NATIONAL MUSEUM
Wed Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2827/01 2941430
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211430Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5175
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 2283
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0038UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002827 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EINT KPAO SCUL TINT PGOV ECPS IZ
 
SUBJECT: GOOGLE IMAGES THE IRAQ NATIONAL MUSEUM 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: In support of Section IV of the Strategic Framework 
Agreement (SFA), post supports programs to preserve Iraq's cultural 
heritage.  To augment these efforts and harness the interest and 
expertise of the American private sector, we have partnered with 
several leaders from the IT industry in the U.S.  As follow-up to 
the April visit of several leading IT CEOs, three Google engineers 
traveled to Baghdad October 7-14 to image the Iraq National Museum 
using several new Google technologies.  The images they took will 
allow browsers, using new technology, a chance to "visit" the Iraq 
National Museum and to learn more about Iraq's heritage. End 
Summary. 
 
Google To The Rescue! 
 
 
¶2.  (U) Building on techniques used for Google Maps and Google 
Street View, Google engineers Dan Ratner, Alex Starns and Matt 
Williams took almost 15,000 pictures during three visits to the Iraq 
National Museum to catalog all the exhibits currently on display. 
After processing, browsers worldwide will be able to "walk" through 
the museum and take a close look at all of the artifacts in the 
museum.  While in Baghdad, the engineers met with several groups of 
Iraqis interested in learning new ways to further develop Iraq's IT 
industry.  The Street View team members also met with Embassy, MNF-I 
and Iraqi counterparts to learn more about Iraq and discuss ways to 
develop Iraq's IT industry with their interlocutors. 
 
Street View Goes Indoors 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Over three visits to the Iraq National Museum in Baghdad 
on October 8, 11 and 13, the Google team imaged all the exhibits 
currently on display.  Dan Ratner, a senior engineer and designer of 
the Street View technology, along with operations engineers Alex 
Starns and Matt Williams, spent eight days in Iraq to accomplish 
their goal of bringing Street View technology inside a museum for 
the first time ever.  Google originally planned to image a museum or 
another building as a test case before coming to Iraq but were not 
able to do so; the Iraq National Museum was the first imaged museum 
and marked the first time Google used the adapted Street View 
technology inside a building. 
 
Google Tools in Iraq 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Street View, a Google technology developed two years ago, 
enables browsers to "walk" along streets by sending cars with high 
resolution cameras on streets around the world.  Over 99 percent of 
U.S. streets have been driven and photographed and there are roughly 
500 Street View cars now on the road in various countries.  Taking 
it a step further in Iraq, the Google team set out to map and image 
inside a building.  To capture data normally done by a car-mounted 
camera with a hard drive in the trunk, Mr. Ratner built a trolley to 
gather image and location information inside buildings and the Iraq 
National Museum was the first location the team tested this new 
technology.  The data the trolley collected should be able to make 
precise indoor maps to complement photos that the team took with 
high resolution still cameras and with specially developed, 
bracketed exposure panorama cameras.  Another complimentary 
technology that will allow mapping and imaging outdoors on paths, 
parks and even mountain bike trails where a car can not drive, 
Ratner built a tricycle that was unveiled on the Today Show October 
¶16.  (NOTE: The tricycle was not used in Baghdad. END NOTE.) 
 
Stuff View 
 
¶5.  (U) Mr. Starns brought another new Google technology, Stuff 
View, with him to image individual artifacts at the museum.  Using a 
simple cloth box, lights, cameras and a rotating disc, Starns placed 
small objects (up to the size of a coke can) on the disc and took 
Qsmall objects (up to the size of a coke can) on the disc and took 
108 pictures of each object as he rotated it slowly.  Working 
closely with the museum staff, he Stuff Viewed 20 artifacts and in a 
matter of weeks internet browsers will be able to view these 
artifacts in great detail from all angles. 
 
Googlers Meet Iraq's Future Sergey Brin? 
 
¶7.  (U) On October 10 the Google team met with 10 young computer 
scientists and IT professionals to talk about the Street View 
project, explain Google and brainstorm on how to improve Iraq's IT 
industry.  The young tech professionals explained the challenges 
they face working with limited connectivity and oppressive 
bureaucracy.  The Google team explained that there were many more 
tools available at no cost that might help them grow or start their 
businesses.  Seeing the potential in Iraq and in the young Iraqis, 
one Google engineer told emboff half-seriously that he wanted to 
give each Iraqi seed money on the spot to see what kind of start-up 
company they could develop. 
Briefings, Brainstorming Sessions 
¶8.  (U) The Google team received a military briefing on the security 
situation in Iraq and met the Economic Counselor to discuss the 
potential of the Iraqi economy and possibilities for a high-tech 
Iraq.  Representatives from International Exchanges and Research 
Board (IREX), an NGO active in Iraq, explained their efforts to 
educate Iraqis about the tools the internet and computers have to 
offer.  They highlighted how Google Earth had helped them to map 
centers for disabled Iraqis so they could either visit the centers 
or contact them easily to request services.  The Google team 
directed the IREX team to the Connect Alabama project as a model for 
how technology and mapping could be used effectively to make 
government services more accessible using tools readily available on 
the internet. 
 
¶9.  (U) Comment: The mere fact the Google engineers traveled to Iraq 
was a success for the Support Network for a Digital Iraq (SNDI) 
initiative, a concept developed after the April visit to Baghdad 
that hopes to provide an online forum to encourage U.S. companies to 
engage and help develop Iraq (septel).  That the Google team brought 
breakthrough technology with them and imaged the Iraq National 
Museum as their first indoor Street View experiment is even greater. 
 There was no press coverage of the Google visit because the 
technology they used has not yet been released.  When this happens, 
their visit will serve as a good example of how SNDI-ITTF efforts 
can advance USG goals as laid out in the SFA.  End Comment. 
 
FORD