09BAGHDAD3307
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Moves Closer to Large
Tue Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #3307 3561415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221415Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5850
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003307 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD ETRN BEXP IZ
SUBJECT: Louis Dreyfus Commodities Moves Closer to Large 
Agricultural Discharge and Processing Investment in Umm Qasr 
 
1.(SBU) Summary and Comment: In a recent meeting with Agricultural 
Counselor, Louis Dreyfus Commodities' (LDC) Iraqi-French 
representative Dr. Khazal Abbas dusted off previously established 
plans for the construction in Umm Qasr of a USD 400 million 
multi-commodity discharge, storage and Qsing facility.  LDC is 
prepared to begin its investment once they have acquired/leased 
approximately 125 acres in Umm Qasr. There is one potential area at 
Umm Qasr port which may be suitable and LDC is looking to engage 
with the Ministry of Transportation on developing this site or other 
potential parcels. For Iraqi consumers, the benefits of this project 
would be greater availability of agricultural commodities at lower 
prices.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
The French Grain Multinational Intends to Establish Deep Roots 
 
¶2. (SBU)   In a meeting with Embassy representatives on December 13, 
LDC's Abbas indicated the company, among the world's largest 
grain-trading multinationals, concluded that the time is ripe to 
proceed with this initiative.  LDC's pursuit of this project began 
in early 2007, and they now seek a long-term port space lease for aQed investment in a 275 million euro ($400M) vegetable oil 
refinery, sugar refinery and grain terminal/flour milling operation 
in the Port of Umm Qasr. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Abbas informed us that LDC is ready to move ahead; they 
have preliminary approval from the office of the Prime Minister, and 
the Ministry of Trade, and now need to engage the Ministry of 
Transportation. LDC will require a 125 acre site suitable for 
unloading Panamax-sized (50,000MT) cargoes.  Once the issue of space 
is finalized, they intend to construct in three phases: 1. a 
vegetable oil refining facility (300TMT/yr.) which will take two 
years to complete; 2. A sugar refining facility (500TMT/yr.); and, 
¶3. a grain terminal  (200TMT/storage) and flour mill (450TMT/yr.)  A 
rail link was discussed and is preferred, but Embassy 
representatives explained that no grain currently is conveyed by 
rail northward from Basra owing to the lack of railcars. 
 
Prescient Planning Should Position LDC for a Market Primed to 
Consume 
 
¶4.  (SBU) With a market of close to 30 million and an economy poised 
to expand and subsequently provide for more consumer spending, LDC 
recognizes the market potential for a number of commodities in which 
they deal, but do not currently supply to Iraq, including sugar and 
vegetable oils.  At least for the next few years, LDC is counting 
heavily on supplying commodities including wheat, sugar and 
vegetable oil to the State Company for Foodstuffs for Iraq's public 
ration system and believe that they will enjoy a competitive 
advantage over competitors by having dedicated port and processing 
facilities located in Iraq. LDC is also anticipating the subsequent 
marketing of branded products produced at these facilities. The 
flour milling operation is an addition to the original plan as 
conceived.  LDC has no plans for an oilseed crushing facility at 
this time.  This had been suggested last year in preliminary 
discussions as a possibility that would address the need for protein 
meal (livestock feed) by poultry/livestock producers.   Abbas 
further suggested that the company's thinking was that they could 
recoup their direct investment outlay in three years time from the 
date of completion. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment:  While no other multinational grain operators 
have a presence in Umm Qasr, LDC's plans for significant processing 
and follow-on marketing in Iraq represent a considerable break from 
Qand follow-on marketing in Iraq represent a considerable break from 
the "discharge and go" approach that has characterized commodity 
exports to this market.  Although there are still a myriad of 
details to be ironed out, Dreyfus's plans are timed to capitalize on 
what will hopefully be an Iraqi investment and business climate more 
conducive to outside participation.  End Comment. 
FORD