09BAGHDAD597
WINNERS AND LOSERS IN THE BAGHDAD RUSTBELT
Sun Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0597/01 0671115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081115Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2043UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD EINV EFIN PGOV IQ
SUBJECT: WINNERS AND LOSERS IN THE BAGHDAD RUSTBELT 
 
REF:  A) 08 BAGHDAD 3924,   B) BAGHDAD 522 
 
 
¶1. This is a Baghdad EPRT-2 reporting cable. 
 
¶2.  SUMMARY:  While many of Iraq's state-owned enterprises are 
doomed to extinction (ref A), some are thriving.  Among firms in 
which the GOI has only a partial stake -- so-called mixed 
enterprises -- market sector and leadership appear to be the 
decisive factors that differentiate winners and losers.  This cable 
describes four mixed enterprises, two in growing sectors and two in 
sectors dominated by imports.  There is little the GOI can do to 
secure a long-term future for the weakest of these firms, but even 
the stronger ones will struggle if the GOI fails to improve the 
investment climate.  END SUMMARY. 
Modern Paints Industries -- Good Prospects for a Turnaround 
---------- 
¶3. Modern Paints Industries (MPI) is a mixed enterprise in the 
Zafaraniyah area of eastern Baghdad whose primary business is the 
production of decorative and industrial paints.  MPI employs around 
245 people, of whom only 150 are actively working.  While MPI's 
share of Iraq's paint market has declined since 2003, its capital 
facilities remain functional.  As is true of other state-owned 
enterprises, the Ministry of Industry and Minerals appoints a 
director general (DG) as the firm's top manager.  MPI's DG, Abdul 
Karim, took the helm in June 2008 and has taken steps to turn the 
company around.  Abdul has a degree from a western university and 
strong free-market instincts.  More important, he understands and 
accepts the fundamental changes in Iraq's markets. 
¶4. With training and assistance from EPRT2, MPI has started new 
advertising and sales initiatives, refocused on the more lucrative 
segments of the market, and begun searching for joint-venture 
partners outside of Iraq.  Abdul Karim expects growth next year as 
private-sector and government spending increases on reconstruction 
projects in the industrial and housing sector.  That should boost 
demand for MPI's products. 
National Foods Industries: -- Pulling out of the Tarpit 
---------- 
¶5. When EPRT2 visited National Food Industries (NFI) in April 2007, 
the mixed enterprise company had not been in production since 2003. 
Before 2003 NFI produced soda, juice concentrates, and beer.  The 
company was in desperate need of new equipment, working capital, and 
electricity.  All requests for help from the GOI had gone 
unanswered. 
¶6. In November 2008, EPRT2 met with NFI's new DG, Intisar Kathim 
Chawi.  The company had restarted production and opened new 
production lines.  Of a total (approximate) workforce of 360 people, 
150 were working every day and 100 were working increasingly 
regularly to help with the company's expanding production.    The 
credit for this revival goes to DG Intisar, one of the few female 
executives in Iraq.  A 1982 chemical engineering graduate of Baghdad 
University, she rose from production engineer to become the DG in 
¶2003.  She has travelled and trained throughout Europe and the U.S. 
and has a strong grasp of finance and free-market concepts.  Through 
Intisar's efforts, NFI was able to secure a three year loan for 
approximately $1.5 million from Warka Bank earlier this year at 17 
percent for equipment upgrades and working capital.  Intisar plans 
to keep expanding and diversifying NFI's product lines. 
Electronics Industries Company -- Success is tenuous 
---------- 
¶7. Before 2003, the Electronics Industries Company (EIC) in the 
Karada District in eastern Baghdad assembled everything from 
televisions and radios to computers and voltage converters.  EIC 
used to employ 1,500 workers and 70 engineers.  Now the company is 
down to fewer than 200 workers and 5 engineers.  Production lines 
Qdown to fewer than 200 workers and 5 engineers.  Production lines 
are all but dead now.  EIC's facilities were damaged in 2003 by 
bombing and looting.  Annual output is now just a few thousand 
telephones and voltage converters. 
¶8. EIC's managing director, A.R. Al-Uraiby, has been running the 
company since its founding in 1973.  Al-Uraiby talks about a 
turnaround; he would like to retool for updated consumer 
electronics.  EIC applied for a GOI loan and sought a grant from the 
USG's Task Force for Business Stability Operations in the summer of 
¶2008.  Neither loan has come through yet.  Al-Uraiby's backup plan 
is to sell pieces of company land to raise the capital. 
Unfortunately, success for EIC may be out of reach.  Al-Uraiby does 
not have a detailed plan for a turnaround, and Asian imports 
dominate the market for EIC's products.  Barring prohibitive 
tariffs, it is unlikely that any Iraqi firm will be able to fend off 
foreign competition in this sector. 
National Chemicals and Plastics Industries - "Just one word: 
plastics" 
---------- 
¶9. National Chemicals and Plastics Industries (NCPI) is a producer 
of injection molded plastic products, polyethylene sheeting, and 
other finished plastics products.  Before the 1990 embargo, the 
company employed around 1500 people.   In recent visits the company 
appeared to employ around 320, most of whom rarely work.  Currently 
production is almost nonexistent.  Efforts over the last 18 months 
by EPRT2 to spur production through relationships with USG 
contractors and direct purchases for agricultural projects have 
largely fallen flat because of NCPI management's failure to follow 
up.  Recently EPRT-2 conducted a small price comparison study with 
various imported materials ("Operation Mrs. Robinson") and found 
that most products were being sold for 15-25 percent less than 
NCPI's cost of materials.    In its present condition, NCPI cannot 
compete. 
¶10. NCPI's DG Abbas took control of the company in July of 2008.  He 
studied agricultural business and has had no exposure outside of 
Iraq.  Abbas started his tenure with grandiose plans for marketing 
and sales, but within a month he had given up.   "I'm shocked that 
no one wants to pay for quality, [they] care only about price," 
Abbas laments.    He believes that private investment will "be good 
only for the investor and the workers will suffer."  Abbas would 
rather focus on returning to past protectionist policies, telling us 
that, "[NCPI] will be prosperous if the regulations go back to 
Saddam's time." 
Comment 
------- 
¶11. Despite the challenges faced by the Iraqi economy and mixed 
enterprises, some of these companies are experiencing a rebound. 
Food products companies have promise and have been a growth sector. 
Construction materials continue to do well as reconstruction efforts 
expand.  However, sectors that were supported by the previous 
regime's protectionism and direct support are suffering.  Companies 
manufacturing consumer goods face stiff competition from advanced 
foreign competitors and face a tenuous future. 
¶12. A crucial factor is the quality of management.   A DG's ability 
to accept and embrace the transition to a free market is a vital 
ingredient to recovery.  As shown in these examples, a DG willing to 
accept the new market conditions, and skilled enough to change the 
direction of the company, can save a mixed enterprise.  Conversely, 
a company with a DG longing for the days of a controlled economy and 
state support, or unable to cope with the free markets, will likely 
continue to falter. 
¶13.  In view of the scarcity of bank financing and the low 
likelihood of a GOI-financed rescue, private investment may be the 
only way ahead for potential winners.  In July 2008, the GOI 
promised the mixed sector USD 85 million in subsidized loans.  But 
now GOI officials say new fiscal pressures mean loans for mixed 
enterprises may not be funded in the 2009 budget.   For potential 
winners in Baghdad's rustbelt, private investment may be the only 
hope. 
 
 
BUTENIS