09BAGHDAD1331
IRAQ SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FUNDING INADEQUATE
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0706
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1331/01 1411244
ZNR UUUUU ZZH ZDK CTG SEVERAL SERVICES
P 211244Z MAY 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3141
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0295UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 001331 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/I, OES/STAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL TPHY SCUL TBIO TNGD TINT PREL KPAO AORC
IZ 
SUBJECT: IRAQ SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FUNDING INADEQUATE 
 
REF: A. BAGHDAD 1204 
     ¶B. 08 BAGHDAD 2769 
 
BAGHDAD 00001331  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU)  From May 11-13, visitors from the U.S. National 
Academy of Sciences and National Science Foundation met with 
numerous Government of Iraq (GOI) officials to discuss 
science and technology (S-T) policy development and funding. 
GOI officials admitted Iraq lacks a driving force and vision 
to adequately manage S-T contributions to reconstruction 
efforts.  S-T funding is a paltry 0.2% of gross domestic 
product and private sector S-T production capacity is 
nonexistent.  Inter-ministry communication is limited and 
only a new government entity working for the Prime Minister's 
Office or Parliament would be able to garner the necessary 
cooperation.  NSF and NAS visitors emphasized the need for 
policy commitment, coordination, and continuity in order to 
build effective S-T institutions.  They provided an overview 
of S-T funding and policy coordination mechanisms in the 
United States.  The Embassy will continue to engage the GOI 
on this issue through the SFA S-T Working Group to build GOI 
capacity to develop and manage national S-T priorities. 
 
------------------------ 
EACH MINISTRY, AN ISLAND 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) As part of an ongoing project to assist the 
Government of Iraq (GOI) to develop national science and 
technology (S-T) policy and funding mechanisms (ref A), Dr. 
John Boright, Executive Director of the Office of 
International Affairs of the U.S. National Academy of 
Sciences (NAS), and Dr. Clifford Gabriel, Senior Advisor in 
the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), addressed a group 
of over one hundred GOI officials on May 11 in a special 
four-hour symposium hosted by the Ministry of Science and 
Technology (MoST).  Participants from the Council of 
Representatives (CoR), Prime Minister's Office (PMO), 
universities, and seven ministries discussed the principles 
of mobilizing S-T for national development, with special 
emphasis on the U.S. system of developing and funding 
national S-T priorities.  One of several programs under the 
joint U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement's S-T Working 
Group, the symposium was followed by two days of small group 
meetings to further explore and enhance GOI capacity to 
manage S-T. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ra'id Fahmi, Minister of Science and Technology, 
identified an issue which became a theme of most discussions 
of S-T policy:  "Each Ministry has its own vision -- there is 
no single vision, nor is there a driving force to create 
one."  When asked if MoST could perform such a function, the 
Minister responded, "No, I do not have any authority over the 
other ministries, so I cannot dictate any of their priorities 
or direct their resources."  (Note:  An early draft version 
of the MoST law, still pending before the CoR, states that 
MoST will, "Establish policies for science and technology 
that will achieve national priorities and in coordination 
with relevant sectors and institutions."  End note.)  Most 
Iraqi interlocutors agreed that any ministry-level entity 
would be unable to coordinate GOI S-T policy and that a new 
office working directly for the PMO or a new independent S-T 
commission would be necessary to gain adequate inter-ministry 
cooperation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
COR LOOKING FOR HELP TO DETERMINE A WAY FORWARD 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Both CoR members we spoke with displayed sincere 
interest in S-T policy issues.  Dr. Ala Makki, Chairman of 
Qinterest in S-T policy issues.  Dr. Ala Makki, Chairman of 
the CoR Education Committee, enthusiastically queried Dr. 
Boright and Dr. Gabriel regarding the Parliament's role in 
S-T policy development and funding and requested electronic 
versions of U.S. legislation establishing the NSF.  "We are 
not looking for a carbon copy -- we will decide ourselves," 
he said, but also admitted he did not fully understand how 
the Government and Parliament might share responsibilities in 
S-T policy and funding.  "Iraq's research and development 
capacity is being starved," he said, and offered that it will 
be a very difficult process to direct GOI resources to S-T. 
"Right now, the Iraqi people want personal things -- that is 
the pressure we in the Parliament face."  Dr. Sami Al-Araji, 
Chairman of the National Investment Commission (NIC), beamed 
that he is planning for a one-time "shot in the arm" infusion 
 
BAGHDAD 00001331  002 OF 003 
 
 
of USD two billion into the MoHESR.  Dr. Boright observed 
that such funds would not go very far given the magnitude of 
the problems in Iraq's higher education system, and the 
portion of those funds that might leak through the system to 
the MoHESR scientific research centers could perhaps be 
better invested in sustainable programs.  "Long-term 
continuity and commitment of resources is a key principle of 
S-T institutional development," he said. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Another common theme throughout S-T discussions was 
Iraq's lack of private industry.  MoST officials asked 
detailed questions about public-private funding for S-T, 
including the role of grants, cooperative agreements, and 
contracts.  Ahmed Al-Shamma, Deputy Minister of Oil, observed 
that, "Even if the GOI developed a new technology or device, 
there is no industry in Iraq to handle production."  Dr. Abid 
Al-Ujayli, Minister of Higher Education and Scientific 
Research, admitted that Iraq must first improve its banking 
systems, internet, and legal framework before private 
industry and foreign investment could begin seriously 
participating in Iraq's redevelopment of S-T.  NIC Chairman 
Dr. Sami Al-Araji, looking to expansion in private industry 
to achieve full national employment, said, "You cannot put a 
dollar value on what Iraq has -- the region's best political 
system, plentiful natural and human resources, and the 
revenues from 6 million barrels of oil per day by 2015."  He 
was confident that continued incremental restructuring of 
state-owned enterprises would also contribute an important 
piece to the development of private industry in Iraq. 
 
------------------------------- 
A STRUCTURAL DISREGARD FOR S-T? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Many officials pointed to what one called a 
structural disregard for S-T in both the GOI and 
international efforts to rebuild Iraq.  Dr. Samir Attar, 
Deputy Minister of Science and Technology, noted that the 
Iraq Ministry of Planning, largely responsible for Iraq's 
five-year plans, does not consider S-T as an independent 
sector in its planning process.  "The World Bank's 2004 plan 
did not contain an S-T section, nor is there one in the 
International Compact with Iraq," he lamented.  Dr. Ammar 
Hassan, Deputy Minister of Higher Education and Scientific 
Research, echoed what we heard from many other officials when 
he observed that, "The GOI is still working on basic services 
and government structures -- S-T policy just isn't a priority 
yet."  Interlocutors variously estimated current GOI S-T 
funding at somewhere between 0.015% and 0.3% of gross 
domestic product and agreed that it will be politically 
complex and very challenging to generate policy coherence and 
expand funding. 
 
¶7. (SBU) MoST efforts to conduct a GOI-wide Science and 
Technology Innovation Policy (STIP) review by the United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is an 
informative example of GOI priorities (ref B).  The goal of 
the review is to inventory Iraq's S-T resources and 
prioritize efforts in order to contribute to Iraq's economic 
growth and ensure Iraq is able to successfully participate in 
a knowledge-based globalized economy.  When funding for the 
review from the Iraq Trust Fund (ITF) was temporarily 
cancelled earlier this year, MoST officials had to look 
outside the GOI for international donors to pay for the 
review, estimated at USD 800,000.  Thinking ITF funding was 
still unavailable, Deputy Minister Attar, the GOI lead for 
the STIP review, asked Dr. Boright and Dr. Gabriel numerous 
Qthe STIP review, asked Dr. Boright and Dr. Gabriel numerous 
detailed questions about other resources that might help the 
GOI continue their review, such as S-T policy review 
templates or completed studies conducted for other countries. 
 It was clear that absent ITF funds, the GOI was not 
considering funding the STIP review, so Dr. Attar was 
attempting to economize while maintaining momentum.  MoST 
officials say they are working with 15 GOI ministries on the 
STIP review and are continuing to gather data for the study. 
MoST would appreciate NSF and NAS reviews of their STIP 
products as they become available.  (Note:  Earlier this 
week, the United Nations tentatively agreed to use the ITF to 
pay for the STIP review. End note.) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Following three days of discussions with GOI 
officials, Dr. Boright and Dr. Gabriel met with EmbOffs to 
discuss possible new GOI governmental structures to develop 
S-T policy and allocate funding, resulting in a preliminary 
 
BAGHDAD 00001331  003 OF 003 
 
 
GOI wiring diagram describing new Science Policy Development 
and Research Support Offices, including flow lines of 
advisory, policy, and budgetary responsibilities.  The 
Embassy will continue to engage the GOI on this issue through 
the SFA S-T Working Group to build GOI capacity to develop 
and manage national S-T priorities. 
HILL