10BAGHDAD299
PRT KIRKUK: NEWEST MEMBERS OF KIRKUK'S BAR
Fri Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO7148
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDH RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0299/01 0360143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050143Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6463
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000299 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/I, NEA/I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KJUS KCRM IZ
SUBJECT: PRT KIRKUK: NEWEST MEMBERS OF KIRKUK'S BAR 
PARTICIPATE IN FIRST CONTINUING LEGAL EDUCATION PROGRAM 
 
¶1. This is a Kirkuk Provincial Reconstruction Team message. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: On January, 21 and 23, 2010, the Kirkuk 
Jurist Union (KJU) hosted a successful two-day workshop on 
practical skills for the legal practice in Iraq.  The two-day 
event also included a tour of  Kirkuk's primary detention 
center and a candid in-chamber discussion with Kirkuk Chief 
Judge Awni about professional responsibility.  The two day 
event was part of the overall ROL strategy to enhance the 
legal profession, encourage professional legal organizations 
to develop continuing legal education programs, and expand 
the capacity for the KJU to develop a self-sustaining 
organization.  End Summary. 
 
KJU - Catalyst for Rule of Law in Kirkuk 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Kirkuk Jurist Union (KJU) is a non-government 
organization designed to assist members in the development of 
the legal profession.  Members pay approximately 3 USD 
annually for dues that barely cover the expense for printing 
their bar card.  The KJU depends upon other NGOs for funding. 
 The organization has received funding in the past from the 
PRT but those funds are no longer available.  The KJU relies 
on PRT funds to publish three periodicals that educated 
lawyers, lay persons and the public at large on their legal 
rights under the new Iraqi government.  These publications 
were distributed at all courthouses and other public venues 
in Kirkuk province.  In addition, the KJU offers assistance 
in legal job placement, temporary financial aid, and sporadic 
workshops for attorneys and law students.  Much of the 
organization's effectiveness is marginalized by its inability 
to become a self-sustaining organization supported by its 
members.  The concept of organizational sustainment through 
dues and continuing education seminars is one of the many 
paradigm shifts the PRT Rule of Law Section's OPDAT Resident 
Legal Advisor seeks to encourage with KJU. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The workshop kicked off with a tour of Police 
Headquarters' detention center.  Detention center supervisor 
Colonel Korsheed introduced the newest members of the Iraqi 
bar to jailhouse procedures for visiting incarcerated 
clients.  The group of twenty-one attorneys, including nine 
female attorneys, toured the male and female cell blocks as 
well as the attorney-client lounge.  Korsheed stressed to the 
lawyers the importance of representing the accused and 
advancing the rule of law in Iraq. 
 
Chief Judge Discusses Professional Responsibility to New 
Attorneys 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) At Kirkuk's main courthouse, Chief Judge Awni opened 
his chamber to the attorneys for a candid discussion about 
the rule of law in Iraq and the important role lawyers play 
in the process.  Awni stressed to the nascent members of the 
bar to embrace this enormous responsibility to society and 
the rule of law.  He explained lawyers should stand against 
improper behavior such as tortured confessions and protecting 
the right of the accused.  The conversation also included 
some practical steps such as the professional decorum in the 
courtroom and proper communication with the court. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The second day of the workshop introduced the new 
attorneys to the fundamentals of practicing law.  The 
seminar's format was tailored toward the novice attorney's 
initial foray into the court and the criminal system.  All of 
the presenters were experienced KJU officers in the 
respective subject-matter areas of attorney-client 
relationships, family law, civil and criminal law procedures. 
 Some of the specific legal procedures such as filing 
Q Some of the specific legal procedures such as filing 
emergency child support writs and the proper execution of a 
search warrant drew some critical debate among the attorneys. 
 At the conclusion of the workshop the attorneys received six 
hours of continuing legal education certificates and the 
instructors obtained teaching credit certificates for the 
commensurate amount. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) While under enormous fiscal constraints, PRT was 
able to facilitate the entire event without any major costs. 
The second day venue was FOB Warrior's dining facility (DFAC) 
VIP room.  By having the lecture series at the DFAC, Iraqi 
attorneys had a chance to experience an American style buffet 
lunch.  The KJU has not previously considered Continued Legal 
Education and similar seminars to develop their usefulness 
and credibility with the legal bar.  However, the workshop, 
 
BAGHDAD 00000299  002 OF 002 
 
 
coupled with the student evaluations, should encourage the 
non-governmental organization to see the value of such 
programs for the legal profession and even to consider 
financial support from their members.  The KJU has already 
begun discussing another CLE for the immediate future with 
the PRT's Rule of Law Section. 
HILL