05BUENOSAIRES496
AMBASSADOR TRAVELS TO SALTA TO MEET WITH GOVERNOR,
Thu Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Buenos Aires
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 BUENOS AIRES 000496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS NSC FOR TOM SHANNON, KIM BREIER, NILMINI GUNARATNE, 

DEL RENIGAR 

PASS USTR FOR SUE CRONIN 

TREASURY FOR DAS LEE, DAVID DRYSDALE, RAMIN TOLOUI AND 

CHRIS KUSHLIS AND OCC FOR CARLOS HERNANDEZ 

USCINCSO FOR POLAD 

 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2015 

TAGS: PGOV PREL AR SNAR OFDA MEETINGS WITH AMBASSADOR

SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR TRAVELS TO SALTA TO MEET WITH GOVERNOR, 

COUNTERNARCOTICS OFFICIALS AND BUSINESS LEADERS 

 

REF: BUENOS AIRES 00397 

 

Classified By: Ambassador Lino Gutierrez for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 

 

¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Ambassador Gutierrez traveled to the 

northern province of Salta February 24-25 to meet with 

Governor Romero, to review the current state of 

U.S.-Argentine counternarcotics cooperation on the northern 

border, and to exchange views with leading business 

executives in the province.  Governor Romero expressed his 

appreciation for the visit and his recognition of the 

importance of cooperation between the U.S. and Argentina. 

Romero said he admires the U.S. and supports the FTAA.  He 

also  highlighted to the Ambassador the province's good 

record of fiscal responsibility and impressive economic 

growth rates in the past few years.  The Ambassador toured 

the Northern Border Task Force (NBTF) headquarters and was 

briefed by NBTF and Gendarmeria commanders.  The commanders 

were proud of the recent seizure of 149 kilos of cocaine in 

Salta by the two forces.  They expressed their gratitude for 

the critical support that the U.S. provides the NBTF and 

Gendarmeria.  The Ambassador was the guest of honor at a 

meeting of leading business executives that produced a useful 

exchange of ideas on U.S. policy.  The Ambassador also met 

with Salta mayor Miguel Angel Isa who stressed the economic 

boom the city is experiencing, fueled by the tourism and 

construction sectors.  END SUMMARY. 

 

------------------------------------- 

Positive Meeting With Governor Romero 

------------------------------------- 

 

¶2. (C) The Ambassador was received by Governor Juan Carlos 

Romero for dinner at his home on February 24.  In the 

conversation with the Ambassador, Governor Romero highlighted 

Salta's continued economic growth, led by the tourism and 

agriculture sectors.  Romero also pointed to the province's 

strong record of fiscal responsibility.  Romero was 

justifiably proud that the province never defaulted on their 

debt when so many of their neighbors did in the past few 

years.  ""We have not signed the (Federal) Fiscal 

Responsibility Law because ours (provincial) is much better."" 

 Romero felt that co-participation reform was unlikely to 

happen in the foreseeable future, even after the debt issue 

was resolved and the elections completed. 

 

¶3. (C) When asked about his relations with Kirchner, Governor 

Romero described the relations as cordial.  Romero did not 

think Kirchner would try to run his own candidates in Salta 

in the October 2005 legislative elections, as ""he (Kirchner) 

does not have much of a following here.""  He did allude to 

his fears that ""many local officeholders (who had backed 

Menem in the 2003 elections) could be affected"" in the 

upcoming elections.  Asked about the Menem/Rodriguez Saa 

alliance, Romero joked that ""they should have done this in 

2003 (during the presidential election).""  He said he was the 

one who advised Menem to withdraw from the 2003 presidential 

race after the first round when it became clear Menem would 

lose big.  ""There is no second round tradition in Argentina."" 

 Romero lamented the fact that former President Eduardo 

Duhalde prevented an internal primary to chose a single 

Peronist candidate in 2003 ""because he would have lost"" to 

Menem.  Note:  Romero was Carlos Menem's running mate in his 

2003 presidential bid.  Salta is one of the only provinces 

where President Kirchner has not made an official visit. 

However, in a sign of warming relations, Governor Romero and 

President Kirchner met in Buenos Aires on March 2 to announce 

the construction of 2000 housing units in Salta using federal 

funds.  End Note 

 

¶4. (C) Romero expressed admiration for the U.S.  One daughter 

currently attends Georgetown and his other children have 

attended U.S. universities.  Romero professed to the 

Ambassador to be pro-FTAA.  Governor Romero criticized the 

central government's ""statist"" policies and said that he 

believed in the free market.  Governor Romero thanked the 

Ambassador for his visit to Salta and said he looked forward 

to continued good relations with the U.S. and the Embassy. 

------------------------------------ 

SALTA: DRUG CORRIDOR TO BUENOS AIRES 

------------------------------------ 

 

¶5. (C) The Ambassador traveled to Salta in the wake of the 

Buenos Aires Airport scandal involving the smuggling of 59 

kilos of cocaine (Reftel) and one day following the seizure 

of 149 kilos of cocaine by the Northern Border Task Force 

(NBTF) and the Gendarmeria operating in Salta.  The trip was 

perfectly timed to take advantage of increased news coverage 

of narcotics related issues and enabled him to highlight the 

assistance and support the USG offers Argentina in the 

counternarcotics area. 

 

¶6. (C) The Ambassador toured the DEA-funded NBTF headquarters 

and received a briefing by NBTF commander Claudio Domenichini 

on February 25.  Domenichini explained that 90 percent of 

cocaine entering Argentina passed through the Province of 

Salta and asserted that the NBTF played a pivotal role in 

Argentina's drug interdiction effort.  He stated that the 

NBTF interdicted 110 kilos of cocaine last year as a direct 

result of investigations and so far this year had already 

interdicted 194 kilos of cocaine.  (COMMENT:  Domenichini's 

choice of statistics is of interest as he cited only 

narcotics seizures directly related to the unit's 

investigative efforts and did not include drugs seized by 

random road block and drug dog searches.  By claiming all 

seizures in which the NBTF participated in some way he could 

have boasted a much larger number, as is the common practice 

by GOA law enforcement agencies.  Domenichini's choice of 

statistics is evidence of his integrity, his commitment to 

modern investigative techniques as opposed to random searches 

and his DEA/INL funded training.  END COMMENT.)  Domenichini 

discussed the NBTF canine unit and expressed the hope that 

DEA/INL could provide a planned drug dog training course in 

Salta later this year.  In response to a question about the 

use of small aircraft in smuggling operations, Domenichini 

stated that there had been a great increase in the number of 

aircraft in the northern part of the country and stated that 

the NBTF was working with authorities in Santiago del Estero, 

Chaco, Salta and Tucuman on the issue.  All agreed on the 

need for the GOA to acquire radar systems in the short term 

to deal with the problem of airborne smuggling.  The 

Ambassador asked Domenichini about inter-agency relations to 

which Domenichini replied that relations between the police 

and Gendarmeria were not the problem.  He stated that the 

major obstacle to effective enforcement rested with the 

Salta-based federal judges.  He related how it often took too 

long to obtain warrants from judges in time sensitive cases 

and opined that in general Argentina's current laws and legal 

system hamper his force's efforts to effectively combat 

narcotics traffickers.  The Ambassador thanked Domenichini 

and his staff for their dedicated efforts in the area of 

narcotics enforcement and praised their recent successes. 

 

¶7. (C) The Ambassador received a briefing by Gendarmeria 

Comandante Jorge Ramon Tapia, the Commander of  operations in 

the Salta area, and Gendarmeria Comandante Anibal Maiztegui, 

the former commander in Salta and current director of the 

Gendarmeria's national narcotics unit.  The meeting started 

with a conversation regarding the recent narcotics scandal in 

the Buenos Aires airport.  Maiztegui opined that the incident 

showed a general lack of control by the services involved and 

added a point about the defunct DEA-sponsored airport task 

force that used to operate in the Buenos Aires airport.  It 

was an obvious comparison between the lack of control and 

communication in Buenos Aires and the healthy coordination 

between the NBTF and other groups involved in 

counternarcotics operations in the Salta area.  Both 

Gendarmeria officers briefed the Ambassador on the narcotics 

situation in the border area, highlighting their belief that 

members of the Bolivian government were involved in narcotics 

trafficking and that members of Colombian narcotics 

organizations were operating in the area.  In response to the 

Ambassador's question about radar, Maiztegui stated that the 

issue was difficult for the Gendarmeria as the decision 

rested with the President, and as such the Gendarmeria dared 

not criticize the lack of action on this issue.  He added 

that for 12 years the lack of radar had been a major and 

growing problem in the region.  Tapia stated that in truth 

his organization could not possibly hope to control the 

entire border that the Provinces of Salta and Jujuy shared 

with Bolivia due to the rugged nature of the terrain and the 

simple lack of manpower.  He said that, recognizing the 

futility of controlling the border, the Gendarmeria employs a 

control-in-depth strategy that utilizes multiple check points 

at transportation choke-points in the border region to combat 

the traffickers. 

 

¶8. (C) Tapia also informed the Ambassador of the lack of jail 

space in Salta and pointed out that the inability of the 

correctional facilities to accept prisoners directly impacted 

the Gendarmeria's operational ability, as each prisoner that 

could not be transported to a penal institution diverted 

resources and field troops from operations.  He acknowledged 

that a federal prison had recently been expanded, but stated 

that it was not big enough to meet current needs.  NOTE:  The 

federal government has committed to building a new prison in 

the Province, but there is no timeline as to when it will be 

ready for operation.  END NOTE. 

 

¶9. (C) Both commanders echoed Domenichini's comments 

regarding cooperation and interaction with the judiciary. 

Tapia asserted that it was common for him to dispatch an 

officer to court at 8am to request an arrest warrant only for 

that officer to wait at the court until 8pm in the hope of 

receiving a warrant.  Both men opined to the Ambassador that 

locally appointed federal judges had more interest in local 

political issues than in law enforcement.  However, they also 

acknowledged that the recently appointed federal judge in the 

northern Salta town of Tartagal was working well with the 

Gendarmeria and seemed to be honest and committed to 

combating the narcotics traffickers.  The Ambassador thanked 

both men for the briefing and congratulated them on their 

unit's recent successes. 

 

--------------------------------------------- ----------- 

Positive Exchange of Views with Salta's Business Leaders 

--------------------------------------------- ----------- 

 

¶10. (SBU) Fundacion Salta hosted a luncheon for the 

Ambassador to meet with business professionals and government 

officials in the province.  The main topics these community 

leaders raised during the Q&A session of the event were 

trade, Argentina's economy, and U.S. foreign policy.  Trade 

questions focused on the issue of U.S. agricultural subsidies 

as an impediment to Argentina's support for the Free Trade 

Agreement of the Americas.  The Ambassador responded that the 

World Trade Organization has established a mechanism for 

addressing concerns about agricultural subsidies.  The 

Ambassador recalled that, although various observers 

predicted NAFTA would have dire economic consequences for the 

U.S. and Mexico, both countries have reaped the benefits of 

freer trade.  He also encouraged an approach to the FTAA that 

would seek common ground on a broad base of issues and not 

allow sensitivity over subsidies to dismiss the FTAA out of 

hand.  The subjects for the economic questions were the U.S. 

perspective on Argentina's debt exchange, recommended sectors 

for investment in Argentina, and the global role of the U.S. 

dollar as a central bank reserve currency.  The Ambassador 

noted that the U.S. does not, and will not, take a position 

on whether the terms of the debt exchange are adequate or 

not.  On the matter of investment in the economy, the 

Ambassador noted that the result of the debt exchange would 

be key to the tone of discussions with the IMF, the outcome 

of which could send positive signals to potential investors. 

He emphasized the importance of legal protections and noted 

that the growth in the services sector indicated 

opportunities, and a need, for investment. 

¶11. (SBU) U.S. businessmen at the luncheon raised concerns 

that the value of the U.S. dollar could fall further if 

central banks around the globe decide not to continue 

including the dollar among their reserves.  Emboffs replied 

that fears about the effect of U.S. trade and budget deficits 

have persisted despite the strength of the U.S. economy. 

Emboffs also remarked that threats to dump the dollar would 

probably not yield large-scale changes in central banks' 

practices to hold dollar-denominated reserves.  U.S. foreign 

policy questions ranged from U.S.-Latin American relations to 

the Middle East peace process.  Ambassador Gutierrez 

responded that U.S.-Latin American relations have improved 

and are improving.  The U.S. is working to expand its trade 

ties with Latin America and has been in discussions on energy 

integration with many countries in the region.  One 

participant in the luncheon was critical of the U.S. position 

regarding Argentina's relationship with the IMF, suggesting 

the U.S. should have been more supportive.  The Ambassador 

was quick to remind the audience that the U.S., unlike other 

G-7 states, had consistently supported Argentina in the 

aftermath of its economic crisis.  Others in attendance 

interjected that the U.S. is not to blame for economic 

difficulties Argentina brought on itself.  The U.S. remains 

hopeful, the Ambassador remarked, for peace in the Middle 

East.  He maintained that U.S. policy is that Israeli and 

Palestinian leaders need to achieve this goal themselves. 

 

¶12. (SBU) Econoff met with Salta Secretary of State Roberto 

Ibarguren.  Ibarguren conveyed his appreciation for the USG's 

strong anti-narcotics cooperation in the province.  He used 

the occasion of the meeting to ask for Embassy Buenos Aires 

consideration of expanding the cooperation to include greater 

customs and immigration controls.  Ibarguren said the border 

with Bolivia needed a modernized system for monitoring 

flights, cars, and people crossing into Salta.  He reported 

that the Gendarmeria had been successful in apprehending 

groups of illegal immigrants from the PRC's Fujian Province. 

He nevertheless would like to work closely with the Embassy 

to identify ""snakeheads"" organizing illegal immigration 

activities into and within the province.  Econoff said the 

Embassy would give these informal requests appropriate 

consideration and looked forward to continuing a close and 

productive relationship with the province. 

 

------------------------------------- 

Press Coverage Extensive and Positive 

------------------------------------- 

 

¶13. (SBU) Press were present on both days of the trip. 

Clusters of media photographers recorded the Ambassador's 

airport arrival, his dinner with the governor, and other 

events.  Salta's binational center, ISICANA, hosted a late 

Thursday afternoon press conference by the Ambassador. 

Reporters from national cable news, Salta TV and radio 

stations, Salta's newspapers, national papers, and the wire 

services were all present.  Several reporters asked for and 

received five-minute exclusives with the Ambassador after the 

press conference had concluded. 

 

¶14. (SBU) The Salta press was extremely appreciative that the 

Ambassador gave them a half-hour of his time to openly answer 

their questions.  One lamented, ""If only our city councilmen 

would give us even a fraction of that time.""  On Friday the 

25th, the Ambassador did a live on-air interview with Buenos 

Aires' leading radio station, Radio 10.  A local TV and radio 

station also showed up for brief coverage of the Ambassador's 

visit to the Salta gendarmes' K-9 unit. 

 

¶15. (SBU) Coverage was extensive and largely positive. 

Though Salta press also focused on the fact that the U.S. 

ambassador was visiting their province and meeting their 

officials, most stories in Argentine media centered on the 

Ambassador's responses to questions on the recent scandal 

involving drug shipment through Buenos Aires' international 

airport.  While coverage varied, the headline of the 2/25 

story in circulation leader ""Clarin"" - ""U.S. Warns on drug 

traffic, but praises the government"" - indicates the tone of 

most reporting.  The Ambassador noted that drug transshipment 

was a problem for Argentina, but that the GOA was making 

serious efforts to combat it.  He praised the level of 

cooperation U.S. anti-drug forces received from their 

Argentine counterparts and noted that U.S. anti-drug efforts 

in Salta provided technical and technological support as part 

of a joint effort with local counterpart agencies.  Comment 

on the Ambassador's remarks in Salta continued in the same 

vein throughout the ensuing week, including brief mention in 

some of the key op-ed columns.  Though all media reflected 

GOA appreciation with U.S. cooperation and the Ambassador's 

remarks, some reporters suggested that it had been the U.S. 

that tipped-off the GOA on the recent Buenos Aires airport 

drug scandal.  The Ambassador made clear in his 2/25 

interview with leading ""Radio 10"" that this was not the case. 

 

¶16. (SBU) The PAO had sidebar visits with Salta province's 

secretary of culture and education and her staff, and also 

 

SIPDIS 

met briefly with Salta city's culture secretary and the 

rector of the Catholic University of Salta.  At all points, 

past and future cooperation between the Embassy and Salta 

institutions was discussed.  All Salteno interlocutors noted 

Governor Romero's firm support for increased cultural 

programming in the city and province.  PAS is already 

providing assistance to some of the programs Governor Romero 

is most interested in, such as the symphony orchestra. 

 

------------------------------ 

Mayor Upbeat on City's Economy 

------------------------------ 

 

¶17. (SBU) The Ambassador was received by Salta Mayor Miguel 

Angel Isa at the Salta City Hall on February 24.  Isa has 

been mayor of Salta's capital city since being elected on the 

Peronist Party (PJ) ticket in 2003.  Mayor Isa thanked the 

Ambassador for his visit and presented him with the keys to 

the city.  Isa highlighted the economic progress that has 

occurred under his mandate in the city of roughly 600,000. 

He reported that the tourism and construction sectors are 

booming and unemployment is down. The Mayor said that the 

city recently launched a major tourism advertising campaign 

in Europe that he thought would help to attract more European 

tourists.  Mayor Isa also highlighted the city's efforts to 

combat drug addiction.  The Ambassador noted the common cause 

that the United States and Argentina have in fighting drug 

addiction and trafficking. 

 

¶18. (SBU) Isa reported that his relations with the province 

are good.  He said that there was an equitable division of 

responsibilities in the city between the city and provincial 

governments.  He noted that the city was in the midst of a 

long-term joint project with the provincial government 

designed to restore the city's numerous colonial-era 

buildings.  The Ambassador thanked Mayor Isa for his 

hospitality. 

 

-------- 

Comment: 

-------- 

 

¶19. (C) The Ambassador's trip to Salta was productive on many 

levels.  The meetings with political and business elites 

deepened the Embassy's contacts in this important province 

and provided for a useful exchange of ideas.  The visit to 

the NBTF and Gendarmeria headquarters emphasized the 

importance the USG places on counternarcotics efforts at a 

time when Argentina is fixated on the narcotics issue 

stemming from the recent Buenos Aires airport drug scandal. 

Salta's location, sharing borders with Bolivia, Paraguay and 

Chile, makes this province critical to stemming the flow of 

illegal drugs into Argentina.  The message the Ambassador 

brought with him to Salta focused on the importance the U.S. 

places on the bilateral relationship and on the need for 

continued political, economic, and counternarcotics 

cooperation.  Given the favorable press coverage in Salta and 

the positive reception the Ambassador received from those 

with whom he met, it appears that this message was well 

received. 

 

 

GUTIERREZ 


=======================CABLE ENDS============================

"