08BUENOSAIRES568
ARGENTINA: PLANNING MINISTER DE VIDO ON ARGENTNE TIES WITH
Wed Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0568/01 1211722
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301722Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0910
INFO RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 000568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR LTRAN AND MMALLOY 
PASS USTR FOR DUCKWORTH 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/OLAC/PEACHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EEPET ECON PREL PGOV AR VZ BR EC
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: PLANNING MINISTER DE VIDO ON ARGENTNE TIES WITH 

U.S., VENEZUELA, AND DOMESTIC STRATEGY TO LAUNCH NEW INFRASTRUCTURE 

AND ""SOCIAL PACT"" INITIATIVES 

 

REF:  Buenos Aires 496, 407, 356, 288, 230, 07 BsAs 1892 

 

This cable contains business-sensitive information - not for 

internet distribution. 

 

------- 

Summary 

------- 

 

¶1. (SBU) Planning Minister De Vido called A/S Shannon's visit to 

Buenos Aires a positive step in rebuilding bilateral relations 

damaged by the earlier Antonini Wilson ""suitcase"" scandal.  He hopes 

the postponed visits to the United States by former President Nestor 

Kirchner and Chief of Cabinet Alberto Fernandez can be rescheduled 

soon and hoped he too might visit the United States.  De Vido will 

travel to Venezuela shortly to sign agreements on a national oil 

company joint venture to construct an LNG receiving plant in Buenos 

Aires province's Bahia Blanca.  He expressed serious concern over 

what he saw as a union-driven process of radicalization in Venezuela 

that is pushing President Chavez further to the left and led to 

Chavez' decision to nationalize the Argentine-owned Sidor steel 

plant.  De Vido said he was skeptical that Bolivia will meet its 

contractual obligations to provide Argentina natural gas, even when 

a second natural gas pipeline linking the two nations is completed 

in 2010.  He noted his recent trip with President Kirchner to 

Ecuador to sign an accord between GoA state-owned energy company 

ENARSA and its Ecuadorian counterpart to construct a $1.5 billion 

hydro-electric project. 

 

¶2. (SBU)  On agricultural sector strife, De Vido called the GoA's 

strategy of sector-specific dialogues on beef, wheat, and milk 

""successful"" despite ongoing limits on beef and wheat exports that 

have prompted accusations of bad faith by agrarian associations.  He 

admitted, however, that there had not been good GoA dialogue with 

farmers earlier.  On inflation, he revealed that an upcoming May 7 

consumer price index conference here at which U.S., French, and 

Spanish experts will participate will help the GoA launch a new, 

more credible CPI index.  De Vido also signaled plans on Argentina's 

May 25 Independence Day for what local pro-government press has 

called an effort to ""re-launch"" and give the government some new 

momentum.  The GoA will also release a Bicentennial strategic 

infrastructure plan detailing development priorities in the 

transport, telecom, energy and mining, water and sanitation, and 

school sectors for each of Argentina's 24 provinces and the Buenos 

Aires metropolitan area.  Also on May 25, the GoA will formally 

launch a ""Social Pact"" initiative to help reconcile and coordinate 

interests of the GoA with organizations representing Argentina's 

industrial, unions and financial service sectors.  This is 

apparently designed to be an ongoing round table which would stand 

in contrast to the lack of dialogue which led to the rural sector 

strike. (SEPTELs will examine further). De Vido also defended the 

GoA's recent increase in mining sector export tariffs, noted new 

generation investment plans by U.S. company AES, and supported 

Exxon's decision not to sell its Argentine refining and gas station 

assets. 

End Summary. 

 

--------------------------------------------- 

Praising Shannon's Understanding and Patience 

--------------------------------------------- 

 

¶3. (SBU) In an April 25 meeting with Ambassador, Planning Minister 

De Vido offered a tour d'horzon of current domestic political and 

regional challenges facing the GoA, as well as background on the 

GoA's broad infrastructure development strategic plans and comments 

on individual U.S. energy company investments in Argentina.  His 

comments on the planned May 25 launch of a new ""Social Pact"" 

initiative by the government will be reported Septel. 

 

¶4. (SBU) De Vido called A/S Shannon's March visit to Buenos Aires a 

positive step in rebuilding bilateral relations damaged by the 

earlier Antonini Wilson ""suitcase"" scandal.  Shannon, he said, 

understands the Latin mindset and appreciates the specific 

characteristics and idiosyncrasies of individual nations.  Above 

all, he praised Shannon's patience, noting that the saying ""he who 

loses patience loses all"" has particular relevance for those 

countries who seek to maintain good working relationships with 

Argentina. 

 

¶5. (SBU) On the earlier planned but postponed March visits of former 

president Nestor Kirchner and Chief of Cabinet Alberto Fernandez to 

New York and Washington, De Vido blamed the extraordinary demands on 

 

 

Fernandez as a result of the three-week agriculture strike in March. 

 He agreed that these visits are important steps to build mutual 

confidence that should be rescheduled soon.  Ambassador suggested 

that De Vido himself consider visiting the United States, and DeVido 

said he would like to do so later in this year. 

 

--------------------------------------------- ---- 

Ag Sector Strike, Inflation and Curbing the Press 

--------------------------------------------- ---- 

 

¶6. (SBU) On ongoing GoA negotiations with the agriculture sector on 

polemical export tariff increases, De Vido was confident that some 

equitable resolution would be achieved, though he declined to say 

whether that could happen before the agrarian associations' May 2 

strike deadline.  He called the GoA's strategy of sector-specific 

dialogues on beef, wheat, and milk ""successful"" despite coincident 

limits on beef and wheat exports managed by Internal Commerce 

Secretary Moreno that have prompted accusations of bad faith by 

 

SIPDIS 

agrarian associations.  De Vido noted that Brazil has recently 

followed Argentina's policy lead in announcing restrictions on rice 

exports to ensure domestic supplies. But when discussing this idea 

of a new ""Social Pact""/round table among business, unions and 

government, De Vido said it would be designed to avoid the lack of 

dialogue between government and the farm organizations which led to 

the rural sector strike. 

 

¶7. (SBU) Speaking of domestic inflation, De Vido offered his 

""personal opinion"" that there is an urgent need to reach some 

domestic consensus on how to develop a viable cost of living index 

that bridges the gap between the GoA's (widely discredited) CPI 

index and the interest of everyone in moderating inflationary 

expectations.  He noted the upcoming May 7 INDEC CPI conference at 

which U.S., French and Spanish CPI experts will participate as a 

step in that direction.  On the GoA's high-profile campaign against 

Clarin, De Vido insisted there were high levels of ""disinformation"" 

that justified the GoA's efforts to modify Argentina's radio 

broadcast law. ""If you don't put limits (on the media), they'll say 

anything,"" De Vido commented. 

 

---------------------------- 

Regional Ties - Energy Focus 

---------------------------- 

 

¶8. (SBU) De Vido said that he would return to Venezuela shortly to 

sign agreements on a PDVSA/ENARSA joint-venture project (Ref BsAs 

288) to construct an LNG receiving plant in Buenos Aires Province's 

Bahia Blanca.  He expressed concern at a union-driven process of 

radicalization in Venezuela that is pushing President Chavez further 

and further to the left.  De Vido called the GoBRV's decision to 

nationalize Techint steelmaker Sidor (Ref BsAs 496) a case in point, 

where demands by seven separate steel factory unions provided the 

impetus for Chavez' nationalization announcement. 

 

¶9. (SBU) De Vido said he was skeptical that Bolivia would meet its 

contractual obligations to provide Argentina natural gas, even when 

a second natural gas pipeline linking the two nations is completed 

in 2010.  He called the President's unsuccessful request at the 

February 2008 trilateral Argentina/Brazil/Bolivia summit in Buenos 

Aires that Brazil cede a portion of its Bolivian gas to Argentina an 

embarrassing ""bad call"" (Ref BsAs 230).  The request should have 

been posed to President Lula quietly in a bilateral meeting. 

 

¶10. (SBU) De Vido noted his recent trip with CFK to Ecuador to sign 

an accord between GoA state-owned energy company ENARSA and its 

Ecuadorian counterpart to construct a $1.5 billion hydro-electric 

project.  He clarified that the GoA would not/not be contributing 

capital in support of its 30% share of the project, but rather would 

work with a number of Argentine private sector players to ""channel"" 

their participation in the project.  He noted that Eduardo 

Eurnekian's Americas Group would be in charge of financing, and 

Enrique Pescarmona's IMPSA group would build turbines for the 

project. 

 

--------------------------------------------- - 

Bicentennial Infrastructure Plan & Social Pact 

--------------------------------------------- - 

 

¶11. (SBU) On May 25 (one of Argentina's two independence days, the 

day the first national government was established in 1810, as well 

as the date former president Nestor Kirchner assumed office in 

2003), the GoA will release its Bicentennial strategic 

infrastructure development plan.  De Vido gave Ambassador a bound 

 

 

300-page text that outlines GoA plans for transport, 

telecommunications, energy, mining, water, sanitation, and school 

development for each of Argentina's 24 provinces and the Buenos 

Aires metropolitan area.  ""We have a plan, we have a vision,"" he 

said.  De Vido confirmed that the GoA will also announce on May 25 a 

""Social Pact"" initiative to help reconcile and coordinate interests 

of the GoA with organizations representing Argentina's industrial, 

unions, and financial service sectors. Local pro-government press is 

presenting this Independence Day effort as a means to ""relaunch"" the 

government and regain momentum. (Septel will examine this in more 

detail). 

 

------------------------- 

Energy and Mining Sectors 

------------------------- 

 

¶12. (SBU) De Vido noted that AES Energy would see him shortly after 

his meeting with the Ambassador to discuss a new potential 

generation investment in southern Patagonia.  (AES had earlier 

informed Embassy the company planned to convey to De Vido AES' 

strong interest in investing roughly $200 million to build a 

greenfield 180 MW combined cycle gas generation plant in southern 

Patagonia.  AES currently generates a total of 2,830 MW in nine 

generation plants here, roughly 12% of total Argentine generation 

capacity.  AES called their new generation investment strategy a 

""defensive"" measure given their large installed generation base here 

and the GoA's insistence on new investment as a ""social obligation"" 

of current sector players.) 

 

¶13. (SBU) On Exxon's recent decision not to sell its Argentine 

refinery and service station assets, De Vido admitted that the GoA 

had rejected a possible Esso sale to Brazil's Petrobras to avoid 

""excessive"" Brazilian participation in the downstream refining and 

retailing sector.  But, he said, the GoA had never really wanted 

Exxon to leave Argentina.  De Vido quoted an old Argentine saying: 

""He that goes without being thrown out, returns without being 

called.""  (Exxon's September 2007 decision to shop its Argentine 

assets reflected a headquarters-mandated strategic retrenchment in 

South America -- Exxon subsequently announced it would be selling 

off its Venezuelan and Brazilian holdings -- as well as growing 

frustration by Exxon's Argentine execs at a complex and distortive 

range of GoA market interventions that have made Exxon's Argentine 

operation only nominally profitable -- Ref 07 BsAs 1892.) 

 

¶14. (SBU) De Vido referred to Apache Energy's longstanding complaint 

that the GoA's decision to cut gas exports to Chile from Tierra del 

Fuego has ""stranded"" large volumes of natural gas in this island 

province pending a planned expansion of the gas pipeline network 

connecting Tierra del Fuego with the Argentine mainland.  This has 

had a significant impact on Apache's profitability since 

over-injection into the existing Tierra del Fuego gas pipeline by 

Petrobras and Total has forced Apache to re-inject a substantial 

volume of gas back into the ground.  De Vido noted that the cut-off 

of Tierra del Fuego gas exports to the Canadian-owned Methenex plant 

in Chile would be ""regularized"" in the coming months and provide 

Apache a source of export revenue.  The GOA, he added, would soon 

bid out the construction of the new gas pipeline from Tierra del 

Fuego to the Argentine mainland.  Once this pipeline is completed in 

2 years' time, he said, oil and gas producers in Tierra del Fuego 

should be able to expand production for domestic consumption 

significantly. 

 

¶15. (SBU) On GoA efforts to build-up domestic energy infrastructure, 

De Vido noted the President's recent inauguration of the first of 

two gas turbines at a Campagna, Buenos Aires province generation 

facility.  The turbines were funded by existing electricity 

generators in Argentina via agreed withholdings of capacity and 

variable cost payments due them by GA electricity wholesaler 

CAMMESA.  The second turbine, he said, would be up and running in 

May, for a total addition to domestic generation capacity of 1,100 

MW.  Looking to the future, De Vido said that the 700 MW Atucha II 

atomic energy facility is scheduled for completion in October 2010 

with 5,000 workers currently employed in its construction. 

 

¶16. (SBU) Ambassador noted Energy Secretary Daniel Cameron's 

participation in the February 2008 WIREC renewable energy (RE) 

conference in Washington.  He encouraged Argentina to move forward 

on Cameron's earlier idea (Ref BsAs 407) of joining the more than 

100 nations who have made voluntary WIREC pledges, taking credit for 

Argentina's current RE efforts, including legislation on the books 

requiring that 5% of diesel fuel be sourced from bio-diesel by 

¶2010. 

 

 

 

¶17. (SBU) On the polemical November 2007 increase in mining sector 

export tariffs, De Vido acknowledged that this could be interpreted 

as contradicting 1990s-era mining legislation that ensured 30 years 

of contractual stability.  But the increase in global commodity 

prices, he said, had boosted mining sector profit margins from the 

15-18% range to the 28% range, and the GoA was committed to 

recycling a portion of additional revenues collected via increased 

export tariffs to mining province-specific infrastructure 

development to maintain a ""virtuous investment cycle.""  He noted the 

example of UK/Swiss mining company Xstrata which controls the 

world-class Bajo de Alumbrera gold mine in Catamarca province. 

Additional taxes collected from this company will be used to fund a 

$200 million/year fiduciary fund to develop provincial 

infrastructure, including roads and electricity public works that 

will benefit the mining operation itself. 

 

------- 

Comment 

------- 

 

¶18. (SBU) In his role as Planning Minister, De Vido is directly 

responsible for Argentina's public infrastructure, energy, telecom, 

transportation, and mining sectors.  He also oversees a large -- and 

rapidly growing -- volume of government transfers and subsidies to 

these sectors that mark the GoA's interventionist economic policy 

model.  As a senior advisor, presidential confidant and ""penguin,"" 

one of a loyal inner circle who served with Nestor Kirchner while he 

was governor of Santa Cruz province, De Vido has taken on a broader 

""super minister"" profile, and is considered by many to be 

Argentina's de facto Foreign Minister to Venezuela, Bolivia, and 

Ecuador. 

De Vido is also widely reported to be the leading figure of the 

government faction battling with cabinet chief Alberto Fernandez and 

his allies. De Vido's group is portrayed in the press as more 

""interventionist"" than Alberto Fernandez's group. 

 

¶19.  (SBU) De Vido has proven himself an important GoA interlocutor 

to address U.S. investor concerns.  Post will continue to advocate 

aggressively on behalf of U.S. companies in Argentina many of whom, 

while profitable, remain concerned by infrastructure bottlenecks and 

unpredictable shifts in the GoA's regulatory and tax regimes. 

 

WAYNE 


=======================CABLE ENDS============================