08BUENOSAIRES714
ARGENTINA: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH ANTI-CORRUPTION ACTIVIST
Fri May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0714/01 1442102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 232102Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1157
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1418
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 2075
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1254
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1107UNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 000714 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KCOR PHUM ELAB AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH ANTI-CORRUPTION ACTIVIST 
LAURA ALONSO 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  The Ambassador met with Laura Alonso, Executive 
Director for Argentine NGO ""Citizen Power"" (Poder Ciudadano-PC) and 
discussed its ongoing efforts to promote government accountability 
and transparency at the federal and local levels.  Alonso explained 
PC's on-going efforts to investigate alleged campaign finance 
irregularities in the October presidential elections and stated that 
the NGO intends to file a lawsuit.  She also discussed PC's work to 
establish a network of mayors dedicated to promoting transparency 
policies.  The Ambassador congratulated Alonso for her recent 
selection as an Eisenhower Fellow and for receiving the Vital Voices 
Global Leadership Award last April for her role as a global leader 
in the promotion of democracy, human rights, and legal reforms in 
Argentina. End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Investigations into Election Irregularities for the FPV... 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Alonso (protect) outlined PC's progress in investigating 
alleged campaign finance irregularities in last year's presidential 
elections.  She stated that PC has gathered evidence of illicit 
campaign contributions and underreporting of campaign spending.  For 
example, she claimed that the Kirchners' Victory Front (FPV) party 
has not declared all expenses associated with its campaign events, 
nor disclosed information on whether government resources were used 
to finance the campaign.  In addition, Alonso alleged that the FPV 
has withheld information regarding campaign expenses and donors, 
""including the donor behind valijagate.""  Alonso indicated that PC 
will file a complaint with federal criminal judge Maria Romilda 
Servini de Cubria, who also has jurisdiction over electoral 
investigations. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Alonso indicated that she did not think much of Servini's 
judicial objectiveness, and characterized Servini's judicial 
interventions as ""terrible"".  (Servini has been widely criticized 
for her tendency to interpret the law in favor of whichever 
administration is in power.  In 2003, contrary to Argentine law, she 
not only allowed the Peronist party to present two candidates in the 
general elections -- i.e., Menem and Kirchner --  she also decided 
that the FPV did not have to disclose the names nor total 
contributions of private campaign donors.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Alonso asserted that as a Criminal Judge, Servini should 
not have jurisdiction over cases involving electoral fraud. 
Although some argue that Congress would have to pass a law in order 
to establish a separate Electoral Court, Alonso believes that 
Argentina's Electoral Code has already established a process by 
which the Council of Magistrates should appoint judges exclusively 
devoted to electoral matters.  She indicated that PC has begun 
preliminary research into the Council of Magistrates' ongoing delay 
in nominating Judges to preside over electoral issues. 
 
-------------- 
...and Recrear 
-------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  In addition to these investigations, Alonso noted that 
National Deputy and recently elected President of the center-right 
Recrear party, Esteban Bullrich, has hired PC to examine the party's 
internal election structure and propose recommendations to improve 
the process.  (Reftel reports concerns by some over irregularities 
in the small opposition party's recent internal elections.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Investigation into Bullet Train Bribery Allegations 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) PC is also investigating allegations into transnational 
bribery associated with the GOA's decision to award the building of 
a bullet train to the French-Spanish-Argentine consortium Alstom, 
Alonso stated.  She pointed out that now everyone is saying that 
Alstom will build Cordoba city's new subway system despite the fact 
that a public tender for the project has not yet been announced. 
When the Ambassador asked if she raised these issues with the 
Europeans, Alonso said it was very difficult to talk to the Spanish, 
French, and German Embassies regarding the importance of 
transparency in public tenders.  The Ambassador noted that in the 
past, the USG has worked to pressure the UK, Germany, and France to 
investigate bribery cases using their adhesion to the OECD 
Anti-Bribery Convention as leverage.  He noted that U.S. companies 
are at a competitive disadvantage with respect to their European 
counterparts, since they are subject to the Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act and are therefore not allowed to engage in bribery to 
win contracts.  Alonso agreed. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
GOA Allies in the Fight Against Corruption 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Ambassador then asked who have been PC's key allies in 
the GOA in the fight against corruption.  Alonso noted that PC has 
worked closely with Manuel Garrido, Federal Prosecutor in charge of 
administrative investigations.  She indicated that PC has worked 
with Garrido to submit a grant proposal to the Inter-American 
Development Bank to develop an archive of the Prosecutor General's 
administrative investigations over the last 40 years. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The Ambassador asked for Alonso's views on the GOA's 
Anti-Corruption Office (ACO).  She indicated that PC had a better 
institutional relationship with the ACO's Policy Division.  She 
expressed regret that the long-time director of the ACO's Policy 
Division, Nicolas Raigorodsky had moved on to the Ministry of 
Health, but noted that she had a strong working relationship with 
the new Director, Nestor Baraldi, given that he is a former PC 
member.  She opined that the ACO's Investigation Division was 
""paralyzed"". 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  When PC does not get much traction from the federal 
government, they turn to working with local officials and the 
private sector, Alonso stated.  For example, PC has reached an 
agreement with 15 city mayors in BA province to develop a network of 
mayors dedicated to government transparency and citizen 
participation.  It has presented a concept paper to the EU in the 
hopes of obtaining a grant to expand the network.  PC is organizing 
a meeting for this network in June or July, and hopes to attract an 
additional 15 mayors from the province. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  PC is working with the mayor of a city in Buenos Aires 
province who wants to hold a transparent, international public 
tender for trash collection.  According to Alonso, the city has been 
under a lot of pressure from Hugo Moyano, head of the General 
Worker's Confederation (Confederacion General de Trabajadores-CGT) 
and truck-drivers union, and his son Pablo Moyano to keep the 
contract in the hands of the local truck-drivers union.  In an 
attempt to make the public tender a more legitimate process, the 
city has signed an agreement with PC to organize public town hall 
meetings and develop on-line mechanisms to consult the public for 
their views on the matter.  PC is in similar discussions with BA 
city mayor's Mauricio Macri, but no agreement has yet been reached, 
Alonso stated. 
 
------------------- 
Upcoming PC Reports 
------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  When the Ambassador asked about PC's other activities, 
Alonso noted that in addition to conducting Transparency 
International's Global Corruption Perception Index, she hopes to 
conduct a similar index measuring Argentine perception of corruption 
in their own country.  She stated that this would help quantify 
local concern over corruption and mitigate criticism that discredits 
the index for only taking into account foreign perceptions.  In an 
attempt to make corruption a more salient issue among Argentines, 
Alonso indicated that PC will also conduct a study of corruption in 
soccer clubs.  The NGO is working on a report that examines GOA and 
Congressional efforts to increase transparency over the last ten 
years. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  Alonso noted that PC also hopes to participate in the 
Publish What You Pay Coalition's ""Extractive Industries Transparency 
Initiative"" by conducting a small study on Argentina normative 
framework.  In late October, Alonso has been invited to serve as a 
panelist to discuss transparency in media communication at the 13th 
International Anti-Corruption Conference in Greece. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Alonso -- Vital Voices Leader and Eisenhower Fellow 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  The Ambassador congratulated Alonso for her recent 
selection as an Eisenhower Fellow and for receiving the Vital Voices 
Global Leadership Award in April for her role as a global leader in 
the promotion of democracy, human rights and legal reforms in 
Argentina, particularly her pioneer advocacy for recognizing the 
right to transparency as a human right.  Alonso thanked the 
Ambassador, and said that she looks forward to observing the U.S. 
electoral process first-hand during the two-month Eisenhower 
fellowship.  She noted that that the Vital Voices award helped to 
highlight media attention to PC's fight against corruption.  She 
said that the award ceremony itself was an opportunity to meet other 
remarkable leaders, adding that Corporate America's commitment to 
philanthropy is ""impressive"".  While in Washington, Alonso met with 
organizations specializing in NGO sustainability, including one 
called Virtual Ventures that has applied for a USAID grant to assist 
three NGOs, including PC, in their efforts to achieve 
sustainability. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Alonso and the Ambassador also discussed the upcoming 
Vital Voices Summit for women leaders from latin America which will 
be held in Buenos Aires in October.  Alonso suggested that the 
Embassy host an event in June with potential Argentine corporate 
sponsors to drum up local financial support for the summit.  The 
Ambassador offered to consider the possibility. 
 
WAYNE