05LIMA4986
FUJIMORI UPDATE: PERU'S SUPREME COURT APPROVES
Wed Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 004986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2015 
TAGS: PGOV KJUS PE
SUBJECT: FUJIMORI UPDATE: PERU'S SUPREME COURT APPROVES 
NINE COUNTS FOR EXTRADITION REQUEST; FORMER FUJIMORI 
CONGRESSMAN BELIEVES...

id: 45972
date: 11/23/2005 14:25
refid: 05LIMA4986
origin: Embassy Lima
classification: CONFIDENTIAL
destination: 05LIMA4842|05LIMA4861|05LIMA4915
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 004986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2015 
TAGS: PGOV KJUS PE
SUBJECT: FUJIMORI UPDATE: PERU'S SUPREME COURT APPROVES 
NINE COUNTS FOR EXTRADITION REQUEST; FORMER FUJIMORI 
CONGRESSMAN BELIEVES EX-PRESIDENT WAS POORLY ADVISED ON 
TRAVELING TO SANTIAGO 
 
REF: A. LIMA 4915 
     ¶B. LIMA 4861 
     ¶C. LIMA 4842 
 
Classified By: D/Polcouns Art Muirhead for Reason 1.4 (D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY.  Peru's Supreme Court has approved nine 
different cases for inclusion in the Fujimori extradition 
request to Chile.  Upon his return to Lima from the APEC 
Summit, President Toledo would not comment on the specifics 
of his talks about Fujimori with Japanese PM Koizumi and 
Chilean President Lagos, but he appeared upbeat about the 
prospects for improved relations with Japan.  A former 
Fujimorista Congressman told Emboff that Fujimori was poorly 
advised by his legal advance staff in Santiago; that the 
Fujimorista remnant parties are fully reconciled and will 
present a single congressional candidate list in February; 
and that the Fujimoristas are seriously considering putting 
forth a woman as their presidential candidate.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------ 
Extradition Issues 
------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Peru's Supreme Court has approved the inclusion of 
nine different cases in the extradition request for former 
President Fujimori that will be forwarded to the Cabinet for 
a final decision on what should be submitted to Chile.  The 
charges involved in these cases include:  illegal 
authorization of a raid on former Intelligence Advisor 
Vladimiro Montesinos' house in 2000; illegal retirement of 
military officers; diversion of public funds from the 
National Intelligence Service (SIN) to the Presidency; 
improper payments to publicist Daniel Borobio; improper 
payments to astrologer Hector Faisal; illegal wiretapping; 
allowing Montesinos to usurp the management of the SIN; 
irregular acquisition of the Cable News Channel; and 
irregular purchase of medicine from China.  Prison terms for 
these offenses would range from 8-12 years. 
 
¶3. (U) On 11/15, the Investigatory Justice of the Supreme 
Court, Jose Luis Lecaros, rejected one of the cases forwarded 
by the Justice Ministry for inclusion in the extradition 
file.  The charge that Fujimori had illegally abandoned the 
Presidency in 2000 was set aside on grounds that this would 
not be a criminal violation in Chile, but rather an 
administrative offense punishable by a fine.  Under the terms 
of the 1932 Peru-Chile Treaty, an extradition can proceed 
only if it refers to a crime punishable by at least one year 
in jail in both countries.  The Court will probably dismiss 
the charge that Fujimori covered up Montesinos, flight, on 
grounds that this would not be a criminal offense in Chile. 
 
-------------- 
Toledo at APEC 
-------------- 
 
¶4. (C) President Toledo was able to work on the Fujimori 
issue at the APEC Summit in South Korea, despite the fact 
that Toledo's initial request for a meeting with Japanese PM 
Koizumi was rejected on the grounds that the latter had "no 
space on his agenda."  Upon his return to Lima on 11/21, 
Toledo said he did not want to politicize the Fujimori 
affair, and would not reveal the substance of his 
conversations with Koizumi and with Chilean President Ricardo 
Lagos.  Toledo seemed upbeat about the future direction of 
Peruvian-Japanese relations, stating that he had encountered 
great openness and collaboration in his talk with Koizumi. 
Foreign Minister Maurtua seconded this in a private 
conversation with the Ambassador on 11/21.  Maurtua said that 
GOP fears that Japan might try to hinder Fujimori's 
extradition to Peru were assuaged. 
 
--------------------------- 
Anti-Fujimori Demonstration 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Thousands of protestors (estimates ranged from 2,000 
to 14,000; we lean toward the former) took part in an 11/15 
anti-Fujimori march that began in downtown Lima and ended in 
front of the Chilean Embassy.  Protest activity both in favor 
of and against the ex-President seems to be diminishing here, 
as it now appears Fujimori will remain in custody in Chile 
while the extradition process moves forward. 
 
------------------------------- 
A Former Congressman's Comments 
------------------------------- 
¶6. (C) Deputy Polcouns discussed the Fujimori situation at a 
11/17 lunch with former Congressman Fernan Altuve.  Altuve 
served in the Congress with Fujimori's Peru 2000 Party prior 
to the "auto-coup" of 1992.  He is a historian and a 
constitutional lawyer who has claimed to have been in 
frequent contact with Fujimori during his Japan exile. 
Although still a Fujimori partisan, Altuve tends to speak 
frankly, and ironically when it suits him.  He offered the 
following observations about the current situation: 
 
-- Fujimori went to Chile thinking he could control the 
situation and stay out of jail once he got there.  In this 
sense, Fujimori was very poorly advised by the legal advance 
staff he had working in Santiago.  He was said to be in the 
process of hiring former Chilean Foreign Minister Hernan 
Felipe Errazurriz as part of his team of advisors.  (NOTE: 
Lima papers reported this week that Fujimori has hired two 
new Chilean attorneys, one of whom, Gabriel Saliaznik, 
represented former Argentine President Menem during his 
Chilean exile.  END NOTE.) 
 
-- The people that were referred to an 11/17 article in 
leading daily "La Republica" as the team that put together 
Fujimori's trip were for the most part a bunch of idiots, 
especially (former Ambassador to Germany) Luis Silva 
Santiesteban and (former Mayor of Miraflores) German Kruger. 
Altuve wasn't familiar with Jorge Bejar, a Fujimori associate 
who's been identified in some reports as an American citizen. 
 
-- The different Fujimorista remnant parties are fully 
reconciled and united behind their leader.  They will present 
a single congressional candidate list, as close as possible 
to the February 8 deadline.  They are seriously considering 
putting forth a woman as a presidential candidate (no 
specifics on whom), someone who's dynamic, representative of 
Peruvian womanhood and not a "fat old maid" like Lourdes 
Flores.  Whoever is chosen to run will be selected personally 
by Fujimori. 
 
-- There is a guiding hand behind the more favorable 
publicity appearing in "La Razon" (the Lima daily linked to 
Fujimori's and Montesinos' interests) for the "charismatic" 
political leaders (Fujimori, Alan Garcia and Ollanta Humala), 
and there could be some kind of electoral collaboration among 
these in the presidential second round. 
STRUBLE 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================