05LIMA2271
AN EYE FOR A VISA -- FAKING EYE INJURIES TO GET
Fri May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201446Z May 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 002271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP, VO, CA/EX, WHA/AND, DS 
MEXICO FOR DHS 
 
MEXICO FOR DHS 
DHS FOR CAO 
 
E.O.E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFRD CVIS KCRM ASEC CMGT CJAN PE
SUBJECT:  AN EYE FOR A VISA -- FAKING EYE INJURIES TO GET 
VISAS 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Post's Fraud Prevention Unit was contacted 
by internal auditors for the Peruvian Ministry of Women and 
Social Development (MIMDES) who were auditing the National 
Council for Integration for the Handicapped (CONADIS). 
During the course of their audit, they determined that 
someone with access to CONADIS was providing malafide 
applicants with genuine documentation confirming a physical 
handicap based on fraudulent medical certifications.  These 
certifications were used to support applications for visas 
to travel for medical treatment to the United States.  FPU 
identified the individuals who submitted applications using 
CONADIS letters of support.  Those applicants with pending 
applications were invited to the Embassy for interviews. 
Two of the applicants were interviewed and then arrested by 
the Peruvian National Police (PNP).  They admitted paying a 
visa fixer USD 5,000 for providing the certification letters 
and official government documentation.  Post will be 
requesting Department's assistance via septel to revoke 
visas issued to those applicants who obtained them under 
this scheme.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 

¶2. (U) In mid-April, a group of auditors from the Peruvian 
Ministry of Women and Social Development (MIMDES) approached 
Post's Fraud Prevention Unit with information on a scheme 
they detected while auditing CONADIS (National Council for 
Integration for the Handicapped).  The auditors found that 
as far back as 2002, CONADIS had been issuing certifications 
for handicapped members of their organization who claimed to 
need eye treatment in the U.S.  To support their claim for 
medical treatment, the applicants (even children) applied 
for their visas with one eye glued shut to simulate a vision 
handicap, apparently using crazy glue. 
 
¶3. (SBU) For a fee of $5,000 the visa fixers, Pedro Luis 
CAMPOS Parra (DOB 02Nov65) and Miguel Ruperto CAMPOS Parra 
(DOB 10Sep58) fabricated medical certifications for malafide 
applicants, specifically confirming an eye condition 
manifested as a disfigured eye that did not open. Claiming 
to be an employee at CONADIS, Pedro CAMPOS obtained 
legitimate documentation certifying that the person was 
handicapped.  Two social workers at CONADIS, Narciza del 
Pilar Solis Zarzosa (DOB 11May73) and Karina Edith Chero 
Amero (DOB 23Jun71) were identified as the employees who 
assisted Pedro CAMPOS in preparing the official 
documentation.  The institute also provided a letter 
addressed to the Consul General requesting assistance in 
issuing visas for U.S. medical treatment. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Post identified 11 fraudulent visa applications 
since May 2004.  These applicants all solicited visas to 
travel to receive eye treatment or surgery at Bascon Palmer 
Eye Institute in Miami, or to accompany a minor traveling 
for that purpose.  While some of the applicants had been 
denied visas under Section 214(b) of the INA, a number had 
been issued.  Four applicants had pending applications. 
 
The Sting 
--------- 

¶5. (U) Working closely with RSO and the Peruvian National 
Police (PNP), two of the four applicants who had 
applications pending at Post, Julio Oswaldo AGUILAR Rojas 
(DOB 31Jan55) and Paul Francisco CALDERON Rios (DOB 
03Jul78), were invited for second interviews on May 5, 2005. 
PNP officials filmed one of them, Aguilar, at his mechanic 
shop the day before the interview.  He had both eyes open 
and no apparent eye problems.  For his interview the 
following day, Aguilar appeared at the Embassy with one of 
his eyes glued shut.  He admitted to ARSO that CAMPOS Parra 
had obtained the documentation from CONADIS for Aguilar to 
submit in support of his application. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Aguilar and Calderon were found ineligible for 
visas under section 212(a)(6)(C) and were arrested by the 
PNP for further investigation.  At the police station, both 
admitted that they had agreed to pay the Campos brothers 
$5,000 to arrange for documentation to travel to the United 
States.  Calderon had made a down payment of $1,500; Aguilar 
$2,000.  Both Miguel Ruberto Campos and Pedro Campos were 
arrested on 05May05.  Pedro Campos' visa has been revoked 
under section 212(a)(6)(E) quasi of the INA.  He has been 
invited to the consular section for an interview once he is 
released from jail.  Miguel Campos has been found ineligible 
for a visa under 212(a)(6)(E) quasi as Post has no record of 
a visa issuance in his name. 
 
Conclusion and Follow Up 
------------------------ 

¶7. (U) Six applicants were issued visas solely for the 
purpose of medical treatment in the U.S. or to accompany a 
minor traveling for that purpose.  CONADIS has confirmed 
that their medical certificates are fraudulent.  Post 
believes all the applicants paid Campos a fee to obtain 
fraudulent medical certificates and official Peruvian 
government documentation to support their visa applications. 
They followed Campos' instructions in applying for their 
visas and, at the time of their visa interview, appeared 
with one eye glued shut.  Their records with Peruvian 
immigration show departure from Peru to the U.S. and no 
return.  As misrepresentation was material to visa issuance, 
the adult applicants are ineligible for visas under section 
212(a)(6)(C).  The children no longer overcome 214b.  Post 
is requesting, via septel, Department assistance in revoking 
their visas. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In addition, Gozalo Alegria, Carlos Manuel (DOB 
21Jul75) was issued a visa for the same purpose and CONADIS 
has confirmed that his medical certificate was false.  His 
Peruvian Immigration departure/arrival record shows he 
traveled to the U.S. and returned to Peru.  His visa (foil 
number 71508668; issued on 8Jun04) is now expired and Post 
has entered him into CLASS under section 212(a)(6)(C) quasi. 
 
Struble