05LIMA2282
CONGRESS AVOIDS VOTE ON PROPOSED TOLEDO SANCTIONS,
Fri May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 002282 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL PE
SUBJECT: CONGRESS AVOIDS VOTE ON PROPOSED TOLEDO SANCTIONS, 
PASSES VILLANUEVA COMMITTEE DOCUMENTS TO PUBLIC MINISTRY 
 
REF: A. LIMA 2250 
 
     ¶B. LIMA 2249 
     ¶C. LIMA 2241 
     ¶D. LIMA 2054 
     ¶E. LIMA 1375 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  In a stormy plenary session that lasted nearly 
16 hours, the Congress finally voted 56-47 to send the 
documents amassed by the committee investigating President 
Alejandro Toledo and his Peru Posible party for registration 
fraud (Villanueva Committee) to the Public Ministry for use 
in the latter's investigation.  No/no vote was taken on the 
different sanctions proposed by the opposition party members 
of the Villanueva Committee.  While the Villanueva 
Committee's report has been effectively archived, the Public 
Ministry and an Anti-Corruption Judge continue their criminal 
investigations and proceedings into registration fraud and 
obstruction of justice allegations.  Meanwhile, opposition 
APRA party members are still stirring the pot, threatening to 
present a new resolution calling for sanctions against Toledo 
on the grounds that he obstructed the Villanueva Committee's 
investigation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  The plenary session began at 09:00 on 5/19 and did not 
end until 01:45 on 5/20.  Debate centered on the substance of 
the Villanueva Committee's report, on whether it was adopted 
in accordance with regulations requiring an absolute 
majority-plus-one to constitute a quorum (Ref D), on the 
three sanctions recommended by opposition members of the 
Committee, and on the performance of Committee members during 
their investigation, with frequent digressions into personal 
insults and impassioned defenses of the honor of those so 
impugned. 
 
¶3.  In the end, following consultations with the leaders of 
the different legislative blocs, Congress President Antero 
Flores-Araoz called for a vote on whether Congress should 
forward the documents produced by the Villanueva Committee to 
the Public Ministry (Attorney General's office) as an 
official report or as "everything acted upon."  The latter 
characterization won by a vote of 56-47.  The sanctions 
against Toledo proposed by the opposition members of the 
Committee (vacating the Presidency, disqualifying Toledo from 
holding public office for ten years after his term ends, 
suspending the President for "temporary incapacity") were 
not/not voted upon. 
 
¶4.  Towards the conclusion of the session, opposition APRA 
legislators began circulating a resolution calling for 
Toledo's 40-day suspension on the grounds that he obstructed 
the work of the Villanueva Committee.  According to press 
accounts, APRA was able to amass close to 40 signatures, 
which would enable them to place this resolution on the 
Congressional agenda. 
 
¶5.  Media coverage of the Congress' deliberations has been 
uniformly negative, portraying it as a political circus, 
highlighting the less savory exchanges between legislators, 
and pointing out the overall lack of quality reasoning in the 
debate. 
 
¶6.  COMMENT:  Congress' decisions not to recognize the 
Villanueva Committee report as an official document and to 
pass it on to the Public Ministry for appropriate handling 
effectively archives the Committee's investigation. 
Nonetheless, this does not mean that the President can rest 
easy.  The Public Ministry has been carrying out its own 
investigation, as has Anti-Corruption Judge Saul Pena.  The 
latter reportedly is close to rendering a decision in the 
prosecution of Toledo's sister Margarita and others accused 
of complicity in the creation and submission of false 
signatures to register Toledo's Pais Posible (now Peru 
Posible) party in 2000, as well as of GOP and Peru Posible 
officials accused of obstructing justice by facilitating the 
temporary flight of a key witness (Ref E).  Convictions in 
those cases could well lead to a revival of charges against 
the President.  In this respect, APRA's proposed resolution 
to suspend Toledo for obstructing the Villanueva Committee's 
investigation, while likely to fail, should keep political 
tensions high for the immediate future.  END COMMENT. 
STRUBLE