05LIMA3887
TFUS01:  SOUTH AMERICAN COMMUNITY OF NATIONS
Thu Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 003887 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID PREL PE
SUBJECT: TFUS01:  SOUTH AMERICAN COMMUNITY OF NATIONS 
EXPRESSES SUPPORT AFTER HURRICANE KATRINA 
 
 
¶1. The Peruvian Foreign Ministry, on 9/5, issued a communique 
on behalf of the South American Community of Nations (CSN), 
over which Peru currently presides, expressing that 
organizations' solidarity with the American people in the 
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, the willingness of its member 
states to assist in relief efforts and member states' 
determination to lend assistance to their citizens adversely 
affected by the storm.  The Spanish language text is 
available on the Peruvian Foreign Ministry's website at 
http://www.rree.gob.pe.  An unofficial Embassy translation of 
the communique follows. 
 
 
¶2. Begin text of Communique of the South American Community 
of Nations: 
 
The South American Community of Nations wishes to convey its 
grief over the painful consequences which Hurricane Katrina 
has brought about after passing through the states of 
Louisiana, Mississipi, and Alabama in the United States. 
 
In that regard, it wishes to express its full solidarity with 
the American people in these dramatic circumstances, and 
wishes to convey it's heartfelt condolences to all victims 
who have lost their loved ones and/or their possessions as a 
result of this national catastrophe. 
 
At the same time, it stands in deep sympathy and close watch 
over the process to control and repair the damage caused by 
the hurricane. The South American Community of Nations wishes 
to affirm its determination to cooperate in everything which 
it is capable of doing in order to support current efforts 
being made to overcome the many difficulties which are being 
encountered. The Community administrations are determined to 
lend their assistance to all citizens of their nations who 
have been affected by this tragedy. 
 
End Text. 
STRUBLE