07LIMA1061
Embassy Science Fellows Program (PERU)
Wed Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
VZCZCXYZ0024
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPE #1061 0872113
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 282113Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY LIMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4729
INFO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS LIMA 001061

SIPDIS

SIPDIS

DEPT FOR WHA/AND, WHA/EPSC
DEPT FOR OES/STC for Shirley Hart

E.O. 12958:  N/A
TAGS: KSCA TSPL AMGT OTRA APER SENV PE
SUBJECT: Embassy Science Fellows Program (PERU)


¶1. (SBU) Post seeks an Embassy Science Fellow (ESF) to assist the
recently established Genomics Research Unit (GRU) of the Cayetano
Heredia University of Peru (UPCH) in Lima.  The ESF will advise the
GRU in the establishment of genetic research protocols, with a
particular focus on private sector partnerships.  Specifically, the
ESF will provide advice and assistance to on-going research efforts
and provide training to GRU junior staff in genetic mapping
techniques, microsatellite work and marker assisted selection.  The
ESF will help establish more formal relations with similar research
centers in the United States.  The ESF will also give lectures to an
extended audience within the Peruvian scientific community.  This
request has full country team support.

¶2. (SBU) Post proposes a stay of up to two months in Lima in the
June-August time frame, with appropriate field visits.  UPCH will
provide office space, computer and internet access. USDA through the
PL 480 Special Unit in the Ministry of Finance will provide funds
for local housing and in-country travel expenses.  Embassy's Office
of Agricultural Affairs (OAA) has sufficient funds to cover any
unexpected supplementary costs.  Spanish speaking ability is
desirable but not required.  No security clearance is necessary.

¶3. (SBU) Background: the Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia (UPCH)
has recently established a Genomics Research Unit to be staffed by
three repatriated Peruvian scientists as principle researchers.  The
mandate of the unit requires that research focus on subjects of
critical importance to Peru's agricultural export industry.  The GRU
has already established working relation with export industries and
collaborating institutions in Peru.

¶4. (SBU) For example, one research area for the GRU includes working
with Peru's asparagus industry.  USDA's Animal and Plant Health
Service (APHIS) recently turned down the asparagus industry's
request for a pre-shipment treatment and clearance program due, in
large part, to the prevalence of several lepidoptera species on the
product.  Therefore, Peruvian asparagus must undergo methyl bromide
treatment upon arrival in the United States.  Research at the GRU
will explore the genome of the lepidoptera and develop
recommendations for appropriate treatment to support a pre-shipment
treatment and elimination of the required methyl bromide treatment.

¶5. (SBU) Post believes that ESF engagement with the GRU will help
advance Peru's R&D priorities and is consistent with a number of
mission objectives.  The effort will help establish a critical
scientific platform within Peru for research in applied genetics.
The research results will have an important impact on Peru's
agricultural exports and can also assist in supporting Peru's
nascent agricultural biotechnology industry.  With its focus on
products of export interest, proposal is consistent with and
supports mission efforts to enhance Peru's trade capacity.

¶6. (SBU) Contacts within the GRU have suggested that both the
University of California, Davis and Oregon State University have
faculty with the desired skills and expertise.  Specific contacts
can be provide if requested.

¶7. (SBU) Embassy point of contact will be Eugene Philhower,
Agricultural Counselor, Eugene.Philhower@USDA.gov, tel:
(511)618-2491 and fax: (511)434-3043.
STRUBLE