06AITTAIPEI2413
MEDIA REACTION: AFTERMATH OF THE PRESIDENTIAL RECALL
Mon Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2413/01 1980833
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170833Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1129
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5419
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6624UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFTERMATH OF THE PRESIDENTIAL RECALL 
ATTEMPT, MIDDLE EAST, NORTH KOREA 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus their coverage July 15-17 on a declaration by some pro-Green 
scholars on Saturday, calling for President Chen Shui-bian's 
resignation, and Chen's vow to stay on.  News coverage also focused 
on the damage Tropical Storm Bilis did to southern Taiwan, and 
developments in the Donald Keyser espionage case.  Only the three 
local English-language papers front-paged wire service reports about 
Israel's bombing of Hezbollah targets in Lebanon.  The pro-status 
quo "China Times" ran a front-page banner headline July 17 that said 
"With Pro-independence Heavyweights' Strong Support, Urge [Chen] to 
Rectify Taiwan's Name and Write New Constitution; Bian:  No 
Intention to Step Down."  The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" also 
ran a front-page banner headline July 17 that read "Bian Considers 
Quitting DPP to Quell Public Outrage."  Taiwan's biggest daily, the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," however, ran a banner headline on 
page three July 17 that said "President Chen:  Will Seriously Check 
on Cross-Strait Trade and Economics." 
 
¶2.  The Chinese-language papers continued to editorialize on the 
pro-Green scholars' call for Chen's resignation.  A "Liberty Times" 
editorial suggests that Chen listen to the majority of Taiwan 
people's opinion and not to resign.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan 
News" also urged Chen to respect the pro-Green scholars' call for 
clean politics, but believes that it is inappropriate for Chen to 
resign now.  An opinion piece in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" said the United 
States has faith in Taiwan's democracy and will continue to express 
concern about Taiwan.  Editorials in the "China Times" and 
pro-unification "United Daily News," however, urged President Chen 
and the DPP to listen to and positively respond to the pro-Green 
scholars' declaration.  Only one English-language paper 
editorialized on the conflict in the Middle East; a "Taipei Times" 
editorial criticized the United States for playing down Israel's 
bombing of Lebanon and rationalizing the latter's acts of "excessive 
aggression."  An editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post," on the other hand, 
criticized Beijing for dancing to Pyongyang's tune.  A separate 
"China Post" editorial discussed U.S. President Bush's attitude 
toward Pyongyang's recent test-firing of missiles, saying Bush "has 
learned the hard way that brutal force and unilateralism do not 
work, even for the world's sole superpower."  End summary. 
 
¶3. Aftermath of Presidential Recall Attempt 
 
A) "Listening to Public Opinion Is Essential for Governing a 
Country" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (7/17): 
 
"... Six years ago, many people were encouraged by the DPP's 
nativist, clean reform image and hoped that it would lead Taiwan to 
become a normal country after it held the reins.  But the fact that 
many of the DPP's policies have deviated from the nativist line 
indicates that even the party's pledge to Taiwan-centered values has 
begun to flag.  In the end, more and more people believe that the 
DPP is no different from the KMT.  The Taiwan people at first hoped 
that the DPP could help to reform the KMT, but it turned out that 
several years later, another KMT was created.  The DPP really needs 
to strictly review itself. 
 
"The pro-Green scholars' pathological analysis of Taiwan's democracy 
is their freedom of speech, but it is after all the idea of just a 
few people and cannot represent the wishes of a majority of the 
Taiwan people.  These scholars expected President Chen to seriously 
consider resigning from the presidency on his own accord.  But Chen 
was elected by a majority of the Taiwan people, and like the 
government's various policies, he must listen to a majority of the 
people's views, and not just those of a few.  ..." 
 
B) "How to Realize Our Responsibility" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (7/17): 
 
"... The push for Chen's resignation from within the broad pro-DPP 
camp has cast another shadow over the president's fragile leadership 
in the wake of a recently failed recall drive  by the 'pan-blue' 
alliance of the former ruling Kuomintang and the People First Party. 
 We share the activists' sense of disappointment with President 
Chen's failure to exercise stricter discipline on his family and 
staff, to engage in honest re-examination and, even more important, 
to adopt clear measures to reform and cleanse the governing party 
and our society as a whole. ... 
 
"We also hope that their initiative will be treated with respect in 
the pan-green camp and also not be twisted into simply a demand for 
 
President Chen's resignation, a proposal which we believe is 
inappropriate. ...  We urge Chen and the DPP to respond positively 
to the issues raised by the pan-green signatory scholars with 
actions to reinforce the soundness of democratic and justice systems 
with 'sunshine' laws and other measures as well as by launching 
through internal party reform to rebuild the DPP's own integrity and 
re-establish its commitment to democratic values. ..." 
 
C) "The US Has Faith in Our Democracy and Society" 
 
Huang Yung-jui, a political commentator based in Taipei, opined in 
the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (7/16): 
 
"...  The aforementioned remarks made by various US government 
officials show that Taiwan is improving its democratic system and 
that Taiwan as a stable society, particularly with regard to freedom 
of speech and other elements that constitute a strong civil society. 
 This means that US confidence concerning Taiwan is not based on 
particular individuals but on Taiwan's system.  ...  I also believe 
that US government officials will continue to express concern about 
Taiwan and pin their hopes on the Taiwanese.  Moreover, they are 
displeased with the pan-blue camp and the pro-China media outlets' 
constant opposition to the arms procurement budget in the 
legislature, and their attempt to take over power by any means." 
 
D) "Pro-Green Scholars' Statement Will Be DPP's Final Trial" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] noted in an 
editorial (7/17): 
 
"... When compared with all the previous criticisms against 
President Chen and the DPP, the tone of the statement published by 
the scholars and social activists was in reality very gentle.  It 
can hardly be viewed as a criticism.  The language they used to call 
on Chen and the DPP did not at all cover up their identification 
with, and pledge of, traditional Green camp ideals.  To put it more 
directly, the statement is more like an appeal to the DPP's spirit 
and an attempt to save the party from its eventual collapse by 
addressing Chen's morality and emotions, rather than a declaration 
to oust Bian or criticize the DPP. ...  In the next few days, we 
will monitor whether the DPP remains a political party in which we 
can put our hopes! ..." 
 
E) "'Identification with Democracy' Is 'Identification with Taiwan': 
Support and Supplement for July 15 Declaration" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (7/15): 
 
"... To sum up, the goal of this declaration is:  The DPP must not 
belittle itself or look down on itself as 'the imperial guards that 
defend Chen Shui-bian's corrupt family.'  Instead, they should look 
upon themselves as guardians of 'Taiwan identity' and 'democracy.' 
If Chen can resign on his own accord and grasp the last chance of 
political proactiveness, he may be able to offer his party a way to 
survive.  By the same token, if the DPP can help Chen to step down 
on his own accord, it might be able to put the pan-Green camp back 
on the high ground of political morality. ..." 
 
¶4. Middle East 
 
"Washington Fiddles, Lebanon Burns" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (7/15): 
 
"... Israel has been subjected to horrific and despicable attacks by 
people who have lost all sense of humanity such that they would 
dismember the bodies of civilians of all faiths.  But Israel has 
also perpetrated unjust treatment against Palestinians for which it 
is rarely held to account.  Perhaps it is only ever a matter of time 
before this kind of situation so degrades the morality of nations - 
even a region - that the unthinkable becomes the best option.  It is 
critical that a powerful mediator be firm but fair to both sides. 
The US, however, continues to play down Israeli excesses while 
effectively rebuking all Palestinians - and now all Lebanese - for 
the actions of extremist minorities. 
 
"If the US continues to rationalize acts of excessive aggression, 
perhaps Taiwan's military may take some comfort from the possibility 
that strikes against major Chinese infrastructure such as the Three 
Gorges Dam and residential areas can be put on the table.  Actually, 
there is no comfort to be had whatsoever, because Taiwan has much 
more to lose if such atrocities become feasible.  As long as the US 
plays down Israel's maverick behavior, the danger of Tehran and 
Beijing's militant governments aping Tel Aviv grows ever larger." 
 
¶5. North Korea 
 
A) "Dancing to Kim's Tune" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] commented in an editorial (7/15): 
 
"... It is irresponsible for Beijing to prop up a notorious rogue 
state that poses a threat to its neighbors with nuclear weapons and 
ballistic missiles.  A nuclear North Korea in Beijing's backyard is 
not in the mainland's interests.  It is unwise for Beijing to 
encourage Kim to make provocations and destabilize the region. 
Beijing's support for Pyongyang has already tarnished its 
international image as a responsible power.  But that's nothing 
compared with the dire consequences such connivance would produce. 
... 
 
"So far, Beijing has failed to play a leading role in defusing the 
crisis.  Beijing should feel embarrassed by Pyongyang's defiance. 
As a regional power, Beijing still has time to save face by taking 
the initiative to work out a diplomatic settlement.  Reconvening the 
six-party talks by twisting Kim Jong-il's arm is an urgent task for 
Beijing.  Failing to do that could result not only in a nuclear 
North Korea, but also a re-armed, possibly a nuclear Japan." 
 
B) "The Mellowing of Bush" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] commented in a separate editorial (7/15): 
 
"It goes without saying that Kim Jong-il's test firing is a surprise 
for the world.  Perhaps more so is the mild reaction to the outrage 
from U.S. President George W. Bush. ...  Nowadays, President Bush 
talks less about the use of force as a means to settle international 
disputes than the employment of diplomacy and multilateral 
negotiations to defuse crises, such as Kim's missile testing and 
Iran's nuclear program.  Apparently, he has learned the hard way 
that brutal force and unilateralism do not work, even for the 
world's sole superpower." 
 
YOUNG