06AITTAIPEI2294
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREAN MISSILE TEST
Thu Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2294/01 1870335
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060335Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0994
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5375
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6582UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002294 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
 
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREAN MISSILE TEST 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage July 6 on North Korea's test-firing of seven missiles, 
including a long-range Taepodong-2, toward Japan on Tuesday morning. 
 
 
¶2.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, editorials in both the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, and the 
pro-independence, English-language, "Taiwan News" expressed the hope 
that North Korea's missile test would contribute to Taiwan 
legislators' review of the U.S. arms procurement bill, since Taiwan 
also faces a missile threat.  An editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" warned that after the 
North Korean missile test, the United States might move closer to 
China, and Taiwan might face a more difficult international 
situation.  An op-ed in the pro-unification "United Daily News," 
however, pointed out the problems China faces with North Korea, and 
added that it is not necessary to worry.  End summary. 
 
A) "Hope That DPRK's Missile Test Would Arouse Consciousness of 
Opposition Parties" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (7/6): 
 
"... The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's (DPRK) missile test 
reminds us of the missile crises in the Taiwan Strait [during 
1995-96].  Perhaps North Korea is just bluffing, but China does have 
the military capabilities to invade Taiwan.  A failed ballistic 
missile test by the DPRK is seen by the United States and Japan as 
the greatest crisis to their national security; China's missile 
test-firing toward Taiwan, however, cannot make opposition parties 
abandon their disagreements, or pass the U.S. arms procurement bill 
with the consideration of protecting the lives of 23 million Taiwan 
people.  This is a tragedy of the Taiwan people.  Although this is 
wishful thinking, we still anticipate that North Korea's test-firing 
of its ballistic missiles would arouse the consciousness of the 
opposition parties, and make them review the budget for U.S. arms 
procurements." 
 
B) "PRC Missile Threat Outranks DPRK" 
 
The pro-independence English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] noted in an editorial (7/6): 
 
"... While we certainly oppose any offensive missile testing in our 
region by any power, it cannot be denied that Pyongyang's actions 
might have a silver lining for Taiwan in terms of refocusing 
attention on the fact that we are the target of the greatest 
regional missile threat. 
 
"The People's Republic of China, which Washington is leaning on 
heavily to persuade North Korea to come back to talks and cease its 
nuclear program, has deployed over 800 medium-range missiles as well 
as longer-range Dongfeng 31 missiles of far greater potency 
opposition the Taiwan Strait and aimed directly at our shores in 
what is undoubtedly a "clear and present danger" to the security of 
Taiwan. ... 
 
"... At the very least, the pan-Blue camp should ease their boycott 
against the government's proposal to purchase advanced defensive 
systems from the Untied States, including antisubmarine aircraft, 
conventional submarines and Patriot III-C anti-missiles missiles. 
 
"We should not excessively rely on such defensive systems for our 
protection, but it would be highly irresponsible for any government 
to allow our people to face missile threats from China or even North 
Korea without any defenses whatsoever." 
 
C) "Beware of N. Korea's Military Expansion" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (7/6): 
 
"... Taiwan should be concerned about the missiles tests, too.  It 
is worth noting that, in trying to prevent North Korea from becoming 
a dire threat to world peace, the international community, 
especially the United States, will seek to establish closer 
relations with mainland China, which is the closest ally of North 
Korea.  This could make it even more difficult for Taiwan to 
cultivate friendships internationally." 
 
D) "North Korea's Missiles Test U.S.-Japan-China Relations" 
 
Lai I-chung, director of the DPP's Chinese Affairs Department, 
opined in the pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] (7/6): 
 
"...Some people think that China will have more bargaining chips 
than the United States in the Taiwan Strait, because of the DPRK's 
nuclear weapons. ... If Beijing is not powerful enough, what kind of 
bargaining chips does China have with the DPRK that would allow it 
to demand U.S. concessions in the Taiwan Strait?  If Beijing is 
reluctant to exert its power, it means that China has a fundamental 
strategic confrontation, the same as it has with the United States 
and Japan.  Beijing thus has to answer Washington's questions 
regarding its ambiguous role.  Since China needs to avoid 
confronting the United States with regard to the DPRK, how can it 
use the same issue to pressure the United States?  Therefore, Taiwan 
does not need to make an excessive inference with anxiety; it should 
design responding strategies based on observations of the situation 
on the Korean Peninsula." 
 
Young