06CAIRO4646
EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:  JULY 30, 2006-07-30
Sun Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4646 2111459
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301459Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0207
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ROBIN SMITH AND DAVID BENZE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PGOV PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:  JULY 30, 2006-07-30 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  Egyptian media continue to focus almost exclusively on 
the Israel-Lebanon crisis, with an occasional turn to domestic 
issues, namely, the hike in gas prices.  Columnists expressed what 
we believe to be widespread frustration with the government due to 
these two issues, and a resultant admiration of Hezbollah. While we 
believe public opinion supports Hezbollah, at least insofar as it 
has taken action against "the Zionist enemy," we learned that at 
least one Friday prayer did not exult in Hezbollah activities.  On 
the Israel-Lebanon situation, we've seen news coverage turn toward a 
concentration on Israel's "inability to shut down Hezbollah."  The 
US is characterized as "in a tough situation" for giving Israel more 
time to succeed in its "project,", yet it is "failing," forcing 
Secretary Rice back to the region.  President Mubarak's weekend 
 
SIPDIS 
statements showed a more critical tone toward the US, and a 
definitive posture against Egypt becoming involved "in an illogical 
dispute."  Breaking news today of the bombing of a building in Qana, 
reportedly inhabited by women and children, was aired continuously 
on Egyptian and regional networks. President Mubarak issued a 
statement condemning the shelling in Qana and criticized the slow 
response of the international community.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Breaking news.  Both today and over the weekend, news outlets 
carried new statements by President Mubarak.  Today's statement was 
made in response to the Israeli shelling of Qana, which was aired 
continuously on all stations.  President Mubarak condemned "the 
irresponsible Israeli shelling of Qana village...which resulted in 
the (fall of) innocent victims, mostly women and children. ... The 
Arab Republic of Egypt, which has called, since day one of the 
Israeli aggression on Lebanon, for an immediate, unconditional 
ceasefire, confirms the urgent need for international intervention 
to issue a Security Council resolution to halt the military 
operations immediately."  President Mubarak pledged support to 
"Prime Minister Siniora's position during the Rome crisis."  Over 
the weekend, pro-government daily, Al-Ahram, published President 
Mubarak's notable statement to Time Magazine that, "The American 
handling of the escalation is too late and very limited."  He also 
said, as reported in pro-government weekly, Al-Akhbar Al-Yom, 
"Egypt's and Arab roles must never be belittled.  We do not accept 
any efforts to drag Egypt into an unreasonable and illogical 
dispute."  While his weekend statement showed the heaviest criticism 
thus far toward the US, this portion of the statement was not played 
widely, and was not repeated as of Sunday. 
 
¶3.  In the headlines. Today's headlines focused mostly on Israel's 
retreat from the border.  Most papers played the events as "Israel's 
humiliating defeat" (Al-Ahram) or "the enemy's retreat" (Al-Masry 
Al-Yom).   Opposition daily, Al-Wafd's headlines were similar, but 
included also a large photo of Secretary Rice at the ASEAN 
conference playing the piano, with the headline, "The Miss Plays the 
Tune of Defeat." 
 
¶4.  In the commentaries.  The commentators wrote largely about the 
ongoing conflict, and the Government of Egypt's decision to raise 
gasoline prices while "the parliament is out of session" and over a 
long weekend.  Both these situations have prompted criticism toward 
the current government, and created palpable frustration.  A column 
in opposition daily, Al-Wafd, remarked that "Egyptian people are 
excluded from political activities and decision-making ...while the 
regime has succumbed to foreign decision-making."  An article by a 
contributor to independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Yom, praised 
"Hezbollah's steadfastness" which is "the only strategy capable of 
defeating the Zionist ambitions."  He concluded that "Egyptian 
people should apologize for Mubarak's criticism of Hezbollah as he 
did not represent the Egyptian public opinion."  A columnist in 
Nahdet Misr accused the Arab regimes of "silence and inaction toward 
the blood of children."  The editor-in-chief of pro-government 
daily, Rose Al-Youssef, demanded that leaders "make decisions on 
behalf of their countries" and dare "to defy the international 
community." 
 
¶5.  In the streets.  According to a close embassy source, the Friday 
sermon at a popular mosque in Cairo, ventured into unexpected 
territory when the imam told the congregation, "to beware of being 
led astray by false heroes.  Never forget that Hizbullah are Shia' 
degenerates intent on spreading Persian rule."