06CAIRO4243
EGYPT: POPE SHENOUDA AND PAPAL SUCCESSION
Mon Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4243/01 1910736
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100736Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9788
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC STAFF FOR SINGH 
DRL/IRF FOR COFSKY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KIRF EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT: POPE SHENOUDA AND PAPAL SUCCESSION 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Pope Shenouda III, head of Egypt's sizeable 
Coptic Orthodox Church for the last three decades, returned 
to Cairo July 9 after receiving treatment for back and kidney 
problems in Cleveland.  Although it appears the Pope will 
recover fully, change in the Coptic Orthodox Church has 
become a subject of avid debate in Egyptian media outlets, 
with some publications suggesting possible successors to the 
papacy.  Separately, Russian-ordained Max Michel, the 
self-proclaimed Bishop Maximous of the unlicensed St. 
Athanasious Church, has declared his denomination to be 
separate from Pope Shenouda's authority.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------- 
The Diagnosis 
------------- 
 
¶2. (U) On June 18, Pope Shenouda, age 83, flew to Germany, 
where doctors diagnosed back and kidney problems.  Back 
surgery in Germany was ruled out after doctors determined the 
Pope's kidneys were in need of treatment.  Pope Shenouda then 
flew to Cleveland on June 22 for further treatment.  On July 
6, the Papal Residence announced that the Pope was in good 
health, but publicly acknowledged a kidney problem. Bishop 
Morcos, Coptic Orthodox Church spokesman, told poloff that 
the Pope's kidney problem has been "fully treated" but 
offered no details.  Pope Shenouda is expected to address his 
health during a July 10 press conference from the papal 
residence. 
 
-------------------------- 
Speculation From Back Home 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Although the Pope's condition appears not to be 
terminal, his health episode has fanned speculation about 
succession in the Church.  Independent and opposition 
newspapers call him the most charismatic Pope in modern times 
and have followed his condition and treatment journey 
closely.  All major newspapers recently reported on President 
Mubarak's three phone calls to the Pope.  Eleven of the 
Coptic Church's top bishops traveled June 28 to visit him in 
Cleveland. Egyptian media outlets have also mulled potential 
successors, including Bishop You'ens, the Pope's first 
secretary; Bishop Mousa, Bishop of Youth Affairs; and Bishop 
 
SIPDIS 
Bishoy, metropolitan of Domietta dioceses. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Succession Scenario and Appointing an Acting Pope 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. (U) Under existing church rules, if the papacy becomes 
vacant the eldest bishop or metropolitan would convene the 
Holy Synod Council (100-plus bishops who carry out papal 
policy) and the Board of the Coptic Orthodox Endowment to 
choose a metropolitan or a bishop as acting pope.  To assume 
the papacy, acting or permanent, a nominee must be an 
unmarried celibate monk with fifteen years of service, 
Egyptian, and at least 40 years of age.  The Acting Pope must 
be chosen within 7 days of the vacancy.  President Mubarak 
would issue a Presidential Decree appointing the acting pope, 
until a new pope is elected.  No modifications to the 
church's laws or regulations are allowed during this period. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Nominating and Electing a New Pope 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) To choose the next permanent Pope, the Holy Synod 
Council identifies an initial group of nominees within 30 
days after the papacy becomes vacant. Following an internal 
vote, the Holy Council forwards names to a Nomination 
Committee, headed by the Acting Pope and including clergy and 
members of Board of the Coptic Endowment (Note: The Acting 
Pope is therefore not eligible to become pope. End note). The 
Nomination Committee rejects those individuals who are not 
qualified and forwards three to seven names to an Election 
Committee, consisting of the metropolitan, bishops, heads of 
monasteries and their deputies and treasurers, and 12 priests 
from Cairo.  The Election Committee oversees a vote for three 
finalists.  Eligible voters include all those who are 
Egyptian Coptic Orthodox, have a "good reputation", be at 
least 35 years of age and have not been convicted of any 
crimes affecting honor or status. 
 
------------------ 
The Altar's Ballot 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) Following the vote, the Election Committee formally 
nominates the three highest vote-getters.  On the altar 
during Mass, from a sealed box with the three nominees' names 
written on slips of paper, a blindfolded young boy, selected 
at random from the congregation, picks the new Patriarch, and 
the selection is announced by formal decree. 
 
---------------- 
Bishop Maximous 
---------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Russian-ordained Max Michel, calling himself 
Archbishop Maximous I, of the unlicensed St. Athanasious 
Church in Egypt, has exploited the Pope's illness to draw 
attention to his breakaway congregation.  Michel seeks to 
establish his own Coptic denomination separate from the 
Pope's authority.  Michel's actions, including plans to 
appoint his own subordinate bishops, coupled with his 
repeated chastisement of the Pope in the press, have caused 
great anxiety within the Coptic Orthodox Church, especially 
during the Pope's medical absence and talk of papal 
succession. Michel, in his 50s, reportedly was educated for a 
brief time in Nebraska.  In several interviews over the last 
few months, Michel has cited a February 13, 2006 letter to 
claim that Secretary Rice supports his cause.  The letter 
appears to be some sort of notarial which does not address 
the merits at all.  And it is not clear how the Secretary's 
name is used.  The Ambassador, in a July 4 interview with 
al-Watani, stated that the U.S. Government has no 
relationship with Bishop Maximous and takes no position at 
all in church politics. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment: At a time when talk of papal succession and 
a rogue bishop crowd the air, Pope Shenouda will likely use 
his return to Egypt to reaffirm his improving health and 
control over the papacy.  Sources have suggested that the 
Pope will "arrange institutional matters" before attending an 
annual celebration of his ordainment as a monk on July 17 and 
before possibly returning to Munich for follow-up back 
treatment later in the month.  President Mubarak's multiple 
calls to the Pope speak as much to the government's concern 
about the Patriarch's health as they do about papal 
succession and the perceived political strength concomitant 
with the papacy.  A new Pope will face a number of 
controversial issues, including the Church's normalization 
with Israel and its relationship with political Islam.  Some 
commentators have indicated a new Pope would have no other 
choice except to focus on the institutionalization of the 
Coptic Orthodox Church in the wake of its expansion across 
borders, including dioceses in the U.S., Europe, Africa, and 
Latin America. 
RICCIARDONE