06DAMASCUS3289
Damascus Media Reaction: Palestinian Territories, Iraq,
Wed Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3289/01 1861254
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051254Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0161
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6083
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3932
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2466
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7131
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1121
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4506
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0728
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6867UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Palestinian Territories, Iraq, 
Lebanon (7/4-5) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that President Asad headed a 
meeting of the National Progressive Front, during which he 
reiterated Syria's support of the Palestinian people and 
confirmed efforts to make their national dialogue a success. Asad 
said, "Syria stands with full force at the side of the Arab 
Palestinian people in their ordeal as they face the oppressive 
Israeli machine." President Asad emphasized backing the political 
process and development of relations with Iraq on the basis of 
securing Iraq's national unity and achieving withdrawal of the 
occupation forces, expressing Syria's readiness to extend all aid 
in this respect. 
 
Further on the Palestinian issue, papers reported that President 
Asad received a telephone call from UN Secretary General Kofi 
Annan which focused on developments in the Palestinian arena and 
efforts to lift the siege and end the Palestinian people's 
sufferings, and cited a lecture delivered by Faysal Miqdad, 
Deputy Foreign Minister, at the Cultural Center in Deraa Province 
on Tuesday 4 July, confirming that Syria will always take the 
side of the Palestinian people and support their just cause. The 
Deputy Minister touched upon the US policies which seek to 
implement the Greater Middle East project, calling it "the 
illusion through which the USA aims to annihilate the Arab 
personality and impose Israel on the region." Miqdad criticized 
recent statements by John Bolton, US Ambassador to the UN, saying 
that "Bolton's extremist positions confirm US bias towards Israel 
on every occasion." Miqdad stressed that Syria will also stand by 
the Lebanese people, pointing to the great sacrifices Syria has 
offered for Lebanon.  He also said, "Syria is concerned about the 
Iraqi people, who have been suffering greatly because of the US 
occupation," and underlined Syria's keenness for Iraq's national 
unity. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a telephone call from UN Secretary 
General Annan on the latest developments in the Palestinian 
arena, and heads a meeting of the National Progressive Front: 
Israeli accusations make us more committed to our rights and 
positions.  With all its power, Syria takes the side of 
Palestinians. We support the political process in Iraq on the 
basis of national unity" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/4) 
 
"Two Palestinians killed, four injured in the Israeli invasion of 
northern Gaza. Israel ignores the deadline set by captors of the 
Israeli soldier and stresses: Our goal goes beyond freeing the 
Israeli soldier" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/4) 
 
"Arab and international mediations collide with Israeli 
stubbornness. Israeli Prime Minister Olmert gives the green light 
to invade Gaza" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/4) 
 
"Killing of two US soldiers and scores of Iraqis in Baghdad, 
Mahmoudiya and Mosel" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/4) 
 
"Deputy Foreign Minister Miqdad: Syria stands by the Palestinian 
people's side and supports their legitimate causes.... Statements 
by John Bolton, the US Ambassador to UN, reflect the American 
bias to Israel" (Government-owned TIshreen, 7/5) 
 
"British Prime Minister Blair expects a massive withdrawal from 
Iraq within 18 months. President Bush: A timetable for withdrawal 
is an insult to our soldiers" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/5) 
 
"One Palestinian killed in an Israeli incursion into Jenin. 
Israeli forces bombard the Islamic University in Gaza. Israel 
links the establishment a Palestinian state to the destiny of the 
Israeli kidnapped soldier. The Palestinian authority calls on the 
UN Security Council to stop the Israeli aggression" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 7/5) 
 
"Lahoud warns against striking at the bases of Lebanese 
reconciliation. Former Lebanese Minister of Defense Abdul-Rahim 
Murd: The February 14 team has become bankrupt; it endeavors to 
distort the role of an international tribunal" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 7/5) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"Contradictions of the US Age" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/4): "UN SecGen Kofi Annan was unable to denounce or condemn 
the Israeli aggression on Gaza. His position was, to say the 
least, regrettable and shameful for the international 
organization and the international community, which has turned 
into a negative spectator unconcerned with what is happening.... 
 
"The UN Secretary General's call for a halt to the destruction of 
the Palestinian infrastructure was yet another proof of the 
political fragility that governs the international position. It 
is as though the infrastructure is more important than the souls 
that are being killed, besieged, and starved by tanks and 
aircraft.... 
 
"This is an age of American contradiction, where people justify 
the aggression or remain silent about it, and where the capturing 
of a soldier while practicing aggression and occupation becomes 
the world's chief concern...." 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"A Whole People against One Prisoner" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, and editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (7/4): "It is shameful that those who call themselves 
leaders of the free world and claim to be the champions of 
democracy are turning a blind eye to Israel's flagrant terrorism 
and employing themselves for the defense of one Israeli while 
intentionally ignoring the tragedy of an entire people and not 
giving any attention to their just cause.... 
 
"It is surprising that everyone in the world is advising 
Palestinians to release the Israeli soldier immediately or 
threatening them if they do not do, while no one is discussing 
the reasons for the problem and the state terrorism that the 
Israeli occupation forces and Olmert's government are 
practicing...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
"A Series of Crises, and the Route to Damascus" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Salim Abbud, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/4): "Damascus' doors have been and will remain open to the 
Lebanese, but not through the power of international pressure or 
UN resolutions, which are the product of American and Israeli 
efforts and desires.... 
 
"The Lebanese team that derives power from foreigners does not 
want to enter Damascus with a spirit of brotherhood and a desire 
to establish fraternal relations. This team applauded the anti- 
Syria international resolutions and everything that harmed 
Syria.... 
 
"This team harmed Lebanon and all Lebanese who reject the 
separation of Lebanon from Syria, because Lebanon cannot exercise 
its sovereignty, Arabism, and cohesion with its geographic and 
historical environment by transcending Damascus...." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
"The United States Must Arrest John Bolton" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
As'ad Abbud, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/4): "The United States wants Syria to arrest Khalid Mish'al, 
hand over many Palestinians, silence Hizbollah's guns, and send 
its army to attack the resistance in Iraq.... 
 
"This does not reflect recognition of Syria's action and 
ability. No, never, because when it comes to 'attacking the 
forces that resist the occupation of our countries,' Syria will 
take no action; no one in Syria can consider this. But it 
reflects recognition of the usefulness of the course of 
opposition to American plans, a line adopted by the peoples of 
the region and various leaderships in it: Syria, Iran, HAMAS and 
all Palestinian resistance forces, Hizbollah, and all those who 
reject this political and military invasion of the region, and 
they are numerous.... 
 
"John Bolton called on Syria to arrest Khalid Mish'al.... He 
believes we are nothing more than a policeman guarding the doors 
of his administration, which commits crimes against our 
peoples.... 
 
"Americans want the peoples of the region to fight each other on 
their behalf. But although there are 'traitors' in the region, 
the peoples of the region cannot do this. They cannot arrest 
Khalid Mish'al or Hizbollah's guns or the HAMAS movement or the 
Iranian nuclear reactor. They cannot do it because they see all 
of these as signs of sustained Arab existence.... 
 
"Washington can solve the problem when it offers a peace plan to 
end occupation and persecution of nations. Only then will it 
win. Let the US arrest those who mastermind sabotage and 
aggression in Israel. Let it arrest Ehud Olmert and John 
Bolton." 
 
Seche