06HILLAH127
SECURITY UPDATE SUMMARY FOR SOUTH CENTRAL IRAQ
Sat Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO4661
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0127/01 2100900
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 290900Z JUL 06
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0691
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0678
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 0745UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MARR PTER KISL IZ
SUBJECT: SECURITY UPDATE SUMMARY FOR SOUTH CENTRAL IRAQ 
 
 
HILLAH 00000127  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SENSITIVE, BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  This cable covers trends and significant events that 
affect security in the five South Central provinces of Iraq. 
Items are taken from the local press or are public knowledge in 
the region (Najaf, Karbala, Qadisiyah, Babil, and Wasit 
provinces). 
 
Najaf Province 
----------------- 
 
2 (SBU)  As of July 28, Najaf is calm, but tense due to two 
security threats:  1) a  Vehicle Borne Improvised Explosive 
Device (VBIED) threat within the city; and 2)  continued 
demonstrations, largely by Sadrists, protesting Prime Minister 
Malicki's visit to the United States, and the situation in 
Lebanon. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  The press has reported that fifteen VBIEDs (cars 
outfitted with explosives) may have been assembled in Najaf, 
presumably by Al Qaeda.  The actual number of VBIEDs may have 
been half of that.  Explosions on July 6 and July 18 killed over 
eighty locals.  Three to four VBIEDs may still be at large in 
Najaf.   In the last two weeks, Iraqi Police and Army 
checkpoints have multiplied and checks are stricter.  Cars with 
out-of-province license plates find it very difficult to enter 
the city.   The Provincial Council is considering a plan to dig 
an anti-vehicle ditch around all of Najaf in order to force all 
vehicles to enter through checkpoints. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Governor Al-Taee and the Provincial Council fired 
Police Chief Abbass Al M'adal this week out of frustration over 
the inability of  provincial security forces to end car bomb 
attacks in Najaf.   The SCIRI-dominated Provincial Council is 
said to want to exert additional direct control over police 
deployments.  All parties are aware that the two bombings with 
mass casualties occurred in Kufa, close to radical cleric 
Muqtada Al-Sadr's residence.  Mahdi Militia maintain a close 
watch over the area and attacks in Kufa could easily escalate 
into armed confrontations between Sadr militia units and the 
largely Badr-controlled police. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Despite the frequent demonstrations and two 
large-scale VBIED attacks, Najaf remains relatively stable.  The 
economy has picked up due to extensive public and private 
construction. 
 
Karbala Province 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Public protests by the Al-Hassani/Sarkhi militia (a 
competitor to the Mahdi Militia) appear to have ended last week. 
 For several weeks, militia members had gathered on Thursday 
afternoons to protest the presence of an Iranian Consulate in 
Karbala (Al-Hassani is still stinging after an Iranian 
television documentary questioned his religious credentials) and 
also to demand a share of the donations to Karbala's major 
shrines.   These marches were a potential flashpoint. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  However, a new cause for worry surfaced on July 25 
when a spokesman for  Karbala Sadrist mosque head Sheikh Fadhil 
Al-Sharii broadcast by loudspeaker a message supposedly 
emanating from the Sunni community in Samarra.  The Sunni 
message, as relayed by the Sarists, was a rejection of any 
attempt by Shi'a militia to enter Samarra and rebuild the sacred 
shrine.    If true, this would represent the first time the 
Sunni community has publicly rejected Moqtada al-Sadr's 
high-profile campaign to recruit workers and guards for 
re-building the shrine. 
 
Diwaniyah (Qadisiyah) Province 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU)  The security situation deteriorated over the last two 
weeks.  Diwaniyah, a quiet provincial capital several months 
ago, has become a center of unrest and a source of concern 
across the region.  Camp Echo, just outside Diwaniyah, took 
frequent indirect fire over the past week, largely coming from 
Sadrist neighborhoods on Diwaniyah's north side.  Coalition 
Forces convoys are under increased threat from lethal 
Explosively Formed Projectile (EFP) attacks.   On July 26, an 
Iraqi Security Forces patrol came under intense fire within the 
city.  Reportedly, there was considerable collateral damage from 
errant militia gunfire.  On July 27, an Explosively Formed 
Projectile (EFP) attack on an El Salvadoran convoy just one 
hundred meters from a police checkpoint killed one soldier and 
severely wounded another. 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Much of the unrest stems from provincial leadership 
that has avoided confrontation with the militias controlling 
Diwaniyah's poorer neighborhoods and played to the street in 
 
HILLAH 00000127  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
echoing Sadrist  harsh anti-American and anti-Coalition Forces 
rhetoric.   However, there are signs that Governor Hamza is 
back-pedaling on his resistance to the "occupying forces," his 
habitual term for Camp Echo.   This week, he lifted his "no go" 
order to Coalition Forces on entering Diwaniyah and after a 
hiatus of over a month, and agreed to travel to REO Al-Hillah to 
resume regular PRDC meetings. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  In the last several days,  the Governor received an 
unprecedented personal envoy from Ayatollah Ali Sistani.  Local 
press reported that the two spoke about the security situation 
and the need for public unity to fight terrorism.  Direct 
intervention by Ayatollah Sistani in governmental or security 
affairs is rare and highlights the degree of regional concern 
over Diwaniyah's problems. 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Nonetheless,  provincial security is not yet 
improving.  For example, the press reported on July 24 that two 
more ex-Baathists were assassinated overnight, the latest in a 
steady stream of executions by either the Sadr or Badr militias. 
 The Iraqi police have shown little cooperation in pursuing 
militia members who tortured and killed the chief Iraqi engineer 
for the Army Corps of Engineers office at Camp Echo. 
 
Babil Province 
------------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU)  Communities in the northern part of the province were 
surprised by a pitched Mahdi Militia assault on an Iraqi police 
station in Mussayib last week.  Coalition forces killed fifteen 
terrorists in a brief, but intense firefight.  On July 28, a 
Sadrist gunman was killed by a US Army patrol close to the main 
Sadr mosque in downtown Hillah.   The Governor and a Sadrist 
Provincial Council member reportedly talked down militia members 
from assembling and mounting an attack, and a complete curfew 
was imposed on the city for most of the day, including during 
Friday prayers. 
MEURS