06HONGKONG2950
ANSON CHAN FORMS CORE GROUP, AGAIN DECLINES TO
Wed Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO3039
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHHK #2950 2000848
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 190848Z JUL 06
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7822
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS HONG KONG 002950 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP AND EAP/CM 
NSC FOR DENNIS WILDER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM PINR CH HK
SUBJECT: ANSON CHAN FORMS CORE GROUP, AGAIN DECLINES TO 
ANNOUNCE ELECTION PLANS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In a July 19 speech, former Hong Kong 
Chief Secretary Anson Chan once again declined to say whether 
she would enter the 2007 Chief Executive election.  Instead, 
she discussed the Basic Law's provision of a legal basis for 
universal suffrage and criticized attempts to establish new 
pre-conditions for its extension.  She said opponents of 
democratization needed to change their positions, while the 
pro-democracy groups had to address concerns that a 
democratically-elected government would be "anti-business" 
and endanger the city's prosperity and stability through 
excessive social welfare.  She also noted the "difficult to 
dispel" concern that a democratically elected government 
would be more likely to challenge the authority of the 
Central Government. Chan said she was forming a "core group" 
to "formulate more concrete proposals and map out a strategy 
on the way forward."  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On July 19, retired former Hong Kong Chief Secretary 
Anson Chan once again declined to announce -- or to rule out 
-- her intention to contest the 2007 Chief Executive 
election.  In a speech at the Foreign Correspondents' Club, 
Chan said she had no intention to confront either the Hong 
Kong Administration or the Central Government, and also that 
she had "no personal agenda" and was not "hungry for power." 
That said, however, she observed that she felt "duty bound to 
practice what I preach."  She briefly reviewed Hong Kong's 
recent history, including the drafting of the Basic Law and 
the "too little, too late" steps taken by the British 
colonial administration to expand democratization.  She went 
into some detail on key provisions of the Basic Law that, she 
believed, "enshrine the concept that truly democratic 
governments cannot exist other than on the basis of universal 
suffrage."  She particularly noted that "universal and equal 
suffrage" was not interchangeable with the idea of some sort 
of "engineered balanced representation" as a justification 
for retaining Hong Kong's Functional Constituencies 
indefinitely. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Chan criticized attempts by "certain quarters" to 
establish new pre-conditions for universal suffrage -- 
"placing ever more hurdles along the track."  She said Hong 
Kong's business community and other sectors "who feel they 
have a vested interest in fending off democracy for as long 
as possible" needed to change their positions.  At the same 
time, the pro-democracy groups would have to address some of 
the popular "myths and concerns" that a 
democratically-elected government would be "anti-business" 
and endanger the city's prosperity and stability through 
excessive social welfare.  She also noted another concern, 
which she described as "misplaced" but difficult to dispel: 
that a democratically elected government would be more likely 
to challenge the authority of the Central Government. Chan 
criticized the constitutional reform package proposed by 
Chief Executive Tsang and blocked by the Legco democrats in 
late-2005, which she said would have done no more than 
"tinker with" the electoral arrangements for the 2007 and 
2008 elections.  She specifically faulted that proposal's 
lack of a timetable and roadmap for democratization, as well 
as its failure to address the role of the Functional 
Constituencies.  She also noted the need for a firmer legal 
foundation for the role of political parties in the Hong Kong 
system.  In conclusion, Chan said there was "much work to be 
done and I would like to play whatever part I usefully can." 
She said she was forming a "core group" to "formulate more 
concrete proposals and map out a strategy on the way 
forward."  She concluded that she intends to "play an active 
role and you can expect to hear more from me on this issue in 
the months and years ahead." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Immediately following her speech, Chan took 
questions from the audience and then met with the large press 
contingent.  As expected, the first audience question was 
whether she would enter the 2007 Chief Executive race; she 
replied that she would choose a time and place to announce 
whether she was standing or not standing.  Similarly, at the 
press briefing Chan said in Cantonese that she would announce 
her decision at "an appropriate time."  She also elaborated 
on her formation of a core group, which would include 8-10 
people with two primary objectives: to address public 
concerns over political reform, and to present a package of 
workable reform proposals to the Commission on Strategic 
Development. 
Sakaue