07BUENOSAIRES297
AG GONZALES MEETS WITH PROSECUTOR GENERAL
Thu Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0297/01 0461730
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151730Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7289UNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 000297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SCUL OVIP KTER AR
 
SUBJECT:  AG GONZALES MEETS WITH PROSECUTOR GENERAL 
RIGHI AND OFFERS ASSISTANCE TO GOA FOR JUDICIAL TRANSITION 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Attorney General Alberto Gonzales met with 
Argentine Prosecutor General Esteban Righi on February 7 and 
discussed the challenges that the GOA faces with its transition to 
an accusatorial justice system.  The AG offered U.S. assistance to 
help with the transition, as well as training for extradition 
 
requests.  The AG invited Argentine prosecutors to visit the FBI and 
USDOJ headquarters to learn more about how the USG prosecutes 
terrorism cases and invited that GOA to join the G-8's 24/7 high 
tech crime network to report cybercrime.  END SUMMARY. 
 
GOA supports Judicial Reform, But Will Take Time 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On February 7, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, 
along with the Ambassador and other senior members of the Department 
of Justice met with Prosecutor General Esteban 
Righi to discuss judicial reform issues.  Righi began by 
noting that the Argentine public has largely discredited the 
inquisitorial system due to substantial delays in bringing 
cases to trial.  His office is working to shorten pre-trial 
investigations in addition to working with the Minister of Justice 
who has the lead in implementing the GOA's transition from an 
inquisitorial to an accusatorial system.  Initial reforms are 
planned for federal criminal cases and those within the City of 
Buenos Aires.  Although no Constitutional change is required, laws 
need to be passed and public debate is required to determine the 
scope of the reforms, he said.  Righi asserted that the GOA should 
shape the debate by explaining that the reforms are necessary in 
order to improve public administration and judicial efficiency.  In 
addition, reforms ensuring that justice is served will help combat 
widespread public perception that elites regularly escape justice by 
ensuring that justice is served. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Adopting a U.S.-style system, where the prosecutor and 
judge are separate and independent entities, takes time to have an 
effect, especially when the GOA has to gain the support of those 
charged with implementing the reforms, Righi continued.  The 
Argentine public, however, mistakenly expects that the changes will 
instantly solve the judicial system's problems. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) While the GOA is committed to the reforms in principle, 
Righi indicated that the Kirchner administration seems to have 
placed judicial and procedural reforms on the backburner given that 
2007 is an election year.  He also observed that many are unaware of 
the impact the reforms will have on secondary issues.  One of the 
major difficulties in the transition is the largely unexamined 
impact the reforms will have on budget allocations, including who 
gains and loses funds. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) When the AG asked how the USG can help, Righi answered that 
Argentina needs to learn more about the U.S. justice system, and 
change the common public perception that the start of a trial is an 
indication of guilt.  The GOA must learn more about the function and 
use of plea bargains and Argentines must learn that very few 
prosecutions end in a jury trial in the United States. 
The AG stated that the USG has provided assistance to other 
countries undergoing a similar transition in their judicial systems 
and that the USG could provide similar assistance to Argentina. 
Righi expressed appreciation for USG assistance. 
 
 
AG Offers Trip to FBI HQ and Extradition and Prosecution Assistance 
 
¶6. (SBU)  On extraditions, Righi suggested that the GOA and USG 
identify problems and explore solutions to expedite extraditions. 
Most problems are technical, not legislative.  He suggested that the 
Prosecutor General's office would benefit from more training in how 
to submit extradition requests.  Alice Fisher, Assistant Attorney 
General for the Criminal Division, stated that USDOJ's Office of 
International Affairs could provide that kind of training.  The 
Attorney General added that the USG would help where it can while 
respecting Argentina's sovereignty. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The AG invited Argentina to join the G-8's 24/7 high tech 
crime network to report cybercrime.  Righi stated he would look into 
it.  AAG Fisher noted that the DOJ is sending, for two years, an 
experienced prosecutor to the Tri-Border area to be based in 
Paraguay who can assist Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay with 
prosecutions.  AAG Fisher also invited prosecutors from Argentina to 
visit the FBI and DOJ headquarters to learn more about U.S. 
counterterrorism prosecution efforts. 
 
AG Praises AMIA Special Prosecutor 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) AG Gonzales concluded the meeting by praising the Special 
Prosecutor for the 1994 terrorist bombing of the Argentine-Israeli 
Mutual Association efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice, 
 
with Righi asserting that the GOA has provided the necessary 
resources to the AMIA Special Prosecutor to ensure justice is 
served. 
 
¶9.  (U) The Attorney General has not cleared on the language of this 
cable. 
 
WAYNE