09CHENGDU310
SW CHINA CITY SEEKS TO BECOME MAJOR TRANSPORTATION HUB --
Thu Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO8508
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0310/01 3510458
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170458Z DEC 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3641
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1989
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4357UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000310 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ELTN EAIR EWWT ETRD SENV PGOV CH
SUBJECT: SW CHINA CITY SEEKS TO BECOME MAJOR TRANSPORTATION HUB -- 
WISE PUBLIC INVESTMENT, OR WASTEFUL PUMPING UP OF CHINA'S GDP? 
 
CHENGDU 00000310  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary.  Leshan officials told Consul General that 
currently planned infrastructure projects would transform the 
city into a transportation and industrial hub for southwest 
China.  The city's ambitious, three billion USD plan calls for 
construction of navigation locks (and hydropower dams) along Min 
River to enable larger vessels to transport goods to Shanghai, 
as well as a new development zone with multi-modal rail, 
highway, and river port connections.  Officials also plan to 
build an airport and a high-speed light rail that would connect 
Leshan with Sichuan's provincial capital, Chengdu.  Two of 
China's largest hydropower engineering firms will pay for this 
construction once the plan receives national-level approval. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Comment: In the absence of data on expected returns on 
investment, we have to wonder whether this massive plan 
represents a smart move for China, or a white elephant.  The 
locks will be hugely expensive, and yet the ships that will be 
able to navigate them will still have relatively small capacity. 
 Chengdu's international airport has just completed its second 
runway, so a Boeing 757-capable airport for Leshan -- a mere 75 
miles from Chengdu -- appears to be another big waste.  Whether 
there will be enough passenger traffic to justify a high-speed 
light rail is yet another question.  The only certainty in this 
project is that it is one more example of local officials 
lobbying provincial and central governments, and of state-owned 
enterprises using retained earnings and easy-money bank loans to 
pump up China's public investment -- already a grossly 
excessive, steroid-like percentage of GDP.  End Summary and 
Comment. 
 
 
 
Re-Engineering Water Transport to the Yangtze River 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Officials in Sichuan's Leshan city recently told Consul 
General that China's central government may spend about 3 
billion USD to improve navigation and develop hydropower on the 
Min River (Minjiang), a tributary of the Yangtze River.  Leshan 
city officials concede, however, that the price tag for the 
construction could increase depending on the actual cost of the 
navigation locks.  The Minjiang already has as many as 70-80 
dams, but Leshan officials seek build five additional dams along 
the southern portion of the river before it flows into the 
Yangtze.  The combined power production of the new dams will be 
1,400 megawatts. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Once completed, Leshan officials expect that vessels 
with cargo capacities as high as 3,000 tons will be able to 
transport goods from Leshan's port facilities to Shanghai in 7-8 
days.  A key variable in this transit time will be how quickly 
the vessels are able to pass through the locks at the Three 
Gorges Dam.  Leshan port currently only has the capacity to 
handle vessels up to 750 tons.  Low water levels during the dry 
winter season from November to April currently plague navigation 
along the river, but officials expressed confidence that the new 
dams would resolve this issue.  Sichuan's provincial government 
has already approved the project, and officials said they hoped 
to receive national-level approval by the end of next year. 
Leshan officials said that two state-owned hydroelectric firms, 
SinoHydro Corporation (Zhongguo Shuidian Jianshe Jituan Gongsi) 
and China Huadian Corporation (Zhongguo Huadian Jituan Gongsi), 
would pay for the construction of the dams and locks, although 
it is unclear how these firms plan to recoup their investment 
costs.  The entire project could be completed as early as 2015, 
but some officials projected that 2018-2020 is a more realistic 
time frame. 
 
 
 
Sichuan's Dongfang Electric Corporation May Benefit from 
Expanded Port 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000310  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) At several points during the conversation, Leshan 
officials mentioned that the increased shipping capacity on the 
Minjiang would help companies like Dongfang Electric 
Corporation, which is a large state-owned enterprise 
headquartered north of Chengdu.  Dongfang produces power 
generation equipment for thermal, nuclear, wind, and hydropower 
plants.  Officials specifically highlighted that Dongfang could 
use the waterway to ship parts for hydroelectric and nuclear 
plants.  (Note: Expanded port capacity in Leshan may be 
particularly beneficial to companies like Dongfang because some 
of the power generation equipment it produces is large, heavy, 
and difficult to move via road or rail.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
Development Zone, Airport, and High-Speed Rail 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Leshan officials provided us a boat tour towards a 
large development zone, also part of the overall development 
plan, that would be located south of the city and north of the 
river locks.  The boat cruised past the Leshan "Giant Buddha," 
whose construction was started in 713 during the Tang Dynasty 
and is now part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site.  The new 
development zone would be adjacent to a smaller, existing zone 
that has foreign investment from several foreign companies 
including a U.S.-invested semiconductor company (septel).  The 
multi-modal zone will also have a rail station, highways, and a 
large river port loading facility.  The zone's plan originally 
had an airport at its center, but officials indicated that the 
airport would be shifted to a new location because of concerns 
by residents about noise pollution. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) City officials say that they plan to build an airport, 
possibly located near town's main business district, which will 
have the capacity to land planes as large as a Boeing 757.  One 
semiconductor firm in Leshan told CongenOff that an airport in 
Leshan would reduce time and potentially costs for products they 
export.  The firm currently ships its products to Chengdu, about 
75 miles north, where they are loaded on planes and exported to 
destinations around the world. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Leshan officials also talked about the planned 
high-speed rail line that will connect the city to Chengdu and 
Mianyang.  The rail line, when completed, will take 30 minutes 
to reach the provincial capital and another 30 minutes to reach 
Mianyang, a city noted for science and technology research. 
(Note:  Officials did not address how the planned high-speed 
rail service might undercut passenger demand for flights from 
the new airport.  Leshan may end up competing with Chengdu's 
larger airport for customers.  End Note.) 
BROWN