09CHENGDU90
SICHUAN QUAKE RECOVERY UPDATE: RAPID RECONSTRUCTION
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO2517
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0090/01 1460941
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260941Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3235
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3908UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CHENGDU 000090 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
BANGKOK ALSO FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI ECON PGOV CH
SUBJECT: SICHUAN QUAKE RECOVERY UPDATE: RAPID RECONSTRUCTION 
COMPROMISING QUALITY AND TRANSPARENCY? 
 
REF: CHENGDU 011 
 
CHENGDU 00000090  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary: Spurred by the central government's goal of 
moving displaced quake victims into permanent housing by the end 
of 2009, reconstruction in the earthquake zone has significantly 
picked up pace since the beginning of the year.  According to 
official statistics, close to 99 percent of home rebuilding in 
the rural areas is now underway.  However, rural families are 
struggling to pay the costs of reconstruction in the face of low 
government subsidies and limited credit access; many are 
delaying completion of their new homes or compromising on 
building material quality.  With official energies apparently 
focused on housing and infrastructure reconstruction, there is 
little evidence of strategic planning to address long-term 
livelihood recovery.  Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and 
volunteer groups continue to operate widely, and are filling 
some gaps, but face an increasingly "managed" operating 
environment.  Obtaining good information on reconstruction 
projects, particularly the bidding and procurement processes, 
remains difficult, raising questions regarding transparency. 
End summary. 
 
 
 
A recent boom in home reconstruction as deadlines loom 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Reconstruction in the earthquake zone has 
significantly picked up pace since the beginning of the year. 
During recent travel in the Dujiangyan, Pengzhou, Mianzhu and 
Beichuan areas, Congenoff observed extensive infrastructure and 
housing reconstruction underway along all routes.  The shift is 
notably dramatic in Zundao, a town of around 20,000 under 
Mianzhu, where reconstruction efforts had barely begun just a 
few months ago (reftel).  During a recent visit, Congenoff found 
the town transformed into a giant construction zone, with the 
majority of residents engaged in home rebuilding, whether 
building themselves or supervising construction.  Piles of 
bricks and reinforcement bar (rebar) lined the roads, and every 
visible housing plot was in one or another state of 
construction.  A small number of residents were putting 
finishing touches on houses they said they began just three 
months ago.  Most were somewhere between laying the foundation 
and building the walls.  Similar scenes are to be found 
throughout the quake zone. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (U) During a press conference in early May, Sichuan 
officials emphasized that all rural residents must move into 
permanent housing by the end of September, three months ahead of 
the central government deadline.  For urban residents the 
deadline is May 2010.  In Zundao, the town government broadcasts 
announcements four times a day, reminding residents of the 
September deadline and urging them to build their houses and 
move out of the temporary shelters as quickly as possible. 
Rural residents also face a June deadline to at least have their 
new foundation in place to qualify for government housing 
reconstruction subsidies. 
 
 
 
Nearly 99% of rural rebuilding underway; one trillion RMB 
reconstruction funding gap 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U) During the above reference press conference, Sichuan 
officials announced that building was underway for 1,248,000 
rural houses, representing 98.8 percent of the total, and that 
repair and reinforcement of an additional 2,213,000 was already 
completed.  Among rural residents, over 45,000 rural households 
with total population of about 160,000 cannot rebuild in situ as 
their land was destroyed; most of this group will move to new 
housing developments.  For urban residents, according to 
official statistics, about half of the repair and reinforcement 
is complete.  (719,000 homes) and rebuilding has started on 
about 44 percent (138,000).  (Note: the total number of damaged 
 
CHENGDU 00000090  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
or destroyed rural homes, at an estimated 3,476,000 stands at 
twice the urban number; the total number of rural homes needing 
to be completely rebuilt, at about 1,263,000, is four times 
greater than in urban areas.) 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U) The provincial government estimates it needs 1.7 
trillion RMB (US$274 billion) for quake reconstruction.  Vice 
Governor Huang Xiaoxiang in mid-May told local media that 
combining provincial government revenues, central government 
support, donations and other sources Sichuan to date has 330 
billion RMB (US$53 billion).  He said the province hopes to 
close the funding gap with a combination of support from other 
provinces, international aid, and credit.  The National 
Development and Reform Commission in a report issued May 21 
noted that spending for quake rebuilding comprises a quarter of 
the 4 billion RMB (US$586 billion) national stimulus plan.  The 
Sichuan Statistics Bureau recently reported that disaster 
reconstruction has boosted the province's fixed asset investment 
by 78.9 percent year-on-year for the period of January-April, 
while transportation-related investment increased by 131 percent 
for the same period. 
 
 
 
Time pressure and poverty may be compromising homebuilding 
quality 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Rural families are struggling to pay the costs of 
rebuilding under current time pressures.  Quake zone residents 
we spoke to in several locations consistently estimated their 
total rebuild costs at about 100,000 RMB (US$14,706).  The 
government subsidies are set at 16,000 to 21,000 RMB (US$2,353 
to 3,088) per household depending on family size.  Local 
governments are supposed to assist with ensuring that bank loans 
are easily available for rebuilding costs, but actual access 
varies across the quake zone.  In recent conversations residents 
report that loan ceilings remain low, in the range of 
20,000-30,000 RMB (US$2,941-US$4,412) or that they have 
difficulty obtaining any line of credit as they are unable to 
meet bank requirements for collateral and proof of repayment 
ability.  Those that do have the option to borrow still 
expressed reluctance to take on the debt, noting their limited 
ability to repay it. 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Many rural residents told us they will delay 
completion of their homes or compromise on the quality of 
building materials.  A group of locals in Sangzao town in 
Mianzhu expounded on the various rebar specifications, 
emphasizing that most people could not afford the 25 millimeter 
bars necessary to withstand a strong quake, and so were 
proceeding to build with cheaper materials and hoping that the 
next quake of similar magnitude would not occur in the coming 
decades.  On the way out of Sangzao, Congenoff observed an 
apparently completed home that seemed to reflect these cost 
impediments, with a brick first floor, but the second level 
built using materials from the temporary pre-fabricated 
shelters.  (Note: While last year's 8.0 quake stands out in its 
severity, quakes in the range from 6.0 to 7.9 have occurred 
regularly over the past century; the barely noted August 2008 
Panzhihua quake, clocking in at a mere 6.1, reportedly cause the 
collapse of 10,000 homes.) 
 
 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Local officials in Beichuan, whose county town was 
completely destroyed and will be rebuilt about 20 kilometers 
away from its original location, also were equivocal in their 
enthusiasm for increasingly constricted official deadlines for 
reconstruction.  When asked whether the State Council's 
declaration that "the goal for a three-year reconstruction 
should be realized within two years" was realistic for the 
building of New Beichuan one official noted that the government 
"must have a scientific reason" for shortening the timeframe, 
even if the local officials did not understand it.  Other 
officials acknowledged that while they expect New Beichuan's 
"basic infrastructure" to be done in two years, true completion 
of the new town will require another decade. 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000090  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
Long-term livelihoods: an outstanding question 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) With official focus on rebuilding, there is little 
evidence of strategic planning for long-term recovery of 
livelihoods.  For now, the business of reconstruction appears to 
be occupying much of the population, as well as providing 
construction jobs to skilled workers from around the country. 
However, our observations within the quake zone point to 
potential future problems.  In Pengzhou, the damaged local 
cement factory in one town will be rebuilt too far away to 
employ the local workers who were previously employed there. 
Near old Beichuan, the county seat that was completely destroyed 
and will be left as a memorial, Consulate staff recently 
encountered residents demonstrating against the plans for the 
New Beichuan.  Their complaint was that their new homes would 
not include any land, thus depriving them of main source of 
previous livelihoods.  This will likely be an issue for many of 
the 160,000 rural residents whose land is too damaged for 
rebuilding and will instead be moved to new housing 
developments.  A number of recovery-funded projects, such as 
state owned enterprise (SOE) expansions, new factories, and 
several "industrial zones" promise sources of future employment, 
but many rural quake area residents lack the skills to take 
advantage of such opportunities. 
 
 
 
NGOs can help, but reach limited and operational environment 
complex 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
 
 
¶11.  (SBU) A large number of international and domestic NGOs 
continue to operate throughout the quake zone, playing an 
important role in filling some of the gaps in the official 
response such as livelihood recovery.  Both Sichuan Academy of 
Social Sciences and local NGO contacts note the extent to which 
NGOs encountered a more open operating environment in the months 
following the quake, when around 200 organizations quickly 
arrived in the area.  However, a May 6 article in 
Guangzhou-based periodical, Nanfengchuang, highlights the 
complexity of the operational landscape for NGOs, with relations 
with local officials usually the key determinant of whether they 
can continue their work or not.  Over time, increased focus on 
maintaining social stability has meant a gradual increase of 
government efforts to manage NGOs and volunteer groups.  In a 
notice issued last month the Mianzhu City Communist Youth League 
called for strengthened "management" of volunteer groups, noting 
the risk of volunteers "doing things that affect social 
stability."  (Some local volunteers have reportedly, for 
example, provided lists of student victims of school collapses 
to Beijing artist and blogger Ai Weiwei.)  In mid-May local 
media reported on a new provincial government program to provide 
financial support to NGO projects in the quake zone, emphasizing 
the need for applicants to have legally registered and 
identifying the project categories eligible for support. 
 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) While larger organizations with savvy government 
relations and a willingness to stay away from sensitive issues 
have been able to expand their post-quake work, smaller NGOs 
that want to maintain more autonomy may find themselves 
increasingly squeezed out.  A domestic NGO that provided social 
services in a small township for most of the last year, with 
local government support, quickly found its fortunes reversed in 
the weeks leading up to the May 12 anniversary.  After resisting 
a new registration requirement, the organization's head told us, 
they found their phone and internet lines cut off and an 
increasingly unwelcoming reception among local officials.  They 
ultimately decided to close down their operations. 
 
 
 
Quake procurement raises transparency questions 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000090  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Obtaining detailed and comprehensive information on 
reconstruction projects remains difficult.  Although publicly 
available information includes some project lists and overall 
statistics on the numbers, types and value of projects, little 
specific detail is provided.  The Sichuan Development and Reform 
Commission's website has a list of the provinces 500 "key 
projects" for 2009, 82 of which are designated as quake 
reconstruction projects.  However, the project descriptions are 
fairly skeletal, with no information on bidding and procurement 
processes.  When asked how procurement for projects under their 
purview is being handled, Beichuan officials recently told us 
only that all bidding is being managed "according to the law". 
They added that bid invitations are basically going to domestic 
companies, noting that the process is too "complicated" and 
timeline too tight to open to international bidders. 
 
 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Most of the assistance being provided by other 
provinces, under the recovery partnering program mandated by the 
State Council in June 2008, is coming in the form of large 
projects carried out by the assisting provinces.  Discussing 
their partnership with Shandong, Beichuan officials readily 
acknowledged the immediate post-quake relief support from 
Shandong, and cited the large reconstruction projects to which 
Shandong has committed.  Seventeen municipalities in Shandong 
are each supporting one or two towns in Beichuan, for a total of 
twenty; all are supporting the building of New Beichuan. 
However, a Beichuan Development and Reform Commission official 
told us that they do not have clear or detailed information on 
project specifications or planning from Shandong.  Although each 
of the Shandong municipalities committed to Beichuan have set up 
offices in the Beichuan areas they are supporting, the project 
bidding process is run out of the working office in Shandong set 
up to coordinate the Beichuan assistance.  Not surprisingly, 
Shandong companies apparently expect to get the vast majority of 
the new business.  Similar arrangements appear to hold true for 
the other provincial partnerships.  A researcher at the Sichuan 
Economic Development Research Institution recently told us he 
expects the assisting provincial governments to recoup a 
significant portion of their reconstruction contributions via 
increased tax revenue from home province companies' 
quake-related projects. 
 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) Comment:  Government at all levels appear to be given 
credit on the ground for the initial rapid reaction to the 
earthquake and subsequent quick deployment of resources for 
reconstruction.  However, as reconstruction moves forward, in 
the hurry to meet mandated deadlines, the current approach could 
very well lead to further shoddy construction and increased 
corruption.  Moreover, despite the scale of current efforts, 
they will likely continue to fall short of the vast needs of the 
quake area population. 
BOUGHNER