09CHENGDU307
DRC PROVIDES SICHUAN DEVELOPMENT OVERVIEW
Tue Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO6121
PP RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0307/01 3490706
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 150706Z DEC 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3635
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY 0034
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4350UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CHENGDU 000307 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EIND EFIN SENV KGHG PGOV PINR CH
SUBJECT: DRC PROVIDES SICHUAN DEVELOPMENT OVERVIEW 
 
REF: A. A) CHENGDU 069, B) CHENGDU 081, C) CHENGDU 114 
     ¶B. D) CHENGDU 122 E) CHENGDU 239 
 
CHENGDU 00000307  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
 
information -- not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) Summary: Sichuan's Development and Reform Commission 
(SDRC) expects that the province will meet ambitious 2009 growth 
targets following a decade of 10 percent annual growth. Official 
attributed this decade of growth to the Great Western 
Development (GWD) initiative, provincial government policies, 
and earthquake reconstruction.  Implementation of ambitious 
transportation infrastructure development plans continues. 
Energy development plans focus on hydropower as well as on 
expanded use of other "green" energy sources and improvement of 
efficiency in coal-fired power plants.  The SDRC attributed 
Sichuan's 2008 energy efficiency shortfall to quake 
reconstruction, but their Beijing colleagues find this a "flimsy 
rationale."  The SDRC believes Sichuan will meet or exceed its 
2009 emission reduction targets.  End summary. 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) Deputy Director of the Sichuan Development and Reform 
Commission (SDRC), Liu Yuan, provided Consul General on December 
1 with an overview of Sichuan's economy.  Liu has been in her 
current position since 2004.  Previously, she spent most of her 
career in the provincial-level Commission for Economic 
Restructuring (Tigaiwei) serving in personnel management and 
Party committee positions.  Also in the meeting were: Wu 
Jianzhong, Deputy Chief of Energy Section; Tang Daisheng, Deputy 
Chief of Great Western Development Office; and Yue Wen, Deputy 
Chief of the Transportation Section. 
 
 
 
Despite Quake and Economic Crisis, 
 
"Sichuan's Economic Situation is Sound" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) While citing the dramatic impact of the 2008 quake 
disaster, and moderately negative effects of the global 
financial crisis in Sichuan, Liu stressed that "Sichuan's 
economic situation is sound," and that the province is on track 
to meet its economic targets for 2009.  The value of the 
provincial GDP in 2008 reached over 1.47 trillion RMB (USD 180 
billion), according to official statistics.  She said 68.6 
percent of planned investment has been completed, totaling 975 
billion RMB (about USD 143 billion), although she did not 
provide further specifics regarding the focus or timeframe for 
most projects.  Commercial retail sales are projected to reach 
463 billion RMB (USD 68 billion) in 2009, about 20 percent 
higher than the previous year, and five percent higher than the 
national average for the same period.  Liu claimed the total 
value of Sichuan's foreign imports and exports would reach USD 
18.47 billion this year, up by five percent from last year.  She 
emphasized that Sichuan was the only Chinese province that saw 
increased foreign trade in the first three quarters in 2009. 
(Note: It is unclear how Liu or the SDRC calculated the 2008 
figures they mentioned.  These figures do not match officially 
recorded statistics published in the Sichuan Statistical 
Yearbook, which show that the value of imports and exports for 
2008 stood at USD 22 billion, i.e. significantly higher than the 
projection for 2009.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
Impact of Quake ... 
 
------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (U) The impact of the 2008 quake on the economy was 
significant, causing economic losses of over one trillion RMB, 
but has also presented opportunities for economic development. 
She noted that two-thirds of central government's 300 billion 
RMB (approx. USD 44 billion) reconstruction fund was allocated 
for projects in Sichuan.  The province has also received 
extensive support from 21 provinces and municipalities mandated 
by the central government to spend one percent of annual 
revenues on quake reconstruction projects.  Increased credit 
access have also helped, she said, but did not provide further 
 
CHENGDU 00000307  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
details on who has benefited from credit flow increases.  (Note: 
We understand that most of the increased credit access has 
benefited the bigger companies - often SOEs -- carrying out the 
many large-scale quake reconstruction projects.  Additionally, a 
portion of families rebuilding quake-destroyed homes have seen 
some improved access to bank loans for this purpose, typically 
capped at 20,000 RMB (USD 2500) per family.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
... and Global Financial Crisis 
 
------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶6. (U) Discussing the impact of the global economic crisis, Liu 
emphasized that Sichuan's relatively low reliance on 
international trade helped it weather the storm more smoothly 
than other provinces.  According to third quarter 2009 
statistics, the employment difficulties faced by Sichuan's 
estimated 20 million migrant workers early in the year have 
largely disappeared, with employers even facing worker 
shortages, she said.  She noted that the employment difficulties 
were resolved faster than the Sichuan government had 
anticipated, although she did not elaborate on this point. 
 
 
 
Great Western Development Driving a Decade of Growth 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (U) Liu credited GWD policies with helping to stimulate 
economic growth in Sichuan over the last decade.  The provincial 
government and party organs have also played crucial roles in 
issuing the "correct development strategies" she emphasized. 
This has included their emphasis on "one hub" -- developing 
Chengdu as a transportation hub in western China; "three 
centers" -- developing financial/banking, logistics and 
commercial centers in western China; and, "four bases" -- 
developing natural resources, processing and manufacture, 
science and technology innovation, and agriculture products 
processing.  Additional and related drivers of growth included 
regional advantages (quwei youshi), increased foreign 
investment, and accelerating industrialization and urbanization, 
she said. 
 
 
 
¶8. (U) As a result of these policies, Liu said, Sichuan saw a 
decade-long average annual growth rate of 11.3 percent.  This 
beat the national average of 9.9 percent in the same period, 
placing Sichuan in ninth place among all the provinces in terms 
of the total GDP value.  Sichuan's total GDP value now accounts 
for a quarter of the total in western China.  (Note: Liu did not 
specify which provinces were included in this statistic, but 
official statistics for 2008 suggest that she was referring to a 
group of 10 provinces that includes Shaanxi, Chongqing, Guizhou 
and the provinces further west.  End note.)  The 2008 GDP growth 
rate of 9.5 percent marked the first time in many years that 
Sichuan's growth rate had dropped below 10 percent. 
Nevertheless, Liu assessed the province's growth is still "too 
slow" in light of the fact that per capita GDP still stands at 
under 70 percent of the national average. 
 
 
 
"Transportation Hub" Development Continues Apace; 
 
Chengdu-Lhasa Railway Construction Start Uncertain 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
 
¶8. (U) Sichuan has made notable progress in transportation 
infrastructure development (ref B) with new expressways 
rendering most prefecture-level cities now within two-three 
hours drive of Chengdu.  The present length of expressways in 
the province now stands at about 3,000 kilometers, a six-fold 
increase over a decade ago.  Ongoing construction will add 
another 700 kilometers by 2012, and the total is planned to 
reach 8,600 kilometers by 2020.  In addition to ongoing efforts 
to also expand rail and air links, provincial planners have 
placed particular emphasis on creating a network of high-speed 
railways, especially for city-to-city links.  Approval for a 
 
CHENGDU 00000307  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
Sichuan-Guizhou high speed rail is expected soon, and will allow 
travelers to complete the Chengdu-Guiyang trip in about four 
hours.  Rail travel to Guangzhou from Chengdu will then be 
possible in about eight hours. 
 
 
 
¶9. (U) Construction of both expressways and railways to Yunnan 
and to connect Sichuan with Southeast Asian countries remains a 
priority goal of transportation infrastructure development.  Liu 
highlighted Sichuan's participation in the annual Pan-Pearl 
River Delta Conference as well as an agreement signed with 
Yunnan province on transportation links between the two 
provinces and to Southeast Asia. (See Ref A for discussion of 
the provincial protectionism challenges that may stymie 
Sichuan's ambitions on this front.) 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) In contrast with reports we saw several months ago, 
which cited plans to commence building the Chengdu-Lhasa Railway 
within the calendar year, Liu described the project as 
"impossible to start in the near future."  Noting that mid- and 
long-term plans have been approved for the railway, she 
emphasized the "two kinds of planning" employed in China - one 
"to really put into practice" and the other to implement at some 
point in the future "according to economic and other 
situations."  The Chengdu-Lhasa Railway currently belongs to the 
latter category, she said. 
 
 
 
Energy: Hydropower Main Energy Source ... 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶11. (U) Sichuan will continue to develop the province's 
hydropower potential, which currently accounts for about 65 
percent of total energy production.  According to SDRC 
projections, this will increase to over 80 percent within a 
decade.  (See Ref C for statistics on provincial hydropower 
resources provided previously by SDRC).  Asked whether there is 
much external investment in hydropower, Liu responded that "it 
is hard to say."  However, she noted that several small 
hydropower stations approved by the provincial Government have 
applied for United Nations Clean Development Mechanism funding 
(ref E). 
 
 
 
... Closing Small Coal-fired Plants ... 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶12. (U) Outside of hydropower, the remainder of Sichuan's energy 
comes primarily from coal (although efforts are underway to 
develop "green energy" sources - see Ref C).  The SDRC is 
emphasizing the need to close down less efficient power 
production.  SDRC officials noted that all thermal power plans 
with an installed generating capacity of less than 50 megawatts 
will be required to close down.  Others assessed to fall short 
in energy efficiency or emission standards are also being 
closed, according to the SDRC.  Shanwayao Thermal Power Plant 
and Chengdu Thermal Power Plant, each with installed capacities 
of around 200 megawatts, were cited as examples of the latter. 
As for new thermal power projects, only those with an installed 
capacity of at least 600 megawatts are being approved. 
 
 
 
... and Expanding Use of Natural Gas 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶13. (U) Natural gas exploitation, on the other hand, will see 
some expansion.  The province is rich in natural gas, with 
proven recoverable reserves within the Sichuan basin (including 
Chongqing) reaching 780 billion cubic meters, the third highest 
among all provinces in China (behind Xinjiang and Shanxi).  SDRC 
officials noted that Sichuan has played an important role in the 
campaign to transmit more natural gas sourced in the west to 
meet eastern power demand.  Liu highlighted a recently approved 
plan to potentially build a natural gas-fired power plant in 
 
CHENGDU 00000307  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
Dazhou, north of Chongqing, that if completed might have a total 
installed generation capacity of 330 megawatts.  Another 
gas-fired plant might be built in Jiangyou, in northern Sichuan, 
although it is unclear if these projects will go forward. 
 
 
 
Sichuan's Energy Efficiency Targets: 
 
Failed in 2008, But "On Track" for 2009 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶14. (U) Acknowledging Sichuan's failure to reach its energy 
efficiency reduction targets in 2008, as recently cited in a 
Ministry of Environmental Protection report, Liu cited the 
immense post-quake reconstruction needs as the primary culprit. 
Many small cement, iron, steel and other building supply 
factories that would otherwise have been shut down were allowed 
to continue operations.  (Comment: A November article in China 
Economic Week, however, quoted an expert from the National 
Development and Reform Commission characterizing the SDRC 
explanation as a "flimsy rationale.")  Sichuan has drafted plans 
to improve the situation, she said, and will catch up with other 
provinces.  While the province was only able to obtain a three 
percent emission reduction in 2008, versus the four percent 
national average, this is expected to increase to six percent 
for 2009.  (See ref E regarding Sichuan officials on energy 
efficiency tactics.) 
 
 
 
¶15. (U) Liu clarified that the SDRC has the overall 
responsibility for energy savings and emission reductions 
throughout the province, while the economic department is in 
charge of energy saving and emission reduction in industrial 
sector.  Discussing the particular measures being taken to 
reduce emissions, Liu cited emission reduction assessments that 
all new projects must pass before commencing.  Older factories, 
she claimed, must improve their facilities if they fail to meet 
environmental standards.  If standards are still not met, they 
must voluntarily cease production or be shut down by the 
government.  Moreover, Sichuan will continue to take actions to 
close down five types of small industries credited with 
producing a large proportion of pollution: cement, iron and 
steel, and fertilizer factories; small coal mines; and small 
paper mills. 
BROWN