04QUEBEC190
QUEBEC CITY 400TH ANNIVERSARY
Wed Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031736Z Nov 04UNCLAS QUEBEC 000190 
 
SIPDIS 
 
State for WHA/CAN; WHA/PDA - Mary Dean Conners 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PGOV PREL CA
SUBJECT: QUEBEC CITY 400TH ANNIVERSARY 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  CG and Embassy Minister Counselor for Public 
Affairs met Oct 14-15 with federal, provincial and municipal 
representatives involved with planning Quebec's 400th 
Anniversary in 2008.  Quebec Mayor L'Allier pushed for a visible 
U.S. legacy in the form of a genealogy center, while Provincial 
government representatives expressed strong reservations with 
the Mayor's proposal, pointing out that it would cost the 
Provincial government 40 million CND for infrastructure work 
alone.  CG and PAO indicated the limits of our ability to 
provide major funding for a large-scale legacy project but that 
we remained open to discussing ways in which we can support a 
genealogy project that makes connections between the U.S. and 
Quebec (and Canada more broadly).  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Quebec mayor Jean-Paul L'Allier, who is hoping the 
U.S. will contribute to the creation of a genealogy center to 
mark the 400th anniversary of the founding of Quebec City in 
2008, came well-prepared to his Oct. 14 meeting with CG and PAO. 
 L'Allier and his team handed us a project proposal complete 
with maps and floor plans for a Genealogy and Heritage Center 
that would be built in an 18th century building in Old Quebec 
known as "The New Barracks."  L'Allier underscored the 
importance and history of US-Canada and US-Quebec ties and noted 
that the 400th anniversary is an opportunity for the U.S. to 
establish a visible presence (a "legacy") in Quebec, which is 
currently lacking.  L'Allier believes U.S. involvement is 
appropriate, given that up to 15 million Americans have origins 
in Quebec and that a large part of the U.S. is former New France 
territory. 
 
¶3.  The following day, L'Allier organized a tour for us of the 
Barracks, which will need considerable infrastructure repair and 
renovation.  L'Allier advisor Jacques Jobin, who accompanied us 
on the tour, indicated the municipal government is confident 
that the Provincial government will pay the 40 million CND cost 
of rebuilding the outside of the building, a project which would 
take about three years.  There was no direct discussion of who 
would cover the cost of the inside of the building, i.e., 
staffing, equipping and running the center itself, but it was 
clear the municipal government is looking for others to foot 
this part of the bill.  (Comment:  By the end of PAO's two-day 
visit, it became apparent that the municipal government is 
hoping the USG either covers these "inside the building" costs, 
or assumes the burden of finding donors to do so.  End Comment.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Our Oct. 15 meeting with Provincial government 
officials revealed a difference of opinion between L'Allier's 
office and the Provincial government.  Sam Hamad, Charest's 
Minister responsible for the Quebec capital region (also 
Minister for Energy and Resources), and his team indicated to us 
they were not pleased L'Allier was assuming the GoQ would 
contribute 40 million CND for renovation of the New Barracks. 
GoQ 400th anniversary Commissioner Raymond Lesage, who works for 
Hamad, said there is a limited amount of Provincial money for 
400th anniversary events.  Every time money is spent on a 
"legacy" project, it means less money for 400th anniversary 
festivities. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Despite their irritation with L'Allier, Provincial 
officials were careful not to flat out reject the genealogy 
center project.  They wanted to know how much the U.S. would be 
willing to invest.  PAO made clear that the USG does not have 
large sums of money to devote to "legacy" projects such as 
building a monument.  We would probably be able to assist along 
the lines of hosting a seminar or conference around the theme of 
the Quebec roots of Americans. 
 
Comment 
------------ 
 
¶6.  Throughout the visit, CG and PAO gently but clearly 
indicated the limits of our ability to provide major funding for 
a large-scale legacy project.  We also indicated that we remain 
very open to discussing ways in which we can support a genealogy 
project that makes connections between the U.S. and Quebec (and 
Canada more broadly) through our shared immigrant experience. 
We are similarly open to other ideas that would highlight our 
shared "North American" experience.  We will continue to explore 
possibilities for USG/Mission contributions to the 400th 
anniversary celebration through cultural and academic exchange 
programs." 
 
¶7.  L'Allier's desire for a "legacy" investment from the USG is 
part of his quite understandable effort as mayor to seize the 
opportunity presented by the 400th to beautify his city.  (The 
"New Barracks" were to have been renovated several years ago to 
make room for a branch of Laval University, but that project 
fell through because of lack of funds.)  We note that for the 
300th anniversary, the only legacy project was the creation of 
the Plains of Abraham Park by the Government of Canada.  Foreign 
governments were asked to participate in festivities and the 
Vice President represented the U.S. at that celebration.