05HALIFAX14
MONUMENT DEDICATION TO U.S. POWS -- MAY 2005
Fri Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS VETERANS AFFAIRS 
OTTAWA FOR POL, PA  AND DAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR PREL CASC CA
SUBJECT: MONUMENT DEDICATION TO U.S. POWS -- MAY 2005 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  We are working with the city, armed forces and a 
historical society on a ceremony to dedicate a Veterans 
Affairs-provided monument to nearly 200 Americans who died near 
Halifax during the War of 1812.  The event will have a high 
profile and has the potential to reinforce our excellent ties 
with the Canadian Forces and at the same time generate some good 
press.  Action requests in para five.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Consulate staff met January 21 with representatives of 
Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM), the Canadian Armed Forces 
and a local historical society to discuss planning for a 
ceremony to commemorate a monument to U.S. prisoners of war who 
died near Halifax during the War of 1812.  The U.S. Department 
of Veterans Affairs is contributing the monument, inscribed with 
close to 200 names of captured Americans who died at Melville 
Island prison and were buried nearby on what has come to be 
known as Deadman's Island, actually a small isthmus on the west 
side of the Halifax peninsula. 
 
¶3.  With the arrival of the stone in Halifax scheduled for 
April, we are anticipating a Memorial Day (May 30) dedication 
ceremony.  HRM, the Canadian Army and Navy and the historical 
society are eager to support in any way they can this tribute to 
fallen Americans -- soldiers, sailors, marines as well as 
private citizens.  Deadman's Island has attracted a considerable 
amount of attention -- including Congressional interest -- in 
the U.S. since it was saved from development and purchased by 
HRM and protected as a historic site.  In 2000 local groups 
supported a somewhat impromptu commemoration on the island by a 
visiting U.S. Air National Guard unit and look forward to the 
opportunity to help us put on a more structured ceremony. 
(  has a "Boston Globe" 
report on the event and a brief history of the burial site.) 
Later in 2005 HRM expects to receive a formal designation of 
Deadman's Island as a National Historic Site by the Canadian 
Historic Sites and Monuments Board. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT:   It's not every day that one finds Canadian groups 
eager and willing to help us commemorate and respect American 
war dead.  This event has the potential to generate good press 
and good feeling, as well as give us an opportunity to stress 
the importance we attach to continued close cooperation with the 
Canadian Forces. 
END COMMENT. 
 
¶5.  ACTION REQUESTS: 
 
--  If a new Ambassador has arrived at post, we would appreciate 
serious consideration being given to his/her participation in 
the May 30 ceremony.  Other introductory calls in Halifax and 
the surrounding area could be set up in conjunction with the 
event. 
 
--  We would appreciate assistance in identifying appropriate 
U.S. military assets that might participate in a  May 30 
ceremony.  We will seek participation of the USN exchange 
chaplain scheduled to arrive this spring.  Other U.S. 
participation could range from an honor guard to a USN or USCG 
vessel anchored off the site to an aircraft flyby. 
 
HILL