05HALIFAX277
LNG PLANTS MOVE CLOSER TO REALITY
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG ETRD PREL CA
SUBJECT: LNG PLANTS MOVE CLOSER TO REALITY 
 
REF: A)  04 HALIFAX 040; B)  04 HALIFAX 115 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY:  Proposals for liquefied natural gas (LNG) 
plants in Atlantic Canada and Maine are moving forward, with a 
race of sorts developing among the four most advanced plans to 
see who can get on stream first.  Pipeline capacity through 
Atlantic Canada to New England can be increased to carry the 
larger supply of gas.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Captain Steve Garrity, Commander of Coast Guard 
Sector Northern New England, told CG that he received a letter 
of intent from Quoddy Bay LLC which proposes a plant in 
Eastport, ME, and that he expected to receive one from Downeast 
LNG (Robinston, ME) early in the week of December 19.  Both 
entities have done draft waterway suitability analyses.  Receipt 
of the letters will trigger a public notice and meetings to 
solicit community views on the plants.  Garrity, who recently 
attended a meeting with Canadian officials in St. John, New 
Brunswick, to discuss aspects of LNG permitting, new ferry 
service between Nova Scotia and Maine, and improved information 
sharing on marine domain awareness, said that he told Transport 
Canada officials at the meeting that Canadian government and 
public views on the LNG plants would be heard. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Downeast LNG President Dean Girdis (protect) called 
on CG to discuss his firm's proposal, and in particular the 
resistance that it is generating from residents of St. Andrew's, 
NB.  Girdis is frustrated with what he says is false and 
misleading information being circulated by opponents of the 
project, as well as by the reluctance of town officials to have 
a meeting where he could speak and seek to address local 
concerns.  Downeast has gone ahead and scheduled its own meeting 
at a local hotel and advertised it widely for anyone in the 
community to attend.  Girdis expects more than a few brickbats, 
but also hopes that a clear and factual presentation about the 
project will help clear up at least some misunderstanding. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  On the Canadian side of the border, activity 
continues as well, with projects in Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick moving ahead.  The Bear Head, NS, project, backed by 
Houston-based Anadarko, has broken ground and poured a 
significant amount of concrete already.  Doug Bloom, President 
of Maritimes and Northeast Pipeline (M&NE) told CG that his firm 
has met multiple times with representatives of all four projects 
and is prepared to increase pipeline capacity to accommodate 
larger gas volumes.  He said that M&NE (majority partner, Duke 
Energy) was well-positioned to bring gas to the U.S. northeast 
and to benefit from the surge of interest in LNG plants in the 
region. 
 
¶5.  (U)  COMMENT:  Gas supplies from offshore Nova Scotia have 
proven to be less than originally estimated, and new discoveries 
in recent years have been few, so it is not surprising that LNG 
is becoming the option of choice to provide additional energy to 
the northeast.  We remain skeptical that four plants in such a 
relatively small area can all be economically viable, but the 
experts seem to think that at least two and possibly three can 
make it given growing demand for gas.  Hence the race to be 
first into the market.  As the U.S plants begin their trek 
through the permitting process, New Brunswick's concerns about 
LNG tankers passing through Canadian waters to unload in the 
U.S. will eventually be elevated formally to the federal level. 
In addition, USCG planning that takes account of "zones of 
concern" around tankers and plants which would extend into 
Canada could add an additional layer of complexity to the 
process.  END COMMENT. 
HILL