05OTTAWA2410
CANADA'S NEW TRANSPORTATION SECURITY STRATEGY
Tue Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

092043Z Aug 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 002410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN (EVELYN WHEELER), L/DL (WYNNE TEEL), 
EB/TRA/OTP 
CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION FOR BONNER 
TRANSPORTATION FOR OST/IA (EDDIE CARAZO) 
TSA FOR SUSAN WILLIAMS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR EWWT CA ETRN
SUBJECT: CANADA'S NEW TRANSPORTATION SECURITY STRATEGY 
INCLUDES A NO-FLY LIST 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Transport Minister Jean Lapierre announced an 
expanded Transportation Security Strategy that will assess 
how Canada's transportation industry and the threat 
environment are likely to evolve.  When completed, the TSS 
will allow the GOC to better assess threats and will guide 
decisions on future spending on transportation security over 
the next five to seven years. 
 
¶2.  He also announced plans for a "made in Canada" no-fly 
list and initiatives to improve air cargo security.  Lapierre 
emphasized that he will continue to work with his 
counterparts in other countries, especially the U.S. and 
U.K., and with international organizations, in developing 
other transportation security measures. GOC concerns about 
USG plans to require flights that transit U.S. airspace to 
use the U.S. no-fly list are well known.  This is likely the 
next step in trying to develop a solution that boosts 
security in a way that addresses Canadian concerns about 
privacy and sovereignty.  The full text of Minister 
Lapierre's speech is available at  www.tc.gc.ca   End Summary 
 
Transportation security can't be an add-on 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  In an August 5 speech in Halifax, Canadian Transport 
Minister Jean Lapierre reviewed the steps the GOC has taken 
since the September 11 attacks to boost transportation 
security and outlined GOC plans for an expanded 
Transportation Security Strategy that builds on security 
efforts implemented since 2001.  Referring to 30 years of 
terrorist attacks on transportation, including the attacks on 
Air India, September 11, and the Madrid and London bombings, 
Lapierre stressed that "Transportation security cannot be 
seen as an add-on.  It must be an integral element of the way 
we do business." 
 
Assessing threats; setting priorities 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The new Transportation Security Strategy will look at the 
entire transport system, take stock of progress and assess 
how the transportation industry and threat environment are 
likely to evolve.  The GOC will then determine the greatest 
risks and how best to invest limited resources to protect 
transportation.  The strategy will include members of the 
transportation industry and the provincial and territorial 
governments, with work teams on security in aviation, marine, 
intermodal transport, rail, transit and trucking.  When 
completed, it will allow the GOC to better assess threats and 
will guide decisions on future spending on transportation 
security over the next five to seven years.  Lapierre 
emphasized that he will continue to work with his 
counterparts in Washington and London and other major 
capitals, and through international organizations such as the 
International Civil Aviation Organization. 
 
Passenger Protect:  the made in Canada no-fly list 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5.  Plans to introduce the "Passenger Protect" program (a 
"no-fly list) next year dominated coverage of the speech. In 
a related announcement, the Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of 
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC) 
confirmed that Transport Canada is starting a round of 
consultations on how to implement the passenger information 
provisions of the Public Safety Act, 2002.  Over the coming 
months, Transport Canada will work with groups including 
airlines, airports, and the Privacy Commission to develop a 
list using a "made in Canada approach that improves security, 
while ensuring the efficient operation of our aviation system 
and protecting the privacy and rights of all Canadians."  In 
coordination with experts from law enforcement to the privacy 
commissioner, the GOC plans to identify those who "pose an 
immediate threat to aviation security."  The list is expected 
to include about 1,000 names, and Transport Canada tells us 
that proposals from the U.S. and other countries will be 
evaluated for inclusion as specified in the Security and 
Prosperity Partnership.  . 
 
A Canadian list for Canadian flights 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  U.S. plans to require use of our no-fly list to include 
flights that transit U.S. airspace has caused a degree of 
consternation in Canada.  In his speech, Lapierre said that 
the U.S. proposal would affect some 3,000 flights a week in 
Canada and that he and the Deputy Prime Minister have advised 
U.S. counterparts of their concerns and stressed that it is 
not appropriate for passengers on domestic Canadian flights 
to be vetted against the U.S. no-fly list.  In addition to 
announcing Passenger Protect, Lapierre confirmed that the GOC 
is moving ahead with a new system of airport passes using 
biometrics and has started discussions with industry on 
further strengthening air cargo security. 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS