05OTTAWA3380
OTTAWA PROGRAMS HUMAN RIGHTS DAY 2005 EVENT
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 003380 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PHUM PREL ODIP PGOV APER CA
SUBJECT: OTTAWA PROGRAMS HUMAN RIGHTS DAY 2005 EVENT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 202764 
 
¶1.  (U)  Post plans to observe Human Rights Day with an 
educational outreach program to fourth grade students at 
which Ambassador Wilkins will read a picture book entitled 
"If a Bus Could Talk:  The Story of Rosa Parks" by Faith 
Ringgold.  The Ambassador will also educate the students 
about Eleanor Roosevelt's role as the chairperson of the 
Human Rights Commission.  The event will take place in one of 
the Parliament buildings and is being hosted by David 
Kilgour, an Independent MP known for his work in the 
international human rights field.  The Political Section will 
coordinate with Public Diplomacy as well as Mr. Kilgour's 
office to arrange media coverage.  Post's and Mr. Kilgour's 
offices plan to post pictures of the event on their websites. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Post is not aware of any other events sponsored by 
members of the diplomatic community.  However, Amnesty 
International and the Canadian Rights and Democracy 
organization are each sponsoring their own events.  Amnesty 
is promoting a letter writing campaign entitled "Write for 
Rights."  In 2004, approximately 700 events resulted in 
individuals and groups producing over 20,000 letters 
advocating various human rights cases to governments and high 
profile activists across the world.  Amnesty promotes the 
program over the Internet (http://www.amnesty.ca/writeathon) 
and will post 25 to 30 different cases on December 1 as 
guidelines for prospective participants.  Rights and 
Democracy, the GoC-funded institution whose international 
mandate includes promotion, advocacy and defense of human 
rights, will present its 2005 John Humphrey Freedom Award to 
Mr. Yan Christian Warinussy of West Papua at a speech and 
reception hosted on December 8 at the Canadian Museum of 
Civilization. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Per reftel's request for quotes, the following is 
attributed anonymously: 
 
"Great Tribute" 
 
It is the VETERAN, not the preacher, who has given us freedom 
of religion. 
It is the VETERAN, not the reporter, who has given us freedom 
of the press. 
It is the VETERAN, not the poet, who has given us freedom of 
speech. 
It is the VETERAN, not the campus organizer, who has given us 
freedom to assemble. 
It is the VETERAN, not the lawyer, who has given us the right 
to a fair trail. 
It is the VETERAN, not the politician, who has given us the 
right to vote. 
It is the VETERAN, who salutes the flag and who serves under 
the flag. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS