05OTTAWA434
EVALUATION OF DIGITAL VIDEO CONFERENCE:
Fri Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

111454Z Feb 05UNCLAS OTTAWA 000434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, IIP/G/WHA - CBARONE, 
INFO WHA/PDA - JGREENBLATT 
 
E.O.:     12958 N/A 
TAGS: OPRC OIIP CA OBSP
SUBJECT:  EVALUATION OF DIGITAL VIDEO CONFERENCE: 
"IRAQI ELECTIONS: NEXT STEPS" February 9, 2005 (3:00 - 
4:00 P.M. EST) TRACKER 23452 
 
 
1    DESCRIPTION: Dr Kenneth Katzman, Specialist in 
Middle East Affairs, U.S. Congressional Research 
Service gave a one-hour, one-country (Embassy and six 
constituent posts) DVC on the subject of the recently 
held Iraqi elections. 
 
2    DATE: Fiscal Year, and Quarter: Wednesday, 
February 9, FY 2005; Second Quarter. 
 
¶3.   JUSTIFICATION/OBJECTIVE: Post would like to 
address the significance of the elections, as the 
centerpiece of the interim Iraqi government and the 
provisional coalition's plan to establish a democratic 
system of government in Iraq. The fundamental question 
we would want to examine is whether the results will 
help to achieve that goal and to bring about an end to 
sectarian violence. Sub-topics would include voter 
turnout, particularly among Sunnis, and what effect it 
will have on minority representation in the new 
government. In addition, we would like to look at the 
Kurdish desire for relative autonomy in the new 
federation. We would be interested in an analysis of 
Syrian, Turkish, and Iranian reactions to the elections 
and implications for regional stability. 
 
 
¶5.   MPP THEME: International Public Opinion; Regional 
Security 
 
¶7.   AUDIENCE: The DVC was well attended at all Posts 
and attracted over 50 attendees country-wide.  The make- 
up of the audiences was broader than usual. In 
attendance were the Press Secretary of the newly 
established Iraqi Embassy in Canada; Muslim and 
Canadian journalists; Iraqi-Canadian and Kurdish 
representatives; Middle East experts from various 
Canadian Universities as well as officials from the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the Canadian International 
Development Agency; Privy Council Office; prominent 
think tanks; and several university students. The 
audiences were amazed at Dr. Katzman's in-depth 
knowledge of the region and appreciated his substantive 
grasp of an extremely complex and rapidly evolving 
subject as well as his willingness to engage in 
discussion with people of opposing views.  His thought- 
provoking analysis generated lengthy post-DVC 
discussion at most Posts. 
 
Many in our audience were initially surprised that the 
Embassy would present a speaker whose views diverge on 
many points from official USG policy, and they came up 
afterwards to compliment us for doing so.  We feel that 
showcasing the controversial views of a respected 
academic researcher enhanced the Embassy's credibility 
in the eyes of our GoC counterparts and perhaps made 
them realize that the U.S. Government draws upon a 
wealth of resources in the formulation of policy toward 
Iraq.  Dr. Katzman's final comment that the program had 
given him issues to think about that he had not 
considered was an extra plus for the organizers. 
Moreover, the passionate commentary that came forth 
during the question and answer period highlighted the 
difficulty of the task confronting Iraq as it seeks to 
create a pluralistic democracy that protects minority 
rights.  Dr. Katzman's plea for the Shia to adopt an 
enlightened and conciliatory approach to the Sunnis 
received a sympathetic response from many in our 
audience, and even those who disagreed still 
appreciated his analysis.  Some of the Posts were able 
to make new contacts both in academia and in various 
Mid-eastern ethnic communities. 
 
¶5. QUALITY OF U.S. SUPPORT: Excellent. Brenda Butler is 
to be complimented on filling the moderator's role very 
competently, a task that is crucial to the smooth 
running of the program. 
 
¶6. TECHNICAL EVALUATION:  Excellent.  Post expresses 
its appreciation to IIP for its assistance in the 
realization of this program. 
 
CELLUCCI