05OTTAWA3649
CANADIAN STUDENTS PRAISE HUMAN RIGHTS DAY PROGRAM
Tue Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 003649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/SEA - PETER SAWCHYN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KPAO CA ID
SUBJECT: CANADIAN STUDENTS PRAISE HUMAN RIGHTS DAY PROGRAM 
 
REF: A. (A) SECSTATE 202764 
 
     ¶B. (B) OTTAWA 03380 
 
-------------------------------------- 
The Embassy Hosts Fourth Grade Students 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  On December 8, Ambassador David H. Wilkins hosted 55 
fourth grade students from the Glen Ogilvie Elementary School 
in Gloucester, their teachers and a dozen chaperones at the 
Embassy in Ottawa to observe the 57th anniversary of the 
signing of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights.  The 
highlight of the two-hour visit was Ambassador Wilkins 
reading of "If a Bus Could Talk:  The Story of Rosa Parks" by 
Faith Ringgold, the graphics of which were projected onto a 
screen for all to see.  Prior to the reading, the students 
passed through security, prompting a discussion of the 
importance of effective security procedures.  The group 
received a brief tour of the Embassy, an explanation of its 
role and responsibilities, a mini-lesson on American civics 
as well as a farewell holiday ginger cookie and fruit.  At 
the end of the reading, the Ambassador, seated comfortably in 
a chair with the students surrounding him on the floor, 
warmly responded to questions like "Who is your favorite 
hero?" "What does this story mean to you?" and "Did you ever 
meet Rosa Parks?"  He stressed how fortunate Canadians and 
Americans are to live in countries that respect basic human 
rights. 
 
¶2.  On December 6, Poloff and OMS visited the school to frame 
the visit, discuss the U.S. role in the creation of the 
International Declaration on Human Rights and introduce some 
of the players in America's Civil Rights Movement.  This 
provided the opportunity to discuss Eleanor Roosevelt as well 
as Canadian John Peters Humphrey, early collaborators on 
writing and passing the original document.  OMS Carolyn 
Alston taught the students the Negro spiritual "O Freedom" 
from the book and the students sang it for Ambassador Wilkins 
during Thursday's reading.  To express their appreciation, 
each of the two classes made student presentations to the 
Ambassador of a handmade, signed card and a book with 
pictures and stories about each student's ethnic background 
and country of origin.  The teacher told poloff that, prior 
to this Human Rights Day program, she had not had a chance to 
focus on her class's diversity and was appreciative of the 
incentive. 
 
¶3.  Both the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and the 
A-Channel broadcast the event on their evening news shows. 
During a personal interview by one station with a student 
attending the event, the student said he learned "that each 
person can make a difference" and, when asked how it was to 
meet the American Ambassador, he replied "I think he's a 
really cool guy!"  One parent chaperone said to poloff, "I 
didn't realize how special coming to the Embassy would be. 
This was great!"  For photos of the event and links to U.S. 
human rights policy and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, visit the Embassy's website at 
www.usembassycanada.gov. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Human Rights Events Across Canada 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Human Rights Day events took place across Canada and 
included the Montreal-based Rights and Democracy event at the 
Canadian Museum of Civilization in Ottawa, attended by 
poloff, on December 8.  The GoC-sponsored NGO, created by 
Canada's Parliament in 1988, presented the 14th annual John 
Humphrey Freedom Award to Yan Christian Warinussy, a human 
rights lawyer and the Executive Director of the Institute for 
Research, Analysing and Development of Legal Aid, in 
Manokwari, West Papua.  In the presence of the Minister 
Counselor from the Indonesian Embassy, Mr. Warinussy, dressed 
in traditional tribal clothing, condemned what he 
characterized as Indonesia's brutal 43 year repressive 
occupation and challenged the Canadian Government to 
facilitate peaceful dialogue between the Government of 
Indonesia and West Papuans.  His colleague, Octovianus Motte, 
a West Papuan activist who received asylum in the United 
States and whom the laureate had not seen in eight years, 
accused the Indonesian government of "genocide, summary 
executions and rape." For more information about Warinussy's 
organization, visit www.pacificpeoplespartnership.org. 
 
¶5.  On December 2, ConGen-Montreal CG attended the Human 
Rights Day event sponsored by the International Centre for 
Human Rights Education or EQUITAS, previously known as the 
Canadian Human Rights Foundation.  The organization provides 
overseas human rights training seminars and offers a summer 
internship program for Canadian youth.  Senator Romeo 
Dallaire, Canadian Lieutenant General, former Force Commander 
of the United Nations Mission to Rwanda and member of the 
Prime Minister's Special Advisory Team on Sudan, was the 
featured speaker. 
¶6.  On November 28, Toronto Mayor David Miller honored 
thirteen people and organizations who contributed to the 
elimination of violence, racism, sexism, homophobia, 
homelessness, hate crimes, hunger, poverty and illiteracy. 
2005 recipients included the Native Learning Centre, The 
Lesbian and Gay Community Appeal and the Toronto Chapter of 
the Chinese Canadian National Council. 
 
¶7.  Comment:  Post believes that the invitation to the 55 
Ottawa school students resonated well beyond those in 
attendance, in part due to the media coverage and in part due 
to the fact that an additional 100 parents were made aware 
that their children had been welcomed into what is sometimes 
unfortunately perceived as a nearly impenetrable fortress, 
the American Embassy in Ottawa.  Post will continue to 
explore other appropriate opportunities to engage young, 
potential leaders by both inviting them to the Embassy for 
additional programming as well as finding appropriate venues 
for the Ambassador to get out the U.S. human rights message. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS