05QUEBEC40
QUEBEC LOOKING FOR ROLE ON HAITI
Tue Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

292002Z Mar 05UNCLAS QUEBEC 000040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON CA
SUBJECT: QUEBEC LOOKING FOR ROLE ON HAITI 
 
REF: MONTREAL 1574 
 
¶1. GOQ Ministry of International Relations (MRI) officials 
offered to brief CG March 28 regarding Quebec's interest in 
contributing in some way to Haiti reconstruction.  (Note: 
Montreal hosts the largest concentration of Haitians in Canada, 
estimated at 125,000, according to GOC officials. see reftel.) 
MRI Assistant Deputy Minister for Bilateral and Francophone 
Affairs Gaston Harvey said the GOQ would be sending a team to 
Haiti April 1 to explore the possibility of Quebec's providing 
ongoing advice to Haitian government officials on strategic 
planning and budget management.  The idea, according to the MRI, 
is for Quebec bureaucrats to work on a TDY basis with Haitian 
officials. 
 
¶2. Harvey said Quebec decided to contribute in this area after 
consultation with the Canadian federal government.  (He noted in 
passing that Canada's Ambassador to Haiti was presently in 
Quebec City for consultations.)  The GOQ considered taking a 
lead on rule of law and elections, but the Canadian federal 
government nixed these as it is already working in these areas. 
Harvey stressed that the GOQ has no desire to compete with the 
GOC on Haiti but is looking for a role that is complementary. 
 
¶3. Harvey reviewed for CG current Quebec province participation 
in Haiti reconstruction.  Seventy-five percent of Canada's 
civpol contribution in Haiti is from Quebec, mainly from the 
Surete de Quebec [the provincial police] and Montreal police, he 
said.  As for infrastructure support, GOQ-owned Hydro Quebec 
previously took charge of and successfully restarted electricity 
in the town of Jacmel.  Hydro Quebec will work next on 
electricity for Les Cayes and may also address electricity needs 
in Gonaives. 
 
¶4. MRI U.S. desk director Ginette Chenard confirmed that Premier 
Charest intends to visit Haiti in June.  She ruled out the 
possibility (floated late last year by the MRI) of Charest's 
visiting Haiti along with Florida Governor Bush.  The Premier 
has been in consultation with the governors of Florida, 
Massachussetts and New York to find ways to get the Haitian 
diaspora to contribute to Haitian reconstruction but no specific 
action has as yet been agreed upon.