05WELLINGTON722
HOLLINGSWORTH-NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE
Mon Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FOR FAS/FAA/YOUNG, USDA/ARS/MICHELE WILLIAMS 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR NZ
SUBJECT: HOLLINGSWORTH-NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE 
 
REF USDA 673432 
 
¶1.  Embassy grants country clearance to USDA official, 
Robert Hollingsworth, USDA/ARS/PWA/HAWAII to visit Auckland and 
Rotorua, New Zealand from September 22 to October 10, 2005 to 
attend and present a paper at the Australasian Postharvest 
Horticulture Conference in Rotorua and attend a pre-conference 
tour in Auckland. 
 
¶2. Embassy understands that country clearance is the 
only assistance required. 
 
¶3. Point of contact at the American Embassy is the office 
of Foreign Agricultural Service, USDA.  Their contact 
details are: 
 
Tel: 64-4-462-6012 
Fax: 64-4-462-6016 
Email: agwellington(at)usda.gov 
 
 
¶4. Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon 
arrival and ATM machines are readily available throughout 
New Zealand.  Check cashing privileges at the Embassy are 
restricted to traveler's checks only upto US100.00. 
Personal checks will not be accepted. 
 
¶5.  Visitors should use local taxi service, which is 
generally safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from 
the airport to downtown Wellington hotels is 
approximately NZD30.00.  A commercial shuttle service is 
also offered at the airport. Taxi fare from the airport 
to downtown Auckland hotels is approximately NZD55-NZD65. 
A commercial shuttle service is also offered at the 
Auckland airport. 
 
¶66.  Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon 
arrival and ATM machines are readily available throughout 
New Zealand.  Check cashing privileges at the Embassy are 
limited to traveler's checks only up to USD 300.00 daily. 
Personal checks will not be accepted. 
 
¶7.  Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The Government of New Zealand instituted fines for non- 
declared biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New 
Zealand with undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be 
immediately fined NZD200.00 (USD150.00).  Biosecurity is 
a serious issue in New Zealand and fines will be 
administered immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶8.  Security Information: 
 
a.  All U.S. citizen personnel serving under the Chief of 
Mission authority in a temporary status of 30 days or 
more must complete appropriate overseas personal security 
training prior to travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who 
have completed the Security Overseas Seminar course at 
the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after June 1, 2000, 
meet this requirement.  All other TDY personnel must 
either (1) complete the approved seminar at FSI entitled 
"Serving Abroad for Families & Employees" (SAFE), or (2) 
have their agency certify to the Department of State's 
Bureau of Diplomatic Security that the employee has 
undergone equivalent security training.  The contact for 
this training is Assistant Director for Training at (703) 
205-2617.  Country clearance will not be granted for any 
traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 days if this 
information is not stated/certified. POC for additional 
information is RSO Wellington. 
 
b.  The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates the 
threat from transnational and indigenous terrorism as 
low. There are no terrorist groups or support groups 
believed to be operating in New Zealand at this time.  In 
light of the worldwide security alert all visitors should 
heighten their security awareness and report any unusual 
incidents to the Regional Security Officer. 
 
c.  Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail 
have occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in 
New Zealand.  In response to U.S. policies and actions, 
various groups in New Zealand have demonstrated 
occasionally at the Embassy in Wellington and at the 
Consulate in Auckland.  These demonstrations are usually 
small and are peacefully conducted.  During these 
demonstrations, the host country police and protective