05WELLINGTON908
NEW ZEALAND'S AVIAN AND PANDEMIC INFLUENZA
Fri Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/DR. DANIEL SINGER AND 
REBECCA S. DALEY, INR FOR LESTER AND BRUNETTE-CHEN, 
STATE FOR D (FRITZ), EAP/FO (STEPHENS), 
AND EAP/ANP 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISA ELIZABETH PHU 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA 
PACOM FOR J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2015 
TAGS: TBIO SENV ECON EAGR EAID PREL NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND'S AVIAN AND PANDEMIC INFLUENZA 
PLANNING UPDATE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 206992 
     ¶B. WELLINGTON 704 
 
Classified By: Political-Economic Counselor Katherine Hadda, 
for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Since launching a government-wide effort in 
June, the GNZ has vigorously planned for the possibility of 
avian and pandemic influenza entering New Zealand.  Under 
the coordination of the Ministry of Health (MOH), the 
Inter-sectoral Pandemic Group (IPG) of thirteen ministries 
and departments in November released publicly a 
comprehensive Influenza Pandemic Action Plan.  In 
developing its national plan, the GNZ has consulted closely 
with Australia and WHO officials, and has sought to shore 
up its inability to produce human vaccines by securing an 
agreement with an Australia-based manufacture to provide 
priority access to a vaccine once it is developed. 
 
¶2.  (C) Beyond the vaccine weakness, New Zealand is 
well-positioned 
to execute its national strategy having mature animal and 
human 
surveillance programs, well-implemented vaccination 
administration programs, and having reviewed its legal 
authorities to implement quarantine and other social 
distancing measures.  In October 2005, Prime Minister Helen 
Clark appointed veteran minister and scientist Pete Hodgson 
as Minister of Health, further signifying the high 
importance of pandemic influenza and other health issues to 
the GNZ. Embassy will provide a further update to this message 
following consultations with GNZ expert Marlene Castle next 
week. 
Castle was unavailable prior to the Ref A requested response 
deadline. 
End Summary. 
 
Preparedness/Communication 
--------------------------- 
¶2. (C) NATIONAL PLAN: The government of New Zealand in June 
initiated development of a comprehensive national plan to 
respond to avian and pandemic influenza, and released the 
plan publicly in early November.  New Zealand is 
well-positioned to implement its national strategy.  New 
Zealand's area of greatest weakness is that it does not 
have local capacity to manufacture human vaccines.  The 
principal 
national planning document is available through the Ministry 
of 
Health at http://www.moh.govt.nz/nhep.  The plan is expected 
to 
undergo continuing revision as a "living document," and is 
currently on its 14th version. Further planning documentation 
regarding animals is available through Biosecurity New 
Zealand at 
http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz. 
 
¶3. (C) RELIABLE REPORTING: There is no reason to doubt the 
government's truthfulness in reporting the scope of any 
disease outbreak among people or animals.  New Zealand has 
a mature public health surveillance system, including two 
programs specifically dedicated to monitoring influenza: 
(1) a general practice (GP) sentinel disease and 
virological surveillance system operates annually during 
the winter months recording the daily number of 
consultations that fit the case definition of an 
influenza-like illness and (2) an ongoing virological 
surveillance is carried out by designated virology 
diagnostic laboratories, and by the ESR virology 
laboratory. Data collected from these laboratories is 
reported nationally in the Virology Weekly Report. 
 
¶4. (U) Biosecurity New Zealand, within the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry's (MAF), manages the Animal 
Disease Surveillance program, including regular reporting of 
surveillance results and auditing of services purchased 
from contractors.  In the last two years, almost 2,000 
samples were collected from migratory waterfowl in the 
vicinity of arrival locations.  No bird flu or highly 
pathogenic avian influenza viruses were isolated from any 
of these samples, or from the less intensive sampling that 
was conducted in previous years. Fifteen avian influenza 
viruses have been isolated and characterized in New Zealand 
over the past 15 years. All were non-pathogenic. 
 
¶5. (C) Presently, public health surveillance reports for 
reportable diseases in humans are published on a weekly 
cycle.  Reports for disease in animals are reported on a 
quarterly cycle.  Greater frequency of reporting of disease 
among animals would contribute to greater transparency by 
providing more timely and thus more relevant information. 
New Zealand's national plan provides for increased animal 
surveillance once the pandemic enters WHO Interpandemic 
Period Phase 2. 
 
¶6. (C) PRIORITY TO GOVERNMENT:  Preparing for an avian flu 
pandemic ranks highly among government priorities.  Staff 
from the External Assessments Bureau (EAB) located within 
the Department of the Prime Minister 
and Cabinet, have been assigned to avian influenza threat 
planning.  The Director, David Kersey, has been seconded to 
the Officials Committee for Domestic and External Security 
(ODESC) for this purpose, and currently spends only 10% of 
his time at EAB.  The Ministry of Health (MoH), the agency 
leading intergovernmental coordination and planning through 
the Intersectoral Pandemic Group (IPG), has taken a 
"maximum credible event" approach to planning for avian 
influenza pandemic.  Under this approach MoH models assume 
a pandemic wave in which 40% of the NZ population will 
become ill over an eight-week period with a 2% fatality 
rate (33,000 deaths in the eight-week period). 
 
¶7. (C) It is difficult to conceive of the government 
placing higher priority on the issue.  In October, Prime 
Minister Helen Clark appointed Pete Hodgson as Minister of 
Health.  As the only scientist among the 
Labour-government's members, Hodgson is well-regarded for 
his management capability and subject-matter expertise. 
During the last term of government, Hodgson had ministerial 
responsibility for energy, fisheries, research & 
technology, and the Crown Research Institutes, and was the 
government's resident expert on climate change. 
 
¶8. (C) KEY CONTACT: The Embassy's principal liaison with the 
government of New Zealand on avian flu issues is Marlene 
Castle, 
External Assessments Bureau (EAB).  EAB is located in the 
Prime 
Minister's office and is responsible for monitoring and 
analyzing world events for the PM and Cabinet officials. 
Castle is a chemical and biological weapons expert and has 
been following the avian flu epidemic for the last two 
years.  She is also heavily involved in GNZ's contingency 
planning should a pandemic strike here, and regularly 
briefs the Prime Minister on the disease's trajectory. 
 
¶9. (U) REVIEW OF LAWS: As part of the Influenza Pandemic 
Action Plan, the GNZ is assessing the legal authorities 
applicable to its planned actions in response to each of 
the WHO-designated pandemic phases.  Much of the specific 
legal authority it cited within the plan, and will be 
updated during subsequent plan versions. 
 
¶10. (C) MULTILATERAL COOPERATION: New Zealand is working 
closely with the World Health Organization and the 
government of Australia.  Castle indicates that GNZ 
officials have nearly "constant touch" with WHO and 
Australian officials.  The government has recognized that 
New Zealand does not have the capacity to manufacture human 
vaccines, and has thus secured an agreement with an 
Australia-based manufacturer to get priority access to 
vaccines in the event of a future influenza pandemic. 
During an actual pandemic, particularly if the agreed 
supplier is incapable of supplying a vaccine, the 
government may seek assistance from Australia, the US or 
other countries for vaccine assistance. 
 
¶11. (U) ANNUAL FLU VACCINES: New Zealand has a mature 
program for administering annual influenza vaccines, but 
does not have the local capacity to manufacture human 
vaccines.  Instead annual influenza vaccines are purchased 
from vendors in Australia, who formulate the vaccine with 
input from the governments of Australia, New Zealand, and 
South Africa and the World Health Organization.  The 
vaccines are formulated for the Southern hemisphere winter 
and the flu season from April to September. 
 
¶12. (C) PUBLIC INFORMATION: The planning group has begun 
to implement a public education campaign, including 
significant 
information now available on the Ministry of Health website 
cited paragraph 1 of this cable.  Other ministries 
and departments have begun publishing information on websites 
including Biosecurity New Zealand and the Ministry for 
Economic 
Development.  Other steps are being considered, including 
pamphlets.  Information on whom to contact in case of a 
pandemic 
are now included in a prominent place in New Zealand phone 
directories.  The aim of GNZ's outreach efforts is to educate 
without inducing panic.  Local media has provided frequent 
coverage of avian influenza both globally and locally, and 
even in rural areas the public is well-informed although 
probably poorly prepared with provisional supplies and coping 
strategies. 
 
Surveillance/Detection 
---------------------- 
¶13. (C) CAPABILITY TO DETECT AND SUBTYPE: New Zealand 
surveillance systems can effectively isolate and detect new 
strains of influenza both among people and animals, and New 
Zealand should be able to properly diagnose cases in short 
order.  There is a relatively low level of endemic disease 
among animal species.  Influenza viruses can be subtyped in 
country, principally by the government owned entity 
Institute for Environmental Science and Research Limited, 
as demonstrated during the 2004 flu season.  During 2004, 
an influenza A substrain was first isolated in New Zealand; 
the virus was later determined to have originated in 
Southern China.  The strain will be formulated into the 
2005 seasonal flu vaccine. 
 
¶14. (C) CRITICAL GAPS: New Zealand's greatest weakness 
appears to be its local inability to manufacture human 
vaccines. 
 
 
Response/Containment 
-------------------- 
¶15. (C) STOCKPILES: The Government of New Zealand has 
acquired 855,000 doses of the antiviral oseltamivir 
(Tamiflu), sufficient to treat 21% of the population.  MOH 
has further recognized the need for District Health Boards 
(DHBs) to consider the need to build their own supplies of 
anti-viral drugs, over above the levels held in the 
national stockpile. 
 
¶16. (U) CULLING AND OTHER ANIMAL MEASURES:  MAF has 
authority under the Biosecurity Act of 1993 to respond to 
organism incursions through control or eradication. 
Biosecurity New Zealand, a component of MAF, has included 
eradication/culling within it planning framework. 
 
¶17. (SBU) QUARANTINE AND SOCIAL DISTANCING:  Given the 
short-run lack of a vaccine and limited antiviral supplies, 
quarantine and social distancing measures are the principal 
means considered by the government for a future pandemic 
virus that enters New Zealand.  These measures include: 
recommending that sick people stay home; advising the 
public against unnecessary travel; utilizing the powers of 
medical officers of health to cancel public events; closing 
child care facilities, schools and tertiary education 
institutions; removal and detention for individuals 
suspected of infection with avian influenza; compulsory 
treatment; authority to use other areas as a hospital or 
place of isolation; and use of police and defense forces to 
isolate infected areas and prevent travel to uninfected 
islands. 
 
McCormick