06QUEBEC39
MALAISE IN THE PQ
Fri Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUEBEC 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EFIN ECON PREL CA
SUBJECT: MALAISE IN THE PQ 
 
SENSITVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Parti Quebecois (PQ) veteran Pauline Marois, 
57 year old MNA for Taillon and three time party leadership 
aspirant, announced March 20 she was quitting politics after 25 
years of public service.  Marois is the second veteran PQ member 
to resign over the last few days and more resignations are 
expected -- some voluntary and others at the bidding of PQ 
leader Andre Boisclair.  Boisclair is hoping these departures 
will allow him to bring fresh and younger faces into the party 
in time for the next election.  But so far Marois' departure has 
re-ignited a debate on women in politics and called into 
question Boisclair's approach to rejuvenating the party.  While 
popular support for Charest remains very low, Boisclair does not 
yet seem to have found a way to present himself and his party as 
the attractive alternative.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) PQ heavyweight and former Minister Pauline Marois 
called it quits this week, saying "her heart was not in it any 
longer."  Marois was badly defeated by the much younger Andre 
Boisclair for the party leadership last fall. Over the span of 
her long political career, Marois held 14 different Quebec 
ministerial portfolios; including Deputy Premier, Finance, 
Education, Health, and the Treasury Board.  She is widely 
considered as the most influential and powerful woman politician 
Quebec has ever had.  For many, her exit highlights that a lot 
still needs to be done on gender equality in politics.  The PQ 
in particular has always had a problem rallying women to the 
sovereignist cause and they tend to vote more often for the 
Liberals than male voters. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Media and public reaction to Marois' resignation is 
split between disappointment over the loss of a rock-solid and 
experienced politician and the view that her departure might 
make room for a young, new generation of Quebec sovereignist 
politicians.  Boisclair himself hinted that other departures 
would follow but refused to allow suggestions that the party was 
imploding; he talked instead of a "healthy and normal renewal." 
(Note:  With now two ridings open for Boisclair to run 
officially, the PQ leader confirmed this week that he himself 
would compete for a seat in the National Assembly this fall.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Others are reading Marois' notice as depriving the more 
moderate party faction of a strong and influential voice.  (That 
faction represents the majority of PQ members but struggles to 
make its voice heard.) Some within the PQ worry that her 
resignation sends a signal that the new PQ leader was unable to 
rebuild party unity after a fierce and drawn out leadership 
race. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment: There are clearly some changes going on 
within the PQ.  Some are generational while others are a result 
of the declining interest in sovereignty. Marois' resignation is 
likely to weaken the PQ, at least in the near term.  Boisclair 
may be calculating that he can afford to take some risks given 
PLQ leader Charest's continuing unpopularity. But at some point 
he will have to go beyond banking on voter dissatisfaction with 
Charest, and earn the confidence of the public based upon his 
actions.  For now, Boisclair has yet to personally win over the 
Quebec public. 
 
FRIEDMAN