06WELLINGTON321
Proposal for Digital Video Conference with an American
Wed Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

262305Z Apr 06UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/EA-SPRIETO; EAP/PD-AGRIMES; EAP/ANP-TWALSH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP NZ OEXC SCUL KPAO
SUBJECT: Proposal for Digital Video Conference with an American 
Specialist on Alternative Renewable and Sustainable Energy Sources 
at the Dunedin (New Zealand) International Science Festival, July 7, 
2006 
 
 
¶1. Post requests a U.S. specialist in alternative natural and 
sustainable energy sources for a digital video conference on (US 
date) Friday July 7 (NZ date: Saturday July 8). Time to be confirmed 
depending on location of the speaker. This DVC would form a major 
event in the Dunedin International Science Festival, which is being 
held in Dunedin July 3-9. 
 
¶2. Justification: The New Zealand public is very interested in 
issues to do with renewable energy resources, as New Zealand 
produces the bulk of its electricity from hydro power.  Demand is 
starting to outstrip production capacity, and alternative sources of 
energy are being researched and discussed.  Most prominent in the 
new technologies is wind generated power.  New Zealand imports all 
its oil requirements and is experiencing the negative effects of 
dramatic rises in oil and refined petroleum.  The future of 
renewable energy resources is a major economic and political issue. 
Extending a power supply that can be produced while maintaining the 
clean, green image New Zealand projects to the world is being 
explored by national and local governments, as well as energy- 
producing companies in New Zealand.  The perception in the New 
Zealand public of the United States' use of non-renewable energy 
sources is generally negative.  It is not generally appreciated that 
the US develops many world-leading technologies that can and will 
assist energy conservation and the change to renewable energy 
sources.  We believe this DVC will help improve the negative 
perception.  A DVC (and the specialist speaker) at this major 
science festival on this topic will get extensive public and media 
attention.  The DVC would be held at Otago University (Dunedin), 
which is the oldest (and most prestigious) university in New Zealand 
specializing in science, medicine, and political science. 
 
¶3. Speaker: The Dunedin International Science Festival director has 
specifically requested Dr. Amory Lovins, CEO of the Rocky Mountain 
Institute in Colorado for this DVC.  Post requests this speaker be 
considered our first priority; however, if this is not possible, 
then we would welcome alternative suggestions. 
 
Contact details for Dr Lovins are: 
http://www.rmi.org/sitepages/pid166.php#ALovi ns 
1739 Snowmass Creek Road 
Snowmass, CO 81654-9199 
Ph: (970) 927-3851. 
 
¶4. Audience: The audience will consist of university specialists, 
politicians, energy lobbyists, energy company officials and 
employees, students, and members of the public. In particular, the 
Minster for Energy and the American Ambassador will be invited to 
participate. Press and radio reporters who cover energy issues 
nationally will also attend. 
 
¶5. Format: The program will consist of a 30-minute talk followed by 
30-40 minutes of a question-and-answer format based on the speaker's 
requirements and suggestions in advance.  Questions from the 
audience can also be forwarded in advance if required. 
 
¶6. Post Project Officer: Control Officer:  Richard Benge, Cultural 
Affairs Specialist 
Office phone: 011-644-462-6052; 
Mobile:  011-64-21-217-1002 
Fax:  011-644-499-0490. 
Email: benger@state.gov 
 
Technical Officer:  The DVC will take place on site at Otago 
University, and details are yet to be provided. 
 
Thank you for considering this request. 
 
Burnett, Acting