06WELLINGTON26
PROPOSAL FOR DIGITAL VIDEO CONFERENCE WITH DEBORAH
Wed Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0026 0110205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110205Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2257UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/EA - SPRIETO; EAP/PD - AGRIMES; EAP/ANP - 
DRICCI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO NZ
SUBJECT: PROPOSAL FOR DIGITAL VIDEO CONFERENCE WITH DEBORAH 
JOWITT, VILLAGE VOICE DANCE CRITIC, FEBRUARY 9 
 
 
¶1. Post requests a digital video conference with Village 
Voice dance critic Deborah Jowitt in New York at 3:30 p.m. 
Thursday, February 9 (9:30 a.m. February 10, New Zealand 
time).  The New Zealand audience would include journalists 
and dance critics in training at a conference conducted by 
"Creative New Zealand," the New Zealand government funding 
agency for the arts.  The DVC audience would be in the 
American Embassy's auditorium in Wellington. (See more on 
Creative New Zealand at http://www.creativenz.govt.nz.) 
 
¶2. Deborah Jowitt has been contacted in advance by Undine 
Marshfield and Ruth Delaney of Creative New Zealand, and she 
has agreed to participate at this date and time. Post 
requests IIP to make formal contact with Deborah Jowitt to 
arrange DVC studio booking and honorarium payment. 
 
¶3. Justification: Following a successful DVC featuring New 
York Times dance critic Jennifer Dunning on March 1, 2005, 
Creative New Zealand again has approached Public Affairs for 
a follow up program specifically for journalists who write 
about dance in New Zealand.  Public Affairs is pleased to 
see the momentum that the initial conference generated and 
the confidence this government agency has in participating 
with digital video conferencing via the American Embassy. 
The conference's goal is to continue to develop the 
standards of criticism by New Zealand dance journalists and 
writers.  Post wishes to develop closer ties with New 
Zealand journalists.  As there is a general bias against 
American foreign policy in the New Zealand media, it is 
important for Post to provide journalists with opportunities 
to write about American culture, while at the same time 
developing their professional standards. 
 
¶4. New Zealand dance criticism in general is not of a high 
standard and (until the DVC on March 1, 2005) there has been 
no specific training in this area.  By contrast, the 
standard of dance -- both contemporary and classical -- in 
New Zealand is rising to the extent that New Zealand 
choreographers, dancers and their works are being celebrated 
overseas.  For example, the New Zealand contemporary dance 
company "Black Grace" was critically acclaimed at the (U.S.) 
Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival in 2004 and in New York in 
¶2005.  See: Jennifer Dunning's New York Times review on the 
Black Grace web site 
http://www.blackgrace.co.nz/events.html. 
 
¶5. Audience: The audience for this digital video conference 
would include newspaper journalists, writers of dance 
history and contemporary dance critics;  administrators, 
teachers and students of leading dance organizations such as 
the New Zealand School of Dance and DANZ (the dance teachers 
and producers network); and, members of the public who are 
interested in the arts, dance and journalism.  Ambassador 
and Mrs. McCormick are scheduled to attend the DVC and to 
welcome the participants. It is expected that a smaller 
invited audience also would be able to observe from the 
American Consulate in Auckland. 
 
¶6. Topic and description of event: Deborah Jowitt is 
requested to present a 15- to 20-minute talk about dance 
criticism, generally discussing "what makes good dance 
criticism and writing" based on her experience and 
knowledge. After this, the discussion would be opened to 
questions from the audience. Alternatively, she may prefer 
to do a shorter talk and ask for questions from the audience 
sooner. 
 
¶7. Deborah Jowitt's contact details are: 
email: dj2@nyu.edu 
Tel: (212) 475-3300 
Village Voice Media, Inc., 36 Cooper Square, New York, NY 
10003 
 
¶8. Post contact: 
Richard Benge, Cultural Specialist, Public Affairs, U.S. 
Embassy Wellington. 
Office phone: 64-4-462-6052 
Fax: 64-4-499-0490 
Email: benger@state.gov. 
 
¶9. Funding: Post requests the New York DVC costs including 
call charge to be paid by IBUCKS. 
 
A DVC with Deborah Jowitt and New Zealand dance journalists 
would be a timely and valuable development following the 
success of the DVC with Jennifer Dunning on March 1, 2005. 
 
Thank you for considering this request and regards. 
 
Pazdral