06WELLINGTON322
OUTDATED ATTITUDES FRUSTRATE PUBLIC DIPLOMACY EFFORTS IN
Wed Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/PD-AGRIMES, EAP/ANP-DRICCI, EAP/P-KBAILES, INR/R/MR 
 
E.O. 12985: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA KIRC OIIP MNUC KPAO KMDR OPRC NZ
SUBJECT: OUTDATED ATTITUDES FRUSTRATE PUBLIC DIPLOMACY EFFORTS IN 
NEW ZEALAND 
 
SUMMARY: Negative perceptions of the United States, sparked by the 
US response to New Zealand's anti-nuclear legislation, are becoming 
an entrenched filter through which New Zealanders view all US 
foreign policy initiatives. Decades later, these lingering 
sentiments are exploited by anti-American proponents to generate 
suspicion, and they undermine any attempt to portray US foreign 
policy as pragmatic, multi-lateral, flexible, and forward-looking. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶1. New Zealand media reflect the views of the wider New Zealand 
population when they describe the US reaction to the anti-nuclear 
legislation as "heavy-handed" and "bullying."  New Zealanders feel 
that the US reaction failed to recognize New Zealand's sovereignty 
and its right to make its own choices and disagree with the US. One 
major daily does not hesitate to describe the residual ill-feeling 
as "anti-Americanism"; the country's second-largest daily, the 
Wellington-based Dominion Post outlines the phenomenon like this: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: The nuclear impasse is a highly visible irritant and has 
contributed to a regrettable undertone of anti-American sentiment... 
What is needed is for disagreements to be managed more maturely. 
That they are not is partly New Zealand's fault ... but the U.S. 
also contributed to the suspicion and ill-feeling. Its heavy-handed 
response helped turn the anti-nuclear legislation into an icon that 
not only expresses New Zealand's long-standing suspicion of all 
things nuclear, but also symbolizes New Zealand's right to determine 
its own foreign policy. If the U.S. wants to repair the 
relationship, it is going to have to do more than pay lip service to 
New Zealand's right to disagree. Restricting military cooperation 
harms only the common interests of the two countries, particularly 
when U.S. and New Zealand personnel find themselves working 
alongside each other. END TEXT. (07/06/05) 
 
A prominent South Island daily, The Otago Daily Times, adds: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: The folk-memory of events such as America's bullying 
response ... has ensured popular support for the legislation, today 
almost an act of blind faith... No change will occur, however, while 
New Zealanders continue with the belief that to do so would make 
them feel like citizens of a client state. America's failure to 
recognize this widely-held belief is the chief reason for the 
enduring ... sentiment. END TEXT. (07/10/05) 
 
¶2. As long as New Zealanders continue to view US policy through this 
filter of residual ill-feeling, they are likely to construe any US 
action in a way that bolsters their established negative view of the 
United States. This results in these harmful perceptions becoming 
further ingrained. 
 
In February The Dominion Post expressed concern that 
anti-Americanism predicated on perceived US "bullying" and 
"heavy-handed response" was and is becoming entrenched, particularly 
in the younger generation. 
 
BEGIN TEXT: The US insistence on punishing New Zealand for banning 
nuclear warships is petty and unproductive... A generation of New 
Zealanders has now been brought up with the knowledge that whatever 
former Secretary of State Colin Powell might have said, the US and 
New Zealand are not "very, very, very good friends." Good friends do 
not try to resolve disagreements over matters of principle by 
bullying those they disagree with. As a sovereign nation, New 
Zealand is entitled to determine its own foreign policy. US attempts 
to force a change of heart by linking anti-nuclear policy to trade 
and military cooperation do nothing for its standing in this part of 
the world. END TEXT. (02/27/06) 
 
¶3. Two decades of conscientious conventional public diplomacy have 
yielded limited results. Making further, significant progress and 
preventing US policy from consistently being used to undermine US 
interests requires creative, modern, big-picture strategies focused 
on countering this underlying perception. 
 
New Zealand's largest circulation daily, The New Zealand Herald, 
clearly articulates the hope that a new American strategy might 
provide the impetus required to win the hearts and minds of New 
Zealanders and cement closer relations between the two countries. It 
expresses a desire for Washington to "help New Zealanders recognize 
a misplaced and redundant source of pride." (07/06/05) 
 
¶4. While Embassy Wellington has undertaken some unconventional 
public diplomacy (including a proposal for a New Zealand-run museum 
exhibition examining the context of decisions about the bilateral 
relationship, school debates with moots such as "NZ contributes more 
to the US than the US contributes to NZ," and our regular but 
unconventionally-structured dialogues with the media), we are 
exploring further possibilities and look forward to an exchange of 
views with Washington as we move forward. 
 
BURNETT, ACTING