07HALIFAX89
CANADA'S FOREIGN, DEFENSE, AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
Wed Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
VZCZCXRO1808
RR RUEHGA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHHA #0089/01 2901225
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171225Z OCT 07
FM AMCONSUL HALIFAX
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1228
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0487
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHHA/AMCONSUL HALIFAX 1309UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HALIFAX 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S FOREIGN, DEFENSE, AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS 
MINISTERS ADDRESS 10TH DIPLOMATIC FORUM IN NEW BRUNSWICK 
 
HALIFAX 00000089  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Canada's Department of Foreign Affairs held its 10th Annual 
"Diplomatic Forum for Heads of Foreign Mission" in 
St.-Andrews-by-the-Sea, New Brunswick, in mid-September. 
Seventy-seven Ambassadors, including Ambassador Wilkins, and two 
Consuls General participated in the two-day meeting. Three 
federal Cabinet Ministers addressed the diplomats during the 
event. Minister of Foreign Affairs Maxime Bernier said Canada's 
two primary foreign policy goals were promoting free and open 
markets and ensuring that the UN sanctioned, NATO-led mission in 
Afghanistan succeeded in helping the that country become 
"secure, prosperous, and free." Defense Minister Peter MacKay 
said the government of Canada is pursuing a "Canada First" 
defense strategy built upon three pillars: defending Canadian 
interests globally (especially in Afghanistan), actively 
supporting North American defense, and protecting Canadians on 
national territory. Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs Rona 
Ambrose said that, during the next session of Parliament, Prime 
Minister Harper will speak frequently on the idea of "Open 
Federalism." Although she did not define precisely what was 
meant by the term, Minister Ambrose spoke of the need for the 
federal government and the provinces to respect each other's 
constitutionally mandated jurisdictions while at the same time 
encouraging cross-competency participation when the other party 
has a direct interest. It appears likely DFAIT will convene next 
year's forum in Quebec City. END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. Foreign Minister Maxime Bernier was the first federal Cabinet 
Minister to address the Diplomatic Forum. He told the diplomats 
that Canada's two primary foreign policy goals were promoting 
free and open markets and ensuring that the UN sanctioned, 
NATO-led mission in Afghanistan succeeded in helping the that 
country become "secure, prosperous, and free."  Expanding on the 
first goal, Minister Bernier underscored the Government of 
Canada's position that free markets are indispensable for a 
modern economy. Citing the benefits that have accrued from CAFTA 
and NAFTA, Bernier said that strengthening the North American 
free trade relationship was his top foreign policy goal, but 
Canada also sees free trade as a vital ingredient in its efforts 
to promote security, prosperity, and democracy throughout the 
Americas. Economic freedom and prosperity are crucially linked 
together. Free democracies, operating under the rule of law and 
respecting human rights, tend to have stronger economies and are 
better able to deal with the challenges posed by natural 
disasters and human pandemics. 
 
¶3. Turning to Afghanistan, Bernier insisted that the world must 
not allow Afghanistan to again become an "incubator of terror." 
Canada's military mission in Afghanistan is critical for 
establishing peace, security, and prosperity in that trouble 
land. Canada and its allies are working hard to fulfill the 
"Afghanistan Compact of 2006." Doing so is an enormous 
challenge, he said, but progress is encouraging. Through 
Canadian International Development Agency programs and through 
its military presence, Canada's mission in Afghanistan is 
supporting the cause of human rights and freedom and is helping 
to guaranty a more secure world.  In conclusion Bernier said 
that Canada will continue to pursue principled foreign policy 
positions on important issues around the world with the ultimate 
goal of helping the people of the world to live secure, 
prosperous, and free lives. 
 
¶4. When the Norwegian Ambassador asked about Canada's views on 
the north, Minister Bernier responded that Canada sees the 
Northwest Passage as internal waters and, "We will do what we 
have to, to keep and protect our sovereignty in the Arctic." 
 
 
------------------------------ 
Department of National Defense 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. Defense Minister Peter MacKay told the participants that the 
government of Canada is pursuing a "Canada First" defense 
strategy built upon three pillars: defending Canadian interests 
globally, actively supporting North American defense, and 
protecting Canadians on national territory.  The mission in 
Afghanistan is clearly in Canada's interests, especially since 
terrorism knows no bounds. Canadian military personnel in 
Afghanistan are, "carrying forward the Vimy Ridge tradition." 
Canada is also keen on domestic and continental defense as shown 
by the creation of CANADACOM, to parallel the U.S. NORTHCOM and 
 
HALIFAX 00000089  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
by the addition of a maritime surveillance and defense element 
to NORAD.  Canada's Department of National Defense expects to 
increase base spending by C$5.3 billion over the next five 
years. The recent acquisition of C-17 aircraft has increased 
Canada's ability to reach out to the rest of the world and 
assist countries in need. Returning to the topic of Afghanistan, 
the Minister noted that the government sought and received a 
mandate from Parliament for a military commitment in Afghanistan 
through February 2009. He sees it as part of his job to help 
Canadians better understand the important role Canada is playing 
in Afghanistan. The Afghani Ambassador expressed his country's 
thanks to Canada and all countries that are helping Afghanistan 
gain stability. The Minister responded by saying, "We cannot 
afford to fail in Afghanistan, it's just too important a 
mission." 
 
------------------------- 
Intergovernmental Affairs 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. Rona Ambrose, Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs told the 
diplomats that, during the next session of Parliament, the Prime 
Minister will speak frequently on the idea of "Open Federalism." 
 Without defining the term, per se, Minister Ambrose said that, 
under Canada's model of federalism it was paramount that the 
constitutional partners (i.e., the provinces and the federal 
government) respect each others jurisdiction. However, when the 
federal government finds itself with significant "unplanned 
surpluses," it may make sense for the federal government to 
direct some spending in areas outside of federal jurisdiction. 
At the same time, the government will seek to facilitate 
provincial participation in areas of federal jurisdiction when 
provinces have a direct interest (e.g., the immigration nominee 
program). "The evolution of the federation," said the Minister, 
"requires the federal government to develop innovative ways to 
adjust." Quebec, through its engagement in UNESCO and la 
Francophonie, was the first province to express interest in 
participating in areas of federal competency. And, following on 
Alberta's efforts, several other provinces are looking to 
co-locate their trade promotion offices in Canadian Embassies 
and High Commissions abroad. 
 
¶7. With this as prologue, the Minister then turned the tables on 
the assembled Ambassadors and asked them to tell her about their 
dealings with provincial governments. Immigration was a major 
concern, with issues ranging from work permits for tradesmen in 
Alberta and seasonal workers in British Columbia, to mutual 
recognition of professional degrees, to student visas, and a 
plea for more information on those individuals who have been 
denied landed immigrant status in Canada. The Brazilian 
Ambassador, seconded by the Dutch Ambassador, reminded the 
Minister that, in addition to the federal-provincial/state 
dynamic, many countries are now finding that municipalities are 
becoming new players on the international scene and these actors 
also need to be taken into consideration in the conduct of 
foreign policy. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. The annual Diplomatic Forum provides a venue for the 
Government of Canada to get its message on government policies 
and direction out to a large segment of the diplomatic corps 
simultaneously. By holding the event in a different province 
each year and by scheduling a day for presentations by the host 
province, the conference also gives members of the Ottawa-based 
diplomatic community a chance to learn more about the different 
regions of the country than they might otherwise. Although DFAIT 
has not yet formally announced next year's conference venue, 
from discussions with protocol staff it appears likely that it 
will be held in Quebec City, which will be in the midst of 
celebrating the 400th anniversary of its founding. 
FOSTER