07OTTAWA1192
CANADIAN MPS RAISE BORDER AND SPP CONCERNS
Wed Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO1040
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1192/01 1712003
ZNY EEEEE ZZH
R 202003Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5950
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 1684
RHMFISS/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY IA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY IAIP WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001192 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS THERESA BROWN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2017 
TAGS: KHLS PGOV PREL CA
SUBJECT: CANADIAN MPS RAISE BORDER AND SPP CONCERNS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU/NF) Summary: In a recent Border Caucus meeting with 
the Ambassador and in one-on-one meetings with Emboffs, MPs 
have expressed a wide variety of issues about the border and 
cross border travel and trade.  Most of the MPs from border 
provinces say they have as one of their key issues (not just 
key bilateral issues, but key issue period), the 
implementation of WHTI.  They continue to press for any 
relief they can get on the passport requirement, arguing that 
it will hurt trade, tourism, and long-standing relationships 
between border towns.  There is also concern by MPs who live 
in the Windsor area about bridge expansion and management and 
a desire for clarity and strategic planning between the U.S. 
and Canada on this key issue.  Finally, it is interesting to 
note concern among some MPs, notably in the NDP, over the 
course of SPP.  They focus on perceived negatives in NAFTA in 
the areas of labor and the environment and extrapolate that 
things can only get worse with the SPP.  Embassy is well 
tooled to push back against these arguments and continues to 
meet with all comers to explain our positions.  End Summary 
 
¶2. (SBU/NF) Ambassador met with some 12 members of the Border 
Caucus recently for a luncheon and Emboffs have met recently 
with eight or so other MPs to discuss bilateral and border 
issues.  The following is a compilation of the issues they 
raised and their views: 
 
--    France Bonsant, BQ - Stanstead, Quebec, Closure of 
Streets in Stanstead: Ms. Bonsant raised an issue which hit 
the press June 20 -- the closure to through traffic of three 
streets in a village in her riding that abuts a Vermont 
village on the other side of the border, thus dividing what 
is effectively one town (Stanstead, QB and Derby Line, VT). 
This is apparently one of those towns where building and 
streets are literally split by the border and pedestrians who 
cross into the U.S. while traversing the street are 
instructed through signboards to report themselves to US 
Customs.  The local community has received reports that the 
streets will soon be closed by US authorities in order to 
channel people through the nearest port of entry.  TV reports 
indicate that this would have to be voluntary as the open 
streets are protected by treaty. Bosant wrote the Ambassador 
asking for his help in keeping the streets open and 
maintaining the flow of the towns as they are. 
 
--    Bonsant, Scanner for Christmas Trees:  It was clear 
from these exchanges that Canadian MPs are interested in 
down-to-earth issues of commerce and travel that affect their 
constituents.  Bonsant also expressed concern about the lack 
of a scanner for one of the crossings in her riding where 
hundreds of thousands of Christmas trees are shipped to the 
U.S. each year but are delayed at the border for inspection. 
She asked us to look into the issue of increasing efficiency 
at key border posts, in this case, by the addition of better 
technology. 
 
--    Judy Sgro, Liberal - York West, Ontario, Management of 
Ambassador Bridge:  In a meeting with Poloff, Ms. Sgro asked 
for reassurance about how the Ambassador Bridge was being 
managed in terms of security and expansion.  She was 
uncomfortable with the private sector management of the 
bridge in an era of rising threats and sought assurances that 
there was strategic planning being conducted by our two 
governments on the future of the bridge. 
Qgovernments on the future of the bridge. 
 
--    Jeff Watson, Conservative - Essex, Ontario, Ambassador 
Bridge Expansion:  Like Sgro, Watson covers a riding whose 
current economy depends on the smooth operation of the 
Ambassador Bridge, and whose future economy depends on the 
expansion of the bridge.  He is very interested in the 
ongoing negotiations over twinning and the third span and the 
various options for this, and wants to see a better bilateral 
planning process for the future of the cross border 
infrastructure.  He is concerned by recent indications that 
the U.S. may not be fully supportive of the Detroit River 
International Crossing (DRIC) planning process.  "If the DRIC 
is undermined," Watson said, "there will be a free for all 
and the required infrastructure upgrades will be delayed," 
with potentially negative consequences for the cross border 
economy.  NDP MP Brian Masse from Windsor similarly is 
concerned with rumors he has heard that officials on the 
Michigan side of the border are considering abandoning the 
bi-national planning process. 
 
--    Watson, Pre-Clearance Negotiations: Watson would also 
like to see negotiations on pre-clearance continue.  He 
basically expressed interest in anything that would help the 
border to function more efficiently and for vehicles and 
 
OTTAWA 00001192  002 OF 002 
 
 
cargo to move more smoothly. 
 
--    Gord Brown, Conservative, Leeds-Greenville, Ontario, 
Future Travel under WHTI:  Brown said he owns hotels in the 
Greenville area and watches bookings closely.  He said to 
date things are not bad and he has not seen an impact from 
WHTI jitters on cross border travel.  He is concerned, 
however, with the impact of the WHTI requirements on group 
travel, and hopes that if we cannot change the passport 
requirement we will at the very least clarify the requirement 
so that groups and individuals can plan with certainty. 
 
--    Peter Stoffer, NDP, Sackville, Eastern Shore, NS, SPP 
Impact on Labor and Environment: Stoffer is one of the more 
conservative of the NDP members, but nonetheless expressed 
concern to Poloff about the direction the SPP is headed.  The 
NDP, he said, is primarily concerned about the impact on 
labor and the environment and has some detailed issues it 
would like to ensure are considered throughout the SPP 
process.  He complained about lack of inclusiveness on the 
Canadian side during the discussions -- the NDP critic, Peter 
Julian was not invited to the Calgary talks, for example, nor 
were representatives of the Canadian Labor Congress.  Stoffer 
said they would like to ensure that no one is left out of the 
discussions.  He also said the NDP position is to keep some 
things off the table altogether as the process moves forward. 
 Finally he suggested we not use the word "integration" when 
discussing SPP, since people on his side of the political 
fence have a major problem with anything that smacks of 
Canada being 
 pulled into the American orbit. 
 
¶3. (SBU/NF) Comment: In these and other discussions with MPs 
we get a good sense for the range of issues they are facing 
in border ridings.  They leave us with several observations. 
First, there is a need for constant dialogue on key issues. 
Canadians want to feel like they are part of the planning 
process and resent when we simply make decisions and inform 
them.  Second, they appreciate clarity.  On WHTI and the 
Ambassador Bridge what hurts us most if simple lack of 
clarity about what will happen and when.  Third, there is 
considerable disinformation about SPP and beating this back 
will take a concerted effort. On the Canadian side there may 
be more work to do to expand the circle of shareholders who 
are part of the process, ensuring all voices are heard as 
decisions are made. 
 
Visit our shared North American Partnership blog (Canada & Mexico) at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap 
 
WILKINS