07TORONTO440
TORONTO TERROR PLOT BAIL HEARINGS RESUME, NEW CHARGES
Fri Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO6951
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0440 3061943
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021943Z NOV 07
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2242
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDCUNCLAS TORONTO 000440 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER CA
SUBJECT: TORONTO TERROR PLOT BAIL HEARINGS RESUME, NEW CHARGES 
FILED 
 
Ref: Toronto 139 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  In an unusual move, Canadian prosecutors 
terminated preliminary hearings in September and decided to move the 
defendants in the 2006 Ottawa and Toronto terrorism plots directly 
to trial.  Ontario courts will now revisit the confinement 
conditions of each of the suspected terrorists, though insiders 
believe the hearings are unlikely to result in changed confinement 
conditions.  The Ontario Superior Court denied bail on October 22nd 
to the first of the accused to appear before the court. 
Concurrently with the decision to move directly to trial, the Crown 
also filed modified charges under Canada's Anti-Terrorism Act 
against several of the defendants.  Consulate law enforcement 
sources believe the Crown moved to a direct indictment to counteract 
what they perceived as unnecessary delaying tactics by defense 
attorneys.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Ontario Superior Court denied bail on October 22nd to 
Steven Chand, accused in the 2006 Ottawa and Toronto terrorism 
plots.  The bail hearing was the first in a series of proceedings 
that will take place over the coming weeks as Ontario courts revisit 
the confinement conditions of the suspected terrorists after Crown 
prosecutors took the unusual step of terminating preliminary 
hearings and moving all of the defendants directly to trial.  The 
defendants' bail conditions are not likely to be loosened prior to 
trial.  A publication gag order on all details surrounding the case 
remains in effect. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Chand's new bail hearing was necessary after the September 
decision by Crown to terminate preliminary hearings (similar to U.S. 
grand jury proceedings) in the terror cases, and move directly to 
trial.  The procedure, known as "Preferred Direct Indictment," is 
rarely used.  The Crown's decision provoked furious protests from 
defense attorneys, as the decision eliminated their opportunity to 
"preview" the Crown's case, and more importantly, cross-examine 
crucial witnesses.  The move came as Mubin Shah, a once confidential 
RCMP informant whose credibility has come under attack, was about to 
testify. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Concurrently with the decision to move directly to trial, 
the Crown also filed modified charges under Canada's Anti-Terrorism 
Act against several of the defendants as follows:  Jahmaal James 
with receiving terrorist training in Pakistan and knowingly 
participating in a terrorist group; Zakaria Amara with instructing a 
person to carry out an activity for the benefit of a terrorist 
group; and Saad Gaya with knowingly participating or contributing to 
the activity of a terrorist group.  The Crown dropped charges of 
providing property to aid and abet a terrorist organization against 
Yasin Mohamed and Ali Dirie, who were already serving two years in 
prison on weapons smuggling charges at the time of the other 
arrests.  Dirie and Mohamed remain behind bars on lesser charges 
related to the plots. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The charges against three suspects, who were youths at the 
time of the arrest, were stayed by the Crown after the original 
charges were filed in 2006.  However, the Crown has reserved the 
right to "reactivate" the charges at a later date.  Two suspects, 
Ahmad Ghany and Ibrahim Alkhalel Aboud, have been living with their 
parents under strict conditions since being released on bail in July 
¶2006.  The remaining adult suspects are being held in solitary 
confinement at Maplehurst Correctional Complex in Milton, Ontario. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Consulate law enforcement sources believe the Crown moved 
to a direct indictment to counteract what they perceived as 
unnecessary delaying tactics by defense attorneys.  During the 
preliminary hearings, each defendant could individually challenge 
each piece of Crown evidence and separately cross-examine each Crown 
witness.  The time consumed by the motions of over a dozen defense 
attorneys eventually persuaded Crown prosecutors to move directly to 
trial. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  Chand's bail hearing was a routine procedural 
step compared to the Crown's unusual decision (taken with no notice 
to the defense) of terminating preliminary hearings and moving 
forward with a direct indictment.  The new bail hearings are 
unlikely to result in changed confinement conditions for any of the 
suspects. At this point, it is unclear whether the direct indictment 
procedure was used to paper over gaps in the Crown prosecutors case, 
a procedure to counteract defense delaying tactics, or simply a 
reflection of the sensitivity and importance of the terrorism 
proceedings.  END COMMENT. 
 
NAY