07WELLINGTON461
NEW ZEALAND - MINISTER ON POLITICS, ISLAM AND
Wed Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO0198
PP RUEHCHI RUEHFK RUEHHM RUEHKSO RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0461/01 1710442
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 200442Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4389
INFO RUEHZU/ASIAN PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0147
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2027 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECPS PINR KISL NZ AS
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND - MINISTER ON POLITICS, ISLAM AND 
IMMIGRATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS, TRANSTASMAN COOPERATION 
 
REF: A. WELLINGTON 413 
 
     ¶B. WELLINGTON 284 
 
Classified by Consul General John Desrocher for reasons 1.4 
(b) and (d). 
 
(U) This message was drafted by ConGen Auckland and approved 
by Embassy Wellington. 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  Up-and-coming Labour Party Minister David 
Cunliffe is confident about his party's reelection chances 
despite poor recent poll numbers.  He is also confident about 
successfully dismantling New Zealand's telecommunications 
monopoly despite the challenges.  Cunliffe is concerned about 
anti-Muslim sentiment among Kiwis, as well as efforts by 
radical imams to emigrate to New Zealand to preach.  He 
predicted efforts to salvage plans for a joint drugs 
regulatory agency with Australia would fail.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
If a week is a long time in politics, 18 months is forever 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Over lunch with ConGen Auckland PO on June 15, David 
Cunliffe, New Zealand's minister for both immigration and 
telecommunications, acknowledged the Labour Party's dismal 
showing in recent polls (ref A) but expressed apparently 
genuine optimism about Labour's prospects for returning to 
power in next year's elections.  Given that Labour has been 
in power for eight years and that the opposition National 
Party has a fresh new face at the top (John Key), Cunliffe 
said, it is no surprise that National is polling so well. 
Pointing out that elections are as far as 18 months away, 
Cunliffe said Labour had plenty of time to make up the lost 
ground and would do so. 
 
¶3.  (C) Cunliffe said there was last year debate within 
Labour regarding how to respond to the then-National Party 
leader, the intellectually respected but politically awkward 
Don Brash.  Many in the Labour caucus, Cunliffe said, 
believed that Brash's clumsiness was a gift to Labour, and 
that Labour should do all it could to ensure Brash remained 
leader of the opposition.  Most Labour MPs, however, argued 
that Key would certainly unseat Brash before the next 
election.  If it was inevitable that Key rather than Brash 
would lead National into the next election, the argument 
went, it was in Labour's interest to have Key in the 
opposition leader's seat as soon as possible so that the 
friction of politics could rub away some of his glow.  Better 
to run against Key when he's been opposition leader for 18 
months rather than only 4-6 months.  Therefore Labour kept 
the heat on Brash, doing whatever they could to speed his 
downfall. 
 
--------------------- 
Battling the Monopoly 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Cunliffe was also upbeat about his telecommunications 
portfolio, despite the challenges.  He is currently trying to 
break up Telecom, which enjoys a monopoly in most New Zealand 
telecommunications sectors and what Cunliffe called a "cozy 
duopoly" with Vodafone in mobile telephony.  New Zealand's 
overpriced cellular services, Cunliffe said, made clear there 
was room for a third provider. He expected the entry of a 
third player in the market to be announced reasonably soon. 
He said that, in slowing investment and throwing up 
roadblocks to reform, Telecom was behaving exactly as any 
monopoly would when faced with being dismantled.  He 
acknowledged that significant government investment in the 
sector might be required, particulary in broadband, where 
NZ's performance against other OECD members has lagged and 
where the country's vast and nearly empty rural areas make 
providing universal coverage a challenge.  He noted that 
people have become very dependent on broadband access in just 
a few years and reported that his constituent office received 
far more complaints about broadband access than about any 
other issue, including the recent, highly-unpopular 
anti-spanking legislation (ref B). 
 
----------- 
Immigration 
----------- 
 
WELLINGTON 00000461  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Cunliffe's constituency is one-third foreign born, 
the largest percentage of any electorate.  He said that, 
while New Zealanders are generally very tolerant of different 
cultures, the country did suffer from cyclical waves of 
anti-immigration sentiment - anti-Pacific in the eighties, 
anti-Asian in the nineties, and anti-Muslim today.  When the 
PO expressed surprise at the latter, given that Muslims, 
particularly Arab Muslims, are nearly invisible even in 
multicultural Auckland, Cunliffe acknowledged that the 
population was small, but concentrated.  He said that Muslims 
drew suspicion and hostility from other Kiwis who view them, 
for no good reason, as a security threat.  While emphasizing 
that New Zealand Muslims are loyal to their adopted country 
and inclined to leave the conflicts of their homelands behind 
them, Cunliffe expressed some concern that more radical imams 
are trying to enter the country and stir up trouble.  Asked 
what tools he had to exclude those who have committed no 
crimes but still might be considered a threat, Cunliffe 
turned coy.  "Some people simply find their visas don't get 
renewed," he said.  Cunliffe was confident that such imams 
are being pushed to New Zealand by radical elements outside 
the country, rather than pulled into New Zealand by 
congregations seeking more extreme preachers. 
 
¶6.  (C) Cunliffe reported that Asian immigrants' approach to 
politics was evolving.  The first generation from China, 
Taiwan, and Korea eschewed politics, focussing instead on 
growing their businesses and educating their children.  The 
next generation, however, is more active in politics. 
Cunliffe, whose electorate office issues some documents in 
Korean, has a number of young Asian staff members.  According 
to Cunliffe, both major parties are trying to reach out to 
this generation.  They are not perceived as having a natural 
political home.  He described them as largely nonideological, 
choosing party allegiance based on their judgement of how 
best to fulfill their ambitions rather than out of loyalty to 
a certain political point of view.  Asian voting patterns 
tend to reflect the neighborhood, Cunliffe said, they vote 
National in National areas and Labour in traditionally Labour 
communities. 
 
------------------------------- 
God and Politics in New Zealand 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Cunliffe also discussed the intersection of religion 
and politics in New Zealand, in the context of disgraced 
Labour MP Taito Philip Field's maneuvers to set up a 
Christian political party.  Cunliffe said that New Zealanders 
are not as secular as generally thought.  Their Christianity, 
however, tends to be overlooked in politics because it is not 
focussed in a particular part of the spectrum.  Christianity 
in New Zealand, Cunliffe explained, runs the gamut from 
liberation theology on the left, to more traditional European 
Christian democracy in the center to evangelical 
fundamentalism on the right.  Cunliffe argued that no 
religious party would be able to cross the 5% threshhold for 
entry into parliament as the potentially most potent 
religious force, the evangelicals, were too divided, but he 
allowed that a particularly charismatic religious politician 
might be able to win a constituency seat and pull a few 
colleagues into Parliament on his/her coattails.  Cunliffe 
thought the odds of this were long and that neither Field nor 
Brian Tamaki, the head of the high profile evangelical 
Destiny Church, could be that politician.  Nonetheless, 
Cunliffe added, Labour recognized that it had neglected those 
New Zealanders to whom faith is important, a failing the 
party would attempt to rectify between now and the election. 
 
¶8.  (C) If so, apparently not everyone in the Labour caucus 
got the memo.  In a separate conversation, Labour backbencher 
Ross Robertson lambasted fellow Labour MP Winnie Laban's 
recent proposal to abolish Parliament's opening prayer. 
Robertson had spent a subsequent constituency meeting dealing 
exclusively with angry questions about the proposal.  Asked 
why Laban would propose something sure to alienate many while 
inspiring few, Robertson shrugged and suggested that Laban 
was trying to make friends with Labour's very secular far 
left.  (Comment:  Laban is well known to Mission New Zealand, 
and we would guess her proposal is more likely linked to her 
role in New Zealand's inter-faith dialogue, a forum she 
strongly supports.  End comment.) 
 
WELLINGTON 00000461  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Transtasman Drugs Agency - Good Policy, Bad Politics 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶9.  (C) The upbeat Cunliffe turned negative when asked about 
Foreign Minister and New Zealand First party leader Winston 
Peters' efforts to salvage the government's attempt to set up 
with Australia a joint drug regulatory agency.  Cunliffe 
suggested the proposal was dead and was disappointed that the 
government had ever pursued it.  From a management and 
efficiency perspective, Cunliffe said, such an agency made 
perfect sense, "a no-brainer."  But it was a political 
mistake.  Cunliffe explained that there were far more votes 
to lose than to gain.  An arcane exercise in setting up a 
regulatory agency would not exactly energize Labour's base, 
but it would offend a significant number of people.  Holistic 
treatment adherents (many of whom are Cunliffe constituents) 
fear the agency will outlaw alternative medicines while 
ultranationalists see any cooperation with Australia as a 
step down New Zealand's path towards becoming just another 
Australian territory.  Cunliffe predicted Peters' efforts to 
save the proposal would fail. 
 
--------- 
Bio Notes 
--------- 
 
¶10.  (C) Cunliffe is a former diplomat and is widely touted 
as one of Labour's future leaders.  Asked why he left the 
diplomatic service, he said he was more tempermentally suited 
to politics than to diplomacy.  Another reason he cited for 
leaving was so that his spouse, whom he described as the 
family's breadwinner, could return to her law practice. 
Cunliffe, who spent six years studying and working in the 
U.S., comes across as genuinely pro-American.  While a 
student, he worked on Senator Kennedy's re-election campaign 
against Governor Romney.  Cunliffe has a mixed reputation 
among his colleagues, some of whom have complained to Emboffs 
that he is arrogant and (ironically) undiplomatic. 
MCCORMICK