07WELLINGTON191
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS - NEW ZEALAND 3/2007
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0191/01 0610116
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020116Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3952
INFO RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 1613
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0105
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 4757
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0151
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0119
RUEHPG/AMEMBASSY PRAGUE 0026
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0231
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0107
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS WELLINGTON 000191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, EAP/ANP, EAP/RSP 
DEPARTMENT PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB NZ
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS - NEW ZEALAND 3/2007 
 
REF: 06 STATE 202745 
 
¶1. (SBU) Following are responses for the Trafficking in 
Persons report for New Zealand, keyed to reftel: 
 
Begin responses: 
 
¶27.  Overview of a country's activities to eliminate 
trafficking in persons: 
 
-- A. Is the country a country of origin, transit, or 
destination for internationally trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for 
each group; how they were trafficked, to where, and for what 
purpose.  Does the trafficking occur within the country's 
borders?  Does it occur in territory outside of the 
government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)?  Are 
any estimates or reliable numbers available as to the extent 
or magnitude of the problem?  What is (are) the source(s) of 
available information on trafficking in persons or what plans 
are in place (if any) to undertake documentation of 
trafficking? How reliable are the numbers and these sources? 
Are certain groups of persons more at risk of being 
trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus girls, 
certain ethnic groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
New Zealand has been a country of destination for 
internationally trafficked women in the commercial sex 
industry.  While the government reports no new confirmed 
cases of internationally trafficked persons have been brought 
to the attention of the authorities since 2001, there was 
evidence that some women from Asia and other parts of the 
world including Brazil and Eastern Europe were working 
illegally in the country as prostitutes.  Although 
prostitution has been decriminalized, it remains illegal for 
nonresidents to work in the commercial sex industry.  Most 
knowledgeable sources estimate that the extent of the problem 
is minimal on the scale of perhaps a few dozen individuals 
per year.  The government believes that Asian women and low 
skilled illegal migrant workers are at greatest potential 
risk of being trafficked to New Zealand. 
 
Shakti Migrant Services Trust, an antitrafficking NGO, 
reported abuses resulting from the immigration of Indian 
women for arranged marriages, and provided services to abused 
women through four refuges located in Auckland, Christchurch 
and Tauranga.  While not providing specific numbers of those 
supported, Shakti reported that one of its 5-bed facilities 
was at full census for part of 2005.  In December 2005 the 
UN's special rapporteur on human trafficking, while on a 
private visit to the country, asserted in the press that 
although in many cases such groups as mail-order brides, 
migrant workers, foreign fishermen, and those in arranged 
marriages enter the country voluntarily, they could be at 
risk of losing their autonomy and becoming victims of 
trafficking. 
 
-- B. Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the country and any changes since the last TIP 
Report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also briefly explain the 
political will to address trafficking in persons. Other items 
to address may include:  What kind of conditions are the 
victims trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted by 
the traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods are 
used to approach victims? (Are they offered lucrative jobs, 
sold by their families, approached by friends of friends, 
etc.?) What methods are used to move the victims (e.g., are 
false documents being used?). 
 
In the past, source countries of trafficked individuals have 
included Thailand, China, and other Asian countries. The 
primary destination in New Zealand is usually Auckland, New 
Zealand's largest city.  In its May 2006 report to the UN 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW), GNZ reported that it has been working 
with the Auckland City Council and relevant local NGOs to 
develop solutions that assist and protect migrants working 
illegally as prostitutes and prosecute those involved in 
their trafficking and employment. Commercial sexual 
exploitation of children was a problem, and this has been the 
subject of increased focus and debate by regional and 
national governmental and non-governmental organizations over 
the past year. 
 
Under the Prostitution Reform Act, it is illegal to use a 
person under 18 years of age in prostitution.  A study by the 
Prostitution Law Review Committee completed in April 2004 
estimated that approximately 200 people under the age of 18 
were working as prostitutes, with the majority (60 percent) 
working on the street. 
 
A January 2006 police sweep for underage persons working in 
the "red light" district of Christchurch yielded four persons 
under age 18, including one age 12 and one age 14.  There has 
been no confirmation that the persons were engaging in 
prostitution, and the persons ages 12 and 14 had been 
reported missing from foster homes prior to the sweep. 
Christchurch is considered to have the greatest problem with 
underage sex workers.  During the year, intense debate 
surrounding the Manukau City Council (Control of Street 
Prostitution) Bill (see 29E), revived discussion about key 
studies of underage sex workers in New Zealand.  A 2001 study 
of sex workers in Christchurch found that 31 percent had 
entered prostitution before age 18.  A 2004 GNZ-funded 
follow-up study of 47 respondents aged 15 to 47 found that 
the average age at which respondents received payment for 
their first commercial sex act was 14. 
 
Following the January 2001 decision ending visa free entry 
for Thai nationals, there have been indications that the 
level of Thai commercial sex workers has waned.  There has 
been an increase in Chinese sex workers coming from 
Cantonese-speaking parts of Asia.  There are also small 
numbers of sex workers from other parts of the world, 
including Eastern Europe.  More recently, there was evidence 
that some women from the Czech Republic and Brazil were 
working illegally in the country as prostitutes. (Note:  The 
Czech Republic and Brazil are among newer countries 
participating in New Zealand's visa waiver program.  End 
note.) Commercial sex work is not legal for non-residents; 
however, these activities would generally be prosecuted as 
immigration violations if uncovered.  The New Zealand 
Prostitutes Collective (NZPC) indicated that there has been 
an increase in non-New Zealand resident sex workers in areas 
where there language schools and universities. 
 
Limited evidence of internationally trafficked persons into 
New Zealand suggests that most understand that they are going 
to work in the commercial sex industry.  However, recalling a 
historical study of the Thai sex worker community in Auckland 
before 2001, one researcher noted that while most 
(70-percent) were aware that they were going to work in the 
sex industry, 30-percent were not aware, which was ipso facto 
trafficking.  At the time of that study, Thais could travel 
to New Zealand without a visa.  Subsequent changes in visa 
policy led to reduced numbers of Thai women in the sex 
industry.  However, observers have noted an increase in 
Chinese prostitutes in New Zealand, and little is known about 
their situation (see 29E).  In the past, trafficked 
individuals also worked in the construction and garment 
industries.  From time to time, "bonds" are required for 
commercial sex workers to pay for entry into New Zealand and 
pimps/facilitators have been known to withhold passports 
pending payment of the "bonds." 
 
 
-- C.  What are the limitations on the government's ability 
to address this problem in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
Resources appear adequate given the size of the problem.  GNZ 
funds programs through its ministries as well as providing 
funding to NGOs that deal with trafficking issues. 
 
The Victims' Rights Act 2002 establishes the rights of 
victims of crime.  Such rights include the right to be 
informed of services (such as physical and mental health 
services, legal services, social welfare, and counseling) and 
access to remedies. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, its 
assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
There is no plan to document the extent of trafficking; 
instead the focus is on ensuring that programs exist to deal 
with traffickers and victims as they come to light.  The 
government is currently in the process of developing the 
National Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 
(NPACT) that will involve all interested government agencies, 
NGOs and civil society groups.  One of the facets of the 
NPACT is to review, refine and enhance New Zealand's present 
strategies and framework, including monitoring and evaluation 
strategies, with the possibility of making improvements as 
considered necessary and desirable. 
 
¶28. PREVENTION: 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
Yes, New Zealand is at the forefront of international efforts 
to combat trafficking in persons.  New Zealand acknowledges 
that trafficking is a problem, although they have disagreed 
with the USG definition of children engaged in the commercial 
sex industry, often defining this as child abuse or neglect. 
The Prostitution Reform Act of 2003 was passed in an effort 
to protect commercial sex workers and in particular to block 
the commercial sexual exploitation of children.  New 
Zealand's trafficking legislation defines minors as those 
less than 18 years of age.  The Act prohibits child sex 
tourism, and citizens who commit child sex offenses overseas 
can be tried in New Zealand courts. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in 
anti-trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
The Department of Labour - Immigration is the current lead 
agency.  Other agencies involved in the formulation of policy 
and is implementation are New Zealand Customs Services; 
Ministry of Social Development; the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade; the Ministry of Justice; the Ministry of 
Health; the Department of Child, Youth and Family; and the 
New Zealand Police.  The independent Human Rights Commission 
also participates. 
 
-- C. Are there, or have there been, government-run 
anti-trafficking information or education campaigns?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target potential 
trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking (e.g. 
"clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
 
A highly successful Thai language anti-trafficking campaign 
was launched in 1999 to target Thai women in the commercial 
sex industry.  The government extends substantial resources 
to combat trafficking in persons. 
 
NGOs including the New Zealand Prostitute's Collective 
(NZPC), the Maxim Institute, the Women's Refuge, Shakti 
Migrant Services Trust and the Salvation Army offer programs 
to commercial sex workers on the street, offering "life 
options."  While the major NZ organization dealing with 
trafficking (End Child Prostitution and Trafficking, or 
ECPAT) primarily targets demand, all NGOs focus on offering 
assistance to victims.  The NZPC has helped underage 
prostitutes to find alternate employment or assisted them in 
returning to school. 
 
New Zealand's 2001 National Plan of Action Against the Sexual 
Exploitation of Children (Protecting Our Innocence) is a 
comprehensive framework that addresses the core child related 
issues of child trafficking, prostitution, pornography and 
sex tourism.  The Ministry of Justice is the lead agency (in 
consultation with the NGO ECPAT).  In 2006, the Ministry and 
ECPAT released a five year stock take of the programs aimed 
at, among other things, combating child trafficking.  The 
Justice Minister noted that the record of action was largely 
a positive one, but that "there in no room for complacency if 
we are to achieve our goal of completely eliminating the 
commercial exploitation of children." 
 
The independent Human Rights Commission criticized the 
government's level of action against child prostitution 
stating that "existing measures are inadequately enforced," 
and called for better central and local government engagement 
for addressing the problem of child prostitution.  The 
Commission further criticized the stock take saying that it 
provides little information about the provision of services 
for children, adding that "while there has been research on 
the numbers of underage prostitutes, little else appears to 
have been done." 
 
-- D. Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking? (e.g., to promote women's participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school.) Please explain. 
 
Yes.  New Zealand supports international efforts to combat 
trafficking.  A number of these campaigns are now provided in 
a range of languages to make new immigrants and refugees 
aware of their rights while living in New Zealand, including 
employment rights and human rights. 
 
The New Zealand government released its Action Plan for New 
Zealand Women in 2004.  The Plan, developed by the Ministry 
of Women's Affairs in consultation with a broad range of 
public sector agencies, NGOs, and civil society groups, is a 
comprehensive whole of government approach to improving the 
circumstances of women in New Zealand.  Specific actions have 
been developed to increase opportunities for Maori and New 
Zealand Pacific Island women and women of other ethnicities, 
as well as women with disabilities, and women from rural 
areas.  The Plan looks at strategies for improving women's 
participation in the paid workforce, access to 
decision-making, attendance in tertiary education, access to 
financial assistance to establish businesses, measures to 
prevent domestic violence, access to social and health 
services and so on. 
 
The Human Rights Commission has also previously received some 
funding for its anti-trafficking campaigns, primarily during 
the period from 1999 to 2001 when actions were focused on 
Thai women working in Auckland's sex industry (see 30G). 
 
The government also supports initiatives such as those 
undertaken by ECPAT to educate travel agents about 
legislation and awareness of issues around sex tourism and 
the risks to children in tourist destinations. 
 
The Department of Child, Youth and Family Services provide 
"bed nights" funding to an organization called Baptist Action 
in Auckland that runs a safe house for young girls at risk 
of, or involved in prostitution.  Youth and Cultural 
Development in Christchurch has a Street Youth Work Project 
that works with young people who are at risk of or are sex 
workers and are under the age of 18 years.  This project has 
a case management component and works with a "Harm 
Minimization" focus.  This project encourages young people 
identified as at risk to look at options for their future. 
Staff work on the street three nights per week and run a 
"drop in" service, home visits where appropriate and promote 
sexual health checks. 
 
-- E. What is the relationship between government officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements of 
civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
There are excellent cooperative relations between the 
government, NGOs and elements of civil society on the 
trafficking issue.  The GNZ funds many NGOs and civil society 
institutions combating this problem. 
 
For example, the government worked with nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) to address trafficking in children and 
provided funding for NGO outreach programs in Auckland and 
Christchurch that provided accommodations and other support 
for young persons at risk for involvement in prostitution. 
The government had a 2001 national plan of action against the 
commercial exploitation of children developed in concert with 
NGOs and completed a progress review of the plan during the 
year; its report on the review was released during the year 
(see 28C). 
 
-- F. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement 
agencies screen for potential trafficking victims along 
borders? 
 
Yes, the New Zealand government reports a commitment to 
maintaining the security of its borders and complying with 
international obligations, including its anti-trafficking 
obligations. The Government regularly monitors immigration 
and emigration patterns onshore and offshore passenger 
screening for evidence of possible trafficking.  The 
government also has in place an Advance Passenger Processing 
system that requires airlines to identify passengers who may 
be seeking to enter New Zealand illegally before they embark 
an aircraft. 
 
-- G. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and 
multilateral on trafficking-related matters, such as a 
multi-agency working group or a task force?  Does the 
government have a trafficking in persons working group or 
single point of contact?  Does the government have a public 
corruption task force? 
 
Yes, while in the past the National Human Rights Commission 
coordinated responses to these problems, the Department of 
Labour has been named the primary coordinating agency for 
anti-trafficking efforts.  The Government actively 
participates in multilateral and efforts to prevent, monitor, 
and control trafficking. 
 
The New Zealand Customs Service has a formal Memorandum of 
Understanding ("MoU") with the New Zealand Police that covers 
information sharing, joint operations and joint training 
opportunities.  The terms of the MoU cover 
trafficking-related issues.  The Department of Labour - 
Immigration has a similar arrangement with the Police.  The 
multi-agency working group related to the NPACT is presently 
led by Department of Labour. 
 
During August 2004, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
provided New Zealand Customs with intelligence on a number of 
New Zealand residents who had access international websites 
offering child pornography.  Base on this information, a 
multi-agency operation executed 52 warrants that ultimately 
resulted in 29 individuals charged for offenses relating to 
importing objectionable material under the Customs and Excise 
Act 1996. 
 
There is no evidence that public corruption is a problem in 
New Zealand.  That said the government has a comprehensive 
response to combating bribery and corruption.  While no 
single agency is charged with the task of dealing with 
corruption, there are a number of agencies that fulfill 
specific tasks.  The core government Ministries and agencies 
include:  Police, Financial Intelligence Unit; Serious Fraud 
Office; Office of the Ombudsmen; Inland Revenue; the Office 
of the Controller and Auditor-General; Department of Internal 
Affairs and State Services Commission.  There are other 
agencies as well, such as the Ministry of Justice which leads 
policy initiatives against corruption and bribery.  On 
Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index, New 
Zealand has ranked among the five best performing nations 
since the inception of the index. 
 
-- H. Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were 
involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the 
process?  What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
Yes.  The Government of New Zealand initiated the process to 
develop a National Plan of Action to Combat Against 
Trafficking in Persons (NPACT) in February 2005, naming the 
Department of Labour (which includes the Immigration Service) 
as the lead agency in coordinating anti-trafficking 
strategies.  The GNZ continues in its efforts to develop the 
plan, and expects to hold a public session in the future. 
 
While the Department of Labour is the lead coordinating 
agency, the Department of Internal Affairs; Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade; the Department of Child, Youth and 
Family Services; the Office of the Commissioner for Children; 
the New Zealand Law Society; the Ministry of Pacific Island 
Affairs; End Child Prostitution, Child Pornography and 
Trafficking of Children for Sexual Purposes (ECPAT); Ministry 
of Youth Affairs; Ministry of Justice; Ministry of Health; 
Ministry of Social Development; Human Rights Commission; New 
Zealand Customs Service; and the Ministry of Education are 
all involved in the development and implementation of New 
Zealand's anti-trafficking plan.  The plan is moving to final 
stages, and consultations are ongoing.  The plan will include 
input from NGOs. 
 
The agencies and ministries mentioned above support a wide 
range of programs that, while not always specifically 
addressing trafficking, are working to explain worker rights 
and keep minors from entering the commercial sex industry. 
 
¶29. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
For questions A-D, posts should highlight in particular 
whether or not the country has enacted any new legislation 
since the last TIP report. 
 
-- A. Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons -- both for sexual and non-sexual 
purposes (e.g. forced labor)?  If so, please specifically 
cite the name of the law and its date of enactment.  Does the 
law(s) cover both internal and external (transnational) forms 
of trafficking? If not, under what other laws can traffickers 
be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery 
or the exploitation of prostitution by means of force, fraud 
or coercion?  Are these other laws being used in trafficking 
cases?  Are these laws, taken together, adequate to cover the 
full scope of trafficking in persons? Please provide a full 
inventory of trafficking laws, including non-criminal 
statutes that allow for civil penalties against alleged 
trafficking crimes, (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws 
against illegal debt. 
 
New Zealand adopts the definition of trafficking set out in 
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children.  The definition only 
covers transnational forms of trafficking.  With this notable 
difference with U.S. law, the New Zealand legislation is 
comprehensive and covers all aspects of trafficking, 
including reception, concealment or harboring of persons. 
Measures to punish incidents of what we would call domestic 
"trafficking," such as abduction, assault, kidnapping and 
rape, are covered in other New Zealand legislation. 
In February 2002, New Zealand passed tough legislation 
criminalizing human smuggling and trafficking.  The 
Transnational Organized Crime Bill was adopted on June 17, 
2002 as an amendment to the Crimes, Extradition, Immigration, 
Passports and Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Amendment 
Acts. 
 
The key legislative provisions are found in Part 5 of the 
Crimes Act 1961.  The relevant provisions are sections 98 
(dealing in slaves), 98A (participation in organized criminal 
group), 98B (definitions), 98D (trafficking in persons), 98E 
(aggravating factors), and 98F (Attorney-General's consent 
required).  Section 6 of the Crimes Amendment Act 2005 
inserted section 98AA.  Section 98A, 98C and 98D are also 
offenses for which a person may be extradited from a country 
with which New Zealand has an extradition treaty.  Section 98 
of the Crimes Act 1961 makes dealing in slavery an offense 
and section 16 of the Prostitution Reform Action 2003 
prohibits inducing or compelling persons to provide 
commercial sexual services or earnings from prostitution. 
Section 98AA, which came into force in 2006, was enacted to 
comply with New Zealand's obligations under the Optional 
Protocol to the Convention on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Child Pornography.  It establishes an 
offense for dealing in people less than 18 years for sexual 
exploitation, removal of body parts, or engagement in forced 
labor.  The Immigration Act 1987 addresses employer 
responsibility (section 39) and employer exploitation of 
those who are note legally entitled to work in New Zealand 
(section 39A). The provisions have not to date been used in 
any trafficking case. 
 
-- B. What are the penalties for trafficking people for 
sexual exploitation? 
 
New Zealand's anti-trafficking legislation imposes penalties 
of up to 20 years in prison and USD 350,000 (NZD 500,000) in 
fines. 
 
-- C. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for labor 
exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor and involuntary 
servitude?  Do the government's laws provide for criminal 
punishment -- i.e. jail time -- for labor recruiters in labor 
source countries who engage in recruitment of laborers using 
knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers that result in 
workers being exploited in the destination country. 
 
For employers or labor agents in labor destination countries 
who confiscate workers' passports or travel documents, switch 
contracts without the worker's consent as a means to keep the 
worker in a state of service, or withhold payment of salaries 
as means of keeping the worker in a state of service?  If 
law(s) prescribe criminal punishments for these offenses, 
what are the actual punishments imposed on persons convicted 
of these offenses? 
 
New Zealand's anti-trafficking legislation imposes penalties 
of up to 20 years in prison and USD 350,000 (NZD 500,000) in 
fines. 
 
-- D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible 
sexual assault?  How do they compare to the prescribed and 
imposed penalties for crimes of trafficking for commercial 
sexual exploitation? 
 
Sexual violation is punishable by a term of imprisonment not 
to exceed 20 years. 
 
-- E. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? 
Are these laws enforced?  If prostitution is legal and 
regulated, what is the legal minimum age for this activity? 
Note that in many countries with federalist systems, 
prostitution laws may be covered by state, local, and 
provincial authorities. 
 
The 2003 Prostitution Reform Bill legalized prostitution, and 
solicitation was no longer a crime.  The legislation set a 
minimum age of 18 to work in the industry, gives prostitutes 
the same workplace protections as other industries, and 
provides for a licensing regime for brothels.  In addition, 
the law removes a client's ability to defend himself from 
prosecution based on his belief that an underage sex worker 
was 18 years or older, and extends prosecution to any person 
receiving financial gain from an act involving an underage 
sex worker. The law prohibits sex tourism, and citizens who 
commit child sex offenses overseas can be prosecuted in New 
Zealand courts. There were no reports of abuse or the 
involuntary detention of women involved in prostitution 
during the year; however, there were several credible reports 
that women smuggled into the country were forced into 
prostitution to repay substantial debts to traffickers. 
There were also reports that some foreign commercial sex 
workers had their passports 
withheld by employers until bonds were repaid.  There were 
also allegations that children engaged in prostitution did so 
to repay debts to local gangs. 
 
A Prostitution Law Review Committee was created in 
conjunction with the Act and is tasked with reviewing the 
operation of the Act and reporting on its findings within 5 
years.  The Committee released a report in April 2005 that 
reported on the number of sex workers in New Zealand. The 
report provided baseline data against which to assess the 
longer term impact of the legislation. 
 
Police have noted that it is difficult to prosecute underage 
commercial sex workers as the police are prevented from 
requiring identification.  As many child prostitutes do not 
see themselves as victims, and do not cooperate with the 
police, the police are finding it difficult to indict 
violators.  Police contend further that their ability to 
enter brothels has been curtailed by the Prostitution Reform 
Act.  Other government agencies and civil society groups 
contest this position, arguing that the Police have the same 
legal authority to enter a brothel as any other building. 
 
During a review of New Zealand's trafficking and related law 
conducted during a GNZ-funded fellowship hosted by the 
Ministry of Justice, U.S. assistant attorney Susan Coppedge 
found that since the PRA came into effect, the burden of 
proof required for Police to enter brothels had risen. 
However, the legal authority does not appear to be the 
primary barrier to entry.  As noted by Coppedge, the Police 
focus in Auckland and other centers of prostitution is on 
drug trafficking and violent crime. 
 
Health workers and researchers have also found access to 
brothels limited, particularly brothels employing Chinese sex 
workers.  They have expressed concerns of coercion based on 
what one health worked characterized as "naive and 
vulnerable" Chinese students.  One study showed a 25 percent 
increase in foreign sex workers since prostitution was 
decriminalized.  One of the study's authors reported that 
two-thirds of the sex workers she had identified were Chinese 
females.  The Prostitutes Collective in Auckland has noted an 
increase in Chinese sex workers coming from 
Cantonese-speaking parts of Asia.  The increase was most 
noticeable in areas near language schools and universities. 
 
In August 2005, the Manukau City Council (Control of Street 
Prostitution) Bill passed its first stage in Parliament, and 
was referred to the Local Government and Environment Select 
Committee.  The bill provides for local control over street 
prostitution in Manukau City by prohibiting solicitation for 
prostitution in public places by prostitutes, clients and 
persons acting on their behalf.  The Select Committee 
reported on the bill in September 2006, and did not offer its 
support.  The bill was voted down in October 73 to 46. 
Legislators noted flaws in the bill and widely divergent 
estimates of the prostitution problem.  However, the primary 
reason that the bill was voted down was that it would have 
contributed to divergent, localized policies while the 
Parliament sought a single, national policy regarding the 
control of prostitution. (NB:  New Zealand has no local law 
enforcement.  New Zealand Police is a national law 
enforcement entity.) 
 
In August, a parliamentary select committee unanimously 
opposed a bill which would have set up a register of serious 
sexual offenders.  New Zealand-based NGO, ECPAT, which works 
to stop child prostitution, said that the public needs more 
information about the way abusers are treated and monitored. 
The NGO acknowledged that registries have problems, but said 
that existing information to guide anyone working with 
vulnerable children was inadequate. 
 
-- F. Has the government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences, including details 
on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Does 
the government in a labor source country criminally prosecute 
labor recruiters who recruit laborers using knowingly 
fraudulent or deceptive offers or impose on recruited 
laborers inappropriately high or illegal fees or commissions 
that create a debt bondage condition for the laborer?  Does 
the government in a labor destination country criminally 
prosecute employers or labor agents who confiscate workers' 
passports/travel documents, switch contracts or terms of 
employment without the worker's consent, use physical or 
sexual abuse or the threat of such abuse to keep workers in a 
state of service, or withhold payment of salaries as a means 
to keep workers in a state of service?  Are the traffickers 
serving the time sentenced:  If not, why not?  Please 
indicate whether the government can provide this information, 
and if not, why not? (Note:  complete answers to this section 
are essential. End Note) 
 
As of April 2006, 14 people had been charged under the 
Prostitution Reform Act for offenses relating to prostitution 
of persons less than 18 years of age.  There have been eight 
convictions.  In the remaining cases the charges were 
withdrawn, the accused was acquitted or the charges were 
otherwise not proven.  Four of the convictions were entered 
in 2005/2006.  During the 2005/2006 year three brothel 
operators and one client were prosecuted for the use of 
persons under age 18 in prostitution.  The client and three 
brothel operators were convicted. 
 
The Prostitution Reform Act (PRA) presumes harm to those 
under 18 who are engaged in commercial sexual activity.  Some 
observers believe that law enforcement officials and the 
judiciary nevertheless tend to perceive consent and 
complicity among underage prostitution victims. According to 
a report by a U.S. Department of Justice (DoJ) attorney 
participating in a GNZ-sponsored fellowship in New Zealand 
the sentencing judge in once case involving a 16-year old 
declared that the victim was not coerced and acted as a free 
agent.  Facing a maximum of 7 years in prison, the defendant 
was sentenced to one year and nine months in prison.  In 
other cases, the DoJ attorney perceived light sentencing that 
did not comport with the PRA's goal of preventing child 
sexual exploitation.  Other observers have noted 
inconsistency and perceived leniency in sentencing with a 
weight toward community service or limited prisons terms. 
New Zealand is facing a prison crowding situation, and has a 
robust home detention system. (NB:  The DoJ attorney 
participated an Ian Axford Public Policy fellowship, and was 
hosted by the Ministry of Justice.  Attorneys who worked with 
her during her fellowship expressed concerns about her 
academic approach and the quality of her work. End NB.) 
 
-- G. Is there any information or reports of who is behind 
the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers freelance 
operators, small crime groups, and/or large international 
organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting for traffickers 
or crime groups to traffic individuals? Are government 
officials involved?  Are there any reports of where profits 
from trafficking in persons are being channeled? (e.g. armed 
groups, terrorist organizations, judges, banks, etc.) 
 
There is no clear evidence on this subject; however, police 
speculate that small-scale Asian organized crime groups 
participate in this illegal trade.  The police have a 
dedicated unit for international organized crime, which may 
overlap with anti-trafficking efforts. There are no reports 
of government officials having been involved in this trade. 
 
-- H. Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking? (Again, the focus should be on trafficking cases 
versus migrant smuggling cases.) Does the government use 
active investigative techniques in trafficking in persons 
investigations?  To the extent possible under domestic law, 
are techniques such as electronic surveillance, undercover 
operations, and mitigated punishment or immunity for 
cooperating suspects used by the government?  Does the 
criminal procedure code or other laws prohibit the police 
from engaging in covert operations? 
 
The New Zealand government informs us that it investigates 
any activity reported or any information that it receives. 
GNZ also reports that to the extent possible, New Zealand 
enforcement agencies use all enforcement tools available to 
them as appropriate and as necessary.  There is nothing in 
the law that prohibits the police from engaging in covert 
operations - although the scope of these powers is tempered 
by the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990. 
 
The Embassy has requested from GNZ statistics regarding the 
number of complaints received and investigations, and has 
received only limited, quantified information concerning 
investigations.  On August 24, the Minister of Immigration 
reported in Parliament that the Department of Labour - 
Immigration, does not gather statistics on the number of 
illegal migrants found working as prostitutes in New Zealand. 
 Beginning August 31, the Department of Labour began 
collecting this information in Auckland compliance 
operations, and through February 28, identified 31 persons 
working illegally in nine premises.  All were from Asia, and 
none were identified as trafficking victims.  They were from 
the following countries:  Hong Kong (8), China (2), Malaysia 
(20) and South Korea (1).  Other foreign-born nationals were 
identified but all were found to be either permanent 
residents or New Zealand citizens and therefore legally able 
to work as prostitutes. 
 
In UN CEDAW reports to New Zealand from 1998 to 2003, the 
Committee consistently expressed the concern that New Zealand 
did not provide sufficient data and information on the 
situation of prostitution and the treatment of sex workers 
who were in New Zealand illegally.  In the 2003 CEDAW report, 
the Committee particularly focused on women without residence 
permits engaged in prostitution, including statistical 
information.  In its five-year stock take on New Zealand's 
actions to prevent the commercial sexual exploitation of 
children, published in June, the Ministry of Justice 
recognized a statistics problem, noting that while government 
and non-government agencies have continued to share research 
reports, statistics and information, such sharing is in an ad 
hoc manner. 
 
A U.S. Department of Justice attorney (see also 29F) believes 
that Police in Auckland are not pursuing cases against those 
hiring underage or migrant prostitutes to work in brothels. 
She said that although Police in Auckland felt it would not 
take long to find immigrants illegally engaged in 
prostitution, their priorities are drug related and violent 
crimes.  This is consistent with the findings of the 
government's Prostitution Law Review Committee report of 
April 2005, which found that only half of New Zealand's 
districts have a New Zealand Police official whose portfolio 
includes prostitution, and then at a small amount - usually 
5-percent of less of the portfolio.  Like rural districts, 
the urban centers assign a single officer to the prostitution 
portfolio but prostitution would represent a somewhat larger 
portion of the officer's workload -- on average 20-percent. 
The proportion of the portfolio was higher still in 
Christchurch (50-percent) and Auckland central (45-percent), 
but in all districts, less than one full-time equivalent 
(FTE) was allocated to prostitution.  Low allocations are not 
altogether surprising, given the generalized 
decriminalization of prostitution in New Zealand. 
 
The Mandarin Times in Auckland has run articles on Asian 
brothels and the lack of Police efforts in investigating 
them.  Police believe that there are many Asian women in New 
Zealand on student permits who may be working illegally, on 
their own volition, in the prostitution industry.  Some Asian 
women may be in New Zealand under conditions of debt bondage. 
 Officers of the Asian Crime Unit in Auckland believe debt 
bondage cases are difficult for police to detect because of 
differences in culture:  the women may not feel that they are 
trafficking victims because they want to work off their debt. 
Police in Auckland also feel that foreign organized crime 
interests may be involved in brothels and in finding women 
for the sex industry.  These opinions are supported by the 
observations of other observers of the Asian community. 
 
Concurrent with debate on the Manukau City Council Control of 
Street Prostitution Bill (see 29E), a series of print and 
television pieces reported on Asian brothels in the greater 
Auckland area.  While much of the debate was anecdotal and 
the government questioned the creditability of the reports in 
general, some reporters cited recent, historical studies as 
evidence.  Among these studies was a 2004 study of Chinese 
women engaged in commercial sexual activity.  That study 
identified 13 Asian brothels in the Auckland and Manukau 
regions.  Several of the brothels refused to allow the 
researchers access to the women.  As part of the study, the 
researchers identified no street workers.  They also found 
that for these Chinese women, the price for commercial sex 
acts was set by the parlor or pimp in all but one instance, 
and that the Chinese women had no apparent control in setting 
price.  Spokespersons from the New Zealand's Prostitute 
Collective contend that the presence of a pimp is by nature 
exploitative. 
 
-- I. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in how to recognize, investigate, 
and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
The government has provided training to other government 
officials -- particularly non-governmental organizations in 
Thailand -- on methods to protect child witnesses in criminal 
proceedings. 
 
-- J. Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases?  If 
possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations on trafficking? 
 
Yes.  The government participates in all international fora 
on anti-trafficking, and has in the past worked closely with 
the Government of Thailand to assist victims of trafficking. 
The Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1992 sets out a 
process that allows New Zealand to co-operate with other 
governments in the investigation and prosecution of criminal 
offending, including trafficking, without the need for 
bilateral mutual legal assistance treaties.  The act allows 
the New Zealand government to provide assistance in a number 
of areas, including the gathering of evidence, identifying 
and locating persons, and executing warrants.  The New 
Zealand Police also provide informal assistance to 
counterparts around the world through Interpol.  New Zealand 
reports that it has not received any requests to investigate 
trafficking. 
 
-- K. Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post provide 
the number of traffickers extradited?  Does the government 
extradite its own nationals charged with such offenses?  If 
not, is the government prohibited by law form extraditing its 
own nationals?  If so, is the government doing to modify its 
laws to permit the extradition of its own nationals? 
 
Yes.  The government allows extra-territoriality to apply in 
child sexual exploitation cases committed by New Zealanders 
overseas.  Trafficking is an extraditable offense under New 
Zealand's Extradition Act of 1999, which allows New Zealand 
to extradite offenders subject to evidential and other 
requirements being met.  New Zealand reports that it has 
never extradited any persons for trafficking offenses nor 
received a request to extradite a person charged with 
trafficking related offenses.  The Act reserves the right for 
the New Zealand Government to refuse to extradite a New 
Zealand national.  Despite this, the New Zealand Government 
does not, as a matter of general practice, refuse to 
extradite New Zealand nationals. 
 
-- L. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
No, there is no evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking 
 
-- M. If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such 
participation?  Have any government officials been prosecuted 
for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption?  Have any been convicted?  What sentence(s) was 
imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if available. 
 
N/A 
 
-- N. If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin?  What are the 
countries of origin for sex tourists?  Do the country's child 
sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial coverage (similar to 
the U.S. PROTECT Act)?  If so, how many of the country's 
nationals have been prosecuted and/or convicted under the 
extraterritorial provision(s)? 
 
While there is not a large-scale problem; New Zealand has 
extraterritorial coverage under 144A of the Crimes Act of 
1961 in respect of child sexual abuse laws and New Zealand 
has cooperated in the prosecution of New Zealand citizens 
that have engaged in child sex tourism overseas.  It is also 
an offense under section 144C of the Crimes Act 1961 to 
organize or promote child sex tours.  ECPAT has worked 
closely with the travel industry to educate travel agents 
about legislation and awareness of issues around sex tourism 
and the risks to children in tourist destinations.  In its 
June 2006 newsletter, ECPAT NZ noted that since the adoption 
of the law in 1994, there had been no prosecutions, poor 
public awareness and low tourism industry awareness.  New 
Zealand NGO, Stop Demand, has also expressed frustration at 
the lack of any convictions, contending that GNZ has not 
directed sufficient resources toward this end.  ECPAT noted 
that countries with similar extra-territorial legislation on 
child sex tourism (Canada, Australia and the United Kingdom), 
featured information on the extraterritorial legislation on 
the government travel advisory websites.  Noting that New 
Zealand lacks this information on its site, ECPAT has asked 
and GNZ is considering revision to its webpage. 
 
-- O. Has the government signed, ratified, and/or taken steps 
to implement the following international instruments?  Please 
provide the date of signature/ratification if appropriate. 
 
--ILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate 
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor. 
--ILO Convention 29 and 105 on Forced or Compulsory Labor. 
--The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC) on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, 
and Child Pornography. 
--The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. 
 
ILO Convention 182 was ratified on June 14, 2001.  ILO 
convention 105 was ratified on June 14, 1968.  The Optional 
Protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the 
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography 
was signed on September 7, 2000. The protocol to prevent, 
suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women 
and children, supplementing the UN convention against 
transnational organized crime was ratified on July 19, 2002. 
 
¶30. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
-- A. Does the government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care facilities? 
Does the country have facilities dedicated to helping victims 
of trafficking?  If so, can post provide the number of 
victims placed in these care facilities? 
 
The government has provided short-term sanctuary, witness 
protection, access to medical services and repatriation. 
Sexual abuse victims are eligible for support from the 
Accident Compensation Corporation.  This includes medical 
assistance at state expense. 
 
The Victims' Rights Act 2002 established the rights of 
victims of crime.  Such rights include the right to be 
informed of services (such a physical and mental health 
services, legal services, social welfare, and counseling) and 
access to remedies.  The NPACT will also consider the levels 
of services available to victims of trafficking and discuss 
any measures that could be employed to extend or enhance the 
support provided to such victims.  Temporary permits, 
including limited purpose permits, can also be provided to 
victims of trafficking in individual cases. 
 
The New Zealand Council of Victim Support Groups provides 
24-hour emotional support, personal advocacy and information 
to all people affected by crime and trauma throughout New 
Zealand.  Victims with special needs, such as emotional 
support or counseling will be referred by relevant 
authorities to the specialist provider of care services. 
 
The New Zealand government is unaware of any situation where 
a person accessing these services or facilities has claimed 
to be a victim of trafficking. However, the government has 
put in place measures to ensure that there are services 
available for young persons who are involved in or at risk of 
all forms of commercial sexual exploitation. 
 
In 2004, the Ministry of Social Development; the Department 
of Child, Youth and Family; the Department of Building and 
Housing, and the Housing New Zealand Corporation began work 
to coordinate income, employment and housing assistance to 16 
to 18 year olds leaving the care of Child Youth in Family. 
In August 2004, the Department of Child, Youth and Family and 
the Manukau Working Group (a group of government agencies and 
NGOs concerned about child prostitution) supported the 
setting up of a safe house for self-referrals and Child Youth 
and Family referrals for homeless girls between ages 12 and 
17 years involved in, or at risk of, commercial sexual 
activity.  Baptist Action offered to run the house on a trial 
basis.  Operated as Awhina Teina, Maori for "embracing the 
little sister," the aim of the house is to create pathways so 
that the girls can make lifestyle changes if they want.  The 
house also provides emergency accommodation for those who 
need a safe bed for the night.  The house opened officially 
in April 2005 and can accommodate up to six children.  During 
the first year, the house had nine residents, whose average 
age was 14.  The government continues to monitor this 
initiative to see whether further facilities are required. 
Multiple commentators have noted this single 
government-funded safe house, and asserted that the 
government, which has funded international venues, needs to 
expand and develop Awhina Teina model in Auckland and other 
regions. 
 
-- B. Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
Yes.  The government supports a wide range of NGOs including 
the New Zealand Prostitutes Collective that provide services 
to commercial sex workers some of whom may have been 
trafficked. 
 
As there have been no domestic prosecutions for trafficking, 
the government has not had cause to provide funding to 
domestic agencies to assist victims.  However, the government 
does fund a number of overseas programs that are directed at 
preventing trafficking, including by assisting countries to 
develop support mechanisms for victims. 
 
NZAID recently concluded its support for a UNICEF sponsored 
program that targeted parts of eastern Indonesia.  The 
program was co-funded with Great Britain, and addressed child 
protection issues including the trafficking and sexual 
exploitation of child workers.  It involved a mix of advocacy 
and capacity building work. 
 
The New Zealand government will continue to support a 
UNICEF-led program in the Philippines.  One important aspect 
of this program involves supporting children at risk of 
trafficking and labor exploitation.  The program includes a 
wide range of strategies to limit these risks, including 
advocacy, awareness raising, and improving laws and 
protection services. 
 
The government has also provided substantial funding to the 
UN Inter-Agency Project (UNIAP) on human trafficking in the 
Greater Mekong Sub-region. Key UNIAP components include 
research work, database development, advocacy, media 
awareness, promoting cooperation between national and 
provincial authorities, capacity building, and 
anti-trafficking projects in specific regions. 
 
-- C. Do the government's law enforcement and social services 
personnel have a formal system of identifying victims of 
trafficking among high-risk persons with whom they come in 
contact (e.g. foreign persons arrested for prostitution or 
immigration violations)? Is there a referral process in 
place, when appropriate, to transfer victims detained, 
arrested or placed in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities to NGO's that provide short- or long-term care? 
 
Yes, the government reports that a system is in place that is 
managed on a case by case basis.  Post has no knowledge of 
trafficked victims who have been jailed, fined or deported. 
Illegal immigrants have been jailed, fined and deported. 
 
-- D. Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims 
treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, or 
deported?  If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are victims 
fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, 
such as those governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
Yes. The rights of all victims of criminal offending are 
respected by New Zealand authorities.  The Victims' Rights 
Act 2002 provides specific statutory recognition to the role 
of victims in the criminal justice system.  The Act provides 
that those involved in the criminal justice system who come 
into contact with victims should treat the victims with 
courtesy, compassion, and respect for their personal dignity 
and privacy.  It also mandates that in addition to being 
provided counseling and social services, victims and their 
families should be informed about the progress of criminal 
proceedings in which the victim is involved, the charges 
laid, the victim's role as a prosecution witness, the date 
and place of certain events surrounding hearings, and every 
final disposition of proceedings.  Any information that 
should be given to the victim can be given to a support 
person when the victim cannot receive it or is not capable 
alone of understanding it. 
 
While the New Zealand government reports that since 2001 it 
is unaware of any victims of trafficking in New Zealand, the 
government encourages victims to support investigations and 
prosecutions of people smugglers.  New Zealand states that in 
any trafficking case, its approach would be to seek victims' 
collaboration, ensure their accommodation needs are met, and 
issue them temporary permits where appropriate to enable them 
to remain lawfully in New Zealand, including to serve as 
legal witnesses if needed. 
 
-- E. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to such 
legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employer, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the country pending trial 
proceedings?  Is there a victim restitution program? 
 
Yes, if the government were to become aware of instances of 
trafficking, it would take steps to solicit the cooperation 
of victims so long as this did not jeopardize the success of 
proceedings. Although the government would have an interest 
in persuading the victims to remain, the New Zealand 
government would not seek to prevent a victim of trafficking 
leaving the country if the person was seeking to leave of 
their own volition. 
 
Where a person has been convicted of an offense, he or she 
may be sentenced to make reparation to the victim.  The court 
must consider reparation in all cases and must impose it 
unless satisfied that it would be clearly inappropriate 
because it would result in undue hardship for the offender or 
the dependents of the offender, or because of any other 
special circumstances. 
 
For example, in 2000 the Human Rights Commission successfully 
represented a Thai sex trafficking victim to the New Zealand 
Disputes Tribunal, and she recovered the NZD 6000 she paid 
traffickers for what she believed would be restaurant work. 
 
-- F. What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the government provide?  Does it provide shelter or 
housing benefits to victims or other resources to aid the 
victims in rebuilding their lives? Where are child victims 
placed (e.g. in shelters, foster-care, or juvenile justice 
detention centers)? 
 
The government provides extensive protection and recovery 
support to victims and witnesses (see 30A and 30B). Much of 
victim recovery support and refuge is managed through NGOs, 
to which the government provides funding.  For child victims, 
if placement back in the home or foster care is not 
appropriate, they are placed in a care and protection unit 
operated by the Department of Child, Youth and Family 
Services.  The government provides special training in 
dealing with all aspects of children and the law.  GNZ has 
successfully prosecuted at least one case of witness 
intimidation. 
 
-- G. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in recognizing trafficking and in 
the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including 
the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?  Does it urge those 
embassies and consulates to develop ongoing relationships 
with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
In 1999, the Human Rights Commission set up a "safe house" 
program to assist Thai sex workers in escaping prostitution 
in New Zealand.  The Commission worked collaboratively with 
the Department of Immigration, New Zealand Police, New 
Zealand Prostitutes' Collective, Shakti Migrant Service 
Trust, and the Thai Embassy to assist a number of victims 
escape from the Auckland sex trade and return them to 
Thailand. 
 
Representatives from the Department of Labour and the Human 
Rights Commission have participated in and conducted numerous 
training workshops for recognizing victims and perpetrators 
of trafficking.  The Government of New Zealand is an active 
participant in international fora concerning human 
trafficking, including the Bali Process and the Asia Pacific 
Forum of National Human Rights Institutions. 
 
The Department of Labour's Immigration Service has conducted 
border control training workshops and document examination 
training for the immigration and border control staff of 
Pacific countries.  The Immigration Service has also provided 
passenger screening training to staff of airlines serving New 
Zealand and the Pacific. 
 
Immigration officers have received training on 
anti-trafficking legislation and its implementation, 
including the process for providing victims with information 
on social services. 
 
-- H. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical 
aid, shelter, or financial help, to its repatriated nationals 
who are victims of trafficking? 
 
New Zealand citizens and residents are entitled to a wide 
range of social, mental and physical services, regardless of 
circumstances.  The means and framework are there to provide 
assistance to victims of trafficking if needed. 
 
-- I. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work 
with trafficking victims?  What type of services do they 
provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities?  NOTE:  If post reports that a government is 
incapable of assisting and protecting TIP victims, then post 
should explain thoroughly.  Funding, personnel, and training 
constraints should be noted, if applicable. Conversely, the 
lack of political will to address the problem should be noted 
as well. 
 
ECPAT New Zealand, Ending Child Prostitution and Trafficking, 
is the lead NGO in this field and works closely with the 
government.  Other relevant civil society groups include the 
New Zealand Prostitutes Collectives and the Salvation Army. 
These groups have worked closely with local authorities in 
the past. 
 
End responses. 
 
¶2. (U) Embassy POC for trafficking in persons issues is 
Political Officer Tod Duran, Telephone (644) 462-6043 Fax 
(644) 472-3537. 
 
¶3. (U) Post estimates that the Political Officer spent 40 
hours in preparation of the TIP report cable. 
Keegan