08OTTAWA85
CANADA: INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT
Tue Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO2841
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0085/01 0152200
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 152200Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7151
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUCPCIM/CIMSNTDB WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 OTTAWA 000085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
TREASURY FOR DO 
COMMERCE FOR ITA 
PASS TO USTR (MARY SULLIVAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA EFIN ELAB ETRD KTDB PGOV OPIC USTR
SUBJECT: CANADA: INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
REF: 07 STATE 158802 
 
¶1. (u) Per reftel instructions, post has updated the 
Investment Climate Statement for the 2008 Country Commercial 
Guide. 
 
¶2. (u) Begin Text of ICS Update 
 
Chapter 6: Investment Climate 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
General Attitude 
 
Strong economic fundamentals, proximity to the U.S. market, 
highly skilled employees, and abundant resources are key 
attractions for American investors in Canada.  With few 
exceptions, Canada offers full national treatment to foreign 
investors within the context of a developed open market 
economy operating with democratic principles and 
institutions.  Canada is, however, one of the few OECD 
countries that still has a formal investment review process. 
Foreign investment is also prohibited or restricted in 
several sectors of the economy. 
 
Canada's economic development relies on foreign investment 
flows to a significant extent.  The Canadian government 
estimates that foreign investors control about one-quarter of 
Canada,s non-financial corporate assets.  The stock of 
global foreign direct investment in Canada over the first 
three quarters of 2007 totaled CDN $495 billion, with U.S. 
investment accounting for about 65 percent of all foreign 
direct investment (FDI) in Canada. 
 
The United States and Canada agree on important foreign 
investment principles, including right of establishment and 
national treatment.  The 1989 Free Trade Agreement (FTA) 
recognized that a hospitable and secure investment climate is 
necessary to achieve the full benefits of reducing barriers 
to trade in goods and services.  The FTA established a 
framework of investment principles sensitive to U.S. and 
Canadian interests while assuring that investment flowed 
freely between the two countries and investors were treated 
in a fair and equitable manner.  The FTA provided higher 
review thresholds for U.S. investment in Canada than for 
other foreign investors, but the agreement did not exempt all 
American investment from review nor did the agreement 
override specific foreign investment prohibitions, notably in 
&cultural industries8 (e.g., publishing, film, music). 
 
The 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) 
incorporated the gains made in the FTA, expanded the coverage 
of the Investment chapter to several new areas, and broadened 
the definition of investors' rights.  The NAFTA also created 
the right to binding investor-state dispute settlement 
arbitration in specific situations. 
 
Legal Framework:  The Investment Canada Act 
 
Since 1985, foreign investment policy in Canada has been 
guided by the Investment Canada Act (ICA), which replaced the 
more restrictive Foreign Investment Review Act.  The ICA 
liberalized policy on foreign investment by recognizing that 
investment is central to economic growth and key to 
technological advancement.  The ICA also provided for review 
of large acquisitions by non-Canadians and imposed a 
requirement that these investments be of "net benefit" to 
Canada.  For the vast majority of small acquisitions, as well 
as the establishment of new businesses, foreign investors 
need only notify the Canadian government of their investment. 
 
Industry Canada must be notified of any investment by a 
non-Canadian to establish a new business, regardless of size; 
to acquire direct control of an existing business that has 
assets of at least CDN $5 million; or to acquire the indirect 
control of an existing Canadian business with assets 
Qcontrol of an existing Canadian business with assets 
exceeding CDN $50 million in value.  However, the review 
threshold is higher for firms from World Trade Organization 
(WTO) member countries, including the United States.  In 
2007, the review threshold for WTO members was CDN $281 
million, rather than the CDN $5 million level applicable to 
non- WTO investors.  For 2008, the review threshold is CDN 
$295 million. 
 
Investment in specific sectors is covered by special 
legislation.  For example, foreign investment in the 
financial sector is administered by the federal Department of 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  002 OF 008 
 
 
Finance. Investment in an activity that is related to 
Canada's cultural heritage or national identity is 
administered by the Department of Canadian Heritage.  Under 
provisions of Canada's Telecommunications Act, foreign 
ownership of transmission facilities is limited to 20 percent 
direct ownership and 33 percent through a holding company, 
for an effective limit of 46.7 percent total foreign 
ownership.  The Broadcast Act governs foreign investment in 
radio and television broadcasting.  (See below for more 
detail on these restrictions.) 
 
In addition to federal regulation, investment in Canada is 
also subject to provincial jurisdiction.  Restrictions on 
foreign investment differ by province, but are largely 
confined to the purchase of land and to 
provincially-regulated financial services.  Provincial 
government policies relating to, inter alia, culture, 
language, labor relations or the environment, can be a factor 
for foreign investors. 
 
U.S. foreign direct investment in Canada is subject to 
provisions of the Investment Canada Act, the WTO, and the 
NAFTA.  Chapter 11 of the NAFTA ensures that future 
regulation of U.S. investors in Canada (and Canadian 
investors in the United States) results in treatment no 
different than that extended to domestic investors within 
each country --"national treatment."  Both governments are 
free to regulate the ongoing operation of business 
enterprises in their respective jurisdictions provided the 
governments accord national treatment to both U.S. and 
Canadian investors. 
 
Existing U.S. and Canadian laws, policies, and practices were 
"grandfathered" under the NAFTA except where specific changes 
were required.  This &grandfathering8 froze various 
exceptions to national treatment provided in Canadian and 
U.S. law, such as foreign ownership restrictions in the 
communications and transportation industries.  The Canadian 
government retains the right to review the acquisition of 
firms in Canada by U.S. investors at the levels applicable to 
other WTO members and has required changes before approving 
some investments. 
 
The U.S. and Canadian governments are free to tax 
foreign-owned companies on a different basis from domestic 
firms, provided this does not result in arbitrary or 
unjustifiable discrimination.  The governments can also 
exempt the sale of Crown (government-owned) corporations from 
any national treatment obligations.  Finally, the two 
governments retain some flexibility in the application of 
national treatment obligations.  They need not extend 
identical treatment, as long as the treatment is "equivalent." 
 
Services Trade 
 
Bilateral services trade is largely free of restrictions, and 
the NAFTA ensures that restrictions will not be applied in 
the future.  However, pre-existing restrictions, such as 
those in the financial sector, were not eliminated by the 
NAFTA.  The NAFTA services agreement is primarily a code of 
principles that establishes national treatment, right of 
establishment, right of commercial presence, and transparency 
for a number of service sectors specifically enumerated in 
annexes to the NAFTA.  The NAFTA also commits both 
governments to expand the list of covered service sectors 
(except for the financial services covered by NAFTA Chapter 
14). 
 
Federal Procurement 
 
NAFTA grants U.S. firms that operate from the United States 
national treatment for most Canadian federal procurement 
Qnational treatment for most Canadian federal procurement 
opportunities.  Inter-provincial trade barriers, however, 
often exclude U.S. firms established in one Canadian province 
from bidding on another province's procurement opportunities. 
 As a first step in the ongoing and difficult process of 
reducing trade barriers within Canada, the Canadian federal, 
provincial, and territorial governments negotiated an 
Internal Trade Agreement that came into effect on July 1, 
¶1995.  The Agreement provides a framework for dealing with 
intra-Canada trade in ten specific sectors and establishes a 
formal process for resolving trade disputes.  In an attempt 
to further reduce inter-provincial trade barriers, the 
provinces of British Columbia and Alberta signed a Trade, 
Investment, and Labor Mobility Agreement (TILMA) in 2006 to 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  003 OF 008 
 
 
ensure that any provincial measures will not "operate to 
impair or restrict trade between or through the territory of 
the Parties, or investment or labor mobility between the 
Parties.8  The Agreement will come into full force in April 
¶2009. 
 
Besides the areas described above, the NAFTA includes 
provisions that enhance the ability of U.S. investors to 
enforce their rights through international arbitration; 
prohibit a broad range of performance requirements, including 
forced technology transfer; and expand coverage of the NAFTA 
investment chapter to include portfolio and intangible 
investments, as well as direct investment. 
 
Investments in &Cultural Industries8 
 
Canada defines &cultural industries" to include: 
 
- the publication, distribution or sale of books, magazines, 
periodicals or newspapers, other than the sole activity of 
printing or typesetting; 
 
- the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of film or 
video recordings, or audio or video music recordings; 
 
- the publication, distribution or sale of music in print or 
machine-readable form; and 
 
- any radio, television and cable television broadcasting 
undertakings and any satellite programming and broadcast 
network services. 
 
The Investment Canada Act (ICA) requires that foreign 
investment in the book publishing and distribution sector be 
compatible with Canadian national cultural policies and be of 
"net benefit" to Canada.  Takeovers of Canadian-owned and 
controlled distribution businesses are not allowed.  The 
establishment of new film distribution companies in Canada is 
permitted only for importation and distribution of 
proprietary products.  Direct and indirect takeovers of 
foreign distribution businesses operating in Canada are 
permitted only if the investor undertakes to reinvest a 
portion of its Canadian earnings in Canada. 
 
The Broadcasting Act sets out the policy objectives of 
enriching and strengthening the cultural, political, social, 
and economic fabric of Canada.  The Canadian Radio-television 
and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) administers 
broadcasting policy.  Under current CRTC policy, in cases 
where a Canadian service is licensed in a format competitive 
with that of an authorized non-Canadian service, the 
commission can drop the non-Canadian service if a new 
Canadian applicant requests it to do so.  Licenses will not 
be granted or renewed to firms that do not have at least 80 
percent Canadian control, represented both by shareholding 
and by representation on the firms' board of directors. 
 
While Canada allows up to 100 percent foreign equity in an 
enterprise to publish, distribute and sell periodicals, all 
foreign investments in this industry are subject to review by 
the Minister for Canadian Heritage, and investments may not 
occur through acquisition of a Canadian-owned enterprise. 
No more than 18 percent of the total advertising space in 
foreign periodicals exported to Canada may be aimed primarily 
at the Canadian market.  Canadian advertisers may place 
advertisements in foreign-owned periodicals, and may claim a 
tax deduction for the advertising costs, including in cases 
where the periodical is a &Canadian issue8 of a 
foreign-owned periodical.  One-half of advertising costs may 
be deducted in the case of publications with zero to 79 
percent original editorial content, and the full cost of 
advertising may be deducted in the case of publications with 
Qadvertising may be deducted in the case of publications with 
80 percent or more original editorial content.  This regime 
is the result of a 1999 agreement between the United States 
and Canada, which balanced U.S. publishers, desire for 
access to the Canadian market against Canada,s desire to 
ensure that Canadian advertising expenditures support the 
production of Canadian editorial content. 
 
Investments in the Financial Sector 
 
Canada is open to foreign investment in the banking, 
insurance, and securities brokerage sectors, but there are 
barriers to foreign investment in retail banking.  Foreign 
financial firms interested in investing submit their 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  004 OF 008 
 
 
applications to the Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions (OSFI) for approval by the Minister of Finance. 
U.S. firms are present in all three sectors, but play 
secondary roles.  Canadian banks have been much more 
aggressive in entering the U.S. retail banking market because 
there are no barriers that limit access.  Although U.S. and 
other foreign banks have long been able to establish banking 
subsidiaries in Canada, no U.S. banks have retail-banking 
operations in Canada, which is regarded as a fairly 
"saturated" market.  Several U.S. financial institutions have 
established branches in Canada, chiefly targeting commercial 
lending, investment banking, and niche markets such as credit 
card issuance. 
 
Chapter 14 of the NAFTA deals specifically with the financial 
services sector, and eliminates discriminatory asset and 
capital restrictions on U.S. bank subsidiaries in Canada. 
The NAFTA also exempts U.S. firms and investors from the 
federal "10/25" rule so that they will be treated the same as 
Canadian firms.  The "10/25" rule prevents any non-NAFTA, 
non-resident entity from acquiring more than ten percent of 
the shares ) and all such entities collectively from 
acquiring more than 25 percent of the shares ) of a 
federally regulated, Canadian-controlled financial 
institution.  In 2001, the Canadian government raised the 10 
percent limit for single, non-NAFTA shareholders to 20 
percent.  Several provinces, however, including Ontario and 
Quebec, have similar "10/25" rules for provincially chartered 
trust and insurance companies that were not waived under the 
NAFTA. 
 
Investments in Other Sectors 
 
Commercial Aviation:  Foreigners are limited to 25 percent 
ownership of Canadian air carriers. 
 
Energy and Mining:  Foreigners cannot be majority owners of 
uranium mines. 
 
Telecommunications:  Under provisions of Canada's 
Telecommunications Act, direct foreign ownership of Type I 
carriers (owners/operators of transmission facilities) are 
limited to 20 percent.  Ownership and control rules are more 
flexible for holding companies that wish to invest in 
Canadian carriers.  Under these rules, two-thirds of the 
holding company's equity must be owned and controlled by 
Canadians. 
 
Fishing:  Foreigners can own up to 49 percent of companies 
that hold Canadian commercial fishing licenses. 
 
Electric Power Generation and Distribution:  Regulatory 
reform in electricity continues in Canada in expectation that 
increased competition will lower costs of electricity supply. 
 Province-owned power firms are also interested in gaining 
greater access to the U.S. power market.  Since power markets 
fall under the competency of the Canadian provinces, they are 
at the forefront of the reform effort.  The reforms will also 
help to further integrate the U.S. and Canadian electricity 
markets. 
 
Real estate:  Primary responsibility for property law rests 
with the provinces.  Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, and 
Nova Scotia all limit real estate sales to out-of-province 
parties.  There is no constitutional protection for property 
rights in Canada. Consequently, government authorities can 
expropriate property after paying appropriate compensation. 
 
Privatization:  Federal and provincial privatizations are 
considered on a case-by-case basis, and there are no overall 
limitations with regard to foreign ownership.  As an example, 
the federal Department of Transport did not impose any 
Qthe federal Department of Transport did not impose any 
limitations in the 1995 privatization of Canadian National 
Railway, whose majority shareholders are now U.S. persons. 
 
Investment Incentives 
 
Federal and provincial governments in Canada offer a wide 
array of investment incentives, which municipalities are 
generally prohibited from doing.  None of the federal 
incentives are specifically aimed at promoting or 
discouraging foreign investment in Canada.  The incentives 
are designed to advance broader policy goals, such as 
boosting research and development or promoting regional 
economies.  The funds are available to any qualified Canadian 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  005 OF 008 
 
 
or foreign investor who agrees to use the monies for the 
stated purpose.  For example, Export Development Canada can 
support inbound investment under certain specific conditions 
(e.g., investment must be export-focused; export contracts 
must be in-hand or companies have a track record; there is a 
world or regional product mandate for the product to be 
produced). 
 
Provincial incentives tend to be more investor-specific and 
are conditioned on applying the funds to an investment in the 
granting province.  Provincial incentives may also be 
restricted to firms established in the province or that agree 
to establish a facility in the province.  Government 
officials at both the federal and provincial levels expect 
investors who receive investment incentives to use them for 
the agreed purpose, but no enforcement mechanism exists. 
 
Incentives for investment in cultural industries, at both the 
federal and provincial level, are generally available only to 
Canadian-controlled firms.  Incentives may take the form of 
grants, loans, loan guarantees, venture capital, or tax 
credits.  Incentive programs in Canada generally are not 
oriented toward the promotion of exports.  Provincial 
incentive programs for film production in Canada are 
available to foreign filmmakers. 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
 
The Canadian dollar is fully convertible.  The Canadian 
government provides some incentives for Canadian investment 
in developing countries through Canadian International 
Development Agency (CIDA) programs.  Canada's official export 
credit agency, the Export Development Corporation (EDC), 
provides political risk insurance to Canadian companies with 
investments in foreign countries and to lenders who finance 
transactions pursued by Canadian companies abroad. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
 
Canadian federal and provincial laws recognize both the right 
of the government to expropriate private property for a 
public purpose, and the obligation to pay compensation. The 
federal government has not nationalized any foreign firm 
since the nationalization of Axis property during World War 
II.  Both the federal and provincial governments have assumed 
control of private firms -- usually financially distressed 
ones -- after reaching agreement with the former owners. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
 
Canada is a member of the New York Convention of 1958 on the 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.  The 
Canadian government has made a decision in principle to 
become a member of the International Center for the 
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).  However, since 
the ICSID legal enforcement mechanism requires provincial 
legislation, the federal government must also obtain 
agreement from the provinces that they will enforce ICSID 
decisions.  Although most provinces have endorsed the 
agreement, full agreement is unlikely in the foreseeable 
future. 
 
Canada accepts binding arbitration of investment disputes to 
which it is a party only when it has specifically agreed to 
do so through a bilateral or multilateral agreement, such as 
a Foreign Investment Protection Agreement (see below).  The 
provisions of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA guide the resolution of 
investment disputes between the United States and Canada. 
The NAFTA encourages parties to settle disputes through 
consultation or negotiation.  It also establishes special 
arbitration procedures for investment disputes separate from 
Qarbitration procedures for investment disputes separate from 
the NAFTA's general dispute settlement provisions. 
 
Under the NAFTA, a narrow range of disputes dealing with 
government monopolies and expropriation between an investor 
from a NAFTA country and a NAFTA government may be settled, 
at the investor's option, by binding international 
arbitration.  An investor who seeks binding arbitration in a 
dispute with a NAFTA party gives up his right to seek redress 
through the court system of the NAFTA party, except for 
proceedings seeking non-monetary damages. 
 
Performance Requirements and Incentives 
 
The NAFTA prohibits the United States or Canada from imposing 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  006 OF 008 
 
 
export or domestic content performance requirements, and 
Canada does not explicitly negotiate performance requirements 
with foreign investors.  For investments subject to review, 
however, the investor's intentions regarding employment, 
resource processing, domestic content, exports, and 
technology development or transfer can be examined by the 
Canadian government.  Investment reviews often lead to 
negotiation of a package of specific "undertakings," such as 
agreement to promote Canadian products. 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
 
Investors have full rights to private ownership. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
 
Foreigner investors have full and fair access to Canada's 
legal system, with private property rights limited only by 
the rights of governments to establish monopolies and to 
expropriate for public purposes.  Investors from NAFTA 
countries have mechanisms available to them for dispute 
resolution regarding property expropriation by the Government 
of Canada. 
 
Canada has yet to ratify key treaties that protect copyright 
works on the Internet (the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) "Internet Treaties") that the government 
signed in 1997. (Please refer to the copyright section of 
this report for more details.)  U.S. (and many Canadian) 
companies have complained that Canada's enforcement regime 
against counterfeiting and piracy, both at the border and 
internally, is cumbersome and ineffective, requiring civil 
court orders before goods can be formally seized. 
 
Transparency of Regulatory System 
 
The transparency of Canada's regulatory system is similar to 
that of the United States.  Proposed legislation is subject 
to parliamentary debate and public hearings, and regulations 
are issued in draft form for public comment prior to 
implementation.  While federal and/or provincial licenses or 
permits may be needed to engage in economic activities, 
regulation of these activities is generally for statistical 
or tax compliance reasons.  The Bureau of Competition Policy 
and the Competition Tribunal, a quasi-judicial body, enforce 
Canada's antitrust legislation. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
 
Investment in Canada,s capital markets presents no problems 
to investors.  As described above, the markets are open, 
accessible, and without onerous regulatory requirements. 
 
Political Violence 
 
Political violence occurs in Canada to about the same extent 
as in the United States.  For example, protests at the April 
2001 Summit of the Americas in Quebec City sparked violent 
confrontations that resulted in some property damage. 
Protests at the North American Leaders, Summit in 
Montebello, Quebec in August 2007 led to confrontation 
between police and protesters. 
 
Corruption 
 
On an international scale, corruption in Canada is low and 
similar to that found in the United States.  There have been 
recent investigations into inappropriate expenditure of 
government funds to support political activities, but this 
alleged activity was not related to foreign direct 
investment.  Reports have been received, particularly from 
Quebec, of alleged mob activity, but again, not to the level 
that would require undue concern by investors.  In general, 
the type of due diligence that would be required in the 
United States to avoid corrupt practices would be appropriate 
in Canada.  Canada is a signatory to the UN Convention 
against Corruption. 
Qagainst Corruption. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements 
 
While the terms of the FTA and the NAFTA guide investment 
relations between Canada and the United States, Canada has 
also negotiated international investment agreements with 
non-NAFTA parties.  These agreements, known as Foreign 
Investment Protection Agreements (FIPAs), are bilateral 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  007 OF 008 
 
 
treaties that promote and protect foreign investment through 
a system of legally binding rights and obligations based on 
the same principles found in the NAFTA.  Within Canada's 
overall foreign investment strategy, FIPAs complement the 
NAFTA.  Canada has negotiated FIPAs with countries in Central 
Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia, and has over 100 
international tax treaties in force. 
 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
 
Because Canada is a developed country, the U.S. Overseas 
Private Investment Corporation does not operate in Canada. 
 
Labor 
 
The federal government and provincial/territorial governments 
share jurisdiction for labor regulation and standards. 
Federal employees and those employed in the railroad, 
airline, and banking sectors are covered under the federally 
administered Canada Labour Code.  Employees in most other 
sectors come under provincial labor codes.  As the laws vary 
somewhat from one jurisdiction to another, it is advisable to 
contact a federal or provincial labor office for specifics, 
such as minimum wage and benefit requirements.  In 2007, the 
employment rate of 63.8 percent set a record high; Canada's 
employment rate was higher than that of the United States and 
most European countries in the second quarter of 2007. 
Strong market conditions in some regions have created 
shortages of many types of skilled labor and a relative lack 
of people willing to take customer service jobs. 
 
In 2007, the proportion of union membership among those in 
paid, non-agricultural employment was 30.3 percent. 
According to 2007 figures, overall union membership reflected 
a 17 percent unionized rate in the private sector and a 71.7 
percent unionized rate in the public sector. 
 
Foreign-Trade Zones/Free Ports 
 
Under the NAFTA, Canada operates as a free trade zone for 
products made in the United States.  U.S.-made goods enter 
Canada duty free.  The city of Vancouver is working to 
establish a free trade zone in association with its airport. 
The zone would be primarily for imported goods from Asia, 
allowing for pre-customs final assembly and for pick-and-pack 
services to operate outside of the Canadian customs 
territory.  The proposed Vancouver FTZ would not apply to 
U.S.-made products imported into Canada under a NAFTA 
certificate. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
 
Statistics in this section are impacted by the strong 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar 
since 2002. 
 
The United States has long been Canada,s top foreign 
investor, and Canada is the second largest recipient of U.S. 
direct investment after the United Kingdom.  At the end of 
2006, Canada hosted US$237 billion in direct foreign 
investment from U.S. residents ) growing by US$13 billion 
(5.5 percent) during the year.  U.S. investors with large 
direct investments in Canada include the major automakers 
(GM, Ford, Chrysler), integrated energy, chemical and mineral 
producers (e.g., ExxonMobil, ChevronTexaco, ConocoPhillips), 
financial services firms (e.g., Bank of America), and 
retailers (e.g., WalMart).  Canada's total inward FDI stock 
was about 30 percent of GDP.  The major industry sectors 
hosting these investments were finance/insurance (21 percent) 
and energy (20 percent). 
 
Canadian residents have become increasingly active as 
worldwide investors, and their net international liabilities 
have been shrinking over the past decade relative to national 
Qhave been shrinking over the past decade relative to national 
income.  The United States is the top destination for 
Canadian foreign direct investment, and Canada has 
consistently been one of the top ten FDI sources for the 
United States.  In 2006, Canadian residents' foreign direct 
investment in the United States grew by US$16.8 billion to 
US$193.4 billion.  Other major destinations for Canadian FDI 
are the United Kingdom, other European Union countries, and 
Japan. 
 
Web Resources 
 
 
OTTAWA 00000085  008 OF 008 
 
 
Investment Canada Act 
 
International Trade Canada 
 
Canada Labour Code 
 
End Text 
 
Visit Canada,s Economy and Environment Forum at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/can ada 
 
WILKINS