08OTTAWA737
SOMALI DIASPORA HIGHLIGHTS THE CHALLENGES OF
Tue Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO0095
RR RUEHAG RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHQU RUEHROV
RUEHTRO RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0737/01 1551530
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031530Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7949
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0383
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI 0009
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 0062
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0188
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 0294
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC
RHMFIUU/HQ USNORTHCOM
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 000737 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CA SO
SUBJECT: SOMALI DIASPORA HIGHLIGHTS THE CHALLENGES OF 
NATION-BUILDING 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In a well-attended conference on May 22 
with keynote speeches by Somali Transitional Federal 
Government Foreign Minister Jangeli, former Prime Minister of 
Canada Joe Clark, and AF DAS Jim Swan, the Canadian Friends 
of Somalia attempted to raise awareness of the "problems and 
challenges of nation-building in Somalia."  The Somali 
Diaspora here reflects the same clan divisions that would be 
evident in Mogadishu, but this event succeeded in drawing out 
a number of Canadian officials on the issue of support for 
the TFG and helped to galvanize the community itself in its 
efforts to assist their homeland.  Given the drive to marshal 
resources for a few missions rather than being spread thin 
everywhere, the government of Prime Minister Harper will not 
make Somalia a major priority.  However, there are a few 
niche areas -- conflict resolution, constitution writing, and 
federalism -- where Canadian expertise could be helpful to 
Somalia's reconstruction, while the Somali Diaspora here 
could also play a supporting role.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On May 22, the Canadian Friends of Somalia, a 
loosely-organized Diaspora group based in Ottawa, organized 
a conference entitled "The Challenges and Opportunities of 
Nation-Building in Somalia."  According to one participant, 
the group represents several but not all Somali clans (the 
Hawiye in particular were apparently not present), as the 
Diaspora here has brought with it various clan rivalries. 
Over 200 Somali-Canadians, Canadian and U.S. public 
officials, and NGO reps attended.  The group obtained a 
conference room on Parliament Hill through Liberal MP Boris 
Wrzesnewskyj, whose Toronto Etobicoke "riding" (district) has 
one of the highest concentrations of Somalis in Canada. 
Wrzesnewskyj also addressed the conference, along with former 
Prime Minister Joe Clark, TFG Foreign Minister Ali Jama 
Jangeli, and, by teleconference, UN Special Envoy Ahmedou 
Ould-Abdallah.  Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for 
African Affairs Jim Swan and Canadian Department of Foreign 
Affairs and International Trade Director General for Africa 
David Angell made presentations on U.S. and Canadian policy 
toward Somalia specifically and Africa more generally. 
 
FORMER PM CLARK -- IS AFRICA FALLING OFF CANADA'S MAP? 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Former PM Clark suggested that the Somali Diaspora 
-- about 20,000 in the Toronto area alone -- 
could have more influence on Canadian policy and on events in 
its homeland if it were less divided, if the younger 
generation (which is quickly getting disconnected from its 
homeland) were more engaged, and if it received more 
assistance from NGOs and/or the government to get better 
organized.  He admitted that there was no groundswell of 
support in Canada for doing more for Africa, and commented 
that the government was able largely to ignore the continent 
and focus instead primarily on Afghanistan and the U.S.  But 
Clark, who has remained active in a number of NGOs and think 
tanks working with African and Western hemispheric issues, 
indicated that there were some creative ways for individuals 
Qindicated that there were some creative ways for individuals 
and groups to be helpful, citing "Project Plowshare," which 
aims to stop remittances from going to weapons purchases, as 
one example.  Clark challenged the Canadian government to 
focus on the good news coming out of much of Africa and pay 
it more attention.  Canada's niche on certain issues, Clark 
said, as well as its moral standing, could make a difference 
in Africa, asking "what other country will engage if we 
don't?" 
 
FM JANGELI ON THE SITUATION IN SOMALIA 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) FM Ali Jama Jangeli, one of several Canadian-Somalis 
who have returned to their homeland to take up high office, 
explained that the TFG was working on several fronts.  First, 
it is pushing a short-term political process focused of 
reconciliation among the clans and factions, offering full 
support to the UN Special Envoy and the national 
reconciliation process that will unfold in July.  Second, it 
 
OTTAWA 00000737  002 OF 003 
 
 
is moving ahead on institution-building, which needs the 
support of the international community and of Somalis 
themselves.  Third, it aims to facilitate humanitarian aid, 
which is getting more difficult to get into Somalia because 
piracy is driving the price of food up and making shipments 
more problematic.  Fourth, the TFG has a long-term road map 
to democratic governance, culminating with elections in 2009 
under a new constitution.  Underlying all of this, Jangeli 
emphasized, was security, without which none of these key 
pillars could yield success.  He commented that all areas 
need to move forward and that they are mutually reinforcing, 
not sequential. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Jangeli's message to the international community was 
that "it is time to do what is right," and to Canada "we 
need your help."  He urged that foreigners not remain 
paralyzed by frustrations over the well-meaning but failed 
efforts at nation-building in Somalia of the 1990's, 
suggesting that "the situation is different now."  He urged 
the Diaspora to reconcile, stating that it remains more 
divided than Somalis in the homeland.  Finally, Jangeli 
pointed to progress that is taking place already in parts of 
Somalia -- functioning markets, 15 radio stations, freedom of 
the press, and numerous cell phones -- as reasons for 
optimism.  He said in conclusion that Somalis and 
international partners must be united to help Somalia finally 
to pull itself together. 
 
SPECIAL ENVOY OULD-ABDALLAH URGES DIASPORA TO RETURN AND HELP 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Special Envoy Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah focused his 
remarks via teleconference on what the Diaspora could do to 
help in Somalia's reconstruction.  He said that the role of 
Somalis living abroad was significant to the local economy, 
with remittances annually of about US$1 billion.  He 
expressed satisfaction with the recent Djibouti meeting, 
which many did not believe would succeed.  Ould-Abdallah said 
that he was now focused on five objectives:  to resolve local 
disputes peacefully; to attempt to impose a cease-fire; to 
organize UN peacekeeping support; to increase humanitarian 
access; and, to seek longer term reconciliation through a 
truth and reconciliation process.  He urged the Diaspora not 
to bring back to Somalia the divisions of their respective 
communities, and told the participants they were still needed 
in Somalia. 
 
DAS SWAN ON U.S. OBJECTIVES IN SOMALIA 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) DAS Swan described U.S. priorities in Somalia, 
notably encouraging political dialogue and reconciliation, 
strengthening development and humanitarian relief, and 
facilitating full deployment of an African Union peacekeeping 
force.  He called upon the Diaspora to play a helpful role in 
Somalia's reconstruction, and warned against the desire of 
some elements to play the role of spoiler.  Swan detailed 
U.S. humanitarian support for Somalia and our continuing 
support for peacekeeping efforts.  He commented that there 
would be a real danger of stagnation if the political process 
were delayed, and urged the participants to support the 
Qwere delayed, and urged the participants to support the 
ongoing progress. 
 
DG ANGELL ON CANADA'S ROLE 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Canadian DG for Africa David Angell highlighted the 
statement of then-Foreign Minister Bernier regarding Somalia 
on February 1, in which the FM urged a political solution to 
end the violence and keep the humanitarian pipeline open.  He 
acknowledged U.S. leadership in the evolution of the Contact 
Group, and offered support for ongoing mediation efforts 
between the TFG and opposition in the interest of reducing 
the power of the spoilers.  Angell confirmed that Canada 
remains engaged in Somalia in a variety of areas, including 
humanitarian assistance, media projects promoting a free 
 
OTTAWA 00000737  003 OF 003 
 
 
press, and support for political reconciliation. 
 
¶9. (SBU) In a separate meeting with DAS Swan, Angell said 
that Canada was "keen to be more involved with the 
Contact Group."  He called a "Catch 22" situation that Canada 
had not been invited to be a full member because it was not 
doing more, but that he was not able to interest his 
superiors to have Canada do more because it is not a member 
of the Contact Group.  He expressed the hope that, with the 
recent reorganization of the Cluster Groups, Canada's 
involvement could now be more robust.  Angell said that he 
believes the approach of Ould-Abdallah to work on the first 
track with Somalis and then move to include the international 
community makes sense. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment: Canada has provided C$15 million in 
humanitarian assistance to Somalia since 2006, and another 
C$3.75 million in regional funding to UN agencies, making 
Somalia one of the 25 countries that receive Canadian 
assistance, albeit not as one of Canada's top priorities. 
Canada would nonetheless like to stay engaged in Somalia for 
moral and domestic political reasons, but knows it does not 
have the resources or clout to be one of the key players. 
Still, given Somalia's need for help working through the 
thorny issue of federalism, writing a constitution, and 
reconciliation and conflict resolution, Canada's expertise 
could be useful. 
 
Visit Canada,s Economy and Environment Forum at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/can ada 
 
WILKINS