08VANCOUVER78
MANAGING 2010 OLYMPICS BORDER TRAFFIC
Fri Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vancouver
VZCZCXRO3870
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU
DE RUEHVC #0078 0951749
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041749Z APR 08
FM AMCONSUL VANCOUVER
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4889
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHVC/AMCONSUL VANCOUVER 7240UNCLAS VANCOUVER 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAN, DS/P/MECU, CA, CA/OCS, CA/EX, CA/VO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA KOLY PREL ASEC CMGT
SUBJECT: MANAGING 2010 OLYMPICS BORDER TRAFFIC 
 
REF: VANCOUVER 0076 
 
¶1.  This is the second of two cables looking at preparations for 
the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics.  Issues related to 
economics, commerce and logistics are covered in ref. This cable 
addresses the travel of tourists and participants to the Games 
and potential issues for border management. 
 
¶2.   The increased global tourism associated with the 2010 
Olympics could have a significant effect on USG visa and border 
management operations.  Vancouver International Airport 
officials told us they are fully confident of their ability to 
handle the increased traffic.  The airport has a surge capacity 
built in for the summer cruise season and expects this to be 
more than adequate to handle the February Olympics' load. But 
the Vancouver Olympics Committee (VANOC) is keenly aware that 
many visitors to the 2010 Games will either visit or transit 
through the United States.  One major concern is the Olympics' 
credentials given to athletes, dignitaries, National Olympics 
Committees (NOCs), and other Olympics family members, which are 
a valid visa for Canada at the time of the Games, but not for 
the United States.  They are worried participants will attempt 
to transit or enter the U.S. using their Olympics' credentials 
only. VANOC told us they have already reached out to officials 
at Seattle-Tacoma Airport to develop protocols for dealing with 
VIPs and other participants who arrive without the proper 
documentation. As an aside, they expressed the desire to discuss 
whether the U.S. government would consider allowing the Olympics 
credentials also to act as at least a transit visa for the U.S. 
during the Games. 
 
¶3. Another concern is the volume of visitors from non-visa 
waiver countries who will want to visit the U.S. once they 
arrive in Canada.  This poses a particularly large problem for 
the Consular section in Vancouver.  To address both issues, 
CONGEN Vancouver proposed incorporating U.S. visa and travel 
information in the packets that VANOC will send out to all 
participants and NOCs prior to the Games. We are also working to 
include the same information in packets sent to ticket holders. 
VANOC responded enthusiastically to our proposal and, although 
they are not ready yet to compile these packets, would very much 
like to have our input when the time comes. 
 
¶4. Border traffic management during the Games has dominated the 
discussions at most cross-border meetings and conferences in the 
region.  CBP and CBSA are working together to develop surge 
plans to cope with the unusually high volumes expected for the 
Games.  Again, the timing, in February, means that by all 
estimates maximum volumes will not be more than the normal highs 
experienced in summer.  However, construction at the Peace Arch 
port of entry in Blaine, Washington, which is now scheduled for 
completion in March 2010, has organizers and officials on both 
sides of the border concerned.  GSA has promised to minimize 
impact at the time of the Games and has indicated that most of 
the construction will be completed prior.  But the Olympics are 
highly visible and there is a strong desire by local communities 
to look their best in promoting the region.  The timing of the 
construction at Peace Arch will continue to be a major source of 
angst and if the timetable slips again local officials are 
likely to demand that GSA do whatever it takes to get the 
project completed before the Olympics. 
 
¶5. VANOC and BC officials display a strong sense of the 
cross-border benefits of the Olympic Games.  VANOC officials 
informed us they are already discussing sending portions of the 
torch relay through the U.S.  Most notably, they would like to 
have the torch in New York City at the time the UN issues its 
Truce Proclamation, a regular event prior to any Olympics.  Also 
the organizers are considering bringing the torch through the 
Peace Arch border crossing and actually holding a small 
ceremony.  Plans for the torch relay are not scheduled to be 
released until fall 2008 but if Peace Arch figures prominently 
this will only increase the pressure on the construction 
timetable. 
 
¶6. Comment: Officials on both sides of the border are aware of 
the potential pitfalls related to border management for such a 
high profile event.  Canadian and American local authorities are 
cooperating to address the issues and come up with workable 
solutions for the 2010 Games.  For some issues the solutions may 
require more engagement from Ottawa and Washington, D.C., to 
ensure that participants and spectators alike reach the Games 
with a minimum of hassle. End Comment. 
 
LUKENS