08WELLINGTON183
NEW ZEALAND THANKS ITS VIETNAM VETS, AND ALSO
Wed Jun 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO6039
PP RUEHHM RUEHNZ RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0183/01 1630357
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110357Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5268
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5188
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 0062
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0736
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 0742
RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1681
RUEHHM/AMCONSUL HO CHI MINH CITY 0004
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000183 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND THANKS ITS VIETNAM VETS, AND ALSO 
APOLOGIZES 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  The New Zealand government sponsored a 
series of events called "Tribute 08" over the May 31-June 2 
three-day weekend to honor and thank NZ veterans who served 
and died in the Vietnam War, and to apologize to survivors 
and their families for not recognizing their service until 
now.  The GNZ also acknowledged those who were exposed to 
Agent Orange, and regretted earlier government decisions that 
minimized the impact of chemical defoliants on Vietnam-era 
servicemembers.  The tribute included a veterans' honor 
parade through downtown Wellington, a memorial service, a 
concert, exhibitions, and an official ceremony with comments 
by PM Helen Clark, Defense Minister Phil Goff, opposition 
leader John Key, and the Ambassador.  The tribute and the 
government's actions were covered extensively by the NZ 
media.  Some viewed the tribute as political opportunism by 
Clark and her struggling Labour Party and a small group of 
veterans considered it too little, too late; it was 
nevertheless largely well-received by veterans and 
non-veterans alike.  End Summary. 
 
New Zealand Apologizes to Vietnam Vets 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  The rumble could be heard long before the source 
could be seen.  A formation of six, olive-drab Vietnam-era 
"Huey" helicopters roared low and slow over Wellington on a 
peaceful Sunday afternoon, introducing many residents to the 
sound of a war they've only read about, and igniting memories 
for others who experienced it.  This scene was one of many 
organized by the NZ government to honor, thank, and apologize 
to the 3,400 NZ veterans who served between June 1964 and 
December 1972 in the Vietnam War, and to give them the 
heroes' welcome that they never received.  (Note:  Although 
the New Zealand governments in those years agreed to 
contribute forces, all New Zealand service members who went 
to Vietnam were volunteers.  As a result, New Zealand 
anti-war protesters were particularly harsh towards returnees 
and family members because they had volunteered to 
participate in an unpopular war.  End Note.) 
 
¶3.  (U)  The Tribute 08 events included a May 31 morning 
parade of Vietnam veterans and their families through 
Wellington's city center, complete with military marching 
bands, and ended in a ceremony in the plaza fronting 
Parliament.  Notable were the applause from onlookers lining 
the streets; the large framed photos carried by family 
members honoring the 37 Kiwis who died in Vietnam; and the 
American flags carried by one contingent comprised of US 
Vietnam veterans living in NZ.  In front of Parliament, a 
group of 30 Maori in traditional dress chanted and danced a 
Maori "Haka" to welcome and bless the assemblage, numbering 
approximately 2,500.  The ceremony included speeches by PM 
Helen Clark, Minister of Defense Phil Goff, opposition leader 
John Key, and others.  Notably, Clark and Goff were prominent 
anti-Vietnam War activists in their youth and cut their 
political teeth in opposition to the war.  Clark expressed 
gratitude for the veterans' sacrifices and offered an apology 
for past governments' denial of their exposure to, and their 
suffering from the effects of, Agent Orange.  This official 
recognition of exposure to and injuries from Agent Orange 
came after a five-year fact-finding process conducted by 
Parliament and the government.  Clark also paid tribute to 
the 37 NZ veterans who died in the war and to the 187 who 
were injured. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Tribute events through the weekend also included a 
memorial vigil within Parliament, a memorial service at the 
National War Memorial, a commemoration celebration and 
reunion,  a tribute concert, and Vietnam War exhibitions. 
Ambassador McCormick and DAO Captain Dawn Driesbach 
participated in most of the events, including a kickoff 
ceremony in the Wellington Civic Plaza where the Ambassador 
read a statement from Senator John McCain saluting the 
veterans and referring to the "sacred bond" shared by those 
who fought in Vietnam.  All events were covered extensively 
by NZ print and television media. 
 
¶5.  (U)  In interviews, one veteran stated that the 
government's apology was "long overdue" and good to hear; 
another complained that the tribute was "a little too late"; 
and a veteran's widow commented: "It is about time the 
 
WELLINGTON 00000183  002 OF 002 
 
 
government recognized what they did.  They fought a war, went 
to save the country, they deserve it.  They were never 
welcomed home or acknowledged, it was like a war that never 
was."  Some veterans complained that the New Zealand Returned 
and Services Association chapters (RSA, the equivalent of the 
Veterans Association chapters in the U.S.) treated Vietnam 
vets poorly, even blocking their membership in some chapters. 
 The returned Vietnam veterans formed their own association, 
the Ex-Vietnam Services Association (EVSA), which reunited in 
December 2006 with the RSA under a Memorandum of 
Understanding.  The MOU was a catalyst that led to the 
government's apology, the Tribute 08 festivities, and a 
financial package to compensate veterans and their families 
for their long-term health issues due to Agent Orange and 
other chemical defoliants. 
 
Apology to Vietnam 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U)  Some anti-war activists had urged the government to 
expand its apology to the people of Vietnam.  However, Clark 
did not go in that direction.  One Cambodian immigrant to New 
Zealand who now runs an NGO commented that an apology to 
Vietnam could invite claims for compensation from the 
Vietnamese government for millions of Vietnamese. 
Journalists who were able to find ethnic Vietnamese for 
reaction to the idea of a GNZ apology to the Vietnam 
invariably received a negative reaction, as the Vietnamese 
questioned had fled the communist regime that took power in 
¶1975. 
 
Comment: On Balance Well-received 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Comment.  For many NZ veterans and non-veterans, 
the events of Tribute 08 and the government's actions were 
positively and tearfully welcomed, but not without 
recognizing a little irony and possible opportunism.  Some 
believe the government's apology was geared towards 
bolstering the Labour Party's flagging poll numbers.  These 
same observers note that the Clark-initiated government 
apologies in 2002 to Samoa for colonial mistreatment and to 
Chinese immigrants exploited by New Zealanders in the 19th 
Century were election related.  While the 2002 apology was 
likely politically motivated, the Tribute 08 apology and 
activities date back to 2006 and planning began in earnest in 
August 2007, well before Labour's current political woes. 
Helen Clark has prided herself on her government's support 
for its country's soldiers and recognition of New Zealand's 
military contributions internationally.  The apology to New 
Zealand Vietnam veterans is a belated GNZ attempt to heal old 
wounds that painfully divided New Zealand in the Vietnam War 
era; financial complaints by its Vietnam veterans remain a 
controversial subject and may never be fully resolved.  End 
Comment. 
MCCORMICK