09BEIJING1227
MAY 7 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HU-OBAMA TELCON, USNS VICTORIOUS,
Thu May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9185
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1227/01 1272328
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 072328Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3860
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0601
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0479
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0635
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AMED MCAP CH MX CE CA AS KU JP
 
SUBJECT: MAY 7 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HU-OBAMA TELCON, USNS VICTORIOUS, 
H1N1 FLU, SPANISH REQUEST ON TIBET, DALAI LAMA'S PARIS CITIZENSHIP 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 7 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- Chinese President Hu Jintao and U.S. President Barack Obama 
discussed bilateral relations and had an "in-depth exchange of 
views" on H1N1 influenza, agreeing to cooperate in addressing the 
issue.  The two leaders also discussed the Korean Peninsula and 
South Asia. 
 
-- The U.S. surveillance ship USNS Victorious "breached 
international and Chinese law by entering into China's Exclusive 
Economic Zone."  The MFA spokesperson urged the United States to 
"take measures to prevent a recurrence." 
 
-- The measures the Chinese Government has taken to respond to H1N1 
influenza were "not discriminatory and are not targeted at any 
country" and were designed "not only to prevent the spread of the 
disease in China but also in Asia." 
 
-- Responding to questions regarding a Spanish judge's request to 
interview eight PRC officials as suspects in Tibetans' deaths 
following the March 14 riots in Lhasa, the MFA spokesman said the 
March 14 incident was a "serious criminal act of violence" and that 
Chinese leaders "handled the situation according to the law." 
 
-- The City of Paris will "meet with the Chinese people's firm 
opposition" if it awards honorary citizenship to the Dalai Lama. 
 
Hu-Obama Phone Call 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  Chinese President Hu Jintao and U.S. President Barack Obama 
discussed bilateral relations and had an "in-depth exchange of 
views" on H1N1 influenza, agreeing to cooperate in addressing the 
issue during a phone call on May 6.  They also discussed "the Korean 
Peninsula and South Asia," spokesman Ma Zhaoxu at the May 7 
regularly scheduled MFA press conference. 
 
H1N1 Influenza 
-------------- 
 
¶3.  The measures the Chinese Government has taken to respond to H1N1 
influenza were "not discriminatory and not targeted at any country." 
 There had been "no change" in visa policy for people traveling to 
China from the United States Ma said when asked about reports that 
China had suspended its rush visa service in the United States.  Ma 
said he could not give out the number of individuals quarantined 
because the matter was "complicated," noting that most people 
involved were Chinese nationals.  The Chinese Government was 
"providing the best possible conditions" and most people quarantined 
"expressed their satisfaction" with their treatment.  Noting that 
China was a big country in terms of "population size and population 
density" and that China had the "experience of SARS," Ma said the 
measures China took were "not only to prevent the spread of the 
disease in China but also in Asia." 
 
Spanish Request to Interview PRC Officials on Tibet 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶4.  Ma responded to multiple questions regarding the Chinese 
Government's reaction to a Spanish judge's request to interview 
eight Chinese officials as suspects in the deaths of Tibetans during 
the March 14, 2008 Lhasa riots by saying that the March 14 incident 
was a "serious criminal act of violence" and that Chinese leaders 
"handled the situation according to the law."  China "encouraged 
other countries to handle the situation according to international 
law and norms and not encourage separatist activity."  Ma declined 
to answer follow-up questions on whether China would cooperate with 
the Spanish request, whether the Chinese officials would avoid 
visiting Spain, and how this issue might affect bilateral relations 
with Spain. 
 
Possible Paris Citizenship for the Dalai Lama 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  When asked about the possibility that the city of Paris might 
award honorary citizenship to the Dalai Lama, Ma replied that Paris 
adopted a resolution to award the Dalai Lama with honorary 
citizenship one year ago, and that "if it does make this award," 
Paris would "meet with the Chinese people's firm opposition."  Ma 
"urged the French side not to interfere" in China's internal 
affairs.  Ma said it took "concerted efforts on both sides" to 
repair the bilateral relationship, and that the relationship had 
"finally returned to a sound and stable" situation. 
 
Human Trafficking 
----------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00001227  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶6.  In response to a question on China's reaction to a media report 
that 77 Chinese children disappeared from a children's home in the 
United Kingdom, Ma answered that he did not know the specifics of 
this case but that the Chinese Government "attaches great importance 
to protecting the rights and interests of its citizens" and efforts 
to "combat trafficking of women and children" have made remarkable 
progress.  China is an "active partner" in the international effort 
to combat trafficking and illegal immigration.  This is a "global 
challenge that requires a global effort," and China is "dedicated 
and committed" to cooperating with other nations in this field. 
 
U.S.-China Incident in South China Sea 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  China had already responded to questions regarding the incident 
involving the U.S. Navy surveillance ship Victorious, Ma said when 
asked about the matter.  Ma stressed that "the U.S. surveillance 
ship breached international and Chinese law by entering into China's 
Exclusive Economic Zone."  Ma urged the United States to "take 
measures to prevent a recurrence." 
 
Visit by U.S. Special Representative for DPRK Policy 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶8. Ma confirmed that U.S. Special Representative for North Korean 
Policy Stephen Bosworth was scheduled to arrive in Beijing on May 7 
and would meet with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and Vice Foreign 
Minister Wu Dawei to "exchange views on issues of common interest." 
 
Chinese Military Development 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. Ma deflected questions about the Chinese Government's assessment 
of the Australian defense white paper by criticizing the questioner 
for not attending the previous press conference and saying that 
China pursued a course of "peaceful development."  China's "national 
defense policy" was "defensive in nature," "China was a positive 
force in promoting world peace and stability" and did not "pose a 
threat" to any other country.  Ma had nothing to add to China's 
previous statements when asked about U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff 
Chairman Michael G. Mullen's comment that China's military upgrades 
were aimed at countering the United States. 
 
"Nanjing! Nanjing!" and China-Japan Relations 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Asked whether China's listing of the film "Nanjing! Nanjing!" 
as one of ten recommended films to view during the 60th anniversary 
of the founding of the People's Republic of China signaled any 
change in PRC policy toward Japan, Ma said China hopes Japan will 
"face history and use history as a mirror" so that China and Japan 
can "face the future together," Ma said. 
 
Harassment of Foreign Journalists in Sichuan 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  When asked about reports that local officials in Sichuan 
Province were harassing foreign journalists, Ma replied that he was 
"surprised" to hear about this and suggested that journalists should 
contact his colleagues or the local foreign affairs office if they 
had any "specific cases."  Ma added that China would "handle 
relevant cases according to the law." 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶12.  Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva will visit China 
May 18-20 at the invitation of Chinese President Hu Jintao.  In 
response to a question about Lula da Silva's visit, Ma said the 
visit was to mark the occasion of the 35th anniversary of bilateral 
relations, and it was his second state visit to China.  China 
attaches great importance to this visit, and Hu Jintao would "hold a 
welcoming ceremony in his honor."  Both sides would hold talks to 
have an "in-depth exchange of views to expand cooperation" in 
practical fields, as well as "sign several cooperation agreements" 
to enhance relations and further develop bilateral cooperation. 
 
¶13.  Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will attend the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO) Foreign Ministers meeting in Moscow 
on 15 May at the invitation of Russian Foreign Minister Sergey 
Lavrov to prepare for the mid-June SCO summit in Yekaterinburg. 
Yang and Lavrov will exchange views on cooperation and major 
international and regional issues. 
 
¶14.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs Department of Asian Affairs 
Director General Ms. Yang Yanyi will take part in the Afghanistan 
Regional Economic Cooperation meeting scheduled to be held in 
 
BEIJING 00001227  003 OF 003 
 
 
Pakistan, Ma said. 
 
¶15.  During Kuwait Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah's 
May 10-13 visit to China, both sides would hold "intense 
discussions" on "how to deepen the mutually beneficial cooperation" 
on energy issues that both nations enjoyed.  Ma said China's 
cooperation with Kuwait on energy issues was "highly 
complementary." 
 
PICCUTA