09HALIFAX32
GEORGES BANK DRILLING ISSUE:  CO-EXISTENCE NOT IN THE
Thu May 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
VZCZCXRO4774
RR RUEHHA
DE RUEHHA #0032/01 1481228
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281228Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL HALIFAX
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1396
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0611
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHHA/AMCONSUL HALIFAX 1487UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HALIFAX 000032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAN; EB/ESC/ISC; OES/OMC 
USDOE FOR IA (DEUTSCH) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG ECON PGOV SENV SCUL US CA
SUBJECT: GEORGES BANK DRILLING ISSUE:  CO-EXISTENCE NOT IN THE 
FISHING INDUSTRY'S DICTIONARY 
 
REF: HALIFAX 0003; 08 HALIFAX 0073 
 
HALIFAX 00000032  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Representatives of the fishing industry in 
southwest Nova Scotia are adamant that there will be no oil and 
gas drilling on Georges Bank.  They contend that rebounding fish 
stocks and the local economy which depends on the fishery will 
be adversely affected by any oil and gas activity. They will be 
pressing a soon-to-be elected provincial government to take the 
necessary steps to continue a drilling moratorium on the 
Canadian side of the bank, which is set to expire in 2012.  The 
representatives also expressed their hope that the U.S. Congress 
will likewise declare the U.S. side of the bank off limits to 
oilrigs.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Consul General and Pol-Econ Specialist met on May 11 with 
fishing industry representatives in southwest Nova Scotia to 
hear first-hand their concerns over the fate of a moratorium on 
oil and gas drilling on the Canadian side of Georges Bank 
(reftels).  The Bank is a lucrative offshore area located 100 
miles off Cape Cod straddling the U.S.-Canada boundary in the 
Gulf of Maine.  In addition to exploitable fish stocks, the area 
also contains an estimated one billion barrels of oil and 5.3 
trillion cubic feet of natural gas.  The representatives 
included fishermen, fishing boat owners, processors and a 
business leader who represents five aboriginal communities that 
now have a commercial interest in the fishery.  In voicing their 
opinions, they acknowledged that in theory it might be possible 
for the fishing and oil and gas industries to co-exist, as they 
do in places such as Norway.  However, they contend this cannot 
be the case on Georges Bank.  They argue that the Canadian 
portion of the bank is simply too small to accommodate fishing 
vessels and drill rigs, plus the number of support vessels 
attached to the drilling activity.  One fisherman said the 
exploitable area is only 40 miles wide and is like a small city 
that gets crowded very quickly when numerous fishing boats are 
out there.  While the potential overcrowding is an important 
part of their argument, their paramount objection is their 
deeply held conviction that exploration and drilling would do 
irreparable harm to the environment and disrupt a rebounding 
fishery that continues to underpin the economy of southwest Nova 
Scotia. 
 
¶3.  Several of the attendees remarked how the health of numerous 
transboundary fish stocks have rebounded in recent years, 
proving scientists' contention that the Bank supports one of the 
fasting growing and richest biomasses in the world.  This 
re-growth in the stocks only came about after they were almost 
fished to extinction, a development that prompted New England 
and Nova Scotia industry reps to work on cooperative strategies 
to restore the stocks.  Now, as the representatives pointed out, 
fishermen and processors are reaping the benefits of that joint 
stewardship and they want to ensure that the prosperity they are 
enjoying today continues, not only for them but also for 
subsequent generations.  They see the future of the fishery as 
critical to their cultural prosperity as well.  This area of 
Nova Scotia is home to generations of French-speaking Acadians 
who have fished these waters for hundreds of years.  With 
assimilation into the overwhelming English culture of North 
America an ever-present threat, they assert that they need a 
viable fishery to ensure the survival of their small Acadian 
seaside communities and their unique cultural heritage. 
 
¶4.  While acknowledging that there was little new in their 
arguments, the representatives were very appreciative of the 
opportunity to personally outline their case.  They also used 
the meeting to voice their hope that the U.S. Congress would 
enact a moratorium on the U.S. side of the bank, or at least 
declare it off limits to the oil and gas industry.  They left 
little doubt that they are not prepared to soften their 
anti-drilling stance, especially the aboriginal business 
representative who made it clear that his communities were just 
starting to enjoy this new revenue source and would be loath to 
put it in jeopardy.  (So great was his concern for the CG to 
hear his views, that he drove eight hours from his home in Cape 
Breton to attend the meeting.) 
 
¶5. In contrast to the anti-drilling forces, there is a less 
vocal, but equally adamant pro-drilling side to this debate. 
The province's oil and gas sector, supported by some business 
leaders in southwest Nova Scotia, want to see the oil and gas 
industry be given a fair chance, especially since there would be 
significant economic impacts to any new offshore activities. 
 
¶6. COMMENT:  As reported reftels, the Nova Scotia provincial 
government will have to give consideration to both sides of this 
debate when deciding on the future of the moratorium.  However, 
the issue is temporarily on hold pending the outcome of a June 9 
provincial election.  All the political parties have been 
 
HALIFAX 00000032  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
careful to avoid bringing up the issue on the campaign trail, 
but for the party that emerges the victor, there will be little 
time to weigh the arguments, as there is a June 2010 deadline 
for the province to indicate how it will proceed on the 
moratorium.  Given post's first-hand exposure to the sentiment 
of the fishing industry, it is clear that there can only be one 
outcome that will satisfy the fishing industry representatives: 
No co-existence policy and definitely no rigs on Georges Bank. 
END COMMENT. 
FOSTER