09OTTAWA766
CANADA: CONSERVATIVES SURVIVE ANOTHER CONFIDENCE VOTE
Thu Oct 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO9603
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0766/01 2742223
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 012223Z OCT 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9902
RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV CA
SUBJECT: CANADA: CONSERVATIVES SURVIVE ANOTHER CONFIDENCE VOTE 
 
REF:  A.  OTTAWA 735 
-     B.  OTTAWA 719 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Conservative minority government of Prime 
Minister Stephen Harper on October 1 again survived a confidence 
vote in the House of Commons.  The censure motion, introduced by the 
Official Opposition Liberal Party, was the first that the 
Conservatives had faced since they took office in February 2006, 
although they have won all other confidence votes (i.e. those on 
budgetary matters or bills that the government had explicitly 
designated a confidence measure).  The opposition New Democratic 
Party (NDP) appears to have shifted its earlier brief strategy of 
voting with the Conservatives until passage of a new bill on 
unemployment insurance to abstaining on confidence votes, probably 
in face of unhappiness within the party in propping up the 
Conservatives.  Poll numbers increasingly favor the Conservatives, 
but also indicate clearly that Canadian voters do not want another 
federal election any time soon.  There will be at least two more 
confidence votes in coming weeks, however, so all parties must 
remain in virtual pre-campaign mode -- just in case.  End summary 
 
Surviving another day 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  The House of Commons on October voted on October 1 to 
defeat a motion introduced by the Liberals "That this House has lost 
confidence in the government" by a vote of 144 against 
(Conservatives) to 117 in favor (Liberals and Bloc Quebecois).  The 
NDP whip rose subsequently to explain that his party's MPs had 
abstained to demonstrate "sympathy with the unemployed, not support 
for the government."  The NDP had already publicly pledged to work 
with the government to ensure passage of a bill to extend Employment 
Insurance, now in committee after two readings in the House.  All 
three opposition parties would have needed to vote together to 
defeat the government. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In the earlier debate that day in the full House, Liberal 
leader Michael Ignatieff chiefly focused on the government's 
economic record, and in particular growing deficits, as the reason 
for losing trust in the Conservatives and confidence in the 
government.  Prime Minister Stephen Harper did not attend the 
debate, but was present for the daily Question Period and for the 
vote itself.  The job of defending the government during the debate 
fell to Transport and Infrastructure Minister John Baird, who dared 
Ignatieff to find one Canadian who wants "an early and inopportune" 
election.  In Question Period, the PM accused the Liberals of 
"flailing around" trying to engineer an election that "no-one wants 
on a topic no-one agrees with." 
 
Liberals Disarray in Quebec 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Ignatieff's attempt to focus the debate on the Conservatives 
failed to move the media spotlight away from the federal Liberals' 
squabbling in Quebec, which broke into the open on September 28 with 
the abrupt resignation of MP Denis Coderre as the Liberals' Quebec 
lieutenant and its National Defence Critic (shadow minister). 
Coderre claimed in a press conference that he no longer had the 
"moral authority" to be his party's top organizer after Ignatieff 
overruled his hand-picked candidate in a key nomination battle in 
Montreal.  Coderre nonetheless insisted that his departure was not a 
challenge to Ignatieff and pledged his continued support for the 
leader, but instead pointed the finger at Ignatieff's inner circle 
from Toronto, who, he suggested, did not understand Quebec.  Five 
Quebec organizers resigned along with Coderre. 
 
¶5. (U) Ignatieff quickly said that he would not appoint a new Quebec 
lieutenant.  He underscored in public comments that the Liberal 
Qlieutenant.  He underscored in public comments that the Liberal 
Party now had 68 of 75 candidates for a future election already 
nominated in the province, for which he gave Coderre credit.  He 
appeared at a Montreal fundraiser on September 29, and will address 
a convention of the Quebec wing of the party in Quebec City on 
October 3-4.  Some Liberal MPs brushed off "l'affaire Coderre" as 
overblown; one Liberal MP noted that the publicity was "not 
particularly helpful, but not fatal," insisting that "it's not going 
to knock us off our game." 
 
NDP Laying Campaign Groundwork? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Despite its pledge to work with the government on EI, the 
NDP is increasingly positioning itself as the party trying to get 
results for Canada's unemployed, while the other parties only fight 
each other for partisan advantage and seek another expensive federal 
election.  New NDP ads feature Layton with rolled-up sleeves, ready 
to "get to work."  The NDP has also ramped up fundraising, with a 
new series of e-mail appeals. 
 
What's next? 
----------- 
 
 
OTTAWA 00000766  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  The Conservatives will remain dependent on the NDP's 
support or abstentions again on other upcoming confidence votes, 
including a budget implementation bill possibly as early as during 
the week of October 5.  The Commons will also soon vote on a Ways 
and Means motion (by definition, a confidence vote) to impose an 
export charge on Canadian lumber companies under the Softwood Lumber 
Agreement, a deal that the NDP had adamantly opposed.  Either the 
Bloc or the Liberals may be able to support this motion, however. 
 
Polls Favor the Conservatives, against an election 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8. (U) Almost three-quarters of respondents (72.6 pct) in a new 
Nanos poll were against a fall election, although 80.6 pct agreed or 
"somewhat" agreed that they "would like to see a party win a 
majority government in the next election."  PM Harper ranked first 
(32.8 pct) as the leader best able to manage a minority government, 
followed by 23 pct for Ignatieff.  Harper led Ignatieff by 
noticeable margins across the country, except in Quebec, where 
Quebecers ranked Ignatieff's skills highest at 29.7 pct, followed by 
the NDP's Jack Layton at 19.1 pct, and Harper at 18.1 pct.  A 
separate new EKOS poll indicated that shifts in the polls since the 
threat of an election emerged in August had slowed and that the 
Conservatives' lead in the polls had begun to "gel" at 36 pct, while 
Liberal support had settled at 29.7 pct and NDP support at 13.9 pct. 
 In the poll, the Liberals now lead only in the Atlantic provinces, 
although they remained in second place in Quebec (26. 4 pct to the 
Bloc's 39.6 pct).  (The poll took place before the Coderre 
resignation.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  The switch from voting for the government in the 
previous confidence vote (reftel) to mass abstentions likely 
reflects the dissatisfaction within NDP ranks of supporting the 
Conservatives, however much the rank-and-file may want the 
additional EI coverage.  It also suggests that the NDP cannot afford 
to continue even this strategy for much longer, so its MPs will 
likely be agitating for the committee to conclude its review of the 
EI legislation quickly and bring the legislation for a final vote in 
the Commons.  (The Liberal-controlled Senate will then have to 
vote.)  The Conservatives arguably have a good reason to string out 
the deliberations:  to continue governing without another election 
-- unless they have already decided that they really do want one to 
capture their stronger showing in the polls.  The Liberals, on the 
other hand, must be concerned that their internal disunity could 
drive their Quebec voters into the arms of another party in the next 
election.  One way or another, all parties must remain in virtual 
pre-campaign mode for the foreseeable future, and be sure that they 
are always ready in case the government does fall in any upcoming 
confidence vote. 
JACOBSON