09OTTAWA735
CANADIAN GOVERNMENT SURVIVES CONFIDENCE VOTE
Fri Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO9369
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHIK RUEHMT RUEHPOD RUEHQU RUEHSL RUEHVC RUEHYG
DE RUEHOT #0735 2611735
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181735Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9868
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS OTTAWA 000735 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV CA
SUBJECT: CANADIAN GOVERNMENT SURVIVES CONFIDENCE VOTE 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 719 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 709 
 
¶1.  (U)  The government of Conservative Prime Minister 
Stephen Harper on September 18 easily survived a confidence 
vote on a Ways and Means motion, with the unusual support of 
both the New Democratic Party (NDP) and the Bloc Quebecois. 
The Official Opposition Liberal Party voted en masse against 
the government for the first time in more than two years, 
reiterating its leader Michael Ignatieff's mantra that the 
party had indeed lost confidence in the government, while 
voicing support for the domestically popular home renovation 
tax credits in the motion.  (The new Liberal line is that the 
motion was in fact unnecessary, since the credits had been in 
the 2009 budget, for which the Liberals had voted, unlike the 
NDP and the Bloc.) 
 
¶2.  (U)  The fight now moves to new legislation to expand 
benefits under Canada's Employment Insurance (EI) program, 
which the Conservatives introduced in the House of Commons on 
September 16.  The Liberals moved on September 17 to obtain 
"unanimous consent" to expedite the legislation without the 
usual three readings and committee hearings in both the House 
and the Senate (the latter of which the Liberals control). 
House leaders from all four parties met on September 17 to 
discuss this possibility.  Ultimately, both the NDP and the 
Bloc indicated some dissatisfaction with the new bill, 
claiming that it was not generous enough and still needed 
committee scrutiny and debate.  Major labor union leaders 
have now begun to criticize the proposed provisions and scope 
of the bill as well.  The NDP has nonetheless pledged to 
support the government until passage of revised EI 
legislation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Comment:  Parliament will recess during the week 
of September 21 in declared deference to the G-20 meetings 
that will again take PM Harper and other key ministers out of 
the country.  The Liberals continue to voice hope that a 
consensus emerges that would enable a successful vote on EI 
before the end of the month, thus freeing the NDP from its 
temporary pledge of support for the government and therefore 
potentially enabling the Liberals successfully to introduce 
another vote of confidence on an Opposition Day o/a October 
¶1.  These Parliamentary maneuvers are well off the radar 
scope for most Canadians, but Ottawa politicos remain riveted 
by the curious ebbs and flows of these short-term tactical 
alliances.  The Canadian public continues to oppose yet 
another election by wide margins; the Conservatives say they 
don't want one, either (although they probably do, given more 
favorable poll numbers); the Liberals vow to topple the 
government (although their chances of winning an election are 
still slim, even if they would likely pick up some seats); 
the Bloc probably doesn't especially care one way or another, 
since it will likely maintain its four dozen seats); while 
the NDP probably fears an election the most, given weak polls 
and finances (although its core constituents will not 
countenance supporting the Conservatives even indirectly for 
long).  Privately, some Conservatives are now beginning to 
predict survival of the government easily through the fall, 
likely well past the 2010 Winter Olympics, and even possibly 
until even fall 2010.  However, recent events demonstrate 
that the ongoing political roller coaster will most probably 
produce still more surprises that could undermine such newly 
optimistic calculations.  The bottom line is that Canada will 
remain in virtual pre-election campaign mode for the 
foreseeable future, limiting the government's ability to pass 
Qforeseeable future, limiting the government's ability to pass 
significant legislation or to undertake bold policy choices. 
 
Visit Canada,s North American partnership community at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
 
BREESE