10OTTAWA124
CANADIAN SUPREME COURT: GOVERNMENT CAN DECIDE ON KHADR
Fri Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXYZ0024
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHOT #0124/01 0292109
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 292108Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0323
INFO ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS OTTAWA 000124 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PTER CA
SUBJECT: CANADIAN SUPREME COURT: GOVERNMENT CAN DECIDE ON KHADR 
 
REF: 09 OTTAWA 629; 09 OTTAWA 313 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In a unanimous decision on January 29, the 
Supreme Court of Canada overturned an Appeals Court order that the 
Canadian government must request the repatriation of Canadian 
citizen Omar Khadr in Guantanamo Bay from U.S. authorities. 
However, the Supreme Court also ruled that the federal government 
had breached --and continues to breach -- Khadr's constitutional 
rights, while leaving the remedy to the government's discretion. 
The mixed ruling gave a little something to each side, confirming 
the federal government's jurisdiction over foreign affairs while 
underscoring the serious violation of Khadr's rights.  The Minister 
of Justice expressed the federal government's satisfaction with the 
ruling and promised to consider any next steps.  End summary. 
 
 
 
TO SEEK REPATRIATION OR NOT 
 
 
 
¶2.  (U) The Supreme Court of Canada issued a succinct and unanimous 
19 page written ruling on January 29 in the case of Canadian 
citizen Omar Khadr (reftels), detained at Guantanamo Bay while 
facing allegations that he had killed a U.S. soldier in Afghanistan 
in 2002.  The judgment followed an expedited hearing on November 
13, 2009 of the federal government's appeal of an August 14, 2009 
Federal Court of Appeal ruling that had ordered the government to 
request Khadr's repatriation from U.S. custody.  The government had 
argued that courts lacked jurisdiction to direct the executive 
branch to act in the conduct of foreign relations.  Khadr's lawyers 
had argued that Canadian officials' complicity in the violation of 
his constitutional rights was an extraordinary circumstance that 
demanded an unprecedented remedy, e.g., that the government 
intercede with U.S. authorities to request his repatriation.  The 
full verdict is at: 
http://www.scc-csc.gc.ca/decisions/Khadr-en.p df 
 
 
 
FOUR KEY ISSUES 
 
 
 
¶3.  (U) In its January 29 ruling the Supreme Court addressed four 
issues: 
 
 
 
-- whether the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms applies to 
the conduct of Canadian officials alleged to have breached Khadr's 
constitutional rights; 
 
 
 
-- whether the conduct of Canadian officials deprived Khadr of his 
right to liberty and security of the person and, if so, whether 
this deprivation conformed to principles of fundamental justice; 
 
 
 
-- whether the repatriation remedy for Khadr was just and 
appropriate in the circumstances; and, 
 
 
 
-- the power of the courts to review and intervene on matters of 
foreign affairs to ensure constitutionality of executive action. 
 
 
 
CLEAR VIOLATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
 
 
 
¶4.  (U)  In its judgment, the Supreme Court unequivocally confirmed 
violations of Khadr's constitutional rights, reaffirming its 
separate 2008 ruling that Canadian officials had breached Khadr's 
right to life, liberty, and security of the person under Section 7 
of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms by interrogating him 
at the Guantanamo Bay facility in 2003 and 2004 and by sharing 
information from those interviews with U.S. authorities despite 
knowing that in 2004 that U.S. authorities had subjected him to 
illegal interrogation methods, including sleep deprivation.  It 
further found that his status as a minor, his detention without 
counsel, and his interrogators' awareness that he had been 
subjected to sleep deprivation were "not in accordance with the 
 
principles of fundamental justice."  The Supreme Court added that 
the conduct of Canadian officials in these interrogations "offends 
the most basic Canadian standards about the treatment of detained 
youth suspects."  Although these breaches of Khadr's rights had 
occurred in the past, the Supreme Court insisted that their impact 
"continues to this day." 
 
 
 
REMEDY UP TO GOVERNMENT TO DECIDE 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U) The Supreme Court judged that Khadr was entitled to remedy, 
but concluded that the repatriation remedy ordered by the lower 
court did not meet the test of justice and appropriateness.  It 
judged that the Federal Court of Appeal had "erred" in ordering the 
federal government to request Khadr's repatriation.  It accepted 
the federal government's argument that the executive branch must 
have flexibility in exercising its royal prerogative (exclusive 
jurisdiction) over foreign affairs, and concluded that the Federal 
Appeal Court ruling had given too little weight to that 
constitutional responsibility.  It commented that the effectiveness 
of the repatriation remedy was in any event "unclear" and that the 
court could not properly assess the impact of a repatriation 
request on Canadian foreign relations.  It also deemed it 
"inappropriate" for a court to give direction as to the diplomatic 
steps necessary to address the breaches of Khadr's rights under the 
Charter.  Finally, it cited "evidentiary uncertainties" posed by 
legal proceedings against Khadr before a U.S. military commission 
as a reason for the Canadian Supreme Court to exercise caution in 
exercising its remedial jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U) The Supreme Court warned, however, that the government "is 
not exempt from constitutional scrutiny."  Courts, it noted, had 
the responsibility "to determine the legal and constitutional 
limits within which such [executive] decisions are to be taken... 
in the case of refusal by a government to abide by constitutional 
constraints, courts are empowered to make orders ensuring that the 
government's foreign affairs prerogative is exercised in accordance 
with the constitution."  The Supreme Court determined that the most 
appropriate remedy in this case was declaratory relief and decided 
"to grant Mr. Khadr a declaration that his Charter rights had been 
infringed, while leaving the government a measure of discretion in 
deciding how best to respond."   It awarded costs to Khadr. 
 
 
 
"END OF THE ROAD?" 
 
 
 
¶7.  (U)  Nathan Whitling, one of Khadr's Canadian lawyers, told 
reporters that he was "not surprised" by the ruling, which "'cut 
down the middle."  He appeared skeptical of the impact of the 
Supreme Court's declaration, stating that he did not expect a "mere 
declaration" that Khadr's rights had been breached would "make the 
PM budge" from his policy of non-intervention in the legal case 
against Khadr in the United States.  "Practically speaking," he 
conceded, "this is pretty much the end of the road for [legal] 
assistance from the Canadian Government."  He added that Khadr's 
Canadian lawyers would hereafter concentrate on U.S. military 
commission proceedings against his client. 
 
 
 
¶8.   (U)  Official Opposition Liberal Party leader Michael 
Ignatieff underscored that the case was back in the political 
realm, arguing that the "ball is clearly in the government's court" 
and the "only thing it can't do is nothing."  Ignatieff called on 
the government to "respect" the Supreme Court's ruling, which he 
said had clearly stated that Khadr's rights were violated, and to 
repatriate Khadr. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U)  Minister of Justice Rob Nicholson noted in a statement 
that "The Government is pleased that the Supreme Court has 
recognized the 'constitutional responsibility of the executive to 
make decisions on matters of foreign affairs in the context of 
complex and ever-changing circumstances, taking into account 
Canada's broader interests'" and promised that "The Government will 
carefully review the Supreme Court's ruling and determine what 
further action is required."  The full text of his statement is at: 
http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/news-nouv/nr-cp/ 2010/doc_32474.html 
JACOBSON