08TOKYO960
AMBASSADOR AND VFM YABUNAKA DISCUSS BILATERAL
Tue Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXRO6067
OO RUEHFK RUEHKSO RUEHNH
DE RUEHKO #0960/01 0990952
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 080952Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3255
INFO RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 2204
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 2702
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL PRIORITY 8729
RUEHOK/AMCONSUL OSAKA KOBE PRIORITY 0821
RUEHKSO/AMCONSUL SAPPORO PRIORITY 7746
RUEHFK/AMCONSUL FUKUOKA PRIORITY 7152
RUEHNH/AMCONSUL NAHA PRIORITY 9532
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/USFJ  PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TOKYO 000960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2018 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR RU CH JA
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND VFM YABUNAKA DISCUSS BILATERAL 
RELATIONSHIP, REGIONAL ISSUES 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J. Thomas Schieffer per 1.4 (b/d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Recent incidents involving U.S. servicemen have 
highlighted the need for the United States and Japan to make 
efforts to strengthen grassroots public support for and 
understanding of our alliance's strategic importance, the 
Ambassador told VFM Yabunaka on April 8.  While VFM Yabunaka 
agreed that such public diplomacy would be useful, he noted 
that public support is already very strong (above 70%); 
domestic politicking aside, even the opposition would not 
attempt to alter the alliance; and, for his part, VFM 
Yabunaka constantly stresses to the press and others that 
American servicemen are far from home and are in Japan to 
defend it.  VFM Yabunaka also briefed the Ambassador on the 
recent Japan-Russia Strategic Dialogue, in which it was clear 
Russia has made a decision to pay more attention to Asia; 
noted that planning continues for Hu Jintao's early May 
visit, adding that an East China Sea deal may still be 
possible; offered his positive assessment of the PRC-proposed 
U.S.-Japan-PRC meeting framework; and, expressed his regret 
that the Host Nation Support legislation was delayed for 
political reasons, noting that it will be passed by May 3 at 
the latest.  End Summary. 
 
VFM Yabunaka Travel to Washington 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Vice Foreign Minister Mitoji Yabunaka opened his April 
8 meeting with the Ambassador by noting his plans to travel 
the next day to Washington to meet with the Deputy Secretary. 
 He expressed his hope that, as this will be his first visit 
to Washington as VFM, the Ambassador could provide some 
advice on the current mood in Washington towards Japan.  The 
VFM also plans a number of other meetings, including with the 
foreign policy advisors to the presidential candidates.  The 
VFM's hope for these is to brief these individuals on Japan's 
viewpoints and policy orientations in the Asia region. 
 
Japan-Russia Strategic Dialogue 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) VFM Yabunaka noted that on April 7 he met with Russian 
First Deputy Foreign Minister Andrey Denisov for the fourth 
Japan-Russia Strategic Dialogue.  The two had a frank 
exchange of views, and Yabunaka noted that, although Denisov 
had been presumed to be in line to replace FM Lavrov, it 
appears that Lavrov will remain in his position, and thus so 
may Denisov.  Responding to the Ambassador's question about 
Vladimir Putin's rumored attendance at the G8 summit, 
Yabunaka said that Medvedev would attend, and that Foreign 
Minister Koumura would travel to Moscow April 14 and would 
deliver the G8 invitation to Medvedev.  Yabunaka acknowledged 
that the source of the Putin G8 rumor was former Prime 
Minister Yoshiro Mori, who met with Putin in December. 
However, Putin has made clear that Russia's foreign policy is 
in Medvedev's hands. 
 
¶4. (C) It seems clear that Russia is restoking its economic 
and strategic interest in East Asia, Yabunaka continued.  One 
sign of this is the Russian Government's increased financial 
support for residents of the disputed Northern Territories. 
Another is the increased pace of high-level Russian visits to 
Japan; ""it seems they want to do something with us,"" Yabunaka 
said.  Japan has put forward its eight-point Eastern 
Siberia/Far East Initiative, which seeks to advance bilateral 
cooperation in the fields of energy, transportation, 
distribution, environmental protection and tourism.  The 
Russians are particularly interested in technology exchanges 
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.  Each area is seeing 
follow-through, and a fiber optic cable was recently 
connected between Japan and Europe (through Russia) that will 
speed up data transfer times. 
 
¶5. (C) The two sides also discussed regional issues such as 
China, and VFM Yabunaka explained to his Russian counterpart 
that all of Japan's relations in Asia, including with China, 
are grounded in the U.S.-Japan bilateral relationship.  Japan 
wishes to improve its relations with China, Russia and India 
and the rise of China has necessitated that Japan ""talk about 
this with the other players in the region.""  Denisov 
expressed an interest in regional architecture, such as the 
Shanghai Cooperative Organization, APEC (which Russia will 
host in Vladivostok in 2012) and even the East Asia Summit, 
which Russia may seek to join someday. 
 
Complicated Japanese Political Situation 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) VFM Yabunaka noted that PM Fukuda may try to visit 
Russia at the end of April, taking advantage of a Japanese 
holiday on April 29 to travel April 26-29.  Complicating this 
planning is a by-election in Yamaguchi prefecture on April 27 
that will be a bellwether of where public sentiment lies on 
renewing Japan's gasoline tax, which the ruling 
coalition-controlled Lower House could choose to re-vote on 
as early as April 29.  The political scene in Japan has been 
in disarray, the most recent example being the contretemps 
surrounding the selection of the next Bank of Japan Governor. 
 The Ambassador noted that the failure of the ruling 
coalition and opposition party to agree on a suitable 
candidate sent a terrible message at a sensitive time for the 
global economy and financial system. 
 
Host Nation Support 
------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) VFM Yabunaka expressed his regret that this kind of 
domestic political wrangling had delayed the passage of the 
legislation for Host Nation Support.  At the latest, this 
legislation will go into force on May 3, perhaps earlier if 
the opposition decides to vote it down in the Upper House, 
opening the way for the Lower House's previous passage to 
take precedence.  In response to VFM Yabunaka's question, the 
Ambassador noted that, while he did not think that the delay 
would have any practical implications on USFJ operations, it 
is nonetheless disappointing that the U.S.-Japan alliance has 
been allowed to become a political football.  VFM Yabunaka 
agreed, noting that the mass media is largely to blame for 
stirring up controversies where they do not exist, such as 
Japanese Government payments for bars and golf course 
attendants on U.S. facilities.  Many within the opposition 
Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) are also unhappy that things 
have come to this, and VFM Yabunaka expressed his hope that 
Washington understands the Japanese Government's desire that 
this delay not cause any practical problems. 
 
¶8. (C) The Japanese public is firmly behind the bilateral 
alliance, and the political games currently taking place are 
no more than opposition leader Ichiro Ozawa's attempt to use 
any means at his disposal to gain the upper hand, VFM 
Yabunaka continued.  There is ""no way"" that Ozawa is opposed 
to the security alliance, Yabunaka stressed. 
 
Incidents 
--------- 
 
¶9. (C) VFM Yabunaka expressed his appreciation for the 
Ambassador's and USFJ's quick reaction to the recent 
incidents on Okinawa and in Yokosuka.  In particular, the 
meeting with Yokosuka Mayor Kabaya went a long way.  The 
Ambassador agreed, noting that Kabaya has always tried to be 
helpful, and it was important to give him support after the 
recent taxi driver murder.  Unfortunately, some in the press 
have taken the line that somehow the SOFA did not work, the 
Ambassador noted.  That is not true.  In every aspect of this 
case, from when NCIS received word from the sailor about his 
whereabouts to during his questioning, the Japanese 
authorities were involved.  There was nothing stopping them 
from asking for anything at any step in the process.  It is 
regrettable that there is a public perception that we were in 
the way or the SOFA did not work.  Yabunaka agreed that the 
leaks and misreporting were annoying, and for its part MOFA 
tried to correct the record.  The opposition has asked for a 
revision of the SOFA, and MOFA's position is that, if there 
is a problem, show us.  But there are no problems; the system 
works, Yabunaka emphasized. 
 
Building Public Support for Alliance 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (C) On the issue of deserters, Yabunaka noted the utility 
of greater information sharing, and the Ambassador agreed 
there will always be areas in which we can make improvements. 
 As the Kanagawa Governor recently suggested, perhaps there 
is a need to examine setting up a public committee or forum 
to ensure that the responsibility of managing our important 
relationship is not limited to our two governments, but 
instead extends into local communities, the Ambassador said. 
We need to find a way to get buy-in from all concerned on the 
importance of the alliance.  Yabunaka agreed on the need to 
build public understanding about the importance of the 
alliance for Japan's security and regional stability, but was 
unsure about the format of a public forum or committee. 
Responding to the Ambassador's expression of concern that 
incidents lead to a public outcry about the American 
occupation army, VFM Yabunaka was optimistic that there is 
solid support, with more than 70% of the Japanese people 
welcoming the alliance and U.S. forces. 
 
¶11. (C) The Ambassador agreed that we have made progress in 
building understanding among the Japanese public about the 
strategic importance of the alliance, particularly with the 
rise of China and the ongoing North Korean threat. 
Nevertheless, we should try harder to connect with the 
Japanese public.  There is an unfortunate perception that 
American soldiers and sailors are animals that should be kept 
in cages, which is an attitude one would not find in the UK 
or Australia.  While we understand there is nothing the 
Japanese Government can do, we need to strengthen public 
understanding of why we are here.  Yabunaka replied that for 
the past several weeks he has met every morning with 
reporters at his home to explain the importance of the 
alliance; ""these young people are far from home to defend 
us,"" Yabunaka said he stresses.  While there may be some bad 
apples among the troops, for the most part they are good 
members of the community.  Yabunaka reiterated that the 
Japanese do not use these problems to think about the need to 
reexamine the broader bilateral relationship. 
 
¶12. (C) Responding to North American Affairs Bureau DG 
Nishimiya's comment on the possible benefit of educating the 
sailors on the George Washington before its arrival in 
Yokosuka, the Ambassador said that this kind of point of view 
is part of the problem.  It is no more okay for U.S. 
servicemen and women to commit crimes in America or Europe 
than it is in Japan; just because they are in Japan does not 
increase the chance they will commit rape or murder unless 
they are instructed not to.  While we cannot promise that 
crimes will not happen, we nonetheless need to get away from 
the idea that U.S. servicemen are bad.  VFM Yabunaka 
suggested that as the 50th anniversary of the U.S.-Japan 
security alliance approaches (2010), there will be many good 
opportunities to get the word out on the importance of the 
alliance and Japan's gratitude for it. 
 
Advice for Washington Trip 
-------------------------- 
 
¶13. (C) VFM Yabunaka sought the Ambassador's advice for his 
upcoming discussions in Washington.  The Ambassador observed 
that there is genuine interest in Washington about what is 
happening in Japan.  People are not sure what the political 
situation is and how long the current government will last. 
With the domestic political situation negatively impacting 
Japan's contribution to Operation Enduring Freedom, the BOJ 
Governor selection and Host Nation Support, there are signs 
that something is wrong, and VFM Yabunaka should try to 
explain what is right.  That is, the alliance is not in 
danger, but we are going through a time in which people are 
trying to work through the political situation.  People will 
also be interested in hearing about China and Tibet and about 
Japan's goals for the G8 summit.  Also, it would be useful to 
hear from VFM Yabunaka about DPRI, as there is increasing 
concern that it will go the way of SACO if it does not regain 
its momentum.  The Deputy Secretary may also wish to hear 
about BISTF and intelligence reform.  Under former Prime 
Minister Koizumi, it seemed that everyone was on the same 
page in Japan, but now things appear to be different, which 
is by no means a criticism of PM Fukuda, who made a good 
impression on the President.  People in Washington will want 
to know what is happening, and what are the short- and 
long-term problems, the Ambassador said. 
 
¶14. (C) Returning to the issue of managing local relations in 
areas with U.S. facilities, the Ambassador noted that under 
Okinawa Governor Nakaima's leadership, ""things are better."" 
Previous Governor Inamine was difficult and never wanted to 
talk or move beyond confrontation.  It always seemed like the 
two sides were playing roles, and it is better on Okinawa and 
elsewhere when both sides can talk candidly and publicly 
acknowledge that it is in both side's interest to improve 
relations. 
 
China, Multilateral Meetings 
---------------------------- 
 
¶15. (C) Responding to VFM Yabunaka's question about the mood 
in Washington towards China, the Ambassador noted that 
Senator Clinton had that morning called on President Bush to 
boycott the Opening Ceremony of the Olympics.  While there is 
no Japan bashing these days, it seems that within our 
political process, China bashing is generated because of 
people's concerns about the economy and lost jobs.  The Bush 
Administration has sought to engage with China, and we have 
made clear to them that our relationship with Japan is not up 
for discussion.  China accepts this, and the U.S.-China 
relationship is better than ever, the Ambassador said. 
 
¶16. (C) VFM Yabunaka noted that the Dalai Lama plans to 
transit Tokyo on April 14 on his way to the United States, 
where he has events scheduled in Seattle and Michigan.  It is 
unclear whether he will go to Washington, and the opposition 
DPJ has criticized the government for not traveling to Narita 
to meet with the Dalai Lama.  MOFA is continuing its plans 
for the May visit of Hu Jintao (likely to start on May 6), 
and Hu himself appears determined to have good relations with 
Japan.  The two sides will produce a joint paper that will be 
""short and strong"" and will not refer to the past, but 
instead will focus on the future.  However, the Tibet and 
poisoned gyoza issues are ""unfortunate,"" Yabunaka said. 
 
¶17. (C) Responding to the Ambassador's question about 
progress on joint natural resources development in the East 
China Sea, Yabunaka said he is considering travel to Beijing 
on April 14 to try to advance the issue.  It may still be 
possible to resolve before Hu's visit, Yabunaka said.  The 
Ambassador noted that the United States welcomes increased 
Japan-PRC engagement, and that working together, the United 
States and Japan can help to moderate China's behavior. 
Yabunaka said that planning is underway for a possible 
Japan-ROK-China summit later in the year, and that China has 
proposed a U.S.-Japan-China meeting framework.  VFM Yabunaka 
noted that he personally feels positively about this, but 
agreed with the Ambassador that the ROK has been the sticking 
point.  While understandable that South Korea would not want 
to be left out of multilateral meetings discussing Korean 
Peninsula issues, there are enough global and other issues to 
discuss among the United States, Japan and China -- such as 
the environment -- to make such a meeting worthwhile, VFM 
Yabunaka suggested. 
SCHIEFFER