09DHAHRAN187
SCENESETTER FOR AA/S FELTMAN'S VISIT TO THE EASTERN PROVINCE
Fri Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Consulate Dhahran
VZCZCXRO5914
PP RUEHDH
DE RUEHDH #0187/01 2051616
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241616Z JUL 09
FM AMCONSUL DHAHRAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0204
INFO RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0179
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0028
RUEHDH/AMCONSUL DHAHRAN 0270C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DHAHRAN 000187 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO NEA/EX MIRIAM SCHWEDT, 
NEA/ARP JOSHUA HARRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  7/24/2019 
TAGS: PGOV ENRG EPET SA
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR AA/S FELTMAN'S VISIT TO THE EASTERN PROVINCE 
OF SAUDI ARABIA 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Joseph Kenny, Consul General, EXEC, DOS. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
INTRODUCTION: 
------------ 
 
¶1. (SBU) The U.S. Consulate General Dhahran welcomes you to the 
Eastern Province (EP) of Saudi Arabia.  In addition to being the 
Kingdom's largest province, the EP also represents the 
industrial engine of Saudi Arabia and sits atop the world's 
largest oil reserves.  Saudi Aramco, the well-run and modern 
state oil company, is based in the EP and the Consulate enjoys 
an excellent working relationship with its executive 
management.  The EP is also the staging point for the country's 
efforts to diversify their economy into the petrochemical and 
mineral processing industries. 
 
¶2. (C/NF) The EP is home to the highest concentration of Saudi 
Shi'a in the Kingdom, the most significant minority religious 
sect representing an estimated ten percent of the population. 
The most prominent Shi'a religious and political leaders reside 
in the EP.  Earlier this year sectarian tensions resulted in 
rare public protests and demonstrations by Shi'a youth in 
several EP towns.  The potential for Shi'a unrest is of 
particular interest due to the minority sect's geographic 
location atop the Kingdom's oil wealth.  The SAG monitors the 
Shi'a closely and rarely allows unrest to progress beyond the 
initial stages. 
 
THE OIL PROVINCE: 
---------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The most important player in the EP is without question 
the government-owned oil company, Saudi Aramco.  We have 
requested a tour of their headquarters and meetings with top 
executives, including the Senior Vice President for Industrial 
Relations, Abdulaziz al-Khayyal (the CEO, Khalid al-Falih, will 
be in New York during your visit).  The USG enjoys a very close 
working relationship with Aramco, largely due to the deep 
American roots and corporate culture the company values so 
highly even today.  Many of the top management officials have 
studied and worked in the U.S.  In fact, the CEO is a 
self-proclaimed "Aggie," having completed his undergraduate 
studies at Texas A&M. 
 
¶4. (C/NF) In May 2008, the Secretary and the Saudi Interior 
Minister signed an agreement creating the Office of Program 
Management - Ministry of the Interior (OPM-MOI).  OPM-MOI is a 
State-led interagency effort to assist the Saudi MOI with 
protection of critical infrastructure, including Aramco's 
petroleum production and transport facilities.  The main aspect 
of this initiative is a new 35,000-man Facilities Security 
Force, largely trained and equipped by DOD elements, which will 
protect key critical infrastructure sites throughout the 
Kingdom.  Aramco is anxious to maintain its prerogatives and 
thus is apprehensive about having these security forces on and 
around their facilities.  These tensions between Aramco and the 
Saudi MOI on this topic are well-known and remain a sensitive 
issue for the company's executives.  Needless to say, this is an 
internal Saudi issue, and we should not be drawn into it. 
 
THE SHI'A: 
--------- 
 
¶5. (C/NF) If oil is the EP's top economic issue, then the Shi'a 
is without doubt the top political subject of the province.  The 
majority of Saudi Arabia's Shi'a live in the EP oases of Qatif 
and al-Ahsa, as well as substantial population centers in Dammam 
and al-Khobar.  Their religious and political leaders also 
reside in the EP.  The relationship between the Shi'a and the 
Saudi authorities is distrustful at best.  The Shi'a demand more 
basic rights, greater representation in the government, and 
access to educational institutions and other civic 
organizations, and have become increasingly vocal with their 
requests.  Following a February 2009 sectarian altercation 
between Saudi authorities and Shi'a worshipers in Medina, 
tensions in the EP flared resulting in public protests, 
demonstrations, and numerous arrests.  Though the situation has 
settled down in recent months, many of our Shi'a interlocutors 
describe the present state of relations with the SAG as 
troubling, and worse than it has been in years. 
 
¶6. (C/NF) In addition to our dedication to promoting 
international religious freedom, the USG is particularly 
interested in a stable Shi'a population because of their 
geographic location atop the world's largest oil reserves and 
proximity to the facilities that brings it to market. 
Furthermore, a disenfranchised Saudi Shi'a population may look 
increasingly to Iran for political support and/or ideological 
guidance. 
 
MERCHANT FAMILIES: 
----------------- 
 
¶7. (C/NF) Several of the powerful business family groups that 
dominate the EP trace their origins to modest but industrious 
Saudi employees of Aramco, encouraged by their American managers 
to become private contractors in the late 1940s and 1950s.  Many 
of the younger generations of these families have been educated 
in the U.S. and have strong relationships with the Consulate 
reaching back several decades.  Due to the important economic 
and political status of these merchant families, they have been 
invaluable contacts for our reporting efforts and often share 
informed and insightful views on a whole host of issues with 
surprising candor.  We have arranged to host a dinner in your 
honor that will include some of the EP's most notable merchant 
families should your schedule allow. 
 
ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION: 
------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) The EP also hosts the country's most substantial 
efforts to diversify the economy away from exclusively petroleum 
exports.  The so-called second and third pillars of the Saudi 
diversification strategy are petrochemicals and mineral 
processing, respectively.  The Royal Commission port city of 
Jubail and the currently underway Jubail II expansion represent 
the largest petrochemicals complex in the Middle East and have 
attracted tens of billions of dollars of private sector 
investment over the past three decades.  Also, Dow Chemical 
recently signed a joint venture contract with Saudi Aramco 
(valued at $ 22 billion) to construct a petrochemical complex in 
the Aramco coastal town of Ras Tanura.  Further to the north 
along the Gulf coast, Ras al-Zour minerals city is under 
construction and will host large-scale phosphate processing and 
aluminum smelting complexes, water desalination, and power 
generation (which will be used to meet the industrial 
requirements of Ras al-Zour as well as elsewhere in the 
Kingdom). 
 
U.S. COMMERCIAL OPPORTUNITIES: 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) While the rest of the world is still reeling from the 
economic crisis, the EP continues to see large and complex 
industrial projects move forward.  The EP accounts for one half 
of all investment in major industrial projects in the Kingdom, 
with the petrochemical city of Jubail accounting for one half of 
all foreign direct investment.  Historically, the U.S. has 
enjoyed a privileged position as the main trading partner for EP 
companies and receptivity to U.S. products and services is 
extremely high.  Despite the best efforts and hard work of our 
commercial section, there is still ample opportunity for U.S. 
businesses to prosper in the EP. 
 
VISAS:A SOURCE OF COMPLAINTS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) A popular subject that is often raised by both Saudi 
business men and Aramco employees alike is access to U.S. 
visas.  Consulate General Dhahran reinstated full visa services 
in May 2008 after a fifteen-year hiatus of very limited service, 
and has issued a total of 8,300 visas over the past 12 months. 
This has been highly successful and has been received very 
positively by the business (and student) communities of the EP. 
However, staffing shortages (we have one vice consul) and 
ever-increasing visa processing times has led some leading 
business figures to complain that the U.S. is difficult to do 
business with.  Visas will almost certainly come up in 
conversation during your visit in Saudi 
KENNY