10DHAHRAN14
CALM PREVAILS IN THE EASTERN PROVINCE AS SHIA COMMEMORATE
Sat Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2010
SECRET//NOFORN
Consulate Dhahran
VZCZCXRO5938
PP RUEHDH
DE RUEHDH #0014/01 0230841
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P R 230841Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL DHAHRAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0349
INFO RUEHZM/GCC C COLLECTIVE
RUEHDH/AMCONSUL DHAHRAN 0470S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 DHAHRAN 000014 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ARP JOSHUA HARRIS AND JEREMY BERNDT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  1/23/2020 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL INR SA YM BA
SUBJECT: CALM PREVAILS IN THE EASTERN PROVINCE AS SHIA COMMEMORATE 
ASHURA 
 
REF: A. A. 09 RIYADH 173 
     ¶B. B. 09 DHAHRAN 265 
     ¶C. C. 09 DHAHRAN 295 
     ¶D. D. 09 DHAHRAN 008 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Joseph Kenny, Dhahran Consul General, Department 
of State. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
Summary 
 
------- 
 
¶1. (S/NF) An atmosphere of calm prevailed during the Islamic New 
Year as Shia of the Eastern Province celebrated Ashura. 
Moderate leaders such as Sheikh Hassan al-Saffar drew large 
audiences to their lectures during the run-up to Ashura, with a 
particularly strong showing by youth.  Contacts note that the 
inflammatory Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, whose influence has reportedly 
dwindled in recent months, is no longer in hiding and is now 
under quasi house arrest.  Though frustrations persist and 
discrimination remains, many Shia in the EP describe the 
atmosphere as "calm" and "tolerable."  End Summary. 
 
Ashura Marked by Peaceful Commemoration 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On December 27, PolOff traveled to the predominantly Shia 
city of Qatif and the outlying Shia villages of Al-Awjam and 
Al-Gudaih to observe various Ashura processions.  (Note:  Ashura 
is a Shia day of mourning that commemorates the martyrdom of 
Hussein Ibn Ali, grandson of the Prophet Muhammad, at the Battle 
of Karbala in 680 C.E.  During Ashura, Shia religious leaders in 
the Eastern Province deliver various sermons to local audiences, 
mostly addressing societal issues, though political topics often 
receive attention, as well.  End Note.)  XXXXXXXXXXXX (protect), 
a well-connected Shia and trusted Post contact with deep roots 
in Qatif, facilitated the visit and interpreted when necessary. 
PolOff witnessed a reenactment of the Battle of Karbala in the 
village of al-Gudaih--prohibited last year (ref A)--as well as 
four different processions where participants, from young 
children to the elderly, conducted ritualistic 
self-flagellation.  (Note:  Though potentially bloody, none of 
the processions involved actual self-flagellation causing 
physical harm.  The ritual is meant to demonstrate solidarity 
with the suffering of Hussein and his family.  End Note.)  The 
Ashura processions were marked by a busy atmosphere with 
numerous spectators, heavy vehicular traffic, and relative calm. 
 Though a small police presence was visible, mostly for traffic 
control purposes, it did not interfere in the processions. 
 
Prominent Scholar A Paragon of Moderation 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) On December 23, the sixth day of the Islamic New Year, 
PolOff attended an evening lecture delivered by Sheikh Hassan 
al-Saffar in his husseiniyya (Shia community center) in Qatif. 
PolOff was joined by XXXXXXXXXXXX(protect) and XXXXXXXXXXXX (protect), Vice-President of the XXXXXXXXXXXX and lead engineer for Saudi XXXXXXXXXXXX (ref 
b).  In attendance were approximately five hundred males, many 
of them in their mid 20's and 30's.  (Note:  Contacts informed 
PolOff that females were situated in an adjacent hall, watching 
via closed circuit monitor.  PolOff is not aware how many 
females attended the lecture.  End Note.)  Al-Saffar's lecture 
addressed political violence across the world and the 
devastating toll warfare takes on mankind.  Additionally, he 
spoke about negative influences from television, music, the 
internet, and video games and their effect on societal violence. 
 He concluded his lecture with a powerful discourse on the 
martyrdom of Hussein Ibn Ali, bringing many in the crowd to 
tears. 
 
¶4. (C) The hour-long husseiniyya lectures are commonplace in the 
Shia community, but more so during Ashura when they take place 
on a daily basis, with several lectures offered throughout the 
evening by different leaders in the community.  (Comment: 
Sheikh Hassan al-Saffar is a Saudi Shia reformist leader who has 
made significant progress in communicating with Salafi leaders 
and other senior officials in Saudi Arabia.  He has come out 
strongly in favor of the SAG in recent months (ref C) and 
preached incessantly on the need for greater minority rights 
from the SAG.  He advocates peaceful coexistence with the Sunni 
majority while cautiously demanding greater tolerance for all 
religious practices, as well as increased access to government 
positions for minorities.  End Comment.) 
 
¶5. (C) On January 6, Shia contacts sent PolOff excerpts of 
various lectures delivered during the Ashura period.  Sheik 
al-Saffar, among others, spoke on topics such as the 
peculiarities of Islamic sects, the need for Muslim unity, and 
sectarian discrimination.  He emphasized the need to overcome 
the prevailing state of pessimism in reaching Sunni-Shia unity. 
Al-Saffar also praised King Abdullah's reform initiatives, 
noting that issues such as human rights and poverty, previously 
absent from the national dialogue, are more prominent under the 
King's leadership.  Al-Saffar condemned extremists in all 
parties, stating that, "among Shias, as well, there are some 
religiously extreme individuals; therefore, we have to hold our 
responsibility as we call on others to their responsibilities." 
Other prominent members of the Shia community, such as Sayyed 
Muneer al-Khabbaz, Sheikh Faisal Alawami, and Sheikh Fawzy 
al-Saif also delivered lectures.  (Note:  PolOff did not attend 
these lectures but received summarized, translated notes of 
their respective discourses.  None demonstrated inflammatory 
themes or language.  End Note.) 
 
A Shia Radical Losing Ground 
 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (S/NF) In a recent meeting with PolOff on December 22, XXXXXXXXXXXX and XXXXXXXXXXXX, without prodding from PolOff, disclosed that religious scholar Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr has 
returned from hiding in an undisclosed location to his home in 
the village of al-Awwamiya, near Qatif.  Earlier this year, 
after the Medina incident and its aftermath (ref D), al-Nimr 
called on Shia to secede from the Kingdom. (Comment:  Al-Nimr 
had been a minority voice in the Shia community before 2009.  As 
a result of ongoing state-backed violence and continued 
intolerance against the Shia community, al-Nimr's hard line 
approach found increasing support in 2009 as he was able to 
channel the frustration and discontent of the Shia community. 
In al-Awwamiya, a small village north of Qatif and one with a 
history of radicalism, he denounced the decision to engage the 
state in dialogue and made clear his belief that the Shia will 
have to fight in order to achieve a modicum of equality.  He 
subsequently went into hiding to avoid a state manhunt.  End 
Comment.)  XXXXXXXXXXXX, who also hails from al-Awwamiya and 
referred to al-Nimr as his "neighbor," said that al-Nimr is 
under quasi house arrest.  He added that the SAG chose not to 
pursue him further out of concern they would elevate his status. 
 Lacking political acumen, al-Nimr spoke out too strongly 
against the SAG, said XXXXXXXXXXXX, thereby losing credibility and his following. 
 
Comment 
 
------- 
 
¶7. (C) Though discrimination by the SAG against the Shia 
community of the Eastern Province persists, the near-boiling 
tensions that followed the Medina incident and mosque closures 
throughout 2009 appear to have abated, for the time being (ref 
D).  This year's Ashura commemoration was marked by calm, with 
no reported incidents of harassment by the Saudi authorities or 
Salafis.  Even the controversial reenactment of the Battle of 
Karbala in al-Gudaih--banned last year (ref A)--was permitted 
with no visible signs of Saudi authorities except for the 
traffic police. 
 
¶8. (S) Sheikh Hassan al-Saffar's consistent tone of moderation 
is a boon to stability in the Shia community of the EP, 
especially as Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr's influence, though limited, 
appears to have waned.  His inclusive message, advocating 
greater rights for minorities as a whole, is an important 
distinction from past demands for Shia rights specifically. 
Al-Saffar is thereby widening the appeal of his message and, 
potentially, his following.  End Comment. 
CG: JKENNY