09MONTEVIDEO381
URUGUAYAN NATIONAL HERO JOSE ARTIGAS RETURNS TO THE POLITICAL SCENE
Wed Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Montevideo
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMN #0381/01 1821232
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 011232Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9165C O N F I D E N T I A L MONTEVIDEO 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/BSC MARY DASCHBACH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/29/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UY
SUBJECT: URUGUAYAN NATIONAL HERO JOSE ARTIGAS RETURNS TO THE POLITICAL SCENE 
 
Classified By: CDA Robin Matthewman for reason 1.4 (B)  

Summary 
-------  

¶1. (SBU) Each year on June 19, Uruguayans of all political stripes celebrate the birthday of national hero Jose Artigas.  Over the past three years, President Tabare Vazquez and his Frente Amplio (FA) coalition have changed this traditionally apolitical holiday into a joint celebration of Uruguayan independence and a commemoration of the victims of political violence during the military dictatorship of 1973-85. President Vazquez used this year's celebration to announce his plans to relocate the remains of Artigas, a controversial move that appeared to energize the FA base and cause consternation among followers of Uruguay's opposition parties.  End Summary.  

Background 
----------  

¶2.  (SBU) A national holiday in Uruguay, June 19 marks the birthday of Jose Artigas, the undisputed national hero of the country and the man often referred to as the father of Uruguayan independence.  The holiday has historically been treated as a celebration of independence, in addition to the official independence day of August 25, complete with military parades and school ceremonies featuring students' oaths of allegiance to the flag.  In 2007, however, President Tabare Vazquez declared that June 19 would also become the Dia del Nunca Mas"" (Never Again Day), to commemorate the victims of political violence in Uruguay during the military dictatorship.  Many opposition groups disagreed with the decision, on the grounds that it usurps a celebration of a national hero for what opponents characterized as political gains.  However, Vazquez maintained that the remembrance of Artigas' ideals of independence and statehood created an ideal environment for the country to renew its commitment against future dictatorships.  

Celebrating Artigas by Moving his Remains 
-----------------------------------------  

¶3. (SBU) This year's ceremony was led by President Vazquez for the first time, and attended by government and military officials and diplomats, but the only presidential candidate to appear was the FA's Jose Mujica.  As is customary, Vazquez began the ceremony with the placement of a flower arrangement at the base of the monument/mausoleum of Jose Artigas in Plaza Independencia, Montevideo's central square, followed by a moment of silence, the national anthem, and a military and school parade.  There was only minimal participation by members of the opposition parties, and the usual crowds of Uruguayans watching the parade.  

¶4. (SBU) Vazquez did not speak at the event itself, but in a pre-recorded radio and television address later that evening he announced his decision to move Artigas' remains from the event site.  Couching the move as necessary out of respect for Artigas, Vazquez said that he plans to move Artigas' remains from the ""cold"" and flood-prone mausoleum built by the dictatorship in 1977 to a ""warm and dignified"" space in a presidential museum.  Vazquez will need legislative support to override a 1974 law that mandated the construction of the mausoleum and dictates the terms of the storage of Artigas' remains.  With the FA's majority in congress, he will likely get that support, but he covered all bases by postulating a direct appeal to the public via referendum if legislators fail to approve the measure.  

¶5. (SBU) The announcement met immediate resistance from the military and opposition parties (one opposition supporter responded by sarcastically asking ""Should we tear down the dams because they were built during the dictatorship?""), and there have been murmurs from congress because legislators were not consulted before the announcement.  This wouldn't be the first such move, however.  Since their repatriation from Paraguay in 1855, Artigas' remains have spent time in the customs house, the National Pantheon, a calvary battalion, and most recently the mausoleum.  Artigas' current resting place is guarded by two soldiers at all times, and is a large, modern-looking and austere room under the main plaza. While some describe it as cold and distant, others see it as majestic.  Most observers agree that Vazquez's initiative had political motives, but there are other theories too.  Some opposed to the measure have speculated that movement of the remains is merely a front for plans to free the space under the main square, for other uses, such as a parking lot. Others cite the need for better protection of the remains, referring to a dictatorship-era plot by guerrillas to steal Artigas' remains as they had stolen the historical flag of  the Uruguayan liberators, the whereabouts of which are still unknown. 
Matthewman