06MEXICO505
APOCALYPSE NOT: AMLO ASSURES AMBASSADOR HE WILL
Tue Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO7640
RR RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #0505/01 0311422
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 311422Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8608
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE51272
2006-01-31 14:22:00
06MEXICO505
Embassy Mexico
CONFIDENTIAL
06MEXICO251|06MEXICO255|06MEXICO505
VZCZCXRO7640
RR RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #0505/01 0311422
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 311422Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8608
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
TAGS: MX PGOV PINR
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MEXICO 000505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT TO USAID FOR AA/LAC, DAA/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2016 
TAGS: MX PGOV PINR
SUBJECT: APOCALYPSE NOT: AMLO ASSURES AMBASSADOR HE WILL 
HAVE A STRONG, SOUND ADMINISTRATION  
REF: A. MEXICO 251 
     ¶B. MEXICO 255 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Antonio O. Garza Jr. for reasons 1.4 (B,D) 
 
Summary 
 
¶1. (C) On 01/23, presidential candidate Andres Manuel Lopez 
Obrador (AMLO) of the leftist-Democratic Revolutionary Party 
(PRD) sat down with the Ambassador to discuss his proposals 
on a number of key issues of interest to the United States. 
Accompanied by his foreign policy advisor, Dr. Jose Maria 
Perez Gay, and economic advisor, Rogelio Ramirez de la O, 
AMLO spoke at length of his plan to stem the flow of 
immigration to the U.S. through targeted economic programs in 
return for a negotiated accord to "regularize" the status of 
Mexicans living abroad.  AMLO explained what Mexico's role in 
the international arena would be under his presidency, as 
well as his plans for major law enforcement restructuring in 
order to combat narcotics and terrorist activity more 
effectively.  He also spoke about his campaign schedule and 
what troubles he foresees in the coming months.  Humble and 
friendly, AMLO did not guarantee a victory come July, but 
instead promised to continue working hard and plowing 
forward.  His promises, though lacking in details, show AMLO 
is aware of common perceptions regarding his candidacy and 
that he tried to ease our minds.  He also set the groundwork 
to seek U.S. assistance -- if elected -- to support several 
of his main objectives.  End Summary. 
 
Taking Care of Business First, Migrants Later 
 
¶2. (C) On 01/23, the Ambassador hosted the last of three 
breakfast meetings with Mexico's top presidential candidates 
(reftels).  Assisting the Ambassador were PolCouns, 
EMINCouns, and USAID Director.  Fresh off of his morning 
half-hour infomercial, AMLO arrived ready for an ample 
discussion of key issues.  After brief introductions by USAID 
Director and EMINCouns, AMLO jumped right into the topic of 
immigration.  Stating that the rise in immigration was due 
primarily to a lack of economic growth in Mexico, AMLO 
proposed cooperation with the private sector and the U.S. on 
economic development projects as the cheapest avenue for 
stemming the flow of migrants, especially in Mexico's 
Southeast where, AMLO said, the new wave of migrants was 
originating.  He described an economic plan, primarily made 
up of large-scale infrastructure programs like highway and 
housing construction and reforestation projects, that would 
generate employment, spur economic growth, and eventually 
give Mexico the necessary leverage to negotiate an 
immigration accord to "regularize" the status of Mexicans 
living in the U.S.  In addition to private sector investment, 
AMLO will seek U.S. assistance for financing and 
accreditation from international institutions for his 
projects so that they can continue long after his term is 
over. 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador proposed that AMLO look beyond the 
economy when contemplating the immigration issue and focus on 
other areas like education, which he stated was consistently 
raised during his travels in the Southeast.  AMLO agreed, 
confirming that education was a problem everywhere in Mexico 
but especially in rural communities. 
 
Mexico Won't Join Regional Blocs 
 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador asked AMLO about Mexico's role in the 
region under his administration and what his position was on 
Cuba, Venezuela and Bolivia.  AMLO responded that the 
situations in each of those countries were different because 
of their varying economic issues, proposing that there is no 
"one" Left and that we should not forget that Brazil, 
Argentina and Chile were also considered "leftist" 
governments.  AMLO explained that Mexico would have a 
measured, prudent foreign policy that would be an extension 
of his domestic achievements.  "We must strengthen Mexico 
first," he said, calling for a less protagonistic role in 
foreign affairs.  The Ambassador explained that Mexico has a 
role to play if it wants, that it is in position to keep 
balance in the region, and that the sheer size of the country 
and economy may demand a more active stance.  AMLO admitted 
that he would be open to cooperation with Central America but 
that Mexico would generally not take the lead on multilateral 
or international initiatives.  He stressed he was  not/not 
interested in joining any "blocs", specifically Anti-American 
or "Anti-Southern" (presumably anti-Mercosur) blocs.  AMLO 
finished by explaining that he does not particularly like to 
travel and that he has never met Hugo Chavez, Fidel Castro or 
Evo Morales.  He did mention, however, that he does know a 
handful of other heads of state from his time as mayor of 
 
MEXICO 00000505  002 OF 003 
 
 
Mexico City.  While AMLO made abundantly clear foreign policy 
was not his priority, he also made clear the U.S. was a 
special case. 
 
Keeping the Peace, Together 
 
¶5. (C) Drug consumption is on the rise, noted the Ambassador, 
and counter-narcotic and counter-terrorism programs must be 
important themes of Mexico's next administration.  AMLO 
agreed and told the Ambassador that both governments must 
find ways to increase cooperation.  AMLO then laid out his 
two-fold plan for combating both issues.  First, he said, he 
wants to give the military more power and authority in 
counter-narcotics operations because it is the least corrupt 
of all of Mexico's agencies and can be the most effective. 
He pointed out, however, that this would require a 
constitutional amendment but felt strongly he could get it 
done.  He also explained that giving the military more 
authority would limit Mexico's Prosecutor General's Office 
(PGR), which AMLO considered too corrupt to have the lead on 
counter-narcotics.  The second part of the equation, 
according to AMLO, was consolidating Mexico's law enforcement 
and intelligence agencies back into the Secretariat of 
Governance (SEGOB).  He proposed doing away with the 
Secretariat of Public Security and returning Mexico's Federal 
 
SIPDIS 
Police Force (PFP) and intelligence agency (CISEN) to SEGOB. 
The plan, as AMLO stated, would help save money, cut agency 
infighting, and give SEGOB a more prominent role on internal 
issues. 
 
Keep On Rolling Along 
 
¶6. (C) AMLO appeared concerned about the campaign season that 
lay ahead, stopping well short of predicting his own  victory 
in July.  He plans to travel the entire country in three 
stages in an effort to consolidate his base and attract more 
independents.  These would be the deciding votes, AMLO said, 
and he currently holds more of them than any of the other 
candidates.  In addition, AMLO described his new daily 
television program on TV Azteca as a major campaign 
component.  The half-hour show runs from 6:00 am to 6:30 am 
Mondays through Fridays.  The show will run every weekday 
from now until the end of the campaign at a total cost of 20 
million pesos (approximately 2 million USD).  AMLO explained 
that he would appear live on the show every Monday and 
Tuesday and will have special guests appearing the rest of 
the week. 
 
¶7. (C) AMLO acknowledged the drawbacks of his two coalition 
partners, as well as the weaknesses of his own PRD.  While 
public infighting between factions of the PRD's Mexico City 
group undeniably reflected badly on him, AMLO said he was 
nonetheless pleased with PRD candidate for Mexico city Mayor 
Marcelo Ebrard.  AMLO finished by telling the Ambassador he 
would like to continue meeting with U.S. officials and that 
he wants the Embassy ready to sit down and discuss areas of 
cooperation immediately after the elections if he should win, 
emphasizing that he would not wait until January 2007 to 
start organizing his new government. 
 
Comment 
 
¶8. (C) Although lacking in concrete details, AMLO appears to 
be working toward putting the right pieces in place for a 
strong government.  The effectiveness of his government, 
however, will require the U.S. playing a key role in his 
programs.  On every issue raised, AMLO expressed his desire 
for new or increased cooperation.  This, in addition to an 
increase in private sector investment, is relevant because 
AMLO proposes cutting government spending while increasing 
social programs.  The emphasis on U.S. development and 
financing assistance is a clear sign his government cuts will 
not be enough to pay for his social programs and that an 
influx of funding from alternate sources are necessary.  It 
was also apparent that AMLO has not thoroughly thought 
through his economic/migration plan.  AMLO,s concentration 
on infrastructure projects as the key to spurring growth and 
employment overlooks many other economic areas that need 
attention by the next government if the desired results are 
to be obtained.  He believes creating jobs in Mexico and 
stemming the flow of migrants moving North is just the olive 
branch needed to negotiate a "regularization" or amnesty of 
those Mexicans already there.  Poloff met with AMLO's 
campaign coordinator the following day (septel) and explained 
that immigration policy was a domestic, congressional affair 
and that Mexico's role should be geared more toward 
controlling its border and emphasizing all legal migration 
tools.  An experienced politician, AMLO geared his discussion 
to his audience, showing his willingness to discuss the 
difficult issues and appearing open to our suggestions.  End 
 
MEXICO 00000505  003 OF 003 
 
 
Comment. 
 
 
Visit Mexico City's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/mexicocity 
 
GARZA