10ABIDJAN160
Chinese Engagement in Cote d'Ivoire; Few Potential Areas for
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO2162
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0160 0430936
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120933Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0154
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000160 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID CH IV
SUBJECT: Chinese Engagement in Cote d'Ivoire; Few Potential Areas for 
Cooperation 
 
REF: STATE 10152 
 
¶1.   (SBU)  On February 4, Pol/Econ Chief met with Lu Pang, 
Economic Commercial Counselor at the Chinese Embassy, along with 
first secretary Luo-Fa Yang to discuss reftel issues.  Both men 
said that China has very few commercial activities or assistance 
programs in Cote d'Ivoire, citing difficulties in dealing with an 
uncoordinated government where each Ministry is run by a different 
political party, and where there is no "primary channel" with which 
to deal. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In terms of development assistance, China has a small (2 
million renmimbi or $300,000 annually) program to provide 
anti-malarial drugs to Cote d'Ivoire.   Pang noted, however, that 
this program was in jeopardy, as WHO guidelines now advised against 
using some of the drugs that China had been supplying.  Instead, 
the GOCI has suggested that the Chinese help equip some hospitals, 
a request that they are considering, according to Pang.    In 
addition, China has a small rice cultivation program in Kikotou, 
and is building a hospital in Gagnoa. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  According to statistics from 1996-2006, Chinese 
investment in Cote d'Ivoire is the automobile, wood, mechanics, 
pharmaceutical, textile, and fishing sectors, and totals around USD 
30 million.  Pang reviewed this list, confirming them all except 
for a 2006 chemical plant project.   He said there had been no new 
investments since 2006, although many have been under discussion: 
"The process is too long."  One of their last major projects was 
construction of the "Maison des Deputes" in Yamoussoukro (for the 
use of the National Assembly members) in 2006, according to Pang. 
Asked about rumors that the Chinese had been given a contract to 
construct the third major bridge in Abidjan, Pang laughed and said 
that it was news to him, noting that he suspected the French would 
wind up building it.  With regards to a proposed 750 MW 
hydro-electric dam, Pang replied that the Chinese Export Import 
Bank and the World Bank have been discussing this project for three 
or four years, but have yet to finalize all the details.  He said 
the GOCI was not an obstacle to the project, however. 
 
 
 
¶4.   (SBU)  In a early February meeting with her Chinese 
counterpart, the DCM was told that the Chinese government is taking 
a wait and see attitude about further engagement in Cote d'Ivoire 
until after Presidential elections (Note:  which have been 
postponed six times, and which are currently at an impasse due to 
political wrangling.  End Note).  Given USG bilateral sanctions 
against the GOCI, chances for any meaningful collaboration between 
our two countries until after elections take place appear to be 
slim to non-existent. 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment:  Given the fact that the USG currently has 
bilateral sanctions against the GOCI, coupled with a rather 
lackluster Chinese involvement in Coted'Ivoire, it does not appear 
that there is much scope for collaboration between o 
STANLEY