10BEIJING293
PRC/IRAN: BEIJING CONTINUES TO CALL FOR PATIENCE
Thu Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5996
OO RUEHBC RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHBJ #0293/01 0351122
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 041122Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7925
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 0007
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000293 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2035 
TAGS: PREL PARM ENRG PTER MNUC IR CH BR
SUBJECT: PRC/IRAN: BEIJING CONTINUES TO CALL FOR PATIENCE 
 
REF: A. BEIJING 269 
     ¶B. BEIJING 209 
     ¶C. BEIJING 145 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Aubrey Carlson. 
Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  The PRC counsels continued patience on the 
Iran nuclear issue because it seeks a "thorough solution" to 
the problem, and it supports the removal of all 1200kg of 
low-enriched uranium from Iranian soil, according to an MFA 
contact.  PRC officials have urged Iranian counterparts in 
recent months to accept the Tehran Research Reactor (TRR) 
proposal and other P5-plus-1 overtures, and the Iranians have 
indicated interest in re-opening discussion of the details of 
these agreements, according to the MFA.  New sanctions, 
however, would have a negative effect on Iranian cooperation 
with the international community, our contact claimed.  He 
suggested that internal political pressure on Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad increases the incentive for returning 
to negotiations, and claimed that Ahmadinejad still enjoys 
the full support of Supreme Leader Khamenei.  He acknowledged 
that China is receiving expressions of concern on the nuclear 
issue from Middle Eastern diplomats, but a contact at the 
Israeli Embassy claimed that Beijing was entirely dismissive 
of these concerns.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) In recent MFA press conferences, PRC officials have 
expressed China's opposition at present to new sanctions to 
deal with the Iranian nuclear issue, calling instead for 
"flexibility and a pragmatic approach" from the international 
community (reftels).  PolOff met with MFA West Asian Affairs 
Department Iran Division Deputy Director Ni Ruchi February 3 
to discuss the issue. 
 
PRC Seeks Continued Patience and "Thorough Solution" 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3. (C) Clarifying these calls for flexibility, Ni said that a 
single year of the new approach from the Obama administration 
was not enough time to overcome 30 years of enmity between 
the U.S. and Iran.  He stressed the importance of slowly 
building mutual trust, and estimated that another 6-12 months 
would be needed to bring the Iranians around to agreeing to 
take concrete steps on the nuclear program.  He said that the 
PRC sought a "thorough solution" to the nuclear issue through 
improving mutual trust between Iran and the United States and 
Europe, and called the U.S.-Iran relationship the "major 
obstacle" in this process. 
 
PRC: Sanctions Risk Increasing Iranian Defiance 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (C) Ni claimed that based on his conversations with 
Iranian officials, he thought Tehran would not likely yield 
in the face of tougher sanctions from the P5-plus-1, but 
would instead react negatively by curbing cooperation with 
the international community.  He acknowledged that some 
pressure was needed to make the choice clear for Iran, but 
had no suggestions to offer on what kind of pressure the PRC 
could support in lieu of multilateral economic sanctions. 
PolOff stressed the importance of fully using the dual-track 
approach, including increasing pressure through meaningful UN 
Security Council action, in order to persuade Iran to take 
the path of engagement with the international community. 
 
PRC Pushing Iran to Allow Uranium to Go Abroad 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. (C) Ni argued that PRC efforts to keep the Iranians 
engaged with the P5-plus-1 had been intense in recent months. 
 He claimed that in addition to then-AFM (now-VFM) Zhai Jun's 
visit to Tehran in November, MFA West Asian and African 
Affairs Department Director General Song Aiguo had met with 
his counterparts in Tehran the week of January 25 to urge 
flexibility on the nuclear issue and a return to negotiations 
with the P5-plus-1.  He said the Iranians told the PRC 
delegations that they had not fully rejected negotiations 
with the P5-plus-1 and were willing to discuss ideas for 
processing LEU currently in Iran outside the country. 
 
PRC: Uranium Could Leave Iran in Tranches 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) According to Ni, the Iranians said that parameters for 
discussion on uranium processing could include timing, 
location, and moving the uranium out in tranches.  The PRC 
had noted the proposal from Turkey that addressed these 
concerns, Ni added, and the Iranians had told their Chinese 
counterparts that they were willing to accept the Turkish 
 
BEIJING 00000293  002 OF 002 
 
 
plan.  Ni claimed that for China, removing the 1200kg of 
uranium from Iran for processing abroad remained the goal of 
their engagement.  He suggested the P5-plus-1 discuss with 
the Iranians the details of uranium removal.  He cautioned 
that Iran would not entirely capitulate to U.S. and European 
demands, but a compromise might be obtainable.  Ni pointed to 
comments made by President Ahmadinejad on Iranian television 
February 2 indicating that he was not opposed to processing 
Iranian uranium abroad in tranches.  Ni suggested offering a 
plan under which the Iranian uranium was exported in three 
batches of 400kg each, while reiterating that removing all 
1200kg from Iran remained China's goal.  PolOff stressed that 
the TRR proposal presented to Iran accommodated Iranian 
concerns, demonstrated flexibility, and gave Iran an 
opportunity to show its peaceful intentions, and that the 
terms Iran was floating would delay the transfer of LEU out 
of Iran and not increase the confidence of the international 
community. 
 
Internal Pressure is Incentive for Negotiation 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. (C) Ni said that China assessed that Ahmadinejad remained 
under significant political pressure stemming from the June 
2009 election and subsequent unrest.  The political situation 
remained complex, he added, but the state so far was still 
able to keep the opposition movement fully under control.  He 
surmised that opposition activities would continue in the 
coming months and suggested that such activities increased 
Ahmadinejad's incentive to negotiate on the nuclear issue, 
because decreasing pressure on the nuclear issue would allow 
Ahmadinejad to focus on strengthening his position 
internally.  Ni assessed that Ahmadinejad continued to enjoy 
full support from Supreme Leader Khamenei. 
 
Little Urgency over Regional Dimension 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Israel, Saudi Arabia and other regional actors had 
expressed serious concern to the PRC over the Iranian nuclear 
program and its implications for regional security, Ni 
reported.  Without acknowledging the legitimacy of these 
arguments, Ni said that the PRC had stressed to these 
interlocutors the importance of increased transparency from 
the Iranians to make clear their intentions in developing 
nuclear technology.  He noted that Iran's cooperation with 
the IAEA had been "generally good," but was unsatisfactory in 
some areas, and Beijing had told the Iranians that they 
should discuss these areas with the P5-plus-1.  Ni argued 
that if Iran were interested in weaponizing its nuclear 
technology, it would do so in secret, but the fact that the 
regime made a public display of its progress in the nuclear 
field argued for its peaceful nature. 
 
Israeli Contact: PRC Dismissing Concerns from the Region 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶9. (C) Israeli EmbOff Guy Kivetz told PolOff February 2 that 
his Embassy had regularly over the last year articulated to 
PRC interlocutors Israeli concerns over the Iranian nuclear 
program and its profound implications for security in the 
Middle East.  He said that PRC interlocutors had never 
acknowledged the validity of this line of argument, but in 
recent months had become entirely dismissive of the argument. 
 He said that PRC officials were convinced that Israel was 
overstating the level of concern over the issue and 
internally the PRC was rejecting the conclusions of 
intelligence provided by Israel and other countries about 
Iran's technical progress on the nuclear program.  He said 
that PRC policy-makers were convinced that no country, 
including Israel, was in a position to respond with force to 
Iran's development of nuclear technology and had likely 
concluded that the development by Iran of nuclear weapons was 
acceptable. 
 
Chinese Outreach to Brazil 
-------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Brazilian Embassy Second Secretary Henri Carrieres 
told PolOff February 4 that PRC officials had met with 
Brazilian counterparts in recent weeks to articulate strong 
PRC opposition to additional sanctions at this time, 
including during a visit to China of Deputy Foreign Minister 
Roberto Jaguaribe February 2.  Carrieres declined to detail 
whether China directly sought support in the UNSC from 
Brazil, currently a non-permanent member, to prevent a 
sanctions resolution from succeeding. 
 
HUNTSMAN