10BEIJING356
FEBRUARY 9, 2010 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, IRAN,
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0345
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHBJ #0356/01 0410951
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 100951Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8065
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHVI/AMEMBASSY VIENNA 0282
RUEHSW/AMEMBASSY BERN 0827
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0015
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 0129
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV 0035
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0012
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0720UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM ETRD MNUC CH JA IR KN
 
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 9, 2010 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, IRAN, 
NATO TRANSFORMATION, ESPIONAGE, DISSIDENTS 
 
BEIJING 00000356  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 9, 2010 MFA press briefing were: 
 
--Following a meeting with Chinese Communist Party International 
Liaison Department Director Wang Jiarui, DPRK officials stated that 
North Korea is ready to continue consultations with relevant parties 
regarding the Six-Party Talks. 
 
--China has taken note of Iran's announcement it will produce 20 
percent enriched uranium. 
 
--China believes that NATO should become a center of consultation 
and security policy.  Under this transformation, NATO should consult 
with developing countries such as Brazil and China. 
 
--Regarding the arrest of U.S. citizen Dongfan Chung for economic 
espionage, China believes these charges are groundless. 
 
--China believes that under Chinese law, there are no dissidents and 
that all individuals are treated equally under the law and all that 
violate the law will be brought to justice. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. Chinese Communist Party International Liaison Department Director 
Wang Jiarui held a meeting with DPRK leader Kim Jong-il in the DPRK. 
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs Spokesman Ma Zhaoxu reported that North 
Korea was ready to continue consultations with relevant parties 
regarding the Six-Party Talks.  During that meeting, Wang provided 
greetings from Chinese President Hu Jintao and stated that China 
stood ready to strengthen its cooperation and friendship with the 
DPRK. 
 
¶3. Ma stated that China believed the issue was complex and sensitive 
and could only be solved through diplomatic and political efforts. 
Ma also stated that all parties must show flexibility to cooperate 
with other involved parties.  China was prepared to continue to 
demonstrate this view. 
 
¶4. In response to a question regarding which Chinese official would 
lead the Chinese delegation to the Six-Party Talks, Ma stated that 
"interested parties would know" once the Talks resumed.  Ma also 
confirmed that UN Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs B. 
Lynn Pascoe met with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi. 
 
Tehran's Plans to Produce 20 Percent Enriched Uranium 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. Ma said he had taken note of the media reports that Iran would 
begin to produce 20 percent enriched uranium for the Tehran Research 
Reactor (TRR) and hoped that relevant parties would exchange views 
on the draft text proposed by the IAEA and would reach common ground 
at an early date. 
 
¶6.  Regarding sanctions proposed by the U.S. and France, Ma stated 
that the P5-plus-1 had already discussed the proposal and he hoped 
that relevant parties would step up and push for continued 
negotiations. 
 
¶7. Ma addressed this question several times from reporters 
unsatisfied with his answer.  However, he provided no additional 
clarification. 
 
NATO Transformation 
-------------------- 
 
¶8. China believed that NATO should become a center of "consultation 
and security policy."  Under this transformation, NATO should 
consult with developing countries, such as Brazil and China.  Ma 
added that China hoped this transformation would build "a new 
strategic vision."  He added that the transformation would benefit 
international peace and social stability and that China and NATO 
would continue engagement. 
 
Espionage 
--------- 
 
¶9.  Referring to the announced sentence for espionage levied against 
former Boeing engineer Dongfan "Greg" Chung, Ma declared that 
allegations accusing China of conducting espionage in the United 
States were groundless.  He stated that parties fabricating such 
accusations had ulterior motives. 
 
BEIJING 00000356  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
Dissidents 
---------- 
¶10. In response to a question regarding the case of human rights 
activist Tan Zuoren, who was sentenced to 5 years in prison for 
"inciting subversion of state power", Ma stated that he did not know 
about the case.  However, he added that China would handle all such 
cases according to the law. 
¶11.  In response to a follow on question about the treatment of 
dissidents in China who go missing in police custody, Ma stated that 
there were no dissidents in China and that all individuals were 
treated equally under the law.  He added that any individual who 
violated Chinese law would be brought to justice. 
(Note: The questions and answers regarding Tan Zuoren's arrest and 
the treatment of dissidents were not carried in the MFA's transcript 
on the Internet.) 
 
China's Reaction to Taiwan Arms Sales 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. When asked if China's reaction to the Taiwan arms sale was an 
attempt to seek greater leadership in the world, Ma stated that such 
allegations were untenable.  He continued by noting that Foreign 
Minister Yang on February 5 in Munich had stated that China promoted 
an independent policy of peace, guided by the 5 principles of 
peaceful co-existence.  He stated that China believed all countries 
were equal, regardless of their size or power, and that no countries 
should interfere in another's internal affairs. 
 
¶13. Ma added that China was still a developing country that had a 
long way to go before realizing modernization.  He stated that China 
continued to play a constructive role in the world and only wanted 
to pursue peaceful development, not hegemony. 
 
Recent Elections 
---------------- 
 
¶14. Asked about China's reaction to recent elections in Costa Rica 
and the Ukraine, Ma stated that China had noticed these elections 
were peaceful and congratulated each candidate on their victory. 
 
¶15. Ma added that President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao had 
delivered congratulations to relevant parties in Costa Rica and 
hoped to increase trade and economic relations.  Ma maintained that 
China hoped the two countries could strengthen economic and business 
ties. 
 
¶16. Ma stated that Ukraine was a friendly country and China hoped to 
see economic development, social stability, and increased 
relations. 
 
Copenhagen Accord 
----------------- 
 
¶17. Asked about press statements claiming that China did not want to 
be associated with the Copenhagen accord, Ma stated that China had 
already submitted its climate change measures.  Ma observed that the 
NDRC had clearly explained China's policies and suggested that 
interested parties could refer to this already published material. 
 
Xinjiang Websites 
----------------- 
 
¶18.  When asked why China's Xinjiang autonomous region continued to 
have restricted Internet access, Ma stated that such a question was 
not under the purview of the MFA and that interested parties should 
contact relevant authorities.  However, Ma assured the reporters 
that China had a free and open Internet. (Note: This item was not 
carried in the MFA transcript on the Internet.) 
 
Indian Missile Tests 
-------------------- 
 
¶19.  In response to a question about India's successful February 7 
test of an Agni III long range missile, Ma only stated that China 
and India maintained strong bilateral relations and that such tests 
would not affect the relationship. 
 
Haiti Medical Team 
------------------ 
 
¶20.  Asked to comment on China's efforts in Haiti, Ma stated that 
 
BEIJING 00000356  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the Chinese medical team had arrived in Haiti on 25 January 2010. 
As of February 5, the team had treated 3,260 individuals, 
distributed over 20,000 published materials on epidemic prevention 
and had maintained exchanges with the WHO and other international 
bodies. 
 
¶21. Ma added that the Chinese team was the only medical team to 
practice an "integrated approach to treatment and disease 
prevention."  He told the journalists that the U.N. had thanked 
China for its support and efforts. 
 
Other News 
---------- 
 
¶22. When asked about any connection between the Taiwan arms sales 
and China's imposition of anti-dumping duties on imports of U.S. 
chicken parts, Ma maintained that there was no connection between 
the two.  He suggested that questions related to chicken imports 
should be directed to the Ministry of Commerce.  And when asked 
about melamine-tainted milk powder, Ma suggested that questions be 
directed to relevant authorities. 
 
 
HUNTSMAN