10BEIJING362
MEDIA REACTION: COLOR REVOLUTION, IRAN, INTERNATIONAL
Thu Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1047
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0362 0420815
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110815Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8079
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000362 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: COLOR REVOLUTION, IRAN, INTERNATIONAL 
RELATIONS THEORY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. COLOR REVOLUTION 
 
"'Color Revolution' is a democratized political game" 
 
The official Communist Youth League newspaper China Youth Daily 
(Zhongguo Qingnianbao) (02/11) (pg 5): "In fact, the 'color 
revolution' is none other than 'non-normal regime change' carried 
out through the interference of external forces.  It is a political 
game of great powers seeking the best local agent for their 
interests.  In fact, 'color revolution' has nothing to do with 
democracy, but rather is all about power.  As initiators of 'color 
revolutions,' the 'color revolutionary heroes' know exactly that 
'color revolutions' are battles for power under the pretext of 
democracy.  As advocates of 'color revolutions,' the United States 
and Europe know very well that 'color revolutions' are geopolitical 
battles under the pretext of democracy.  But as participants of 
'color revolutions,' the people in the 'colored countries' have had 
to bear on their own the sweet and sour of the 'color 
revolutions.'" 
 
¶2. IRAN 
 
"China will not answer the multiple-choice question produced by the 
West" 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/11)(pg 14): "It 
seems that China has a choice to make as to whether to support or 
oppose sanctions on the Iran issue.  This is a false impression. 
China will not answer the question.  What China should do now is add 
choices to this question.  China's stance of favoring the 
continuation of  negotiations with Iran reflects the Chinese 
people's public opinion, and as such China will not change [its 
opinion]  no matter if the West favors it or continues to apply 
pressure on China to change.  The West always intended to depict 
China as exclusively aiming at profit in Iran.  It is natural and 
understandable that China tries to protect its own interests.  But 
meanwhile, China is also a country emphasizing principles.  China 
will not interfere in other countries' internal affairs according to 
its principle.  China opposes sanctions, which is the stance of the 
majority of developing countries, since China was also the victim of 
sanctions in its history.  History also tells us that sanctions 
seldom succeed.  Take the Iran and Afghanistan issue for example. 
China is not isolated on the Iran issue as many developing countries 
support it.  China should have its voice heard on how to warn Iran 
and how intense of the warning should be." 
 
¶3. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS THEORY 
 
"New changes to the theory of international relations" 
 
The official Communist Party People's Daily (Renmin Ribao)(02/11)(pg 
23): "The occurrence of the international financial crisis has lead 
to significant changes not only in the world, but also in western 
leadership and its theory of contemporary international relations. 
The changes occurred in three aspects: First, all countries' views 
on interests reflects a focus both on an individual country's 
interest and mankind's common interest as well.  Non-nation 
action-producers, international organizations, multinational 
companies and non-governmental organizations have become more active 
than countries as a unit on global issues.  Second, the change of 
action-producers leads to development of both competition and 
cooperation.  International cooperation in the post-crisis era has 
been an obvious characteristic of the economic globalization era, 
developing from 'hard structure' to 'soft mechanism.'  Developed 
countries and developing countries both emphasize the importance of 
stability and order during and after the crisis.  They are gradually 
reforming current international organizations and mechanisms. 
Third, the diversity of the world and the democratization of 
international relations are promoting the diversified development of 
international relations theory.   The basic view points of 
international relations theory will begin to truly break through 
Western civilization's dominance.  The values based on Chinese, 
Islamic and Indian civilizations will add new elements now and bring 
about substantial reform regarding fundamental international 
relations theory.  Diplomatic theories with China's characteristic 
will play a far-reaching role in the coming into being of the 
world's international relations theory along with China's rise in 
strength. " 
 
HUNTSMAN