10BOGOTA400
Passport Fraud: Tales of the Sophisticated and
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #0400/01 0341757
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031756Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2483
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMAUNCLAS BOGOTA 000400 

SIPDIS 
STATE FOR CA/PPT, CA/FPP AND WHA/AND 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CPAS SMIG KFRD KCSY CO
SUBJECT: Passport Fraud: Tales of the Sophisticated and 
Unsophisticated 

------- 

SUMMARY 

------- 



¶1.  Over a three week period in January, the Fraud Prevention Unit 
(FPU) in Bogota investigated three separate incidents of US 
passport fraud.  Two involved attempts to smuggle alien children, 
while the third was a case of an American fugitive assuming a 
different identity to avoid detection by US law enforcement.  Two 
cases were spotted thanks to airline personnel and Colombian 
immigration officials, the third due to information received in the 
FPU.



------------------------- 

Unsophisticated Imposters 

------------------------- 



¶2.  On January 4, Avianca Airlines notified FPU of the case of a 
sixteen-year old imposter who was traveling alone.  Avianca
referred the case to Colombian immigration officials (DAS) who 
agreed that the passenger (presumably a Colombian national) was not 
the rightful bearer of the US passport.  DAS turned the passport 
over to FPU. FPU requested that the minor and his Colombian father 
present themselves at the Embassy to confirm the teenager's 
identity, but the family has failed to show.  The passport has been 
cancelled and local prosecutors are pursuing possible criminal 
charges against the minor's Colombian father for human smuggling. 



¶3.  On January 18, DAS notified FPU of a twenty-year old US citizen 
who under questioning admitted to being an imposter.  The subject 
remained in DAS custody until he was deported on January 20 under 
his true identity and on an emergency passport issued by the 
Embassy.  US law enforcement checks on the individual revealed that 
he was a wanted person.  FPU worked closely with DHS and USSS to 
have the individual arrested upon arrival in the United States. 



---------------------------- 

Sophisticated Passport Fraud 

---------------------------- 



¶4.  The third case of fraud revealed a much more sophisticated 
scheme.  On January 14, an informant detailed the mala fide travel 
intent of a family of four.  The individual told FPU that a 
nine-year old Colombian national had obtained a US passport in the 
name of another individual.  Using PIERS and the Consolidated 
Consular Database (CCD), FPU discovered that the photograph in both 
a denied visa record and the US passport application were of the 
same child.  In other words, a US passport containing the 
biographical data of a US citizen child bore the photograph of the 
Colombian child who would attempt to use it.



¶5.  FPU believes that the child's six-year old sister succeeded in 
traveling to the US in December under the same scheme.  However, 
because we do not know the identity she used - and existing 
consular systems do not allow for facial recognition on demand 
using photographs from visa records - this could not be confirmed. 
The father of the children allegedly has been in the US illegally 
for several years.  The mother intended to follow her son to the US 
by traveling to Mexico and then crossing the border with the 
assistance of a smuggler. 



¶6.  With the information provided by the walk-in individual, FPU 
referred the case to the Assistant Regional Security 
Officer-Investigator (ARSO-I).  ARSO-I worked closely with the 
airlines and Colombian immigration to flag the travelers at 
check-in. Diplomatic Security's (DS) Colombian vetted law 
enforcement unit confiscated the fraudulently obtained passport and 
detained the US citizen adult who was accompanying the child. 



¶7.  The AmCit adult has since been charged in Colombian courts with 
human smuggling of a minor.  The child's mother is also under 
investigation and will likely be charged for human smuggling. 
Furthermore, the vetted unit discovered that the US passport of the 
child had a false Colombian immigration stamp; the officer 
responsible for that stamp is now under investigation for 
corruption. 



¶8.  The ARSO-I will refer the case to the DS Los Angeles Field 
Office for further investigation once the investigation by the DS 
Colombian vetted unit is complete.  This investigation will include 
a review of policies and procedures to identify any existing 
irregularities or vulnerabilities at the passport acceptance 
facility. 



------- 

COMMENT 

------- 



¶9.  FPU does not have evidence that this sudden spike in passport 
fraud is anything but a coincidence.  In FPU's on-going training of 
airline personnel and immigration officers we will continue to 
emphasize the security features of US passports and the importance 
of being on the look-out for imposters. 



¶10.  The last case, however, is particularly disturbing as the 
would-be traveler was in possession of an authentic unaltered US 
passport bearing his photograph.  The personal appearance 
requirement instituted in 2004 for all passport applicants did not 
catch that the photograph on the application did not match the 
child actually appearing.  As the Department continues to roll-out 
new technologies to enhance the security of passports, it bears 
mention that facial recognition technology that runs passport 
applicants against visa records would likely have caught this fraud 
as the child had previous visa applications in the Consolidated 
Consular Database.
BROWNFIELD