10CHENGDU30
YUNNAN CHRISTIANITY GROWING, GOVERNMENT ATTITUDE IMPROVING
Thu Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO0339
OO RUEHGH
DE RUEHCN #0030/01 0351031
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041024Z FEB 10 ZDS
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3730
INFO RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4454
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000030 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y - 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL, EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PINR SOCI CH
SUBJECT: YUNNAN CHRISTIANITY GROWING, GOVERNMENT ATTITUDE IMPROVING 
 
CHENGDU 00000030  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The number of Christians in Yunnan Province 
continues to grow, both among government-approved congregations 
and illegal "house churches," the Pastor of a large church in 
Kunming told us recently.  80 percent of adherents in Yunnan 
belong to ethnic minorities, though Christianity is spread 
fairly evenly across the province.  The government's attitude 
toward religion is improving, though it continues to "hit hard" 
against house churches, and appears to favor "traditional" 
Chinese religions over Christianity.  Though himself an 
important figure in Yunnan's official church, the pastor said 
both government-approved and house churches are necessary, and 
that they should be united in their desire to be left alone by 
the government.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Consul General and PolEconOff met January 18 with Jing 
Jiuwei, pastor of the Kunming City International Trinity Church. 
 A third-generation Christian originally from Hebei whose uncle 
was a house church leader, Jing graduated in the 1980s among the 
first class of a government-approved seminary in Beijing before 
moving to Yunnan, where he now presides over a very large 
government-approved church in Kunming (i.e. part of the Three 
Selfs Patriotic Protestant Association).  (Note: In 2007, 
ConGenOff visited St. John's, another large Three Selfs church 
in Kunming, see ref A.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
Christianity Popular, Growing in Yunnan 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) There are currently roughly 800,000 Christians in Yunnan, 
Jing said, making it among the top ten Chinese provinces for 
numbers of Christian adherents.  (Note:  Official government 
statistics report the number to be over one million.  End Note.) 
 Reasons for the popularity of Christianity in Yunnan include 
extensive foreign contact dating to the 19th century, as well as 
the religion's popularity among China's ethnic minorities -- 80 
percent of Yunnan's Christians belong to ethnic minorities, Jing 
said.  Geographic distribution of Christians across the province 
is fairly even, he added.  (Note: A 2003 Kunming Religious 
Affairs Bureau report on the religious situation in Kunming 
sketched the city's religious demographics.  The report counted 
in Kunming and adjacent counties subordinate to Kunming "more 
than 350,000 religious believers or about 7.2 percent of 
Kunming's population.  These people include believers in 
Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, Protestant Christianity, and 
Catholicism.  About 60 percent of believers belong to national 
minorities."  Ref B describes Party and government strategies 
for controlling religious communities in Kunming and the 
challenges they face.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) In the provincial capital of Kunming, there are 
currently 50-60,000 Christians, including both those who attend 
the government-approved Three Selfs churches (self-governing, 
self-financing, and self-propagating) and illegal "house 
churches."  Jing said he is not familiar with every house church 
in the city, but his wife, who runs his church's religious 
bookshop, frequently meets people who mention they belong to 
house churches of which Jing was previously unaware.  Growth 
rates among government-approved and house churches are about the 
same, he noted, increasing by about 10 percent per year. 
 
 
 
¶5. (U) Jing's own congregation has doubled in size in the past 
five years, growing to 6,000 -- so many that they needed to 
build a bigger church.  (Comment:  Jing's existing three-story 
church can fairly be described as massive, with a huge main 
floor and a sanctuary with two large theater-type balconies 
reachable by elevator.  End Comment.)  The old church had a 
maximum capacity of 600, whereas the new one can hold 1,700 
during any of its three Sunday services.  Since the new church 
was built, more people have started coming, he said, though some 
just out of interest in the attractive building itself.  Every 
Christian group in Kunming is working hard to attract new 
followers, Jing continued, and his own congregation is starting 
to see more people with advanced degrees showing interest, 
though in terms of age the congregation remains evenly split 
among young, middle-age, and older attendees. 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000030  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
 
¶6. (U) Jing noted that in addition to a government-approved 
seminary in Kunming, others exist in the Yunnan cities of Dali, 
Baoshan, Nujiang, and Qujing.  The Kunming program runs for 
two-three years, with a total school size of about 100 students 
(just over 30 students in each class); each student must be 
approved by the government. 
 
 
 
Government Attitude Toward Christianity Improving 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The PRC government's attitude toward Christianity is 
getting progressively better, Jing said, mostly because 
officials realize they cannot contain the religion's growth. 
The government is, however, still "hitting hard" at the house 
churches.  Jing gave a few examples, including the case of a 
friend of his who was jailed in Lifeng City in Shanxi Province 
for organizing house churches.  The government's attitude toward 
Buddhism and Daoism, as "traditional" Chinese religions, is 
better than that toward Christianity, a foreign import, he said. 
 (Note: Buddhism, too, is a foreign import from India, though 
albeit a much earlier one.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Commenting on his own relations with city and 
provincial authorities, Jing said he had a very good 
relationship with Kunming Vice Mayor Du Ming (ref C).  Du's 
attitude toward religion in recent years has been very good, 
particularly toward Christianity.  Jing repeated a statement by 
Du regarding his desire to build more churches instead of jails, 
echoing Du's remarks to Consul General during a September 
meeting.  Jing also said Kunming Party Secretary Qiu He is doing 
many good things for the city in terms of development and, like 
Du, has a positive attitude toward religion. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) A current challenge associated with the church's 
growth, Jing said, is the need for more space for worship. 
Christian leaders in Kunming are currently, for example, renting 
a house for a new government-approved church at the cost of RMB 
100,000 (USD 15,000) per year.  Jing recounted a story from 
2007, when he met with Du and several other government officials 
at the church and raised this very topic.  In front of 200 
people, Du asked Jing much land the church needed, to which Jing 
replied, "Whatever land you give me, I'll fill."  Du offered 
them 10 mu (roughly 0.667 hectares) at the market price of RMB 
400,000 per mu.  When Du asked whether the church had this much 
money, Jing said no, but if the government would provide the 
land for free, the congregation would use its own funds to build 
a new church building.  Du agreed.  The church has yet to 
receive the land, but Jing is convinced the deal will be 
honored. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Jing's only complaint toward the government, in 
addition to comments about "hitting hard" against house 
churches, was in regards to government interference in church 
decisions over selecting leaders for Three-Self Patriotic 
Movement churches.  Jing said both the government-approved and 
house churches have their good and bad points, but "both are 
necessary."   "We can eat together and neither want the 
government beating us down."BROWN