10HONGKONG304
SUBMISSION FOR 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT:
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO9423
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHHK #0304/01 0530952
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 220952Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9672
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 12 HONG KONG 000304 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G- LAURA PENA, DRL, INL, PRM, EAP/RSP, 
EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
KMCA, HK 
SUBJECT: SUBMISSION FOR 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT: 
HONG KONG 
 
REF: A. 10 SECSTATE 2094 
     ¶B. 10 HONG KONG 76 
 
¶1. (U) Per reftel A, the following are post's contributions 
to the tenth annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report for 
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) of the 
People's Republic of China.  Subheadings and answers 
correspond to questions posed in paragraphs 25-30 of reftel 
¶A. 
 
 
Para 25: THE COUNTRY'S TIP SITUATION 
------------------------------------ 
 
-- A. What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
human trafficking?  What plans are in place (if any) to 
undertake further documentation of human trafficking?  How 
reliable are these sources? 
 
(SBU) The Hong Kong government (HKG), human rights, labor, 
and migrant workers' non-government organizations (NGOs) all 
maintain a high level of interest and scrutiny on TIP-related 
issues.  The HKG responds promptly to Post's requests for 
information.  NGOs regularly share their findings and 
observations with Post.   Information from this wide range of 
sources has generally been reliable. 
 
-- B. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for men, women, or children subjected to 
conditions of commercial sexual exploitation, forced or 
bonded labor, or other slave-like conditions?  Are citizens 
or residents of the country subjected to such trafficking 
conditions within the country?  If so, does this internal 
trafficking occur in territory outside of the government's 
control (e.g. in a civil war situation)?  From where are 
people recruited or from where do they migrate prior to being 
subjected to these exploitative conditions?  To what other 
countries are people trafficked and for what purposes? 
Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for each group 
of trafficking victims.  Have there been any changes in the 
TIP situation since the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in 
destinations)? 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong is not a significant point of origin, 
transit, and/or destination for internationally trafficked 
men, women or children.  Sex trafficking cases detected by 
the government, NGOs, and foreign consulates usually involved 
women recruited from rural areas of mainland China and 
Southeast Asian countries who believed they would be employed 
in restaurants, bars and hotels, but upon arrival were 
coerced into prostitution through debt bondage or physical 
coercion.  Women, primarily from mainland China and Southeast 
Asia, continued to travel to Hong Kong of their own volition 
to engage in sex work. 
 
(SBU) Some foreign domestic workers (FDWs), particularly 
those from Indonesia, face high levels of indebtedness 
assumed in their home countries as part of the terms of 
employment, which can in some cases lead to situations of 
debt bondage if unlawfully exploited by recruiters or 
employers. 
 
-- C. To what kind of conditions are the trafficking victims 
subjected? 
 
(SBU) While many women come to Hong Kong willingly to engage 
in prostitution, previously documented cases suggest a small 
number are lured by criminal syndicates or acquaintances and 
deceived about the nature of their future work.  Once in Hong 
Kong, they are forced into prostitution under conditions of 
debt bondage or physical coercion.  Traffickers sometimes 
hold onto the women's travel documents until debts incurred 
for travel to Hong Kong and for accomodations and subsistence 
while in Hong Kong are paid. 
 
-- D. Vulnerability to TIP: Are certain groups of persons 
more at risk of human trafficking (e.g. women and children, 
boys versus girls, certain ethnic groups, refugees, IDPs, 
etc.)?  If so, please specify the type of exploitation for 
which these groups are most at risk (e.g., girls are more at 
risk of domestic servitude than boys). 
 
(SBU) Previously documented trafficking cases have typically 
involved women from poor rural areas of mainland China and 
Southeast Asia, particularly Thailand and the Philippines. 
 
-- E. Traffickers and Their Methods: Who are the 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  002 OF 012 
 
 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business 
people?  Small or family-based crime groups?  Large 
international organized crime syndicates?  What methods are 
used to gain direct access to victims?  For example, are the 
traffickers recruiting victims through lucrative job offers? 
Are victims sold by their families, or approached by friends 
of friends?  Are victims "self-presenting" (approaching the 
exploiter without the involvement of a recruiter or 
transporter)? If recruitment or transportation is involved, 
what methods are used to recruit or transport victims (e.g., 
are false documents being used)?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved with or 
fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic 
individuals? 
 
(SBU) Previously documented trafficking cases in Hong Kong 
and anecdotal accounts from NGOs suggest criminal syndicates 
sometimes facilitate illegal migrants entering Hong Kong with 
fraudulent documents and/or establishing themselves in the 
city.  Information from NGOs continues to suggest women are 
approached by acquaintances from their home village/town and 
promised service industry jobs such as waitressing, foot 
massaging, car washing, and cleaning.  However, upon arrival, 
they find themselves forced into prostitution in order to pay 
back significant debt incurred in coming to Hong Kong. 
 
 
Para 26: SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP 
EFFORTS 
-------------------------- 
------------------------------------ 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that human trafficking 
is a problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
(SBU) The Hong Kong government acknowledges occasional cases 
of labor exploitation of FDWs might occur, but maintains TIP 
is not a systemic problem in the territory. While the HKG 
contends trafficking cases continue to be rare in Hong Kong, 
it also insists its law enforcement agencies are willing and 
capable of utilizing all relevant laws and tools to pursue 
trafficking crimes when identified. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in efforts to 
combat sex and labor trafficking - including forced labor - 
and, which agency, if any, has the lead in these efforts? 
 
(SBU) The Joint Investigative Team (JIT) on Human Smuggling, 
formed in 1998 to combat organized human smuggling, 
coordinates Police, Immigration and Customs Department 
enforcement efforts and maintains links with private sector 
organizations, NGOs and local and international bodies 
involved in combating human smuggling.  They also monitor the 
implementation of the government's anti-trafficking policies 
and recommend appropriate strategies and tactical responses. 
 
(SBU) The Security Bureau (SB) has policy responsibility for 
illegal immigration and TIP and administrative control over 
the police, customs and immigration departments which are 
responsible for enforcing laws used to combat trafficking. 
 
(SBU) The Social Welfare Department (SWD) and the Hospital 
Authority (HA) are responsible for coordinating and 
implementing victim support and assistance programs.  The 
Labor Department oversees policies on FDW, handles complaints 
filed by FDWs, and carries out awareness and education 
campaigns on FDW rights. 
 
-- C. What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address these problems in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
(SBU) With a sophisticated legal system, a highly 
professional law enforcement apparatus and adequate funding, 
the HKG has the infrastructure to address TIP problems. 
However, police officials have often pointed to a victim's 
unwillingness to press charges as a major obstacle in their 
efforts to pursue TIP offenders. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, victim protection, and prevention) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, its 
assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  003 OF 012 
 
 
 
(SBU) The Security Bureau (SB) regularly reviews and closely 
monitors the performance of the law enforcement agencies' 
(LEAs) anti-trafficking efforts.  LEAs are expected to 
carefully document all cases where trafficking is suspected. 
SB monitors daily police reports for confirmed or suspected 
trafficking cases and seeks further details from the 
appropriate police unit for follow-up and reporting.  When 
reviewing deportation orders, SB is alert to possible 
trafficking victims amongst the proposed deportees.  The Hong 
Kong Police (HKP) provides SB with a quarterly "Trafficking 
in Women" report.  HKP's Organized Crime and Triad Bureau 
(OCTB), the unit responsible for investigating human 
trafficking cases, also produces biannual reports for the 
JIT.  While the above reports are for internal consumption, 
the HKG continues to respond promptly to Post's requests for 
information throughout the year. 
 
-- E. What measures has the government taken to establish the 
identity of local populations, including birth registration, 
citizenship, and nationality? 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong's Registration of Persons Ordinance (Cap. 17) 
and its subsidiary regulations require the mandatory 
registration of all individuals for the issuance, possession, 
production and application of Hong Kong Identification cards. 
 Birth and death registrations are governed by the Births and 
Deaths Registration Ordinance (Cap. 174).  Chinese citizens 
who have the right of abode in the Hong Kong SAR and hold 
valid Hong Kong Permanent Identity Cards are eligible for the 
HKSAR passport. 
 
--F. To what extent is the government capable of gathering 
the data required for an in-depth assessment of law 
enforcement efforts?  Where are the gaps?  Are there any ways 
to work around these gaps? 
 
(SBU) The Security Bureau oversees all the law enforcement 
entities involved in fighting human trafficking and is 
capable of gathering the data needed for an in-depth 
assessment of law enforcement efforts. 
 
 
Para 27: INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
----------------------- ------------------------------ 
 
For questions A-D, posts should highlight in particular 
whether or not the country has enacted any new legislation 
since the last TIP report. 
 
-- A. Existing Laws against TIP: Does the country have a law 
or laws specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons -- 
both sexual exploitation and labor?  If so, please 
specifically cite the name of the law(s) and its date of 
enactment and provide the exact language (actual copies 
preferable) of the TIP provisions.  Please provide a full 
inventory of trafficking laws, including non-criminal 
statutes that allow for civil penalties against alleged 
trafficking crimes (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws 
against illegal debt). Does the law(s) cover both internal 
and transnational forms of trafficking?  If not, under what 
other laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are 
there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of force, fraud, or coercion?  Are 
these other laws being used in trafficking cases? 
 
(SBU) While Hong Kong does not have a comprehensive law 
prohibiting all forms of trafficking, specific provisions in 
the Crimes Ordinance (Sections 129 and 134 of Cap. 200; July 
1, 1997) and the Offences Against Persons Ordinance (Cap 212, 
July 1, 1997) enable law enforcement authorities to take 
action against sex trafficking crimes.  Section 129 of Crimes 
Ordinance makes it an offense for a person to take part in 
"bringing another person into, or taking another person out 
of, Hong Kong for the purposes of prostitution," regardless 
of whether the other person consented, knew the purpose, or 
received any advantage.  This offense is punishable by up to 
10 years' imprisonment. Section 134 criminalizes "detention 
for intercourse or in a vice establishment."  It cites " a 
person who in any manner or by any means detains another 
person against his or her will (a) with the intention that 
the other person shall do an unlawful sex act; or (b) on any 
premises or vessel, or in any place, kept as a vice 
establishment" shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 
liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for 14 
years.  Additionally, under the Offences Against Persons 
Ordinance, traffickers who have detained a person against 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  004 OF 012 
 
 
his/her will may be subject to heavier penalties, up to a 
maximum of life imprisonment. 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong uses its Employment and Theft Ordinances to 
prosecute labor violations and related offenses.  Hong Kong's 
Bill of Rights Article 4 bans forced and bonded labor.  Under 
the Employment Ordinance (EO, Cap. 57), employers who violate 
contract terms or minimum wage requirements (the latter only 
applies to FDWs) can be fined and imprisoned.  Any employer 
who pays less than the legal minimum wage for FDWs can be 
fined HKD 350,000 (USD 44,870) and imprisoned up to three 
years.  Employers or employment agencies who illegally 
withhold a FDW's passport can be prosecuted for blackmail 
under the Theft Ordinance (maximum penalty 14 years) or for 
"obtaining property by deception" by which "any person who by 
any deception dishonestly obtains property belonging to 
another, with the intention of permanently depriving the 
other of it, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 
liable on conviction upon indictment  to imprisonment for 10 
years." 
 
(SBU) The Employment Ordinance regulates the operation of 
employment agencies (EAs) in Hong Kong.  An EA is only 
allowed to charge job-seekers (including FDWs) a commission 
of not more than 10% of the first month's wages received upon 
successful placement.  Overcharging is a criminal offense and 
carries a maximum fine of HK$50,000 (US$6,410).  The license 
of an offending EA may also be revoked upon conviction, and 
the Commissioner for Labor may refuse to issue or renew a 
license, or may revoke a license, if (1) he is satisfied on 
reasonable grounds that an employment agency is being, or is 
likely to be, used for unlawful or immoral purposes, or (2) 
if a person operating or intending to operate an employment 
agency has, within the preceding five years, been convicted 
of an offense against a child, young person or woman or of an 
offense involving membership of a triad society, fraud, 
dishonesty or extortion (Sec. 53(1)(c)(ii) of Cap. 57). 
 
-- B. Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for the trafficking of 
persons for commercial sexual exploitation, including for the 
forced prostitution of adults and the prostitution of 
children? 
 
(SBU) Section 129 of the Crimes Ordinance makes it an offense 
for a person to take part in "bringing another person into, 
or taking another person out of, Hong Kong for the purposes 
of prostitution," regardless of whether the other person 
consented, knew the purpose, or received any advantage.  This 
offense is punishable by up to 10 years' imprisonment. 
Section 130 of the Crimes Ordinance prescribes 14 years' 
imprisonment for a person who "harbours another person or 
exercises control or direction over another person with the 
intention that person shall do unlawful sex acts with 
others."  Section 134 criminalizes "detention for intercourse 
or in a vice establishment."  It cites "a person who in any 
manner or by any means detains another person against his or 
her will (a) with the intention that the other person shall 
do an unlawful sex act; or (b) on any premises or vessel, or 
in any place, kept as a vice establishment" shall be guilty 
of an offence and shall be liable on conviction on indictment 
to imprisonment for 14 years. 
 
-- C. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for labor trafficking 
offenses, including all forms of forced labor?  If your 
country is a source country for labor migrants, do the 
government's laws provide for criminal punishment -- i.e. 
jail time -- for labor recruiters who engage in recruitment 
of workers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers 
with the purpose of subjecting workers to compelled service 
in the destination country?  If your country is a destination 
for labor migrants (legal/regular or illegal/irregular), are 
there laws punishing employers or labor agents who confiscate 
workers' passports or travel documents for the purpose of 
labor trafficking, switch contracts without the worker's 
consent as a means to keep the worker in a state of compelled 
service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of keeping 
the worker in a state of compelled service? 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong uses its Employment and Theft Ordinances to 
prosecute labor violations and related offenses.  Hong Kong's 
Bill of Rights Article 4 bans forced and bonded labor.  Under 
the Employment Ordinance (EO, Cap. 57), employers who violate 
contract terms or minimum wage requirements (the latter only 
applies to FDWs) can be fined and imprisoned.  Any employer 
who pays less than the legal minimum wage for FDWs can be 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  005 OF 012 
 
 
fined HKD 350,000 (USD 44,870) and imprisoned up to three 
years.  Employers or employment agencies who illegally 
withhold a FDW's passport can be prosecuted for blackmail 
under the Theft Ordinance (maximum penalty 14 years) or for 
"obtaining property by deception" by which "any person who by 
any deception dishonestly obtains property belonging to 
another, with the intention of permanently depriving the 
other of it, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 
liable on conviction upon indictment  to imprisonment for 10 
years." 
 
(SBU) The Employment Ordinance regulates the operation of 
employment agencies (EAs) in Hong Kong.  An EA is only 
allowed to charge job-seekers (including FDWs) a commission 
of not more than 10% of the first month's wages received upon 
successful placement.  Overcharging is a criminal offense and 
carries a maximum fine of HK$50,000 (US$6,410).  The license 
of an offending EA may also be revoked upon conviction, and 
the Commissioner for Labor may refuse to issue or renew a 
license, or may revoke a license, if (1) he is satisfied on 
reasonable grounds that an employment agency is being, or is 
likely to be, used for unlawful or immoral purposes, or (2) 
if a person operating or intending to operate an employment 
agency has, within the preceding five years, been convicted 
of an offense against a child, young person or woman or of an 
offense involving membership of a triad society, fraud, 
dishonesty or extortion (Sec. 53(1)(c)(ii) of Cap. 57). 
 
-- D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible 
sexual assault? (NOTE:  This is necessary to evaluate a 
foreign government's compliance with TVPA Minimum Standard 2, 
which reads: "For the knowing commission of any act of sex 
trafficking... the government of the country should prescribe 
punishment commensurate with that for grave crimes, such as 
forcible sexual assault (rape)."  END NOTE) 
 
(SBU) Under the Crimes Ordinance, rape (Section 118 of Cap. 
200) and non-consensual sodomy (Section 118A of Cap. 200) 
carry maximum penalties of life imprisonment. 
 
-- E. Law Enforcement Statistics: Did the government take 
legal action against human trafficking offenders during the 
reporting period?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences imposed, including 
details on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and 
available.  Please note the number of convicted trafficking 
offenders who received suspended sentences and the number who 
received only a fine as punishment.  Please indicate which 
laws were used to investigate, prosecute, convict, and 
sentence traffickers.  Also, if possible, please disaggregate 
numbers of cases by type of TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual 
exploitation) and victims (children under 18 years of age vs. 
adults).   What were the actual punishments imposed on 
convicted trafficking offenders? Are they serving the time 
sentenced?  If not, why not? 
 
(SBU) The Hong Kong government took legal action against two 
sex trafficking cases during the reporting period. In August 
2009, the Philippines consulate informed the HKP that two 
Filipinas had sought help from the consulate after being 
forced to work as prostitutes in a nightclub.  A family 
acquaintance had misled them to believe they would be working 
as waitresses.  The HKP launched an undercover operation with 
police officers posing as potential clients that resulted in 
the arrest of two HK-based Filipina traffickers.  The case 
was heard in District Court February 1-3, and a verdict is 
expected at the end of February. 
 
(SBU) The second case involved a Thai woman who was invited 
by her neighbor to travel to Hong Kong for sightseeing in 
September 2009.  Upon arrival in Hong Kong, the neighbor 
brought the victim to a brothel.  The victim refused to 
engage in prostitution and managed to escape.  She filed a 
report at a local police station and helped authorities 
locate the brothel where she had worked.   The neighbor had 
already left Hong Kong, but using immigration records and 
with assistance from the Royal Thai consulate, the police was 
able to identify the trafficker and arrest her when she 
attempted to enter Hong Kong in October.  The case is 
scheduled to go to trial in March. 
 
(SBU) While no labor trafficking cases were detected during 
the reporting period, Hong Kong labor authorities did take 
numerous legal actions against various violations of the 
Employment Ordinance. The Labor Department conducted 940 
inspections of employment agencies and revoked the licenses 
of two EAs for overcharging FDWs. The two EAs were also fined 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  006 OF 012 
 
 
HKD 6000 (USD 770) each.  The Labor Department also levied 
122 fines against FDW employers for either underpayment or 
non-payment of wages. One employer was sentenced to nine 
months' imprisonment (which was reduced to 3 months after 
appeal), and the rest were fined, with the highest fine being 
HKD 90,000 (USD 11,540). 
 
-- F. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for law enforcement and immigration officials on identifying 
and treating victims of trafficking?  Or training on 
investigating and prosecuting human trafficking crimes? 
Specify whether NGOs, international organizations, and/or the 
USG provide specialized training for host government 
officials. 
 
(SBU) Front-line police officers continued to receive 
training on victim identification and investigative 
techniques during their initial police academy studies. 
Those who enter the officer corps, especially if they are 
assigned to the Organized Crime and Triad Bureau (OCTB), the 
unit responsible for investigating TIP crimes, receive 
additional internal training. 
 
(SBU) In 2009, representatives from the police and 
immigration departments actively participated in various 
regional and international conferences/seminars on human 
trafficking.  Police and immigration officers attended the 
Senior Officers' Meeting of the Bali Process on People 
Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational 
Crime in Australia in February.  In June, an immigration 
officer attended a week-long USG-sponsored Forced Child 
Labor/Human Trafficking/Child Sex Tourism Workshop held in 
Manila.  Post in October organized a two-day seminar for an 
ICE investigator and DOJ prosecutor to share their expertise 
with over 40 frontline police, immigration and customs 
officers.  Topics covered included investigative techniques, 
case scenarios, prosecution of cases, interview techniques, 
victim identification and empowerment, and working with NGOs. 
 Several police officers attended the November Trafficking In 
Persons course held at the International Law Enforcement 
Academy in Bangkok. At the HKG's request, the local ICE 
Attache in November provided a three-hour block of training 
on victim identification and assistance to approximately 40 
immigration officers. 
 
--G. Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases?  If 
possible, provide the number of cooperative international 
investigations on trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
(SBU) While Hong Kong law enforcement agencies did not have 
any joint investigations with other governments during the 
reporting period, they continued to participate regularly in 
international conferences and seminars on transnational 
crime, immigration control, document fraud, and victim 
identification.  The HKG worked closely with the Philippines 
Consulate General in pursuing the above-mentioned case. 
 
(SBU) Recognizing that many Indonesian FDWs arrive in Hong 
Kong with a large amount of debt incurred from fees charged 
by recruitment firms in Indonesian, Hong Kong's Secretary for 
Labor and Welfare has repeatedly been pressuring the 
Indonesian government on ways to reduce the amount of fees 
charged to FDWs in an effort to reduce the debt burden 
incurred in Indonesia. 
 
-- H. Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, please provide 
the number of traffickers extradited during the reporting 
period, and the number of trafficking extraditions pending. 
In particular, please report on any pending or concluded 
extraditions of trafficking offenders to the United States. 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong currently has extradition agreements with 
sixteen countries for the surrendering of fugitives, 
including for trafficking crimes.  Agreements have been 
signed but have not yet come into force with an additional 
two countries. No extraditions related to trafficking 
occurred during the reporting period. 
 
-- I. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
(SBU) There was no evidence or allegations of government 
involvement in or tolerance of trafficking during the 
reporting period. 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  007 OF 012 
 
 
 
-- J. If government officials are involved in human 
trafficking, what steps has the government taken to end such 
complicity?  Please indicate the number of government 
officials investigated and prosecuted for involvement in 
trafficking or trafficking-related criminal activities during 
the reporting period.  Have any been convicted?  What 
sentence(s) was imposed? Please specify if officials received 
suspended sentences, or were given a fine, fired, or 
reassigned to another position within the government as 
punishment. Please indicate the number of convicted officials 
that received suspended sentences or received only a fine as 
punishment. 
 
(SBU) There was no evidence or allegations of government 
involvement in or tolerance of trafficking during the 
reporting period. 
 
-- K. For countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a 
peacekeeping or other similar mission who engaged in or 
facilitated severe forms of trafficking or who exploited 
victims of such trafficking. 
 
(SBU) Not applicable to Hong Kong. 
 
-- L. If the country has an identified problem of child sex 
tourists coming to the country, what are the countries of 
origin for sex tourists?  How many foreign pedophiles did the 
government prosecute or deport/extradite to their country of 
origin?  If your host country's nationals are perpetrators of 
child sex tourism, do the country's child sexual abuse laws 
have extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT 
Act) to allow the prosecution of suspected sex tourists for 
crimes committed abroad?  If so, how many of the country's 
nationals were prosecuted and/or convicted during the 
reporting period under the extraterritorial provision(s) for 
traveling to other countries to engage in child sex tourism? 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong does not have an identified child sex tourism 
problem. 
 
 
Para 28: PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
-- A.  What kind of protection is the government able under 
existing law to provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it 
provide these protections in practice? 
 
(SBU) Under the Witness Support Programme estabished in 1996, 
specially trained HKP officers provide protection and support 
for victims and witnesses throughout the investigation and 
prosecution phases and court proceedings.  Past and current 
trafficking cases indicate Hong Kong law enforcement provide 
these protections in practice.  In 2007, Hong Kong police 
provided protection for six Filipina trafficking victims 
throughout the course of the investigation and trial in which 
they testified.  The police also traveled to the Philippines 
to meet with relevant government departments to discuss how 
to ensure the safety of the victims and their reintegration 
into society.  After the conviction of their two traffickers, 
the HKP escorted the victims to the airport where Philippine 
Consulate General officials met them. 
 
(SBU) The HKP has also been providing protection to the two 
Filipinas who testified in court February 1-3.  The two women 
stayed at an undisclosed shelter, and were escorted by 
officers to necessary appointments.  One of the women is 
pregnant, and police accompanied her to doctor's visits. 
 
-- B.  Does the country have victim care facilities (shelters 
or drop-in centers) which are accessible to trafficking 
victims?  Do foreign victims have the same access to care as 
domestic trafficking victims?  Where are child victims placed 
(e.g., in shelters, foster care, or juvenile justice 
detention centers)?  Does the country have specialized care 
for adults in addition to children?  Does the country have 
specialized care for male victims as well as female?   Does 
the country have specialized facilities dedicated to helping 
victims of trafficking?  Are these facilities operated by the 
government or by NGOs?  What is the funding source of these 
facilities?  Please estimate the amount the government spent 
(in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these specialized facilities 
dedicated to helping trafficking victims during the reporting 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  008 OF 012 
 
 
period. 
 
(SBU) Six government-subsized NGO shelters serve victims of 
violence, abuse or exploitation, including trafficking 
victims.  These centers provide temporary free accommodations 
and counseling to both local and foreign victims. Child 
trafficking victims can be admitted to several refuge centers 
specifically equipped to provide temporary services for 
children. 
 
-- C.  Does the government provide trafficking victims with 
access to legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, 
please specify the kind of assistance provided.  Does the 
government provide funding or other forms of support to 
foreign or domestic NGOs and/or international organizations 
for providing these services to trafficking victims?  Please 
explain and provide any funding amounts in U.S. dollar 
equivalent.  If assistance provided was in-kind, please 
specify exact assistance.  Please specify if funding for 
assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional or 
local governments. 
 
(SBU) The Social Welfare Department (SWD) provides funding to 
six NGO-run shelters that also provide psychological 
assistance and access to legal and medical services.  The 
Government-funded Family Crisis Support Center, operated by a 
local NGO, provides 24-hour support for victims.  The Center 
offers counseling, a resource center, hotline service and 
referrals to community groups.  Services provided by the 
center include short-term emergency accommodation, 
counseling, hotline service, a resource corner and 
self-learning facilities, and referrals to additional 
community support services. 
 
(SBU) As reported in ref B, some local NGOs providing care to 
TIP victims have not asked for subsidies from the government 
because they have found their own resources to be adequate to 
support their clients.  The HKG provides HKD 100 (USD 13) a 
day to victims it refers to NGOs. 
 
(SBU) The Hong Kong Hospital Authority provides public 
medical and clinical psychological services to trafficking 
victims, who enjoy the same rights as other patients.  The 
Department of Health operates Female Social Hygiene Clinics, 
which offered free services to all female sex workers without 
asking about their legal status in Hong Kong. 
 
-- D. Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, 
for example, by providing temporary to permanent residency 
status, or other relief from deportation?  If so, please 
explain. 
 
(SBU) All trafficking victims, regardless of nationality, are 
entitled to the short-term assistance and social services 
mentioned immediately above.  Those remaining in Hong Kong 
prior to repatriation or to participate in criminal 
proceedings against traffickers are granted leave to remain 
by the Director of Immigration.  This status does not allow 
the individual to work or study.  Hong Kong law does not 
provide for issuing permanent residency status to foreign 
trafficking victims.  As a result, the HKG will assist the 
victims to return to their home countries, including liaising 
with home country governments to ensure a smooth 
reintegration into society. 
 
(SBU) The HKG in October 2009 contracted an NGO to provide a 
free-of-charge telephone interpretation service in English 
and seven ethnic minority languages.  The service is 
available to all government departments that need assistance 
in handling cases involving foreigners who cannot speak 
Chinese. 
 
-- E. Does the government provide longer-term shelter or 
housing benefits to victims or other resources to aid the 
victims in rebuilding their lives? 
 
(SBU) The HKG collaborates closely with the local consulates 
and governments of victims' home countries to ensure the 
victims' needs, including protection for their families, are 
met. 
 
-- F. Does the government have a referral process to transfer 
victims detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by 
law enforcement authorities to institutions that provide 
short- or long-term care (either government or NGO-run)? 
 
(SBU) The SWD and police have an established set of 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  009 OF 012 
 
 
guidelines and procedures for joint handling of the 
investigation process and support services for all victims of 
abuse, including trafficking victims.  SWD manages the 
referral of victims to the six government-subsidized shelters. 
 
-- G. What is the total number of trafficking victims 
identified during the reporting period?  (If available, 
please specify the type of exploitation of these victims - 
e.g. "The government identified X number of trafficking 
victims during the reporting period, Y or which were victims 
of trafficking for sexual exploitation and Z of which were 
victims of nonconsensual labor exploitation.)  Of these, how 
many victims were referred to care facilities for assistance 
by law enforcement authorities during the reporting period? 
By social services officials?  What is the number of victims 
assisted by government-funded assistance programs and those 
not funded by the government during the reporting period? 
 
(SBU) The HKG identified three trafficking victims during the 
reporting period, all of which were victims of trafficking 
for sexual exploitation.  All three victims were referred to 
a local NGO who had staff that could communicate in the 
victims' native languages. The HKG provided HKD 100 (USD 13) 
a day to the victims while they were at the shelter. One of 
the victims learned she was pregnant while staying at the 
shelter, and the HKG has arranged for her to deliver the baby 
in Hong Kong free of charge. 
 
-- H. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and 
social services personnel have a formal system of proactively 
identifying victims of trafficking among high-risk persons 
with whom they come in contact (e.g., foreign persons 
arrested for prostitution or immigration violations)?  For 
countries with legalized prostitution, does the government 
have a mechanism for screening for trafficking victims among 
persons involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex trade? 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong's law enforcement and social services 
personnel continued to look for certain indicators of 
exploitation/abuse to proactively identify potential 
trafficking victims among high-risk persons.  These 
indicators and appropriate follow-up questions have been 
formalized into an Action Card to standardize debriefing of 
potential trafficking victims.  Some of the indicators noted 
on the card include whether the person a) was in possession 
of identification and travel documents; b) appeared to have 
been coached on what to say; c) could freely contact family 
and friends; d) had been beaten or threatened; and e) was 
receiving any of the money he/she earned. 
 
-- I. Are the rights of victims respected?  Are trafficking 
victims detained or jailed?   If so, for how long?  Are 
victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of 
other laws, such as those governing immigration or 
prostitution? 
 
(SBU) Persons determined to be trafficking victims are not 
detained, jailed, or prosecuted for violations of other laws. 
 
-- J. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many 
victims assisted in the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers during the reporting period? May victims file 
civil suits or seek legal action against traffickers?  Does 
anyone impede victim access to such legal redress?  If a 
victim is a material witness in a court case against a former 
employer, is the victim permitted to obtain other employment 
or to leave the country pending trial proceedings?  Are there 
means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
(SBU) HKG policy is to encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases, although 
in practice victims are reluctant to do so.  One contributing 
factor might be the fact that victims are not allowed to work 
while waiting to testify in court. Victims, however, are 
allowed to leave the country pending trial proceedings. In 
the case of the Thai female who was deceived by a neighbor in 
traveling to Hong Kong, the victim was allowed to return to 
Thailand to take care of her young family.  The HKP later 
paid for her to return to Hong Kong to further assist in 
their investigation.  She is now back in Thailand but will 
return to Hong Kong to testify in court in March.  The two 
Filipina victims identified during the reporting period 
testified in court in February. 
 
(SBU) Under Hong Kong law, a victim may initiate civil 
proceedings for compensation arising from injuries/damages 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  010 OF 012 
 
 
sustained as a result of unlawful or wrongful acts of the 
trafficker. Such a claim is considered a civil action between 
two private parties.  Legal aid in the form of legal 
representation is available to eligible persons. 
 
-- K. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in identifying trafficking victims 
and in the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, 
including the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?   What is the number of 
trafficking victims assisted by the host country's embassies 
or consulates abroad during the reporting period?  Please 
explain the type of assistance provided (travel documents, 
referrals to assistance, payment for transportation home). 
 
(SBU) As mentioned above, Hong Kong law enforcement and 
immigration officers in 2009 received training on victim 
identification and assistance through several USG-sponsored 
courses and locally-organized seminars.  The Hong Kong SAR 
does not maintain embassies or consulates abroad. 
 
-- L. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical 
aid, shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are 
repatriated as victims of trafficking? 
 
(SBU) Although Hong Kong is not a point of origin for 
internationally trafficked men, women or children, all the 
assistance mentioned above are available to Hong Kong 
residents. 
 
-- M. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work 
with trafficking victims?  What type of services do they 
provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities? 
 
(SBU) Various NGOs involved in the promotion of the rights of 
sex workers and/or migrant workers provide varying levels of 
support to trafficking victims.  International Social Service 
(ISS), with HKG consent, deploys Information Ambassadors 
(IAs) to meet every incoming flight from Southeast Asia that 
lands in Hong Kong from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.  The IAs distribute 
HKG-funded information kits produced in several of the most 
commonly-spoken Southeast Asian languages to passengers 
identified as potential victims of trafficking or other 
exploitation.  ISS runs a hotline, provides interpretation, 
medical and counseling services, and helps arrange for 
shelter and access to legal counsel.  Other NGOs such as Zi 
Teng, Action for Reach Out, International Organization for 
Migration, Diocesan Pastoral Centre for Filipinos, and 
Bethune House provide assistance and support to sex and 
migrant workers in Hong Kong. 
 
 
Para 29 PREVENTION 
------------------ 
 
-- A. Did the government conduct anti-trafficking information 
or education campaigns during the reporting period?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Please provide the number of people 
reached by such awareness efforts, if available.  Do these 
campaigns target potential trafficking victims and/or the 
demand for trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor)?  (Note: This can be an 
especially noteworthy effort where prostitution is legal. 
End Note.) 
 
(SBU) The Labor Department (LD) increased its efforts to 
educate the FDW population of their rights guaranteed by the 
Employment Ordinance.  In addition to the normal 
mini-exhibitions and information kiosks staged in areas 
frequented by FDWs where 
pamphlets and videos in English, Tagalog, Indonesian, Thai, 
Sri Lankan and Chinese were distributed, LD also targeted 
Indonesian FDWs in an outreach campaign during Ramadan.  LD 
handed out more than 6,000 flyers/DVDs in Victoria Park to 
Indonesian FDWs.  LD organized a seminar for 200 employment 
agencies November 11 to educate them on handling passports, 
racial discrimination, and workers, rights.  LD will enclose 
information brochures on how to treat foreign domestic 
workers in the electric bills sent to all households in Hong 
Kong. 
 
(SBU) The HKG has designed a pamphlet for use in educating 
the public about human trafficking and encouraging people to 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  011 OF 012 
 
 
report suspicious activities to the police.  The HKG plans to 
print the pamphlets in Chinese, English, Thai, Tagalog and 
Indonesian and distribute them through local District Council 
offices starting March 2010.  The pamphlet provides tips to 
people coming to work in Hong Kong on how to protect 
themselves and where to seek help if they have become a 
trafficking victim. 
 
-- B. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking? 
 
(SBU) The HKG devotes a significant amount of resources to 
monitoring immigration and emigration activities, to include 
evidence of trafficking. Law enforcement authorities have 
continued to apply stringent measures to screen for 
trafficking victims and suspected trafficking cases among 
visitors and illegal immigrants along borders.  Immigration 
officers received training from US immigration officers and 
local NGO ISS on how to spot potential trafficking victims at 
the airport. 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong imigration and customs officials continue to 
exchange intelligence about suspected illegal migration with 
mainland China, Macau and foreign counterparts.  They 
maintain close and frequent contact with counterparts at 
consular missions accredited in Hong Kong.  The various 
parties share information alerts and bulletins, including 
those related to anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
-- C. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and 
multilateral on trafficking-related matters, such as a 
multi-agency working group or a task force? 
 
(SBU) The Joint Investigation Team (JIT) serves as Hong 
Kong's principal forum for regular intra-government 
communication on matters relating to human trafficking. JIT 
also coordinates with foreign counterparts and sends members 
to international forums and exchanges. 
 
-- D. Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If the plan was developed 
during the reporting period, which agencies were involved in 
developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the process?  What 
steps has the government taken to implement the action plan? 
 
(SBU) The Hong Kong government does not have an 
inter-departmental Action Plan to address human trafficking, 
but individual departments have programs and measures in 
place to address various aspects of tackling TIP. 
 
-- E: Required of all Posts: What measures has the government 
taken during the reporting period to reduce the demand for 
commercial sex acts? (please see ref B, para. 9(3) for 
examples) 
 
(SBU) Post is not aware of any new measures the HKG has taken 
to reduce the demand for commercial sex acts.  While law 
enforcement agencies have tolerated the existence of "one 
woman brothels" -- a single sex worker of legal age and 
residency status operating independently -- all other forms 
of commercial sex are illegal. 
 
-- F. Required of all Posts: What measures has the government 
taken during the reporting period to reduce 
the participation in international child sex tourism by 
nationals of the country? 
 
(SBU) Although Post is not aware of any specific measures 
specifically aimed at reducing the participation of Hong Kong 
residents in international child sex tourism, Hong Kong 
residents have not previously been identified as participants 
in such activities. 
 
-- G. Required of posts in countries that have contributed 
over 100 troops to international peacekeeping efforts 
(Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, 
China, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, 
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, 
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, 
Korea (ROK), Malawi, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco,  Nepal, 
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Russia, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, 
Ukraine, United Kingdom, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe): What measures has the government adopted to ensure 
 
HONG KONG 00000304  012 OF 012 
 
 
that its nationals who are deployed abroad as part of a 
peacekeeping or other similar mission do not engage in or 
facilitate severe forms of trafficking or exploit victims of 
such trafficking?  If posts do not provide an answer to this 
question, the Department may consider including a statement 
in the country assessment to the effect that "An assessment 
regarding Country X's efforts to ensure that its troops 
deployed abroad for international peacekeeping missions do 
not engage in or facilitate trafficking or exploit 
trafficking victims was unavailable for this reporting 
period." 
 
(SBU) Not applicable to Hong Kong. 
 
Para 30: PARTNERSHIPS 
--------------------- 
 
-- A.  Does the government engage with other governments, 
civil society, and/or multilateral organizations to focus 
attention and devote resources to addressing human 
trafficking?  If so, please provide details. 
 
(SBU) Hong Kong continues to be an active participant in the 
main multilateral forums dealing with human smuggling, human 
trafficking and organized crime.  During the reporting 
period, the HKG regularly engaged with Post and visiting USG 
officials on training and ways to address TIP. Hong Kong 
authorities worked closely with the Philippines and Thai 
governments to coordinate assistance and support to their 
nationals who became trafficking victims in Hong Kong in 
¶2009.  NGOs have reported to Post that the HKG has increased 
outreach to them in the past year. 
 
-- B.  What sort of international assistance does the 
government provide to other countries to address TIP? 
 
(SBU) Post is not aware of any assistance the Hong Kong 
government provided to other countries to address TIP. 
 
¶4. (U) Post point of contact is Poloff Lisa Tam, tel: (852) 
2841-2139, fax: (852) 2526-7382, email: TamLY@state.gov. 
 
¶5. (U) Hours spent on drafting this report cable: 
 
FS4-120 
FS2-2 
FS1-2 
MARUT