10KABUL698
WOMEN ACTIVISTS PUSH FOR INCLUSION IN
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO4087
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0698/01 0571053
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261053Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5885
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000698 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL KDEM AF
SUBJECT: WOMEN ACTIVISTS PUSH FOR INCLUSION IN 
REINTEGRATION PLANNING PROCESS 
 
REF: KABUL 689 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Representatives from the Afghan Women's 
Network met February 23 with Masoom Stanekzai, the Afghan 
government's current lead on reintegration efforts, at his 
invitation, to voice their concerns over GIRoA's 
reintegration and reconciliation plans.  Stanekzai opened the 
meeting by explaining GIRoA's reintegration efforts, the 
difference between reintegration and reconciliation, GIRoA's 
way forward in developing a reintegration program and 
soliciting their input.  The group called for women's 
participation in all negotiations, and requested additional 
guarantees that women's rights and participation in society 
will be protected as discussions move forward.  They also 
briefly addressed concerns that non-Pashtun ethnic groups 
will not be protected, and that development projects will 
focus too heavily on the south.  Stanekzai was receptive to 
the women's concerns and requested further input in the form 
of a two-page paper.  The meeting was a positive initial step 
in improving coordination between the government and civil 
society on reconciliation and reintegration.  The Embassy 
will continue to support civil society and press the 
government to listen to and address their concerns.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
More Than Just a Seat at the Table 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Eight members of the Afghan Women's Network (AWN), 
a civil society organization with 70 women's NGOs and 3000 
individual women activist members, met with Masoom Stanekzai 
at his request to understand GIRoA's reintegration policy and 
way forward on developing a reintegration program.  They 
pushed for the inclusion of women in the reintegration and 
reconciliation process.  The assembled AWN representatives, 
including former Minister of Women's Affairs candidate 
Palwasha Hassan and 2007 International Women of Courage Award 
winner Mary Akrami, told Stanekzai they wanted transparent 
negotiations, with no "behind the curtains" deals.  In 
particular, the women sought an equal and active role 
throughout the planning and implementation process.  They 
judged women's role in government over the last eight years 
as only symbolic, and implored Stanekzai to involve them 
constructively in the peace process. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Constitutional Rights Not Enough 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Stanekzai assured the AWN representatives that the 
constitution would protect women's rights throughout the 
reintegration and reconciliation process.  However, the women 
were skeptical that the constitution alone offers sufficient 
protection.  They pointed to the limited political power 
women currently wield, including the lack of high-level 
government positions, as evidence that more needs to be done 
to protect and promote women's rights.  The women were 
particularly concerned that former Taliban and Hezb-e Islami 
would influence the government to enforce their 
interpretations of Shari'a law.  The conversation grew 
increasingly animated as the women asked what would prevent a 
future government from closing girls schools, limiting 
women's employment opportunities, and forcing women back 
behind closed doors.  The women told Stanekzai the government 
needs to make a strong statement on their commitment to 
protecting women's rights. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  The AWN representatives voiced particular concern 
that former Taliban would be appointed or elected to 
high-level government positions.  Stanekzai brushed over a 
question on what mechanism would prevent Taliban from joining 
the government as MPs or in other influential roles. 
However, in a February 3 press conference he told journalists 
that the Afghan government is "open and transparent," and 
that once former opposition members have accepted the 
constitution they can become "officials, politicians, even 
president." 
 
---------------------- 
Concern for Minorities 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  As leaders among civil society activists, the AWN 
representatives took the opportunity to voice broader 
reintegration concerns in addition to the role of women. 
They urged Stanekzai and his reintegration team to think 
about how former Taliban will live and work alongside 
non-Pashtuns.  The women also shared a frequent complaint 
from civil society that reintegration and reconciliation 
efforts, which will focus on the south, will further tip the 
 
KABUL 00000698  002 OF 002 
 
 
balance of development resources and efforts away from the 
safer provinces in the central and northern regions. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Government Receptive, Now Need Action 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Stanekzai was receptive to AWN's concerns, and 
began the meeting by telling the collected interlocutors that 
he intended the meeting to be the beginning of a longer 
discussion.  He noted that some Afghans believe women oppose 
reconciliation, and said the dialogue would prove that women 
in Afghanistan are supporting the process.  This comment 
could reflect a disconnect between Stanekzai and civil 
society; civil society is engaging in discussions not to 
prove their support, but to play a decision-making role in 
the process.  Stanekzai requested the group submit a two-page 
paper summarizing their concerns and proposed input for the 
reintegration process, which his team would take into 
consideration alongside the Ministries' papers (Reftel) as 
they formulate the reintegration program. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  There is still need for the Afghan government to 
more clearly define its way ahead in developing and 
implementing reintegration and reconciliation efforts.  The 
AWN representatives expressed their concern to Stanekzai that 
the Peace Jirga would be a constitutional Loya Jirga, 
allowing the opposition to bring amendments limiting women's 
rights to the constitution.  Stanekzai reassured them it 
would be a Peace Jirga, not a Loya Jirga, but the group 
insisted that President Karzai had referred to it as a Loya 
Jirga several times.  In a follow-on meeting with AWN 
representatives and Embassy officers, the women again asked 
whether reintegration and reconciliation are one process.  A 
number of concerns they addressed in their meeting with 
Stanekzai were more relevant to the reconciliation process. 
The differences between reintegration and reconciliation, and 
whether there will be a joint or separate policies, are not 
yet clear to the Afghan public. 
 
------------------------------ 
Embassy Engagement and Support 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) While numerous civil society organizations have 
voiced legitimate concerns to the Embassy about 
reconciliation and reintegration, none has been as organized 
and proactive as AWN.  AWN has held regular meetings with 
women activists since the London Conference, has written 
documents articulating their concerns, and has plans to reach 
out to additional Embassies, ISAF, government ministries, and 
President Karzai.  AWN representatives are appreciative of, 
and have requested, additional Embassy and international 
support in directing attention to women's issues, but are 
determined to remain in the lead on conversations with the 
government.  AWN's meeting with Stanekzai was a positive 
first step towards greater cooperation between the government 
and civil society.  However, AWN is unlikely to accept that 
submitting a two-page paper on their views suffices; rather, 
they rightfully expect women to be involved in the 
negotiating process. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Embassy has been actively engaging both civil 
society and the government to facilitate dialogue on 
reintegration and reconciliation.  A recent Embassy dinner 
which brought together Minister Stanekzai, IDLG Director 
Popal, AIHRC, and USIP representatives will hopefully serve 
as a springboard for further cooperation.  Stanekzai's 
meeting with AWN is evidence that our repeated message to the 
government that they must not cut civil society and women out 
of the reintegration and reconciliation planning process is 
starting to be heard.  SRAP Senior Advisors Rina Amiri and 
Barnett Rubin's discussion of civil society's role in 
reintegration and reconciliation during a recent string of 
meetings with senior Afghan government officials highlighted 
to the Afghan government the extreme importance the USG 
places on this issue.  The Embassy will continue to work with 
civil society and the government to ensure that they are 
sharing information and responding to each others' concerns. 
 
RICCIARDONE