10KABUL382
NEW AFGHAN MINISTER OF LABOR CITES CHILD LABOR AS
Mon Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3665
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0382/01 0320726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010726Z FEB 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5231UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000382 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB ETRD PGOV PHUM USAID AF
SUBJECT: NEW AFGHAN MINISTER OF LABOR CITES CHILD LABOR AS 
KEY ISSUE 
 
KABUL 00000382  001.9 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On January 26, Ambassador Eikenberry and a 
team from the Embassy paid a courtesy call on the newly 
appointed Minister of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs, and the 
Disabled (MOLSA),  Ms. Amena Afzali.  Of the three female 
Cabinet members President Karzai put forward in the second 
round, Ms. Afzali is considered by some observers to be the 
least bold choice on issues such as women's empowerment.  A 
political place-holder, she nevertheless may make her mark in 
this ministry, and welcomed the USG's interest in addressing 
crucial social and economic issues. She and the Ambassador 
agreed on several key issues: the urgency of anti-child labor 
efforts and the need for more vocational training. They also 
agreed to explore the possibility of technical assistance to 
the ministry. End Summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
"We know you by reputation" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 26, Ambassador Eikenberry, accompanied by 
Mission officers Mike Spangler, Economic Counselor; Valerie 
Begley, POL; Grace Lang, USAID, and Heidi Meyer, IPA, paid a 
courtesy call on Minister Amena Afzali, the newly appointed 
Minister of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs, and the Disabled 
(MOLSA). The Ambassador congratulated Afzali on being the 
first woman appointed in the new Karzai administration to a 
ministry other than Women's Affairs, and commended her 
ability to navigate a "difficult" Parliament. He noted that 
this visit was his first to the MOLSA,  welcomed closer 
cooperation as partners in Afghan-led efforts in social 
development efforts, and stressed the importance of economic 
livelihood for personal dignity and social stability. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Background:  Minister Amena Afzali was the only 
woman approved in the second round of Afghanistan 
parliamentary votes for the new cabinet. Heralded by some as 
a lifelong advocate of human rights, she is nevertheless 
conservative in her views on social issues, while also 
filling a "Tajik slot" and appeasing those allied with Fahim 
Khan. She hails from a prominent Herati family, and her 
husband was a well-known jihadi killed by the Soviets in 
¶1993. End note. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In 2004-06, Afzali served as Deputy Minister of 
Youth Affairs, a small and fairly unimportant ministry. MOLSA 
is a greater challenge, as a complex ministry with three 
departments, more than 7,000 employees, and structural 
divisions which inhibit effective functioning. Some observers 
are skeptical about her ability to effectively manage the 
behemoth bureaucracy. They point out the similarities to many 
female activists in the developing world whose prominence was 
initially the result of her influential husband and family. 
Others feel she will bring welcome strength and commitment. 
For more than a decade, she has worked on peace initiatives; 
she represented the Northern Alliance at the Bonn peace talks 
in 2001. She worked on behalf of Afghans in the Diaspora, 
conducting courses for refugee girls in Iran and assisting 
refugee families to settle and integrate. Finally, she 
emphasizes that she is a war widow who can sympathize with 
martyrs' families. 
 
-------------------------------- 
"No More Time or Money to Waste" 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U)  The Ambassador emphasized three key areas of U.S. 
concern: (a) increased vocational training; (b) implementing 
the new labor law; and (c) anti-child labor reform. Regarding 
the omnibus labor law passed in July 2009, the Ambassador 
discussed placing an advisor in the Ministry -- supplying the 
right kind of technical assistance to help the Ministry meet 
goals rather than someone who "drinks tea for years on end." 
The Minister agreed: "There is no more time or money to 
waste." She recognized that security is interrelated with 
economic development and social issues, and emphasized the 
importance of improving governance and fighting corruption. 
 
¶6. (U) Addressing child labor as a vital concern, Minister 
Afzali noted that child labor can only be effectively 
eliminated when families have alternative, sufficient 
livelihoods. Addressing vocational training, an AID officer 
noted  that USAID is considering a new vocational education 
program. In addition, pending Congressional approval, the 
U.S. Department of Labor plans to extend funding on a 
successful MOLSA capacity-building initiative. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: The Minister hit all the right notes: she 
is anti-waste, anti-corruption, and pro-partnership. She is 
in favor of vocational training, child labor reform, 
education, and anti-poverty programs. She has not yet 
demonstrated depth of knowledge on these topics, but she 
 
KABUL 00000382  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
appears capable of developing the expertise and insight 
needed to drive key reforms. Whether she can manage such a 
large bureaucracy will largely determine her success. Some 
mentoring will be necessary, as a multi-pronged, 
cross-ministerial approach is vital to make progress, and 
MOLSA lacks a good track record on coordinating with other 
ministries. End Comment. 
 
Ricciardone