10KUALALUMPUR64
OPPOSITION LEADER ANWAR'S "SODOMY II" TRIAL BEGINS
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kuala Lumpur
VZCZCXRO5136
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHKL #0064 0341226
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031226Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3741
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITYUNCLAS KUALA LUMPUR 000064 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM MY
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION LEADER ANWAR'S "SODOMY II" TRIAL BEGINS 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Summary:  After months of delay while his defense 
team submitted motion after motion ranging from a request to 
see all the evidence to outright dismissal, opposition leader 
Anwar Ibrahim's trial for alleged consensual sodomy with a 
former aide began in the Kuala Lumpur High Court on February 
¶3.  The prosecution immediately called to the stand the 
alleged victim, 25-year-old former Anwar aide Saiful Bahari, 
who described his relationship with Anwar and began a 
detailed account of the events of June 26, 2008 when the 
alleged sodomy occurred.  At the defense's request, the judge 
stopped the testimony when Saiful was on the verge of 
describing sexual contact.  The testimony will resume in 
camera (without the public present) on February 4.  Among the 
70 members of the public observing the trial from the small 
gallery were opposition politicians, local and international 
journalists, and diplomats from several embassies.  Polcouns 
and Pol staff attended the February 2 and 3 sessions. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Comment: Anwar's second sodomy trial is extremely 
controversial in Malaysia, seen by many as a political ploy 
to derail him and the opposition, and as a repeat of the 1998 
sodomy trial.  In launching the trial -- and there were 
doubts there would be a trial --  the GOM appears to 
determined to pursue the charge notwithstanding the potential 
costs domestically and internationally.  While there may be 
many days and weeks to go before this case concludes, and 
there is potential for further delays, the GOM has so far 
allowed Malaysians and foreigners access to the proceedings. 
Observers from the International Bar Association and 
International Council of Justice were seated alongside the 
attorneys in the front of the courtroom. The proceedings are 
being prominently covered in both the mainstream 
government-influenced media and the blogosphere, as well as 
in the international press.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Anwar Ibrahim's trial began at 3:30 pm on February 3 
after High Court judge Mohamad Zabidin Mohd Diah rejected 
lead Anwar attorney (and fellow opposition Parliamentarian) 
Karpal Singh's request for a stay to allow the Appeals Court 
to rule on a request to obtain the government's evidence 
before the trial.  A clerk read the charges concerning the 
alleged incident aloud in front of Anwar, standing toward the 
rear of the courtroom, who said that the charges were 
"frivolous" and ordered by the prosecution's "political 
masters" before pleading not guilty. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The prosecution immediately called 25-year-old 
former Anwar aide Saiful Bahari to testify, walking 
methodically through questions about his educational 
background, first association with Anwar (March 2008), and 
his job description.  Saiful, testifying in Malaysian, said 
he was paid RM 1,000 per month (about USD 270) to help with 
Anwar's schedule, carry his private cellphone, and manage his 
finances.  At that point, Anwar leaned over to his wife, PKR 
politician Wan Azizah, and said "liar" in Malaysian.  The 
prosecution had Saiful describe in detail how he arrived at 
Anwar's condominium on June 26, 2008, and what happened next, 
presenting as evidence a one-page statement that Saiful had 
signed in front of police when he reported the alleged 
sodomy.  The defense succeeded in having a reference to 
previous sexual contact between Anwar and Saiful expunged 
from the statement.  When Saiful had described how Anwar had 
allegedly asked him to have sex and then ordered him to 
undress in the bathroom, the defense requested that the 
remainder of Saiful's testimony be heard in camera.  The 
judge agreed to do so starting at 9:30 a.m. on February 4. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In parallel with trial, Anwar's legal team continues 
to pursue motions to have the charges dismissed or to gain 
reviews of earlier decisions denying the defense access to 
the government's evidence.  If accepted, those motions could 
lead to renewed delays in the trial. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In the months before the trial, Anwar was careful to 
keep in touch both with prominent foreigners and Malaysian 
supporters.  On January 25, his People's Justice Party (PKR) 
International Bureau held a closed door briefing for 
diplomats about the trial, arguing that the GOM was 
determined to convict "the Prime Minister in waiting" to 
remove him from the political scene.  They also argued that 
there was clear medical evidence refuting the charges, and 
that the judiciary was being manipulated to ensure a 
conviction. 
KEITH