10KYIV232
FIRTASH TRIUMPHS OVER TYMOSHENKO ON NADRA
Thu Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kyiv
VZCZCXRO1330
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHKV #0232/01 0421229
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111229Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KYIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9316
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KYIV 000232 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UMB, EEB/OMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EREL ELAB ECON ETRD PGOV PREL XH UP
SUBJECT: FIRTASH TRIUMPHS OVER TYMOSHENKO ON NADRA 
 
KYIV 00000232  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Nadra Bank's year-long moratorium on deposit 
withdrawals ended on February 10, amidst last-ditch negotiations 
over the bank's future.  The National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) had 
engaged in talks on February 10 about liquidating Nadra, one of 
Ukraine's largest private banks, only to halt negotiations at day's 
end and yield to majority shareholder Dmitro Firtash's proposal to 
recapitalize the bank.  This solution amounts to a notable defeat 
for Prime Minister Tymoshenko, who had sought to gain control of the 
bank to prove accusations of currency speculation and insider 
dealings against Firtash, Nadra's majority shareholder. 
Nonetheless, if Firtash's plan comes to fruition, the GOU would 
stand to save $938 million in expenditures from its strapped 2010 
budget that had been slated for Nadra's recapitalization.  The deal 
would also eliminate the NBU's need to monetize GOU securities to 
pay for the majority of Nadra's unfinanced liabilities.  End 
summary. 
 
FIRTASH REGAINS THE UPPER HAND 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In what appears to be a dramatic, if predictable, 
conclusion to the Nadra saga on February 10, business tycoon Dmytro 
Firtash offered to inject a further UAH 6 billion ($750 million) 
into Nadra, provided he was given a guarantee that Nadra's assets 
and liabilities would remain at the bank.  This proposal caused the 
NBU governing board to halt deliberations over transferring Nadra's 
assets and liabilities to state-owned Rodovid, which it had been 
mandated to do per a December 23 Cabinet of Ministers' decision. 
According to Embassy sources, NBU deliberations on February 10 were 
interrupted throughout the day by numerous side meetings between NBU 
Governor Stelmakh and Firtash.  Ultimately, the NBU announced it 
would extend Nadra's temporary administration and stated it would be 
willing to accept Firtash's recapitalization proposal, upon 
receiving proof that Firtash had sufficient funds to meet Nadra's 
needs. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A major financial backer of Viktor Yanukovych, Firtash is 
motivated to retain control over and prevent liquidation of Nadra, 
both to keep it out of the hands of Tymoshenko's government and to 
prevent the loss of UAH 4 billion ($500 million), which Firtash had 
placed as collateral for NBU refinancing in 2008.  Since he also 
reportedly controls roughly 92% of Nadra's shares through numerous 
holding companies, including the eponymous DF Group, losing the bank 
would mean he would cease having access to a financing source for 
his numerous business activities. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) After purchasing Nadra in the fall of 2008, Firtash 
quickly managed to secure NBU refinancing, which in total was 
equivalent to nearly 29% of Nadra's entire loan portfolio. 
Tymoshenko then accused Firtash, also the notorious head of gas 
middleman RosUkrEnergo (RUE), of using Nadra's NBU monies for 
currency speculation in December 2008.  Tymoshenko publicly claimed 
Firtash's currency dealings caused massive hryvnia depreciation and 
wreaked havoc on Ukraine's banking sector and broader economy. 
Tymoshenko has since sought to wrest control of the bank from 
Firtash and the NBU. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Meanwhile, Nadra's temporary administrator, Valentina 
Zhukovskaya, has reputedly worked to delay the bank's resolution 
until after the presidential election.  With a Yanukovych victory 
apparent for weeks before the election, and with the alleged support 
of incumbent President Yushchenko, Zhukovskaya succeeded in 
scuttling a negotiated agreement with foreign creditors, including 
the U.S. Export-Import Bank and USDA's Commodity Credit Corporation. 
 The inability to come to terms with creditors prevented a decision 
by the Tymoshenko government and stymied plans for Nadra's 
recapitalization and nationalization. 
 
NBU EXTENDS TEMPORARY ADMINISTRATION 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) After the NBU agreed on February 10 to extend 
Zhukovskaya's writ for another year, Nadra announced it would begin 
paying out deposits to households for the first time since February 
¶2009.  The following day, lines of disenfranchised, mostly elderly 
depositors could be observed outside Nadra branches in Kyiv. 
Analysts speculate there will be a run on Nadra's deposit base, 
leading to a sharp deterioration of Nadra's already precarious 
capital position.  As of January 2010, Nadra's capital adequacy 
ratio was a meager 1.9%, according to Embassy sources. 
 
TYMOSHENKO NOW PLIANT 
--------------------- 
 
 
KYIV 00000232  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Aced out by Firtash and Zhukovskaya (and their political 
supporters), the Tymoshenko government announced it would likely 
cancel the December 23, 2009 Cabinet of Ministers' resolution to 
transfer Nadra's assets and liabilities to recently nationalized 
Rodovid bank.  Acting Finance Minister Umanskyi also said the 
government would halt plans to use government treasury bills to 
recapitalize Rodovid, which reportedly required UAH 7.5 billion 
($938 million) to make up for the shortfall in Nadra's assets. 
Umanskyi insinuated that Tymoshenko had agreed to halt the 
recapitalization of Rodovid, and he suggested the Cabinet of 
Ministers would likely approve his proposal during a February 11 
meeting.  Umanskiy indicated the move would save the government UAH 
7.5 billion in expenditures and drastically reduce the overall 
amount the NBU would need to monetize in government securities in 
¶2010. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Despite the fact that Nadra is -- in the words of one IMF 
official -- a "dead man walking" from a financial point of view, 
Firtash's victory is sweet revenge over Tymoshenko, who had cut RUE 
out of its lucrative dealings with Gazprom and Naftohaz in early 
¶2009.  Firtash has clearly made the calculation that he stands to 
gain more by retaining control of the troubled bank than letting it 
become nationalized or liquidated, and thus falling into the hands 
of Tymoshenko in what most likely are the waning days of her 
government.  After following through on his proposal to recapitalize 
Nadra, Firtash is likely to get another major liquidity injection 
from the NBU, which could enable the bank to become a going concern 
again and position Firtash to take full advantage of his alliance 
with Yanukovych, Ukraine's apparent President-elect. 
 
TEFFT