10MONTREAL38
Quebec Relief Efforts for Haiti in High Gear
Fri Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Montreal
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMT #0038/01 0361706
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051705Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL MONTREAL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0071
INFO RUEHMT/AMCONSUL MONTREAL
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCEUNCLAS MONTREAL 000038 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID PREL HA CA
SUBJECT: Quebec Relief Efforts for Haiti in High Gear 
 
REF: 10 OTTAWA 86 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Quebec's and Montreal's historical and cultural 
links to Haiti are driving significant relief efforts at the 
provincial, municipal and local levels.  While the ties of this 
province and city to Haiti were no secret, the extent of society's 
involvement in relief efforts has been striking. END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) Three weeks after the earthquake that devastated Haiti, 
Quebec's newspapers (both French and English) still devote 
substantial (often front-page) coverage to Haiti, covering relief 
efforts and related subjects. The disaster has evoked special 
interest and a sense of "solidarity" here because Quebec and Haiti 
have the two largest francophone populations in the Western 
Hemisphere. Quebec is also home to 132,000 people of Haitian 
origin.  Over 100,000 of them live in Montreal, where they are a 
well-established, growing and "visible minority". 
 
Province Front and Center 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Quebec Premier Charest has been very visible since the 
earthquake hit, assuring the Haitian community of the province's 
concern.  His bid to take part in the January 25 Haiti Donors 
Conference in Montreal was rebuffed by the federal government, but 
he met at that time with Haitian PM Bellerive, outlining programs 
that had been sending Quebec and Montreal police officers to take 
part in MINUSTAH (United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti), 
and Hydro-Qu????bec's longstanding work to upgrade ????lectricit???? 
d'Ha????ti's capabilities.  Charest has pledged $3 million to Haitian 
relief, to be delivered through NGOs, dwarfing offers from other 
provinces. Quebec's Department of Employment and Social Solidarity 
has offered stipends to aid Haitian families arriving in Quebec as 
well as those already present that were directly affected by the 
earthquake. 
 
Opens Doors to Further Immigration 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The province also announced February 3 that it would raise 
its previously-announced quota of 1500 (of 50,000 Quebec immigrant 
spots for 2010) was being raised to 4500 in order to unite extended 
families of Haitian Canadians.  Quebec has special discretion and 
approval authority for immigrants choosing to live in Quebec and 
has previously modified existing Canadian regulations during crises 
for certain cases.  About 70 of 85 fast-tracked Haitian adoption 
cases for Quebec families have already flown into Montreal, with 
the remainder scheduled for a fifth flight this weekend. At least 
219 fast-tracked adoption requests by all Canadians have been 
granted. The city of Montreal is running an emergency service 
center to assist Haitian Canadians in finding missing family, and 
with counseling on immigration and related issues. 
 
City of Montreal Also Active 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Montreal's police chief and eighteen Haitian-born Montreal 
police officers built on existing cooperation with Haitian 
authorities, undertaking a mission to aid in security issues in the 
wake of earthquake; with the generosity of Air Transat and Air 
Canada.  This flight to Haiti was not unique; like several other 
flights originating from Montreal, it included volunteer doctors, 
aid workers, nurses, field-station cooks, etc., and was fully 
loaded with tons of water, clothing, generators, tents and medical 
equipment donated by local NGOs. 
 
¶6. (U) Other aid, reconstruction, and related efforts also bear the 
Quebec label to a great extent.  Nearly half of the first 800 
Canadian soldiers involved in relief operations at Jacmel from the 
 
Quebec-based 22nd "the Royal Van-doos" Regiment. Several 
Montreal-based NGOs, religious organizations, and official 
personnel were already established in Haiti at the time of the 
earthquake, and have since expanded operations.  The Jesuits (a 
Catholic religious order) are organized in Haiti in an 
administrative union with Quebec, an arrangement that has led to 
substantial interaction between Quebec and Haiti in educational and 
poverty-reduction efforts.  Contacts in Montreal told us that the 
order had set up six relief centers staffed by Quebecois/Haitian 
personnel in the wake of the earthquake, building on their existing 
infrastructure. 
 
¶7. (U) The Montreal-based NGO Center for International Studies and 
Cooperation (CECI) also has a long-standing relationship with 
Haiti, and was able to ramp up its operation by funding the 
deployment of additional medical personnel to Haiti, as well as 
sending food and supplies.  CECI commented to us that they feel 
their operations functioned particularly well because they 
primarily utilized Canadian-Haitians fluent in Creole, unlike other 
large operations. 
 
Charitable Giving Runs High 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Montreal is still abuzz with private charity and corporate 
fundraisers for Haiti.  A French-language telethon garnered $6.7 
million in Quebec, while a separate Canada-wide effort brought in 
$13.5 million. The Canadian Red Cross branch in Quebec has been 
particularly active, although there are no provincial-specific 
statistics kept on the $90.8 million raised in Canada. Other large 
Montreal-based charities are active with donors, including 
Oxfam-Quebec and the Archdiocese of Montreal. The latter has 
collected $2 million through its Development and Peace charity 
group. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The ties of this city and province to Haiti were well 
known to us, but the extent of the attention to - and involvement 
in - relief efforts has been striking.  The Consulate has played an 
active role, as well, with strong outreach to NGOs and media to 
update them on U.S. actions.  The Consulate has also provided TDY 
assistance for the crisis, with the Consular and Management Section 
Chiefs working in Port-au-Prince and the Dominican Republic, in 
addition to two Creole-speaking Canadian LES who have been deployed 
back to their nation of birth to assist USG efforts. 
 
¶10. (U) Minimize considered. 
MCCLENNY