10NAIROBI202
Somalia - Request for Government Outreach Voluntary Visitor
Tue Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0026
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #0202/01 0331202
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021201Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0628
INFO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBIUNCLAS NAIROBI 000202 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPAO SO
SUBJECT: Somalia - Request for Government Outreach Voluntary Visitor 
Program 
 
REF: 07 STATE 116686 
 
Unclassified - entire text 
 
 
 
¶1. Project Description: Somalia Unit, based at Embassy Nairobi, 
requests the creation of a Voluntary Visitor (VOLVIS) program that 
will enable a team of four people from Somalia's Transitional 
Federal Government (TFG) to study options for enhancing their 
outreach efforts on behalf of the TFG.  We request a four or five 
working day program. 
 
 
 
¶2. Post Objective: This VOLVIS program seeks to encourage the TFG 
to more efficiently and effectively conduct their outreach 
activities, thereby 'winning the hearts and minds' of the Somali 
people, which is a vital element in the success of the TFG. 
Currently, the TFG is not capitalizing on opportunities to reach 
out to their constituents - the Somali people - in a systematic 
manner, with frequent and targeted media appearances.  The 
objective of this program would be to expose the TFG officials to 
media and public affairs professionals who would guide the TFG 
officials in recognizing opportunities for and situations that 
require outreach, and then educating them in the most effective 
means of accomplishing that outreach.  At the same time, the 
Minister of Information will be exposed to a variety of U.S. 
policymakers, practitioners, and experts, which should positively 
affect his view of the United States and the U.S. government's 
efforts to improve Somalia. 
 
 
 
¶3. Background: The current administration of the TFG came to power 
almost exactly one year ago.  The transitional period in which to 
organize elections was extended for two years, from October 2009 to 
October 2011.  The Sharif administration had gained significant 
positive momentum until, in early May 2009, the extremist group 
al-Shabaab began a sustained offensive aimed at toppling the TFG. 
The offensive continues to this day, and has required the TFG to 
focus almost exclusively on security, rather than the transitional 
tasks. 
 
 
 
¶4. The current Minister of Information, who was appointed in August 
2009, ran a media outlet before his appointment and has proven to 
be very motivated and resourceful.  His most notable success has 
been the late 2009 revitalization of the TFG radio station, Radio 
Mogadishu.  The station had been limping along for many years with 
a skeleton staff operating outdated and inadequate equipment.  The 
Minister independently secured a new FM transmitter from private 
donors, which instantly boosted the broadcast reach of Radio 
Mogadishu to 100 kilometers outside of Mogadishu.  The station is 
roundly cited as one of the most successful operations being 
overseen by the TFG.  The Minister has also overseen the 
development of a new website, and a well-coordinated effort among 
the international community to provide much-needed assistance to 
his ministry. 
 
 
 
¶5. The Somalia Unit supports the addition of the Minister of 
Justice, a Member of Parliament, and the Information Minister's 
Senior Advisor to this program.  All three additional members are 
vital parts of the TFG's ability to reach out to the Somali people, 
countering the extremist messaging propagated by al-Shabaab.  The 
addition of a Member of Parliament will allow a member of the 
legislative branch to absorb information about messaging along with 
his colleagues from the executive branch of the TFG. 
 
 
 
¶6. Post Recommendations: Post recommends the following three themes 
for the program: 
 
a. Understanding the importance of proactive and systematic 
outreach - How does a government coordinate itself to administer an 
effective outreach operation?  How does a government decide which 
events merit an aggressive outreach campaign or response?  When 
should a government refrain from engaging in a 'war of words' with 
groups who are not governed by norms of media work? 
 
b. Developing appropriate messaging in order to achieve policy 
goals - How should a government shape messages in a situation in an 
often-hostile physical environment?  How does a government counter 
messages from a well-funded extremist group that is not bound by 
 
 
rules of factuality and decency?  What tools are the most 
appropriate for various situations? 
 
c. Understanding U.S. policy goals in Somalia - What are the United 
States government's primary goals in Somalia?  How do the U.S. 
government's goals complement the goals that Somalis hold for 
themselves?  What is the U.S. government doing to affect positive 
change in Somalia?  In contrast to the extremist propaganda, what 
is the reality of U.S. engagement with Somalia? 
 
 
 
¶7. Post recommends the team meet their respective counterparts at 
the following U.S. institutions (if possible): 
 
*         Foreign Press Center. 
 
*         One or more studios of major media outlets. 
 
*         Think tanks. 
 
 
 
The team would like to understand the processes and tools used in 
mounting effective media campaigns, whether short or long term. 
 
 
 
¶8. Timing: Somalia Unit requests that this program take place as 
soon as possible.  The Minister of Information, the leader of this 
delegation, is planning a wide-ranging trip to visit the United 
Kingdom and Canada, in addition to the United States.  We are 
coordinating with our Nairobi-based British and Canadian 
counterparts to ensure this trip has maximum effectiveness and 
efficiency.  As such, we are requesting that this program be 
conducted in late February or early March, depending on when the 
Minister receives his U.S. visa and begins his travel.  The 
Minister is slated to be back in Africa for a meeting starting on 
or about March 5. 
 
 
 
¶9. Nominees: The group will be composed of four TFG representatives 
with different areas of oversight and responsibility for outreach 
on behalf of the TFG.  Full bio data are available for the nominees 
in the EVDB under project number E/VFE-2010-0178. 
 
 
 
¶10. Support: The TFG will pay for the international airfare for the 
group.  Somalia Unit asks that ECA/PE/V/F/E contribute per diem, 
housing, and internal transportation for the group during the 
proposed program. 
 
 
 
¶11. Points of Contact: PAO for Somalia Mark. V Zimmer, 
ZimmerMV@state.gov, 254-20-363-6181, fax 254-20-363-6329. 
Alternate POC: Public Affairs Assistant Ali Issack, 
IssackAA@state.gov; 254-20-363-6198. 
RANNEBERGER