10PARIS198
FRANCE: INPUT FOR THE 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO4378
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHFR #0198/01 0501636
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191636Z FEB 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8352
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPARTMENT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 PARIS 000198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP (JENNIFER DONNELLY), G (LAURA PENA), 
EUR/PGI (JODY BUCKNEBERG), INL, DRL, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
,KMCA, FR 
SUBJECT: FRANCE: INPUT FOR THE 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
REPORT (PART 2 OF 3) 
 
REF: STATE 2094 
 
PARIS 00000198  001.6 OF 006 
 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) Responses are keyed to reporting questions specified 
in paragraph 28 of reftel. 
 
What kind of protection is the government able under existing 
law to provide for victims and witnesses? Does it provide 
these protections in practice? 
-- A. Victims' assistance is primarily handled by NGOs in 
close association with the French government.  Once a 
trafficking victimQ identified by the police or social 
services to the NGOs that work with the victims, the 
individual is given shelter, access to legal counsel, food, 
and medical care.  Since the Council of Europe's Convention 
to Fight Trafficking in Persons entered into force in 2008 in 
France, victims have a 30-day reflection period after 
receiving medical and psychological assistance and the right 
to compensation to consider whether they wish to cooperate 
with authorities and to decide a course of action. 
 
Does the country have victim care facilities (shelters or 
drop-in centers) which are accessible to trafficking victims? 
 Do foreign victims have the same access to care as domestic 
trafficking victims?  Where are child victims placed (e.g., 
in shelters, foster care, or juvenile justice detention 
centers)?  Does the country have specialized care for adults 
in addition to children?  Does the country have specialized 
care for male victims as well as female?   Does the country 
have specialized facilities dedicated to helping victims of 
trafficking?  Are these facilities operated by the government 
or by NGOs?  What is the funding source of these facilities? 
Please estimate the amount the government spent (in U.S. 
dollar equivalent) on these specialized facilities dedicated 
to helping trafficking victims during the reporting period. 
-- B. Most victim care facilities in France take the form of 
temporary shelters maintained by the network of NGOs, which 
are supported by government funding and private sources. 
Specifically, France works with the Association (ALC), the 
Committee Against Modern Slavery (CCEM), and L'Amicale du Nid 
among others to shelter and aid victims.  The CCEM contacts 
noted that they often require the aid of religious groups in 
different regions to provide temporary lodging for victims, 
as they only have a handful of emergency apartments for use 
and do not maintain permanent shelters.  In cooperation with 
Zero Tolerance on Modern Slavery (ETZ) in the south of 
France, the CCEM works with pro-bono medical and social 
service professionals to assist victims of forced labor.  For 
child victims, Action Teams Against Pimping (EACP) runs an 
SOS prostitution helpline and provides support for sexually 
exploited minors.  The government provides training through 
the Minister of Social Action to NGOs and social workers to 
help victims of trafficking.  The CCEM also works with local 
charities to provide interpretation services via telephone 
for victims in Arabic, Spanish, and Wolof, recognizing that 
the majority of victims are foreign nationals who may not 
speak French when they call hotlines. 
 
Does the government provide trafficking victims with access 
to legal, medical, and psychological services?  If so, please 
specify the kind of assistance provided.  Does the government 
provide funding or other forms of support to foreign or 
domestic NGOs and/or international organizations for 
providing these services to trafficking victims?  Please 
explain and provide any funding amounts in U.S. dollar 
equivalent.  If assistance provided was in-kind, please 
specify exact assistance.  Please specify if funding for 
assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional or 
local governments. 
-- C. The GOF sends victims to NGOs for assistance with 
temporary shelter and access to legal, medical, and 
psychological services.  General medical attention, including 
emergency care, is also provided through the national health 
care system.  In addition to such assistance, victims are 
also given a stipend by the GOF through NGOs, with the 
amounts varying per NGO.  CCEM contacts reported that they 
provide victims with a stipend of 100 euros ($137) a month. 
According to the OCRTEH, the government does not release 
complete figures on how much it contributes to anti-TIP NGOs 
every year.  However, contacts at the CCEM reveal that they 
received 46,000 euros ($63,020) in 2009, representing roughly 
20 percent of their annual budget. 
 
 
PARIS 00000198  002.6 OF 006 
 
 
Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, for 
example, by providing temporary to permanent residency 
status, or other relief from deportation?  If so, please 
explain. 
-- D. As French nationals are rarely victims of trafficking, 
the majority of the assistance is provided to foreign 
trafficking victims.  Under article R316-1 of the code of 
entry and stay of foreigners and asylum seekers (CESEDA), 
victims of trafficking or pimping may receive a temporary 
residence permit labeled "private and family life" for a 
minimum of six months by the local prefect if they file a 
complaint against the perpetrators of the crime or testify in 
criminal proceedings against a person prosecuted for a 
similar offense.  The OCRTEH stated that the temporary 
residence permits were typically valid for one year and are 
renewable every six month, for the duration of the criminal 
procedure provided that the conditions for its issuance 
continue to be met.  In the event of a final conviction of 
defendants for trafficking-related offenses, a permanent 
resident card may be issued to foreign national victims.  The 
French government does not report the number of residence 
cards given each year.  As in previous years, Fondation 
Scelles continued to express frustration with the fees 
required for the residency permit and renewal of the permit. 
The residency permit granted to victims that is valid for one 
year costs 300 euros ($411) and 55 euros ($79) to renew it 
every six months. 
 
Does the government provide longer-term shelter or housing 
benefits to victims or other resources to aid the victims in 
rebuilding their lives? 
-- E. The government does not provide longer-term shelter or 
housing benefits to victims. 
 
Does the government have a referral process to transfer 
victims detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by 
law enforcement authorities to institutions that provide 
short or long-term care (either government or NGO-run)? 
-- F. The government has an NGO-run referral program to 
transfer victims detained, arrested, or placed in protective 
custody by law enforcement authorities to institutions that 
provide short-term care.  The GOF also provides witness 
protection services for victims of trafficking who work with 
police to prosecute traffickers.  Case-specific protection in 
France must be authorized by a judge and can take the form of 
complete 24-hour-a-day protection for victims who will 
testify or a mixed protection program in which police work 
with NGOs to assure the protection of victims.  In order to 
qualify for the more robust protection program, victims must 
fulfill certain criteria that involve being the primary 
witness or essential to the outcome of a trial. 
 
What is the total number of trafficking victims identified 
during the reporting period?  Of these, how many victims were 
referred to care facilities for assistance by law enforcement 
authorities during the reporting period?  By social services 
officials?  What is the number of victims assisted by 
government-funded assistance programs and those not funded by 
the government during the reporting period? 
-- G. The government identified 822 trafficking victims in 
¶2008.  There is no official number of victims assisted by 
government-funded assistance programs and those not funded by 
the government during the reporting period. 
 
Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and social 
services personnel have a formal system of proactively 
identifying victims of trafficking among high-risk persons 
with whom they come in contact (e.g., foreign persons 
arrested for prostitution or immigration violations)?  For 
countries with legalized prostitution, does the government 
have a mechanism for screening for trafficking victims among 
persons involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex trade? 
-- H. The pocket-sized cards distributed by the MiQstry of 
Economy, Industry, and Employment instruct border police and 
NGOs on how to correctly identify trafficking victims. 
 
Does the country have a mechanism for screening for 
trafficking victims among persons involved in the 
legal/regulated commercial sex trade?  Are the rights of 
victims respected?  Are trafficking victims detained or 
jailed?  If so, for how long?  Are victims fined?  Are 
victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as 
those governing immigration or prostitution? 
-- I. Law enforcement contacts in the Ministry of Interior 
 
PARIS 00000198  003.6 OF 006 
 
 
report that the anti-soliciting law, which was criminalized 
in the 2003 Internal Security Law (LSI) is used as a means to 
evaluate the situation of prostitutes and screen for 
potential victims of trafficking.  There is evidence that 
victims may be inadvertently penalized for unlawful acts that 
were committed as a direct result of being trafficked.  NGOs 
reported that women in prostitution are sometimes arrested 
and fined for solicitation without being screened to 
determine whether they are trafficking victims. 
 
Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many 
victims assisted in the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers during the reporting period?  May victims file 
civil suits or seek legal action against traffickers?  Does 
anyone impede victim access to such legal redress?  If a 
victim is a material witness in a court case against a former 
employer, is the victim permitted to obtain other employment 
or to leave the country pending trial proceedings?  Are there 
means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
-- J. The GOF encourages victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of traffickers and provides 
temporary residence permits to those victims who provide 
information essential to the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers.  The law also permits trafficking victims to 
remain in the country for the duration of the trial if they 
agree to testify against their perpetrators.  Victims are 
allowed to stay long-term if they aid in the conviction of 
their perpetrator.  The Ministry of Justice did not provide 
specific numbers on the number of victims who assisted in the 
investigation and prosecution of traffickers during the 
reporting period. 
 
Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in identifying trafficking victims and 
in the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, 
including the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?   What is the number of 
trafficking victims assisted by the host country's embassies 
or consulates abroad during the reporting period?  Please 
explain the type of assistance provided (travel documents, 
referrals to assistance, payment for transportation home). 
-- K. According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the 
French government has officials in 100 embassies around the 
world who function as a liaison with the host government on 
trafficking issues.  In addition, there are also French 
police officers embedded in French embassies in source 
countries who work on trafficking in persons issues. 
Although the GOF did not provide the number of trafficking 
victims assisted by French embassies abroad during the 
reporting period, an example of French cooperation with other 
governments in the investigation of a trafficking case would 
be the successful dismantling of a child prostitution network 
in Cambodia by French and Cambodian police.  The joint sting 
operation against the pedophilia ring operating in Phnom Penh 
was carried out on January 21, 2010.  The existence of the 
network, in place since 2003, was revealed by an anonymous 
source of the French NGO "Innocence in Danger," which 
identifies suspected pedophiles on the internet.  For six 
months, Cambodian authorities investigated the case with the 
help of the French Embassy, leading to the arrest of two 
Cambodian citizens charged with child prostitution and an 
American suspected of indecent acts with three minors.  The 
MFA spokesperson said that "France is thrilled by the success 
of the operation...and will pursue such actions in 
partnership with the local authorities of the countries 
affected in order to fight human trafficking."  The victims 
have placed under the protection of NGOs in Cambodia. 
 
Does the government provide assistance, such as medical aid, 
shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are 
repatriated as victims of trafficking? 
-- L. There were no reports of French nationals as 
trafficking victims during the reporting period. 
 
Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work with 
trafficking victims?  What type of services do they provide? 
What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities? 
-- M. NGOs and the GOF work very closely to combat 
trafficking and to provide assistance to victims.  The 
inter-ministerial commission on anti-trafficking established 
 
PARIS 00000198  004.6 OF 006 
 
 
in 2008 is comprised of the following NGOs: the Committee 
Against Modern Slavery (CCEM), Dispositif ACSE, L'Amicale du 
Nid, Fondation Scelles, Hors la Rue, Les Amis du Bus des 
Femmes, and Amnesty International, which all work with 
trafficking victims in some form.  In addition, the 
commission involves the participation of the International 
Organization for Migration, the International Labor 
Organization (ILO), the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the European Commission, and 
the Council of Europe. 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
¶6. (U) Responses are keyed to reporting questions specified 
in paragraph 29 of reftel. 
 
Did the government conduct anti-trafficking information or 
education campaigns during the reporting period?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Please provide the number of people 
reached by such awareness efforts, if available.  Do these 
campaigns target potential trafficking victims and/or the 
demand for trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
-- A. The organization to End Child Prostitution, Child 
Pornography, and Trafficking of Children for Sexual Purposes 
(ECPAT) unveiled its new public campaign in March 2009. 
Courtesy of BETC Euro RSCG and Partizan, the new ECPAT 
campaign was launched in cooperation with Air France, a 
partner of ECPAT for the past 15 years.  The campaign 
developed several shocking and poignant themes in regards to 
sex tourism, child pornography, and child prostitution.  In 
both film and in print ads, the campaign against sexual 
tourism depicted the horrible reality of the sexual 
exploitation of children and the chain of violence they 
suffer as a result of the abuse.  The ads which have been 
strategically placed throughout Paris, show a disturbing 
series of photographs of a young Asian girl and the different 
stages of abuse she suffered before forced into prostitution. 
 In the hopes of shaming consumers of cyber child 
pornography, the film and print ad examples featured the 
often violent and painful ways in which children are forced 
to strip against their will and the immoral pleasure of 
adults viewing the content on-line.  Prison sentences and the 
legal consequences of sex with a minor were stressed 
repeatedly through the use of visual ad campaigns and radio 
spots to highlight the problem of the prostitution of minors. 
 All elements of the ECPAT campaign highlighted the strong 
French laws against the sexual exploitation of children. 
Program Coordinator for ECPAT Carole Bartoli stated that the 
campaigns seek to "hold consumers (of child sexual 
exploitation) accountable" and will keep them from 
"insulating themselves or minimizing the scope of their 
actions."  Launched on April 6, 2009, the campaign was 
distributed widely on television, in movie theatres, in the 
major dailies, via radio, and on the internet.  In June 2009, 
Air France aircraft and cars showcased the new campaign. 
ECPAT also distributed flyers and posters to all major 
tourism agencies in France.  In addition, Air France 
continues to show anti-sex trade films on buses 
 and shuttles between downtown Paris and major airports while 
also distributing anti-sex trade pamphlets on flights to 
sex-tourism destinations.  Airports similarly feature 
anti-trafficking and anti-sex trade posters inside terminals. 
 
On October 9, 2009, Secretary of State for Sports Rama Yade 
announced the creation of the public-private French "sports 
fund for the international protection of children," 
committing two million euros ($2.74 million) to the cause. 
She noted that foreign players, particularly from Africa, are 
recruited as early as age 13 by European training centers and 
an overwhelming majority of them do not reach professional 
levels, leaving them penniless and without official papers. 
Yade proposed working with FIFA and the African countries in 
the lead up to the 2010 World Cup in South Africa to become 
more active in fighting the practice of child sports 
trafficking.  She personally committed herself to bringing 
together all those actors who are willing to promote social 
development within communities and strengthen local 
organizations by providing essential infrastructure through 
outreach to clubs, leagues, federations, businesses, and 
fans. 
 
Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
 
PARIS 00000198  005.6 OF 006 
 
 
patterns for evidence of trafficking? 
-- B. The GOF does not have a designated border monitoring 
unit that focuses specifically on trafficking in persons. 
But border officials are trained to spot trends in 
trafficking in persons, as well as organized crime and 
narcotics.  The OCRTEH also works with immigration officials 
to report increases in trafficking and to combat trafficking. 
 
Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and 
multilateral on trafficking-related matters, such as a 
multi-agency working group or a task force? 
-- C. The General Secretariat for European Affairs created 
the inter-ministerial working group to ensure GOF compliance 
with the Council of Europe Convention on Action against 
Trafficking in Human Beings.  The convention states that 
"each Party shall take measures to establish or strengthen 
national coordination between the various bodies responsible 
for the prevention and the fight against trafficking in human 
beings."  The parties must therefore adopt "measures 
necessary to ensure the coordination of policy and 
administration of public agencies in the fight against the 
trafficking of human beings as necessary by establishing 
coordinating bodies."  To meet this requirement, the French 
multi-disciplinary working group, established in December 
2008, drafted a decree establishing greater inter-ministerial 
coordination and the text was forwarded to the Prime 
Minister.  As in previous years, the government also 
sponsored a nationwide conference at the Supreme Court on 
January 22, 2010, that brought together enfor 
cement officials, magistrates, and NGOs to discuss how better 
to improve communication and cooperation in protecting 
victims and preventing trafficking. 
 
Does the government have a national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons?  If the plan was developed during the 
reporting period, which agencies were involved in developing 
it?  Were NGOs consulted in the process?  What steps has the 
government taken to implement the action plan? 
-- D. The multi-disciplinary group, composed of experts from 
French government ministries and European NGOs, meet on a 
regular basis to define the structure of a national 
coordination and action plan to place the protection of 
trafficking victims at the center of the fight against 
organized crime.  Government offices also meet with NGOS 
under the aegis of the Cooperation Committee Against Sexual 
Exploitation to develop new proposals and encourage best 
practices that Qld update a 2002 national action plan to 
fight trafficking.  Ministry of Justice contacts stated that 
they plan to have a draft action plan ready for approval by 
the end of 2010. 
 
Required of all Posts: What measures has the government taken 
during the reporting period to reduce the demand for 
commercial sex acts? 
-- E: On November 25, 2009, Prime Minister Francois Fillon 
declared that combating violence against women would be the 
great national cause in 2010.  Every year, the GOF selects 
one major issue to represent the "grande cause nationale" and 
grants NGOs a special budget to lead the awareness campaign. 
The group of 25 NGOs assigned to lead the campaign against 
violence against women includes Fondation Scelles and 
L'Amicable du Nid, which have already promoted the need to 
raise awareness about the violence perpetrated against women 
exploited in the commercial sex industry and modern slavery. 
Fondation Scelles also works with the university system in 
France to engage directly with French youth and sensitize 
20,000 to 30,000 students to the issue of prostitution and 
the problem of human trafficking. 
 
Required of all Posts: What measures has the government taken 
during the reporting period to reduce the participation Q 
international child sex tourism by nationals of the country? 
-- F. The French government continues to fund programs 
through airlines and tourism operators describing the 
penalties for child sex tourism.  Pamphlets given to tourists 
feature a picture of a child and the message, "she is not 
merchandise."  The OCRTEH reported that the MFA researches 
and reports on indicators of child sex tourism abroad and 
uses this data to warn French tourists of child sex tourism 
sites and to monitor increases in sexual tourism.  All Air 
France buses and shuttles between Paris and Roissy-Charles de 
Gaule and Orly airports show a video reminding tourists that 
their actions on foreign soil are subject to prosecution in 
 
PARIS 00000198  006.8 OF 006 
 
 
France.  Club Med sends tourists traveling with their company 
to source countries documents detailing the penalties for 
engaging in sex with a minor.  All tourism students in France 
must do course work on sex tourism. 
 
To respond to the surge in prostitution on the internet, the 
center for the national child sexual abuse database (CNAIP), 
which is run by the National Gendarmerie in Rosny-sous-Bois, 
has granted gendarmes the right to pass themselves off as 
minors on web forums to track down internet pedophiles as of 
March 30, 2009.  In cooperation with international 
counterparts, the cyber-patrol units are responsible for 
examining all illegal content collected during criminal 
investigations of child abuse to identify perpetrators and 
victims.  Using a pseudonym or avatar, the on-line 
investigators will connect with chat rooms and forums to 
identify pedophiles and prevent potential offenses involving 
sexual proposals to minors. 
 
Required of posts in countries that have contributed over 100 
troops to international peacekeeping efforts: What measures 
has the government adopted to ensure that its nationals who 
are deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping or other 
similar mission do not engage in or facilitate severe forms 
of trafficking or exploit victims of such trafficking? 
-- G. French military personnel receive training on 
trafficking and sexual abuse during their basic training. 
There is also a three-week training course given to 
peacekeepers before their departure.  During this course, 
instructors recount problems of sexual abuse and 
exploitation, and soldiers are given a card that reminds them 
of international human rights.  France also supplies a legal 
advisor to deployed units who doubles as a human rights 
officer.  In this position, the officer assures that troops 
respect international norms and human rights.  The French NGO 
L'Amicale du Nid reported that it continues to work with the 
Ministry of Defense to organize more specific trafficking 
training. 
 
RIVKIN