10PHNOMPENH142
COMMEMORATION OF THE 60TH ANNIVERSARY OF U.S. - CAMBODIA
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0142/01 0570938
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260938Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1733UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000142 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/ES, R, F, EAP/MLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO
SUBJECT:  COMMEMORATION OF THE 60TH ANNIVERSARY OF U.S. - CAMBODIA 
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: July 2010 marks the 60th Anniversary of diplomatic 
relations between the United States and Cambodia, and the Embassy 
plans to mark this event with a week of commemorative activities 
designed to highlight the development of bilateral relations during 
that period and our commitment to Cambodia for the future.  Embassy 
seeks Department support and consideration of high-level visits to 
make the commemoration a success; see action request in paragraph 7. 
END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  Embassy Phnom Penh has planned an ambitious series of programs 
designed to highlight our contributions to the development of 
Cambodia over the past sixty years. A week of events beginning July 
18 is expected to include the signing of bilateral agreements in the 
health, education, food security and trade sectors, concerts by the 
MARFORPAC Marine Band and the rock band Dengue Fever (led by a 
Cambodian vocalist), and an academic symposium with participation of 
distinguished scholars from government and academia, including 
former U.S. Ambassadors to Cambodia. A gala dinner is also planned 
as well as a series of cultural events which highlight the 
contribution of Cambodian-Americans to the arts, including a film 
festival, art exhibit and dance recital produced by a 
Cambodian-American choreographer.  A joint 60th Anniversary 
commission has approved a logo which will be used to brand the 
celebration.  The Royal Government of Cambodia also plans to issue a 
special postage stamp to commemorate it. 
 
¶3.  This series of commemorative events will provide the United 
States with an ideal opportunity to reinforce the Secretary's 
message of U.S. engagement in Southeast Asia and our commitment to 
the responsible development of Cambodia.  The timing is particularly 
fortuitous in that the commemoration will happen during the same 
time frame as two major events that reflect our broadening military 
relationship: the visit by the hospital ship USS Mercy to provide 
treatment to many thousands of rural Cambodians through its medical 
humanitarian mission (June 15-28); and the Global Peacekeeping 
Operations Initiative (GPOI)Capstone exercise, a large multinational 
military exercise involving several thousand troops from both 
countries as well as participants from 22 other nations (July 
9-30). 
 
¶4.  Especially considering the tragedy of Cambodian history, these 
60th Anniversary events will help cement our long term commitment to 
Cambodia and highlight the concrete benefits of that commitment and 
cooperation.  Much of the public diplomacy planned for the 
anniversary will focus on the historical investment the U.S. made in 
the country's infrastructure and human capital since the early 
1950s.  Several of the events are slated to take place in buildings 
that were originally constructed with U.S. assistance during that 
period -- a meaningful way to emphasize to the younger generation 
that our presence in and commitment to Cambodia is not a fleeting 
phenomenon. 
 
¶5.  Opinion polls repeatedly reflect the overwhelmingly positive 
opinion of Cambodians towards the United States; roughly 85% of the 
population has a positive view of the U.S. and its ideals.  The 
planned commemorative events will show that we do not take this 
reaction for granted and that our commitment to Cambodia is not 
eclipsed by the growing influence of China, whose recent 50th 
anniversary celebration launched a series of high level visitors 
from Beijing.  Our planning is designed to enhance all sectors of 
our cooperation with Cambodia and to target all elements of 
Cambodian society in the process.  As such we believe it will lay 
the groundwork for strong future cooperation. 
 
¶6.  Foreign Minister Hor Namhong and the Ambassador are personally 
engaged in the planning front, and have formed a joint commission of 
selected Embassy staff and representatives from several Cambodian 
ministries.  Last fall, Hor Namhong invited the Secretary to visit 
Cambodia to commemorate the anniversary, and we would of course 
welcome the Secretary's participation -- and that of other senior 
administration officials as well -- during this time frame.  A 
substantive schedule for such a visit could include the signing of 
several bilateral agreements, a gala dinner possibly hosted at the 
Royal Palace (with the attendant historical context of the 
well-known 1967 visit of Jacqueline Kennedy hosted by then Prince 
Sihanouk), a speech to the youth of Cambodia focusing on the future, 
and a key role in whichever of the other ongoing commemorative 
events are appropriate.  The undeniable message to the world would 
be a clear commitment of the United States to the region, and every 
aspect of the 60th Anniversary events that would form the backdrop 
of the visit would underscore that message with visual acuity. 
 
¶7.  As existing post public diplomacy funds are not sufficient for 
the estimated $130,000 budget required for this commemoration, post 
seeks Department funding to support the initiative.  We will of 
course approach U.S. companies in the private sector for assistance, 
but do not expect a significant response from the limited pool of 
businesses active in Cambodia.  For its part, the Royal Government 
of Cambodia has offered in-kind contributions to support the 
celebration including prominent venues for many of the events, and 
it remains actively involved in coordinating the required 
 
permissions and venues to make it happen.  Post seeks an early 
indication of Department's support in order to proceed with the 
planning and commitments necessary to make this event a reality. 
 
RODLEY