10PRETORIA256
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER FEBRUARY 1-FEBRUARY 5
Fri Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO7642
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #0256/01 0361515
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051515Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1139
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7547
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1611
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9900UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 000256 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ASEC KDEM SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER FEBRUARY 1-FEBRUARY 5 
 
PRETORIA 00000256  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
South Africa's Crime Rates Reportedly Discourage Fans From 
Purchasing World Cup Tickets 
 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Al Jazeera English reports that, while South Africa will 
host the Football World Cup in less than six months, foreign fans 
are being discouraged from purchasing tickets reportedly because of 
high crime rates.  Fewer than half the numbers of foreign fans are 
coming - 450,000 - much fewer than the one million estimated back in 
2002 and FIFA officials want South African President Jacob Zuma to 
intervene.  The report noted that officials are spending 
approximately 200 million US dollars on security during the World 
Cup, hoping to allay security fears, and an additional 40,000 police 
will be deployed to maintain law and order.  According to police 
statistics, South Africa has one of the highest crime rates in the 
world, with 50 murders a day.  [Description of source: Doha Al 
Jazeera English TV in English -- international English-language news 
service of Al-Jazeera, independent television station financed by 
the Qatari Government] 
 
 
Broad Range of Commentary on Arrest of Security Minister's Wife 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Pretoria News reported that the January 29 arrest of State 
Security Minister Siyabonga Cwele's wife on drug-trafficking charges 
has raised many questions. Opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) MP 
Theo Coetzee questioned whether the country's security was the 
minister's number one priority, stating that he should have known 
about his wife's alleged activities.  Commenting on the incident, 
the Presidency asserted that the arrest of a cabinet minister's wife 
for alleged drug trafficking did not affect the governing African 
National Congress (ANC) party at all.  Coetzee said the minister 
will be called to appear before the intelligence committee "to 
demonstrate that he has not been compromised by the matter - failing 
which, he should resign."  [Description of source: Pretoria Pretoria 
News Online in English -- Website of local daily, privately owned by 
Independent Newspaper Company; URL: http://www.pretorianews.co.za/] 
 
 
RSA: Mining Minister Says Nationalization "Not Government Policy" 
 
¶4. (SBU)  The Sowetan reports that Minister of Mining Susan Shabangu 
stated on February 4 that there would be no change to the country's 
minerals laws in response to a question on the ANC Youth League's 
call for the nationalization of the country's mines.  Shabangu 
asserted that although South Africa was a democracy and people were 
free to debate issues of political importance, these debates "did 
not inform government policy."  South African President Jacob Zuma 
and Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe have said that there will be 
no change to the country's policy and that nationalization is not 
yet on the cards. [Description of source: Johannesburg Sowetan 
Online in English -- privately-owned weekday regional newspaper 
targeting a mainstream black audience and supportive of government 
policies; Internet: http://www.sowetan.co.za] 
 
Department of Justice Gears up for 2010 
QDepartment of Justice Gears up for 2010 
 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Some South African courts will extend their hours of 
operation hours during the FIFA World Cup to avoid possible backlogs 
of justice, the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development 
said on February 5.  Each court will be allocated two magistrates, 
two prosecutors and clerks, with the first team working from 8.30 am 
to 4.30 pm and the second one working from 4.30 pm to 11.30 pm.  A 
total of 1,140 court officials, 35 paralegals, and 93 foreign 
language interpreters will be deployed to all earmarked courts. 
Department of Justice spokesperson Tlali Tlali said the beefed up 
courts would ensure that existing court rolls are not overburdened 
with cases related to the tournament.  Tlali reported there will be 
54 dedicated courts, 34 district and 20 regional courts, across all 
nine provinces.  He added there would not be any mobile courts set 
up at the stadiums as existing physical infrastructure will be used 
instead.  (Buanews, February, 4, 2010) 
 
 
Investigation Unit Uncovers Corruption in Mpumalanga's Department of 
Agriculture 
 
PRETORIA 00000256  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Senior officials in Mpumalanga's Department of Agriculture 
have squandered thousands of dollars earmarked to assist emerging 
farmers and boost food production in the province.  Five senior 
managers from the department of agriculture have been implicated in 
a multi-million dollar fraud claim.  Investigation by the Forensic 
and Investigative Accounting Unit revealed that top officials paid 
the corporation and some service providers without following 
standard procedures; it is believed the officials connived with 
service providers to make payments for work not done.  The probe by 
the investigation unit was commissioned by Premier David Mabuza to 
look into the affairs of the Mpumalanga Agricultural Development 
Corporation, a parastatal attached to the department of agriculture. 
 (Sowetan, February, 4, 2010) 
 
ANC Women's League Defend Inkatha Freedom Party Chairperson 
 
 
¶7. (SBU)  The ANC Women's League (ANCWL) in KwaZulu-Natal has 
condemned the redeployment of Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) national 
chairperson Zanele Magwaza-Msibi from mayor of Zululand district 
municipality to the provincial legislature.  After weeks of denying 
the claim, the IFP confirmed on Sunday that Magwaza-Msibi would be 
redeployed.  The ANCWL provincial chairperson Lungi Gcabashe called 
for "all forces in the IFP who believe in a truly equal society to 
jump ship".  She told IFP supporters "there is only one conclusion 
to be drawn from the IFP's decision to redeploy its chairperson and 
that is there is no place for women in the IFP," Gcabashe said. 
Gcabashe said the decision gives credence to the long-held suspicion 
that there is a ceiling for women among IFP ranks.  (Sowetan, 
February 5, 2010) 
 
President Takes Time Off 
 
¶8. (SBU)  The presidency has issued a statement noting President 
Jacob Zuma would be taking February 4-5 off to "rest following a 
hectic schedule."  The announcement came after the president 
returned from the African Union summit and confirmation on February 
3 that he has in fact fathered a child (reportedly his 20th) with 
soccer boss Irvin Khoza's daughter, Sonono Khoza.  (Eyewitness, 
February, 4, 2010) 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
Desmond Tutu Calls For Iranians to Release American Hikers 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Nobel Lauriate Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu on 
February 2 called on Iranian authorities to release three American 
hikers, who have been held for six months for straying into Iran 
while hiking along the Iraqi-Iranian border.  Tutu said it was 
difficult to escape the conclusion that they were being held because 
they were Americans and not for any legal reason.  (SAPA, February 
2) 
 
GIPS