10PRETORIA395
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER FEBRUARY 22-FEBRUARY 26
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO4250
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #0395/01 0571315
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261315Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1364
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7612
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1675
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9965UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 000395 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ASEC KDEM SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER FEBRUARY 22-FEBRUARY 26 
 
PRETORIA 00000395  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
International Relations Minister Mashabane Visits China 
 
¶2. (SBU)  According to a statement released by the Department of 
International Relations and Cooperation, Minister Maite 
Nkoana-Mashabane undertook an official visit to the People's 
Republic of China (PRC) from February 25-26 to hold discussions with 
Yang Jiechi.  The visit takes place within the context of the 
Strategic Partnership Dialogue between South Africa and China, which 
was launched on 7 January 2008 as a vehicle to consolidate the 
bilateral relations between the two countries.  The main objectives 
of the visit are to examine ways to advance the African agenda, to 
deepen cooperation in the multilateral arena, to coordinate and 
strengthen business linkages, and to exchange Chinese views on the 
Asian regional integration.  Nkoana-Mashabane will also pay a 
courtesy call on Vice President Xi Jinping. [Description of source: 
Department of International Relations and Cooperation in English -- 
Official government website; URL: http://www.dfa.gov.za] 
 
Zuma Condemns Niger Coup 
 
¶3. (SBU) President Jacob Zuma joined the African Union, Economic 
Community of West African countries, and other African leaders in 
condemning the coup d'tat by Niger's military on February 18. 
(DIRCO Briefing, February 19) 
 
Deputy International Relations Minister in Congo 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Department of International Relations and Cooperation 
Deputy Minister Ebrahim Ebrahim attended the SADC Council of 
Ministers in Congo from February 24-26.  South Africa participated 
in the Southern African Development Community Council (SADC) of 
Ministers meeting within the context of strengthening SADC.  The 
SADC Council of Ministers session considered the following: regional 
food security, the establishment of a center for coordination of 
agricultural research and development, the establishment of the 
Zambezi Watercourse Commission, and a report from the Finance 
Committee.  (DIRCO Briefing, February 22) 
 
Pro-Democracy Groups Push for Democracy in Swaziland 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Pro-democracy groups from several southern African nations 
gathered in South Africa on February 21 to launch a campaign for 
democracy in Swaziland, whose government many consider to be one the 
few remaining absolute monarchies in the world.  Activists from 
trade and student unions, civic groups and Swazi opposition parties 
launched the Swaziland Democracy Campaign.  The campaign is designed 
to seek the removal of restrictions on political parties, the news 
media and political gatherings.  The group also is calling for free, 
multi-party elections.  International Relations Secretary for the 
Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) Bongani Masuku said 
these groups are calling for targeted sanctions against Swazi 
leaders.  (Voanews.com, February 22) 
 
South Africa Seizes North Korean Arms 
 
¶6. (SBU)  South Africa Government officials claim Pretoria has 
seized an illicit shipment of North Korean arms bound for the 
Republic of Congo in violation of United Nations sanctions.  The 
QRepublic of Congo in violation of United Nations sanctions.  The 
government reported the seizure to the UN Security Council.  The 
South African report on Monday February 22 was made to the UN panel 
monitoring sanctions imposed on North Korea last year following the 
government's underground nuclear test.  The report indicates that 
spare parts for tanks were seized in November 2009 after a tip-off 
from a French shipping company that the North Korean vessel was 
carrying suspicious cargo.  Experts from the Council's sanctions 
panel have been tasked with probing the case. (EWN, February 24) 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
Official Announces Details of World Cup Air Defense Plan 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Pretoria News reports that fighter jets and attack 
helicopters will be on standby during World Cup games in South 
Africa, ready to be scrambled at a moment's notice, to react to any 
potential terrorist attacks launched from the air, according to 
 
PRETORIA 00000395  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Brigadier-General Leslie Lombard, officer commanding Air Force 
Command Post.  The World Cup air defense plan is based on the CIA's 
Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP), which was compiled after 
the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center.  According to Lombard, a 
strict 50 nautical miles (92km) controlled zone in cities where 
games are being played will be enforced, with a total exclusion zone 
of 5 nautical miles (9km) around stadiums.  The management of the 
restricted airspace will be handled by the air force's command post, 
as a component of the national joint operation command. 
[Description of source: Pretoria News Online in English -- Website 
of local daily, privately owned by Independent Newspaper Company; 
URL: http://www.pretorianews.co.za/] 
 
Labor Federation COSATU Says Gordhan's Budget "Last Straw" on 
Alliance Ties 
 
¶8. (SBU)  SABC TV 3 reports that relations in the tripartite 
alliance have hit a "new low," with labor federation COSATU saying 
that Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan's budget speech was the "last 
straw."  COSATU said the budget, which it termed unilateral, had 
failed workers, prompting the federation to organize a series of 
strikes as part of a rolling mass action campaign beginning in 
October.  According to the report, observers say COSATU's reaction 
revealed some kind of regret for backing President Zuma. 
[Description of source: SABC 3 Television in English -- 
English-language television channel, nominally independent but 
partially funded by government] 
 
Government and Traditional Leaders to Intensify Partnership for 
Service Delivery 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Zuma has called for a stronger partnership between 
government and traditional leaders, saying this would ensure 
sustainable development in rural areas.  Speaking at the opening of 
the National House of Traditional Leaders, the South African leader 
told reporters that traditional leaders have a critical role to play 
with regard to rural development.  He said Godhan, in his budget 
speech, announced that several million dollars would be used this 
year for the Comprehensive Rural Development Strategy.  He also 
announced a new grant to support on-site water and sanitation 
infrastructure as part of the rural housing program.  Zuma urged 
traditional leaders to be part of government's year of action 
approach to ensure that service delivery challenges are addressed 
especially in rural areas.  (Note: It has become tradition that 
after the President delivers the State of the Nation Address, and 
the Minister of Finance delivers the Budget Speech, the President 
officially opens the National House of Traditional Leaders.  End 
note.)  (Buanews, February 23, 2010) 
 
Race Tension Hits the Democratic Alliance 
 
¶10. (SBU)  Coloured members of the Democratic Alliance (DA) have 
accused the party's leaders of undermining black and Coloured 
members.  Two DA councilors in Cape Town, Frank Martin and Grant 
Twigg, have raised concerns about the role of black delegates at the 
party's forthcoming provincial conference.  According to Martin and 
Twigg, the party "is more lenient towards white transgressors 
compared to black ones."  They cited alleged the party's decision to 
place Community Safety Minister in the Executive Committee (MEC) 
Lennit Max on special leave for the last 10 days after allegations 
surfaced that he had an extramarital affair with a police clerk in 
¶2007. The councilors contrasted this with the leniency shown by 
Western Cape Premier and party leader Helen Zille in disciplining 
QWestern Cape Premier and party leader Helen Zille in disciplining 
Western Cape party head Theuns Botha, where no action was taken 
against Botha when he "embarrassed" the party in 2007.  Martin and 
Twigg allege that this lack of action consistency is motivated by 
race issues within the party.  Zille insists that she has treated 
all candidates equally and based on the facts before her and said it 
is unfortunate that the race card is played on an issue which has 
nothing to do with race.  (www.iol.co.za February 22, 2010) 
 
Gauteng to Empower Women 
 
¶11. (SBU)  To reduce reliance on government grants, over 10,000 
young women in Gauteng townships will receive training in various 
skills development programs.  MEC for Health and Social Development 
Qedani Mahlangu reported that together with the Gauteng City Region 
Academy his department would train young women as auxiliary social 
workers, shop fitters, air conditioning technicians and lift 
technicians, giving them the opportunity to earn a decent living. 
The program will start in Heidelberg, and will later target 
economically depressed areas of Ekurhuleni, Johannesburg and 
Pretoria.  (Buanews, February 24, 2010) 
 
Service Delivery Protests Rock Gauteng 
 
¶12. (SBU)  Tensions flared in Sharpeville, South Gauteng after 
residents accused local political leaders of lining their pockets 
with millions of dollars meant to upgrade the local stadium and 
 
PRETORIA 00000395  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
other infrastructure projects in area.  The residents vowed to 
protest until Zuma addresses issues of fraud in Gauteng province. 
Meanwhile, Hartbeespoort residents in Gauteng met February 24 to 
discuss poor service delivery in their area, following reports that 
the tap water in the area was not safe and should be boiled first. 
Community members have threatened to withhold their rates and taxes 
until service delivery issues solved in the province.  (Eyewitness 
News, February 24, 2010) 
 
Prosecuting Chief Refutes Criticism Over His Appointment 
 
¶13. (SBU)  National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) head Menzi Simelane 
has brushed off criticism that he may not be able to execute his 
duties without fear or favor.  His appointment has been criticized 
by opposition parties following the Ginwala Commission which 
suggested that Menzi Simelane was "not a fit and proper person" to 
hold a legal position in the government.  Simelane was speaking at 
the University of Cape Town during a roundtable discussion on 
whether courts are able to hold public officials to account.  He 
said he will be able to perform his duties without any problems. 
(SABCNEWS, February 24, 2010) 
 
 
GIPS