10RABAT62
ANTICORRUPTION AUTHORITY PRESSES EFFORTS
Mon Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0062/01 0321645
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011645Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1099
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 0063UNCLAS RABAT 000062 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/AAE, NEA/PI AND NEA/MAG 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR - P BURKHEAD 
TUNIS ALSO FOR MEPI REGIONAL OFFICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINS ECON KCOR PGOV KMPI MO
SUBJECT: ANTICORRUPTION AUTHORITY PRESSES EFFORTS 
 
REF: 08 RABAT 0887 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  In its first year, Morocco's 
Central Authority for Corruption Prevention (ICPC), 
established by the Government as the coordinating 
body for the fight against corruption, has initiated 
work on several draft anti-corruption laws.  While 
Morocco's Transparency International corruption 
ratings worsened in 2009, recently the Government 
has sought to reinvigorate anti-corruption efforts. 
In December 2009, the Government set up an inter- 
ministerial commission to oversee and update 
Morocco's anti-corruption strategy.  In January, in 
cooperation with the private sector, the government 
instituted an ethics and corruption oversight body 
for the Customs Administration.  At a recent meeting 
with Ambassador, the ICPC put forward several ideas 
for possible cooperation with the Embassy.  End 
summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
FOCUS ON ANTI-CORRUPTION LEGISLATION 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) On January 14, the Ambassador, Economic 
Counselor and EconOff met with ICPC President 
Abdesselam Aboudrar and several members of his ICPC 
team.  Aboudrar, one of the founders of NGO 
Transparency Maroc, outlined the ICPC's plans.  The 
ICPC became operational in January 2009 with a 
mission to ensure inter-ministerial coordination in 
anti-corruption efforts and to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the Government's actions (reftel). 
Aboudrar emphasized that the ICPC's focus is 
prevention, not prosecution and investigation of 
corruption cases. 
 
¶3.  (U) The ICPC has emphasized areas of corruption 
that most directly affect common citizens, including 
traffic enforcement, public health services, the 
justice system and urban planning.  Aboudrar told 
the Ambassador the ICPC is drafting legislation on 
whistleblower protection and on public access to 
information.  The ICPC is also developing tools for 
prevention of conflicts of interest.  Aboudrar 
explained that although the ICPC does not adjudicate 
corruption cases, it forwards corruption complaints 
it receives to the Ministry of Justice for follow- 
up. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Aboudrar said that in 2010 the ICPC plans 
to increase its staff from 25 to 45 members and open 
several regional offices.  He conceded that the 
Moroccan Government has not yet allocated sufficient 
funding for these projects.  He felt confident that 
the ICPC would obtain an increased budget, he said, 
since the ICPC "enjoys support of the highest 
level." 
 
-------------------------- 
NEED TO INCREASE SANCTIONS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Aboudrar noted that increasing sanctions 
for corruption was essential, since Moroccans will 
not believe that there is political will to fight 
corruption unless criminals are punished.  He 
explained that in Morocco corruption is often not 
considered a crime, but a common fact of everyday 
life.  Aboudrar opined that the Government needs to 
tackle both high-level and petty corruption.  Petty 
corruption, he explained, affects daily lives of 
people, and it can even be a "question of life or 
death" if someone needs to pay a bribe to get 
medical care.  Aboudrar also stressed the need to 
regulate monopolies and introduce measures to 
increase the government's transparency and 
accountability. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL RANKING WORSENS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Ambassador emphasized that corruption 
in the judiciary is a serious deterrent to increased 
American investment in Morocco.  Aboudrar told us 
that the ICPC would address corruption in the 
judicial system through a series of public debates 
planned for 2010.  Although government officials 
frequently cite corruption as one of the key 
obstacles to development, the public perception is 
that the problem worsened over the last decade. 
Transparency International (TI) ranked 89th Morocco 
in a list of 180 countries included in its 2009 
Corruption Perception Index Survey.  With a 3.3 
index on a scale from 0 to 10, Morocco's ranking 
slid by 9 places from 2008.  According to TI, real 
estate is the sector perceived as most affected by 
corruption, and the judiciary is considered the most 
corrupt public institution.  Aboudrar recently told 
the press that the fight against corruption is a 
long-term undertaking and it would take some time 
for the country to reap the benefits of the efforts 
it makes to curb the phenomenon. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
GOVERNMENT REINVIGORATES ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In December 2009, the Government of 
Morocco formed a ministerial-level commission tasked 
with updating the government's anti-corruption 
strategy and developing a set of new laws, including 
a draft law on access to information and a draft law 
on whistleblower protection.  The ICPC will work 
closely with the ministerial commission.  On January 
19, the Customs Administration, in cooperation with 
the quasi-official private sector association, the 
General Confederation of Moroccan Companies (CGEM), 
established a watchdog body tasked with collecting 
information and providing analysis on ethics 
problems and corruption within the Customs 
Administration.  The "observatory" will help 
identify areas particularly prone to corruption and 
will follow up on implementation of its 
recommendations. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Government of Morocco has recently 
taken part in several international and regional 
initiatives to improve public governance.  In 
November 2009, Morocco took over the co-presidency 
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development's (OECD's) Middle East and North Africa 
(MENA) Initiative on Good Governance and Investment 
for Development.  Morocco will also chair the third 
Convention of the State Parties to the UN Convention 
against Corruption (UNCAC) in 2011. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
ICPC OUTLINES IDEAS FOR COOPERATION WITH THE EMBASSY 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) ICPC Secretary General Rabha Zeidguy 
presented several areas for possible cooperation 
with the Embassy to help Morocco's anticorruption 
effort.  These include:  promoting ethics in the 
public sector; developing tools and indicators for 
evaluating effectiveness of inspection and control 
bodies of the government and judiciary; promoting e- 
government as a tool to fight corruption; and 
engaging speakers to participate in debates on 
corruption in the judiciary. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Comment:  We agree with many observers 
that the public perception of the government's 
determination to tackle corruption will depend 
largely on whether there are prosecutions of well- 
connected, large-scale operators.  If all the "big 
fish" appear to escape the net, broad support to 
crack down on petty bribe-taking by police and 
health care personnel will dissipate.  It is too 
early to conclude that Aboudrar and his colleagues 
on the ICPC have the high-level backing they will 
need to pursue an evenhanded approach to rooting out 
corruption.  The Mission intends to continue to 
support the ICPC's efforts while waiting for the 
evidence to come in, financing not only performances 
of an anti-corruption play through public diplomacy 
and Middle East Partnership Initiative funds but 
also seeking new vehicles to highlight the anti- 
corruption message.  End Comment. 
 
Kaplan