10RIYADH182
SCENESETTER FOR SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE AMBASSADOR
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Riyadh
VZCZCXRO2513
OO RUEHSL
DE RUEHRH #0182/01 0431215
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 121215Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY RIYADH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2477
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDO/AMEMBASSY DOHA PRIORITY 0817
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD PRIORITY 4835
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0325
RUEHDH/AMCONSUL DHAHRAN PRIORITY 0481
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0595E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 RIYADH 000182 

NOFORN 
SIPDIS 

S/SRAP FOR AMBASSADOR HOLBROOKE 
DOHA FOR AMBASSADOR HOLBROOKE 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2020 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KTFN SA AF PK
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE AMBASSADOR 
HOLBROOKE'S FEBRUARY 15-16 VISIT TO RIYADH 

REF: KABUL 500 

RIYADH 00000182 001.2 OF 003 


Classified By: Ambassador James B. Smith for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 

¶1. (C) Ambassador Holbrooke, Embassy Riyadh warmly welcomes 
you to Saudi Arabia, which, by virtue of its historical and 
cultural ties to Central Asia; personal relationships between 
Saudi, Afghani and Pakistani leaders; financial power; and 
leadership of the Muslim world, can play a central role in 
implementing the President's strategy for Afghanistan and 
Pakistan. Your visit comes at a time of great potential but 
great uncertainty: the Saudi-Afghan relationship appears to 
be warming up, while the traditionally close Saudi-Pakistani 
relationship has grown increasingly strained. The Saudis are 
broadly supportive of our approach to Afghanistan and 
Pakistan, but occasionally express skepticism about our 
timing or our approach. Your visit provides an opportunity 
to mine the Saudis' wealth of experience in dealing with 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and extremism, and further explore 
ways to translate our shared goals into action in the unique 
Saudi context. We have requested meetings with GIP Director 
Prince Muqrin bin Abdulaziz, Assistant Interior Minister 
Prince Mohammed bin Nayif, and Prince Turki Al-Faisal during 
your visit. 

¶2. (C) SAUDI-AFGHAN RELATIONS WARMING: President Karzai's 
February 2-3 visit to the Kingdom, although richer in 
symbolism than substance, was a sign that lukewarm 
Saudi-Afghan relations may finally be warming up. In his 
official statement at the London Conference, FM Saud 
announced a $150 million pledge of additional financial 
support for Afghan reconstruction. He expressed broad Saudi 
support for reconciliation, adding that they would be willing 
to assist at the request of President Karzai-- on the 
condition that the Taliban sever its relationship with 
Al-Qaeda and cease providing refuge to its leaders. While 
not as forward leaning as we may have liked, FM Saud's 
statement put the Saudis on the record and created an 
opportunity to put reconciliation talks back in 
motion--eventually. Saudi participation at the Turkish-led 
regional conference on Afghanistan on January 26 was further 
evidence of the Saudi commitment to engagement. Karzai's 
visit showed that the King was ready to deal with Karzai as a 
legitimate, Muslim head of state. However, the Saudis 
continue to have concerns about Afghan corruption and believe 
greater political incorporation of the Pashtun community is 
essential. Their apparent wish to downplay Karzai's 
visit--as compared to the Afghans (reftel)--may also indicate 
the King's desire to keep some distance and maintain his 
credibility as a potential reconciliation mediator. 

¶3. (S/NF) BUT MEDIATION NOT READY FOR PRIME TIME: 
Privately, the Saudis tell us it's still "too soon" to be 
publicly discussing technical and financial aspects of 
reintegration efforts. GIP Director Prince Muqrin has made 
clear that his marching orders are to work through 
intelligence channels only until progress becomes 
sustainable, at which point foreign ministries will be 
brought in. In a recent meeting with the Ambassador, Prince 
Muqrin hinted at but did not provide details about what 
appears to be significant movement on the Saudi mediation 
effort, with visits by high-level Taliban and Afghan 
officials, since the Hajj. We surmise that Muqrin is 
reluctant to share information because the talks remain 
delicate and he fears U.S. involvement could derail progress. 
He has also voiced concern about how to address UNSCR 1267 
prohibitions on dealing with various Taliban members. 

¶4. (C) ZARDARI STILL THE PROBLEM IN PAKISTAN: The Saudis 
generally agree that there is a need to deny terrorists 
safehavens in Pakistan, but question whether the methods we 
have outlined will be effective. Despite tense relations 
with the Zardari government, close military and intelligence 
cooperation continues between Saudi Arabia and Pakistan. The 
Saudis believe opposition leader Nawaz Sharif can play a 
"great role" in working with tribal chiefs and that "money is 
better than bullets" in the fight against the Taliban. They 
have started to fulfill their pledge from the Tokyo donor,s 
conference (over half of the $700 million pledged has been 
disbursed) and have expressed a willingness to continue with 
financial support for a stable Pakistan. Saudi interlocutors 
stress the importance of remembering that Pakistan remains 

RIYADH 00000182 002.2 OF 003 


pre-occupied with issues on its Indian border, coloring its 
ability to deal with the Taliban. 

¶5. (C) IN THE ARMY WE TRUST: The tumultuous democratic 
process in Pakistan makes the Saudis nervous, and they appear 
to be looking for "another Musharraf": a strong, forceful 
leader they know they can trust. In his January meeting with 
General Jones, the King cited President Zardari as an 
impediment to denying terrorist safehavens, calling him an 
"obstacle" and "a rotten head" that was infecting the whole 
body. He maintained that the Pakistani Army was capable of 
being a strong partner for the U.S., and opined that U.S. 
development assistance would rebuild trust. He asserted that 
that the Army was staying out of Pakistani politics in 
deference to U.S. wishes, rather than doing what it "should." 
FM Saud told General Jones that we must reach out to tribal 
leaders and separate "those we could work with" from "those 
we must fight." He believed that using the military to fight 
extremists posed certain dangers, and that the credibility of 
the army must be maintained. The Saudis were pushing 
Pakistan's civilian leaders to work together, but "compromise 
seemed alien to Pakistani politicians." 

¶6. (C) TURKI'S TAKE: During a recent meeting with 
Ambassador, former GIP Director Prince Turki Al-Faisal called 
Afghanistan a "puzzle," where establishing trust with Afghan 
leaders, and recognizing the links between Pakistan and the 
Taliban, were keys to success. All financial aid to the 
Afghan government should be conditional: benchmarks must be 
set for the leadership, and aid must be withheld until these 
are met. Recent Saudi efforts to assist in Taliban mediation 
had failed, he said, when "both sides fell short." He 
described the Taliban leadership as "fractured," and 
suggested the U.S. and NATO needed to target criminal 
elements more vociferously and re-focus our attention on 
capturing Osama Bin Laden and Ayman Al-Zawahiri. He 
suggested Saudi Arabia, the U.S., China, Russia, Afghanistan 
and Pakistan could join forces and share assets in order to 
capture or kill bin Laden and Al-Zawahiri. This would break 
the terrorists' "aura of invincibility" and allow the U.S. to 
"declare victory" and move on. 

¶7. (S/NF) TERRORISM FINANCE: Terrorist funding emanating 
from Saudi Arabia remains a serious concern. Over the last 
year, however, Saudi Arabia has made important progress in 
combating al-Qaida financing emanating from the country. 
Sensitive reporting indicates that al-Qaida's ability to 
raise funds has deteriorated substantially, and that it is 
now in its weakest state since 9/11. The Kingdom is also 
cooperating more actively than at any previous point to 
respond to terrorist financing concerns raised by the United 
States, and to investigate and detain financial facilitators 
of concern. Nonetheless, sustained engagement is required to 
maintain the current momentum, particularly in providing the 
Saudis with specific details and actionable information. 
Your visit provides another opportunity to welcome the 
progress Saudi Arabia has made, and reiterate the importance 
that President Obama and the USG place on curtailing 
fundraising activity by global terrorist groups in Saudi 
Arabia, particularly those that undermine the stability of 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. 

¶8. (S/NF) TERRORISM FINANCE, CONTINUED: While in the past 
the KSA stood reluctant to pursue Saudi donors who backed 
groups that did not directly threaten the Kingdom, the Saudi 
Ministry of Interior (MOI) has now demonstrated willingness 
to take action, and has begun to detain individuals involved 
in funding networks for groups such as Lashkar e-Tayyiba 
(LeT), the Taliban, and in some cases even Hamas. Our TF 
cooperation with the MOI is of utmost strategic importance to 
U.S. national security as donors in Saudi Arabia continue to 
constitute a source of funding to Sunni extremist groups 
worldwide. Available intelligence reflects that the Kingdom 
remains an important fundraising locale-especially during the 
Hajj and Ramadan-for the Taliban, LeT, and other terrorist 
groups based in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The MOI remains 
almost completely dependent on the CIA to provide analytic 
support and direction for its counterterrorism operations. As 
such, our success against terrorist financing in the Kingdom 
remains directly tied to our ability to provide actionable 
intelligence to our Saudi counterparts. In order to enhance 
the USG's ability to influence and direct Saudi efforts to 

RIYADH 00000182 003.2 OF 003 


disrupt terrorist financing, in 2008 we stood up a Treasury 
attach office in Embassy Riyadh. This office actively 
contributes to the daily intelligence sharing process that 
is led by CIA. 

¶9. (S/NF) TERRORISM FINANCE, CONTINUED: Saudi Arabia has 
taken increasingly aggressive efforts to disrupt al-Qaida's 
access to funding from Saudi sources. An example of recent 
progress by the KSA is the conviction of over 300 people for 
involvement in terrorism, including some for providing 
financial support. News reports suggest that appeals may be 
opened to the media in order to enhance the deterrent effects 
of such prosecutions. In addition, Assistant Interior 
Minister for Security Affairs Mohammed bin Nayif stated that 
the Ministry of the Interior (MOI) deliberately timed its 
August 19, 2009 press release regarding the arrest of 44 
terrorist supporters to deter potential donors from giving 
money to suspected terrorist groups during Ramadan. Although 
a great deal of work remains to be done, Mohammed bin Nayif 
has given his commitment to work with the United States on 
Taliban finance, and has said that the MOI will arrest 
individuals involved in Saudi-based Taliban fundraising 
activities - even if involved in the reconciliation process - 
when provided with actionable intelligence. 

¶10. (S/NF) IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES: The Saudis have 
expressed broad support for the President's strategy on 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, but often balk when asked to 
designate an SRAP to coordinate policy with the USG and 
others. In part, this reflects the centralized Saudi 
decision-making process and the reality that issues related 
to Afghanistan and Pakistan policy are not delegated, but 
rather dealt with directly by the King and members of the 
intelligence community. While the Saudis are hesitant to 
delegate authority and tend to make only broad-based 
commitments to high-profile, multilateral initiatives, they 
appear ready, willing and eager to share their experiences 
with us and identify greater opportunities for cooperation on 
a bilateral basis. Your visit provides an opportunity to 
further explore how we can best translate our shared goals 
into action in the unique Saudi context. 

SMITH