10STATE15561
COOPERATION WITH THE INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR
Sat Feb 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5561 0510106
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 200101Z FEB 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT PRIORITY 0000
RUEHMK/AMEMBASSY MANAMA PRIORITY 0000
RUEHMS/AMEMBASSY MUSCAT PRIORITY 0000
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0000
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 0000
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 015561 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC KNNP ENRG TRGY MU BA KU SA
SUBJECT: COOPERATION WITH THE INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR 
SAFEGUARDS AND ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  Please see paragraphs 7 and 8. 
 
¶2. (U) SUMMARY: During the January 2010 Department of 
State-led delegation to the Gulf region, the Department of 
Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration (DOE/NNSA) 
provided information on the potential for cooperation with 
the International Nuclear Safeguards and Engagement Program 
(INSEP).  As described during the meetings, INSEP conducts 
peaceful nuclear cooperation with selected nations to improve 
nuclear safeguards infrastructures as those nations move 
toward civil nuclear energy.  To this end, DOE/NNSA would 
like to explore the establishment of a non-legally binding, 
technical arrangement for cooperation on nonproliferation and 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy between DOE/NNSA and the 
appropriate counterpart organization in Bahrain, Oman, 
Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia.  This message contains further 
information on INSEP, requests that Embassy convey this 
proposal formally to appropriate officials in Bahrain, Oman, 
Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia, and proposes a DOE/NNSA delegation 
hold detailed discussions with appropriate officials during 
the March 14-18, 2010 "International Conference on Human 
Resource Development for Introducing and Expanding Nuclear 
Power Programmes" to be held Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (U) BACKGROUND: The United States regards civil nuclear 
energy as an important source of energy for both developed 
and developing nations.  Under Article IV of the NPT, the 
U.S. supports peaceful nuclear development and applications 
through bilateral cooperation with developing states.  This 
cooperation, complementary to the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) Technical Cooperation Programme, has enabled 
many developing countries greater utilization of peaceful 
nuclear techniques in a wide range of disciplines, such as 
nuclear safety, nuclear safeguards, medicine, agriculture, 
and water resources. 
 
¶4. (U) As a component of U.S. bilateral cooperation, the 
DOE/NNSA International Nuclear Safeguards and Engagement 
Program (INSEP) strengthens the international nuclear 
safeguards regime and supports the safe, secure, and peaceful 
implementation of nuclear technologies.  Beginning in 1982, 
DOE/NNSA has implemented non-legally-binding bilateral 
cooperation arrangements with Algeria, Argentina, Egypt, 
Indonesia, Libya, Mexico, Morocco, Peru, Romania, Thailand, 
and Vietnam.  New arrangements are being negotiated with 
Malaysia and the UAE. 
 
¶5.  (U) Under these arrangements, INSEP conducts peaceful 
nuclear cooperation with these nations to improve nuclear 
safeguards infrastructures as those nations move toward civil 
nuclear energy.  This cooperation addresses numerous nuclear 
infrastructure topics including: radiation protection; 
nuclear regulation; energy planning; international nuclear 
safeguards; emergency planning and response; radioactive 
waste management; environment, safety and health; quality 
assurance; international laboratory certification; and 
nuclear human resource development.  The areas for 
collaboration are developed jointly between the technical 
organizations in both countries, with the overall approval by 
DOE/NNSA and Department of State.  Mechanisms for 
collaboration include: on-site joint evaluation; technical 
training and workshops; expert visits and consultation; 
exchange of samples, computer codes, and standards; and use 
of non-classified facilities.  Through these collaborative 
activities, INSEP supports effective civil nuclear 
stewardship and helps developing countries meet future 
nuclear energy needs in ways that are safe, secure, and 
consistent with the highest standards of nuclear 
nonproliferation. 
 
¶6.  (U) INSEP would like to explore the possibility of 
bilateral collaboration with Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait, and Saudi 
Arabia, and hold related discussions with appropriate 
officials during the March 14-18, 2010 "International 
Conference on Human Resource Development for Introducing and 
Expanding Nuclear Power Programmes" to be held Abu Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates. END BACKGROUND. 
 
¶7.  (U) BEGIN ACTION REQUEST: Drawing from the background 
above and the talking points contained in para 9 below, 
Embassy is requested to notify appropriate officials in 
Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia, of INSEP's interest 
in following up on its January 2009 visit and exploring the 
potential for bilateral cooperation.  In order to initiate 
this dialogue, Embassy is requested to deliver the attached 
model "Arrangement for Cooperation" to these countries about 
the potential areas for cooperation (see para 10).  (NOTE: 
For Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, with which we presently have 
non-binding civil nuclear cooperation Memoranda of 
Understanding (dated 3/24/08 and 5/16/08 respectively), this 
arrangement would be implemented pursuant to the MOU.  In 
these cases, the MOU would set an over-arching framework, 
while the proposed new INSEP arrangement sets a basis for 
technical cooperation.  This approach has been successfully 
applied in the United Arab Emirates.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶8.  (U) ACTION REQUEST CONTINUED: Embassy is also requested 
to notify officials in Bahrain, Oman, and Kuwait, and Saudi 
Arabia about INSEP's interest in holding detailed discussions 
about cooperation during the March 14-18, 2010 "International 
Conference on Human Resource Development for Introducing and 
Expanding Nuclear Power Programmes" to be held Abu Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates.  Embassy is requested to report any 
particular interest to Matthew Van Sickle at NNSA (address 
below).  END ACTION REQUEST. 
 
¶9.  (U) BEGIN TALKING POINTS: 
 
-- We would like to thank you for the recent productive 
meetings during the January 2010 Department of State- led 
delegation on civil nuclear energy cooperation with the 
United States. 
 
-- During those meetings, you received information about the 
U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security 
Administration (DOE/NNSA) and its International Nuclear 
Safeguards and Engagement Program (INSEP). 
 
--We would like to explore the establishment of a non-legally 
binding, technical arrangement for cooperation on 
nonproliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
 
-- Such cooperation would benefit both countries through 
exchange of experience and best practices, and would 
demonstrate commitment by both countries to the safe, secure, 
and peaceful implementation of nuclear energy. 
 
-- Potential areas for collaboration with INSEP include: 
international safeguards; radiation protection; nuclear 
regulation; energy planning; emergency planning and response; 
radioactive waste management; environment, safety and health; 
quality assurance; international laboratory certification; 
and nuclear human resource development. 
-- In order to better understand the steps necessary for 
cooperation, we have provided a copy of the model 
"Arrangement for Cooperation" that INSEP uses to establish 
technical partnerships.  This "Arrangement for Cooperation" 
is a non-legally binding document that establishes a 
framework for cooperation by outlining the different forms of 
cooperation available and provides an organizational 
structure for the partnership.  While each Arrangement is 
negotiated separately, this model provides an initial point 
for discussion. 
 
-- As a next step, representatives from INSEP propose holding 
detailed discussions about the potential for cooperation 
during the March 14-18, 2010 "International Conference on 
Human Resource Development for Introducing and Expanding 
Nuclear Power Programmes" to be held Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates. 
 
-- For additional information, please contact Matthew Van 
Sickle at matthew.vansickle@nnsa.doe.gov or at 202-586-2859. 
 
END TALKING POINTS. 
 
¶10.  (U) BEGIN ATTACHMENT MODEL "ARRANGEMENT FOR COOPERATION". 
 
ARRANGEMENT BETWEEN THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY OF THE UNITED 
STATES OF AMERICA AND the (appropriate MINISTRY or authority) 
OF THE (Country) FOR INFORMATION EXCHANGE AND COOPERATION IN 
THE PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
NONPROLIFERATION 
 
The Department of Energy of the United States of America 
(DOE) and the (Ministry) of the (Country), hereinafter 
referred to as the "Participants," 
 
Including, within their respective missions, programs for the 
development and application of peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and associated infrastructures in their respective 
countries; 
 
Recognizing the interest of the United States of America and 
(Country) in promoting cooperation in the area of peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy as called for in Article IV of the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; 
 
Noting the desire of the DOE, through its National Nuclear 
Security Administration (NNSA) and its national laboratories, 
and of the (Ministry), through its (Designated Entity(ies)), 
to exchange technical information and to cooperate in the 
field of peaceful nuclear energy infrastructure and 
nonproliferation; 
 
Have reached the following understanding: 
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Arrangement is to establish a cooperative 
institutional relationship between the Participants for the 
exchange of unclassified, non-proprietary technological, 
scientific, and other information regarding peaceful nuclear 
energy infrastructure and to facilitate additional forms of 
cooperation to the extent permitted by the laws, regulations, 
and policies of their respective Governments.  Under this 
Arrangement, cooperative activities include projects that 
establish effective nuclear infrastructure promoting best 
practices in nuclear safeguards, safety, and security. 
SECTION 2 - FORMS OF COOPERATION 
¶A.    The activities intended to be carried out by the 
Participants under this Arrangement may include the 
following, subject to available funds and to the extent 
permitted by the laws, regulations, and policies of their 
respective Governments: 
¶1.    Exchange of unclassified, non-proprietary 
technological, scientific, and other information; 
¶2.    Training of technical, scientific, and managerial 
personnel through technical training visits; work periods in 
laboratories or other institutions; and seminars or specific 
courses in subject areas such as but not limited to nuclear 
legislation and regulation; nuclear safeguards; nuclear 
material physical security; quality assurance; emergency 
preparedness; environment, safety, and health; low- and 
intermediate-level radioactive waste management; and research 
reactor operations and utilization; 
¶3.    Facilitation by NNSA of acquisition by the (Designated 
Entity(ies)) of appropriate laboratory equipment or 
associated materials that are difficult to obtain in a timely 
manner, to include recommendation of appropriate items for 
acquisition, coordination with suppliers and vendors, and 
review and consultation on export control requirements; 
¶4.    Joint projects in which each Participant is, unless 
otherwise determined in writing, responsible for the costs it 
incurs; 
¶5.    Organization of technical seminars, workshops, and 
meetings; and 
¶6.    Other specific forms of collaboration relating to 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear infrastructure as 
may be added by written arrangement of the Participants. 
¶B.    To the extent permitted by the laws, regulations, and 
policies of their respective Governments, the Participants' 
cooperation in the activities described in subparagraph (A) 
of this Section may be implemented through the following: 
¶1.    Short visits by DOE's or the (Designated Entity(ies)') 
expert teams or individuals to the other's laboratories or 
other facilities; 
¶2.    Working visits of either DOE's or the (Designated 
Entity(ies)') personnel to the other's laboratories or other 
facilities; 
¶3.    Use by the (Designated Entity(ies)') personnel of 
appropriate facilities and equipment owned and operated by 
DOE or its laboratories; 
¶C.    DOE and the (Designated Entity(ies)) should confirm in 
writing the details of any specific cooperation undertaken 
under this Arrangement, including the conduct of specific 
projects for which DOE may utilize its laboratories or other 
facilities. 
¶D.    Although the generation of intellectual property is not 
foreseen at this stage of cooperation, should DOE and the 
(Ministry) desire to undertake a joint project that could 
result in the creation of intellectual property, they should 
conclude an appropriate written agreement therefor.  Each 
such agreement should include appropriate provisions for 
carrying out the joint project, including such matters as 
technical scope, intellectual property protection and 
allocation, management, costs, cost-sharing and schedule of 
work. 
SECTION 3 - MANAGEMENT 
¶A.    Each Participant intends to name one Principal 
Coordinator to supervise its respective activities under this 
Arrangement.  Unless otherwise determined, the Principal 
Coordinators should meet or communicate annually to evaluate 
the status of cooperation under this Arrangement.  This 
evaluation should include review of the achievements, 
problems, and effectiveness of activities under this 
Arrangement.  The Principal Coordinators should also identify 
and propose for Participants' approval future collaborative 
opportunities with a view toward maximizing the mutual 
benefits of cooperation. 
¶B.    With the exception of joint projects described in 
Section 2 D. and under the Participants' direction, the 
Principal Coordinators should establish an Action Sheet for 
each cooperative activity, such as those in Section 2 A.2. 
Each Action Sheet should include objectives, task 
description, milestones, schedule, and assignment of 
responsibilities for participating institutions.  Action 
Sheets should specify start and end dates, typically being 
from one to three years in duration. 
¶C.    Subject to the prior approval of the Participants, each 
Principal Coordinator may appoint a Technical Coordinator to 
manage specific cooperative activities initiated under this 
Arrangement and to establish and maintain working contacts at 
the staff level. 
SECTION 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
¶A.    Cooperation under this Arrangement may commence upon 
signature of both Participants. 
¶B.    The terms of this Arrangement may be altered in writing 
by the Participants' mutual determination.  If either 
Participant wishes to discontinue its activities under this 
Arrangement, it should endeavor to give at least 30 days 
advance written notice to the other Participant 
¶C.    Each Participant should conduct the activities under 
this Arrangement in accordance with the laws, regulations, 
and policies of that Participant's Government and applicable 
international agreements to which that Participant's 
Government is party. 
¶D.    Each Participant should handle information received 
from the other Participant in implementing this Arrangement 
in accordance with the applicable laws, regulations, and 
policies of the receiving Participant's Government. 
¶E.    This Arrangement is not intended to create legally 
binding obligations between the Participants.  The 
Participants understand that the cooperative activities are 
subject to available funds and personnel. 
¶F.    Unless otherwise determined in writing, each 
Participant is responsible for the costs it incurs in 
participating in the activities contemplated by this 
Arrangement. 
 
END ATTACHMENT MODEL "ARRANGEMENT FOR COOPERATION". 
 
¶11.  (U) Embassy is requested to provide response and points 
of contact to Mr. Matthew Van Sickle DOE/NNSA/NA-242 at 
matthew.vansickle@nnsa.doe.gov or 202-586-2859 by March 5, 
¶2010.  Embassy assistance is greatly appreciated.  END TEXT. 
CLINTON