10WELLINGTON49
New Zealand: PM Key and Diplomatic Corps hear grievances at
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0049 0410628
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 100628Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0349
INFO RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTONC O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000049 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP, EAP/ANP 
AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON PASS TO AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/02/10 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM SOCI ECON NZ
SUBJECT: New Zealand: PM Key and Diplomatic Corps hear grievances at 
Waitangi Day celebration 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert J Clarke, Charge' d Affaires, State, 
Wellington; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1. ( SBU) Summary:  On February 5--the day before New Zealand's 
official national "Waitangi Day"--the Ambassador and DCM joined a 
large Diplomatic Corps contingent in Waitangi for a program 
commemorating the 170th Anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of 
Waitengi in 1840.  The Diplomatic Corps' participation in 
celebrations at the Waitangi site ended a 15-year absence which 
began in 1995, when Maori protesters had underscored their 
displeasure with the government by baring their buttocks at the 
international guests.  This year's carefully managed program for 
diplomats offered nothing so dramatic, but the political nature and 
underlying tensions of the celebrations came through during the 
public exchanges between PM John Key and Maori leaders at the Te 
Tii Marae (tribal area).  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Security was tight at the Te Tii Marae with dozens of 
Maori wardens and members of the Waitangi war canoe team armed with 
 
paddles assigned to keep order.  They formed up before PM Key's 
arrival under the direction of a Maori activist who gave a running 
commentary, saying that the PM would be safe (after being 
manhandled at the 2009 celebration) "even though we don't all like 
him."  Key arrived surrounded by his own security and escorted by 
Titewhai Harawira, the respected activist and mother of the 
controversially outspoken Maori Party Member of Parliament (MP) 
Hone Harawira.  Key entered the marae through an entrance flanked 
by controversial red, white and black Maori flags, received a Maori 
welcome, and sat for a formal discussion with tribal leaders. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Hone Harawira, who is not a member of the Waitangi iwi 
(tribe) and normally would not be participating, was given the 
microphone early in the exchanges.  Harawira began by lecturing Key 
for criticizing him based on newspaper stories (about his misuse of 
official travel funds).  He berated Key and National Party policy, 
saying that "a lot of our people are still starving and raising GST 
(sales tax) might be good for you and your mates but it is 
certainly not going to help the people on low incomes."  In a 
rambling presentation, he also said "you know what I am saying 
about Pakeha (caucasian) colonization is true." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Dr. Pita Sharples, co-head of the Maori Party, which is in 
the governing coalition with the National Party, sat with PM Key. 
He was at pains in his remarks to reject Harawira's suggestion that 
being in the coalition was compromising Maori demands.  When his 
turn came, PM Key spoke confidently about progress on the Treaty 
settlements.  He acknowledged disproportionate Maori unemployment 
levels and pledged to address them.  He said that the root of 
unemployment among young Maori was a high school dropout rate.  His 
government, he said, was looking at alternate, better ways of 
delivering education but needed the cooperation of parents and 
tribal leaders.  Key, in a reference to on-going negotiations on 
the Foreshore and Seabed Act (which in 2004 stopped Maori from 
going to the courts to seek customary title to foreshore and seabed 
areas), said 2010 could be a "breakthrough year."  He added the 
cautionary note, however, that the negotiations had to have give 
and take on both sides and had a "bottom line of access rights for 
all New Zealanders."  Key mentioned outright repeal of the Act, 
which many Maori are calling for, only as one possible outcome of 
the negotiations. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  PM Key's remarks on the Foreshore and Seabed Act 
at Waitangi have generated criticism among Maori because they 
seemed to walk back a position he took last November which seemed 
to promise repeal.  The smart betting is that he will eventually 
back repeal, which underlies Maori Party cooperation with the 
National Party, but only after he achieves the difficult task of an 
"elegant" solution which does protect access rights for all New 
Zealanders to the foreshore and seabed areas, rights which are 
potentially highly lucrative.  End Comment. 
HUEBNER