09ANKARA670
MFA U/S APAKAN TALKS CYPRUS, N-K, AEGEAN, AND
Thu May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8901
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHAK #0670/01 1271637
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 071637Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9611
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/07/2029 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV OVIP CY GR TU
SUBJECT: MFA U/S APAKAN TALKS CYPRUS, N-K, AEGEAN, AND 
MORE; FM DAVUTOGLU LOOKING FOR S MEETING IN DC 
 
REF: ANKARA 666 
 
Classified By: Ambassador James Jeffrey for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C) ACTION REQUESTS in Paras 4 and 6. 
 
¶2. (C) SUMMARY: Turkey is concerned about signs that contrary 
to GOT expectations of US efforts to lessen the isolation of 
Turkish Cypriots, it appears the USG is actually making 
decisions that have the opposite effect.  The GOT is 
extremely concerned about the negative impact the European 
Court of Justice (ECJ) decision on the Orams property case 
will have on comprehensive settlement negotiations.  It hopes 
the US, UN, and others will weigh in with the UK and the EU 
to urge that such court decisions which have a clear 
political motivation and impact be frozen until a settlement 
can be achieved.  President Gul and U/S Apakan look forward 
to meetings later in the day with Azeri President Aliyev and 
Armenian President Sargsian and are hoping to make progress 
on the Nagorno-Karabakh issue.  GOT officials are still 
considering how to move forward on providing additional 
support to Afghanistan, while they would like to see progress 
in organizing a regional investment conference on Iraq.  MFA 
will look into continued Greek claims of overflights of Greek 
islands by Turkish military aircraft, though Apakan said GOG 
"exaggerated claims" in the past lead MFA to view such 
complaints with skepticism.  He will need to consult with 
political leaders before determining the GOT's ability to 
consider accepting Uighur detainees from Guantanamo.  Apakan 
noted newly appointed FM Ahmet Davutoglu would like to meet 
soon with Secretary Clinton.  Davutoglu is considering a 
visit to the United States at the end of May and early June 
to attend the opening session of the UN Security Council 
under the Turkish presidency and the American Turkish Council 
meetings in Washington, DC, and would like to combine that 
visit with an initial meeting with the Secretary.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶3. (C) Ambassador met May 7 with MFA U/S Ertugrul Apakan to 
discuss a number of outstanding issues.  During the tour 
d'horizon, Apakan conveyed to Ambassador a diplomatic note 
providing Turkish views on the way forward on a historical 
review of events associated with 1915 (septel). 
 
DAVUTOGLU TO WASHINGTON; MEETING WITH S? 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Apakan indicated newly appointed Foreign Minister 
Ahmet Davutoglu is hoping to make his first visit as minister 
to the United States at the end of May/early June.  He would 
like to attend the American Turkish Council Conference in 
Washington as well and is hoping to be able to meet with 
Secretary Clinton on the front end of that visit.  ACTION 
REQUEST: Please advise if Secretary Clinton is available and 
willing to meet with Davutoglu in the late May/early June 
time frame. 
 
CYPRUS 
------ 
 
¶5. (C) Apakan raised concerns expressed to him by Turkish 
Cypriot officials during the initial visit of newly appointed 
Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu on May 6.  Apakan said there 
appears now to be an issue regarding the continued ability of 
Embassy Nicosia to issue visas on a separate paper to "TRNC" 
passport holders.  Apakan alluded to a dispute between State 
and DHS on the matter.  Apakan also conveyed "TRNC" concerns 
about the notification its representative in Washington had 
received that Talat and future "TRNC" leaders will no longer 
be eligible for a Diplomatic Security protective detail 
during visits to the US.  Ambassador noted he had not 
previously heard of the visa problem, was aware of the 
security issue, and would look into both and get back to him 
with the facts.  (NOTE: Post subsequently consulted with 
Embassy Nicosia and understands the visa issue is resolved. 
END NOTE)  Apakan said these issues arise just as the GOT is 
hoping to see steps from the USG to further ease the 
isolation of the Turkish Cypriots as a way to further bolster 
the settlement negotiations.  Instead, it seems Washington is 
moving in the opposite direction. 
 
¶6. (C) Apakan also expressed dismay over the European Court 
of Justice decision on the Orams property case.  He noted the 
decision gives the Greek Cypriots "sweeping jurisdiction" 
over the Turkish Cypriots and posited that the point of 
comprehensive settlement negotiations is to establish a new 
partnership on the island, not simply to "resume the old 
Republic of Cyprus."  Apakan said the GOT hopes the USG and 
UN officials will convey their concerns to the UK and the EU 
and "call for court decisions on such matters to be frozen 
until a settlement is reached," adding that the ruling on 
such a politically charged issue should not be allowed to 
negatively impact settlement negotiations.  Referring to 
court decisions in the 1980s and 90s on direct flights to 
Ercan and cutting off citrus exports directly to EU 
countries, he called this yet another effort to derail the 
negotiating process.  Apakan noted he had called in HMG Amb. 
Baird and President Gul had called PM Brown on this issue and 
said the GOT would continue to work hard to try to keep the 
negotiating process on track, and vowed Turkish support for 
Talat's efforts to reach a deal.  ACTION REQUEST: Department, 
as appropriate, raise this issue with the UN, EU and UK. 
 
NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
---------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Apakan indicated he will accompany President Gul later 
in the day on his visit to Prague to attend the dinner hosted 
by the Czechs for participants in the Eastern Partnership 
Summit, as well as the May 8 Southern Corridor Summit. 
Ambassador conveyed USG hope that meetings involving Azeri 
President Aliyev, Armenian President Sargsian, and Gul will 
help achieve momentum on some of the outstanding issues 
concerning Nagorno-Karabakh with which the Minsk Group has 
been grappling for some time.  Ambassador also noted PM 
Erdogan's planned May 12 visit to Baku and May 16 visit to 
Sochi could be very helpful in seeking a breakthrough on 
Nagorno-Karabakh. 
 
AFGHANISTAN/IRAQ 
---------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Ambassador requested further information on the GOT's 
plans to enhance its support for Afghanistan, particularly on 
civilian efforts.  Apakan said the GOT continues to develop 
its plan and is not yet in a position to discuss it with us, 
but hopes to do so soon.  On Iraq, Apakan expressed continued 
GOT interest in hosting a regional investment conference to 
encourage investment in Iraq and asked that the US and Turkey 
continue to consult and cooperate on this. 
 
AEGEAN 
------ 
 
¶9. (C) Ambassador referred to Deputy U/S Haydar Berk's 
planned visit to Athens for a Turkey-Greece Steering Group 
meeting and asked about recent reports of alleged Turkish 
overflights of Greek islands in the Aegean.  Apakan said MFA 
would look into the GOG complaints.  He did not dismiss the 
possibility that such overflights had occurred, and 
differentiated the issue from the normal Greek complaints 
that we routinely raise, but said exaggerated claims by the 
GOG in the past make him and MFA somewhat skeptical (see 
reftel). 
 
UIGHUR RESETTLEMENT 
------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Ambassador raised the possibility that Turkey might 
consider favorably a formal USG request to accept for 
resettlement ethnic Uighurs currently in custody at 
Guantanamo Bay.  Turks, Ambassador pointed out, applauded 
like so many others the President's decision to close 
Guantanamo.  But as a strategic partner, we need them to do 
some heavy lifting to make the decision feasible.  Apakan 
again indicated the need for a political level decision and 
said he would get back to us on the matter. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
Jeffrey