09ATHENS747
EMBASSY ATHENS WELCOMES STAFFDEL JOHNSON (MAY 17-22)
Fri May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Athens
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTH #0747/01 1281453
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 081454Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ATHENS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0162
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENSUNCLAS ATHENS 000747 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN GM GR
SUBJECT: EMBASSY ATHENS WELCOMES STAFFDEL JOHNSON (MAY 17-22) 
 
¶1.  Embassy Athens welcomes STAFFDEL Johnson to Athens, 
Greece, from May 17-22 for the 17th OSCE Economic and 
Environmental Forum. 
 
¶2.  The Administrative Point of Contact (Control Officer) 
for STAFFDEL Johnson is: 
 
David Muehlke, Political Officer 
Office:  (30) 210-720-2551 
Mobile:  (30) 695-721-0688 
Fax:     (30) 210-729-4307 
Email:  muehlkedv@state.gov 
 
¶3.  The Embassy has confirmed the following hotel 
reservations for Mr. Alex Johnson: 
 
Sunday, May 17 to Wednesday, May 20 (3 nights) 
Lagonisi Grand Resort Hotel 
RATE: 175 euro ($237) per night.  Tax, service, and 
breakfast buffet included. 
ADDRESS:  40th Km. Athens-Sounio Avenue, 19010, Lagonissi 
TEL:  (30) 229-107-6000 
FAX:  (30) 229-102-4534 
WEBSITE:  www.grandresort.gr 
NOTES:  This room rate is the OSCE conference rate and is 
above per diem.  Embassy will disburse lodging per diem 
to traveler at actual cost. 
 
Wednesday, May 20 to Friday, May 22 (2 nights) 
Divani Acropolis Hotel 
RATE: 150 euro ($204) per night.  Tax, service, and 
breakfast buffet included. 
ADDRESS:  19-25, Parthenonos Street, 11742 Makrygianni 
TEL:  (30) 210-928-0100 
FAX:  (30) 210-921-4993 
WEBSITE:  www.divanis.com/acropolis 
NOTES:  This room rate is above per diem.  Embassy will 
disburse lodging per diem to traveler at actual cost. 
 
¶4.  VISA REQUIREMENTS:  Diplomatic and official passport 
holders must/must have a Greek diplomatic visa, a valid 
Schengen visa, or a current diplomatic ID from any other 
Schengen country, in addition to their passport, in order 
to enter Greece.  The Embassy will be unable to obtain 
planeside visas for USG employees arriving in Greece 
without proper documentation.  Holders of tourist 
passports do not require visas for a stay of up to 90 
days. 
 
----------------- 
THREAT ASSESSMENT 
----------------- 
 
¶5.  Security 
 
Embassy Athens has a high designation for indigenous 
terrorism and political violence.  In the past, local 
Greek terrorist groups have targeted prominent Greeks as 
well as non-Greek Officials, including Americans.  We 
believe that the threat to official US Government 
personnel on short-term assignments to Greece or visiting 
for tourism is low.  The indigenous groups historically 
have engaged in extensive operational surveillance over 
long periods of time prior to an attack. 
 
In 2003 and again in 2004, the Greek Government made 
significant progress to combat domestic terrorism by 
successfully convicting the leader and key hit men of the 
November 17 terrorist organization and of the ELA.  17N 
was responsible for assassinating prominent Greeks and 
five members of the US Mission over the course of its 30- 
year history.  Convicted ELA members were responsible for 
several bombings, attempted murders and were involved in 
at least one assassination.  While these convictions 
likely impacted on the operational capabilities of 17N 
and ELA, it is too soon to assess whether the threat from 
17N and ELA was completely eliminated.  New domestic 
terror groups with similar ideologies to 17N have 
launched attacks against both local government agencies 
including police stations and businesses. The domestic 
terrorist group Revolutionary Struggle (RS) launched a 
Rocket Propelled Grenade at the US Embassy on January 7, 
¶2007.  Greek Police have not made any arrests.  We urge 
vigilance and caution, as the worldwide threat from other 
terrorist groups against Americans in general remains 
high.  Official Americans should assume they are 
potential targets. 
 
The U.S. Government remains deeply concerned about the 
heightened threat of terrorist attacks against U.S. 
 
citizens and interests abroad.  There are anarchist 
groups that engage in violent acts in Greece.  Although 
these activities in recent years have been primarily 
against economic and Greek government targets, they 
continue to pose a danger to Greeks and foreign visitors. 
American businesses have been attacked by anarchists 
using gas canister bombs and Molotov cocktails. 
 
Over the past year, the U.S. Embassy has experienced bomb 
threats, protest marches, and anti-U.S. demonstrations. 
These protests are generally peaceful though a few 
provoked random acts of violence.  Travelers to Greece 
are advised that protests or demonstrations could occur 
at any time; unwitting observers or bystanders might be 
identified, to their disadvantage, as Americans.  RSO 
recommends that official U.S. travelers in Greece remain 
alert when moving about in public places and avoid 
certain places where demonstrators frequently congregate. 
These places include the Polytechnic University area, 
located on 28 October (Patission) Street between the 
National Archeological Museum and Omonia and Exarchia 
Squares, located near Kolonaki; Omonia and Syntagma 
Squares, which are often used as launch sites for large 
demonstrations; and Mavili Square, located near the U.S. 
Embassy.  Visitors should keep abreast of news about 
large demonstrations and avoid these areas and metro 
stops. 
 
Crime 
 
Crime is rated medium in Greece.  For TDY visitors, 
pick pocketing and purse snatching are the most common 
crimes.  Taxis are generally safe though metered cabs are 
recommended.  Taxis too will often pick up more than one 
passenger unless prior arrangements are made.  Crimes of 
opportunity  thefts, break-ins, and occasional scams are 
on the rise.  Travelers should be especially cautious 
with wallets, purses, and parcels when traveling on 
crowded streets, public buses, trolleys, and the subway. 
There have been several instances of motorcyclists 
approaching cars stuck in traffic, reaching through open 
windows or smashing closed ones, and stealing whatever is 
within reach.  Security recommends keeping purses, 
parcels, handbags, etc. out of sight under the seat or on 
the floor of the car.  Windows should be kept closed and 
doors locked.  Pedestrians may also be confronted by 
beggars and other street people who may attempt to divert 
attention, then steal unprotected valuables  either by 
pick pocketing or snatch-and-grab techniques.  Women are 
generally safe from violent crime in Greece.  Men are 
aggressive by American standards however when approaching 
women. 
 
Traffic in Greek urban areas, especially Athens and 
Thessaloniki, is undisciplined and dangerous.  Greece has 
a poor record within the European Union for traffic 
fatalities, mainly due to excessive speeding.  Road rage 
is always a concern.  Accidents can result in fistfights. 
Drivers in Greece should exercise caution and common 
sense.  Drivers and pedestrians alike should exercise 
extreme caution when operating motor vehicles or when 
walking along roadways.  Moreover, tourists who rent 
motorbikes either on the Greek mainland or its islands 
must wear helmets and must take special precautions on 
the local roads that are typically poorly maintained. 
 
 
SPECKHARD