09CHENGDU82
SW CHINA BROADBAND: GROWING RAPIDLY IN A LARGE POTENTIAL
Mon May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO6613
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0082/01 1380854
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180854Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3209
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3882UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000082 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON CH SOCI
SUBJECT: SW CHINA BROADBAND: GROWING RAPIDLY IN A LARGE POTENTIAL 
MARKET 
 
REF: STATE 027310 
 
CHENGDU 00000082  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  The number of Internet users in Southwest 
China doubled to 27 million people between 2005 and 2008.  The 
region's population of 200 million people leaves room for 
substantial growth based on the penetration rates reported in 
Beijing and Shanghai.  Broadband Internet connections in both 
urban and rural areas offer the potential for high-speed 
Internet surfing, but network congestion often leaves users with 
only a fraction of the advertised bandwidth.  Recently 
introduced third generation (3G) wireless networks offer another 
potential path to high-speed Web browsing, although speeds still 
appear too slow to access some content hosted outside of China. 
End Summary. 
 
 
 
Broadband Use Surging in Southwest China 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Wired broadband Internet service, already available in 
major Southwest China cities and many rural areas, continues to 
expand.  The China Internet Network Information Center (CINIC) 
reported that by the end of 2008, Southwest China had 27.3 
million Internet users, roughly 14 percent of the population. 
The number of users represents a roughly 135 percent increase 
since 2005, although growth is somewhat uneven across the 
Southwest.  Sichuan saw the region's lowest average growth over 
the three year period ending in 2008, but still boasted the 
highest number of Internet users in the region at just over 11 
million out of a population of 80 million.  Internet use in 
Tibet grew more than 400 percent over the same period, yet still 
had only 470,000 Internet users out of a population of about 3 
million; this is lowest of any region in China.  The Southwest's 
14 percent Internet penetration rate is less than half of the 
CINIC's calculated national average of 24 percent. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) More than one million users in Chengdu connect to the 
Net using an ADSL (asymmetrical digital subscriber line) 
provided by China Telecom.  Chengdu News reported in mid-2008 
that number of users is growing at a rate of 1,000 customers per 
day.  Broadband service levels vary, and users pay higher 
monthly access fees to obtain greater bandwidth.  In Chengdu, 
subscribers at the lowest monthly rate, around $14 USD per 
month, have their download speeds capped at 512 kilobits per 
second (kbps).  For roughly double the price, a user can get 
four times the speed.  Even at higher service levels, downloads 
are still often very slow.  China Telecom announced in March 
that they would raise bandwidth caps free of charge for any 
customer with a 1,500 kbps or slower connection who called in to 
request an upgrade.  Posts on a popular Chinese website, Baidu, 
indicate that broadband service in southern Sichuan city of 
Panzhihua and the heavily Tibetan prefecture Ganzi is cheaper 
than in Chengdu. 
 
 
 
Connections Fast Within Chengdu But Then Decline Markedly 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Despite claims of high speed access, users experience 
much slower speeds.  Sometimes broadband download speeds are 
lower than speeds a user might obtain using a dial-up modem. 
Congenoff recently used web-based software (www.linkwan.com) to 
measure download speeds at a local Internet cafe.  The recently 
remodeled cafe has computers purchased in March and caters 
heavily to online video gaming clients, who demand fast 
connections.  Congenoff found at the cafe that download speeds 
for sites based in Chengdu averaged over 4,000 kbps.  Average 
download speeds for sites outside the city declined by 
two-thirds or more.  The second fastest downloads were seen for 
some sites in Hong Kong averaging 1,200 kbps.  Speeds to sites 
hosted in Mianyang, a city northwest of Chengdu, averaged just 
704 kbps.  Downloads from Beijing were 339 kbps, while speeds 
from Seattle, Los Angeles, and Washington DC averaged under 100 
 
CHENGDU 00000082  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
kbps.  During separate tests from a different location, 
downloads averaged around 150 kbps from U.S. sites. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Excessive numbers of user sharing bandwidth on the 
ADSL likely contributes to the slow download speeds.  Congenoff 
was told by China Telecom in March that slow speeds for even the 
fastest service level were the result of high numbers of users 
during peak usage periods in the early evening hours.  User 
reports that connection speeds are better in the morning hours 
before eight o'clock seem to confirm the peak usage explanation, 
but the large and expanding ADSL customer base probably accounts 
for sluggish speeds during non-peak hour. 
 
 
 
A False Dawn For Fast 3G Wireless Networks? 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Chengdu officials earlier this year announced the 
arrival of third generation (3G) wireless networks, which may 
enable wireless data rates similar to broadband.  The deputy 
chief of the Telecommunications Administration Bureau, Chen 
Jiachun, projected that China would have 150 million 3G users 
within three years.  3G networks are already deployed in 13 
cities in Sichuan, and China Telecom plans to have networks 
running in every county and major township by early July, 
according to the Chengdu Evening News.  Wireless 3G cards for 
laptop and desktop computers are widely available in Chengdu 
stores from about USD 60.  Congenoff recently had a chance to 
use the Zhongxing Telecommunication Company (ZTE) AC8710 EV-DO, 
a USB-type 3G card retails for about $70 USD.  3G card users 
must also purchase a cellular phone SIM card to access the 
network, which cost roughly $15 USD per month. 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) During a stationary test in downtown Chengdu using the 
ZTE card, download speeds from websites hosted in the city were 
approximately 490 kbps.  As with the ADSL network, accessing 
sites hosted in the U.S. was much slower than sites hosted in 
Chengdu.  Speeds to the U.S. during one test were too slow for 
Congenoff to access the broadband speed metering software on 
SpeakEasy.net.  Websites like ESPN loaded, but connection speeds 
did not permit continuous streaming of video clips.  Two 
employees at a local electronics market said that they thought 
speeds would improve over time.  Another vendor said that the 
network was not "stabilized yet," suggesting that she also 
thought speeds might improve.  None of the three suggested 
specific expansion plans or reasons why they thought speeds 
would increase. 
BOUGHNER