09CIUDADJUAREZ228
BIOGRAPHIC REPORTING: FRANCISCO BARRIO TERRAZAS - MEXICO'S
Fri May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Ciudad Juarez
R 222308Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL CIUDAD JUAREZ
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6001
INFO AMEMBASSY MEXICO 
AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 
AMCONSUL CIUDAD JUAREZUNCLAS CIUDAD JUAREZ 000228 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR MX CA
SUBJECT: BIOGRAPHIC REPORTING: FRANCISCO BARRIO TERRAZAS - MEXICO'S 
NEW AMBASSADOR TO CANADA 
 
REF: 08 CIUDAD JUAREZ 1021 (NOTAL) 
 
 
Controversy Greets Mexico's New Ambassador to Canada 
 
¶1.  On February 26, 2009, Francisco Barrio Terrazas presented 
his credentials in Ottawa as Mexico's new Ambassador to Canada. 
Barrio's appointment has resulted in protests and calls for his 
resignation from Mexican and Canadian women's groups and human 
rights organizations.  The groups assert that while Governor of 
Chihuahua from 1992 to 1998, Barrio was negligent in pursuing 
the killers of an estimated 500 women and so responsible for 
allowing the wave of gender-based violence to grow.  However, 
Barrio also has a strong record of promoting economic and social 
development, and he can be expected to seek greater Canadian 
involvement in Mexico's manufacturing sector. 
 
¶2.  The following is a biographical report on Mexico's new 
Ambassador to Canada. 
 
PAN No Longer the "Loyal Opposition;" Barrio's Early Political 
Career 
 
¶3.  Francisco Barrio Terrazas was born on November 25, 1950 in 
the southern Chihuahua town of Satevo.  He received a bachelor's 
degree in accounting and an MBA from the Autonomous University 
of Chihuahua.  After working as a consultant in the private 
sector, Barrio entered politics in the early 1980s.  Like many 
businesspeople from northern Mexico, Barrio was responding to 
what he considered to be the declining legitimacy of the 
Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).  In this view, the 
populist policies of Presidents Echeverria and Lopez Portillo 
represented the end of a long-standing, informal coalition 
between the PRI and PAN-leaning business owners.  The business 
community also attributed the balance of payments crises of 1976 
and 1982 to these populist policies.  The tipping point occurred 
when Lopez Portillo nationalized the banking system in 1982.  As 
a result of this action, Mexican government institutions could 
no longer be trusted to protect property rights.  At this point, 
many businesspeople, such as Barrio, left the private sector and 
used their financial and political capital to embark on 
political careers.  Barrio became the first PAN Mayor of Ciudad 
Juarez in 1983. 
 
¶4.  Barrio gained national and international attention in 1986 
when he ran for Governor of Chihuahua and lost to the PRI 
candidate, Fernando Baeza Melendez.  Members of the PAN and 
international press alleged that the PRI committed electoral 
fraud in denying Barrio the governorship, thus further eroding 
the party's legitimacy.  The alleged fraud fueled public support 
for a nascent PAN opposition group known as the "Neo-Panistas" 
or "Barbaros del Norte," which played an important role in 
Mexico's democratic alternation of power.  In addition to 
Barrio, several prominent political figures emerged from this 
movement, including Vicente Fox and 1988 PAN presidential 
candidate, Manuel Clouthier. 
 
Governor of Chihuahua 
 
¶5.  In 1992, Barrio ran again for Governor of Chihuahua and won, 
becoming one of three PAN Governors that the business-friendly 
President Salinas allegedly allowed to reach power.  As the 
first PAN Governor in Chihuahua's history, Barrio entered office 
facing high expectations, and his results were mixed.  He 
presided over a period during which Chihuahua's manufacturing 
industry became one of the leading sources of foreign exchange 
for Mexico.  Moreover, Barrio and state business leaders founded 
the Fundacion del Empresariado Chihuahuense (FECHAC), which is 
still one of Mexico's most effective civic organizations for 
delivering development assistance (see reftel).  At the same 
time, human rights organizations criticized Barrio, both 
domestically and abroad, for his inability to arrest and 
prosecute those responsible for the Juarez femicides.  The human 
rights groups accused Barrio of indifference and insensitivity. 
They allege that Barrio said that the victims brought the crimes 
upon themselves by "walking in dark places and dressing 
provocatively," an allegation that Barrio denies. 
 
President Fox's Corruption Czar 
 
¶6.  When President Fox took office on December 1, 2000, he 
appointed Barrio to be the architect of his flagship 
anti-corruption campaign.  As Secretary of the Comptroller, 
Barrio promised to punish the "big fish" of previous PRI 
administrations.  During his three years in office, however, 
there was a broad public perception that Barrio failed to 
prosecute high profile corruption cases.  Most notably, he was 
unable to prosecute PEMEX union leader Carlos Romero Deschamps 
for reportedly providing union funds to finance campaign spots 
for the 2000 presidential campaign of Francisco Labastida (PRI). 
 
¶7.  In 2003, Barrio left the Secretariat of the Comptroller and 
won a seat in Mexico's lower house of Congress on the PAN's 
plurinominal list.  Barrio then served as the legislative 
coordinator for the PAN in the House of Deputies.  Political 
observers at the time interpreted this series of events as a 
sign that Barrio had fallen out of President Fox's inner circle, 
and had lost clout within the PAN.  In 2005, Barrio announced 
his interest in his party's nomination for the 2006 presidential 
election, only to pull out shortly thereafter, citing funding 
shortages after he failed to win President Fox's endorsement. 
Barrio completed his term in Congress in 2006 and returned to 
the private sector, where he remained until his appointment as 
Mexico's Ambassador to Canada. 
 
¶8.  Comment.  Barrio's political career has been characterized 
by his groundbreaking role in Mexico's democratic transition. 
He is considered by many to be a shrewd politician who helped 
lead PAN's transition to a viable opposition and then governing 
party.  Despite these accomplishments, his ambitious policy 
pronouncements and high public expectations for his ability to 
effect change often collided with the realities of Mexican 
politics.  After falling out of Fox's inner-circle, Barrio's 
ambassadorial appointment is widely viewed as a consolation 
prize for his years of service.  The appointment also signals 
that his career in elected office has likely peaked.  With this 
in mind, Barrio will likely try to parlay his trade and 
investment promotion efforts in Canada to benefit his future 
aspirations in the private sector. 
 
 
MCGRATH