09JOHANNESBURG81
SOUTH AFRICA:  MAY 2009 LABOR NOTES
Thu May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Johannesburg
R 071431Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6480
INFO DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
SADC COLLECTIVE
DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHINGTON DC
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURGUNCLAS JOHANNESBURG 000081 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ELAB ETRD SF EIND ECON EFIN EMIN ELTN
ENRG 
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA:  MAY 2009 LABOR NOTES 
 
Summary 
------ 
 
¶1.  This is the May, 2009 issue of U.S. Consulate Johannesburg's 
Regional Labor Office monthly notes.  Topics in this issue are 
as follows: 
 
-Legal work for Zimbabwean migrants? 
-COSATU unsuccessful in its bid to halt the sale of Vodacom 
shares 
-COSATU May Day rallies 
-Union ends successful trucking strike 
-Strike in the public sector comes to an end with physicians 
still dissatisfied 
-Public servants call for a better pay 
-Mineworkers demand a 15% pay increase 
-NUM threatens to strike over the liquidation of Pamodzi Gold 
-COSATU calls for government to act urgently in addressing job 
losses 
-Recession hampers skills training 
-Aviation faces critical skills shortage 
-Metro Bus Strike continues 
End summary. 
 
 
Legal work for Zimbabwean migrants? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The South African Government announced that it plans a 
temporary visa waiver and permit policy for Zimbabweans to enter 
and/or remain in South Africa that addresses Zimbabweans' mainly 
economic motivations for migration.  South African officials 
countered media speculation that the permit would flame 
xenophobic sentiment by noting that employers will be more 
likely to hire legally documented individuals rather than hiring 
individuals off the books.  Formal processes are expected tQ 
follow strict South African labor laws and wage regulations. 
NGOs have urged South Africa to quickly articulate the details 
of the proposed policy and to widely publicize it to employers, 
migrants, and the general public, to encourage a smooth 
transition and avoid xenophobic retaliation. 
Source:  Business Day - May 5, 2009 
 
 
COSATU unsuccessful to halt the sale of Vodacom shares 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  A South African court has dismissed an attempt by COSATU to 
stop UK-based Vodafone's planned $2.6 billion purchase of a 15 
percent stake in Vodacom from state owned Telkom.  The court 
ruled that Telkom has the right to sell its 50% stake in Vodacom 
--- South Africa's most successful mobile phone provider. 
COSATU had applied for an interdict to prevent the sale alleging 
that Telkom failed to `properly consult unions' about the merger 
and possible job losses.  The case sets an important legal 
precedent in favor of the business community as it was one of 
the first times that South African courts ruled on the rights of 
non-shareholders and unions to be consulted during merger 
discussions.  COSATU continues to raise concern that cellular 
phone service is a national asset that should be under South 
African government control. 
Source:  Business Report - April 21, 2009; Engineering News - 
April 30, 2009; Reuters - April 30, 2009 
 
 
COSATU May Day rallies 
---------------------- 
 
¶4.  The Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) marked 
`Workers Day' with 36 rallies around the country. COSATU 
President Sidumo Dlamini, ANC president Jacob Zuma, COSATU 
General Secretary Zwelinzima Vavi, and South African Communist 
Party General Secretary Blade Nzimande addressed 20,000 
supporters gathered at the national rally held in the Eastern 
Cape.  Vavi stated that `COSATU played a prominent role in the 
ANC's victory and now COSATU is mobilizing for our own 
interests.'  COSATU expected `fresh blood, unity, continuity and 
loyalty to the Polokwane [ANC conference held in December 2007] 
resolutions.'  Vavi went on to say that COSATU was pleased with 
the consultation process with the ANC on the formation of the 
new government and that trade union federations were going to 
`reap the benefits.'  Zuma's speech suggested that the ANC would 
look at ways to further regulate the labor market but did not 
agree to COSATU demands to outlaw temporary and contract work. 
 
Source:  Mail and Guardian - April 29, 2009; Sunday Times - May 
3, 2009 
 
 
Union ends successful trucking strike 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  A contentious nine day strike in the trucking sector ended 
on April 16 with a settlement between The South African 
Transport and Allied Workers Union (SATAWU) and the Road Freight 
Industry Employers Association (RFA).  COSATU affiliate SATAWU 
was pleased that employers raised minimum wages for truck 
drivers by thirty seven percent with long distance drivers now 
guaranteed a minimum of 6000 Rand per month (approx $722).  All 
drivers making above minimum wage are guaranteed an 11% salary 
increase implemented over two years.  The settlement also 
included a provision for employees to receive thirty-three 
percent of their basic salary during maternity leave.  SATAWU 
told the media that the sticking point in the strike had been 
SATAWU's (successful) demands to extend the agreement beyond 
truck drivers to all workers employed in operations, 
warehousing, fleet maintenance, and administration.  The media 
gave SATAWU credit for receiving a healthy settlement given that 
non-COSATU unions did not join in the strike and kept the 
country from experiencing a large - scale shortage of goods. 
 
Source:  Sowetan - April 16, 2009 
 
 
Public health physicians still dissatisfied 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  A two week strike by doctors in the troubled public health 
system ended on April 20 without resolution.  Doctor's had gone 
on strike to protest low pay, staff shortages, mismanagement, 
and overcrowding in South Africa's public health facilities. 
The South African Medical Association (SAMA), representing 
public practitioners, told the media that conditions in public 
hospitals had created `reverse demand and supply.'  SAMA said 
that 35% of doctors in the country serve 70% of the population 
because most physicians prefer private practice.  SAMA urged the 
Department of Health to focus on retention of skilled staff. 
The South African Department of Health criticized SAMA actions 
as premature and offered a five percent wage increase.  SAMA 
rejected the five percent increase, reiterated its demands for a 
fifty percent salary increase, and will be meeting on May 11 to 
discuss the impasse. 
Source:  The Citizen - April 21, 2009; Sowetan - May 4, 2009 
 
 
Public servants call for a better pay 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  One of the first tasks of the Zuma government will be to 
enter into wage negotiations with the South African Civil 
Service.  Unions representing the public service have upped 
their calls for salary increases, affordable medical insurance, 
and housing subsidies.  The Independent Labor Caucus (ILC), 
representing South Africa's public sector unions, plans to begin 
wage negotiations with the government shortly.  Unions expressed 
concern that most of South Africa's one million public servants 
earn between 3500 and 6200 Rand per month (approx $416 to $773). 
 The ILC emphasized that it was `sensitive to the global 
economic situation and is deeply concerned about the scale of 
job losses locally and internationally,' but said `it remains 
our duty, as custodians of our members' rights and interests, to 
ensure that their employer meets at least the most basic of its 
responsibilities towards its employees.'  ILC officials reminded 
the media that a 2007 strike by its members had lasted over one 
month. 
 
Source: Business Day - April 15, 2009 
 
 
Mineworkers demand a 15% pay increase 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) submitted its 2009 
wage demands to the Chamber of Mines.  NUM members made clear 
that they expect `nothing more and nothing less' than a 15% 
non-negotiable wage increase.  NUM said that their proposal can 
easily be supported despite the global financial crisis.  NUM 
believes that South Africa's `huge' infrastructure development 
program has kept the demand for coal strong.  They also said 
that gold and other commodities remain a safe haven for 
international investors.  Other NUM demands include that medical 
aid be given to employees; that the minimum basic rate for entry 
level work be set at 5000 Rand Per Month (approx $595); and that 
a homeowners allowance received by miners be adjusted to the 
greater of 1500 Rand per month (approx $175) or 25% of the 
monthly mortgage repayment.  NUM General Secretary Frans Baleni 
stated that `the mandate is clear and our members say they 
expect no excuses from the industry.' 
 
Source:  Frans Baleni, Num General Secretary and Lesiba Seshoka, 
NUM National Spokesman - April 20, 2009 Press Release 
 
 
NUM threatens to strike over the liquidation of Pamodzi Gold 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶9.  The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) is preparing for a 
national strike over the liquidation of Pamodzi Gold with full 
organizational support from COSATU.  COSATU is angry that they 
were not consulted about liquidation plans and potential buyers 
for Pamodzi's troubled (bankrupt) Orkney mine.  COSATU 
emphasized that `the liquidation of Pamodzi Gold will have a 
negative impact on unemployment rates and poverty levels' and is 
angry over plans to trim Pamodzi's labor force and/or use 
potential contract labor.  Labor broker JIC Mining Services was 
appointed by creditors to manage Orkney until the mine can be 
packaged for resale.  NUM believes that JIC might try to run the 
mine on a permanent basis with contract labor and has said that 
any mine operator must negotiate directly with the union on 
employment levels and conditions of employment. 
 
Source:  Business Report - April 22, 2009; Mining MX - April 23, 
2009 
 
 
COSATU says govt should act in addressing job losses 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶10.  COSATU upped its criticism of the South African Government 
`for not acting urgently enough to implement the plans decided 
on to stem the tide of job losses resulting from the global 
financial meltdown.'  Business, labor, and the government drew 
up a framework for South Africa's response to global economic 
crisis in March.  However, COSATU said the plan was not working 
given daily retrenchments and loss of benefits, particularly in 
the export-oriented automotive, clothing and textile industries. 
 COSATU appealed to the government to review tariff reductions 
that have had a negative effect on industrial development and 
job creation.  The union federation further said that South 
Africa should resist calls to reduce tariffs that may compromise 
the protection and competiveness of the country's industries and 
creation of jobs. 
 
Source:  Patrick Craven, Cosatu Spokesperson - April 15, 2009; 
Business Day - April 16, 2009 
 
 
Recession hampers skills training 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Deputy Policy Head of the South African Presidency Allan 
Hirsch stated that the global economic recession had hampered 
the development of skills in South Africa as companies often 
slashed training budgets to guard against job losses. 
Presenting the annual reports of the Joint Initiative for 
Priority Skills Acquisition (JIPSA) and the Accelerated and 
Share Growth Initiative for South Africa (AsgiSA), Hirsh told 
the cabinet that `when the economy recovers, companies will once 
again be unable to recruit suitably skilled people, unless we 
continue the momentum of JIPSA and AsgiSA.'  AsgiSA, a Mbeki-era 
program, had set an ambitious target of halving unemployment 
from 28% in 2004 to 14% or lower by 2014 and halving the poverty 
rate in the same period.  Hirsh stated that the targets were 
impossible given the global economic slowdown.  JIPSA skills 
development programs would continue in the Zuma administration 
under the umbrella of a new body, the Human Resource Development 
Strategy (HRDS), with further details to soon be announced. 
Source:  Business Day - April 17, 2009 
 
 
Aviation faces critical skills shortage 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) Chief Executive Officer 
Colin Jordaan said that the poor global economy had not helped 
to resolve South Africa's dire shortage of aircraft technicians, 
air traffic controllers, and aviation safety inspectors.  Due to 
global shortages, many highly skilled South Africans were easily 
lured overseas by lucrative job offers at an `alarming' rate. 
Coupled with the emigration of skilled professionals, the number 
of young South Africans entering the aviation industry could not 
meet local demand.  The CAA believed the most pressing demand 
was for technicians and Jordaan noted that `if we don't start 
attracting and training youngsters as technicians we will have a 
critical shortage in two to three years.  To avoid that we need 
to train 200 to 300 technicians a year.'  He said the CAA was 
investigating ways to develop and retain skills in the industry. 
Source:  Business Day - April 16, 2009 
 
 
Metro Bus Strike continues 
-------------------------- 
 
¶13.  The South African Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) has vowed 
to intensify an ongoing 14 day strike of Johannesburg's limited 
public bus service unless demands are met.  No agreement has 
been reached between the union and management and the matter has 
been referred to the bargaining council.  500 drivers and 300 
support staff accuse senior management of neglect and 
corruption.  The last SAMWU metro bus strike lasted two months 
and occasionally turned violent. 
Source:  Sowetan - May 4, 2009 
 
 
PASSEN