09KHARTOUM686
SOUTHERN SUDAN'S JONGLEI STATE - HUMANITARIAN SITUATION
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2506
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0686/01 1460901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 260901Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3853
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 000686 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A/S CARSON, AF/E 
NSC FOR MGAVIN 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: SOUTHERN SUDAN'S JONGLEI STATE - HUMANITARIAN SITUATION 
REPORT 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 446 
B) KHARTOUM 375 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Relief organizations are responding to the estimated 22,000 
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Jonglei with emergency 
assistance; however, the logistical challenges of the approaching 
rainy season, lack of roads, insecurity caused by numerous ethnic 
rivalries and armed groups, and the remote location of the IDPs pose 
significant challenges to providing assistance.  Secure road and 
river access are essential to ensuring that food and other relief 
supplies can be delivered and markets continue to function.  Relief 
activities need to be linked to grassroots peace-building and 
higher-level peace initiatives to help stabilize Jonglei. End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Background:  Politicized Ethnic Fighting, Cattle Rustling, and 
External Meddling 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2.  (U) Despite unifying events such as the 2006 Juba Peace Accord, 
which brought significant numbers of formerly pro-Khartoum Southern 
Sudan Defense Forces militia into the Government of Southern Sudan 
(GOSS), greater Upper Nile region, which includes Upper Nile, Unity, 
and Lakes states in addition to Jonglei, remains the most unstable 
region in Southern Sudan.  Underlying the political conflict has 
been traditional tribal cattle-raiding, as well as lack of 
well-established government security forces in rural areas and 
unsuccessful disarmament in the region due to the fact that some 
groups will not voluntarily disarm in the absence of government 
security. 
 
¶3.  (U) One UN staff member characterized the current problems in 
the region (reftels A and B) as a "hangover of power" among local 
authorities and militias from the war.  In general, the lack of 
effective policing and governance hampers the ability of former 
combatant groups to transition to civilian governance structures. 
Small arms are widely available and carried by civilians in rural 
areas.  In this environment, traditional cattle-raiding and resource 
conflicts easily escalate into violent encounters. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Effects of Escalating Conflict in Jonglei in 2009 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4.  (U) While inter-ethnic violence is an age-old occurrence in the 
greater Upper Nile region, new trends in 2009 have increased concern 
among humanitarian staff.  In a meeting with USAIDoff, a UN Resident 
Coordinator's Support Office (RCSO) field staff member who has 
worked extensively in the region identified the destruction of 
public buildings in Lekuangole Payam during the March 5 to 12 
Lou-Nuer attacks as a new and concerning development.  The RCSO 
staff member also identified Lou-Nuer abduction of Murle children 
during raids as evidence of a new conflict dynamic.  Historically, 
Nuer have not abducted children, as kidnapping is against their 
culture, according to a prominent member of the Lou-Nuer and Jikany 
ethnic groups.  In contrast, Murle are notorious for a long history 
of abducting Dinka and Nuer children in the region. 
 
¶5.  (U) According to the RCSO, the fighting had displaced 
approximately 15,000 Nuer IDPs to Akobo town and 7,000 Murle IDPs to 
Pibor town as of May 17.  The IDPs are mostly residing with families 
and are integrated within the community.  According to relief staff, 
IDPs are unwilling to return home until the security situation 
stabilizes and they feel protected from future attacks. 
 
¶6.  (U) In addition, local NGO staff report that conflict between 
Lou-Nuer and Jikany groups north of Akobo has resulted in limited 
commercial goods arriving to Akobo market.  Aid agencies fear that 
the restricted flow of commercially available goods will impact the 
region's food security in the coming weeks with potentially serious 
consequences later on, as rains imminently make roads impassible and 
prevent traders from resupplying the market. 
 
--The Most Recent Attack-- 
 
¶7.  (U) On May 8, Lou Nuer attacked the Jikany village of Torkech in 
Jikmir Payam located in the south of Nasir County, approximately 20 
km from Nasir town.  According to reports from non-governmental 
organization (NGO) field staff, the attack killed 47 people and 
 
KHARTOUM 00000686  002 OF 004 
 
 
wounded nearly 50 others.  A local NGO identified 50 orphans who 
were transported to Nasir town by boat and reported that 1,550 
people are displaced in five villages in Nasir County.  Some IDPs 
are reportedly gathering in Nasir town.  In addition, the attackers 
reportedly destroyed homes and looted personal property. 
 
¶8.  (U) According to USAID staff, the Torkech incident relates to 
the broader problem between two large Nuer communities - the Eastern 
Jikany Nuer of Nasir, Ulang, Maiwut, and Longechuk counties (and 
also in Ethiopia); and the Lou Nuer of Jonglei State, primarily in 
Wuror, Nyirol, and Akobo counties.  Insufficient amount of water 
constitutes a key conflict driver for the Lou, who lack access to 
water in the dry season in their heartland in central Jonglei.  As a 
result, the Lou and their cattle travel to areas with permanent 
water near the Sobat River, where they encounter the Jikany; the 
Akobo River, where they meet Jikany and Anyuak; and the Nile River, 
where they come across Dinka and other Nuer in Ayod.  As of May 17, 
relief workers expected further retaliatory attacks to continue 
until the rains hinder armed groups' movement in the region or 
security is improved throughout the region. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Humanitarian Situation for the IDPs 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The RCSO reported that poor logistics represents one of 
the key challenges in delivering humanitarian assistance to the IDPs 
in Jonglei.  On May 19, the UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) 
reported that the delivery of more than 2,400 non-food item (NFI) 
kits, as well as mosquito nets and kitchen sets to communities in 
Akobo had been delayed due to poor road conditions, and reported 
that NFIs are being held in Waat and Walgak.  In addition to the 
usual road difficulties during the April/June to September rainy 
season, the Pibor-Bor road is currently plagued by insecurity linked 
to the inter-ethnic conflict, making delivery of relief supplies 
unpredictable.  As of mid-May, Akobo town is only accessible via 
river from Nassir.  However, aid agencies report that the river 
route is currently impassible due to the presence of armed groups 
and uncertainty over further outbreaks of violence.  On May 21, the 
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
reported that the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) has a river boat 
capable of providing force protection to humanitarian river convoys, 
but that the boat is not fully functional. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The RCSO staff member reports that Dinka, Murle, and Lou 
Nuer groups will not permit relief convoys to pass through their 
areas to deliver assistance to the other groups.  During a May 21 
meeting, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) reported 
that local officials in Nuer areas in Waat and Walgak refused to 
allow the transport of 250 NFI kits out of the area once they noted 
that the supplies were destined for Murle groups in Pibor. (Note: 
UNJLC unloaded the NFIs in Waat and Walgak, at which time community 
members took note of the load list indicating that the supplies 
would be transported to Pibor.  End Note.)  OCHA and UNMIS are 
working to resolve this issue with the local county commissioners, 
but as of May 21 the issue had not yet been resolved. 
 
¶11.  (U) Both Pibor and Akobo can be reached by air, but delivery of 
food and NFIs via airlift would be costly and time consuming.  UN 
field staff note that badly-needed food and emergency relief 
supplies can continue to be delivered by road using Sudan People's 
Liberation Army (SPLA) armed escorts or UNMIS force protection for 
relief convoys as long as the roads do not become too muddy or 
blocked by seasonal rivers.  However, OCHA notes concern that using 
SPLA-provided escorts to conduct relief deliveries would undermine 
the humanitarian principles of impartiality and neutrality and are 
particularly sensitive given the history of forced disarmament in 
these areas in previous years.  OCHA has requested UNMIS force 
protection for relief convoys traveling to Jonglei State and is 
hopeful that with the increased UNMIS presence in the state UNMIS 
will be able to be the primary armed escort instead of SPLA. 
 
¶12.  (U) Various UN agencies are responding to the immediate needs 
of the IDPs.  However, the RCSO notes that gaps exist in health care 
and water, sanitation, and hygiene assistance.  Relief workers note 
particular concern for vulnerable groups among the IDPs, which 
include child-headed households, unaccompanied children, wounded 
individuals, and the elderly.  Aid staff anticipate that emergency 
needs for food and emergency relief supplies will remain an urgent 
priority for displaced populations in the coming months. 
 
¶13.  (U) The UN World Food Program (WFP) is providing emergency food 
rations to the IDPs in both Pibor and Akobo.  However, delivery of 
additional food dispatches has been problematic in both areas due to 
 
KHARTOUM 00000686  003 OF 004 
 
 
attacks on convoys, looting of food, and poor road conditions.  WFP 
reports that a convoy of trucks was able to reach Pibor between May 
14 and 15, carrying 176 metric tons (MT) of commodities, of which 63 
MT will be given to Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) for use in the 
hospital.  The last 30-day food distribution to IDPs in Pibor 
occurred in March.  In Akobo, IDPs were given a 15-day ration in 
late April, and WFP has 100 MT of commodities in warehouses in the 
area and dispatched another 600 MT recently.  WFP reports that some 
of the trucks are stuck on the roads and some food has been looted, 
but exact amounts are not yet known.  WFP is currently conducting an 
emergency food assessment in Pibor and planning a second assessment 
for Akobo, which should be underway imminently. 
 
¶14.  (U) WFP is currently in the midst of prepositioning food stocks 
throughout Southern Sudan, moving food into remote areas where road 
access will soon become extremely difficult or impossible once heavy 
rains commence.  The emergency relief requirement to support the 
growing number of IDPs in eastern Jonglei is straining WFP's ability 
to preposition sufficient food stocks in these areas for its 
'normal' activities, as well as to provide general food rations for 
thousands of IDPs.  WFP anticipates being able to start using river 
transport to deliver food in Akobo, but only starting in July once 
the river is deep enough for the barges to move freely.  WFP now 
reports that it will have to resort to airlifting some of the food 
needed in these remote areas.  While WFP budgeted for airlifting 
1200 MT in their 2009 emergency operation, it projects having to 
airlift more than the budgeted amount this year, with upwards of 
1500 MT required for Jonglei State alone.  WFP is currently starting 
to approach donors to request earmarked funds for the airlift 
operation. 
 
¶15.  (U) Abducted children and unaccompanied minors are among the 
highest protection concerns for the humanitarian community.  The UN 
Children's Fund (UNICEF) had registered 142 missing children and 10 
missing women in Pibor and Lekuangole, as of April 8.  Urgent 
cooperation is needed among local authorities to secure the release 
of abducted children from both Nuer and Murle groups.  The 
international community discourages the practice of "trading 
children" as part of a negotiated peace process, as has been done in 
the past, and insists that children must be returned to families 
independent of negotiated peace processes.  UNICEF is initiating 
tracing and reunification programs in the area to address these 
concerns. 
 
¶16. (SBU) While it is impossible to be certain, relief workers 
familiar with the area believe that many IDPs will begin to return 
to home villages in a month or two after the rains have commenced. 
As of May 21, thousands of IDPs had not yet been verified or 
registered and new reports of secondary displacement were being 
received, according to OCHA.  According to a local NGO staff member, 
only women, children, and the elderly are considered as IDPs.  Youth 
and men normally remain with their cattle away from villages until 
the rainy season.  When youth and cattle return home, IDPs will most 
likely feel protected and opt to return home.  As of May 21, youth 
remained in cattle camps; however, youth are expected to begin 
moving to home areas in the coming months.  The rainy season is also 
a safer time for villagers because it is more difficult for 
aggressors to move around.  As of May 21, the security situation in 
Jonglei remained uncertain, particularly after MSF staff evacuated 
Pibor town on May 20 after staff witnessed Murle youth gathering 
with arms around the area.  If UNMIS succeeds with its stabilization 
plan, emergency organizations will immediately switch gears to 
assist IDPs to return home and resettle.  If the security situation 
continues to prompt new displacement, the focus must remain on 
meeting the urgent needs of IDPs and affected host communities in 
one of the most difficult remote areas in the region. 
 
--USG Priorities and Assistance- 
 
¶17.  (U) Based on discussions with NGOs and UN agencies in Juba, 
USAID staff project that the current emergency response will have to 
be sustained for the coming two months at a minimum.  If IDPs begin 
returning home, the focus will shift from meeting immediate needs to 
assisting communities to resettle and rebuild destroyed villages, 
homes, and livelihoods.  According to USAID humanitarian staff in 
Juba, current priority humanitarian needs in Jonglei include food, 
shelter, health care, NFIs, livelihood support, and water, 
sanitation, and hygiene.  Rapid small interventions such as 
cash-for-work would enable communities to earn much-needed cash and 
rebuild some community infrastructure or homes for vulnerable 
families.  In addition, emergency efforts to avoid outbreaks of 
waterborne diseases in Akobo and Pibor are priority interventions. 
 
¶18.  (U) To meet immediate needs, USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign 
 
KHARTOUM 00000686  004 OF 004 
 
 
Disaster Assistance (USAID/OFDA) has funded IOM to provide 3,000 NFI 
kits, which include 15 pieces of soap, 2 mosquito nets, cooking 
utensils, 2 blankets, 2 sleeping mats, 2 water containers, and a 
piece of plastic sheeting, to affected families in Jonglei, as well 
as logistical support to the overall humanitarian response. 
USAID/OFDA has also funded Save the Children/U.S. in an ongoing 
primary health care program that operates five health facilities in 
Akobo County, serving IDPs and affected populations.  To assist in 
resolving long-term water scarcity, USAID/OFDA has funded PACT's 
water program in the area that recently completed nearly 40 new 
boreholes in Pibor and Akobo counties. USAID/OFDA is in 
consultations with NGOs on providing additional resources to support 
efforts to scale-up the emergency response in Jonglei and address 
the most urgent humanitarian needs among the displaced population. 
 
 
¶19.  (U) At present, WFP has sufficient food stocks in its pipeline 
to cover emergency food requirements for the current displaced 
populations in eastern Jonglei State and has not approached USAID's 
Office of Food for Peace (USAID/FFP) for additional contributions. 
To date in Fiscal Year (FY) 2009, USAID/FFP has contributed 333.6 
million USD to WFP, of which approximately 48.3 million USD is being 
channeled to Southern Sudan. 
 
-------- 
Comments 
-------- 
 
¶20.  (U) Physical security for IDPs and humanitarian agencies and 
GOSS political will are needed to resolve the current escalating 
conflict in Jonglei.  While agencies have initiated an emergency 
response, it is concerning that food and NFIs have not yet reached 
IDPs, particularly in Akobo area, due to logistical constraints. 
WFP and other UN agencies are working hard to find solutions to move 
the food and NFIs into affected areas in Jonglei, but time is of the 
essence.  USAID/FFP and USAID/OFDA will continue to monitor the 
humanitarian situation and work with UN and NGO partners to meet the 
urgent needs of IDPs in the area.  The situation in Jonglei serves 
as a stark reminder of the need to maintain significant emergency 
response capacity in Southern Sudan, while continuing to work on 
development priorities. 
 
ASQUINO