09MADRID482
SPAIN'S BIOTECH CROP UNDER THREAT
Tue May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXRO7893
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHMD #0482/01 1391201
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191201Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0645
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA 3981UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 000482 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/WE AND EEB/TPP/ABT/BTT 
USDA FOR OSTA/LIZ JONES, OCRA/JOE KOWALSKI, OFSO/DAVE YOUNG 
USEU for AGRMINCOUNS DEBRA HENKE 
USEU ALSO FOR APHIS AGRMINCOUNS PETER FERNANDEZ 
PARIS FOR AGRMINCOUNS ELIZABETH BERRY 
BERLIN for AGRCOUNS BOBBY RICHEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON TBIO SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN'S BIOTECH CROP UNDER THREAT 
 
MADRID 00000482  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  See paragraph 12. 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Spain's MON810 corn crop is under threat from an emerging 
well-coordinated campaign to ban cultivation of genetically 
engineered seed varieties in Europe, according to industry sources. 
The campaign has gained strength and speed in recent months with the 
April 14 German ban on MON810 cultivation - which followed an EU 
vote supporting maintenance of a ban in Austria and Hungary. 
Legislation which threatens MON810 cultivation has also been 
introduced recently in both the Basque and Catalonian Regional 
Parliaments. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In response to invocation of a safeguard and emergency 
measure to suspend MON810 cultivation in France, the European Food 
Safety Authority's (EFSA) Scientific Opinion of October 29, 2008 
found no new scientific evidence of risk related to MON810 
plantings.  The EFSA report, however, is being questioned.  Monsanto 
maintains that anti-MON810 momentum was gained by a de facto 
agreement between the Government of France and Greenpeace/Friends of 
the Earth whereby the GOF would support the anti-GMO movement and 
environmental activists would turn a blind eye to Sarkozy's nuclear 
energy initiatives.  A senior Spanish agriculture official has 
expressed concern that Spain is under increasing pressure within the 
EU.  Post requests renewed USG support of Spain's science-based 
agricultural biotechnology position, as well as support for a 
non-USG science fellow to interact with Spanish interlocutors.  End 
Summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Spain was the first EU country to grow genetically 
modified (GM) corn and now cultivates nearly 75 percent of the EU's 
MON810 corn crop - nearly 200,000 acres.  During a May 13 meeting 
with Monsanto's Director for Biotechnology for Spain and Portugal, 
Embassy officials were told that Spain is increasingly becoming a 
target of anti-biotechnology forces within Europe and that Spain's 
cultivation of MON810 corn was under serious threat.  The sentiment 
echoed by supporters of agricultural biotechnology regarding a ban 
on MON810 cultivation in Spain is that "If Spain falls, the rest of 
Europe will follow." 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Anti-biotechnology activists in the EU have gained 
momentum in recent weeks.  On April 14, Germany announced a ban on 
the cultivation of MON810 following similar bans in France, Austria, 
Hungary, Greece and Luxembourg, despite EU approval of MON810 as 
safe for commercial use.  This followed a March 2 vote in which 
Spain joined with France and other EU corn producers to allow 
Austria and Hungary to maintain their provisional bans on the use 
and sale of MON810 corn.  According to Ministry sources, this 
surprising vote did not represent a change in position by Spain on 
biotechnology; rather, technical considerations justified upholding 
the provisional bans pending EU-wide renewal of MON810 corn. 
Industry contacts, however, assert that Spain's vote was a political 
gesture to thank French President Sarkozy for helping to arrange 
President Zapatero's presence at the November 2008 G-20 financial 
summit in Washington. 
 
¶6.  (U) The GOS has traditionally been a strong supporter of biotech 
corn due to high domestic demand for feed corn within the livestock 
sector.  Spain is the number two pork producer within the EU and the 
number one corn importer.  GM corn plantings in Spain reached nearly 
200,000 acres in 2008 - approximately 30 percent of total Spanish 
feed corn production.  Cultivation of MON810 corn is mainly 
concentrated in Aragon and Catalonia, where the European corn borer, 
which MON810 protects against, is a serious pest.  The feed compound 
industry and the livestock sector are supportive of GM corn.  Within 
the agriculture sector, only left-wing farmers' unions have negative 
opinions of GMOs. 
 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Anti-GMO forces periodically attempt to build support for 
a prohibition on GMO cultivation in Spain.  According to Monsanto's 
biotechnology director, two left-wing parties have recently 
discussed introducing such legislation in the Spanish parliament.  A 
Socialist (ruling) party Member offered reassurances that his party 
would oppose such a move, but advised that the issue bears watching, 
especially given the government's uncertain majority. 
 
¶8.  (U) In addition, there have been worrisome developments in 
several of Spain's 17 autonomous communities, which, led by 
 
MADRID 00000482  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Catalonia and the Basque Country, continue to seek more autonomy via 
a vis the central government.  In March 2008, the Canary Islands 
were declared GM-free.  Since fewer than 1,380 acres of corn are 
grown in the Canaries, this is considered mostly a symbolic gesture. 
 However, on February 5, 2009, an initiative was proposed in the 
Catalonian Regional Parliament to declare the region GM-free.  The 
initiative has not yet come up for a vote, and its prospects are 
uncertain.  Such an action would be cause for serious concern, since 
Catalonia is a center of GMO corn cultivation.  More recently, on 
April 21, 2009, the Basque Parliament passed stringent biotech 
coexistence legislation which could likely force farmers to halt 
planting of MON810 due to strict compliance issues.  The Spanish 
Association of Biotechnology Industries (ANOVE) will challenge the 
Basque legislation. 
 
¶9.  (U) In February 2008, France notified to the EC an Order 
suspending cultivation of MON810 and further invoked safeguard and 
emergency measures to provisionally prohibit the cultivation of 
MON810 on its territory.  In response, the Scientific Panel on 
Genetically Modified Organisms of the European Food Safety Authority 
(EFSA) issued a Scientific Opinion on October 29, 2008.  In its 
report, the panel assessed the package of documents supporting and 
justifying the French safeguard clause and the duration of the 
invoked measure.  The panel concluded that, in terms of risk to 
human and animal health and the environment, the information 
provided by France presented no new scientific evidence that would 
invalidate the previous risk assessments of MON810.  It further 
concluded that invoking the safeguard clause and emergency measure 
was scientifically unjustified.  The EU is currently facing the 
MON810 cultivation renewal process.  The renewal is the legal 
condition for the lifting of the ban under French law.  Within the 
scientific review carried out by EFSA, the Spanish authorities and 
experts have completed the environmental risk assessment for MON810 
corn.  According to Monsanto, the EFSA Scientific Opinion report is 
being questioned.  The GOF has sent letters to different Member 
States urging them to sign up and request an in-depth examination of 
the application for the renewal of MON810. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Monsanto asserts that anti-MON810 momentum was gained by 
a de facto agreement between the Government of France and 
Greenpeace/Friends of the Earth whereby the GOF would support the 
GMO-free movement if activists turned a blind eye to President 
Sarkozy's nuclear energy initiatives.  In Spain, agricultural 
factions against agricultural biotechnology include the 
environmental side of MARM and organic farmers.  Increasingly, 
consumers are also expressing negative attitudes toward genetically 
modified crops.  On April 18th, the newspaper "El Pas" conducted a 
survey on whether or not GM food should be prohibited.  The 
following results were obtained after a one month period: 85 percent 
voted "Yes, they can be dangerous" and 15 percent voted "No, they 
are absolutely safe". 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Secretary of State and Deputy Minister Josep Puxeu 
contacted the Charg d'Affaires on April 22, following the Basque 
vote on coexistence and the German ban, to express his concern that 
the Government of Spain is under increasing pressure to ban MON810 
cultivation.  Puxeu, a long-time supporter of agricultural 
biotechnology, lamented that it was "the most complicated week of my 
life."  He asked that the USG maintain pressure on Brussels to keep 
agricultural biotechnology an option for Member States and requested 
that the USG work together with Spain in this endeavor.  Deputy 
Minister Puxeu is becoming increasingly isolated on biotech issues 
at the Ministry OF Environment and and Rural and Marine Affairs 
(MARM) due to the rising influence of environmental officials within 
MARM as well as the increased influence of France within the Spanish 
government.  While MARM Minister Espinosa has come out publicly in 
favor of genetic engineering in agriculture, her views on issues 
will generally reflect those of the Zapatero Administration which 
has recently shown itself to be fickle when it comes to voting 
against France's anti-GMO interests. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) ACTION REQUESTED:  In response to recent urgent requests 
by MARM State Secretary Josep Puxeu and Monsanto, post requests 
renewed USG support of Spain's science-based agricultural 
biotechnology position through high-level USG intervention in 
support of the EFSA findings.  Post also requests USG support for a 
non-USG science fellow to meet with influential Spanish 
interlocutors on this issue and assistance with developing an 
agricultural biotechnology action plan for Spain.  Post would also 
welcome any comments from other posts concerning the anti-GMO 
campaign. 
 
DUNCAN