09MANAGUA534
NICARAGUA: ECONOMIC OUTLOOK BLEAK FOR 2009
Fri May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0018
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0534/01 1491902
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 291902Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4179
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1361
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/27/2029 
TAGS: ECON ETRD EINV EAGR NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: ECONOMIC OUTLOOK BLEAK FOR 2009 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0133 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0116 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
Summary 
------- 

¶1. (C) Businessmen and economists gathered for the 
Ambassador's May 15 roundtable focused their discussion on 
the global economic crisis, the Nicaraguan political crisis, 
and deficit financing.  One local economist predicted that 
the economy would contract by 1%.  A banking executive noted 
that failure to secure budget support from the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) or other international donors could 
result in capital flight and currency devaluation.  Business 
owners reported falling sales as a result of a decrease in 
overall demand.  Roundtable participants stressed the gravity 
of a growing credit crunch on the supply side.  Manufacturers 
and farmers are suffering from a lack of financing.  End 
summary. 
 
Economic Contraction of 1% Forecast for 2009 
-------------------------------------------- 

¶2. (C) On May 15, the Ambassador hosted a group of prominent 
local businessmen and economists for a roundtable discussion 
on the economy.  Mario Arana, Executive Director of the 
Foundation for Economic and Social Development (FUNIDES), 
opened the discussion with a macroeconomic overview.  FUNIDES 
estimates that the Nicaraguan economy will contract in 2009 
by 1% or more.  Arana noted that this scenario is more 
pessimistic than the IMF's projection of 0.5% growth for the 
year.  The GON continues to project 2% growth, but this seems 
out of the realm of possibility. 
 
Economic Stability Threatened by Budget Gap 
------------------------------------------- 

¶3. (C) Further discussion of the macroeconomy focused on how 
the government would finance its budget deficit, now 
estimated to be $150 million for 2009.  Arana argued that the 
next few weeks would be crucial, as the government negotiates 
with the IMF over revisions to its program.  Government 
officials have indicated that the Finance Ministry would soon 
place $80 million in bonds on the local market, but Luis 
Rivas of BANPRO, Nicaragua's largest bank, doubts that there 
is that much appetite for government paper right now.  Rivas 
agreed with Arana that the GON needs international donors to 
provide budget support.  Donors, however, continue to 
withhold funds as long as the government refuses to address 
fraudulent municipal elections held in November 2008.  The 
government appears to be hoping that its close ally Venezuela 
will come through at the last minute. 
 
¶4. (C) Arana spent some time describing the pessimistic 
scenario in which the government loses its IMF program and 
donors refuse to close the budget deficit.  If the government 
fails to finance its deficit with bonds purchased by local 
banks or Venezuelan entities, it would be forced to withdraw 
funds from its reserves.  Arana argued that financing the 
budget deficit with foreign reserves would trigger a run on 
the banks and a possible economic meltdown.  So far, however, 
capital flight has not been a serious problem. 
 
Sales Down for Many Businesses 
------------------------------ 

¶5. (C) Moving from the macroeconomic to the microeconomic 
view, a representative from the only textile mill in 
Nicaragua, Cone Denim (part of the International Textile 
Group based in North Carolina), explained that the company 
closed its $100 million denim mill in response to a steep 
drop in demand.  The company wants to reopen the plant as 
soon as possible, but it may be a year before it happens. 
 
¶6. (C) Mario Salvo, owner of dairy company El Eskimo, 
reported that ice cream sales are down by 13% this year as 
compared to 2008.  In response, his company is introducing 
less expensive products with lower profit margins in an 
attempt to retain its predominant market share.  On the 
positive side, Roberto Bendana of Don Paco Coffee noted that 
while Nicaragua's coffee production was down 30% during the 
2008-2009 harvest, the outlook for 2010 is positive. 
Producers are forecasting a better harvest, and international 
prices have improved. 
 
¶7. (C) Ricardo Teran, who distributes Kodak and Hewlett 
Packard equipment, among other U.S. consumer products, 
reported that many businesses have decreased capital 
investment.  He also reported that sales are down at 
Managua's large shopping centers.  Moreover, from January to 
March 2009, imports fell 60% when compared to the same period 
in 2008.  Teran believes that part of this decrease can be 
attributed to the Nicaraguan Customs Agency's (DGA) decision 
to abandon selective inspection for 100% inspection of all 
imports.  Custom delays increase shipping costs, making 
imported goods costlier. 
 
Credit Crunch Affecting Supply Side 
----------------------------------- 

¶8. (C) Besides the effect that weak international demand is 
having on local economic activity, roundtable participants 
stressed the gravity of the growing credit crunch on the 
supply side.  According to Luis Rivas, international banks 
have cut lines of credit to local banks and suspended most 
direct lending to local manufacturers.  To retain liquidity, 
Nicaraguan banks have decreased local lending, particularly 
to exporters and agricultural producers.  Lines of credit to 
importers have fallen by 40%, Rivas reported, and loan 
periods sometimes have been cut in half.  Without adequate 
financing, many manufacturers and farmers are suffering. 
 
¶9. (C) Duilio Baltodano, President of agricultural wholesaler 
Cisa Agro, pointed out that fertilizer sales are down at the 
same time Nicaraguan farmers are planting crops.  Without 
financing for fertilizer and other inputs, yields will be 
low, making it even more difficult for farmers to repay 
existing debts.  This could be the beginning of a vicious 
downward spiral. 
 
¶10. (C) Rivas added that even when funds are available for 
agriculture -- for cattle, for example -- local banks are not 
lending out of fear that the &No Payment8 movement will 
inspire borrowers to default on their loans (Ref B).  While 
the delinquency rate on cattle loans is historically 1%, the 
&No Payment8 movement has caused it to climb to 7%. 
 
Comment 
------- 

¶11. (C) Nicaragua suffers from a lack of finance, both public 
and private, as a result of the international economic crisis 
and the politics of the Ortega administration.  Through new 
financing facilities for developing countries, the IMF is 
likely to provide some percentage of the $150 million needed 
to finance the 2009 budget deficit.  Should Venezuelan 
funding fail to materialize as many predict, the government 
is likely to go through with plans to sell bonds, perhaps 
forcing local banks to buy them or using proceeds from its 
oil import scheme with Venezuela to buy them.  Forcing local 
banks to participate may only exacerbate the already 
crippling credit crunch. 
CALLAHAN