09MOSCOW1346
RUSSIA AND THE ARCTIC:  POLICY AND COMPETING VOICES
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO2637
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHMO #1346/01 1461141
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 261141Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3458
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RUCPDC/NOAA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/SACEUR POLAD SHAPE BE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MOSCOW 001346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OES/OA FOR JULIE GOURLEY 
STATE EUR/RUS PLEASE PASS TO NOAA, INTERIOR, AND EPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/20/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ENRG SENV RS
SUBJECT: RUSSIA AND THE ARCTIC:  POLICY AND COMPETING VOICES 
 
REF: A. MOSCOW 1115 
     ¶B. MOSCOW 842 
     ¶C. VLADIVOSTOK 10 
     ¶D. MOSCOW 1281 
     ¶E. MOSCOW 1242 
     ¶F. MOSCOW 652 
 
Classified By: Political M/C Alice G. Wells for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  In March, Medvedev approved Russia's long-delayed 
Arctic policy.  It defined the region as Russia's strategic 
energy reserve, called for its promotion as a transportation 
corridor, and sought to balance cooperation with the 
country's security needs.  The policy itself reflects 
competing voices within the GOR, with security officials 
emphasizing the deployment of Federal Security Service (FSB) 
forces and the Russian Foreign Ministry calling for 
cooperation (although the GOR remains universally allergic to 
NATO's presence in the region).  The State Duma is now 
considering a draft law on managing the Northern Sea Route 
and the new policy supports additional FSB coast guard and 
coastal stations to monitor the expected increase in sea lane 
traffic.  The GOR continues to abide by its commitments under 
UNCLOS, although Presidential Envoy Chilingarov has called 
for Russian withdrawal, if the states parties do not agree to 
Russia's territorial claims.  The GOR is ambivalent on global 
warming, seeing both positive and negative effects from the 
melting Arctic ice.  Analysts discount the near-term 
viability of the Arctic as a major source for commercially 
feasible hydro-carbons, and point out that there are more 
easily accessible fields that Russia has not yet exploited. 
Joint U.S. and Russian efforts in the Arctic could encourage 
Russian moderates to pursue cooperation, rather than 
competition, in the region, with the MFA already proposing 
some specific projects.  End Summary. 
 
Russia Defines Its Arctic Interests, Finally 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On March 27, the GOR released its long-delayed 
""Foundations of the Russian Federation National Policy in the 
Arctic Until 2020 and Beyond.""  President Medvedev chartered 
the policy September 17, 2008 at a special meeting of the 
Russian Security Council on Franz-Josef Land (the 
northernmost Russian territory in the Arctic Ocean). 
Originally scheduled for release in December 2008, the policy 
presented the four fundamental national interests of the GOR 
in the Arctic:  its use as a strategic resource base, the 
preservation of peace and cooperation in the Arctic, the 
protection of the region's unique ecology, and the 
establishment of the Northern Sea Route as ""exclusive"" to the 
GOR. 
 
Transport and Energy 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Behind Russia's policy are two potential benefits 
accruing from global warming:  the prospect for an (even 
seasonally) ice-free shipping route from Europe to Asia, and 
the estimated oil and gas wealth hidden beneath the Arctic 
sea floor.  The shipping route would reduce the distance of a 
voyage from Europe to Asia by 40 percent (if compared to a 
route through the Suez Canal).  These savings in shipping 
costs to Russia and to Europe are potentially huge, even if 
the voyage could only be made in the summer months.  Artur 
Chilingarov, Arctic explorer, State Duma member, and the 
President's Envoy for Cooperation in the Arctic, with the 
support of Medvedev's administration, has put forward draft 
legislation that would establish a new regulatory body, ""the 
Administration for the Northern Sea Route,"" for oversight, 
management, navigation, and ecological protection.  The 
current draft defines the route as located in ""the internal 
waters, territorial sea, or exclusive economic zone of the 
Russian Federation.""  However, some Russian shippers at a 
conference held by the Carnegie Moscow Center October 2008 
pointed out that short windows of good weather, the presence 
of unpredictable ice flows, and the lack of logistical and 
 
MOSCOW 00001346  002 OF 004 
 
 
emergency response support would conspire to make the cost of 
insurance for the Northern Sea Route unfeasible. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Arctic region, both within Russia's legally 
clarified borders and in areas beyond, likely holds vast 
untapped resources of oil and gas.  While many Russian 
analysts are skeptical that any of these resources will be 
economically exploitable in the near future, the Russian 
leadership wants to secure sovereignty over these ""strategic"" 
resources.  Many analysts point to the fact that Russia has 
not yet begun to exploit much more accessible potential 
resources on its territory.  Gazprom's plans, for example, to 
develop new gas fields in the Yamal peninsula have been 
pending for years.  Furthermore, those development plans will 
likely move much more slowly than had been previously 
anticipated, given currently declining gas demand in the 
region and an extremely tight financing environment.  The 
Shtokman gas field in the Barents Sea, even given recent 
movements toward its development, will likely not produce gas 
until about 2020.  Developments further afield in Arctic 
territory would likely not materialize, if ever, for many 
decades.  Russia would need many tens of billions of dollars 
of investment, both in development and in related 
infrastructure, and would need new technologies, which Russia 
would seek from potential foreign partners.  Finally, gas or 
oil from the Arctic would have to compete on world markets 
with other oil and gas sources as well as other 
non-hydrocarbon sources. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
---------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) State Duma Foreign Affairs Committee Chair 
Konstantin Kosachev told CODEL Levin April 15, that climate 
change ""was not a matter of any concern,"" and added that it 
may work to Russia's advantage by reducing the cost of 
transportation and easing access to petroleum resources in 
the far north (Ref A).  Despite potential economic benefits, 
influential voices in the Russian scientific community 
disagree with Kosachev, acknowledging that climate change 
also poses a danger.  A November 2008 report on climate 
change by Russia's Federal Hydrometeorological Service 
(Roshydromet) noted that the minimum seasonal level of Arctic 
sea ice has receded by 9 percent per decade since satellite 
observations began in 1979; in September 2007, the ice cover 
reached the lowest level ever recorded (Ref B)  Roshydromet 
noted that climate change affected the Arctic region 
disproportionately compared to lower latitudes.  The habitat 
of such threatened species as the polar bear have especially 
suffered.  Warming could increase the spread of certain 
vector-borne diseases, negatively affecting human health. 
Large-scale permafrost melting threatens Russian cities, such 
as Yakutsk, whose foundations are built on permafrost (Ref C). 
 
U.S.-Russia Cooperation 
----------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In light of environmental concerns, the GOR 
supports cooperation on environmental programs with the 
United States and the other Arctic littoral countries. 
Through the Arctic Council, Russian Arctic indigenous 
communities are cooperating with the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) on pollution remediation programs; 
the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) is cooperating with Roshydromet on climate monitoring 
programs in the Arctic.  On April 17, the MFA approached the 
Embassy to request cooperation on a wide range of 
long-stalled Bering Strait initiatives, including nature 
protection, oil and gas exploration, and sea shipping and 
transport (Ref D). 
 
Competing Voices 
---------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) While now official policy, both during its long 
deliberation and following its announcement, voices within 
the GOR have given contradictory signals on what Russia 
wanted in the policy and what was meant by it.  State Duma 
Deputy Chilingarov called for Russia to withdraw from the 
1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) so that 
Russia could stake a greater claim to the region's sea bed (a 
 
MOSCOW 00001346  003 OF 004 
 
 
claim he tried to bolster when he planted a Russian flag 
below the North Pole in August 2007).   XXXXXXXXXXXX, 
XXXXXXXXXXXXX(XXXXXXXXXXXX) told us 
Chilingarov was following orders from the ruling United 
Russia party.  Although, XXXXXXXXXXXX was skeptical that Russia 
and the United States would be able to agree on a 
high-profile summit deliverable in the Arctic because of 
expected opposition from the military and security services. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Despite on-going efforts to renew U.S.-Russian 
relations, some Russian voices have called the situation in 
the Arctic a ""cold peace"" vis-a-vis NATO and the U.S.  In 
April 2008, Russian Navy head Admiral Vladimir Vysotsky said, 
""While in the Arctic there is peace and stability, however, 
one cannot exclude that in the future there will be a 
redistribution of power, up to armed intervention.""  His 
statements preceded the July deployment of Russian Northern 
Fleet missile cruiser ""Marshall Ustinov"" and anti-submarine 
ships off the coast of Spitsbergen to coincide with fishing 
season, and the Russian submarine ""Ryazan's"" September 
underwater transit of the Arctic ice sheet, a first since the 
end of the Cold War. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Security Council Secretary Nikolay Patrushev in an 
interview published in the online media outlet Gazeta.ru 
March 30 also posited a zero-sum view of the Arctic, 
assessing that ""It is clear that (developments do) not 
coincide with the economic, geopolitical, and defense 
interests of Russia (in the Arctic) and is a systemic threat 
to its national security.""  In a March 31 interview with 
Moscovskiy Komsomolets, he declared that ""there have been 
efforts to drive Russia out of the Arctic.""  To counter these 
trends, he pointed to the creation of a new FSB coast guard 
force and calls for new coastal stations to protect Russian 
territory as outlined in Russia's new policy. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Russia's senior Arctic official, 
Ambassador-At-Large Anton Vasiliyev and Foreign Minister 
Sergei Lavrov have made efforts to tamp down these more 
aggressive statements.  Vasiliyev said in a April 21 
interview with Moscovskiy Komsomolets that ""Russia is far 
from having imperial ambitions such as wanting to seize the 
territory,"" and Lavrov in his April 29 Arctic Council 
ministerial address said that ""There can be no validity to 
the view of the Arctic as a zone of potential conflicts...."" 
Patrushev's comments also clashed with Medvedev's January 29 
speech at FSB headquarters, where he told FSB officers and 
leadership that the service must ""concentrate efforts on 
creating a modernized coast guard, which is imperative for 
effectively intercepting trafficked ocean and biological 
resources,"" not to address an armed conflict.  Further, 
statements regarding the Arctic in the May 12 Russian 
National Security Strategy are limited to calling for 
investment in the ""formation of a basic transportation, 
energy, information, and military infrastructure..."" (Ref E). 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Russian commentator Stanislav Belkovskiy said in 
an interview with Svobodnaya Pressa on March 27, that the 
effort to create an FSB coast guard was ""intended to conceal 
the deterioration of the Russian Armed Forces"" and was a 
pretext to secure greater appropriation for national defense. 
 Belkovskiy's comment reflects the broader realities of 
Russian military reform and the difficulty in establishing 
new military units, while at the same time downsizing the 
officer corps and attempting to modernize the force (Ref F). 
Andrey Fedorov in a January 14 article in Kommersant, wrote 
that ""Confrontation (in the Arctic) will do no good.  We 
would do best to agree to pool our efforts and set up joint 
structures to use the Arctic's natural resources."" 
 
But No NATO 
----------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) While the Russian MFA has been more supportive of 
cooperation in the region, it bristles at NATO exercises or 
presence there.  In his remarks at the Arctic Council, Lavrov 
underlined that there were no threats that required 
""force-based solutions or a presence of military-political 
blocs in the region"" - Lavrov's clear reference to NATO and a 
possible Nordic security alliance (a concept proposed in a 
 
MOSCOW 00001346  004 OF 004 
 
 
February 9 report commissioned by the five Nordic foreign 
ministries).  These comments are routine for Russia, 
including a recent statement from MFA spokesman Andrei 
Nesterenko March 26, when he said that NATO's activity in the 
Arctic ""can result in erosion of the present constructive 
scheme of cooperation between coastal states,"" and will 
continue to serve as an irritant.  Russian Ambassador to NATO 
Dmitriy Rogozin in a January 30 interview with Vesti-24 said 
that ""The twenty-first century will see a fight for 
resources, and Russia should not be defeated in this fight 
... NATO has sensed where the wind comes from.  It comes from 
the North."" 
 
Comment:  Empowering Moderates 
------------------------------ 
 
¶13.  (C) The statements of the MFA and President Medvedev 
indicate that moderates have focused on the Arctic as a zone 
of cooperation.  Our continued support of the Arctic Council 
and bilateral engagement on the Arctic (included in the 
proposed U.S.-Russia Action Plan), can help bolster the 
moderates and give incentives to the GOR to continue 
cooperation.  Increased scientific cooperation, particularly 
on climate change, could increase trust and build confidence. 
 Under the framework of either multilateral or bilateral 
cooperation, we can also offer to jointly develop navigation 
aids and port facilities, continue developing and sharing sea 
current and meteorological data, promote social development 
for indigenous peoples, and cooperate on emergency response 
and oil spill remediation --  all tasks that Medvedev charged 
the GOR with in his September 17, 2008 remarks, but will be 
difficult to fulfill without outside expertise.