09PHNOMPENH323
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL WILLIAMS
Tue May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO7706
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0323 1390931
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 190931Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0721
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 4093
RUEHVN/AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE 2889UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000323 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN CB
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL WILLIAMS 
 
REF: State 49452 
 
¶1.  Embassy Phnom Penh warmly welcomes and hereby grants Country 
clearance to STAFFDEL members Lisa Williams and Major Mack Curry, to 
visit Cambodia from May 26 through May 28, 2009. 
 
¶2.  The Control Officer for this visit is Political Officer Greg 
Lawless. 
Office: (855) 23 728 125 
Cell: (855) 12 810 463 
Fax: (855) 23 728 888 
Home: (855) 23 217 659 
Email: lawlessgf@state.gov 
 
¶3.  Hotel reservations have been made at the Raffles Hotel Le Royal 
in Phnom Penh (confirmation# 370257) and at Hotel De La Paix in Siem 
Reap (confirmation#133740). 
 
¶4.  Visas: All visitors must have a Cambodian visa.  The Mission 
recommends that travelers entering the country on official or 
diplomatic passports obtain a visa prior to traveling to Cambodia. 
If this is not possible, visas may be obtained in the airport.  In 
this case, the traveler should bring a visa-sized photograph with 
him/her for inclusion with the visa application.  The immigration 
authorities will generally waive the US $20.00 fee for travelers on 
official and diplomatic passports; however, the traveler should be 
prepared to pay the fee.  Regular (tourist) passport holders will be 
required to pay the fee. 
 
¶5.  Airport Departure Tax:  Travelers departing Cambodia for an 
international destination must pay a $25.00 airport tax before 
clearing passport control.  Airport tax for travel to in-country 
destinations is $6.00. 
 
¶6.  Security:  Street crime remains a concern in Cambodia.  Military 
weapons and explosives remain readily available to criminals despite 
efforts by authorities to collect and destroy such weapons.  Armed 
robberies occur frequently in Phnom Penh, and while not specifically 
targeted, foreign residents and visitors are among the victims. 
Victims of armed robberies are reminded that they should not resist 
and should surrender their valuables as any perceived resistance may 
be met with physical violence to include lethal force. Armed 
individuals or their bodyguards may discharge small arms at any time 
during the day or night at the smallest provocation, mainly in the 
vicinity of bars, nightclubs and snooker establishments, but 
sometimes in tourist areas.  Bystanders may be accidentally wounded. 
Pickpockets and beggars are also present in the markets and at the 
tourist sites.  Persons visiting Cambodia should practice sound 
personal security awareness by varying their routes and routines, 
maintaining a low profile, not carrying or displaying large amounts 
of cash, not wearing flashy or expensive jewelry, and not walking 
the streets alone after dark.  In addition, we recommend that 
Americans travel by automobile and not use local moto-taxies or 
cyclos for transportation.  These vehicles are more vulnerable to 
armed robberies, purse snatching and offer no protection against 
injury when involved in traffic accidents.  The embassy continues to 
receive reports of purse snatchings.  If you are the victim of a 
purse snatching, it is imperative that you release your purse 
immediately and do not struggle with the thief. The Heart of 
Darkness nightclub in Phnom Penh has been placed off limits to all 
persons under the authority of the Chief of Mission due to a number 
of safety and security incidents that have occurred there.  American 
citizens are also advised not to visit that establishment. Political 
and labor related public demonstrations occur on a fairly regular 
basis in the capital city, are generally peaceful and conducted 
without notable incident. Nonetheless, these gatherings have turned 
violent on occasion and the Embassy continues to advise American 
citizens to avoid political rallies, demonstrations, and political 
party offices where crowds may gather. Precautions should also be 
taken not to discuss sensitive or classified matters outside secure 
environments or over unsecured and/or cellular telephones, and to 
securely safeguard classified or sensitive materials at the Chancery 
and not at hotels or residences. 
 
¶7.  Currency/Credit Cards:  Cambodia is a U.S. dollar cash economy. 
While the local currency - the Cambodia Riel - is in use, dollars 
are accepted for all transactions.  Therefore, there is no need to 
exchange currency.  The Embassy Cashier will cash traveler checks 
and personal checks of TDY personnel provided their social security 
number and a photocopy of their passport are presented.  A limited 
number of establishments (including most hotels) accept credit 
cards. A few banks will provide cash against credit cards but they 
charge a hefty fee.  Post recommends that visitors plan on using 
cash for transactions outside their hotels. 
 
¶8.  Post looks forward to your visit. 
 
ALLEGRA