09STATE51396
CYPRUS: GUIDANCE FOR MAY 22 SECURITY COUNCIL
Tue May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1396 1392238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192225Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 6169
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS IMMEDIATE 0369
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA IMMEDIATE 5146UNCLAS STATE 051396 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO PBTS GR TU CY UK
SUBJECT: CYPRUS: GUIDANCE FOR MAY 22 SECURITY COUNCIL 
CONSULTATIONS ON UNFICYP 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request:  USUN is instructed to draw 
from the points below during UN Security Council 
consultations on Cyprus scheduled for May 22, 2009. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin points: 
 
The United States welcomes the report of the 
Secretary-General.  We echo his full support for the current 
Cypriot-led negotiations under the auspices of the UN 
Secretary General,s Good Offices Mission, as well as his 
hope that the parties will make decisive progress in the near 
future. 
 
The United States stands ready with the international 
community to assist in whatever way we can, but continues to 
recognize that a comprehensive settlement is in the hands of 
the two communities.  The sides have made progress and the 
Secretary-General,s report notes this by pointing out that 
there are now fewer significant areas of divergence than in 
previous attempts to reach a settlement. 
 
As the SYG,s report points out, however, the two sides will 
relatively soon enter into what we understand will be the 
most difficult phase of negotiations to date.  We urge 
flexibility, 
compromise and the continued courage of the two communities 
to reach a settlement.  As the Secretary-General,s report 
also suggests, the parties must move beyond positions of 
principle to ones of practicality where possible.  The 
present negotiation environment is unique and promising, and 
we urge the communities to seize this window of opportunity 
to achieve a lasting settlement. 
 
To be successful, the parties need continued support and 
encouragement from the Council as they work toward a 
settlement.  We support UN efforts to continue facilitating 
dialogue, encouraging convergence, focusing the parties on 
the future, and providing perspective and fresh and creative 
thought as appropriate.  We encourage the communities to draw 
on the support of the UN,s Good Offices and of the 
international community as they continue their dialogue. 
 
Special Advisor Downer and the UN,s Good Offices Mission 
will continue to be critical to the success of the 
negotiation process.  As the negotiations enter a critical 
stage, we should continue to support his efforts.  We also 
encourage the UN Good Offices Mission,s intention to 
intensify its efforts to fully exploit the window of 
opportunity.  As we have stated before, we support efforts to 
increase the momentum of the negotiations. 
 
Ultimately, the parties will also need the support of the 
Cypriot communities writ large.  Thus, the Council should 
encourage continued public signals of goodwill and unity, 
including good faith implementation of confidence building 
measures.  Implementation of the confidence building measures 
is important for achieving success in the political talks, 
but may also help to garner communal support when pursuing 
adoption of a final referendum. 
 
We agree with the Secretary-General that at this time, 
UNFICYP plays an important role on the island, both as a 
stabilizing factor on the ground and as a source of 
substantive and administrative support for the Good Offices 
Mission.  UNFICYP personnel also continue to do excellent 
work.  The United States supports an additional extension of 
its mandate for six months. 
 
The United States continues to fully support the ongoing 
settlement negotiations.  The United States is willing to 
offer all the help sought by the parties as they work toward 
a just and lasting settlement that reunifies Cyprus into a 
bizonal, bicommunal federation. 
CLINTON