09USUNNEWYORK481
SRSG QAZI BRIEFS COUNCIL ON UNMIS REPORT
Tue May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO1686
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0481/01 1320111
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 120111Z MAY 09 ZDK
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6518
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SU AF
SUBJECT: SRSG QAZI BRIEFS COUNCIL ON UNMIS REPORT 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On April 23, the Security Council held 
consultations on the Secretary General's quarterly report on 
the United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS).  SRSG Ashraf 
Qazi stressed that key Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) 
issues -- elections, border demarcation, the two referenda 
(South Sudan and Abyei), and ensuring peace dividends to the 
Three Areas-- must be addressed or the CPA would unravel. 
Qazi asserted that progress on these and other issues had 
been curtailed in the aftermath of the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) indictment.  He encouraged the Council to 
consider the challenges presented by the Darfur conflict and 
the humanitarian expulsions within the context of CPA 
implementation.  Council members discussed the deteriorating 
security situation in Southern Sudan; the Government of 
Sudan's (GOS) March 4 and 5 expulsions of non-governmental 
organizations; the impact of the ICC indictment; Joint 
Integrated Units (JIUs), elections and disarmament, 
demobilization and reintegration of soldiers (DDR).  End 
Summary. 
 
Qazi Briefs the Council 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Special Representative of the Secretary General 
(SRSG) to UNMIS, Asharaf Qazi, briefed the Council in closed 
consultations on the Secretary General's April 17 UNMIS 
report.  Qazi said that a UN assessment mission would travel 
to Sudan to determine needs for elections support and would 
submit a supplemental budget request.  He stressed that 
border demarcation remained outstanding and critical to the 
CPA's success because elections, the redeployment of forces 
and the referenda could not take place until border issues 
were resolved. 
 
¶3.  Qazi said that the lack of funding for the Abyei Interim 
Administration impeded its progress and contributed to 
uncertainty about Abyei's future, preventing returns.  He 
indicated that both the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) and Sudan 
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) had withdrawn from the Abyei 
roadmap area, and the Joint Integrated Units (JIU) were the 
only military forces remaining.  The Permanent Court of 
Arbitration should issue its demarcation decision in July, 
and Qazi said that if the decision were contested, this would 
destabilize the area. 
 
¶4.  Qazi addressed the ICC indictment and the GOS expulsion 
of humanitarian organizations by stating that both issues had 
preoccupied the National Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan 
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM).  Qazi said that a joint 
UN/Government of National Unity (GNU) assessment of the 
impact of the expulsions on the Three Areas was currently 
being conducted.  He stated that health and sanitation were 
major concerns immediately, but that the loss of capacity in 
the medium and long term would affect peace dividends to the 
Three Areas and adversely impact CPA implementation.  He 
expressed support for the UN's three-track approach to 
resolving the expulsions. 
 
¶5.  Turning to security, Qazi detailed intertribal conflicts 
in the south, incidents involving the JIUs, particularly the 
conflict in Malakal on February 24 that resulted in 62 dead 
and 94 wounded, and Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) incursions 
into Western and Central Equatoria.  Qazi expressed concern 
with the JIUs ability to maintain command and control and 
said that UNMIS would continue to liaise with the JIUs to 
train them and enhance their efficiency.  Qazi noted that the 
GOSS had requested additional UN Police support during 
elections but the GNU had not yet made a request.  Qazi said 
UNMIS' current mandate included 715 police personnel, but an 
additional 600 could be required. 
 
¶6.  On DDR, Qazi praised the initiation of the DDR process 
and initial support provided by donors.  However, he said 
that funding for reintegration must be forthcoming -- with 
35,000 SPLA members part of expedited demobilization efforts, 
unmet expectations could become a security threat.  Qazi 
observed that diminishing oil revenues could affect the 
GOSS's ability to deliver on DDR promises, as well as 
elections and referenda issues. 
 
The Council Reacts 
------------------ 
 
¶7.  Ambassador Rice said that the United States continued to 
be troubled by the delays and obstacles preventing full 
implementation of the CPA, and she listed several critical 
issues that remained unresolved, including the release of 
census results, lack of funding for the Abyei Interim 
Administration, the unresolved border demarcation, and 
increasing violence in southern Sudan.  Rice also urged the 
UN, through its needs assessment mission, to quickly identify 
the support necessary to conduct national elections, 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000481  002 OF 002 
 
 
including the amount of security assistance UNMIS could 
provide.  Rice said that the United States remained deeply 
concerned about the GOS expulsion of international aid 
organizations, and she emphasized the effect of these 
expulsions on the Three Areas.  Rice likewise expressed deep 
concern with the increasing violence linked to inter-ethnic 
disputes and LRA incursions in southern Sudan. 
 
¶8.  Russia agreed that publishing the census results, 
enacting needed legislation to permit elections to take 
place, and improving the command and control of the JIU, 
especially in light of security sector problems in the south, 
would be critical.  Russia noted that the expulsions had 
complicated relief efforts but also stated that the ICC 
indictment had negative repercussions on the peace process. 
China agreed with the negative impact of the ICC warrant and 
urged the Council to make peace a priority.  The UK focused 
on UNMIS' need to develop the JIUs, stressing their important 
role in border areas, and asked how UNMIS could assist with 
countering tribal violence.  The UK stated that the expulsion 
of NGOs was more critical to the south than Darfur, as the 
NGOS provided the bulk of humanitarian assistance to the 
border areas.  France also stated that tribal conflict was 
destabilizing the south and that NGO expulsions had affected 
the Three Areas even more than Darfur. 
 
¶9.  Burkina Faso encouraged the UN assessment mission to 
develop an electoral calendar to assist parties in preparing 
for 2010 elections and indicated that normalization of 
relations between Chad and Sudan would improve peace 
prospects in the region.  Vietnam also expressed concern at 
the deterioration in relations between Chad and Sudan. 
Turkey encouraged the Council to develop a pragmatic, forward 
looking approach to CPA implementation and warned against the 
Council being seen as pursuing a "selective" approach to 
implementation.  Uganda stressed positive developments, 
including the return of two million displaced people to 
southern Sudan.  Uganda stated that this important 
development was indeed fragile, but a sign of progress that 
the Council should assist in consolidating. 
 
¶10.  Libya also pointed to positive developments-- such as 
establishing a timetable for elections, taking steps to 
implement the Abyei Roadmap agreement, and beginning the DDR 
process -- but acknowledged negative developments, including 
the increase in violence, which Libya attributed to the ICC 
arrest warrant.  Libya stated that humanitarian organizations 
had been expelled for engaging in activities contrary to 
their areas of responsibility and asserted that the GOS 
decision would not be reversible.  Libya repeated requests 
for the Council to respond to regional organizations' request 
for Article 16 deferral of the indictment. 
Rice