08USOSCE150
FSC-PC JUNE 4: CYBER SECURITY AND PREPARATION FOR
Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mission USOSCE
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHVEN #0150/01 1581243
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061243Z JUN 08 CTG SECSTATE #0047W
FM USMISSION USOSCE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5767
INFO RUCNOSC/ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0530
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1084
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1029
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE//POLAD/XPXC//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//ECJ5-T/ECPLAD/ECCS//
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEASWA/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC//OSAE
RUESDT/DTRA-OSES DARMSTADT GE
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J5-DDPMA-E/DDPMA-IN/CAC//
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS USOSCE 000150 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR VCI/CCA, VCI/NRRC, EUR/RPM, EUR/PRA, EUR/CARC, 
SCA/CEN, SCA/RA, PM/WRA 
JCS FOR J5 
OSD FOR ISA (PERENYI) 
NSC FOR DOWLEY 
USUN FOR LEGAL, POL 
CENTCOM FOR CCJ5-C, POLAD 
UNVIE FOR AC 
GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL OSCE KCFE KCIP EN FI XG
SUBJECT: FSC-PC JUNE 4: CYBER SECURITY AND PREPARATION FOR 
BMS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The Estonian defense minister and other 
speakers discussed cyber security and the need for the OSCE 
to remain involved in coordinating the efforts of 
participating States (pS) in responding to emerging threats 
to information and communication systems.  Speakers extolled 
the Council of Europe's Convention on Cybercrime as an 
example of the international cooperation needed. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The special working group to prepare the OSCE 
contribution to the Biennial Meeting of States (BMS) on the 
UN Program of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) 
discussed the products needed for the July 14-16 meeting in 
New York.  These will include an oral presentation and a 
written report.  Delegations generally agreed to focus on 
existing programs and documents, including brokering and 
end-user certificates.  Germany lamented the absence of any 
normative work on SALW over the last four years and 
recommended considering the merger of the OSCE Documents on 
SALW and Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition.  End summary. 
 
Cyber Security 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Jaak Aaviksoo, the Estonian Minister of Defense, 
told the June 4 joint PC-FSC meeting there was a continued 
need for international and domestic legal frameworks regimes 
to address threats to cyber security, including use of the 
Internet by terrorists and attacks on the Internet and other 
information systems.  Aaviksoo urged all countries to join 
the European Council's Convention on Cybercrime.  Inter-state 
cooperation was essential, and the OSCE could have a role in 
fostering cooperation among policymakers, experts, and other 
stakeholders.  (FSC-PC.DEL/18/08) 
¶4. (SBU) The UK, Canada (FSC-PC.DEL/23/08), Germany, France, 
and Russia (Voronkov), agreed that the OSCE could respond to 
the emerging threats by further discussion and exploring ways 
to develop concrete actions, although Russia's definition of 
cybercrime seemed to include websites that propagated 
extremist views without necessarily directly connecting them 
to terrorist activities. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Voronkov welcomed further OSCE efforts on cyber 
security, mentioning favorably "recent documents and 
conferences" on the subject, particularly the "Public-Private 
Partnership."  Voronkov noted a connection between terrorist 
use of the Internet and unrest in the Caucasus.  He reported 
that terrorists use sites controlled from computers in the 
Baltics, Finland, and Sweden.  Voronkov called for 
international legal frameworks to identify terrorist websites 
and monitor their activities.  Such legal regimes need not 
conflict with human rights principles, he added, but would 
actually buttress a fundamental human right to life itself. 
(FSC-PC.DEL/22/08) 
 
¶6. (SBU) Belarus (Pavlov) noted the use of the Internet to 
incite ethnic and religious hatred.  He said transnational 
crimes committed through the Internet require international 
cooperation to prevent or prosecute them.  The OSCE could 
work with specialist organizations like Interpol to 
coordinate national efforts while avoiding politicization of 
cyber security.  (FSC-PC.DEL/24/08) 
 
¶7. (SBU) The U.S. (Finley) mentioned the recent cyber attacks 
on Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Internet sites in Belarus 
and supported further OSCE work on cyber security, 
 
particularly in cooperation with other international 
organizations like NATO.  Ambassador Finley also announced 
the distribution of remarks on cyber security by Homeland 
Security Secretary Chertoff at the 2008 RSA conference. 
(FSC-PC.DEL/20/08) 
 
¶8. (SBU) Armenia (Tabibian) observed it was perhaps less 
vulnerable than some pS because its information 
infrastructure was less developed.  He described information 
technology as a "Faustian deal" that brings added 
vulnerabilities as well as advantages.  A fundamental concern 
in cyber security should be the privacy of the individual, he 
concluded, as the cyber realm creates a "culture of 
licentiousness and gossip." 
 
European Council's Convention on Cybercrime 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Alexander Seger, head of the economic crime division 
at the legal directorate in the Council of Europe, explained 
the organization and provisions of the Council's Convention 
on Cybercrime, which the U.S. and 22 other states have 
ratified.  He noted that cybercrime is transnational, yet 
there is no consolidated international response to it.  He 
said there remained a need to balance states' interest in 
preventing and prosecuting cybercrime and protecting privacy. 
 The Convention on Cybercrime contains both procedural and 
substantive provisions, including measures for preserving 
electronic evidence that are relevant to general criminal 
investigations.  Seger touched on the Council's Convention 
for the Prevention of Terrorism, which the U.S. has not 
joined, and concluded there was at present no need for 
additional international legal instruments beyond these two 
conventions.  (FSC-PC.DEL/19/08) 
 
Finnish Approaches to Cyber Security 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) Colonel Aapo Cederberg of the Finnish Ministry of 
Defense explained his country's "total defense" approach to 
securing vital national functions.  This draws on the legacy 
of Finland's "nation in arms" experiences in World War II and 
involves coordinated action between different sectors of 
Finnish society.  Total defense is designed to preserve a 
well-functioning economy and infrastructure, including 
information and communications technology.  (FSC-PC.DEL/15/08) 
 
¶11. (SBU) Erka Koivunen, head of the emergency response team 
from the Finnish Communication Regulatory Authority, briefed 
the organization and functions of his team, which provides a 
coordinated response to information security incidents. 
KoivUnen said that Finland had a robust domestic IT 
infrastructure but was still dependent on outside resources 
for its functioning, e.g., the "main route" to the Internet 
passes physically through Sweden.  Thanks in part to the 
efforts of his agency, Finland has among the "cleanest" 
networks in the world, as measured by the presence of 
"malware" in host servers.  (FSC-PC.DEL/16/08) 
 
Azerbaijan Attacks France (and Armenia) 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Azerbaijan (Ismayilov) launched a long tirade 
against France for mentioning, in its report of a Vienna 
Document inspection in Armenia, the Armenian charge that 
 
Azerbaijan is in excess of its CFE equipment quotas. 
Ismayilov said the place to raise this issue was the Joint 
Consultative Group.  He criticized France's apparent 
partiality to Armenia, particularly offensive because France 
was a member of the OSCE-sponsored Minsk Group charged with 
resolving the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan over 
Nagorno-Karabakh.  He also referred to his country's May 14 
intervention in the FSC challenging Armenia's nil response in 
its 2008 Code of Conduct submission to the question of how 
many of its forces were serving outside its national 
territory. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Armenia (Hovhannisyan) complained it had not been 
given warning of the Azerbaijani intervention.  France 
(Simonet), also noting the absence of warning, reserved the 
right to reply. 
 
Georgia Reports More Russian Troops Deployed 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Georgia reported that Russia had deployed 
additional forces into the disputed separatist region of 
Abkhazia without Georgian consent.  Despite Russian 
assurances of benign intentions, Georgia saw these recent 
deployments as part of Russia's large-scale preparation for 
aggression against it and called on all states to prevent 
this aggression.  (Note:  The Georgian and Russian 
delegations were at this time meeting separately as part of 
the consultative mechanism of Chapter III of the Vienna 
Document 1999 to discuss the situation in Abkhazia including 
the April 20 UAV incident.  End note.) 
 
Ireland Pitches Cluster Munitions Ban 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Ireland (O'Leary) announced an agreement to ban 
cluster munitions had been completed by a diplomatic 
conference in Dublin recently.  O'Leary called on all states 
to join the agreement while noting the absence from the 
conference of "some of the major producers of cluster 
munitions."  The agreement will, he said, stigmatize any use 
of these munitions. 
 
SALW/SCA Donations 
------------------ 
 
¶16. (SBU) Finland announced it was contributing 345,000 euros 
to Tajikistan for stockpile security, phase II, task 3 of the 
OSCE SALW project there.  Finland also will contribute 15,000 
euros to Albania for melange disposition. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Denmark announced it too was contributing 15,000 
euros for melange disposition in Albania. 
 
Code of Conduct Outreach 
------------------------ 
 
¶18. (SBU) Austria (Eischer), the Code of Conduct coordinator, 
announced a September 22-24 conference in Almaty, Kazakhstan 
for central Asian pS on the Code of Conduct.  Details and 
invitations will follow. 
 
¶19. (SBU) Estonia (Parts), the FSC chair, announced it 
planned a June Code of Conduct outreach meeting with the OSCE 
Partners for Cooperation.  She solicited views and 
 
suggestions for content of the meeting from all pS. 
 
Special Working Group Meeting on BMS and Future SALW Actions 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Discussion of the OSCE contribution of the Third 
Biennial Meeting of States on the UN Program of Action on 
SALW (BMS), to be held in New York July 14-18, at the special 
working group meeting did not result in agreement on the 
specifics of the contribution, although there was general 
support for including information about ongoing OSCE programs 
in SALW including normative documents.  The chair announced 
that Vasily Pavlov (Belarus), the current chair of the 
Informal Group of Friends of SALW, and Colonel Steven 
Hartnell (UK), who will follow Pavlov in the chair this 
summer, will represent the OSCE at the BMS. The chair also 
reported that the OSCE planned a side event and exhibition of 
its SALW work at the BMS. 
 
¶21. (SBU) There was prolonged discussion over the content of 
the oral and written reports the OSCE will present at the 
BMS.  Belarus (Pavlov) suggested including information about 
both the normative and practical sides of OSCE work on SALW, 
including currently pending draft decisions for an 
information exchange of end-user certificates and a Best 
Practices Guide on regulation of air transport of SALW, as 
well as the recent decision on updating the OSCE MANPADS 
export controls principles. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Germany (Schweizer) said that the limited time for 
an oral presentation meant it should concentrate solely on 
implementation of existing documents and project work.  This 
would include implementation of extant documents on brokering 
and end-user certificates.  Schweizer lamented the lack of 
OSCE normative work on SALW over the last four years.  The 
OSCE seemed to be better at generating ideas that others 
realized than doing the work itself, he said. 
 
¶23. (SBU) Russia (Petr Litavrin, Russian MFA security affairs 
and disarmament deputy director) countered that the OSCE had 
an enviable record of accomplishments in SALW, unlike the UN 
Program of Action (UNPOA) that had limited impact because of 
funding constraints.  Litavrin also noted that UNPOA reports 
had diminishing substance and influence.  Litavrin suggested 
a focus on international brokering of SALW, as well as export 
controls and MANPADS. 
 
¶24. (SBU) Finland (Kangste) reminded that the OSCE could 
participate in the thematic sessions at the BMS besides the 
meeting for regional organizations.  Sweden (Nilsson) 
suggested it was good news that, as Schweizer had noted, 
other organizations were now sharing the burden of work on 
SALW. 
 
¶25. (SBU) Slovenia, as EU president, supported concentration 
on physical security and stockpile management, surplus 
destruction, marking and tracing, export and border controls, 
and the control of brokering.  The EU continues to support 
work on an international treaty to regulate trade in arms. 
(FSC.DEL/110/08) 
 
¶26. (SBU) The Conflict Prevention Center (Kytomaki) reported 
on its participation in the OSCE and European-Atlantic 
Partnership Council "synergy" conference May 28-30 in 
Brussels at NATO.  Kytomaki reported the conference concluded 
there was insufficient implementation of existing SALW 
obligations and scarce cooperation among international and 
regional organizations.  The conference report is available 
through the CPC. 
 
¶27. (SBU) The chair will prepare the reports for the BMS with 
the assistance of the CPC and the chair of the IGOF of SALW. 
Germany made a point of wanting to see the draft reports 
before the BMS, as did Turkey.  Sweden and Canada, while 
happy to review the drafts, expressed full confidence in the 
FSC chair and do not believe additional discussion of the 
drafts would be necessary. 
 
Future Actions on SALW 
---------------------- 
 
¶28. (SBU) During the last part of the special working group, 
delegations were asked to consider future actions on SALW. 
Germany (Schweizer) suggested it was time to undertake a 
review of the OSCE Document on SALW.  In the context of the 
BMS, he suggested, perhaps OSCE SALW reporting requirements 
could be "standardized" in light of the UNPOA.  Schweizer 
also suggested considering the merger of the OSCE Documents 
of SALW and Conventional Ammunition. 
 
¶29. (SBU) Russia (Litavrin) rejoined that SALW and SCA were 
two different threats: SALW work meant efforts to prevent 
inappropriate transfer, while ammunition and other munitions 
represented a safety and environmental threat wherever they 
were.  Schweizer responded that, when considering a merger of 
the documents, he had in mind "SALW and its ammunition," not 
the entire realm of explosive devices and munitions. 
Litavrin separately remarked to USDel that he anticipated 
some personnel changes at MFA, particularly in his department 
(DVBR).  These could result in "fresh approaches" to security 
issues. 
 
¶30. (SBU) Sweden (Nilsson) agreed it might be time to 
undertake a thorough review of the OSCE Document on SALW. 
Should the OSCE task itself to do this at the 2008 
Ministerial in Helsinki?  Perhaps the OSCE should also review 
the need for separate documents on SALW and ammunition. 
Belarus said any review would involve experts from capitals 
meeting under OSCE auspices.  Finland said the OSCE should 
seek a "global" endorsement of its SALW norms and programs. 
Switzerland is prepared to explore further work in SALW. 
 
Future Meetings 
--------------- 
 
¶31. (SBU) The FSC will return to its standard agenda in the 
Plenary and working groups at its next meeting on June 11. 
Austria (Eischer) told USDel that it will make a presentation 
on "private military companies" at the June 25 FSC. 
FINLEY