08USOSCE293
FSC DECEMBER 10: UNSCR 1540 COMMITTEE CHAIR
Thu Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mission USOSCE
VZCZCXRO3907
PP RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR
DE RUEHVEN #0293/01 3461501
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111501Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION USOSCE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6079
INFO RUCNOSC/ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0647
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1202
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHDLCNE/CINCUSNAVEUR LONDON UK
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEASWA/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC
RUESDT/DTRA-OSES DARMSTADT GE
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1142UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 USOSCE 000293 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR VCI/CCA, VCI/NRRC, EUR/RPM, EUR/PRA, EUR/CARC, 
SCA/CEN, SCA/RA, PM/WRA, ISN/CPI 
JCS FOR J-5 
OSD FOR ISA (PERENYI) 
NSC FOR HAYES 
USUN FOR LEGAL, POL 
EUCOM FOR J-5 
CENTCOM FOR J-5 
UNVIE FOR AC 
GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL KCFE OSCE RS CY XG
SUBJECT: FSC DECEMBER 10: UNSCR 1540 COMMITTEE CHAIR 
VISITS; CYBER SECURITY AGENDA 
 
REF: A. WRIGHT-SILBERBERG DECEMBER 9 EMAIL 
     ¶B. STATE 124486 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Ambassador Jorge Urbina, chair of the 
UNSCR 1540 Committee, told the FSC its members were in the 
vanguard of states implementing the resolution, which calls 
on all states to prevent the proliferation of WMD and their 
delivery systems to non-state actors.  Urbina said the Best 
Practice Guide being compiled by the FSC would benefit all 
states by setting standards.  The entire OSCE could usefully 
further 1540 goals by assistance to states in developing 
border controls and sensitive item dual-use lists. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In the working groups, several delegations objected 
to the new U.S. edits to the draft agenda for the March 2009 
cyber security workshop.  With Russia now accepting the 
current draft agenda, the U.S. is now alone.  A working group 
meeting will now be held before the plenary on December 17, 
the last meeting of the autumn session.  France and Germany 
supported the latest version of the Russian proposal for a 
single defense planning deadline.  The AIAM agenda will be 
forwarded to the plenary for adoption on December 17.  Turkey 
and Russia are still waiting for instructions on the Code of 
Conduct questionnaire.  Washington, see para 19.  End summary. 
 
Russia Says Georgia Freezes South Ossetia 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Russia (Ulyanov) accused Georgia of cutting off 
natural gas to South Ossetia, threatening civilians in their 
homes, schools, and hospitals with privation as winter 
approaches.  Russia, as a consequence, has taken actions to 
assure gas is supplied to South Ossetia and is constructing a 
gas pipeline to the region through North Ossetia.  Ulyanov 
charged Georgia with a premeditated suspension of gas 
delivery, akin to a "blockade."  Ulyanov said the situation 
was similar to the Balkans war in the early 1990s.  Then, 
too, Russian had ensured gas supplies to a threatened 
minority, the Muslim Croatians, as a humanitarian act. 
Ulyanov asserted that Slobodan Milosevic, although tried as a 
war criminal, never used gas supplies as a weapon. 
¶4. (SBU) Ulyanov acknowledged Georgia claims the pipeline was 
damaged during the August conflict: if so, he asked, can 
Georgia describe the damage and predict when the pipeline 
will be repaired?  Did Georgia not see it was hurting its own 
people still living in South Ossetia?  Ulyanov called on the 
EU and the U.S. to consider the matter and take appropriate 
action.  In the meantime, if the situation had not 
dramatically improved, Russia would return tot e subject at 
the nest meeting of the FSC. 
 
Georgia Claims Russia Prevents Repairs 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Georgia (Kvachakidze) replied that the relevant 
facts included Russia's invasion of Georgia, the six-point 
peace agreements, Russia's support for ethnic cleansing, and 
Russia's continued denial of access to South Ossetia for 
humanitarian aid and unarmed OSCE monitors.  Russia now had 
over 5,000 troops each in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. 
Georgian jurisdiction needed to be restored, particularly to 
the Alkhagori region. 
 
 
USOSCE 00000293  002 OF 006 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Kvachakidze recalled that two gas pipelines in North 
Ossetia that supplied Georgia with Russian gas had been 
bombed in 2006.  Russia described these as "terrorist" 
attacks yet never investigated them or other similar attacks. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Kvachakidze said Russia knows that the pipelines 
were damaged during the August war.  Georgia was repairing 
them, but could not make repairs in South Ossetia as the 
Russians denied them access.  Georgia expected to complete 
repairs, where it could make them, soon.  Ulyanov countered 
that the South Ossetian pipeline was repaired; this was 
instead a case of Georgia diverting the supplies.  Georgia's 
report, he allowed, was encouraging, but he would still need 
to return to the subject at the next meeting. 
 
 
Security Dialogue: UNSCR 1540 Committee Chair 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Costa Rican Jorge Urbina, chair of the UN Security 
Committee Resolution 1540, praised the OSCE for its progress 
in implementing the resolution, which requires all states to 
prevent the proliferation of WMD and delivery system to 
non-state actors, in particular for terrorist purposes. 
Urbina noted the FSC workshop on 1540 in late 2006 and the 
Ministerial decision 10/06 on supporting national 
implementation.  Urbina reported all participating States 
have submitted reports to the 1540 Committee and over half 
have offered assistance on 1540 implementation to other 
states.  He cited the Best Practice Guide on 1540, currently 
under preparation, as an example of the standard setting for 
which regional organizations like the OSCE were particularly 
well-suited. 
 
Eleven pS Request Help on 1540 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Urbina urged pS to follow through on their 2006 
decision by preparing implementation plans and sharing them 
with the OSCE and the 1540 Committee.  He reported that at 
least eleven pS had requested technical assistance in full 
implementation; the 1540 Committee could help arrange 
partnerships to help these states and has developed an 
assistance template for states seeking help. 
 
¶10. (SBU) UNSCR 1810, adopted in 2008, extends the mandate of 
the 1540 Committee until 2011 and reinforces the need for 
cooperation among international and regional organizations. 
Urbina noted the role of NGOs in full implementation, citing 
a conference in Ankara arranged in part by SIPRI on dual-use 
goods export controls.  He urged pS to identify and address 
the gaps remaining in their full implementation of the 
resolution. 
 
Plenty of 1540 Work for Both PC and FSC 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Urbina said the implementation of 1540 overlapped 
the work of both the Permanent Council and the FSC.  He 
suggested the OSCE consider developing rosters of national 
experts as well as 1540 points-of contact.  He also noted the 
presence in Vienna of other international organizations 
helping to implement 1540, the IAEA and the UNODC, and called 
 
USOSCE 00000293  003 OF 006 
 
 
for the OSCE to cooperate with them.  (FSC.DEL/190/08) 
 
¶12. (SBU) France, Turkey, the UK, and Finland welcomed Urbina 
and expressed national support for 1540.  The UK (Gare) asked 
Urbina it specify some of the lacunae in pS implementation. 
Urbina deferred to Richard Cuppitt (U.S.), a 1540 Committee 
staff member, who noted that the committee has identified 382 
measures states should take to implement 1540; the pS had, on 
average, taken about 215.  Urbina said the establishment of a 
"regional center" to focus implementation efforts could be an 
appropriate role fore regional organizations. 
 
U.S. Proposes 1540 Workplan for OSCE 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. (SBU) The U.S. (Neighbour) also expressed support for the 
resolution and noted that control of WMD-related items 
instilled greater confidence among trading partners that 
their trade does not support illicit activities; increases 
legitimate access to advanced technologies; makes trade more 
secure from theft and diversion; and enhances market research 
and inventory control. 
 
¶14. (SBU) The U.S. is seeking expansion of the G-8 Global 
Partnership against the spread of WMD that will provide 
financial support for implementation of 1540.  Neighbour said 
that the 1540 Committee alone cannot do the work of promoting 
implementation.  The OSCE can assist by further work on the 
Best Practice Guide; take steps to exchanging 1540-related 
data among all pS and the Partners and forwarding same to the 
committee; identify an OSCE liaison with the 1540 Committee 
who would develop lists of national experts and 
points-of-contact; and support greater cooperative efforts 
between the PC and FSC as well as with the IAEA and UNODC. 
(Full text of U.S. intervention will appear in the December 
10 FSC Journal of the Day.) 
 
Crimean ERW Clean-Up 
-------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Ambassador Lubomir Kopaj, the OSCE project 
coordinator in Ukraine, described plans for remediation of 
explosive remnants of war (ERW) in the Crimea, much of it 
dating to the Second World War and earlier.  OSCE estimates 
the project will cost over 361,000 euros, most of it to be 
spent on the provision of modern equipment and specialized 
training to Ukrainian government explosive ordnance 
officials.  OSCE experts visited the Crimea in October to 
assess the scope of work.  Kopaj added that the project to 
clean up ERW at Novobohdanivka was successfully completed and 
the area had been returned to local control. 
 
Cyber Security Workshop Agenda 
------------------------------ 
 
¶16. (SBU) Russia supported the draft decision on an agenda 
and modalities for the March 2009 cyber security workshop. 
Ulyanov added that Andrey Kortskiy, a deputy director of the 
Russian MFA arms control and security affairs department, 
would speak on "political aspects of ensuring international 
cyber security.  Germany and Greece announced they would 
provide speakers. 
 
 
USOSCE 00000293  004 OF 006 
 
 
¶17. (SBU) The U.S. (Silberberg) expressed general support but 
proposed minor changes to the agenda for working session 1 to 
reflect greater emphasis on responses and remediation and 
less on threats and attacks because of the difficulty in 
identifying the sources of attacks and because the technology 
used by attackers was changing so rapidly (ref A).  The U.S 
noted particular interest in session 2 on good practices and 
legal frameworks and offered a speaker from the Department of 
Justice. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Germany, Denmark, Austria, Switzerland, and 
Luxembourg (Pilot) said they would need to consider any 
changes to the agenda carefully, Pilot observing that 
delegations were free in any case to bring up whatever they 
wanted at the working sessions.  Separately, Estonia 
(Tiigimae) and Finland (Kangaste) complained that omission of 
reference to threats from the agenda would defeat the goal of 
the workshop to have a comprehensive overview of cyber 
security.  Estonia reported that Russia would need to rerun 
to capital for instructions, which could delay the decision 
until well into 2009.  Kangaste pointed out that the 
organizers of the March 17-18, 2009 event would be 
handicapped if the agenda was not determined until only a few 
weeks before. 
 
¶19. (SBU) The U.S. is apparently alone in its views of the 
agenda.  Mission requests Washington guidance whether to join 
consensus on the current version of the agenda (FSC.DD/17/08). 
 
Single Defense Planning Deadline 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Russia Ulyanov noted the incorporation of German 
edits into the latest version of the proposal for a single 
deadline for submission of defense planning information under 
the Vienna Document.  He urged all pS to support the 
proposal.  Germany and France announced they could now 
support.  Azerbaijan reported it lacked final instructions. 
Separately, the chair, Finland (Kangaste) asserted that 
Azerbaijan's position was related to its failure to submit 
defense planning information for the last four years. 
Kangaste said he was considering asking the CPC to send a 
reminder to Azerbaijan that its submissions were overdue. 
 
AIAM Agenda for 2009 
-------------------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) The draft agenda and modalities for the 2009 Annual 
Implementation Assessment Meeting will be redistributed as a 
chair's draft decision and forwarded to the plenary for 
adoption on December 17. 
 
SALW 
---- 
 
¶22. (SBU) Colonel Walter Schweizer (Germany), chair of the 
informal group on small arms and light weapons (SALW), noted 
the adoption of Ministerial decision 6/08 that calls for a 
review of the OSCE Document on SALW. Schweizer said he 
planned to brief the FSC in January 2009 on a work plan after 
consultation with the troika. 
 
SCA 
 
USOSCE 00000293  005 OF 006 
 
 
--- 
 
¶23. (SBU) Lieut. Colonel Nils Peterson (Denmark), FSC 
stockpiles of conventional ammunition coordinator, announced 
a December 16 meeting to review melange elimination project 
work in Ukraine and Albania. 
 
Code of Conduct 
--------------- 
 
¶24. (SBU) Belarus (Krayushkin) argued that reference to the 
UN Charter in the preamble of the draft decision on updating 
the Code of Conduct questionnaire (FSC.DD/14/08) was not 
relevant to a "technical" subject like the questionnaire. 
Also, Krayushkin asserted, the reference instead to the 
Helsinki Final Act Belarus proposed (FSC.DEL/186/08) did not 
require the extended description of the act's purpose 
subsequently suggested by Denmark and Sweden (FSC.DEL/18808). 
 Their edits would include reference to fundamental freedoms 
"without distinction as to," inter alia, sex.  Denmark and 
Sweden had earlier proposed a reference to UNSCR 1325 on the 
role of gender in security issues, but this lacked support 
from many delegations.  In any case, Belarus would need more 
time to consider the Danish/Swedish proposal. 
 
¶25. (SBU) In response to prompting from the chair, Turkey and 
Russia reported that final instructions they lacked were 
expected to contain edits to both the text of the decision 
and the questionnaire. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Colonel Anton Eischer (Austria), the FSC Code of 
Conduct coordinator, proposed considering "supplementary" 
proposals for enhancing implementation of the Code.  He 
reported a draft decision proposing annual assessment of the 
Code is in preparation.  Separately, Eischer identified 
Germany as the author. 
 
Cypress MANPADS Project 
----------------------- 
 
¶27. (SBU) An informal meeting chaired by FSC SALW coordinator 
Colonel Steve Hartnell (UK) was held December 10 in response 
to a request by Cypress for technical assistance in the 
destruction of slightly more than 300 MANPADS (SA-7). 
Cypress (Zivanas) made clear it was not looking for financial 
assistance, but rather for technical expertise and advice on 
the best way to get rid of these weapons.  Zivanas said his 
government had no preference between destruction or 
demilitarization, nor whether the process should be 
accomplished on Cypress or somewhere else.  He said these 
choices would depend on the results of an assessment visit, 
tentatively scheduled for February 2009. 
 
¶28. (SBU) Several delegations, including the UK, Italy, Czech 
Republic, Greece, Hungary, and Ireland, offered one kind of 
assistance from another, ranging from experts for an 
assessment visit to demilitarization or destruction of the 
weapons at dedicated national facilities (Hungary and Italy). 
 The U.S. (Silberberg), per guidance (ref B), announced its 
interest in helping and, subject to the scope of work, 
leading the project. 
 
¶29. (SBU) Hartnell suggested that the next step should be for 
 
USOSCE 00000293  006 OF 006 
 
 
each country interested in participating in the project to 
submit in writing a proposal for assistance, including costs 
and logistical requirements.  He would like to see these 
written ideas by the end of January 2009.  This would be 
followed by an assessment visit, which would result in a 
forma; report to the OSCE. 
 
¶30. (SBU) The Conflict Prevention Center (Martynyuk) (CPC) 
said there were too many volunteers for the project.  There 
are currently ten to twelve experts offered for a visit to 
look at slightly more than 300 missiles.  Hartnell supported 
this observation by asking delegations to consider how 
important for each of them to be involved in this particular 
project. 
 
Next Meeting 
------------ 
 
¶31. (SBU) The next and final meeting of the autumn session of 
the FSC will be on December 17. 
FINLEY