08USOSCE270
OSCE/FSC NOVEMBER 5:  PLENARY DISCUSSES UNPOA;
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mission USOSCE
VZCZCXRO9629
PP RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHVEN #0270/01 3121623
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071623Z NOV 08 DUE TO NUMEROUS SVCS H/W ZDK
FM USMISSION USOSCE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6025
RUCNOSC/OSCE COLLECTIVE
INFO RUCNOSC/ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0626
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1181
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHDLCNE/CINCUSNAVEUR LONDON UK
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEASWA/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC
RUESDT/DTRA-OSES DARMSTADT GE
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1121UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 USOSCE 000270 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR VCI/CCA, VCI/NRRC, EUR/RPM, EUR/PRA, EUR/CARC, 
SCA/CEN, SCA/RA, PM/WRA 
JCS FOR J-5 
OSD FOR ISA (PERENYI) 
NSC FOR HAYES 
USUN FOR LEGAL, POL 
EUCOM FOR J-5 
CENTCOM FOR J-5 
UNVIE FOR AC 
GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL KCFE OSCE RS XG
SUBJECT: OSCE/FSC NOVEMBER 5:  PLENARY DISCUSSES UNPOA; 
CODE OF CONDUCT QUESTIONNAIRE NEARING COMPLETION 
 
REF: A. OCT 23 WRIGHT-MITCHELL EMAIL (FSC.DD/10/08/REV.1) 
     ¶B. NOV 4 MEYER-SILBERBERG EMAIL (BMS ON UNPOA AT 
        FSC 5 NOVEMBER) 
     ¶C. OCT 31 WRIGHT-SILBERBERG EMAIL (U.S. PROPOSED 
        TEXT ON GEORGIA FOR CHAIR'S PROGRESS 
        REPORT) 
 
USOSCE 00000270  001.2 OF 006 
 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  During the November 5 FSC Plenary the 
Republic of Macedonia criticized Greece for a 28 October 
military parade in Thessaloniki and said it had evidence that 
slogans against the Republic of Macedonia were chanted by 
Greek armed forces.  Decision No. 11/08 introducing best 
practices to prevent destabilizing transfers of small arms 
and light weapons through air transport and on an associated 
questionnaire was adopted.  The rest of the Plenary focused 
on the UN Program of Action (UNPOA) on the Illicit Trade in 
Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) and the Third Biennial 
Meeting of States (BMS3) held in July 2008.  Ambassador 
Dalius Cekuolis, Chair of the BMS3, spoke about the role 
regional organizations, specifically the OSCE, could play in 
contributing to implementation of the UNPOA and the 
recommendations that came out of BMS3. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In the Working Groups, the Chair requested that 
delegates seek final guidance from capitals on the 
Ministerial Council draft decision on SALW and SCA and the 
draft decision on end user certificates.  There was consensus 
to endorse the draft decision on the overview of disposal 
aspects of liquid rocket fuel (melange) in the OSCE area at 
the next plenary.  The Estonian delegation said it would 
circulate for comment a draft agenda for the March 2009 cyber 
security workshop.  There was discussion on the Chair's four 
draft progress reports.  There was some discussion on the 
Ministerial Council decision on issues relevant to the FSC, 
but Russia did not have guidance from Moscow.  Discussion on 
the draft decision for a single deadline for submission of 
information on defense planning will continue in the next 
meeting of the Working Group.  There was intense discussion 
over the update of the questionnaire on the Code of Conduct. 
Many delegations expressed general sentiment that all 
delegations had made wins and losses and the time has come to 
push forward the draft decision for an update on the Code's 
questionnaire.  Washington, please see paragraphs 9, 12, 13, 
and 18.  Attendance in the Working Groups was less than usual 
as many NATO delegations had sent reps to the HLTF off-site 
in Romania.  End Summary. 
 
The Republic of Macedonia Condemns Greek Military Parade 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (SBU)  The Republic of Macedonia (Zekolli) condemned a 
military parade in Thessalonki on 28 October and said it had 
audio and visual evidence that members of the Greek armed 
forces chanted provocative slogans that 'contained hate, 
xenophobia, and intolerance.'  Ambassador Zekolli said that 
such behavior contradicted obligations supported by the Code 
of Conduct on Politico-Military Aspects of Security.  Greece 
(Sourani) responded that she could not recall 'a previous 
case in any international forum where a state had been 
criticized for conducting a military parade on its National 
Day.'  Sourani said that slogans in parades are expressions 
of the sensitivities and sentiments of the local population. 
 
USOSCE 00000270  002.2 OF 006 
 
 
She claimed that the slogans heard in the October 28 parade 
did not contain any 'irredentist or aggressive references and 
were a testament to the fact that the people of Thessaloniki 
consider the name of Macedonia as an integral part of their 
Greek identity.' 
 
Role the OSCE Might Play to Further Work on UNPOA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Ambassador Dalius Cekuolis, Chair of the Third 
Biennial Meeting of States (BMS3) on the UN Small Arms 
Program of Action on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and 
Light Weapons (UNPOA), addressed the FSC under the Security 
Dialogue.  He focused on how regional organizations, such as 
the OSCE, could help 'keep alive' the BMS3 outcome document. 
He said regional organizations could help to build national 
capacity and political will for furthering the work on the 
UNPOA. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The United Kingdom, Germany, France, Turkey, 
Sweden, Belarus, and Italy supported the role of the OSCE in 
contributing to the efforts of the BMS3.  The United States 
spoke in favor of regional meetings to further UNPOA 
implementation. The UK (Gare) supported including the OSCE 
where a regional approach can be effective and welcomed a 
comprehensive OSCE program where further projects could 
happen.  Germany (Horsten) said it was important to implement 
BMS3 recommendations and suggested holding an FSC workshop to 
look at securing stockpiles.  Horsten also suggested that the 
OSCE could 'bridge the gap' by convening meetings and holding 
workshops before the next BMS is held.  Germany (now with 
Schweizer in the chair) said the focus should be on 
'normative aspects.'  He looked forward to a review of the 
work which could result in a 'major meeting at the end of 
2009.' 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The U.S. (Silberberg), drawing from talking points 
and notes prepared by PM and ISN per ref email A, stated that 
the U.S. remains fully committed to UNPOA implementation, 
continues to uphold our obligations under this agreement, and 
encourages others to do the same.  Silberberg noted that in 
order for States to be successful in UNPOA implementation 
they must undertake practical measures, including destruction 
of surplus weapons, development and enforcement of arms 
export and import control policies, and better stockpiling 
management; this is most effectively done at national, 
sub-regional, and regional levels and does not require 
additional global meetings. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Separarte from the discussion on the UNPOA, the 
decision introducing best practices to prevent destabilizing 
transfers of small arms and light weapons through air 
transport and on an associated questionnaire was adopted 
(FSC.DEC/11/08).  The U.S. delivered an interpretive 
statement, per ref email B, which has been attached to the 
Decision and the FSC Journal of the day.  The text of the 
U.S. statement follows: 
 
'The U.S. welcomes FSC.DEC/11/08 and applauds the extent of 
Wassanaar's valuable work on best practices to prevent 
destabilizing transfers of small arms and light weapons by 
air for implementation as standard elements in the FSC. 
 
USOSCE 00000270  003.2 OF 006 
 
 
 
The U.S. would like to underscore the value, when employing 
such elements, of leveraging existing export regulations that 
focus on the exporter's responsibility to ensure compliance 
by its agents, employees, and others who are party to the 
authorized export.  Integral to that responsibility is the 
exporter's awareness of the means of transportation for the 
authorized export, to ensure it reaches the authorized end 
user for authorized end use.' 
 
UPDATE ON SALW PROJECTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The Coordinator for SALW projects (UK-Hartnell) 
provided an update on the status of SALW projects. 
Tajikistan second phase is expected to be completed in early 
¶2009.  There will be a donors' visit to Belarus from 16-21 
November 2008.  The Kyrgyz Republic has requested assistance 
in enhancing stockpile management and security of storage 
sites containing SALW and conventional ammunition and in this 
regard has replied to the OSCE Questionnaires on SALW and 
conventional ammunition.  An experts' assessment visit to 
Kyrgyzstan is scheduled for 11-13 November 2008.  Hartnell 
recalled the request by Cyprus during the Joint FSC-PC on 29 
October and announced that Cyprus has distributed answers to 
the OSCE Questionnaire (FSC.EMI/419/08).  Cyprus' request 
seeks expert assistance to develop a program, for which 
Cyprus will assume the costs, for the destruction of 324 
MANPADS.  The Coordinator mentioned that one participating 
State has indicated willingness to provide assistance, and 
stands ready to help any other participating States which 
respond to this request. 
 
Ministerial Council Decision on SALW and SCA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  In Working Group B, chaired by Finland's Tuomas 
Riihimaki, there was agreement to accept the U.S. proposed 
additional text 'within existing resources and/or 
extrabudgetary contributions' in the Ministerial Council 
decision on small arms and light weapons and stockpiles of 
conventional ammunition (MC.DD/7/08/Rev.2).  Armenia 
suggested the U.S. phrase be placed in the preamble, which 
would apply to all operative paragraphs instead of repeating 
the language after each mention of OSCE contributions in the 
text.  Azerbaijan did not have final instructions from 
capital.  Revision 3 of this draft decision reflects the 
addition of the U.S. text in the preamble and the adoption of 
the SALW by air decision (FSC.DEC/11/08). USDEL believes that 
the current text satisfies U.S. criteria and will join 
consensus on November 12, unless otherwise directed. 
 
Ministerial Council Decision on FSC Issues 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  On the MC draft decision on issues relevant to 
the FSC (MC.DD/6/08/Rev.2), Georgia (Giorgadze) said it did 
not have instructions from capital.  It is not clear whether 
Georgia will ultimately accept the language that refers to 
the FSC's Security Dialogue as 'addressing the armed conflict 
in August 2008 as well as other conflict situations and 
security problems in the OSCE area' or will insist on more 
 
USOSCE 00000270  004.2 OF 006 
 
 
specific language.  Germany (Schweizer) suggested a minor 
edit correcting its proposed compromise language in operative 
paragraph three.  The U.S. (Wright) said it could accept the 
German compromise language.  Russia (Ulyanov) said it prefers 
the original text which is 'more precise and clear,' but that 
it did not have official instructions from Moscow.  The Chair 
thanked the U.S. for its acceptance of the compromise 
language.  Germany (Schweizer) also suggested that 'in its 
mandate' be added to operative paragraph two to make clear 
that the Security Dialogue continue to address issues within 
the FSC's mandate.  Switzerland (Von Arx) suggested that the 
next revision contain only options one and three (i.e., 
delete option two, the U.S. proposed text) in operative 
paragraph three so delegations could focus on the two options 
that have support.  Revision 3 distributed on November 6 
reflects these changes; discussion will continue in Working 
Group B on November 12. 
 
Single Deadline for Submitting Defense Planning Information 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  In Working Group A, also chaired by Riihimaki, 
Norway, Sweden, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, and Belarus 
said they support Russia's VD99 proposal for a 30 September 
deadline to submit defense planning information 
(FSC.DEL/494/07/Rev.3/Corr.1).  The UK (Hartnell) reported 
that although the U.K. budget runs from April to April it 
must go to Parliament for approval, which means it 'lands in 
the hands of politicians' and, like the U.S. budget, is 
notorious for not being approved on time.  Discussion will 
continue in the Working Group on November 12. 
 
End User Certificates 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Chair (Riihimaki) noted that the phrase 
'and/or other pertinent documents' was inserted into 
operative paragraph one of the draft decision on an 
information exchange with regard to sample formats of 
end-user certificates and relevant verification procedures 
(FSC.DD/9/08/Rev.3).  Riihimaki said that this additional 
language derives from the SALW document and makes reference 
to additional documents that States may use for the same 
purpose.  The UK, U.S., Germany, and Poland supported 
Revision 3 of the draft decision.  USDel believes that the 
current text satisfies U.S. criteria and will join consensus 
on November 12, unless otherwise directed. 
 
Liquid Rocket Fuel 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Greece was the only delegation without final 
instructions from capital on the draft decision on the 
overview of disposal aspects of liquid rocket fuel in the 
OSCE area (FSC.DD/13/08).  This draft decision (melange) will 
be adopted on November 12, pending Greece's support.  USDEL 
believes that the current text satisfies U.S. criteria and 
will join consensus, unless otherwise directed. 
 
Code of Conduct 
- - - - - - - - 
 
 
USOSCE 00000270  005.3 OF 006 
 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Latvia and the UK argued, right off the bat, that 
changes they had proposed to the draft decision on an update 
of the questionnaire on the Code of Conduct (FSC.DD/14/08) 
had not been accepted.  The Chair (Riihimaki) stressed the 
need to 'finalize the process.'  He acknowledged that several 
States still have differing views on a number of issues 
related to the questionnaire, but that everyone had to make 
compromises.  He urged delegations to demonstrate 
'flexibility,' and strongly noted that 'we should get a 
result this year' if we wanted the document to be ready for 
use in April 2009 when the next set of States' replies will 
be submitted. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  The UK (Hartnell), supported by Turkey and 
Latvia, repeated that it still disapproves of question II.1.2 
and thought it odd that we would ask States to comment on 
'the legitimate security concerns of other States.'  Russia 
(Ulyanov) said that this question exists due to Russia's 
insistence; in fact, Russia thinks 'it is one of the most 
important items in the entire Code.'  (NOTE:  After the 
Working Group, Hartnell approached USDel and inquired whether 
we supported keeping the question in.  It is unclear at this 
point whether London will live with the question, or stand in 
the way of the document going forward.) 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  Latvia (Nilsons) expressed concern that paragraph 
three of section one (other international commitments) still 
appeared in the questionnaire.  If nothing else, he suggested 
the two questions become one and also recommended removal of 
the phrase 'in good faith' from the end of question I.3.1. 
He said that Latvia preferred paragraph three of section one 
in a previous version of the questionnaire 
(FSC.DEL/9/08/Rev.1 ) 11 June).  He also noted that Latvia 
preferred to see 'if applicable' added to the three questions 
that consisted of section one in the 11 June version. 
 
¶17.  (SBU)  Belorussian delegate Pavlov said that although 
Belarus was 'skeptical' on adopting the draft decision it 
would not stand in the way of continued dialogue and, he 
would send the document back to capital for review.  Pavlov 
also said that Belarus did not like mention of the UN Charter 
in the second paragraph of the preamble.  He said that 
perhaps the Helsinki Final Act should also be mentioned. 
Germany (Schweizer) suggested language in paragraph eight of 
the Code itself, which mentions the Helsinki Final Act, as a 
compromise. 
 
¶18.  (SBU)  A lengthy, intense discussion ensued wherein 
Switzerland, Germany, Sweden, Italy, France, Austria, 
Denmark, Spain, Ireland, and Slovenia argued for moving 
forward with the document, which means no additional edits at 
this point and a request that capitals conduct a careful 
review of the document as it currently stands.  Germany 
(Schweizer) strongly argued that much of the 'balancing act' 
to achieve compromises on the questionnaire had been 
conducted over 'lots of hours' in informal working groups and 
that some of the smaller delegations, which often cannot 
attend all  informal meetings, may not have witnessed the 
effort put in by all.  The Chair (Riihimaki) concluded the 
discussion by noting 'a lot of support to go forward,' and 
asked delegations to consult with capitals.  USdel requests 
Washington conduct a final review of the document, with a 
 
USOSCE 00000270  006.2 OF 006 
 
 
view toward its adoption in the next few weeks. 
 
Chair's Progress Reports 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶19.  (SBU)  The Chair (Riihimaki) gave an update on the 
status of its four progress reports to the MC (MC.GAL/5/08 - 
arms control agreements and CSBMs; MC.GAL/2/08 - SALW; 
MC.GAL/3/08 - SCA; MC.GAL/4/08 ) Code of Conduct). 
Suggestions made by delegations during the 4 November 
informal meeting will be reflected in revised versions of the 
reports.  The Chair requested that any additional inputs be 
delivered to drafters no later than 12 November to finalize 
and publish the reports in time for the December 4-5 
Ministerial.  The U.S. proposed text on discussions on the 
Georgia conflict will be added to the arms control agreements 
and CSBMs report, as requested by Washington, per ref email 
¶C.  The U.S. (Wright) mentioned that we had received comments 
on the SALW and SCA reports and would pass them on to the 
respective drafters immediately following the Working Group. 
 
 
Next Meeting 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶20.  (U)  The next FSC meeting will be on 12 November. 
Working Groups A and B will meet before the Plenary so the 
draft decisions noted in paras 9, 12, and 13 above can be 
passed to the Plenary for adoption. 
SCOTT