08AITTAIPEI830
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT TALKS
Fri Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0830/01 1650916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130916Z JUN 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9164
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8359
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9590UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000830 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT TALKS 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's print media June 13 gave significant coverage 
to the historic meetings between Taiwan's Straits Exchange 
Foundation (SEF) and China's Association for Relations across the 
Taiwan Strait (ARATS) on improved cross-Strait relations Thursday. 
All major Taiwan dailies front-paged the landmark handshake between 
SEF Chairman Chiang Pin-kun and his ARATS counterpart Chen Yunlin in 
Beijing Thursday and said that SEF and ARATS may consider setting up 
reciprocal offices to handle visa applications.  In the meantime, 
news coverage continued to focus on the aftermath of a collision 
between a Taiwan fishing boat and a Japanese frigate near the 
Tiaoyutai islands Tuesday.  Several papers also quoted a "Washington 
Post" report as saying that top U.S. officials have put the brakes 
on the arms package for Taiwan. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" criticized the SEF-ARATS talks as 
black box negotiations and said the Taiwan people will never accept 
the results of such talks.  An editorial in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" also remained skeptical of the 
SEF-ARATS talks and said Taiwan's sovereignty is at stake.  An op-ed 
piece in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times," on the other hand, 
discussed Taiwan's internal concerns over the island's political and 
economic prospects once the dialogue between Taiwan and China 
becomes systematic.  End summary. 
 
A) "How Can the [Taiwan] People Accept [Results of] Black Box Talks 
[with China]?" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (6/13): 
 
"... Peaceful developments across the Taiwan Strait as well as 
stability and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region are not only the 
results welcomed by the 23 million people of  Taiwan but also a 
long-term goal pursued by the island.  Given such a basis, the Ma 
administration could have sought to reach an internal consensus [on 
the resumption of cross-Strait talks] in a discreet and orderly 
fashion first and then started negotiating [with Beijing] based on 
the consensus.  During the entire process [of pushing for the 
resumption of cross-Strait dialogue], it is the responsibility of a 
ruling and accountable government to pay equal attention to proper 
procedures and rule of law.  But as a state leader, [Ma] simply used 
statements like 'the people have been waiting for eight long years' 
to respond to straightforward criticism from the outside saying that 
the new administration has been acting too hastily [on the 
cross-Strait issue].  Such a mentality [of the Ma administration] 
will surely result in [chaotic] policy and personnel arrangements 
... and will thus put Taiwan in a dangerous situation. ..." 
 
B) "Sovereignty at Stake in Beijing" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (6/13): 
 
"... This time the talks are being held in Beijing, a factor that is 
itself full of symbolism.  Not holding the talks on neutral ground, 
as happened in the past, gives China the chance to frame events as 
it desires. The venue for the talks, the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse, 
is proof of this, as it is where the Chinese government houses 
visiting provincial government officials. Thus, Beijing can portray 
the talks as one of its provinces coming to pay tribute to the seat 
of power.  All the talk about 'putting aside disputes over 
sovereignty' to create a 'win-win' situation for both sides is a red 
herring because if Taiwan is willing to overlook sovereignty just 
once, then it is setting a precedent for future talks. The only 
winner if this happens will be Beijing. ... 
 
"Another consequence of this week's talks is that China fever is now 
in danger of developing into a full-scale epidemic, with county 
commissioners and city mayors now champing at the bit to cross the 
Strait and hobnob with their communist counterparts. Elected 
officials are lining up to ditch their titles to take part in 
economic activities and some are even willing to break the law to do 
so. ...  The government must put its foot down soon and allow the 
Mainland Affairs Council (MAC) to exercise its authority if it is to 
prove wrong the doubters who said Lai Shin-yuan's appointment was 
just a publicity stunt. ...  How can people trust a government that 
is prepared to stand up to Japan over the sovereignty of the 
Diaoyutais while at the same time cower to China?" 
 
C) "Resumption of SEF-ARATS Negotiations; Beneficial Effects and 
Anxiety" 
 
Tao Yi-feng, an associate professor of the Department of Political 
Science at National Taiwan University, opined in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (6/13): 
 
"... In terms of politics, the resumption of negotiations between 
[Taiwan's] Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and [China's] 
 
Association for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS) is based 
on the prerequisite that both sides accept the '1992 consensus.' 
Beijing is pleased to see Taiwan return to the 'one China' 
framework, while the KMT is only emphasizing the 'respective 
interpretations' part of the '1992 consensus.'  However, it has 
become an obvious trend over the past decade that Taiwan's political 
and economic power is declining while Beijing's is increasing.  In 
international society at present, no matter how Taiwan interprets 
the connotations of 'one China' -- be it 'one China is the Republic 
of China;' 'one China refers to a cultural China;' or 'one China 
refers to a China in the future' -- it has never been able to 
contend with Beijing's interpretation [of one China] (namely, 'there 
is only one China in the world; Taiwan is part of China, and the 
People's Republic of China is the only legitimate government of 
China).  How to secure the sovereignty of the Republic of China 
during the reciprocal talks about status as a 'political entity' 
will be a question constantly asked of the KMT by the people and the 
opposition parties in Taiwan. 
 
"In addition, the 'status quo' advocated by [President] Ma 
[Ying-jeou] -- 'no unification, no independence, no use of force' -- 
is actually a dynamic balance.  If the current interests of big 
powers like China, the Untied States and Japan prefer that Taiwan 
maintain such a 'status quo,' these countries should act more 
proactively to help Taiwan maintain such a dynamic balance.  After 
substantial progress has been made following the resumption of talks 
between SEF and ARATS, Taiwan should have more leeway to ask the 
United States and Japan to give Taiwan more support for Taiwan's 
participation in the international community.  In this way, Taiwan 
will avoid falling into circumstances in which it can only 
unilaterally hope for Beijing's goodwill. ..." 
 
YOUNG