08AITTAIPEI857
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0857/01 1700954
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180954Z JUN 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9213
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8379
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9608UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus June 18 news coverage on the dispute between Taiwan and Japan 
over the Diaoyutai (generally anglicized in Taiwan as "Tiaoyutai") 
Islands; on new developments in cross-Strait relations; and on 
electricity price hikes in Taiwan, slated to go into effect 
beginning July 1.  The pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran a banner 
headline on page two reading "DPP Expresses Doubts about  [National 
Security Council Secretary-General] Su Chi  Proposing to the U.S. 
that Arms Procurements be Suspended and Thus Endangering Taiwan's 
Interests." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial criticized the Ma Ying-jeou administration's "base, low 
and contemptible manner" in dealing with the U.S. arms procurement 
package and cross-Strait relations.  A column in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" urged President Ma to maintain a balanced 
relationship with the United States, China, and Japan because it 
will benefit Taiwan's strategic interests most.  A column in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" recommended that the Ma 
administration focus on Taiwan's bid to participate in international 
organizations other than the United Nations, such as the World 
Health Organization, the World Bank, and the International Monetary 
Fund.  End summary. 
 
A) "President Ma's Inability to Draw a Line between His Party and 
the Nation and His Willingness to Suffer Humiliation Have Put Taiwan 
in Imminent Danger" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (6/18): 
 
"... The new [Ma] administration's base, low and contemptible manner 
of disarming itself was fully exposed in the cases of the arms 
procurement package and 'one China with respective interpretations.' 
 In terms of arms procurements, President Ma announced superficially 
that '[Taiwan] is determined to defend its security, will have a 
rational defense budget and will acquire necessary defensive 
weaponry' in an attempt to placate popular sentiments on Taiwan. 
But in reality, he is scared that the U.S. arms procurement package 
will jeopardize his pro-China policy.  As a result, there were 
horrifying rumors circulating that a core aide of the new 
administration had privately requested that the United States 
suspend its arms sales to Taiwan for the time being.  Such a 
double-dealing approach has both fooled the Taiwan people and 
violated Taiwan's interests, putting Taiwan's security at great 
risk.  Also, in terms of the controversy over [Taiwan's] 
sovereignty, it appears that the Ma administration only dares to 
adopt tough measures against Japan, which has been a long-time 
friend to Taiwan.  But when it comes to China, which has deployed 
over a thousand missiles aimed at Taiwan and has never renounced the 
use of force against the island, the Ma administration only blindly 
curries favor with it.  [Ma's practice] has in fact proved that he 
has put his personal political position and national identify ahead 
of Taiwan's security and interests. 
 
"In addition, the Ma administration claimed that the spirit of the 
1992 consensus is 'one China with respective interpretations' and 
has proudly used it as the basis for the resumption of talks between 
Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and China's Association 
for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS).  But given the 
recent performance of the new administration, 'one China with 
respective interpretations' has proven to be a political scam. ... 
In order to meet with ARATS Chairman Chen Yunlin, President Ma even 
said yesterday that both sides can address each other as 'Mr. Ma' 
and 'Mr. Chen' - a gesture showing that self-humiliation is nothing 
for him as long as Chen is willing to visit Taiwan.  If Ma is a 
civilian, no one can say anything against his decision to be 
addressed as Mr. Ma.  But as president, Ma's status represents the 
Taiwan people as a whole.  He must not call himself Mr. Ma, or it 
will not only be a move of self-disparagement but also an insult for 
all the Taiwan people." 
 
B) "Ma Ying-jeou Must Play the Four-Sided Chess Game Skillfully" 
 
Journalist Hsiao Hsiu-tsen wrote in a column in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (6/18): 
 
"Taiwan's fishing boat sank in the waters near the Tiaoyutai Islands 
after a collision with a Japanese frigate.  The indignation 
triggered by the hawks in Taiwan has generated repercussions on the 
sensitive relationship among the United States, Japan, Taiwan and 
China....  Ma Ying-jeou will need to put forth some effort in order 
to play this four-sided chess game skillfully.  Also, it requires 
further deliberation as to whether Ma should disclose his card [so 
early] by saying that he and [ARATS Chairman] Chen Yunlin can 
address each other as Mr. Ma and Mr. Chen when Chen visits Taiwan 
[in fall].  Current indications are that relations across the Taiwan 
Strait are getting better, and China is also striving to mend its 
relations with Japan.  But Taiwan's relations with Japan will likely 
 
take a turn because of the controversy [over the Tiaoyutai Islands]. 
 On the other hand, given the increasingly intimate relationship 
across the Taiwan Strait, Taiwan's relations with the United States 
have become more complicated, and as a result, U.S. arms sales to 
Taiwan have become bewildering.  Should Washington and Japan 
determine that Taiwan is tilting toward China, it will have 
unfavorable impact on Taiwan's strategic position ... 
 
"The appropriate approach for Ma is that while reaping the harvests 
of cross-Strait exchanges, he should also seek to stabilize Taiwan's 
relations with the United States and Japan.  Unless Ma believes that 
exchanges across the Taiwan Strait supersede the other relations, 
the maintenance of a balanced relationship among the four sides - 
the United States, China, Taiwan and Japan - should be most 
favorable for Taiwan's strategic interests. ..." 
 
C) "[Taiwan's] Proposal to Enter the UN Should Be Changed this 
Year" 
 
New York correspondent Jeromy Fu wrote in the "United Notes" column 
in the pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
(6/18): 
 
"Cross-Strait relations have seen a great improvement since 
[President] Ma assumed his post.  [Ma's election] has also created a 
long-awaited opportunity for Taiwan's bid to join the international 
community.  In order to pursue more strategic interests in Taiwan's 
diplomacy, Taipei should seize this rare opportunity and adjust its 
tactics.  [Taipei] should change its course [of diplomacy] for the 
upcoming 63rd United Nations General Assembly, which is due to open 
in September, and consider halting its efforts to enter the United 
Nations. 
 
"[Such a proposal] is by no means a diplomatic retreat; instead, it 
is to abandon 'falseness' and focus on 'pragmatism.'  In other 
words, Taiwan should give up the method which has done no real 
benefit to the island but has been utilized by [its] diplomatic 
allies as a way of extortion in the last fifteen years.  Taiwan 
should instead put more mental and physical effort into 
participating in international organizations which are more 
substantive, concrete and accessible, such as the World Health 
Organization, the World Bank, and International Monetary Fund. 
 
"In this vein, this [change of course] will not only embody the Ma 
administration's new thinking of 'reconciliation and truce' in 
foreign affairs, but is also [a way] to make concessions for the 
purpose of gaining greater advantages.  Since [Chinese President] Hu 
Jintao showed flexibility during his meeting with KMT Chairman Wu 
Poh-hsiung by claiming that China will consider the issue of 
Taiwan's participation in the World Health Organization, Taipei can 
then reciprocate by not engaging in a diplomatic attack and a 
defense of its UN bid, about which Beijing cares the most, and can 
use it in exchange to gain a chance to join the World Health 
Organization. ..." 
 
YOUNG