08AITTAIPEI820
Media Reaction: Cross-Strait Talks
Thu Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0820/01 1640716
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120716Z JUN 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9151
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8356
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9588UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000820 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: Media Reaction: Cross-Strait Talks 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  On June 12, Taiwan's print media gave extensive 
coverage to the historic talks between Taiwan's Straits Exchange 
Foundation (SEF) and China's Association for Relations across the 
Taiwan Strait (ARATS) on improved cross-Strait relations.  News 
coverage also focused on the aftermath of a collision between a 
Taiwan fishing boat and a Japanese frigate near the Tiaoyutai 
islands Tuesday.  Two English-language dailies -- the 
pro-independence "Taipei Times" and the pro-unification "China Post" 
-- also ran a Reuters news story filed from Washington, which said 
Taiwan's representative to the U.S. Joseph Wu has urged the U.S. 
government to approve the sale of F-16 fighter jets as soon as 
possible. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a news analysis in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" said the main goal of the 
SEF-ARATS talks should be resuming the systematic interaction 
between Taipei and Beijing, instead of negotiating technical issues. 
 An op-ed in the "China Times" urged Taiwan to grasp the opportunity 
to make a breakthrough in cross-Strait relations.  An editorial in 
the pro-independence "Liberty Times" criticized Ma Ying-jeou's 
administration for compromising Taiwan's sovereignty in its recent 
policies.  End summary. 
 
A) "Only [When Both Sides of the Strait] Resume a Systematic 
Exchange of Visits Can [Taipei and Beijing] Take [Their Interaction 
and Dialogue] Seriously" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
analyzed (6/12): 
 
"... This time, Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and 
China's Association for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS) 
finally took the opportunity to resume normal dialogue.  [Taiwan's 
President] Ma Ying-jeou and [SEF Chairman] Chiang Pin-kun should 
understand that launching weekend charter flights and opening up 
Taiwan to mainland tourists are just agreements on technical issues. 
 Resuming a systematic exchange of visits between SEF and ARATS 
would be the most historically significant achievement of the 
meeting between Chiang and [ARATS Chairman] Chen [Yunlin], if it is 
feasible. 
 
"However, one hand cannot clap.  Chiang threw out the suggestion of 
resuming the exchange of visits between SEF and ARATS in the 
informal press conference [held in Beijing] on Wednesday night...Do 
the Chinese Communist high-level [officials] just want to maintain 
the good atmosphere for a short period, or do they really expect 
both sides of the Strait to stay on the road of normalized 
interaction for the long run?  The answers to these questions will 
not only have influence on the consensus which the "Chiang-Chen 
meeting" might reach, but will also determine the final achievements 
of the Chiang-Chen meeting." 
 
B) "Ten Years to Sharpen a Sword" 
 
Yang Yu-wen, a freelance writer, opined in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (6/12): 
 
"Since both sides of the Strait started systematic negotiations, two 
hiatuses in the talks were caused by disagreement over the 
'one-China principle.'  The second resumption [of the dialogue 
across the Strait] is going to proceed.  Compared with the 
resumption of [the first] dialogue which was held ten years ago, 
what has changed is the political and economic power of both sides 
of the Strait, respectively.  What has not changed is that the ball 
is still in Beijing's court, whose goal is to push [Taiwan] toward 
political negotiation. ... 
 
"China has never been in such circumstances in almost one hundred 
years.  Its national power is rising.  At the same time, it is 
improving relations with neighboring countries, especially when its 
relations with Russia, Japan and South Korea are concurrently in 
strategic cooperation and mutually beneficial partnership.  What is 
even more important is, the final result of the United States 
Presidential election will only be known at the end of the year and 
[the United States'] foreign policy will only be clear by mid next 
year.  The influence of the United States on the situation in East 
Asia and on cross-Strait relations will be diminished during this 
time.  Taiwan, after having experienced strongman and populist 
politics, is in a nadir in which political and economic power is 
declining and the government's governing capability is weak.  Now 
that [Chinese President] Hu Jintao has the upper hand, how could 
Taiwan fail to accelerate the tempo and grasp an opportunity which 
barely occurs once in a hundred years to realize the most 
significant advancement of cross-Strait relations for the last 
thirty years? 
 
C) "The Unification Wing Comes to Power; Taiwan's Sovereignty Faces 
an Unprecedented Crisis" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (6/12): 
 
"After taking office, Ma's administration is publicly walking a 
course of leaning towards China and ultimate unification, a course 
filled with policies and moves that have downgraded our sovereignty. 
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) revealed recently that it is 
implementing measures of 'de-Taiwanification.'  Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Francisco Ou also revealed that he gave clear instructions 
to MOFA staff in a speech, saying that there will be adjustment in 
the new government's foreign policy, with consideration toward not 
disrupting the benign development of cross-Strait relations.  After 
President Ma advocated a 'diplomatic truce' in his inauguration 
speech, he constantly repeated the same rhetoric while receiving 
foreign guests.  It is obvious that 'cross-Strait relations trumping 
foreign affairs' has been set as the new government's policy.  The 
new government's resumption of dialogue with China is a corollary to 
this policy. ... 
 
"From the reality that, externally, the new government is retreating 
and surrendering spontaneously on the diplomatic battlefield and 
proceeding in negotiating between the two countries [Taiwan and 
China] and introducing China's influence into Taiwan; internally, 
[the new government] is in haste to change the roadmap of 
Taiwan-centric consciousness and efface the name of Taiwan, we know 
that after the unification wing came to power, Taiwan's sovereignty 
has actually been facing an unprecedented crisis.  The Taiwan people 
should think about how to do our utmost to turn the tide in order to 
save Taiwan at this critical juncture of life and death." 
 
YOUNG