08CAIRO1128
EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF TWO
Wed Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #1128/01 1560940
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040940Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9438
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS CAIRO 001128 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA AND PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MASS MARR EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF TWO 
(2) UH-60M BLACK HAWK HELICOPTERS 
 
REF: A. EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST (08-224) FOR 
LETTER OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE (LOA), DATED 02 SEPT 07. 
¶B. MEMORANDUM FOR EGYPTIAN ARMAMENT AUTHORITY (EAA), SUBJECT: 
REQUEST FOR COORDINATION MEETING, DATED 10 MAR 08. 
¶C. MEMORANDUM FOR EGYPTIAN AIR FORCE (EAF) ARMAMENT DEPARTMENT, 
SUBJECT: REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR CTA AND LOR SUBMISSION, DATED 27 
MAY 08. 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU).  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Description.  In REF A, the GOE submitted a request to 
procure two UH-60M Black Hawk Helicopters to support their Border 
Security Mission.  These designated aircraft will perform tasks 
associated with border security and surveillance.  These helicopters 
will support an existing military force in conjunction with an 
upgraded Border Surveillance Operations Center.  This operations 
center will include a ground station that provides an enhanced 
digital downlink and communications capability.  All missions will 
be in compliance with the standards and regulations outlined within 
current international and regional agreements.  Additional 
information is available at www.mmc.gov.eg.  The GOE desired 
end-state of these Border Security assets is a more effective 
day/night surveillance and observation capability that enhances the 
current operational awareness along designated border areas. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Reason and justification for customer's request.  Recent 
events along Egyptian border areas support the GOE initiative to 
procure an increased rotary-wing capability to perform surveillance 
and observation missions.  These modern aircraft will replace 
existing, aging airframes (MI-17, etc.) that have reached or rapidly 
approaching the end of their recommended service life.  There will 
be no change to the existing mission and primary roles will include 
surveillance, troop transport, reconnaissance, etc.  Existing 
aircraft provide a limited night capability to support this high 
priority mission.  This procurement has been discussed in detail at 
the recent Financial Management Review (FMR) and Military 
Cooperation Conference (MCC), and has GOE Presidential visibility. 
The UH-60M (Black Hawk) helicopter with surveillance package was 
identified by the U.S. Army and Blackhawk Program Manager as a 
suitable rotary-wing platform to support the GOE specific Mission 
Requirements.  This action will assist in the modernization of the 
EAF to ensure safe flight operations, individual aviator proficiency 
and the overall readiness of EAF border security assets.  The UH-60M 
(Black Hawk) helicopter will improve the EAF ability to perform 
mission essential tasks inherent in the GOE Border Security Mission. 
 In addition, it provides a common platform for the EAF to 
participate in future training exercises with U.S. and Coalition 
Forces.  These aircraft are currently in the U.S. Army inventory and 
long-term sustainability through the U.S. supply system is another 
distinct advantage. 
 
¶3. (SBU) System description and Impact to Force Structure. 
The primary mission of the basic UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter is as a 
troop carrier and logistical support aircraft.  However, the 
helicopter can be configured to carry out Medical Evacuation, 
Command-and-Control, Search-and-Rescue, Armed Escort, Electronic 
Warfare and Surveillance Missions.  The UH-60M features new wide 
chord composite spar main rotor blades (500lb more lift), 
strengthened fuselage and advanced infrared suppression.  The 
fly-by-wire glass cockpit has a digitized 1553 bus-based avionics 
suite with four multi-function displays, four-axis fully coupled 
autopilot, two electronic flight management systems, digital moving 
map and Integrated Vehicle Health Management System (IHVMS).  The 
new T700-GE-701D engine is more powerful and provides additional 
lift during sling load operations.  Recent enhancements to this 
helicopter will significantly increase the aircraft's day/night 
surveillance capability and will only add two additional airframes 
to their current force structure. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Will the procurement of UH-60M SAR aircraft contribute to 
both U.S. and Egyptian defense/security goals?  Aircraft sales are 
consistent with DOD's Security Cooperation Guidance as it enhances 
the territorial security and crisis response capabilities of 
regional states.  It assists the U.S. in enabling allies and 
partners, while also protecting U.S. and partner interests.  It 
supports the modernization and transformation of allies or partners 
to reduce their vulnerability to external military sales.  Finally, 
it improves their ability to operate independently at night without 
significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Justification for type/quantity of aircraft requested. 
A detailed analysis and review of several suitable airframes was 
completed by EAF with input from the Utility Cargo Helicopter Office 
(UPHO) and Cargo Helicopter Program Manager.  Their findings 
revealed that the UH-60M Black Hawk with surveillance package would 
be an excellent airframe to support the border security mission. 
 
The procurement of these aircraft is a natural progression to 
modernize assets and significantly improve an existing capability. 
This modernization effort of aerial platforms to support border 
security will inevitably demand additional procurements of 
rotary-wing aircraft. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a 
new Humanitarian and Disaster Relief capability to the nation or 
region.  Combatant Commander's concurrence will be provided 
separately. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. 
The procurement of these additional surveillance aircraft should not 
influence the regional balance of power or cause negative reactions 
from any of Egypt's neighbors.  This procurement introduces a 
limited increase of technology to Egypt, but does not introduce new 
technology to the region.  Several regional allies have recently 
purchased similar airframes through the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) 
or Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) programs, with U.S. concurrence. 
These assets will greatly enhance Egypt's ability to participate in 
combined Regional training exercises.  This procurement will not 
impact Israel's qualitative military edge. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to ensure proper 
funding, accountability, sustainability and security of assets.  The 
GOE has demonstrated the intent and ability to protect sensitive, 
classified military technology over an extended period.  Egypt 
signed a General Security of Information Agreement with the U.S. and 
as a customer, has purchased and protected the sensitive technology 
of other U.S. weapons systems.  Egypt has procured similar 
rotary-wing aircraft in the past to include eight (8) UH-60L 
Blackhawk helicopters that currently provide VIP support to the GOE 
President.  The EAF has met all previous security and End Use 
monitoring (EUM) requirements. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Training required either in country or in the U.S. and 
anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. trainer's 
in country.  The EAF already maintains a squadron of eight (8) 
UH-60L Helicopters and maintains sufficient numbers of trained 
aircrews.  The EAF pilots currently complete all UH-60 Black Hawk 
Aviator Qualification Courses (AQC) in the U.S.  The only exception 
would be specialized Surveillance and communications training for 
the aircrews, taught by a Mobile Training Team (MTT).  The presence 
of this additional MTT would have little anticipated reaction 
because of the permanent Security Assistance Teams (SATs) already 
assigned in country. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the 
proposed acquisition.  Egypt plans to procure these two aircraft 
utilizing Foreign Military Financing and has already allocated 
sufficient funds within their FY08/09 budget.  This acquisition is 
essential for the GOE Border Security capability and is on the 
Egyptian Armament Authority (EAA) Priority List. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed 
acquisition.  None. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Plan for end-use monitoring and plan for compliance 
verification.  The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a 
robust Golden Sentry Program.  The Golden Sentry Program 
representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for 
the program, will coordinate for the review and maintenance of 
required documentation.  All parties will maintain serial number 
lists of all components within the inventory or transferred, and 
will conduct the mandated inspections as required.  This 
coordination will ensure that historical copies of all EUM 
Inspection results and customer's physical security and 
accountability control plans remain on file.  The Egyptian military 
currently has over 100 helicopters (FMS) of various configurations 
in country.  Egypt has maintained accountability and security of 
these aircraft without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date. 
The GOE has indicated a willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for 
accountability and security of these advanced aircraft, and the 
Office of Military Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring (EUM) 
of all required components if this request is approved. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Operational Plan and specific end-users. The operational 
plan for these aircraft is to support the existing Border Security 
Mission.  These aircraft will replace older airframes that are 
approaching obsolescence and perform tasks associated with border 
security and surveillance.  These helicopters will support a 
dedicated security force in conjunction with an upgraded Border 
Surveillance Operations Center.  This action will assist in the 
modernization of the EAF to ensure safe flight operations, 
individual aviator proficiency and the overall readiness of the EAF. 
 Finally, it improves their ability to perform mission tasks at 
night without significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces. 
 
 
¶14. (SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve the request 
to procure additional rotary-wing aircraft.  The country team 
recommends USG approval for the GOE procurement of two (2) UH-60M 
Black Hawk helicopters to support security and surveillance 
operations along the Egyptian border.  This is a coordinated mission 
position. 
 
SCOBEY 
 
 
 
1 of 5