08DAMASCUS405
ECA DECISION REQUESTED ON OPTIONS FOR CONTINUATION OF
Sun Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0405/01 1600401
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080401Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5058
INFO RUCNNAF/NORTH AF NEA AND SOUTH ASIAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAMASCUS 000405 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR ECA/A/E RLSWENSON; ECA/A/E/NEA DAIVES, LTALAMI; 
NEA/PPD WDOUGLAS, PAGNEW; NEA/ELA 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SY XF OEXC PGOV PREL
SUBJECT:ECA DECISION REQUESTED ON OPTIONS FOR CONTINUATION OF 
FULBRIGHT U.S. STUDENT PROGRAM IN SYRIA 
 
 
¶1.  THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST FOR ECA: PLEASE SEE PARAGRAPH 12. 
 
¶2.  [SBU] SUMMARY: The SARG has refused to regularize the 2007-2008 
Fulbright U.S. student program in Syria, despite significant 
pressure brought to bear by Post.  American Fulbright students 
remain in Syria on tourist visas and subject to the whims of Syrian 
immigration officials.  Recent developments highlight the uncertain 
status of this program.  Post seeks a decision from ECA on whether 
to continue the program in the current environment or to pull out 
the eight remaining students before the end of their grant periods 
in September and December 2008.  Post recommends the former approach 
but notes this places the students at the mercy of the SARG.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------ 
Timeline of Events 
------------------ 
 
¶3.  [U] Between March 2007 and February 2008, Post sent six 
diplomatic notes to request permission for the ten 2007-2008 
students to register at Damascus University and apply for residency 
permits.  The diplomatic notes were accompanied by the Charg's 
direct personal intervention by phone and in person on behalf of the 
Fulbright program, both with MFA officials and with the Deputy 
Minister of Higher Education. 
 
¶4.  [U] The SARG did not respond to Post's request until an April 
2008 diplomatic note from the MFA.  This note stated that it was too 
late in the academic year for students to register at Damascus 
University.  The MFA's response did not require the students to 
leave Syria. 
 
¶5.  [SBU] In the meantime, the students have been able to remain in 
Syria on temporary extensions of their tourist visas, or new tourist 
visas obtained from the Syrian Embassy in Washington, DC.  Two 
students have already completed their grants and departed Syria 
permanently.  Post has kept the students informed of their 
situation.  At a May 14 meeting, the A/DCM warned them against 
unneccessary travel and made clear the limits of the Embassy's 
ability to assist when problems arise with immigration authorities. 
 
---------------------- 
Trouble at the Borders 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  [SBU] Despite the seeming non-objection of Syrian authorities to 
the Fulbright students' continued presence in Syria, the students 
have encountered problems when trying to reenter the country after 
trips abroad.  On May 2, 2008, immigration authorities at Damascus 
International Airport initially refused re-entry to a Fulbright 
student who inadvertently arrived back in the country on the 
expiration date of her extended visa.  She was allowed to enter on 
an exceptional basis by the MFA. 
 
¶7.  [SBU] On May 18, 2008, a student with just a week left of his 
grant was denied re-entry from Jordan to Syria despite possessing a 
valid six-month, multiple entry visa.  He was told his name was on a 
list of foreign students who would not be allowed to re-enter Syria. 
 Unable to return to Syria, he flew back to the States from Amman on 
May 22.  (Note: Post was unable to confirm the existence of such a 
list.  End note.) 
 
¶8.  [SBU] Since the May 18 incident, another Fulbright student has 
left the country and re-entered, two students extended their tourist 
visas in Syria, and two students have received new tourist visas 
from the Syrian Embassy in Washington, D.C., all without incident. 
 
------- 
Options 
------- 
 
¶9.  [SBU] Post proposes two options to address the problems 
encounted to date: 
 
-- Option 1: Post continues to press the SARG about ways to 
regularize the program and informs the SARG that the students will 
continue their research grants on tourist visas until the SARG 
regularizes the program.  Post reiterates to the students the risk 
of being denied re-entry should they depart Syria for any reason and 
stresses the inability of the Embassy to intervene on their behalf 
with regard to immigration matters; and reminds them that other 
problems may arise vis-`-vis the Syrian government. 
 
-- Option 2: Post informs the SARG that because the SARG has not 
regularized this part of the Fulbright program, the USG will end the 
program of the eight remaining U.S. Fulbright students. 
 
Given that the students do not face harassment from the Syrian 
authorities and are successfully pursuing their research goals, Post 
 
recommends option one, but notes this will place the students 
continued stay in Syria entirely at the whim of Syrian authorities. 
Recent developments have shown the Embassy no longer has the ability 
to resolve immigration matters with the SARG on behalf of Fulbright 
students.  In addition, while we do not expect serious problems to 
arise with Syrian authorities as long as the students remain within 
Syria, the Embassy's ability to assist students if they do face 
harassment would be equal to its ability to assist any American 
tourist in Syria.  For example, the SARG does not provide consular 
notification of arrests of American citizens, and Embassy consular 
access to Amcit prisoners is not generally granted. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Status of the Program in 2008-2009 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  [SBU] Given the constraints and frustrations experienced in 
2007-2008, Post has already decided, with ECA's concurrence, to seek 
affiliation for the ten students identified for grants in the 
2008-2009 academic year as researchers with the Ministry of Culture 
vice students affiliated with the Ministry of Higher Education. 
Post has had no problem in the past obtaining residency permits for 
our Fulbright researchers through the Ministry of Culture.  In this 
way, if the Ministry of Culture approves, the 2008-2009 students 
will be assured the right to apply for residency permits upon their 
arrival in Syria and will not be forced to expend time, energy, and 
money maintaining tourist visas.  Their status as Fulbrighters in 
Syria will be sanctioned by the SARG and Post will have recourse 
should immigration status problems arise in the course of the year. 
Should the Ministry refuse to approve all or any of the researchers' 
projects and affiliation, grants will not be awarded. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
COMMENT: Fulbright Foreign Student Program 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  [SBU] Post does not recommend a suspension of the Fulbright 
Foreign Student Program under which Syrians travel to the United 
States for MA studies.  This program is a critical vehicle for the 
promotion of mutual understanding and encouraging the development of 
Syrian society through the experiences of young Syrians in the 
Untied States. 
 
-------------- 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
¶12.  [U] Post seeks ECA's guidance on how to proceed with the 
2007-2008 U.S. Fulbright student program in Syria as soon as 
possible. 
 
CORBIN