08PANAMA486
PANAMA: ARCHBISHOP TOUCHES UPON POLITICAL ISSUES
Thu Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0486/01 1641838
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 121838Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2165
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000486 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: ARCHBISHOP TOUCHES UPON POLITICAL ISSUES 
IN SERMON 
 
Classified By: POLCOUNS BRIAN NARANJO. REASONS: 1.4 (D). 
 
 ------- 
 SUMMARY 
 ------- 
 
¶1. (C) 
"The excessive cost of political campaigns is a slap in the 
face to the poor," Archbishop Jose Dimas Cedeno, stated 
during his sermon at the 38th Eucharist mass on June 1st, 
¶2008. Cedeno underscored key political issues deterring 
Panama's progress, and urged the Panamanian government and 
private sector to address: i) the growing income gap, ii) the 
healthcare crisis, iii) the corrupt judicial system, iv) and 
the soaring cost of political campaigns. Additionally, he 
also proposed an immediate increase in minimum wage and 
overhaul of the judicial and health care system. The 
Archbishop's remarks were well received by the public. The 
only one to attend the mass, PRD presidential candidate 
Balbina Herrera, agreeing with the Archbishop, promptly 
issued a press statement that called for a "cap on campaign 
spending". Conversely, her opponent Juan Carlos Navarro 
justified his high campaign costs, noting that such expenses 
were necessary to educate effectively the public. 
 
End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Highlights of the Sermon 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The following are key highlights from the Archbishop's 
sermon: 
 
--"Economic prosperity benefits the minority, while excluding 
the majority."-- The GOP and private sector, Cedeno asserted, 
should raise minimum wage salaries to help the country's 
working class. Panama's economic growth continued to benefit 
a small percentage of the population that enjoyed access to 
material wealth, while the working class majority suffered 
from the rising cost of gas, increased standard of living 
expenses, and high inflation rates. 
 
--"The increasing presence of bars and casinos generates 
violence in the community."-- Panama's incredible economic 
growth led to a proliferation of nightclubs and casinos, 
further fueling alcohol abuse, poverty, and crime in the 
community, the Archbishop stated. Women were the most 
vulnerable to these social dynamics, since they carried the 
burden to support the family. 
 
--"Eradicating corruption and impunity is the country's most 
urgent task."-- Presidential candidates had to immediately 
address corruption, impunity, and the broken judicial system, 
according to Cedeno. Political parties should also reduce 
wasteful spending on political campaigns fueled with empty 
propaganda. Candidates had to present concrete plans to 
improve the country. 
 
--"The majority of the population lacks access to quality 
healthcare."-- GOP and private enterprise had to initiate a 
collaborative effort to fix the healthcare system that lacked 
the infrastructure to provide service to all citizens, Cedeno 
said. 
 
--"Public Transportation maintains our country's development 
and growth."-- The economy could not operate effectively 
without an efficient public transit system. The community 
depended on it to survive, Cedeno asserted. GOP should 
address the concerns of taxi and bus drivers that suffered 
from the increasing cost of gas. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Leading Catholic NGO Echoes Archbishop's Remarks 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The essence of the Archbishop's remarks were echoed 
in a meeting between POLOFF and Maribel Jean, Executive 
Director of the Justice and Peace Commission, a Catholic NGO. 
 She described the role of the church in the upcoming 
elections as ensuring a clean vote through election 
observation, education of the public about their duties as 
citizens, and highlighting corruption as a societal ill. She 
too said the Church supported a "just salary" that would 
cover the costs of housing, food, education, and healthcare, 
though she put no dollar figure on what a "just" minimum 
salary would be. 

------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT:  The Archbishop's sermon addressed many of 
the top issues affecting the country on voters' minds: the 
economy, security, transportation, and health care. Public 
approval of his message underscores the importance of the 
Archbishops' non-partisan voice on political matters, one of 
the few such voices in Panama. Many Panamanians would like 
the Archbishop to be more vocal. Cedeno's last sermon was six 
months ago in December. POL is reaching out to Cedeno and 
hopes to delve into his views in greater depth in the coming 
weeks. END COMMENT 
 
EATON