08PRETORIA1222
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO3164
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #1222/01 1581445
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061445Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4677
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 5658
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 9868
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8078UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 001222 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, MAY 2008 
 
 
PRETORIA 00001222  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings newsletter, May 2008, Volume 3, Number 
5, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
-- CT INSTALL SOLAR GEYSERS TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE 
-- GREEN SCORPIONS' CEMENT PLANT CLEAN OUT CAMPAIGN 
-- PSSW REVIES MEDICAL WASTE DISPOSAL PROCESSES 
 
-- FIRE FIGHTERS GET READY FOR THE FIRE SEASON 
 
-- SA CELEBRATE SANITATION AND HYGIENE WEEK 
 
-- NEW GENERATION DAM FOR CAPE TOWN 
 
-- 2,000 FOREIGN MATH/SCIENCE TEACHERS HEAD FOR SA 
 
-- FACTOID 
 
End Summary. 
 
 
CT Install Solar Geysers to Combat Climate Change 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. (U) Cape Town has demonstrated its seriousness about combating 
climate change and sustainable use of energy by installing 60 Eskom 
accredited solar water geysers in households in the township of 
Kwanokuthula.  Once completed, the city could save up to 500 MW in 
electricity, which could help ease up the pressure on the national 
electricity supply.  The project is only the launch of the first 
phase of a bigger proposed project, whereby the Western Cape 
provincial government would install 1,000 solar-powered geysers in 
local communities.  Western Cape province Premier Ebrahim Rasool 
said the project was being implemented among Western Cape's poor 
communities because climate change is a poverty issue, which would 
affect the poor the most.  The project is also a means of bringing 
renewable energy to the poor, according to Rasool.  The next 
installations would go to Nyanga, Elisies RIvier and Atlantis during 
¶2008. 
 
Green Scorpions' Cement Plant Clean Out Campaign 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. (U) The compliance and enforcement wing of the Department of 
Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT), popularly known as the 
"Green Scorpions," has embarked on a compliance inspection campaign 
at cement manufacturing companies across South Africa.  The campaign 
commenced on May 26 at the Lafarge plant in the North West Province. 
 The Green Scorpions have partnered with six provincial departments 
and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to monitor 
compliance with all environmental legislation, authorizations and 
permits applicable to each site of operation.  The "Clean Cement" 
campaign follows a similar campaign which occurred in the past year 
and had focused on the steel and ferroalloy industry. 
 
¶4. (U) DEAT informed representatives of companies at an April Cement 
Industry Workshop so they could prepare for the inspections.  DEAT 
Deputy Director General Joanne Yawitch said the cement industry was 
placed under scrutiny because its products have suddenly become much 
in demand because of an increase in construction and other 
developmental projects.  She added that the industry could 
significantly contribute to pollution because of its rapid 
expansion, if not given attention. 
 
PSSA Reviews Medical Waste Disposal Processes 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The Pharmaceutical Society of South Africa (PSSA) has 
recently developed a checklist and guidelines for pharmacists to 
transport and dispose of medical and pharmaceutical waste according 
to accepted world practice.  The move is an end result of shocking 
reports of indiscriminate disposal of hazardous medical waste and 
expired medicines, including human remains in landfill sites in some 
Qexpired medicines, including human remains in landfill sites in some 
parts of the country.  The incidents led to countrywide outcries for 
a stop and investigation into the illegal practice.  The PSSA 
conducted an informal survey among its own members, mostly 
pharmacists, which revealed that there was confusion as to whether 
the processes applied by some waste removal operators were 
environmentally acceptable.  South Africa has laws which regulate 
the transportation and disposal of medical waste, but the 
enforcement thereof remains a serious challenge. 
 
Fire-Fighters Get Ready for the Fire Season 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
PRETORIA 00001222  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶6. (U) Forty aviation pilot fire-fighters underwent an intense, 
week-long fire-fighting training program from May 26, in Nelspruit 
in Mpumalanga province.  The training program dubbed "Working on 
Fire" (WOF) was conducted in preparation of the coming dry winter 
fire season which began on June 1.  The period is characterized by a 
series of wildfire outbreaks which have claimed many lives and 
property in the past.  In July and August 2007 alone, wildfires 
claimed seventeen civilian lives, including six firefighters, 
severely injured twenty-seven, and wiped out 63,000 hectares of 
plantation forests and grazing land.  This fire season's pilots will 
fly helicopters, spotter and bomber planes across the fire-prone 
provinces and beyond, just as a precaution.  WOF Program Manager 
Fred Mokgope said WOF is a government-funded and multi-partner 
organization focused on integrated fire management.  He added that 
the militaristic training, which demanded physical fitness and 
discipline, has saved many lives and property over the years. 
 
SA Celebrates Sanitation and Hygiene Week 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry Lindiwe Hendricks 
formally launched the National Sanitation and Hygiene Week (NSHW) on 
May 26 at the Sandton Convention Center in Johannesburg. The 
Minister opened the keynote address by strongly condemning the 
xenophobic violence which had plagued the country in the past three 
weeks.  She noted that there was a general perception that the 
people who were engaged in the barbaric acts were those who have not 
received basic services and who have lived in poverty, but said that 
this did not justify involvement in such violence.  Hendricks said 
although there were many millions of people who have yet to receive 
water and sanitation services, the government provided clean water 
to over 18.7 million people since 1994 and access to decent 
sanitation services to another 10.9 million. 
 
¶8. (U) The Minister added that at a recent United Nations Commission 
on Sustainable Development session in New York, South Africa was 
quoted as one of the countries which had met its Millennium 
Development Goals target on sanitation, despite of the outstanding 
backlog.  Sub-Saharan Africa was identified as the region most 
unlikely to meet the sanitation MDG by 2015.  The NSHW (May 26-31) 
is celebrated annually to raise the profile of sanitation on the 
political agenda, to raise public awareness on health and hygiene 
and to promote sanitation best practices. 
 
New Generation Dam for Cape Town 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) The Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA), a statutory body, 
is to transform the Berg River Dam into a new breed of dams to be 
operated according to World Commission of Dams standards for 
environmental protection.  The Berg River Dam in Franschoek, Western 
Cape will be the first bulk water resource development project in 
South Africa, directly linked to water demand management.  TCTA 
Environmental Section Head Nigel Rossouw said engineers would build 
a 63-meter wet in-let tower to enable the dam to make high and low 
releases through out the year, to simulate flood events and natural 
inflow into the dam.  The cabinet-approved 2002 Berg River Dam 
Project was commissioned after a water assessment indicated that 
Cape Town would be the first South African city to be hit by a high 
water demand and low supply period.  The dam was therefore designed 
Qwater demand and low supply period.  The dam was therefore designed 
to capture winter rainfall and store it for supply to Cape Town in 
the dry summer months, while increasing the annual yields. 
Next-in-line for a similar development is the Olifants River in 
Steelpoort, Limpopo, according to TCTA. 
 
2,000 Foreign Math/Science Teachers Head for SA 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶10. (U) 2,000 Foreign Math/Science Teachers Head for South Africa 
Department of Education (DOE) Deputy Director General (DDG) Firoz 
Patel told the National Assembly's portfolio committee on education 
that his department will employ two thousand foreign math and 
science (M&S) teachers in the next two years.  Patel said there was 
a critical shortage of skills in M&S teaching in South Africa, while 
DOE still had to deal with unqualified or under-qualified teachers. 
The DDG said DOE already has 1,432 foreign teachers working in local 
schools, and has received enquiries about employment from Asia and 
the U.S.  The program will run for three years, with the first group 
of 1,000 teachers arriving in October this year. 
 
¶11. (U) The Department of Home Affairs has, on the other hand, 
allocated 4,000 permits for the expected teachers.  Palesa Tyobeka, 
another DOE DDG, noted that there was a growing lack of interest in 
teaching by good M&S teachers, which is why they had been leaving 
the profession in droves.  In an effort to remedy the situation, DOE 
has allocated R500 million ($66.6 million) for teacher incentives, 
 
PRETORIA 00001222  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
and has established a four-year bursary fund for teacher training 
programs.  Tyobeka said the DOE was aiming at completely eradicating 
under-qualified teachers by 2013 
 
Monthly Factoid 
--------------- 
 
¶12. (U) 220,000 years ago a meteorite struck South Africa, forming 
the Tswaing Crater northwest of Pretoria.  This is one of the most 
accessible and best-preserved meteorite impact craters in the 
world. 
Bost