08STATE67981
TALKING POINTS FOR UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON KUWAITI
Tue Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO2361
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHC #7981 1762237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 242238Z JUN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 2268
INFO IRAQ COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 9112
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT IMMEDIATE 4059UNCLAS STATE 067981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: TALKING POINTS FOR UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON KUWAITI 
PROPERTY AND MISSING PERSONS 
 
1.(U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 2. 
 
2.(U) USUN is instructed to draw from the following talking 
points during the June 25 consultations on the 
Secretary-General,s June 19 report on the repatriation or 
return of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their 
remains and the return of all Kuwaiti property, including 
archives, seized by the former regime in Iraq.  Additional 
points are also included for Ambassador Khalilzad,s June 26 
meeting with Ambassador Gennady Tarasov, successor to 
Ambassador Vorontsov. 
 
3.(U) Begin points: 
 
-- I would like to begin today by welcoming Ambassador 
Gennady Tarasov and congratulating him on his appointment as 
the High-Level Coordinator for the repatriation or return of 
all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains and 
the return of all Kuwaiti property, including archives, 
seized by the former Iraqi regime.  I am confident in his 
ability to facilitate the resolution of outstanding issues 
and continue the work of his esteemed predecessor, Ambassador 
Vorontsov.  Ambassador Vorontsov carried out his mandate with 
compassion and determination and will be remembered for his 
dedication to his country and the international community. 
 
-- Today, I would like to discuss four points on the 
developments and progress achieved during the reporting 
period. 
 
-- First, allow me to commend the Iraqi and Kuwaiti 
governments for their cooperation in resolving the fate of 
missing persons and the work of identifying human remains. 
We extend our condolences to the families of all those who 
are still missing and those who have been identified.  In 
light of the improved security situation in Iraq, I am 
hopeful that search and assessment operations will increase 
in the future.  The cooperation of witnesses and local 
residents will be crucial to the success of such operations, 
and we encourage efforts to reach out to them. 
 
-- Second, I regret that the case of our own missing Navy 
pilot, Captain Michael S. Speicher, has not been resolved. 
The United States continues to investigate the loss of 
Captain Speicher, who has been missing from action in Iraq 
since January 17, 1991.  The government and people of the 
United States share a common bond and a lasting commitment 
with other nations and families seeking answers to the fate 
of their missing personnel.  Efforts to conclusively 
determine the circumstances or fate of Captain Speicher have 
not yet been successful and the United States desires all 
efforts possible to be taken until he is recovered and 
returned to his family and loved ones.  We look forward to 
the resolution of this case and are grateful for the 
cooperation of the Kuwaiti and Iraqi governments in this 
regard. 
 
-- Third, I am disappointed by the lack of progress made in 
the retrieval of Kuwaiti national archives. However, the 
Iraqi government,s discovery and promise to return hundreds 
of Kuwaiti radio and television tape recordings is 
encouraging, as it signals a renewed effort by Iraq to locate 
and return seized documents. 
 
-- Finally, I would like to thank Ambassador Tarasov for his 
efforts to achieve progress on these issues. I am pleased to 
note that he has been invited to visit Iraq and meet with the 
officials in charge of the issue of missing Kuwaitis, Kuwaiti 
property, and archives.  I hope that this visit can occur as 
soon as possible, and I look forward to the continued 
cooperation of all parties concerned.  His visit to Kuwait 
and his discussions here in New York have, I hope, proved 
helpful in his task.  Thank you. 
 
4.(U)  Additional points for Ambassador Khalilzad,s June 26 
meeting with Ambassador Tarasov: 
 
-- It is important that we see progress on missing 
persons/remains and archives in the coming months.  What is 
your candid assessment of what progress might be possible? 
 
-- What further assistance do you think we might be able to 
provide? 
RICE