08TELAVIV1273
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1273/01 1680552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160552Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7126
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3983
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0619
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 4281
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4789
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3998
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2291
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4748
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 1618
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 2064
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8607
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 6094
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0997
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 5117
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 7071
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 9912
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001273 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz quoted defense sources (and The Jerusalem Post sources in 
the Prime Minister's Office) as saying that the GOI will continue 
with the Egyptian-backed cease-fire talks with Hamas despite 
yesterday's heavy shelling (50 rockets) from Gaza.  However, 
Ha'aretz's sources were quoted as saying that the IDF may step up 
operations in response to the attacks.  Leading media reported that 
Hamas initially accused Israel of causing an explosion in a Beit 
Lahiya (northern Gaza) home that resulted in the deaths of seven 
Palestinians; however the group was forced to tone down its 
accusations after it became clear that Israel was not involved. 
Israel Radio quoted the military branch of Hamas as saying that the 
explosion occurred during the preparation of a "special jihad 
operation."  Israeli sources were quoted as saying that the incident 
was probably caused by Palestinians making a bomb.  Altogether, 13 
Palestinians were killed and two Israelis wounded yesterday.  The 
media quoted the IDF as saying that Gaza militants planned to use 
the heavy rocket barrage as a diversion while carrying out an attack 
by with a booby-trapped bulldozer on the Israeli border.  The media 
reported that IDF forces destroyed the vehicle with an anti-tank 
missile.  Israel Radio quoted a senior defense source as saying that 
Israel is concerned that Hamas may carry out a "quality" attack 
before the cease-fire settles in. 
 
Israel Radio quoted an Egyptian Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying 
on Aljazeera-TV following the visit to Cairo of Amos Gilad, the head 
of the Defense Ministry's Diplomatic-Security Bureau, that Israel 
intends to implement and wants a cease-fire but that it has raised 
demands regarding Gilad Shalit and weapons smuggling from Sinai, 
which Hamas is opposed to.  Israel Radio quoted Hamas as saying that 
Israel has refused to include the Rafah crossing in the cease-fire 
deal. 
 
Media quoted the pro-Syrian Lebanese newspaper A-Diar as saying 
yesterday that jailed Lebanese terrorist Samir Kuntar has been told 
to pack his belongings and prepare to return to Beirut in the near 
future.  The report said that Kuntar, who has been jailed in Israel 
 
since 1979 for killing four people during a terror attack in the 
northern town of Nahariya, would be returned to Lebanon as part of a 
prisoner exchange between Israel and Hizbullah, and that the swap 
could take place by the end of the month.  Some media cited the 
GOI's denial of the story.  In an interview with Arabic-language 
paper Assennara, Hizbullah spokesman Hussein Rahal, was quoted as 
saying that they [Hizbullah] are not responsible for whatQs been 
published in the media in regards to the release of Kuntar.  He 
denied the rumor that Hezbollah was officially notified about a 
release date.  Minister Ami Ayalon, former head of Shin Bet, was 
quoted as saying in an interview with the Arabic-language newspaper 
Kull Al-Arab that if it was proved to him that the two soldiers in 
Lebanon are alive, he would agree to release even the devil from the 
Israeli prisons. 
 
As previously covered, the Knesset earlier this week passed the 
first reading of a bill that would prohibit Israeli citizens who 
have visited 'hostile' countries from serving in the Knesset.  In 
its first publication since this action, the Arabic language paper 
Panorama led with this news, framing it as Israel forcing Muslim 
Arab MKs to choose between public service and politics or religion - 
either the Hajj or the Knesset (Saudi Arabia is among the banned 
countries). 
 
Leading media reported that yesterday American Professors Stephen 
Walt and John Mearsheimer -- the authors of "The Israel Lobby and 
U.S. Foreign Policy" -- told a raucous Hebrew University audience 
that Israel and its lobby were now pressuring the US to attack Iran. 
  The Jerusalem Post quoted Mearsheimer as saying: "There is only 
one country in the world that is putting any pressure on the U.S. to 
attack Iran, and that is Israel.  And it is putting enormous 
pressure on the U.S."  "Inside the United States, it is pro-Israel 
individuals and groups who are almost wholly responsible for 
pressure being brought to bear on Bush and Cheney to use military 
force on Iran," he went on.  "The idea that the lobby and Israel 
don't put huge amounts of pressure on the U.S. is contradictory to 
the evidence." 
 
Ha'aretz, Yediot, and Maariv reported that the UN Security Council 
is scheduled to discuss a draft resolution next week demanding that 
Israel halt all construction in West Bank settlements. 
Representatives of the UN's Arab bloc met yesterday to finalize the 
draft for submission to the council.  Ha'aretz reported that UN 
sources told the daily that the draft is the first to address the 
settlement issue in a "sweeping, unequivocal and direct manner." 
The sources were quoted as saying that the driving force behind the 
resolution is Saudi Arabia.  Yediot reported that the U.S. is 
expected to try and halt debate on the issue as use of a veto could 
undermine Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.   Ha'aretz reported that 
this week the District Council for Planning and Construction in 
Jerusalem approved a new construction project in the city that will 
include 1,300 housing units to be built near the ultra-Orthodox 
neighborhood of Ramat Shlomo, next to the Arab neighborhood of Bet 
Hanina. 
 
In a first interview with an Israeli newspaper, Egyptian Culture 
Minister Farouk Hosni, a staunch opponent of normalization with 
Israel, who even threatened to burn Israeli books, was quoted as 
saying in Yediot that he is willing to visit Israel.  Yediot wrote 
that Hosni is motivated by his desire to become director-general of 
UNESCO. 
 
Yediot reported that on June 3 Ambassador Richard Jones sent a 
letter to Finance Minister Roni Bar-On, drawing his attention to the 
"troubling issue of the illegal importation of pistachios of Iranian 
origin to Israel."  Jones noted that Israel is the world's largest 
per capita consumer of pistachio nuts.  Citing that Israel has 
favorable trade deals with the U.S., Jones deplored Israel's 
preference of imports from Iran over the U.S. in this market. 
Jones wrote that Iran's product is banned by Israel's Trading with 
the Enemy Act.  The Jerusalem Post reported that former energy 
minister Moshe Shahal has admitted to the newspaper that Israel may 
be indirectly, even unwittingly, buying Iranian oil. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a landmark conference bringing 
together the world's leading parliamentarians in the fight against 
anti-Semitism will convene at the British Parliament and Foreign 
Office in February 2009.  Key figures in the Inter-Parliamentary 
Coalition for Combating anti-Semitism (the co-sponsor of the 
conference) include Israel's Welfare and Social Services Minister 
Isaac Herzog and New Jersey Congressman Chris Smith. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the state is preparing to take over 
responsibility from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees for 
examining the requests of Africans crossing the Sinai border into 
Israel for political asylum. 
 
All media reported that yesterday, responding to reforms announced 
by the Finance Ministry, the Histadrut Labor Federation declared a 
labor conflict.  A general strike might ensue in two weeks. 
 
Yediot reported that American rapper Snoop Dogg will appear in 
Israel in September.  Jewish Canadian singer Leonard Cohen is also 
scheduled to perform here on September 18. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Makor Rishon-Hatzofe cited the results of a 
poll conducted by the Hebrew University's Truman Institute: 
 
68% of respondents are against a cease-fire with Hamas if it does 
not include freeing Gilad Shalit; 30% said they would support one. 
67% of respondents oppose the return of the Golan in exchange for 
full peace with Syria (56& held that view three months ago). 
Support for the Clinton parameters/understandings during the Taba 
talks has gone done to 49%. 
57% of Israelis oppose the Saudi peace plan; 39% favor it. 
55% believe that the Olmert-Abu Mazen meetings are not useful; 36% 
believe they must be continued. 
 
Erratum: Defense Minister and Labor Party Chairman Ehud Barak 
declared yesterday that his party was prepared to call for the 
dissolution of the Knesset on June 25, and not on July 25 as 
reported here yesterday. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel and Palestinian affairs 
correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote on page one of the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Optimists will say these things will happen 
after the sides reach a truce.  Others will say that in accepting 
the Egyptian initiative, Israel will become one of the first Western 
states to recognize, at least de facto, the legitimacy of Hamas's 
rule in Gaza." 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Hamas believes that this is the first 
lull in its war of independence [a reference to the way Israel won 
the 1948 war] -- to allow it to breathe fresh air and fix some 
flaws." 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Khaled Abu Toameh wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "Conflicting interests and 
power struggles in the Palestinian territories and the Arab world 
are largely responsible for the delay in reaching a cease-fire 
agreement between the Palestinians and Israel." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "Kadima's delay in finding Olmert a 
successor should not enable Olmert to remain in office.  The moral 
and practical responsibility to act lies with Kadima leaders, but it 
is Barak's duty to take the lead in urging them to do so." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "More Talk, More Fire" 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel and Palestinian affairs 
correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote on page one of the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (6/13): "[Yesterday's heavy] shelling can be 
seen as a ... message by Hamas, directed at the cabinet's decision 
Wednesday.  Israel had announced it was continuing the talks to 
reach a cease-fire.  Hamas decided to show it that the cease-fire 
would be achieved only on its own terms.  In other words, it would 
try to make Israel squirm and take more fire before accepting the 
Egyptian-brokered truce.  The rockets and mortar shells landed in 
the Negev while Israel's envoy Amos Gilad was in Cairo, questioning 
the truce agreement.  In principle, Jerusalem says yes to the 
arrangement, but conditions it on clarifications on two crucial 
issues -- the deal to release abducted soldier Gilad Shalit and the 
struggle against arms smuggling from the Sinai into Gaza.  As things 
appear today, both the talks and the fighting will continue 
intermittently next week as well.... Has Israel's siege on Hamas 
 
achieved its goal?  The support for Hamas in the Strip is declining, 
but not Hamas's hold on the government.  The siege has not stopped 
the rockets on the Negev or the arms smuggling into Gaza.  Optimists 
will say these things will happen after the sides reach a truce. 
Others will say that in accepting the Egyptian initiative, Israel 
will become one of the first Western states to recognize, at least 
de facto, the legitimacy of Hamas's rule in Gaza." 
 
II.  "The Lie before the Storm" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (6/13): "This week the cabinet adopted the 
security worldview developed by Israeli governments over the past 
two decades: What can be postponed until tomorrow will be delayed 
until the day after tomorrow.... As far as the army is concerned, 
all options exist -- war in stages, whose climax ... will be the 
conquest and takeover of the entire Gaza Strip.... As far as Hamas 
is concerned, this is not a cease-fire that is supposed to lead to a 
final-status agreement with Israel.  Hamas believes that this is the 
first lull in its war of independence [a reference to the way Israel 
won the 1948 war] -- to allow it to breathe fresh air and fix some 
flaws.... But above all, the population in Gaza is tired -- and 
Hamas knows how to read moods.... In the mean time, [Hamas's] 
military wing is gearing up for war.... [Hamas] provided the Israeli 
cabinet session with mortars and rockets that were fired to check 
ranges ahead of the real battle." 
 
III.  "How Arab Rivalries Are Delaying Cease-Fire Process" 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Khaled Abu Toameh wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (6/13): "Conflicting 
interests and power struggles in the Palestinian territories and the 
Arab world are largely responsible for the delay in reaching a 
cease-fire agreement between the Palestinians and Israel.... Mubarak 
is ... concerned that another Arab country, not Egypt, will succeed 
in solving the dispute between Fatah and Hamas.... But, [as a 
Palestinian] political analyst in Ramallah pointed out, it's highly 
unlikely that Syrian President Bashar Assad would allow Mubarak's 
efforts to succeed..... The Saudis are also jockeying for a bigger 
role in the Israeli-Arab conflict..... The Saudi rulers are also 
angry with Assad, who, they argue, has been inciting Hamas not to 
listen to the advice coming from Riyadh.  Moreover, the Saudis are 
said to be very jealous of their rivals in Qatar for striking the 
historic deal between the warring Lebanese factions.  Reports that 
Qatar was involved in attempts to reach a cease-fire agreement 
between Israel and the Palestinians have prompted the Saudis to 
pressure Fatah and Hamas to resolve their differences and form a new 
unity government." 
 
IV.  "Half a Step in the Right Direction" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (6/13): "Barak's statement yesterday -- to 
join the opposition's draft bill calling for early elections -- ups 
the stakes for Olmert.  His announcement, like Olmert's, only hints 
at a move in the right direction.  Barak seems fearful of delivering 
on his threat and is thus weakening his own power.... During this 
dangerous period, the government may be required to make difficult 
decisions -- for example, on a military operation in Gaza or a 
cease-fire -- while the public has no confidence in its leader's 
judgment or motives.  The ball has been in Barak's court for the 
past month, during the most intensive criminal investigation against 
Olmert so far.  Only Barak can increase the pressure on Kadima to 
set a final date for its party leader to leave.  Barak already has 
marked Olmert as unfit in principle, but has not done enough to 
implement this in practice.... Kadima's delay in finding Olmert a 
successor should not enable Olmert to remain in office.  The moral 
and practical responsibility to act lies with Kadima leaders, but it 
is Barak's duty to take the lead in urging them to do so." 
 
JONES