07AITTAIPEI284
MEDIA REACTION: WANG YOU-THENG'S CASE, TAIWAN'S NAME CHANGE
Mon Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0284/01 0360906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050906Z FEB 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4008
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6335
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7568UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000284 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: WANG YOU-THENG'S CASE, TAIWAN'S NAME CHANGE 
PLAN, U.S.-CHINA 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave 
significant coverage February 3-5 to Wang You-theng, founder of the 
debt-ridden Rebar Group, and his wife, who are now both held in 
custody at the San Pedro Processing Center after having been refused 
admission to Singapore and returned to Los Angeles.  News coverage 
also focused on the 2008 presidential elections and on former 
President Lee Teng-hui's recent remarks on Taiwan independence.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, front-paged a banner headline February 4 that said "Wang 
You-theng Detained; United States Will Decide the Disposition [of 
His Case] within the Week."  The pro-unification "United Daily 
News," on the other hand, ran a banner headline on page four on 
February 4 that read "Change in [Its] Strategy toward Taiwan, 
Beijing Starts All-out [Effort] to Develop Relations with the Green 
[Camp]." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" column 
strongly urged the United States not to accept Wang You-theng's 
request if he seeks political asylum in the United States.  A 
"Liberty Times" editorial discussed the recent name change of two 
state-run enterprises, saying the move was meant to carry out the 
Taiwan-centered values and thereby transform Taiwan into a normal 
country.  An op-ed piece in the "United Daily News," on the other 
hand, discussed Chinese President Hu Jintao's intensive visits to 
Africa and urged Washington to pay close attention to China's 
interaction with Sudan. End summary. 
 
¶3. Wang You-theng's Case 
 
"Asylum for Criminals?" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 550,000] noted (2/5): 
 
"[Rebar Group founder] Wang You-theng put up a desperate fight in 
the United States, and sources said he might act on some experts' 
advice and seek political asylum there.  It will be completely 
outrageous and humiliate the founding spirit of the United States if 
the U.S. immigration agency accepts his request.  The United States 
might turn into an asylum for criminals if it does so. .... 
 
"How firm the Bush administration has been in dealing with 
terrorism; it waged wars against, and overthrew, the totalitarian 
regimes of Afghanistan and Iraq.  Despite the fact that President 
Bush was lashed out by some people, he has won applause from many 
more people.  As for Wang You-theng, he is clearly a criminal who 
hollowed out Taiwan's economy; he does not possess a U.S. passport, 
and he has no reason to stay in the United States.  It is in 
accordance with the principle of justice that he be deported back to 
Taiwan and judged here.  As a result, how the United States handles 
Wang's case and whether it will meet the universal principles of 
democracy and the Taiwan people's expectations is a test of the U.S. 
Government's wisdom." 
 
¶4.  Taiwan's Name Change Plan 
 
"CPC Taiwan Makes a Belated Start for Taiwan's Name Change 
[Efforts]" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 550,000] 
editorialized (2/5): 
 
"The state-run Chinese Petroleum Corporation (CPC) decided to change 
its name to CPC Taiwan.  This is yet more progress for Taiwan's 
society in its name change efforts following the change of Chiang 
Kai-shek [International] Airport to Taiwan Taoyuan Airport.  Even 
though the administrative branch is already behind its schedule for 
name changes, we still welcome this decision made by the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs. ... 
 
"The rectification of Taiwan's name is by nature the engineering of 
social transformational justice which needs to be implemented after 
Taiwan got rid of the governance by an alien party.  Just as the 
recent revisions to history textbooks for high school students, in 
which Sun Yat-sen's [title of "father of the country"] was rectified 
and the historical perspective of an alien party was removed, the 
name change [of CPC Taiwan] is also meant to carry out 
Taiwan-centered values. ...  We look forward to joint efforts from 
the public and private sectors to transform Taiwan into a normal 
country via name changes as early as possible." 
 
¶5. U.S.-China Relations 
 
"Beijing Pays Intensive Visits to Africa to Compete with the United 
States for Foreign Relations" 
 
Yen Cheng-sheng, a research fellow at National Chengchi University's 
Institute of International Relations, opined in the pro-unification 
PLAN, U.S.-CHINA 
 
"United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (2/5): 
 
"... It is all right that Washington does not care about its 
bilateral relations with seven of the eight countries that [Chinese 
President] Hu Jintao recently visited.  But the United States must 
pay close attention to the exchanges between China and Sudan, 
particularly when the latter was sanctioned by the international 
community for its ethnic extinction action in Darfur, and it is 
implicitly related to international terrorist organizations, 
including bin Laden and al Qaeda.  This is because this development 
[of China-Sudan relations] will affect the United States' leadership 
in the international community and its global layout for the war on 
terrorism." 
 
YOUNG