07BAGHDAD433
Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary --
Thu Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2011
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0433 0391517
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081517Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9510
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000433 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PKPA PGOV ECON IZ US
 
SUBJECT:  Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary -- 
      February 7, 2007 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) cable. 
 
Continuing Reaction to Article 140 Committee Resolutions 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (U) Kurdish press was dominated today by continued reactions 
from across the region on two resolutions of the Higher Committee 
for the Implementation of Article 140 that were issued on February 
¶4.  Committee Resolutions #3 and #4 call for the relocation of 
"Arabs of Aribization" in Kirkuk back to their original homeland, 
beginning on March 15.  They call for the cancellation of their 
title to land in Kirkuk, a payment of 20 million Iraqi Dinar per 
family, and a promise of land and jobs in their new homes. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP)-run media, including 
Khabat newspaper, covered a press conference by Kurdistan National 
Assembly Speaker Kamal Karkuki (KDP member) who announced that 7,000 
"Arabs of Arabization" had already registered with the Committee for 
relocation and were prepared to leave Kirkuk. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Major Kurdish newspapers covered a joint statement by five 
Kurdish-Turkmen parties that called for an implementation of Article 
140 and the return of Kirkuk to Kurdistan Regional Government 
administration.  The statement was issued by the Rafah Party, the 
Shuroq Party, the Brayati Party, the Turkmen Democratic Party, and 
the Party Gali Turkmen.  The statement showed the support of the 
Turkmen to the Kurdistan Region and described the deep social and 
historical relationship between the Turkmen and Kurdish people. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Kurdistan National Assembly Speaker Adnan al-Mufti (PUK 
member) issued a statement welcoming the sentiments of the Turkmen 
parties.  The statement said, "Kurdish leaders and the KNA support 
the Turkmen request and when Kirkuk returns to the Kurdistan Region, 
the Turkmen will be the second nation of Kurdistan." 
 
¶6.  (U)  KDP-run Khabat newspaper published highlights of an 
interview with Wail Abdullatif, a member of al-Iraqia faction in the 
Iraqi National Assembly, with Sawt al-Iraq radio. Abdullatif says 
"It is too early to implement Resolutions 3 and 4 of the Article 140 
Committee." 
 
¶7.  (U)  Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) publications and 
broadcast media reported on a press conference in held with local 
members of various Kurdish political parties at the PUK branch 
building in the town of Khanaqin.  At the press conference the head 
of the PUK branch said the gathering showed the unity of the Kurdish 
people in support of implementing Article 140. 
 
Deputy PM and Tamim Governor Discuss Reconstruction Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8.  (U)  PUKmedia.com and Kurdistani Nwe newspaper reported on a 
meeting between Iraqi Deputy Prime minister Barham Salih (PUK 
member) and the Tamim province Governor Abdurrahman Mustafa.  Salih 
talked about the central government's concern regarding 
reconstruction and infrastructure development in Kirkuk, saying the 
government would continue to support economic and social development 
in the province. 
 
Ministries of Justice Merged Yesterday 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9.  (U)  A ceremony was held yesterday to commemorate the merger of 
the Erbil and Sulaimaniyah justice ministries.  Kurdistan Regional 
Government (KRG) Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani delivered a speech 
saying, "If we want to build a civil society that is independent, we 
should use justice in the right way."  Faroq Jamil (PUK member) was 
will become the new KRG Minister of Justice.  Azad Malafandi (KDP 
member) who had been the Minister of Justice Affairs for 
KDP-controlled Erbil and Dohuk provinces will become a KRG Minister 
without portfolio. 
 
KRG President Massoud Barzani Meets with General Dempsey 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10.  (U)  Khabat newspaper covered the meeting between Kurdistan 
Region President Massoud Barzani and Coalition Forces General Martin 
Dempsey in Salah al-Din yesterday.  General Dempsey explained the U. 
¶S. plan for training the Iraqi Army. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  This media summary is prepared by Press and Cultural 
Specialist Tawar Rasheed.