07BASRAH16
EMPOWERING THE WOMEN OF SOUTHEAST IRAQ
Fri Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO7053
RR RUEHWEB
ZNR UUUUU ZOC STATE ZZH
TOQ4984
RR RUEHC
DE RUEHBC #0016/01 0541833
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231833Z FEB 07
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0513
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0108
INFO RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0022
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0533UNCLAS BASRAH 000016 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/I AND G/IWI 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN EAID PHUM PREL IZ
SUBJECT: EMPOWERING THE WOMEN OF SOUTHEAST IRAQ 
 
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY 
 
1.) As part of our public outreach strategy, REO Basrah, along 
with the British Consulate General, sponsored a conference on 
empowering women on February 20.  The purpose was to encourage 
women to promote stability and economic prosperity.  The 
conference was held at the Basrah Airport and attended by 34 
women from Basrah, Dhi Qar, Maysan, and Muthanna provinces.  The 
participants included politicians, attorneys and judges, 
physicians, teachers, engineers, and representatives from NGOs. 
The conference also received extensive press coverage.  End 
summary. 
 
PEACE, STABILITY AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 
 
2.) The first portion of the conference focused on peace and 
stability.  Our objective was to encourage women to take back 
their streets from the militia who wage intimidation campaigns 
on the citizens and target Coalition bases with mortars and 
rockets.  REO Director Louis Bono spoke of the power of women. 
Quoting American suffragist Elizabeth Cady Stanton, he urged the 
women to harness this power against the destructive forces in 
their communities.  He told the women that the role of the 
Coalition is limited in this regard; it is up to the Iraqi 
people to take back their streets.  British Consul General 
Rosalind Marsden said in the coming months that Iraqis would 
retake control of security in Basrah and Maysan and discussed 
how women can play a role in this process.  (Note: Provincial 
Iraqi Control - PIC - has already occurred in Dhi Qar and 
Muthanna.  End note.)  One example she cited is the police 
anonymous hotline.  She said of the 45 calls received in the 
previous week, all were from women. 
 
3.) While the UK and U.S. officials focused on militia violence, 
the Iraqi speakers focused on a different type - domestic 
violence.  Basrah Provincial Council member Esra al-Saad spoke 
about the violence against women and children and called for 
legislation to protect women.  Judge Suad Nassar agreed that 
women suffer under the law.  She said the uneducated are most 
prone to violence and stressed the need to train women, 
including elected officials, on their rights. 
 
4.) The participants agreed on the need for education on women's 
issues, especially for women in the countryside and ghettos, as 
well as for male leaders.  They said the Convention to Eliminate 
Discrimination and Violence Against Women (CEDAW) was, in part, 
inconsistent with Islamic principles but work is being done to 
draft an acceptable version.  They did agree on the utility of 
using experiences of women in other countries as building 
blocks.  On militia violence, they discussed the need to address 
violence sponsored by external forces in order to improve 
security.  One woman pointed out that most of the people killed 
and injured in market explosions were women.  Another drew a 
nexus between militias and domestic violence:  "sometimes when 
women report on militia activity, they are beaten by their 
husbands."  There was also discussion on the rights of female 
prisoners. 
 
A ROLE IN THE ECONOMY 
 
5.) The second part of the conference focused on economic 
opportunities for women.  By empowering women economically, they 
will be more inclined to foster stability to protect their 
interests.  Two representatives from USAID's IZDIHAR project 
addressed the conference.  Susanne Jalbert spoke about small 
business development and Thelma Tajirian explained about small 
business loans and microfinance.  The REO director cited the 
Prophet Mohammed's wife Lady Khadeijah as an example of the 
prominent role women can play in the business community.  He 
also mentioned USG programs for women, including the Gift Fund 
to promote public-private partnerships.  Many of the women 
expressed an interest in seeking business opportunities and 
helping those in their communities to do so.  Jalbert handed out 
a CD-rom containing information on how to start a business and 
obtain credit. 
 
ENGAGING THE MEDIA 
 
6.) Media coverage of the conference was extensive.  There 
seemed almost as many reporters and photographers from 
television, radio, and print media as there were participants. 
We were surprised by the media presence, as we were told 
beforehand that most women were reluctant to publicize their 
efforts or their association with the Coalition.  However, 
during the conference, few if any, seemed camera shy.  This 
followed their discussion on media engagement to promote the 
role of women in society and expose the issue of domestic 
violence. 
 
 
MOVING FORWARD 
 
7.) One of the immediate successes of the event was bringing 
together women from southeastern Iraq.  All agreed on the need 
for female representation in government, and there was 
discussion on coordination between NGOs and politicians.  We 
encouraged them to form an umbrella association to remain in 
contact and coordinate their efforts, but there was too little 
time to accomplish this.  However, several women got together to 
discus the formation of such an association.  There was 
overwhelming consensus to continue the dialogue, and the 
participants asked UK and U.S. officials for assistance.  As we 
move forward, Jalbert suggested we focus on leadership, business 
development, and security training, as well community 
coalitions.  We are pleased with outcome of this event and will 
continue our work with the women of the region. 
BONO