07BEIJING1015
FEBRUARY 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING
Tue Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6028
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1015/01 0441110
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131110Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4744
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING 
 
 
¶1. Key points made at the February 13 MFA Press Conference 
were: 
 
-- News on the Six-Party Talks will be released later in the 
day after a "important meeting" has concluded. 
 
-- Journalists must abide by new Olympic regulations and 
local regulations when working in Tibet, along with the 
constraints of the natural environment. 
 
-- Defense Minister Cao Gangchuan's reported promise of no 
more anti-satellite tests was not confirmed.  China's 
interest in an international ban on space weaponization was 
restated. 
 
-- M Li Zhaoxing will visit Japan on Thursday to meet PM Abe 
and FM Aso. 
 
-- Sri Lanka's President will visit China February 26-March 4. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  MFA Spokesperson Jiang Yu said at the February 13 regular 
press brieing that all information relevant to the Six-Party 
Talks would be released by the Six-Party Talks press center 
this afternoon.  Jiang deflected all questions regarding the 
Talks, saying only that an important meeting would take place 
this afternoon. 
 
New Reporting Regulations Apply to Tibet 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  In light of numerous recent refusals to allow reporting 
in Tibet, a reporter asked if new Olympic reporting 
regulations on foreign journalists still applied to work in 
the province.  Jiang said that the refusals were due to 
constraints imposed by the natural environment and clarified 
that in granting access for journalists, officials must abide 
by the new national regulations and local regulations while 
considering present conditions. 
 
¶4.  Despite repeated questions from reporters, Jiang would 
not confirm reports in the Japanese media that Chinese 
Defense Minister Cao Gangchuan told former Japanese Defense 
Agency Director General Fukushiro that China would not 
conduct another anti-satellite test.  Jiang reiterated 
China's commitment to the peaceful development and peaceful 
exploration of space, opposition to the weaponization of 
space and refusal to participate in a space arms race. 
China, Russia and other countries have made specific 
proposals at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva to 
prohibit the weaponization of space.  China is ready to adopt 
a UN resolution on the matter and take joint efforts with the 
international community in this regard. 
 
FM Li to Meet Abe and Aso 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Jiang did not confirm whether President Hu was still 
planning to visit Japan this year when asked by reporters, 
but provided details on other high level visits.  FM Li has 
departed China for a visit to India and will travel to Japan 
on February 15 where he will meet with PM Abe and FM Aso to 
further improve China-Japan relations and prepare for Premier 
Wen's upcoming visit. 
 
Putin Criticizes United States NATO Policy 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  When asked to comment on President Putin's criticism of 
United States' NATO policies, Jiang expressed China's hope 
that both sides can take advantage of opportunities for 
cooperation to deal with challenges to the relationship and 
work to build a world of common prosperity and harmony. 
 
South Korea Fire 
---------------- 
 
¶7.  When prompted by Chinese media for more information on 
the recent death of Chinese citizens in a fire at the Yeosu 
detention center in the ROK, Jiang said that the Chinese 
government attaches great importance to this issue and hopes 
local officials will make all efforts to rescue the injured, 
take measures to prevent this type of incident from 
reoccurring and conduct a full investigation.  Local Chinese 
Embassy officials are on the scene monitoring the situation 
and dealing with the aftermath. 
 
Position Unchanged on Repatriation of Lai 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  When asked about the case of Lai Changxing, a fugitive 
 
BEIJING 00001015  002 OF 002 
 
 
accused of running a smuggling operation who has been in 
Canada since 1999, Jiang said China's position has not 
changed and Lai's repatriation is in the common interests of 
both Canada and China. 
 
Sir Lankan President to Visit China 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  President Mahinda Rajapaksa of Sri Lanka will visit China 
February 26-March 4 at the invitation of President Hu Jintao. 
 When asked whether the President's visit and the reported 
visit of Sri Lanka's Deputy Prime Minister and lead 
negotiator in the Sri Lankan peace negotiations signified 
China's willingness to get involved in the Sri Lankan peace 
process, Jiang said she had no relevant information. 
SEDNEY