07DAKAR426
SENEGAL: ELECTION SITREP 1, 13:50 GMT
Sun Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO7023
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0426/01 0561341
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251341Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7639
RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 000426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/S-O, S/S-S, AF, AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL/AE AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR POL - D'ELIA 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC KDEM PGOV PHUM PINS PREL SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: ELECTION SITREP 1, 13:50 GMT 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: Senegal's 4.9 million registered voters appear to 
be voting in large numbers today in what most see as a referendum on 
President Abdoulaye Wade's seven years in office.  The voters roll 
is twice as large as the 2000 list and includes many youth who had 
hoped Wade would create more jobs.  Initial reports indicate that 
turnout is high and voters are largely able to cast their ballots 
freely, but organizational problems are slowing the voting process. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U)  Turnout appears high at most polling stations.  Observers 
report voters waiting patiently in long lines beginning well before 
8 :00 a.m., and it is likely that not all voters will be able to 
vote before the polls officially close at 6 :00 p.m.  At least two 
local prefects have stated they have been authorized to remain open 
as late as 8 :00 p.m. if voters are still in line. 
 
¶3. (U)  Many polls opened late, but most voting stations were 
operational by 9 :00 a.m., one hour after the official opening of 
polls.  In some cases, the delay was caused by missing materials, 
such as the "a vote" (has voted) stamp. 
 
¶4. (U)  Overall, the voting environment is neutral : observers have 
reported isolated instances of propaganda or visible campaign 
material (less than one percent of observed polling stations) and no 
overt attempt to intimidate voters.  In one rural Casamance village, 
a woman wearing a uniform identifying her as an employee of the 
Ministry of Women served breakfast to poll workers and voters in two 
voting rooms. In some other cases, party representatives were seen 
to assist voters in casting their votes, but this practice was not 
widespread and is authorized under the electoral code. 
 
¶5. (U)  Voting has moved very slowly.  To some degree, this can be 
attributed to voters unfamiliar with the voting process.  In some 
cases, observers reported elderly voters leaving the voting booths 
with empty hands, having thrown their ballots into the trash boxes 
in the voting booths rather than depositing them into the ballot 
boxes outside the voting booths. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Poor organization, however, rather than voter error, is 
the primary cause of the slow pace of voting.  Most delays in poll 
opening can be attributed to lack of preparation and organization by 
the electoral commission.  Lines of voters remained long and grew 
throughout the morning.  Observers reported that even at the same 
polling location (lieu de vote), different polling booths (bureaux 
de vote) were organized and run differently, with widely varying 
degrees of efficiency. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Many poll workers are unclear on their responsibilities. 
In at least three cases, poll officials asked or allowed political 
party representatives to assist voters in voting.  In another case, 
the election commission representative did not have his copy of the 
voter registration rolls, which voters sign after they vote.  The 
signed exit rolls can then be checked against the entry rolls which 
the voter signs as s/he enters the polling office.  The poll worker 
stated it was too much work to have each voter sign the rolls twice, 
and said "They will copy the book for me later," missing the point 
that having two separate rolls helps to ensure the integrity of the 
process. 
 
¶8.  (U) The overall security environment is calm.  Most businesses 
and restaurants are closed; and there is no/no evidence of increased 
police and gendarme presence on the streets of Dakar or in the 
vicinity of polling stations. 
 
¶9.  (U) On February 23, Minister of Interior and Local Government 
Ousmane Ngom told representatives of the 2,500 Senegalese and 
international observers that the Government was ready for a "free, 
fair and transparent election."  He noted the entire voters roll is 
on the Internet.  Each of the 12,000 plus polling places is 
identified on maps that are available to citizens and observers, and 
the security force ballots have been safeguarded since approximately 
19,000 of the possible 23,000 cast their ballots on February 17 and 
¶18.  Over 90 percent of registered voters have picked up their new 
biometric voter and national identity cards, which cost USD 40 
million.  The Government hopes that another five percent will 
retrieve their cards at polling stations today.  In response to a 
question about pre-campaign election activities, Ngom reiterated 
that the Government had authorized 69 percent of demonstrations and 
marches for a total of 132. 
 
¶10.  (U) Ngom also assured the observers that there would be no 
fictional polling stations.  Approximately 2,000 Senegalese 
observers are monitoring the election, and approximately 500 
international observers are on the ground.  In addition to the 52 
U.S. mission observers who are working in 14 teams, the 
International Observatory for Democracy has sent 166 observers led 
by the Chairman of Burkina Faso's independent election commission. 
The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has fielded 
60 observers.  Moreover, "la Francophonie," the African Union (AU), 
the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA or WAEMU), the 
 
DAKAR 00000426  002 OF 002 
 
 
Organization of the Islamic Conferences (OIC), and various national 
delegations from Europe are observing. 
 
JACOBS