07MANAGUA539
CODEL NELSON MEETS WITH OPPOSITION LEADER EDUARDO
Wed Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0539/01 0591559
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281559Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9269
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0975
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0025
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000539 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND H 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR OVIP NU
SUBJECT: CODEL NELSON MEETS WITH OPPOSITION LEADER EDUARDO 
MONTEALEGRE 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) leader 
Eduardo Montealegre advised Senator Nelson that President 
Ortega is struggling against competing interests within the 
Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) and may find 
governing more difficult when he is unable to comply with his 
campaign promise of "zero unemployment," especially if 
promised Venezuelan assistance fails to materialize.  To 
counter Venezuelan influence, Montealegre stated that 
regional powers such as Mexico and Colombia should become 
more active in regional policy development and promoting 
trade networks.  He advised the USG to focus on "visible" 
assistance projects in addition to institutional development. 
 On the domestic side, Montealegre acknowledged that a 
unified opposition in the National Assembly would constitute 
the only effective barrier to Ortega's totalitarian 
ambitions, but that Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) leader 
Arnoldo Aleman continues to be the primary obstacle to 
Liberal cooperation.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) ALN leader Eduardo Montealegre received Codel Nelson 
and emboffs at his residence on February 18 to discuss the 
future of the Ortega administration and the role of the 
Nicaraguan opposition.  Montealegre's brother-in-law and 
political supporter Donald McGregor also attended the 
meeting.  (Comment: Montealegre's ALN controls 23 of 92 seats 
in the Nicaraguan National Assembly, and Montealegre won 
second place in a field of five presidential candidates last 
November.  Montealegre is currently attempting to position 
himself as the leader of a unified opposition -- including 
the PLC and Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) -- with a 
majority of 51 votes.  End Comment.) 
 
¶3. (C) Senator Nelson asked Montealegre about his views on 
the future course of President Daniel Ortega, who has made 
overtures both to the United States and to extremist regimes 
in Iran and Venezuela.  Montealegre responded that Ortega is 
pulled in different directions by factions within the FSLN, 
which include pro-U.S./free market groups (headed by his wife 
and chief of staff Rosario Murillo), as well as left-wing 
radicals urging him to form anti-U.S. alliances with 
Venezuela and Iran.  He added, however, that vastly improved 
access to information through the internet would impede a 
regression to a repressive 1980s-style dictatorship. 
 
¶4. (C) Montealegre opined that Ortega will find reconciling 
these interests and governing the country more difficult if 
he cannot make significant progress on his campaign promises 
-- especially "zero unemployment."  Montealegre noted that 
120,000 new job seekers enter the market each year, the vast 
majority of whom will not find employment without private 
sector investment. 
 
¶5. (C) In response to a question from Senator Nelson on how 
the USG can best counter growing Venezuelan influence in 
Nicaragua, Montealegre urged the USG to convince regional 
powers such as Mexico and Colombia to take a more active role 
in Central America regarding regional trade and policy 
development.  In addition, Montealegre suggested that the 
U.S. focus more on "visible" assistance projects, such as 
schools and housing, to win the battle for Nicaraguans' 
hearts and minds.  He specifically mentioned a project to 
provide corrugated zinc roofs for poor Nicaraguans, which he 
believes would generate considerable good will for a 
relatively low-cost expenditure. 
 
¶6. (C) Domestically, Montealegre stated that the 
opposition-controlled National Assembly is "the key to 
moderating Ortega's totalitarian tendencies."  He commented 
that ex-President, convicted money launderer, and PLC leader 
Arnoldo Aleman is the primary obstacle to Liberal 
unification.  Despite the PLC's pressure to quickly achieve 
institutional unification (under Aleman's rules), Montealegre 
believes that a common legislative agenda between the two 
independent parties would build confidence and gradually 
reduce Aleman's influence. 
 
¶7. (C) Later in the meeting, Senator Nelson asked Montealegre 
his opinion of USG policy towards Cuba, noting that older 
Cuban exiles tend to take a hard line regarding the trade 
embargo and flow of remittances, while the younger generation 
favors more openness.  Montealegre commented that, in his 
opinion, the trade embargo has favored European and Canadian 
investors without hurting the Castro regime.  Recounting his 
experiences returning to Nicaragua from exile in the early 
1990s, Montealegre said that change must come from within 
Cuba, and the exiles must be prepared to work with those who 
stayed instead of thinking that they will "rescue" the 
country. 
 
¶8. (U) Participants: 
 
Nicaragua: 
 
ALN President Eduardo Montealegre 
Donald McGregor 
 
USG: 
 
Senator Bill Nelson 
Mrs. Grace Nelson 
Ms. Caroline Tess 
Ms. Sherry Davich 
Captain Gene Moran 
Ambassador Paul Trivelli 
DCM Peter Brennan 
Polcouns Victoria Alvarado 
Poloff Timothy L. Smith, note taker 
Poloff Irene Marr, control officer 
 
¶9. (U) This cable was cleared by Codel Nelson. 
TRIVELLI