07MANAGUA530
FOREIGN MINISTER TRIES TO DOWNPLAY ANTI-U.S.
Tue Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO9187
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0530/01 0581702
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 271702Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9257
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0971
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000530 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR KDEM NU PREL
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER TRIES TO DOWNPLAY ANTI-U.S. 
RHETORIC, BUT CONCERNED OVER EFFECTS ON TOURISM 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0179 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0155 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Foreign Minister Samuel Santos appears 
perturbed by threats against U.S. local residents, tourists, 
and journalists in Nicaragua's San Juan del Sur area.  He has 
requested details of the incidents and will speak with the 
mayor of the town about the concerns.  Santos informed us 
that the Nicaraguan government (GON) is "unprepared" to 
participate this year in a national defense workshop offered 
by the Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies (CHDS). 
Regarding our protests over President Ortega's derogatory and 
fallacious remarks against the United States in a recent 
speech, Santos promised to convey our concerns to Ortega. 
The Foreign Minister's efforts aside, Ortega appears 
determined to criticize the United States -- as evidenced by 
his speech before the police and by the government's 
communication strategy (septel), which stipulates the use of 
the media to oppose President Bush, but encourages U.S. 
investment.  End Summary. 
 
GON Back-peddles on CHDS Defense Workshop 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - 
 
¶2.  (C) On February 23, the Charge and PolCouns solicited 
Foreign Minister Santos' confirmation that his government 
will participate in a CHDS-sponsored national security 
workshop, tentatively scheduled for May 16-18.  Santos, who 
had been enthusiastic about the concept when CHDS director 
Richard Downie met with him and other GON officials the week 
before, informed us that, after raising the program with the 
presidency, the decision had been to decline the offer. 
Attempting to "cushion" the GON's decision, Santos argued 
that the new government is still being established; many 
ministers do not even know where they stand and must work 
until midnight every day to keep afloat.  He suggested that 
perhaps the course would be viable next year, adding that in 
the meantime, training on disaster preparedness would be 
welcome.  (Comment: During his visit, Downie mentioned the 
possibility of a follow on course on disaster assistance. 
Most likely, Ortega and his inner circle viewed the national 
security workshop as an attempt to influence the policy 
direction of the administration and turned it off.) 
 
Threats against U.S. Citizens 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) The Foreign Minister was visibly perturbed by 
Charge's news of the threats against U.S. local residents, 
tourists, and journalists in Nicaragua's tourist spot, San 
Juan del Sur.  The Charge explained that the threats started 
with the detention, trial and sentencing of U.S. citizen Eric 
Volz for allegedly murdering his Nicaraguan girlfriend.  For 
example, two journalists covering the case and representing 
newspapers in Texas and California had departed Nicaragua 
after receiving threats.  Another U.S. citizen retiree 
residing in San Juan del Sur was alarmed after he found his 
tires punctured.  The Charge reiterated our commitment to 
protect U.S. citizen interests and suggested that this rise 
in anti-U.S. sentiment could be partly politically driven. 
He showed the Foreign Minister a copy of a draft warden 
message warning U.S. citizens to exercise caution, adding 
that these types of incidents could frighten off U.S. 
tourists. 

¶4.  (C) Santos, who reddened and suddenly asked his assistant 
to turn up the air conditioning in the room, requested 
details of the incidents and the names of U.S. citizens who 
have been subject to these threats.  He assured us that the 
police will protect them and offered to speak with the mayor 
of the town about the problem, but asserted that the Ortega 
government will not intervene in the Volz case.  The Charge 
reminded Santos that the case and the concerns about the 
safety of U.S. citizens in the San Juan area have caught the 
attention of the U.S. Congress and our media.  The Foreign 
Minister's special assistant, Danilo Rosales, and his new 
Director of the MFA's North America Office, Orlando Gomez 
noted our concerns. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) We next raised an apparent rash of police 
detentions of U.S. citizens, especially those driving rental 
cars, and police demands for payment for infractions that are 
not the responsibility of the renter to pay, e.g. failure to 
carry a safety triangle.  The police threaten to seize the 
licenses of those refusing to pay on the spot.  Santos 
clarified that the police are authorized to seize a traffic 
violator's license, but are not allowed to receive payment. 
Rather, the offender must pay in the appropriate office, and 
in this type of violation, the rental agencies are 
responsible.  He acknowledged that the police are probably 
seeking bribes and promised to report the problem to Chief of 
Police Aminta Granera.  The Charge mentioned that we have 
also raised the issue with the Police Chief. 
 
Anti-U.S. Speech Belies Accord to Deal with Contentious 
Issues Away from the Public Spotlight 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) The Charge then broached our displeasure and concern 
over President Ortega's derogatory and fallacious remarks 
directed against the United States in his February 20 speech 
before the National Police.  He noted that all of Ortega's 
eleven copious references to the United States were negative 
and unhelpful, including his remark that even some U.S. 
presidents are reportedly involved in narcotrafficking, that 
U.S. society is in decay, and our assistance to Nicaragua is 
mere crumbs -- while our military is working with its 
Nicaraguan counterparts to build  clinics and schools.  The 
Charge reminded Santos that he had asked us to address 
contentious issues away from the public spotlight, a concept 
Ortega has not respected. 
 
¶7.  (C) Attempting to downplay Ortega's negative rhetoric, 
Santos asserted that Ortega was really praising the police 
for their fine counternarcotics efforts, even with very scare 
resources.  The Charge replied that attacking the United 
States is not the way to convince us to provide more support. 
 Santos concurred and promised to convey our concerns to 
Ortega at the earliest opportunity. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) As we reported in Ref A., Santos is a relative light 
weight, one of the new government's token "friendlier, 
gentler," public faces, who will attempt to downplay any of 
Ortega's egregious antics directed against the United States. 
 Santos' efforts aside, Ortega appears determined to 
criticize us, as evidenced by his speech before the police -- 
a discourse eerily reminiscent of President Chavez' early 
rhetoric -- and by the government's communication strategy 
(septel), which stipulates the use of the media to oppose 
Bush, but encourages U.S. investment. 
 
TRIVELLI