07SAOPAULO129
PT INTERNAL DISPUTE FORESHADOWS 2010 ELECTION
Thu Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO8658
PP RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0129/01 0461041
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151041Z FEB 07
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6446
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 7539
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 2930
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 2640
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 2273
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 3226
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 1988
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3379
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 7808
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 2711
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SAO PAULO 000129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/FO, WHA/BSC, DRL, IL, INR/IAA, INR/R/AA 
STATE PASS USTR FOR CRONIN 
STATE PASS EXIMBANK 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR DMORONESE, NRIVERA, CVERVENNE 
STATE ALSO PASS TDA FOR ANGULO AND MCKINNEY 
NSC FOR FEARS 
TREASURY FOR OASIA, DAS LEE AND JHOEK 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USCS/OIO/WH/RD 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
USAID FOR LAC/AA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PINR PGOV ELAB BR
SUBJECT: PT INTERNAL DISPUTE FORESHADOWS 2010 ELECTION 
 
REFS: (A) BRASILIA 208; (B) BRASILIA 107; 
 
      (C) SAO 06 SAO PAULO 1264 (D) 06 SAO PAULO 1105; 
      (E) 06 BRASILIA 727; (F) 05 SAO PAULO 1110 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The 2010 presidential election, in which 
President Lula will not be a candidate for the first time since 
1985, is the apple of discord behind the current conflict between 
various factions and tendencies of the ruling Workers' Party 
(Partido dos Trabalhadores - PT).  The different ideological groups 
in the party are fighting for a better political position within the 
government during Lula's second term and in the PT's governing 
National Directorate (DN).  The two main rivals are the Majority 
Faction ("Campo Majoritario"), heavily influenced by former Minister 
Jose Dirceu, and leftist tendencies represented by Tarso Genro, 
Minister of Institutional Relations.  In regional terms, the Campo 
Majoritario is dominated by PT members from Sao Paulo, while the 
leftists who oppose them are from various other states, with Rio 
Grande do Sul heavily represented.  The immediate occasion for the 
dispute is the celebration of the 27th anniversary of the party's 
founding, but it is expected to play out through the 3rd National PT 
Congress, scheduled for July, and PT internal elections for 
President and DN, which are scheduled for late 2008 but are expected 
to be moved up to late 2007.  Ultimately, this power struggle and 
its outcome are likely to have a major impact on the PT's 2010 
candidate and campaign.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The PT's performance in the 2006 national elections, when it 
won 83 seats (out of a total of 513) in the Chamber of Deputies and 
became the second-largest political force in the Congress, just 
behind the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB), gave the 
party a new lease on life and a new perspective.  Instead of being 
humiliated and punished by voters for the various corruption 
scandals of 2005-6, as many analysts predicted, the PT recovered 
strength and optimism.  With these, not surprisingly, came an 
appetite for more power.  In January, the party decided to put 
forward its own candidate for President of the Chamber of Deputies 
(Speaker of the House equivalent) in the person of Arlindo Chinaglia 
of Sao Paulo, who led government forces in the last Congress (see 
ref B).  This decision challenged a previous agreement between the 
President Lula and member parties of his governing coalition to 
maintain Aldo Rebelo (Communist Party of Brazil - PCdoB) in the 
presidency.  When the new Congress was seated February 1 (ref A), 
Chinaglia defeated Rebelo in the second round and became the new 
Chamber President as a result of an alliance with the PMDB and some 
unexpected support from the opposition Brazilian Social Democracy 
Party (PSDB). 
 
------------------------------ 
CAMPO MAJORITARIO VS. LEFTISTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Chinaglia represents the Campo Majoritario, the largest 
faction in the PT, and was supported by a group of prominent 
traditional representatives of the influential Sao Paulo PT.  These 
include Jose Dirceu, President Lula's former Chief of Civil 
Household (Chief of Staff equivalent), who resigned in June 2005 at 
the height of the "mensalao" (vote-buying) scandal and was later 
expelled from Congress and deprived of his political rights for 
eight years, and indicted by the Attorney General (AG); former Sao 
Paulo Mayor Marta Suplicy, considered by some a possible successor 
to Lula; former Finance Minister Antonio Palocci, another senior 
administration figure who resigned due to corruption allegations; 
 
SAO PAULO 00000129  002 OF 004 
 
 
former president of the Chamber of Deputies Joao Paulo Cunha, 
accused in the "mensalao" scandal of receiving dirty money but 
acquitted by Congress, though he remains under indictment by the AG; 
and PT National President and former Labor Minister Ricardo 
Berzoini, who stepped down as Lula's campaign manager last September 
at the height of the "dossier" scandal and only recently returned to 
the party's presidency after a semi-voluntary leave of absence. 
Marco Aurelio Garcia, Lula's foreign policy advisor and PT First 
Vice President who replaced Berzoini both in the campaign and 
(temporarily) in the party's top job, is also affiliated with the 
Campo Majoritario, but owes his loyalty directly to Lula.  Senator 
Aloizio Mercadante, the PT's unsuccessful candidate for Governor of 
Sao Paulo, is another prominent Campo Majoritario figure close to 
Lula.  His clout has been diminished, however, by both his poor 
showing in the election and his centrality to the "dossier" scandal, 
in which PT operatives, including Mercadante campaign staffers, are 
accused of paying about USD 870,000 for a smear campaign against 
Mercadante's opponent, now-Governor Jose Serra. 
 
¶4.  (U) Chinaglia's victory in the Chamber election demonstrated not 
only that the PT as a whole is back on track, but that the Campo 
Majoritario is still very powerful within the party, though somewhat 
fragmented.  Leftist groups and social movements within the PT hold 
the Campo Majoritario responsible for the mensalao scandal and more 
generally for betraying the party's history and social 
responsibility.  They have been particularly critical of the Lula 
administration's orthodox macro-economic policies as implemented by 
former Finance Minister (now Federal Deputy) Palocci; they believe 
Brazil's high interest rates stifle growth and hurt the poor.  More 
generally, they believe President Lula has not devoted enough 
attention or resources to social programs or to redistribution of 
wealth.  The Campo Majoritario has controlled the National 
Directorate and thus the party for almost fifteen years and is 
credited with developing the party apparatus that made possible 
Lula's 2002 victory.  The mensalao scandal, however, had given the 
internal opposition the opportunity to overthrow the Campo and gain 
more seats in the National Directorate; in the September 2005 
internal elections for PT President and Directorate, leftist 
candidates Valter Pomar (now PT Secretary for International 
Relations) and Raul Pont (Rio Grande do Sul state legislator and, 
until last week, PT Secretary-General - see ref D) gave Ricardo 
Berzoini of the Campo Majoritario a run for the money.  Berzoini won 
in the second round and the Campo retained its majority, but it was 
a close call.  One immediate result of these elections was the 
defection of several prominent leftists to Heloisa Helena's 
Socialism and Liberty Party (PSOL) (ref F).  The results of the 2006 
presidential, gubernatorial, and legislative elections, however, 
followed by Chinaglia's victory in the Chamber, made it clear that 
the Campo Majoritario is still very much alive. 
 
----------------- 
TARSO'S MANIFESTO 
----------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) The dispute between the two groups, though no secret, came 
into the full glare of the public and media spotlight in early 
February when leftist groups, with the support of more moderate 
groups, launched the first draft of a document called "Message to 
the Party."  Signed by 214 party officials and orchestrated by 
Minister of Institutional Relations Tarso Genro, the document is a 
preliminary version of a proposal to be presented in July at the 3rd 
PT National Congress.  It calls for a new internal party 
organization in which the Campo Majoritario would no longer be the 
core element.  Furthermore, it suggests that the 3rd PT Congress 
should address corruption within the party and punish those involved 
in the mensalao scandal as part of an effort to "recreate" or 
"re-found" the party.  The manifesto was clearly an attack on the 
group beholden to Jose Dirceu, many of whose members have been 
 
SAO PAULO 00000129  003 OF 004 
 
 
involved in the ethical scandals of recent years.  Until his 
spectacular fall, Dirceu was considered the evil political genius of 
the Lula administration and the PT; many believe the activities that 
led to the scandals were motivated by Dirceu's desire to generate 
the funds necessary to perpetuate the PT's hold on power. 
 
¶6.  (U) Dirceu, who is prohibited from running for or holding any 
government office but not barred from behind-the-scenes activity, 
reacted angrily to the document and asked Lula to weigh in on his 
behalf.  Tarso Genro then rewrote the document, removing provocative 
words like "corruption" and "party re-creation", but the overall 
message of profound dissatisfaction remained, albeit less 
explicitly.  An important subtext of the imbroglio is Dirceu's 
ongoing effort to have the Chamber of Deputies rescind its December 
2005 expulsion of him and removal of his political rights; while he 
has strong support in some quarters, many in the PT believe this 
would be an inappropriate, indeed scandalous, use of the party's 
political resources.  Dirceu may also eventually want an amnesty to 
protect him from the AG's charges (ref E) that he was the mastermind 
of a sophisticated criminal organization that engaged in bribery, 
money-laundering, and illicit payoff schemes, but for the time being 
he appears content to let the judicial process take its course; he 
says he is innocent and wants his day in court. 
 
¶7.  (U) The division between the Campo Majoritario and the leftist 
groups is an old story.  The novelty in this episode is that there 
is a new configuration of the Campo Majoritario itself.  The 2006 
election brought to the forefront new faces in the party, such as 
the new Governor of Bahia, Jacques Wagner, and the new Governor of 
Sergipe, Marcelo Deda.  (Note: Deda signed the "Message to the 
Party" but Wagner did not.  End Note.)  Popular in their states, 
they both belong to the Campo Majoritario but are not within 
Dirceu's sphere of influence.  They also cannot be considered close 
to the leftists from Rio Grande do Sul.  They represent new forces 
from the Northeast which want the region to have a larger role in 
party deliberations.  They also believe that the PT must face up to 
its ethical shortcomings and responsibilities.  With President 
Lula's support, they propose the creation of a new Campo 
Majoritario, which is being referred to informally as the New 
Political Camp ("Novo Campo Politico).  It would remain a majority 
but would not leave power concentrated in the hands of the one small 
group - especially not a group controlled by Dirceu. 
 
----------------- 
THE 2010 ELECTION 
----------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Gathered together for the celebration of its 27th 
anniversary in Salvador (Bahia) last weekend, the PT also revealed 
that its relationship with President Lula is not what it used to be 
(see ref C).  Lula gave a speech asking the party to avoid internal 
disputes and to unite in support of his government.  At the end of 
the gathering, however, the PT National Directorate issued a note 
saying that the party wants a larger and more substantive presence 
in Lula's second-term government.  They would like to control such 
Ministries as Communications and Health, currently in the hands of 
Lula's PMDB coalition partners.  Indeed, Lula is faced with the 
challenge of distributing Ministries and other important positions 
to representatives of his eight-party coalition without 
significantly reducing the PT presence in the government.  The 
Directorate also criticized the government's macroeconomic policies, 
especially the high (albeit declining) interest rates maintained by 
the Central Bank.  The PT has often accused the Central Bank of 
being too independent and out of tune with the country; the leftists 
especially believe the Bank should hew more to the government and 
party line. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The content of the Directorate's communique reveals that 
 
SAO PAULO 00000129  004 OF 004 
 
 
the party is trying to play both government and opposition roles, 
since it is seeking more power within the government while at the 
same time posing as an independent government critic.  In the past, 
the PT, even when critical of Lula, has remained on his side and 
defended him against outside criticism.  Now the balance of forces 
between Lula and "his" party is more delicate.  The PT seems 
determined to run its own candidate for president in 2010 instead of 
supporting somebody from another party in the coalition, which would 
be President Lula's first choice if he can't find a successor to his 
liking from within the PT.  On the other hand, Lula is determined to 
have a strong influence over future elections.  As Lula increasingly 
becomes a lame duck - a process expected to accelerate after the 
2008 municipal elections - his interests are likely to match the 
PT's goals and priorities less and less. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The internal dissension in the PT is not as simple as it 
might appear from the description above.  Following the "Message to 
the Party," the Campo Majoritario put out its own message, and 
various smaller groups, including Valter Pomar's Axis of the Left, 
weighed in with their own perspectives.  These papers may be viewed 
on the PT's website, www.pt.org.br.  The various "tendencies" appear 
to be staking out territory.  The PT is scheduled to hold internal 
elections in 2008, but Pomar told us recently that the National 
Congress is likely to move the date up to September 2007, before the 
municipal election campaign begins. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Tarso Genro, the most vocal "dissident" against Campo 
Majoritario rule, is believed to be close to Lula but otherwise 
unpopular in the party.  A former Mayor of Porto Alegre, he served 
as Education Minister until Lula asked him in 2005 to help pull the 
PT back together after scandal decimated its senior ranks.  He would 
have run for PT President but was unwilling to do so as long as 
Dirceu remained a candidate for the National Directorate.  After 
resisting the pressure for some time, Dirceu eventually withdrew his 
name, but the hard-fought battle made it clear to Genro that even as 
party president he would not be in charge, so he stepped aside to 
let Ricardo Berzoini run.  Genro is often spoken of as a 
short-listed candidate to replace Marcio Thomaz Bastos as Minister 
of Justice, but Lula has been in no hurry to implement his 
long-awaited Cabinet shuffle.  Now Genro may have burned too many 
bridges in the party to be named to the Cabinet.  For his part, the 
PT's most famous founding member, President Lula, is clearly not 
happy about the PT's internal conflicts, but appears to be taking 
the same lackadaisical approach to party affairs as to governing: 
he's essentially watching the world pass by.  End Comment. 
 
¶12.  (U) This cable was cleared/coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
WOLFE