07TALLINN79
REVISED: ESTONIA: FUROR OVER BRONZE SOLDIER
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tallinn
VZCZCXRO6540
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHTL #0079/01 0331505
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021505Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY TALLINN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9497
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TALLINN 000079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL RS EN
SUBJECT: REVISED: ESTONIA: FUROR OVER BRONZE SOLDIER 
DEBATE 
 
REF: (A) 06 TALLINN 533 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On January 10, the parliament approved a 
bill giving the government legal authority to relocate 
the graves of Soviet soldiers and the adjacent QBronze 
SoldierQ statue from their current location in central 
Tallinn.  While Prime Minister Andrus Ansip has stated 
that excavation of the graves could begin in May, the 
decision will ultimately fall to the new government 
that will be formed after parliamentary elections in 
March.  In addition, any decision to move the graves 
and the monument will likely face legal challenges 
that could drag on for some time.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) As previously reported (Ref A), ethnic and 
political tensions over the QBronze SoldierQ, the 
Soviet-era monument dedicated to the war dead of WWII, 
initially reignited in May 2006.  On the anniversary 
of the QEnd of the Great Patriotic War DayQ, counter- 
demonstrations resulted in scuffles between ethnic 
Russians and Estonians near the monument. 
Subsequently, the Ministry of Interior temporarily 
cordoned off the park in which the monument is located 
and banned demonstrations near the site.  The media 
coverage of these events was extensive, in part due to 
the highly prominent and visible location the Bronze 
Soldier in central Tallinn and the fact that the 
police were filmed removing an Estonian flag brought 
to the scene by protesters.  The police later stated 
they had removed the flag to ensure its safety, but 
its removal was seen as an insult by more 
nationalistically-inclined Estonians. 
 
¶3. (U) Political leaders immediately began to debate 
the necessity of moving the Bronze Soldier to a less 
visible location outside of the city Q giving the 
justification that it would lessen the ability of 
radical groups on both sides to disturb the public. 
Prime Minister Andrus Ansip voiced his support for 
moving the monument, but acknowledged that in the 
absence of national legislation regulating the 
protection of war graves, the GOE lacked authority to 
take any action.  The Tallinn city government Q which 
is dominated by the Center Party, an opponent of 
removing the monument -- convened a series of 
roundtable discussions that included Russian NGOs and 
local leaders, but could not reach a consensus. 
 
Where There is a Bill, There is a Way 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Members of the three-party ruling coalition 
split over the issue: Center and PeoplesQ Union 
opposed moving the Bronze Soldier while the Reform 
Party strongly supported the idea.  In November, Vaino 
Lind, a Reform MP and the Chair of the Legal Affairs 
Committee, submitted the QWar Graves Protection Bill 
(WGP) to the Parliament for consideration.  The 
parliament approved this legislation, jointly 
sponsored by the Reform Party, Social Democratic 
Party, Res Publica, and Pro Patria, on January 10, 
giving the GOE the legal authority to move war graves, 
markers, and monuments that are located in 
QunsuitableQ areas.  According to the law, the 
Ministry of Defense will establish an independent 
committee (made up of representatives from the 
Estonian Association for the Maintenance of War Graves 
and the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defense, 
Interior, Justice, and Culture) to determine a list of 
war graves designated for removal and reburial at an 
alternate location.  The Commission has one year to 
make its determination.  Once finished, the committee 
submits its findings to the Ministry of Defense for 
implementation.  Opponents of the bill have criticized 
it for being inflammatory.  Supporters, however, 
emphasize that it is in full compliance with the 
Geneva Convention, and includes provisions for the 
proper reburial of any disturbed remains. 
 
¶5. (U) Prime Minister Ansip has publicly expressed his 
desire for the excavation process to begin in May. 
However, it is unlikely the GOE will take any action 
until March parliamentary elections determine the 
shape of the next government.  In addition, any GOE 
effort to move the monument itself may face delays 
from legal challenges.  Elina Elkind, an Advisor at 
the Ministry of Justice, told us that there is some 
ambiguity in the language of the law which opponents 
 
TALLINN 00000079  002 OF 002 
 
 
could use to challenge the GOEQs right to move the 
Bronze Soldier. 
 
¶7. (U) Another bill tangentially related to the WGP, 
the QDisallowed Construction Removal BillQ (DCR), has 
stalled in the Riigikogu.  The DCR would authorize the 
GOE to prohibit the construction of and allow the 
removal of any monument or structure that glorifies 
the occupation of Estonia and/or incites hatred or 
disturbs public order.  The DCR, which was also 
initially submitted in November, has been through only 
one of three readings in the parliament.  The same 
four parties sponsored the bill, but gave priority to 
passage of the WGP.  Raini Lind, the Director of the 
parliamentQs Legal Affairs Committee Secretariat, felt 
that in her opinion the DCR will likely die in 
committee before the parliamentQs last on February 
22nd. 
 
Is it History or Politics? 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Comment:  From the mid-90s on, the Estonian 
government has generally learned to turn the other 
cheek in the face of provocative statements and 
actions related to such emotionally-laden issues as 
treatment of the Russian minority and the Bronze 
Soldier.  Why, after 15 years, last MayQs events 
caused the Estonian political leadership to bring back 
this issue front and center is not completely clear to 
us, although the desire to use this issue for 
political benefit in the run-up to next monthQs 
elections was clearly one important factor.  With 
those elections now at hand, we believe that what 
happens next will largely depend on the shape of the 
next governing coalition. 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN