04KUWAIT3056
LETTER FROM KUWAITI DETAINEE AT ABU GHARAIB AND
Sat Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/PD QUINN AND SMITH, S/CT MILLER AND 
S/WCI PROSPER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV MARR KU IZ
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM KUWAITI DETAINEE AT ABU GHARAIB AND 
FATHER'S RESPONSE--ANGUISHED REASSURANCE OR COMMITMENT TO 
JIHAD? 
 
(U) SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED--PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1. (U) Local Kuwaiti Arabic daily "Al Watan" published an 
article September 8 reporting excerpts of a letter from 
Abdarrahmane Al Badali, a Kuwaiti detained at Abu Gharaib 
prison in Iraq, and the response from Al Badali's father. 
The son's letter, poorly written in undereducated idiom, 
asserts in nonetheless fulsome religious language that "he 
has learned a lot in prison" and that one of his "Arab 
brothers" has proposed that he marry his sister, following 
this news with the words "I have changed my father, and 
don't worry about the path I have chosen."  The father 
replies that his son's path is "filled with difficulties and 
thorns," that he should study the Quran and "apply it to 
your temporal world" and "pay no attention to those of us 
outside, for we are in a deep slumber." 
 
¶2.  In response to a query by PAO to a senior editor in 
Kuwait, the latter responded that the section of his 
newspaper that analyzes Islamic currents thought the letter 
might represent a kind of "code," in which the son, 
announcing his agreement to marry, was communicating to his 
family his intention to seek martyrdom or continuing his 
Jihadist "path of thorns," and receiving the desired 
benediction from his father.  The contact said that the 
families of two Kuwaiti jihadis who died in Iraq were 
informed of their deaths by a message from extremists 
informing them of the "good news" that their sons had just 
gotten married.  Post also notes that the father's use of 
the phrase "we are in a deep slumber" has been used several 
times by Osama bin Laden and other extremists in their calls 
to Muslims to take up Jihad. 
 
¶3.  While we have no idea if this poorly written 
correspondence suggests ongoing extremist intent on the part 
of Abdarrahman Badali or simply reflects a family's effort 
at mutual reassurance, there is certainly no indication of 
regret on the part of the son or his father for the 
presumably extremist activities that landed him in Abu 
Gharaib. 
 
¶4.  Post translation follows: 09/08/04 "Al Watan" Arabic 
daily, page 4: 
 
"A detainee proposed that I marry his sister" 
 
In a letter from Abu Ghraib to his father Albidali says: 
 
"The path I have chosen is not easy.prison has taught me a 
lot" 
 
Albidali's father:  I am proud of you.and you are in a place 
to be envied. 
 
"Family News Only" 
 
"God's peace be upon you, father how are you.  I hope you're 
fine, thanks be to Allah. 
 
"I bring you the good news that I'm awaiting reward from 
almighty Allah for this plight that has befallen me as a 
result of sins, disobedience, scarce reading of the Koran, 
excessive chatting and laughter.  O father, I have learned a 
lot in prison praise be to Allah.  Please know father that 
this is all thanks to Allah and you.  My reward goes to you 
my father. My father I love you in Allah.  Please take care 
of my folks, my mother and sisters.  Most importantly take 
care of the girls. Father, don't think I am young.  They 
have arranged a marriage for me but right now it's an 
engagement." 
 
The newspaper article: 
 
"Citizen Abdarrahmane Badali who has been detained in 
AbuGhraib for months sent a letter to his family reassuring 
them "I bring you the good news that I'm counting only on 
Almighty Allah for my reward for this plight that has 
befallen me as a result of sins, disobedience, scarce 
reading of the Koran. I have learned a lot in prison praise 
be to Allah.  Father, don't think I am too young.  One of 
the Arab detainees proposed to me marriage to his sister. I 
have changed, my father, and I need your prayers and don't 
worry about the path I have chosen.  It is not easy.  Be 
patient father as 'verily, with every difficulty there is 
relief'. Praise to Allah, I am with my Arab brothers who all 
send their greetings. Be reassured that I am well and don't 
forget me in your prayers. 
 
"In the end of his letter, Abderrahman sends greetings to 
his mother telling her "I love you in God", followed by 
greetings to his sisters. 
 
"Abderrahman's father replied saying: Don't worry O 
Abderrahman.  This is a path filled with difficulties and 
thorns. Be one of those who take opportunities. Seize this 
opportunity and memorize the Koran and consult it in your 
temporal world.  This is an opportunity that does not repeat 
itself.  Don't pay attention to those outside for we are in 
a deep slumber.  I declare that I am proud of you in this 
life and if God wills it in the after life. 
 
"You must be patient Abderrahman.  I am your witness in 
front of Allah.  Don't omit me from your prayers as you are 
in a place for which you are envied. Spare no effort praying 
for me, yourself and your brothers.  God willing we will 
meet one of these days and be one of those who consider 
difficulties and afflictions as blessings from God in order 
for you to get closer to God. 
 
"Albidali senior concluded the letter saying "your mother, 
grandmother, brothers, uncles and their children are all 
sending their greetings and waiting for your return.  Don't 
forget us in your prayers. Please do individual prayers 
(translator note: perhaps for each family member.)  Do not 
forget to memorize the Koran. Persevere in reciting it.  We 
shall meet in spite of all the oppressors and enemies God 
willing.  I will not forget you no matter how long it will 
take. 
 
"On the other hand, "Al Watan" contacted one of the UN Red 
Cross officers in Kuwait Mark Lening who said that Abderhman 
Albidali who is detained in Abu Ghraib is well and that the 
Red Cross workers in Iraq visit the detainees almost 
everyday to check on them. 
 
"He added that he does not know whether Albidali will be 
released sooner or later as only authorities can decide 
that.  He also affirmed that he has brought the matter to 
the authorities in Kuwait adding that the committee is not 
concerned with the release of Kuwaiti detainees or others. 
Authorities in both countries have that prerogative. He 
declared that a class of detainees will be released without 
trials, while others will go to court.  He denied any 
knowledge about the status of Kuwaiti citizen Albadali 
reaffirming that the committee is neutral and is not 
entitled to interfere in such matters. "We only implement 
what the two parties in both countries agree on as far as 
transporting and delivering the released prisoners". 
 
¶5. Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
TUELLER