06JAKARTA12498
SECRETARY'S INITIATIVE ON GLOBAL INTERNET FREEDOM --
Fri Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #2498/01 2860629
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130629Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1197UNCLAS JAKARTA 012498 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/CIP/BA (FETCHKO) 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECPS EINT EAID PHUM
SUBJECT:  SECRETARY'S INITIATIVE ON GLOBAL INTERNET FREEDOM -- 
USAID INDONESIA EFFORTS 
 
REF:  SecState 142140 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  Embassy Jakarta welcomes the Secretary's Global 
Internet Freedom Task Force Initiative (GIFT) and looks forward to 
contributing to its success.  As requested in reftel, a list of 
USAID projects related to the GIFT is described below.  USAID in 
Indonesia continues to place high priority on increasing access to 
information through information and communication technologies 
(ICT). The USAID Strategic Plan for Indonesia 2004 - 2008 (Plan) 
identifies digital freedom as a cross-sector priority.  Since 
implementation of the Plan, ICT activities have started in all 
sectors where USAID is active.  In FY05-F06 alone, USAID provided 
approximately $5.8 million for ICT-related activities in 
Indonesia.  This priority will continue over the next two years. 
Of particular note are activities under the President's Education 
Initiative, which will use innovative technologies such as 
wireless internet to increase ICT access for teachers, students 
and the surrounding communities.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  List of USAID ICT Projects 
 
E-Government Projects 
--------------------- 
 
Project Name: FluNet 
Recipient: Ministry of Agriculture, Agency for Agricultural 
Quarantine at National, Regional and Field levels in three 
provinces. 
Project Description: Strengthen capacity in preparing for, 
detecting, and responding to outbreaks of Highly Pathogenic Avian 
Influenza (HPAI). This public-private partnership will customize 
and deploy an online disease surveillance system. The project will 
also include training for rapid identification of HPAI in animals 
in transit and in the use of IT to report findings. 
IT Component: The on-line system allows field staff to submit real- 
time data reports to the system via the internet, text messaging, 
mobile phone or PDA. Supervisors can map and analyze data via web 
interface, and use communication tools to send alerts and 
broadcast messages back to the field. 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 350,000 
 
Project Name: Aceh Technical Assistance Recovery Project (ATARP) 
Recipient:  Indonesian Bureau for Aceh Reconstruction and Recovery 
(BRR)- Housing Office 
Project Description:  Provide technical assistance to BRR's 
Housing Office for post-tsunami recovery, including shelter and 
housing reconstruction issues and mapping/spatial planning for 
villages and urban rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
IT Component: Providing computer hardware and software for the 
Housing Office, including Primavera Project Management software, 
GIS software for mapping, and Oracle Database Manager. 
FY05 Funding: 300,000 
FY06 Funding: 0 
 
Project Name: Immediate Assistance for Strengthening Community- 
based Early Warning and Early Reaction to Avian Influenza (AI) 
Recipient: Ministry of Agriculture 
Project Description: Establish and implement a systematic, active, 
village-level AI surveillance plan, and a rapid response strategy 
to animal outbreaks of AI, enabling officials to report and map 
outbreak information for improved control and containment of AI in 
animals. 
IT Component: Provide Global Positioning System (GPS) devices to 
officials, plus training in use of GPS, and in use of information 
obtained to improve program and decision-making. 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 55,000 
 
Project Name: Strengthening the Initiatives of the Government and 
Others against Human Trafficking (SIGHT) 
Recipient: Ministry of Women Empowerment 
Project Description: Provide technical assistance to the Ministry 
of Women Empowerment for combating trafficking in persons.  The 
project includes technical assistance, training, and small grants 
to local NGOs in support of prevention and protection.  A third 
component of the project is aimed at enhancing coordination and 
communication between government agencies, NGOs, businesses and 
the public. 
IT Component: Development of a website for the Ministry 
(www.stoptrafiking.or.id) aimed at raising public awareness of 
trafficking issues in Indonesia. The website will provide 
opportunities for persons active in combating trafficking, as well 
as victims of trafficking, to interact through chatrooms and 
discussion forums. 
FY05 Funding: 11,407 
FY06 Funding: 0 
 
Project Name: Institutional Development and Advocacy for Legal 
Reform in Indonesia (IDeAL) 
Recipients: Legal community and practitioners. 
 
Project Description: Build capacity of government legal 
institutions and civil society organizations to address problems 
of justice and law enforcement. 
IT Component: Develop a public online database with information on 
Supreme Court decisions and other legal information. 
FY05 Funding: 43,239 
FY06 Funding: 0 
 
 
ICT Project in Support of Decentralization, Municipalities, and 
Local Government 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
 
Project Name: Local Governance Support Program 
Recipients: 60 Local Governments 
Project Description: Increase capacity of local governments to: 
-- plan and manage public services and finances, 
-- increase transparency and accountability in legislative and 
administrative processes, 
-- respond to citizen priorities; and, 
-- provide greater opportunity for citizens to participate in 
local government decision-making. 
IT Component: Training of local officials in ICT, promoting 
sharing of best practices and ICT based information exchange 
between local and national government experts.  The project will 
introduce e-announcement and e-procurement models to increase 
transparency in targeted jurisdictions.  Officials will develop a 
local governance data bank, including on-line self-assessment 
tools on good governance and core capacities such as planning and 
budgeting. 
FY05 Funding: 50,000 
FY06 Funding: 125,000 
 
 
ICT Projects in Support of Economic Growth 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Project Name: Indonesia Anti-Corruption and Commercial Courts 
Enhancement (IND ACCE) 
Recipients: Anti-Corruption Court and Commercial Court under the 
jurisdiction of Supreme Court 
Project Description: Assist the Supreme Court by enhancing the 
capacity of the Commercial Court and establishing a functioning 
Anti-Corruption Court. 
IT Component: Implement a court information technology system 
which will improve efficiency in these specialized courts, and 
also increase transparency by allowing more public access to court 
information. 
FY05 Funding: 300,000 
FY06 Funding: 1,200,000 
 
Project Name: Indonesia Trade Assistance Project 
Recipient: Ministry of Trade (MOT) 
Project Description: Build the capacity of the Ministry of Trade 
(MOT) to analyze trade information and implement trade reform, 
resulting in increased exports, improved investment climate, and 
increased employment. 
IT Component: Support a comprehensive upgrade to the MOT ICT 
systems, including the following: 
-- Re-design the MOT IT network 
-- Upgrade equipment and software to improve management, 
efficiency and security 
-- Building a new, integrated website providing more information 
to the public in both English and Indonesian 
-- Improve communication facilities and ICT infrastructure 
-- Support consolidation of various trade databases to provide 
higher quality data while improving data collection and 
management, and; 
-- Provide both technical ICT training to support personnel and 
application training to end-users. 
FY05 Funding: 300,000 
FY06 Funding: 1,800,000 
 
Project Name: Indonesia Competitiveness Program (SENADA) 
Recipient: Ministry of Industry 
Project Description: Generate growth, trade, jobs and income by 
improving Indonesia's competitiveness in selected high potential 
industry value chains driven mainly by small and medium sized 
enterprises (SME). 
IT Component: Develop and maintain a website.  Provide technical 
assistance and industry value chain support to SME internet 
services providers. 
FY05 Funding: 100,000 
FY06 Funding: 200,000 
 
Project Name: Agribusiness Market and Support Activity (AMARTA) 
Recipient: Agribusiness industries in Indonesia 
Project Description: Assist the GOI in promoting a robust 
Indonesian agribusiness system, significantly contributing to 
employment growth. 
IT Component: Create and maintain a website informing persons 
 
involved in agribusiness industries on AMARTA services, and 
support association and alliance-driven advocacy campaigns to 
remove constraints and improve the enabling environment. 
FY05 Funding: 10,000 
FY06 Funding: 100,000 
 
Project Name: Reducing Barriers to Market Entry and Business 
Operation (PROMIS) 
Recipient: Local governments and business organizations in 
Indonesia. 
Project Description: Reduce the cost and complexity of business 
licensing and permitting, resulting in higher numbers of 
businesses entering the formal sector. The project also aims to 
improve formulation of business regulations, and create strong 
incentives for local governments to implement business-friendly 
policies. 
IT Component: Help establish an "e-government" system to improve 
government efficiency and accountability in business licensing 
procedures.  The system will include application forms for 
licenses. 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 60,000 
 
Project Name: Financial Crime and Prevention Project (FCPP) 
Recipients: Ministry of Finance, Indonesian Financial Intelligence 
Unit (PPATK), Supreme Audit Board (BPK), Corruption Eradication 
Commission (KPK), and Attorney General's Office (AGO) 
Project Description: Assist Indonesia in creating a modern legal 
and institutional framework to detect and prosecute financial 
crimes, and facilitate cooperation among agencies in preventing 
financial crime. 
IT Component: Create a website by June 2007, containing 
information and training materials on anti-corruption/money 
laundering/financial crimes. 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 15,000 
 
Project Name: Indonesia Deposit Insurance Policy 
Recipient: Ministry of Finance, Bank of Indonesia, Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (LPS) 
Project Description: Assist in GOI efforts toward creating a 
modern deposit insurance scheme. 
IT Component: Provide laptop computers, servers and software to 
improve ICT capability for staff of LPS. Develop a Risk Management 
Data Repository and Reporting Tools System to assist LPS in 
analysis of financial risk posed by insured banks. 
FY05 Funding: 55,790 
FY06 Funding: 7,200 
 
 
E-education Projects 
-------------------- 
 
Project Name: Decentralized Basic Education 1 
Recipients: Provincial Education Offices, Provincial Religious 
Offices, District Education Offices, District Religious Offices, 
Elementary Schools, and Religious Schools (Madrasah Ibtidaiyah) in 
three provinces. 
Project Description: Improve capacity of local governments to 
provide and manage basic education services, strengthening 
community participation in the process. 
IT Component: Conduct an assessment and make recommendations for 
development of a national education management information system 
(EMIS) for use at all levels of government, with possible follow- 
on activity supporting development of the system. 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 80,000 
 
Project Name: Decentralized Basic Education 1 
Recipients: District Education Offices, District Religious Affairs 
Offices, District Public Libraries, District Planning Boards, and 
local private sector entities in six provinces. 
Project Description: Improve capacity of local governments to 
provide and effectively manage basic education services, and 
strengthen community participation in process. 
IT Component: Enable district public libraries, education offices, 
and other district offices to leverage technologies which enhance 
information and communication flow with education stakeholders 
(schools, teachers, etc) and the wider community through one of 
two grant categories:  ICT Access Grants (or Education Hotspots) 
and ICT Innovation Education Management and Governance Grants 
(EMG). 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 200,000 
 
Project Name: Decentralized Basic Education 2 
Recipients: Primary school teachers, principals, students, and 
local communities in seven provinces and Jakarta. 
Project Description: Enhance quality of teaching and learning to 
improve student performance. 
IT Component: Provide a wide variety of new communication 
 
technologies, increasing access to information for teachers, 
students and local communities.  Community Resource Centers (CRC) 
will host a wide array modern ICTs.  In FY07, a number of pilot 
sites will introduce wireless "hotspots" to the CRCs. 
FY05 Funding: 0 
FY06 Funding: 25,000 
 
Project Name: Decentralized Basic Education 3 
Recipients: Junior secondary school teachers in up to 100 
Indonesian districts 
Project Description: Strengthen life skills components in junior 
secondary school curriculum. 
IT Component: Train teachers to integrate ICT into teaching 
methods and extracurricular activities. 
FY05 Funding: 95,000 
FY06 Funding: 80,000 
 
 
Projects Providing Computers to NGOs and Schools 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Project Name: Support for Women in Aceh 
Recipients:  Students in 15 Islamic boarding schools (Dayah) 
throughout Aceh Province 
Project Description:  Improve the quality of education for girls 
in Islamic boarding schools with a majority female student body, 
by providing computer labs, libraries, and/or community 
development projects. 
IT Component: Provide internet-ready computers for a new computer 
lab in each school.  The school will determine whether to fund the 
internet connection. 
FY05 Funding: 265,950 
FY06 Funding: 0 
 
Project Name: Environmental Services Project (ESP) - Rare Pride 
Indonesia Grant 
Recipients: Mapayah Foundation, NGO Peduli Nanggroe Aceh, NOG 
Kaliandra, NGO Ekosistem Lestari and YBL Masta. 
Project Description: Conservation campaign training program 
focused on biodiversity. 
IT Component:  Provide ICT equipment and supplies to the five 
participating NGOs. 
FY05 Funding: 25,000 
FY06 Funding: 0 
 
PASCOE