06JAKARTA2915
INDONESIA - MARCH 2 AVIAN INFLUENZA UPDATE
Mon Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JAKARTA 002915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/IET, A/MED AND S/ES-O 
DEPT FOR OES/FO, OES/EID, OES/PCI, OES/STC AND OES/IHA 
DEPT PASS TO USDA/FAS/DLP/HWETZEL AND FAS/ICD/LAIDIG 
DEPT ALSO PASS TO USDA/FAS/FAA/DYOUNG AND USDA/APHIS 
DEPT ALSO PASS TO USAID/ANE/CLEMENTS AND GH/CARROLL 
DEPT ALSO PASS TO HHS/BILL STEIGER AND AMAR BHAT 
PARIS FOR FAS/AG MINISTER COUNSELOR 
CANBERRA FOR APHIS/DHANNAPEL 
ROME FOR FAO 
NSC FOR JMELINE 
BANGKOK FOR RMO, CDC, USAID/RDM/A 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO AMED CASC EAGR AMGT PGOV ID KFLU
SUBJECT: INDONESIA - MARCH 2 AVIAN INFLUENZA UPDATE 
 
REF: A) Jakarta 02403        B) Jakarta 16939 
 
JAKARTA 00002915  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The Jakarta city government carried out 
24-26 February a series of actions to control Avian 
Influenza (AI) in birds, including door-to-door inspections, 
limited culling and vaccinations.  Human and animal health 
officials in West Kalimantan told us that they are doing 
what they can to address the avian influenza (AI) threat. 
They claimed that while AI in poultry emerged in the 
province in 2004, there were no cases in 2005 and none so 
far in 2006.  Surabaya officials acted decisively to a 
reported outbreak of bird flu in poultry, including the 
immediate culling of infected birds within a 1-kilometer 
radius of the affected area.  The total number of confirmed 
human AI cases in Indonesia has risen to 28, with 20 deaths, 
indicating a mortality rate of 71 percent.  Recent cases, or 
reports of recent cases, have emerged in and around 
Yogyakarta, Central Java, for the first time.  End Summary. 
 
Jakarta Culling 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (U) As noted ref A, Jakarta authorities sent a 500-person 
team to "scour" residential areas for AI in birds from 
February 24-26.  The Jakarta city government, in conjunction 
with MOA officials, Indonesian Red Cross and Bogor 
Agriculture Institute volunteers, conducted the AI 
surveillance and limited stamping-out.  Reportedly, the more 
than 500 individuals involved in this effort split up into 
teams of 10.  The plan envisaged culling all birds within a 
one-kilometer radius of sick birds and vaccinating those 
within an additional three kilometers. 
 
¶3.  (U) Adnan Achmad, sub-Director for Animal Health at the 
Jakarta Provincial Livestock Services Office, told us on 
March 2 that 37 birds tested positive for AI following the 
rapid on-site tests, and that as a result, 5,026 birds were 
slaughtered.  Achmad said that the team found AI positive 
birds in West, South, East, and Central Jakarta Districts, 
but none in North Jakarta.  The team discovered most of the 
AI positive birds among small-scale backyard poultry flocks 
or among caged pet birds.  However, Achmad said that they 
discovered some AI positive chickens in a large live chicken 
collection and distribution market in East Jakarta, and the 
team thus destroyed 4,000 chickens there. 
 
¶4. (U) Achmad said Ministry of Health (MOH) officials plan 
to follow-up the February 24-26 campaign by disinfecting 
premises where infected birds were found.  The MOH will also 
test humans in these areas. (Comment: There is no indication 
that teams involved in the February 24-26 campaign culled 
birds within a one kilometer radius of infected sites, which 
has been the most recently stated MOA policy.  It is also 
unclear how soon after the culling the authorities would 
reimburse bird owners the promised Rp 10,000 (USD 1) per 
bird). 
 
AI in West Kalimantan? 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) During a February 21-23 visit to West Kalimantan, 
 
JAKARTA 00002915  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
human and animal health officials at the provincial, 
district, municipal levels told us that they are doing what 
they can to address the avian influenza (AI) threat.  They 
claimed that while AI in poultry emerged in the province in 
2004, there were no cases in 2005 and none so far in 2006. 
(Comment:  These claims seem implausible and are probably 
due to a lack of systematic surveillance.)  At a February 22 
meeting co-chaired by Dr. Abdul Manaf and Dr. Oscar Primadi, 
heads of the provincial agricultural and health departments 
respectively, district, provincial and city officials 
described their efforts to fight bird flu.  These include: 
a) an aggressive public awareness program; b) culling and 
vaccination of infected animals and zoning of affected area; 
c) surveillance; d) sanitation promotion; and e) 
establishment of an AI task force. 
 
¶6. (U) Manaf admitted that illegal movements of poultry 
complicate biosecurity measures.  He also warned that the 
constant high state of alert for AI without any recent 
incidence in poultry and humans breeds fatigue and 
complacency.  In addition, the AI scare has caused a 
damaging decline in poultry and egg consumption (as much as 
60 percent in some areas).  Manaf said the province also 
suffers from other animal diseases such as New Castle, Hog 
Cholera, Nipah Disease, and Foot and Mouth disease, which 
complicate AI preparedness.  Primadi praised the 
coordination between his department and Dr. Manaf's, noting 
that it was much better than at the national level.  He said 
the provincial AI Task Force includes staff from both 
offices and has prepared an AI contingency plan that 
features aggressive public awareness and advocacy campaigns 
in affected districts and cities, as well as close 
collaboration with hospitals and health centers.  Like their 
counterparts in East Kalimantan (Ref B), Manaf and Primadi 
believe the central government will only take notice of 
their requests for funding when AI strikes humans in their 
jurisdictions, by which time it could be too late. 
 
The Soedarso Hospital 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) During a February 23 visit to Soedarso Hospital in 
Samarinda (one of the 44 national AI referral hospitals and 
the only one in the province), Director Mohammad Subuh 
revealed that hospital staff have prepared an isolation room 
in the infectious disease ward equipped with one ventilator 
and personal protective equipment (PPE).  However, he 
admitted that the 300-bed hospital would be overwhelmed with 
more than one AI human case.  He said the hospital has only 
300 Tamiflu capsules in stock, or 30 treatment courses. 
Subuh and his staff said they need medical equipment (e.g., 
influenza rapid testing kits and respirators) and trained 
staff (particularly nurses) to cope with a large outbreak of 
AI and other infectious diseases.  Subuh acknowledged that 
the central government has provided extra financial and 
technical help (e.g., PPE's like goggles, gloves, masks and 
head and shoe covers) to the province and his hospital to 
prepare for AI, but in amounts inadequate for the challenges 
ahead. 
 
AI Efforts in Surabaya. 
 
JAKARTA 00002915  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) The Governor of Surabaya, the nation's second largest 
city and capital of East Java, declared a status of "Alert 
One" for the city following the finding of bird flu case at 
Kedurus area recently.  Five chickens in Kedurus of 
Karangpilang district, Surabaya, died on February 15, 2006. 
Laboratory tests conducted by the Veterinary Center in 
Yogyakarta confirmed that the five chickens were infected 
with AI.  Surabaya Mayor Bambang DH then ordered an 
immediate cull of all birds found within a radius of 1 km 
from Kedurus. He also vowed to vaccinate all chickens and 
birds in every sub-district. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Dr. Nidom of Tropical Disease Center (TDC) of 
Airlangga University in Surabaya stated that AI may have 
already been present in Surabaya for some time prior to the 
announced outbreak.  Nidom told us that in the last two 
months he had been conducting random research at bird 
markets around Surabaya and had found birds infected with 
AI.  He said that he reported his findings to the Surabaya 
Health office, but his reports did not elicit any immediate 
action by the City. 
 
¶10. (U) Despite the confirmation of the AI incident in 
Kedurus, authorities consider the Surabaya City Zoo, located 
only 2.5 kilometers from the affected area, as safe and it 
remains open to the public. "Up to now, the zoo is still 
free from the avian influenza virus and we will do our 
utmost to protect the zoo's animals from the virus. We are 
preventing the virus from affecting the animals by spraying 
disinfectants and closely checking their state of health," 
Liang Kaspe, manager of the Surabaya Zoo's conservation 
department, reportedly told the press. 
 
Human AI Case Profile 
--------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) NAMRU-2 data indicates the following AI-related case 
profile as of March 6. 
 
-- Number of laboratory confirmed (positive PCR and/or 
serology) human AI cases: 28, of which 20 have been fatal 
(fatality rate of 71 percent). 
 
-- Number of probable AI cases: 5, with 4 deaths (fatality 
rate of 80 percent). 
 
-- Number of cases awaiting verification by the US CDC: 1. 
 
-- Number of possible AI cases under investigation: 
approximately 36. 
 
-- Number of excluded AI cases: 211. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Comment:  Although a very welcome first step, the 
Jakarta city government's culling and vaccination program 
fell far short of a meaningful assault on AI among poultry 
in this enormous city.  We will encourage the authorities to 
follow up systematically in order to begin to build momentum 
in grappling with AI. 
 
JAKARTA 00002915  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
AMSELEM