07JAKARTA2947
LIAISON OFFICERS REACH ACROSS INDONESIA
Mon Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #2947/01 2950148
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220148Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6742UNCLAS JAKARTA 002947 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS AND EAP/PD 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO ECON CMGT APER ID
 
SUBJECT: LIAISON OFFICERS REACH ACROSS INDONESIA 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Embassy Jakarta launched a liaison officer (LO) program 
to key strategic areas in Indonesia: Yogyakarta, Kalimantan, 
Semarang and Papua.  Two person teams of entry level officers and 
officers with content area expertise were designated as the 
Embassy's primary representatives to these areas.  After their 
initial visits in late September and early October 2007, LOs 
reported great local interest in developing stronger ties with the 
U.S. Embassy on numerous issues, including economic development, 
trade, environmental preservation, educational enrichment, mutual 
understanding, security and consular services. LOs said the program 
is developing their skill sets and allowing for a wider range of 
professional experience.  End summary. 
 
INCREASING ACCESS AND UNDERSTANDING 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. The program envisions increasing local leaders' access to the 
Embassy and increasing the Embassy's capacity to carry out Mission 
objectives across Indonesia.  The primary goals of the LO program 
are: to further the Embassy's knowledge of the target areas, develop 
a network of leaders and future leaders, increase public diplomacy 
outreach, coordinate other Embassy visits and provide professional 
development opportunities for the officers involved.  These officers 
provide a valuable service to the Embassy in covering regions of the 
country that had previously been covered by the consulate in 
Surabaya (Yogyakarta and Semarang) or received less coverage due to 
distance (Kalimantan and Papua). 
 
¶3. Currently, the entry level participants are all first tour 
consular officers and their partner LOs are more experienced 
officers from the public affairs, economic and political sections. 
Benefits to consular officers include greater opportunities for 
developing contacts, networking, public speaking, writing reporting 
cables, collaborating with other Embassy components and learning 
about resources and programs of public and private U.S. 
organizations.  Greater familiarity with these regions will improve 
the quality of visa adjudication for residents of these areas and 
establish more regular contact with American citizens for consular 
services.  Additionally, LOs from other sections use this program to 
build their expertise in designated regions and in content areas 
within their respective portfolios. 
 
ENVIRONMENT DOMINATES THE AGENDA IN KALIMANTAN 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶4. Kalimantan LOs focused their initial trip on environmental issues 
in the northeast region of the island. Local government officials 
and NGO representatives introduced them to a number of the area's 
successful marine preservation projects that included conservation 
education, turtle nesting habitat conservation, aquaculture and 
ecotourism. Local environmental NGOs asked for assistance in finding 
and creating ties with U.S. NGOs that share common goals.  LOs 
voiced support for local efforts to conserve natural resources at an 
event attended by approximately 35 NGO members, local officials and 
press. 
 
EDUCATION AND AID ARE TOP PRIORITIES IN YOGYAKARTA 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5. Yogyakarta LOs reached out to universities and NGOs on 
educational issues and disaster relief.  They met with a small group 
of university officials and student leaders at Sanata Dharma 
University and discussed a wide range of topics from U.S. student 
visas to American culture.  They discussed possible areas of 
cooperation, including an exchange program with a U.S. university. 
LOs learned about the role of U.S. affiliated organizations in local 
relief efforts, including Rotary Club's reconstruction assistance to 
earthquake damaged areas. 
 
BUSINESS AND EDUCATION HIGH ON THE LIST IN SEMARANG 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. Semarang LOs concentrated their attention on the business and 
educational sectors.  Local government and business leaders asked 
for assistance with developing their tourism industry and trade 
capacity, particularly in terms of food, furniture and textile 
exports.  They, along with university representatives, asked about 
forming links with U.S. institutions, for example, through the 
Sister Cities program and university partnerships.  LOs visited the 
American Corner at the Walisongo Semarang State Islamic University 
and met with English Club students regarding topics for future 
programs.  LOs also toured the Tanjung Emas Port and viewed security 
upgrades made in response to U.S. Coast Guard inspections. 
 
PAPUA 
----- 
 
¶7. In November 2007 LOs will accompany the Ambassador to visit 
Jayapura, Papua Province and the surrounding area, as well as tour 
the PT Freeport Indonesia gold and copper mine. 
U.S. EMBASSY OUTREACH IS ON THE RISE 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. LOs are following up on possible areas of cooperation between 
local officials and the Embassy or other U.S. institutions.  They 
will maintain communication with their counterparts in the 
designated areas and plan regular visits every three to four months. 
 Future trips will include significant public diplomacy outreach, 
including programs geared towards university students and consular 
issues. 
 
HUME