09JAKARTA371
MUNIR CASE -- SUCIWATI'S LETTER TO THE SECRETARY
Tue Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO7811
OO RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHJA #0371/01 0621045
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031045Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1694
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 000371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, DRL, DRL/AWH 
NSC FOR EPHU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KJUS PHUM ID
SUBJECT: MUNIR CASE -- SUCIWATI'S LETTER TO THE SECRETARY 
 
¶1. (U) This is an Action Request -- Please see paragraph 3. 
 
¶2.  (U) Attached is the text of the letter which Suciwati, 
the widow of murdered human rights activist Munir Said 
Thalib, gave to Secretary Clinton when they met in Jakarta on 
February 18.  During their conversation, the Secretary 
expressed to Suciwati how she shares Suciwati's pain and 
understands what she has gone through.  Suciwati responded 
that she is still hoping for justice.  (Note:  Munir's 
murderer has been convicted and remains in prison.  A Jakarta 
court recently ruled that a former intelligence official was 
not guilty of conspiring to commit the murder; the GOI is 
appealing that decision.) 
 
¶3.  (U) ACTION REQUEST -- We request that the Department 
prepare a response to this letter for the Secretary's 
signature.  Mission will send suggested points for this 
proposed response to EAP/MTS shortly. 
 
¶4.  (U) The text of Suciwati's letter follows: 
 
Begin text: 
 
Jakarta, February 18 2009 
 
Her Excellency Madame Hillary Clinton, 
 
In the spirit of change, 
 
Allow me to introduce myself; my name is Suciwati, wife of 
belated husband Mr. Munir, Indonesian human rights defender. 
I wish to congratulate you and your country in leading the 
process of change in a new era of USA, full of hope towards 
justice and respect to universal human rights norms and 
standards. 
 
I believe change will happened in the near future, and this 
would be a perfect one with your leadership Madam Hillary 
Rodham Clinton.  You will be an important actor in 
determining the course of this change for hope.  Most of 
worldwide expectation, including myself and my 2 children 
Alif Allende and Diva Suukyi, are in your honor, hope, power 
and capability. 
 
I believe that you have heard information and knowledge 
regarding the political assassination and evil conspiracy 
against my belated husband Munir Said Thalib.  And I am sure 
that you and your government under the presidency of Mr. 
Barack Obama will put special attention to the settlement of 
this case.  Justice on the murder of my husband is not only 
important for me and my children but also significant for the 
enforcement of rule of law, human rights and democracy in 
Indonesia.  We, the victims of gross human rights violations 
have not achieved justice, so the settlement of Munir case is 
the key of achieving justice.  Ending the cycle of impunity 
as part of the protection to human rights defenders in our 
beloved country. 
 
Enforcement of justice and knowing the truth on the 
assassination of my husband is also very important for the 
future of Indonesia.  This assassination has shaped my 
consciousness and all Indonesian people, that political 
transition and hope for change for better future after the 
fall of Soeharto is under imminent and serious threat. 
 
The strongest message about this assassination and the way 
our government try to settle this case so far, has shown that 
the anti human rights and democracy forces are still very 
strong. 
 
As a wife and mother of 2 kids, I am still in the middle of a 
struggle to seek truth and justice that have not been done. 
 
Your visit to Indonesia is a part or a larger US American 
discourse to push the wind of change towards democracy and 
full respect on human right values.  Awakening the hope to 
face the future for us including me and my children, 
welcoming your visit to Indonesia with the spirit to achieve 
democracy, respect to human rights and justice to all victims 
of gross human rights violations. 
 
Allow me to accept your sincere and honorable great concern 
to the effort to seek justice for my belated husband Munir 
Said Thalib.  Your human touch, capability, power and courage 
are our great expectation.  I sincerely thank you for this. 
 
Warm regards from us and from our faith to the truth that 
always be part of our struggle. 
 
JAKARTA 00000371  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Suciwati. 
 
End text. 
HUME