05WARSAW2164
PROPOSED WARSAW CONFERENCE ON DISABILITIES IN IRAQ
Wed May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  WARSAW 002164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE TARA ERATH AND MICHAEL SESSUMS 
STATE FOR DRL CHRIS CAMPONOVO 
STATE PASS TO USAID DCHA/DG LLOYD FEINBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL ECON IZ PL
SUBJECT: PROPOSED WARSAW CONFERENCE ON DISABILITIES IN IRAQ 
HITS SOME SNAGS 
 
REF: WARSAW 1517 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. The Polish government sent a letter to 
USAID Administrator Natsios on April 6 stating that while it 
supports the idea of an international conference on Iraqi 
disabled issues in principle, it sees many obstacles to 
moving ahead with such a conference in Poland at this time 
due to lack of funds and impending Polish elections.  With 
the Polish national government reluctant to begin organizing 
the proposed conference, the main U.S. NGO backing the 
project is now seeking to interest Polish NGOs, private 
Polish businesses, and the Warsaw municipal government in 
hosting the event. End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On April 27, the Embassy received a courtesy copy of 
an April 6 letter the head of the National Fund for the 
Rehabilitation of Disabled People (PFRON) sent to 
Administrator Natsios of USAID.  PFRON is the state agency 
that implements Polish laws concerning the disabled.  The 
head of PFRON, Roman Sroczynski, signed the letter, which his 
aide said was cleared by both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and the Ministry of Social Policy. 
 
 
Begin text of unofficial embassy translation: 
 
April 6, 2005 
 
Dear Mr. Director, 
 
I would like to inform you that on March 30, 2005 
consultations were held (initiated by Minister Izabella 
Jaruga-Nowacka) regarding the proposal of organizing in 
Warsaw a worldwide conference regarding disabled people from 
Iraq and their post-conflict situation. 
 
After discussing the complex issues regarding this subject 
with Minister Jaruga-Nowacka, I would like to present our 
point of view. 
 
The intention and the idea of organizing such a conference in 
Warsaw are very positive and need support. 
 
I would like to point out a few obstacles in organizing this 
conference here due to some problems we are experiencing. 
 
Firstly, the very slow stabilization process in Iraq should 
be taken into consideration.  The current government is a 
temporary one (until fall of this year).  It would be better 
to organize this conference after a more stable government (a 
new government) is chosen in order to discuss it in all of 
its details. 
 
Secondly, there is a lack of obligation from the U.S. 
administration and other American NGOs in the area of 
financing this conference.  I am disappointed by the lack of 
a positive response from the American side.  I hope that you 
will be able to convince the U.S. administration to 
financially participate in organizing this conference.  The 
scale and budget needed for this kind of event should be 
taken into consideration. 
 
Thirdly, in the budget for this year, the Polish parliament 
did not forecast any financial means for organizing the 
conference.  This year, presidential, parliamentary, and 
senatorial elections will take place.  Therefore the budget 
can not be changed.  I would like to stress that such an 
amendment will be possible if the American side will declare 
an appropriate amount of financial support in organizing the 
conference. 
 
I hope that you will understand our point of view.  I do 
believe that current difficulties are only temporary and that 
this very noble idea of involvement of the international 
society in solving the problems of the disabled people in 
Iraq will be successfully implemented. 
 
Roman Sroczynski 
President 
 
End translation. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ministry of Social Policy privately informed 
Post on April 27 that its position has not changed since the 
April 6 letter was sent, and that it is reluctant to move 
forward with the conference due to the lack of Polish 
financial resources and the political uncertainty created by 
 
 
the upcoming Polish national elections.  It believes, 
furthermore, that it would be preferable to have a permanent 
Iraqi government well in place before such a conference 
occurs.  As a result, the Ministry of Social Policy does not 
currently intend to move ahead with any planning. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Based on the hesitant Polish government response, 
the United States International Council on Disabilities 
(USICD), the main U.S. NGO supporting the conference, is now 
looking for support from Polish NGOs and businesses.  It 
believes one possiblity would be for the Warsaw municipal 
government to host this conference, but we have had no 
indication that the City of Warsaw is interested in 
supporting this venture. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment.  It appears that the Polish national 
government will not be moving ahead with planning this 
conference in the foreseeable future.  Post will continue to 
monitor this issue to inform Washington whether USICD's 
attempts to partner with Polish municipal government to 
organize the conference are successful. End comment. 
ASHE 
 
 
NNNN 

 2005WARSAW02164 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED