05WARSAW1168
POLAND: FIFTH ANNUAL (2005) TRAFFICKING IN
Wed Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 WARSAW 001168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
G/TIP FOR JENNIFER TOPPING 
G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EUR/PGI 
EUR/NCE FOR MICHAEL SESSUMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF KWMN PL KRCM
SUBJECT:  POLAND: FIFTH ANNUAL (2005) TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS REPORT SUBMISSION 
 
REF: A) 04 STATE 273089 B) 04 STATE 248963 
 
¶1. (SBU) Following are responses keyed to questions in 
paragraphs 18-21 of REFTEL A.  Embassy point of contact 
is POLOFF Tom Yeager (telephone: 48-22-504-2676, fax 48- 
22-504-2613, e-mail yeagerta@state.gov).  POLOFF (FP- 
04) spent 65 hours collecting data and compiling 
report; Two POLFSNs spent a total of 25 hours 
collecting data. 
 
¶2. (SBU) OVERVIEW: Answers keyed to para 18 of REFTEL A 
   --------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
18A. Poland is a country of origin, transit and 
destination for trafficking in persons. The main groups 
at risk are women and girls, with unemployed women, 
women from the poorest regions of Poland, and victims 
of domestic violence most at risk. Some trafficking 
occurs within Poland's borders, but most cases involve 
women and children being trafficked to, from, or 
through Poland. The illicit nature of trafficking in 
persons makes it difficult to determine the number of 
victims, particularly those of Polish citizens, and 
estimates vary substantially. The NGO La Strada 
believes that 15,000 foreign women transit into or 
through Poland to work in the sex industry (voluntarily 
or involuntarily), and Polish officials do not dispute 
these estimates. The main sources of information for 
information and statistics contained in this cable are 
international and local non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs), UN officials, OSCE/ODIHR contacts, Polish 
officials including those in the Ministry of Interior 
Affairs and Administration, Ministry of Justice, Border 
Guards and National Police. All of these have proven to 
be reliable sources. 
 
18B. Persons are trafficked to and through Poland from 
countries to the east and southeast, primarily Ukraine, 
Bulgaria, Romania, Belarus and Moldova. Ukraine 
continues to serve as the source of the greatest number 
of persons trafficked through Poland.  Russia is no 
longer a significant source of victims. Poles are 
trafficked to Western Europe including Germany, Italy, 
Belgium, France, and the Netherlands, as well as to 
Japan and Israel. Police statistics based on arrests 
and other direct contacts indicate that about 30 
percent of the 7,300 prostitutes known to be working in 
Poland are of foreign origin.  Press reports have 
estimated the number of foreign prostitutes at over 
5,000, and Post believes these reports may be closer to 
the actual number than the police data. 
 
18C. During the past year, as a result of EU accession 
and general economic improvement, there have been 
noticeable changes in the direction and extent of 
trafficking in Poland.  Whereas previously, virtually 
all of the activity involved women trafficked into the 
sex trade, there is now a small but growing percentage 
of victims forced to work in agricultural or other 
menial trades.  NGOs also report that the number of 
Polish women trafficked to other countries appears to 
be decreasing, but there is no hard data to support 
this point. 
 
18D. The Main National Police Headquarters now receives 
data from provincial office twice yearly to attempt to 
document accurately the extent and nature of 
trafficking in Poland. The reliability of this data is 
not known.  The National Prosecutor's office maintains 
statistics on investigations and prosecutions related 
to trafficking, and works closely with provincial and 
local prosecutors to ensure accurate reporting.  In 
addition, a La Strada intern works with the Polish 
government to document cases. 
18E. Victims are trafficked to Poland primarily for 
work in "massage parlors" and "escort agencies," i.e., 
brothels.  However, there have also been documented 
cases of victims forced to work in agriculture, in 
sweatshops and forced to beg on the streets.  Victims 
in the sex trade are forced to work as nude dancers or 
prostitutes, and are often deprived of their passports 
and identity papers, and threatened with violence.  In 
the case of forced prostitution, victims failing to 
service a minimum number of clients each day may suffer 
physical abuse. Police estimate 750 "escort agencies" 
operate in Poland, with 3,500 to 3,600 women working in 
them. Press sources, meanwhile, put the number of women 
working in all elements of the sex industry in Poland 
at anywhere from 18,000 to 20,000. 
 
18F. Traffickers in Poland target young, unemployed or 
poorly paid Polish women. In addition, they focus on 
women with poor family ties and weak support networks. 
According to the NGO La Strada, 80 percent of Polish 
victims are under 24 years of age. Traffickers approach 
young victims with promises of lucrative jobs in 
Western Europe as domestic workers, dancers, cooks, or 
waitresses. The victims are told that their handlers 
will take care of all documentation and are asked to 
turn over their passports. While some of the victims 
may know they are involved in an illegal employment 
ploy, many do not realize that they will be performing 
forced sexual services. A second method of recruitment 
is for a trafficker, usually residing permanently 
outside Poland, to feign emotional involvement and 
persuade his future victim to visit him abroad.  In 
both cases, victims are subsequently detained and 
forced into prostitution through threat, blackmail or 
violence.  Often, traffickers are connected with 
organized crime syndicates.  If a victim is transported 
with documentation, they travel by train or car; if 
illegally, they are hidden in trucks, cars, or walking 
across unguarded borders. 
 
18G. Polish government officials at the highest levels 
are aware of the seriousness of the trafficking problem 
in Poland, and are taking action to address the 
problem.  TIP was one of the issues discussed by 
Interior Minister Kalisz and U.S. Attorney General 
Ashcroft at their meeting in Warsaw in December 2003. 
In August 2003, a National Action Plan was adopted by 
high-level representatives of 12 government agencies, 
academics and NGOs (including the Ministries of 
Interior and Administration, Foreign Affairs, Education 
and Justice; Border Guards and National Police; NGOs La 
Strada and "Nobody's Children" and the University of 
Zielona Gora). The National Program is a strategy 
document that seeks to coordinate the efforts of 
various GOP and private sector entities involved in 
combating trafficking. The Prime Minister approved the 
Program in December 2003, and permanent representatives 
were appointed in March 2004.  A National Action Plan 
for 2005 is pending (see Para 19H).  Personnel in the 
National Police Headquarters have been active in 
outreach to local police, and provided guidance to all 
Polish police units on the required treatment for 
trafficking victims. However, agencies are expected to 
fund anti-trafficking initiatives from their own 
budgets.  A reported weakness in National Action Plan 
coordination is reluctance by some government officials 
to fully include NGOs and other "outside" experts in 
planning meetings. 
 
18H. There is no evidence that governmental authorities 
condone or are otherwise complicit in trafficking 
activities.  GOP law-enforcement agencies are actively 
increasing their capacity to detect and apprehend 
criminal groups involved in trafficking. There are 
unconfirmed reports that local police have taken bribes 
to ignore known trafficking activity.  If any such 
cases were determined to have merit, rules call for the 
offender to be automatically suspended pending an 
investigation. To date, there have been no cases of law- 
enforcement officials punished for trafficking-related 
corruption. 
 
18I. There are no limitations on Poland's law- 
enforcement activities, but government efforts on 
education and victim assistance have been primarily 
carried out through NGOs using foreign government 
funding. According to the coordinator of the National 
Police's anti-TIP section, approximately 100 officers 
were trained in identification of trafficking and 
victim assistance in 2004 through internal training 
classes.  All incoming National Police are reported to 
receive basic instruction on the subject.  More 
advanced training programs and victim assistance 
efforts conducted by foreign governments or NGOs are 
welcomed by GOP officials. Societal factors may play a 
role in the GOP's anti-trafficking program.  Although a 
CBOS survey indicates that awareness has risen 
substantially over the past several years, many average 
Poles still view victims of trafficking as being 
responsible for their own fate. 
 
18J. At this time, there is no overarching document, 
which monitors Polish anti-trafficking efforts. The 
National Police Public Affairs Unit informs the public 
systematically about their efforts. The National 
Prosecutor's Office of the Ministry of Justice 
maintains records of investigations and legal actions 
taken against traffickers. 
 
18K. Prostitution in Poland is legal; but "pimping" or 
otherwise profiting from a prostitute's activities is 
illegal.  Under the current version of the Polish 
Criminal Code, the legal age of consent to sexual 
activity is 15.  However, Poland has ratified the 
Palermo Protocol, the Optional Protocol to the UN 
Convention on the rights of Children (of May 25, 2000), 
and the EU Convention on the Rights of Children.  All 
of these documents prohibit prostitution by individuals 
less than 18 years of age.  In the opinion of the 
National Prosecutor's office, according to the Polish 
Constitution (Art. 87) and international law, the 
provisions of these documents automatically become part 
of Polish law and act to prohibit child prostitution as 
therein defined.  Full implementation of the protocols 
and Convention will require changes, inter alia, in the 
Polish Criminal, Family and Labor Codes.  The 
prosecutor's office additionally states that anyone 
(including a parent) assisting a person under the age 
of 18 to engage in prostitution would be assumed to be 
benefiting financially from this assistance and would 
be investigated and prosecuted accordingly. 
 
¶3. (SBU) PREVENTION: Answers keyed to Para 19 of REFTEL 
A 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
19A. The GOP acknowledges that trafficking in persons 
is a serious problem and that it occurs in Poland. Law- 
enforcement officials have been active in educating 
local officials about the problem. 
 
19B. Responsibility for domestic anti-trafficking 
efforts lies primarily with the Ministries of Interior 
and Administration and Justice; the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs is engaged on a bilateral and multilateral 
level. The Plenipotentiary for Equal Rights for Women 
and Men, who functions as an adjunct to the Prime 
Minister's office, is also involved in anti-trafficking 
programs. In all, eleven Polish government agencies are 
actively involved in carrying out the National Program 
against trafficking. 
 
19C. The government has relied heavily on training 
programs organized by NGOs or the University of Warsaw 
TIP project to train law-enforcement personnel and 
counter trafficking.  This training has largely been 
financed by U.S Government grants approved by G/TIP 
under the FY-2002 INCLE funding plan. Grants have been 
fully implemented and no further U.S. Government 
funding for these or similar projects is anticipated. 
The government relies on NGOs to carry out 
informational and education campaigns targeted at 
potential victims. 
 
19D. The Ministry of Education supports programs aimed 
at lowering the teenage dropout rate, including holding 
parents responsible and assessing fines in cases of 
truancy. Other GOP programs that indirectly help 
prevent trafficking include public awareness campaigns 
against domestic violence and child abuse as well as 
job training programs for unemployed women. 
 
19E. Resource constraints limit the government's 
ability to support prevention programs. Government 
officials frequently attend training and seminars 
sponsored by other entities. La Strada received 
approximately US$4000 from the Polish government in 
2004 to carry out prevention programs. [POST NOTE: Last 
year's tip report indicated La Strada received US$3000 
from the GOP in 2003.  The $4000 received in 2004 
equates to 12,000 PLN, the same amount received in 
2003, and does not represent an increase in funding] 
 
19F. The GOP recognizes the importance of NGOs and 
other elements of civil society in preventing 
trafficking in persons, and actively worked with them 
in the development of its National Program. The GOP 
relies on -- and works closely with -- NGOs for victim 
protection projects, law-enforcement training, and 
prevention campaigns. The relationship between the GOP 
and anti-trafficking organizations is described as open 
and positive by both government officials and NGO 
representatives.  However, the degree of involvement 
with NGOs is sometimes inconsistent, with the Ministry 
of Health and Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Administration (MSWiA) occasionally characterized as 
less open to cooperation and input than "front-line" 
agencies such as the National Police, Border Guards 
(which operate semi-independently, but within the 
structure of the MSWiA) and Ministry of Justice. 
 
19G. The GOP devotes considerable resources to 
monitoring its borders. The Border Guards receive high 
marks for the quality of their training and 
effectiveness of their enforcement activities from 
Western European counterparts. Thanks to training 
programs implemented by La Strada, Polish border guards 
are now trained to detect and assist victims of 
trafficking.  The Border Guard discovers potential TIP 
victims most often during inspections that they hold to 
check the legality of aliens' stays in Poland.  These 
checks are essentially documentary in nature. 
 
19H. In August 2003, a coordinated National Program for 
Combating Trafficking was accepted by all GOP agencies 
involved in anti-trafficking efforts, as described in 
18G. In December 2003, the plan was adopted by the 
Prime Minister, and a Board of Directors to implement 
the plan was named in spring 2004. A new National 
Action Plan for 2005 was recently approved by an 
interagency anti-trafficking working group, but still 
requires ministerial approval.  The 2005 plan 
reportedly includes special provisions regarding 
children and, significantly, a requirement for specific 
financial support of TIP programs within ministries' 
and agencies' annual budgets.  There is also an active 
National Anti-Corruption Strategy, managed by the 
Ministry of the Interior and Administration. 
 
19I. Polish officials participate actively in 
international trafficking conferences.  In April 2004, 
Poland was an initial sponsor of a resolution creating 
a U.N. Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in the 
Commission on Human Rights.  A Ministry of Justice 
expert, Krzysztof Karsznicki, sits on the European 
Commission's group of 20 experts on Trafficking. Mr. 
Karsznicki developed special guidelines for the police 
on the implementation of Palermo Protocol definitions 
in practice, which the NGO La Strada referred to as a 
"breakthrough" in investigation of prosecution of 
traffickers.  The Polish National Police (PNP) 
participate in several bilateral task forces that seek 
to share information, track the movements of 
traffickers and victims across borders and coordinate 
repatriations and casework. Bilateral efforts include 
Polish task forces with the Czech, German, and Swedish 
Police forces, and one multilateral task force exists 
to coordinate efforts between Polish and Baltic-nation 
Police forces on anti-TIP efforts. The GOP participated 
in a joint Polish-Czech program sponsored by the United 
Nations, but sources indicate this initiative was not 
well-coordinated and that certain of Poland's 
obligations regarding administrative and logistics 
support for the project coordinator were not fulfilled. 
 
19J. See Paragraphs 18G and 19H. 
 
19K. Mr. Piotr Mierecki, Director of the Department for 
European Integration and International Cooperation in 
the Ministry of the Interior and Administration, 
together with his staff, is responsible for 
coordinating the activities of the inter-agency working 
group. 
 
¶4. (SBU) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
Answers keyed to Para 20 of REFTEL A 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
20A. Polish law prohibits forcing individuals into 
prostitution, trafficking in human beings, and pimping. 
The relevant sections of the Criminal Code are Articles 
204(sexual trafficking) and 253 (non-sexual 
trafficking) effective since September 1, 1998. The 
laws cover both internal and external trafficking, and 
do not require proof that the victim was coerced in 
order to secure a conviction.  Poland has adopted the 
UN Protocol on Trafficking in Persons (Palermo 
Protocol).  Plans to add the Protocol's definition of 
trafficking to the Polish penal code in 2004 were not 
implemented.  However, the National Prosecutor's Office 
uses the Protocol's definition of trafficking in its 
prosecutions and indicates it has not been adversely 
affected by the absence of a specific definition in 
Polish national law. 
 
20B. The maximum penalty for trafficking in persons is 
up to 15 years' imprisonment under Article 253 of the 
Criminal Code (minimum of 3 years' imprisonment).  This 
Article of the Code does not require proof of 
trafficking connected with prostitution. Article 204, 
section 4 of the Code provides for up to 10 years' 
imprisonment for trafficking involving prostitution. 
Most sentences are shorter, with the most severe 
sentences reserved for those convicted of trafficking 
minors for the purpose of prostitution or 
luring/abducting adults into prostitution abroad. 
 
20C. According to Criminal Code Article 197, using 
violence, threat, or deceit to force a person to have 
sexual intercourse is punishable by one to 10 years' 
imprisonment. Using such means to force a person into 
other sexual activity is punishable by three months' to 
five years' imprisonment. In cases involving more than 
one perpetrator or excessive cruelty, the punishment 
ranges from two to 12 years imprisonment, compared to 
up to 15 years for trafficking under Article 253. 
Polish prosecutors have expressed interest in using the 
multiple perpetrator/excessive cruelty provision of the 
law to sentence traffickers to longer sentences, 
although this has not be tested in court. 
 
20D. According to the National Prosecutor's Office in 
the Ministry of Justice, in 2004 Polish authorities 
arrested 39 persons on trafficking charges, compared to 
134 in 2003.  However, that office points out that 
arrest statistics vary substantially from year to year, 
and that, the number of arrests in 2003 was unusually 
large (three times more than the prior year).  Of the 
39 persons arrested, 18 were prosecuted - a prosecution 
rate of 46 percent, compared to 22 percent (30 of 134) 
in 2003. Of those arrested, 30 were Polish citizens, 5 
Bulgarians, 1 German, 1 Turkish, 1 Rumanian and 3 
Vietnamese. In all, 25 trafficking cases were completed 
in 2004, versus 45 in 2003. The most infamous 
trafficking case of 2004 occurred in Rzeszow in eastern 
Poland, where a woman of Ukrainian origin, described in 
the Polish press as a "babcia" (grandmother), solicited 
young women from her home region of Lwow in Ukraine who 
were subsequently sold into prostitution in other 
countries. 
 
20E. Polish police believe that large organized crime 
groups as well as individual operators control the 
trafficking business and that victims are frequently 
trafficked by nationals of their own country, with 
Polish traffickers collecting a percentage to allow 
passage into or through Poland. According to arrest 
statistics, approximately 25 percent of traffickers are 
non-Poles. Bulgarian traffickers continue to account 
for a significant number of cases.  Except for 
anecdotal evidence from NGOs that some corrupt police 
officers are complicit in trafficking, Post has 
received no information or indication that Polish 
government officials are involved in trafficking. 
Police sources believe that employment and talent 
agencies are sometimes used as fronts for trafficking 
operations. 
 
20F. The GOP actively investigates trafficking. 
Advanced law-enforcement techniques, including 
immunity/mitigation, covert operations, etc., are used 
mainly by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI- 
Poland's FBI equivalent), but the CBI is not typically 
involved in the investigation of trafficking cases. 
Prosecutors' ability to protect other witnesses in 
trafficking cases is generally limited to withholding 
of personal data from court records.  Although victims' 
depositions may be used in Polish criminal cases even 
where defense counsel have not had the opportunity to 
be present or cross-examine witnesses, the Prosecutor's 
office indicates that it is likely that any defendant's 
appeal of a conviction based on such evidence to the 
European Court of Human Rights would be successful. 
Polish Border Guards also have the ability to use 
advanced law-enforcement techniques but find a shortage 
of resources limiting their effectiveness in 
investigating TIP (which is not their primary 
function). According to the NGO La Strada, Polish 
authorities lack sufficient resources to investigate 
and prosecute the majority of trafficking cases 
originating in Poland. In the past, they prosecuted 
cases that involved persons deported from Germany, but 
increasingly, cases now involve traffickers apprehended 
in Poland. 
 
20G. Incoming border guards and police officers now 
receive some training on the subject of trafficking. 
Specialized training led by La Strada is conducted at 
the national law-enforcement training facility for 
selected personnel. This training involves role-play 
simulations, legal exercises, film showings, and other 
awareness-building exercises. Prosecutors throughout 
Poland have also taken part in training, including 
courtroom simulations with volunteer judges. 
 
20H. Poland cooperates enthusiastically with other 
countries in trafficking cases and the repatriation of 
victims, especially with its closest neighbors. The 
main barrier to increased multinational investigations 
is a lack of funds.  There has been no OSCE funding for 
victim assistance and repatriation since 2002, and 
there is no prospect for EU funding of anti-trafficking 
programs.  U.S. grants under the SEED program were 
concluded in 2004. 
 
20I. The Polish constitution prohibits extradition of 
Polish citizens.  However, since Poland's entry to the 
EU, citizens may be removed to other EU countries under 
a "European Arrest Warrant," despite the constitutional 
bar. 
 
20J. Although the GOP is generally not tolerant of 
trafficking, there continue to be some credible 
accusations of lax attitudes among some officials and 
abuses, including sexual harassment, by individual 
police officers. This may be attributed to corruption 
and/or a lack of awareness among rank-and-file officers 
of the true nature of trafficking and the predicament 
of victims. 
 
20K. While post has received anecdotal evidence of 
corruption and complicity among some police officials, 
Post knows of no specific cases of trafficking 
involving government officials. The internal control 
office of the PNP actively disciplines and prosecutes 
police officers for corruption, but post knows of no 
prosecutions of corrupt police officers or other 
government officials for trafficking. 
 
20L.  There is no indication that Poland has any child 
sex tourism problem. 
 
20M. The GOP ratified the ILO Convention 182 on August 
9, 2002, and Conventions 29 and 105 (forced labor) on 
July 30, 1958. The Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child (CRC) was signed on February 
13, 2002. The UN Trafficking Protocol (Palermo 
Protocol) was signed by the Government of Poland on 
December 12, 2000, and ratified on September 26, 2003. 
On September 10, 2004, the Polish Sejm passed a bill 
ratifying the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on 
the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Pornography (of May 25, 2000).  The 
ratification bill was signed by the President on 
December 31, 2004, and will enter into force one month 
after the ratifying document is submitted to the UN 
Secretary General. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶5. (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: Answers 
keyed to Para 21 of REFTEL A 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
21A. Polish law allows foreign victims to remain in 
Poland legally during the investigation and trial of 
their traffickers; a total of eight foreign victims 
remained in Poland during 2004 under this law (two 
under police protection and six under the care of La 
Strada). Additional legislation has been enacted to 
allow for videoconference testimony from abroad. The 
lack of government financial support for victims 
remains a barrier to full implementation of this law 
(note: many Polish NGOs have set up shelters to fill 
this need for victims as they await trial). Polish 
victims are eligible for various welfare services; 
however, the Polish government has not funded shelters 
or medical care for trafficking victims to this point. 
 
21B. The GOP has typically awarded grants to La Strada 
to support victims, with the Office of Victims' Rights 
and the Office for Women and Family Issues providing 
the grants; in 2004, La Strada received approximately 
$4000 through this Office. Several universities are 
operating victims' assistance programs, which are 
indirectly funded by the GOP. The Center for Women's 
Rights and shelters operated by Caritas and other 
Catholic organizations receive funding from local 
governments. The City of Warsaw has budgeted US$18,000 
in 2005 to fund a crisis intervention center operated 
by La Strada, the first such contribution of its kind 
by Warsaw's government.  The national government also 
provides funds to address AIDS prevention and domestic 
violence. 
 
21C. La Strada and Caritas Polska both indicate that 
they are pleased with the degree of cooperation between 
Polish law-enforcement and victim assistance 
organizations. When identified, victims are typically 
referred to the nearest assistance point in Poland. 
 
21D. Border guards and police sometimes regard victims 
of trafficking as criminals who have violated passport 
laws. However, according to government and NGO sources, 
increased training has markedly improved this 
situation, and most rank-and-file officers now 
understand the difference between smuggling and 
trafficking. Polish law continues to require that 
anyone found within the territory of Poland in an 
"illegal" status be deported to the country of origin. 
Article 316, section 3 of the Criminal Code provides an 
exception to this general requirement permitting 
victims to stay in Poland during the course of a 
prosecutor's investigation, but requires a specific 
request by the prosecutor and a judge's authorization. 
As a result, some victims continue to be deported as 
soon as possible, removing the opportunity for 
cooperation with law-enforcement officials.  Currently 
pending legislation provides for a "reflection period" 
of two months during which a trafficking victim would 
be permitted to remain in Poland, receive support and 
assistance, and decide whether to cooperate in an 
investigation.  Victims who decide not to cooperate 
would be returned to their countries of origin, but in 
such a way as to attempt to shield them from contact 
with traffickers. 
 
21E. The Polish government encourages and facilitates 
victim participation in investigations and 
prosecutions.  As indicated above, victims, regardless 
of their legal status, may now remain in country to 
assist in the investigations of traffickers. This legal 
authority was used successfully in eight cases in 2004 
(vice 3 in 2003). Polish authorities have not 
encouraged victims to file civil suits or otherwise 
take legal action against traffickers. Increasingly, 
NGOs are working to enhance victims' access to legal 
service and inform them of their rights. Post knows of 
no victim restitution program other than repatriation 
of foreign victims. 
 
21F. Two victims received direct police protection 
during 2004 (vice three in 2003). The government 
provides no direct victim assistance other than 
detention centers for victims (and other illegal 
immigrants) awaiting deportation; however, several NGOs 
throughout Poland are active in operating shelters and 
support programs for victims. 
 
21G. Through a cooperative arrangement between the 
Polish Ministries of Interior and Administration and 
Foreign Affairs, extensive formal training for consular 
officials in Polish embassies and consulates abroad is 
regularly conducted. GOP officials encourage their 
embassies to develop relationships with anti- 
trafficking organizations in transit and source 
countries. 
 
21H. While there is no specific government assistance 
set aside for repatriated nationals who are victims of 
trafficking abroad, such persons are eligible for 
standard unemployment and welfare benefits, and the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs cooperates with NGOs to 
identify repatriated Polish victims of trafficking for 
assistance. NGOs allow repatriated victims to 
participate in assistance programs and utilize shelters 
following their return to Poland. 
 
21I. Numerous international, national, and local 
organizations are involved in anti-trafficking 
initiatives in Poland, and the NGO community remains at 
the forefront of Poland's anti-trafficking efforts. 
International organizations such as the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime, UNHCR, International 
Organization on Migration, and OSCE are closely 
involved in anti-trafficking initiatives in Poland. 
NGOs active in the fight against trafficking include, 
La Strada, CARITAS, Temida Association of Lawyers, 
Barka Foundation for Mutual Assistance, and the Center 
for Women's Rights. Prestigious academic institutions 
such as the Jagiellonian University of Krakow, 
University of Zielona Gora, and the University of 
Warsaw are also involved in anti-trafficking education 
and policy-making. These institutions work closely with 
local authorities, and the relationship between NGOs 
and the national government is, by all accounts, 
excellent. NGO training and projects continue to be the 
most effective method to enhance Poland's overall anti- 
trafficking capacity. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) POST COMMENT: The government of Poland fully 
complies with the minimum standards for elimination of 
trafficking and has demonstrated a political commitment 
to improving its anti-TIP programs and cooperation 
among agencies, NGOs, international organizations and 
other parties of interest.  It has fulfilled the 
majority of the goals established in the Department's 
TIP Strategy for Poland (REFTEL B), including increased 
training for police, prosecutors and other front-line 
personnel; continued (and increased) cooperation with 
neighboring states to combat traffickers; continued 
anti-corruption training programs; tangible movement 
toward adoption of new laws permitting trafficking 
victims to remain legally in Poland to assist in 
investigations and prosecutions; continued positive 
development of the National Action Plan and National 
Working Group; and creative, effective strategies 
designed to incorporate international and EU 
definitions related to trafficking and minors into the 
Polish legal framework, even where legislation has not 
yet been enacted to conform Polish criminal and civil 
law.  The most significant remaining challenge is to 
provide adequate financial support for anti-TIP 
programs and to increase levels of assistance for 
victims and supporting NGOs.  Statistics pertaining to 
investigations, arrests and prosecutions, while showing 
a decrease in total cases from last year, tend to 
indicate an improved quality of investigations (i.e., a 
higher percentage of investigations resulting in 
indictments and prosecutions).  Based on Poland's 
continued progress and commitment to combating 
trafficking, Post strongly supports the continued 
inclusion of Poland in Tier I. 
ASHE