06WARSAW174
POLAND REQUESTS USG SUPPORT FOR UNCHR CANDIDACY
Fri Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 000174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KUNR ADCO PHUM PL UN
SUBJECT: POLAND REQUESTS USG SUPPORT FOR UNCHR CANDIDACY 
 
REF: WARSAW 0090 
 
¶1. The Polish MFA delivered January 30 a diplomatic note 
containing a message for the Secretary from Foreign Minister 
Stefan Meller. As anticipated in reftel, the Poles request 
our support to secure a spot on the United Nations Commission 
on Human Rights (UNCHR) from 2007-2009.  Text at paragraph 2 
below. 
 
¶2. Begin Text: 
 
Excellency, 
 
I have the honour to inform you that the Government of the 
Republic of Poland has decided to submit the candidacy of 
Poland for membership of the UN Commission on Human Rights in 
the years 2007-2009, in the election planned during the 
organizational session of the Economic and Social Council, to 
be held in New York in April 2006. 
 
Poland considers the Commission on Human Rights to be an 
exceptionally important organ for the promotion and 
protection of human rights. As a member of the Commission on 
Human Rights on several previous occasions, Poland has 
endeavoured to play an active role in the works of the 
Commission and its working groups, demonstrating commitment 
to the idea of universality of human rights as well as 
dedication to the principles of democracy and rule of law. 
 
During recent sessions of the Commission, Poland presented a 
resolution on the protection of human rights in the context 
of the HIV/AIDS, and jointly with other states -- a 
resolution on the role of good governance in the promotion of 
human rights. Poland attaches great significance to such 
topics of interest to the Commission as the rights of women 
and children. 
 
Poland is a party to the most important international human 
rights conventions and as such, recognises the competence of 
the treaty bodies responsible for the observance of human 
rights. 
 
While noticing the need for reform of the Commission on Human 
Rights and wishing to be actively involved in the work of the 
new body, we feel that the achievements of the present 
Commission should not be questioned. That is why Poland is 
requesting support for its candidacy in the next election to 
the Commission on Human Rights. 
 
I would be most grateful for the valuable support of your 
country for the candidacy of Poland for membership of the 
Commission on Human Rights. 
 
Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest 
consideration. 
 
Stefan Meller 
ASHE