07WARSAW2273
POLAND'S MINORITY ROMA FACE UPHILL BATTLES DESPITE
Tue Nov 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO6937
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHWR #2273/01 3311612
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271612Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5542
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 WARSAW 002273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/NCE FOR BART PUTNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL SCUL PL
SUBJECT: POLAND'S MINORITY ROMA FACE UPHILL BATTLES DESPITE 
GOVERNMENT EFFORTS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  While Poland's Roma population is not as 
large or significant as those in nearby countries, it remains 
a community which faces significant challenges.  The GOP has 
recognized the distressing situation of the Roma minority in 
Poland.  In 2001 it created the Pilot Program for the Roma 
Community in Malopolska (southern Poland) to promote the 
integration of Roma; that program was launched nationwide in 
2003, with an annual budget of $3.4 million.  Poland,s 
National Program to Counter Racial Discrimination and Related 
Intolerances and a Team on Monitoring Racism and Xenophobia 
further demonstrate the GOP,s efforts to improve the lives 
of Polish Roma.  The Common Commission for National and 
Ethnic Minorities was created in 2005 to protect minorities, 
rights and facilitate their involvement in government. 
Increasing attention has also been paid to the promotion of 
Roma culture and the commemoration of Romas, historical 
struggles in festivals, publications, and exhibitions. 
Nonetheless, the GOP has not fully implemented its ambitious 
agenda, and as elsewhere in Central Europe, the Roma 
community continues to face substantial challenges, including 
failure to integrate into public life, inadequate education 
and housing, significant unemployment, and widespread 
societal discrimination. END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.   (U) PolOff and Interns met with various GOP and Roma 
community leaders and consulted Ministry of Interior (MOI) 
reports to develop this periodic update on the state of the 
Roma minority in Poland. 
 
BACKGROUND: ROMA IN POLAND 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) The Roma population of Poland was almost entirely 
destroyed during World War II.  The remaining Roma were 
forced to disperse and assimilate under the communist 
government's compulsory settlement policy.  The twin legacies 
of Nazi massacres and communist authorities, forced 
assimilation led the Roma to view state institutions as a 
threat to their traditions and community.  Roma opted instead 
to further isolate their community from the rest of Polish 
society. 
 
¶4.  (U) According to the 2002 census, approximately 12,900 
Polish citizens are Roma, making it the fourth largest 
national minority group after Germans, Belorussians, and 
Ukrainians.  Many claim the true number of Roma is much 
higher * from 20,000 to 50,000 * noting that Roma 
frequently deny their ethnicity out of fear that the police 
will use such information against them.  Roma communities are 
most highly concentrated in Southern Poland and in the cities 
of Tarnow, Olsztyn, Wroclaw, Andrychow, and Ciechanow.  There 
are four distinct ethnic groups: Polish Roma, Carpathian Roma 
(or Bergitka), Kalderash, and Lovash.  Polish Roma comprise 
the largest group and maintain their own dialect and internal 
community structure presided over by a judge. 
 
¶5.  (U) The Roma population is far from unified: in addition 
to territorial divisions, the four Roma groups speak distinct 
dialects and attempts to systematize the Roma language have 
failed. Poland,s Roma community is smaller and has been less 
pressured to assimilate than the Roma populations of 
neighboring countries.  As a result, the community tends to 
be more traditional, less educated, and less likely to speak 
Polish.  The traditional unwritten legal code, Mageripen, is 
still followed by many. 
 
ISSUES FACING POLISH ROMA 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) The Roma Community's isolation from mainstream Polish 
society results in a lack of knowledge among other Polish 
citizens about the minority and widespread, negative 
stereotyping.  The Polish Criminal Law penalizes all forms of 
violence, public insult, and discrimination on the basis of 
ethnic identities; however, many reports confirm that Roma 
are continuously subject to racism and discrimination. 
According to a 2004 Public Opinion Research Center poll, 56% 
of Poles had negative views of Roma, the highest percentage 
of any ethnic group.  A 2002 European Roma Rights Center 
(ERRC) report on the Roma in Poland cited racially motivated 
violence and discrimination with regards to education, 
employment, health care, housing, and social welfare. 
Nevertheless, few cases of discrimination against Roma are 
heard in court.  In 2004, Amnesty International reported that 
incidents against Roma were not properly investigated by 
Polish law enforcement.  Police have been known to racially 
profile and discriminate against Roma and use excessive force 
against them.  The Roma community distrusts authorities, 
making cooperation between police and Roma difficult. 
 
WARSAW 00002273  002 OF 003 
 
 
Roma Face Uphill Battle to Break the Cycle of Poverty 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7.  (U) One enduring, negative stereotype of the Roma 
population is its perceived idleness.  The majority of Roma 
live without permanent employment.  Many traditional 
practices are no longer in demand and trade, especially of 
Western cars, has become the most common Roma profession. 
Others perform odd jobs, work illegally, and some beg; many 
depend on social welfare.  High unemployment rates are 
exacerbated because many have limited or no Polish language 
skills, lack qualifications and face employer discrimination. 
 Roma passivity in searching for a job also plays a part: a 
1999 report conducted by the Association of the Roma in 
Poland (ARP) found that only 32% of those questioned were 
willing to work professionally. 
 
¶8.  (U) Poverty and discrimination force Roma to live in 
segregated areas, in substandard dwellings without proper 
sewage, running water, electricity, or heating.  As many as 
ten family members live in one room. Substandard housing 
conditions, poor diets and limited access to health services, 
lead to a higher instance of disease and shorter life spans. 
Circulatory and respiratory system diseases, diabetes, and 
viral type B hepatitis are frequent. 
 
¶9.  (U) Low levels of education further perpetuate the cycle 
of poverty and unemployment.  A 1999 ARP report demonstrated 
that only two-thirds of Roma had finished elementary school 
and only 0.8% had obtained some kind of higher education. 
Roma children are behind and have trouble keeping up, in part 
because parents cannot afford nursery school.  Parents also 
fear that Polish education is a means of indoctrination and 
thereby a threat to Roma principles.  Discrimination 
additionally impedes the immersion of Roma children in Polish 
schools: one third of Polish pupils in a recent poll stated 
that they would prefer not to sit with &a Roma ) Gypsy.8 
Roma parents often choose to place their children in classes 
that cater exclusively to Roma children in order to protect 
them from such hostility.  These classes may provide a safe 
haven from discrimination, but most Roma organizations see 
them  as substandard and believe they reinforce segregation. 
 
¶10.  (U) The Roma population's self-isolation leads to its 
needs and concerns being ignored.  Many Roma harbor a 
negative view of politics and do not realize that political 
participation could improve their standing.  Although Roma 
civil society organizations are on the rise, -- the MOI 
currently has a list of over 50 Roma NGOs -- many are limited 
to a small local area.  Only two organizations, the Central 
Roma Council and ARP, aim to represent larger Roma 
communities. 
 
GOP Programming Targets Gap in Education 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) The GOP has recognized the poor situation of the 
Roma in Poland and has made serious attempts to improve it on 
multiple fronts.  In 2003, the MOI instituted a Program for 
the Roma Community across Poland, based on a previous pilot 
program in the Malopolska region.  The program was created to 
address education, employment, health, living conditions, and 
functional skills in civil society.  The program has an 
annual budget of $3.4 million (10 million PLN) through 2013, 
with the possibility of an extension.  A monitoring team 
evaluates the program's progress and makes appropriate 
changes when necessary.  (Note: The program got off to a 
rocky start with the GOP meeting only 50-60% of its budget 
from 2003 to 2006.  Although the GOP has since fulfilled its 
financial commitment, some are skeptical that it will 
continue to do so.) 
 
¶12.  (U) Education is the main priority of the program.  In 
order to promote integrated classrooms, a state-supported 
Roma kindergarten was set up in 2005 in Czarna Gora that 
brings Roma students up to the level of Polish ethnic 
students.  Attempts to increase pre-school attendance have 
also been successful in narrowing the gap between Roma and 
Polish education levels.  Once Roma students are enrolled in 
Polish schools, ethnic Roma assistants monitor their progress 
and establish a rapport between Roma families and Polish 
teachers. 
 
¶13.  (U) The GOP has made great strides in recognizing the 
need to combat racial intolerance in Poland.  In 2004, it 
created a National Program to Counter Racial Discrimination 
and Related Intolerances, and the MOI established a team to 
track instances of ethnically motivated crimes.  In 2005, the 
GOP passed the Law on National and Ethnic Minorities and 
 
WARSAW 00002273  003 OF 003 
 
 
Regional Language to ensure a high standard of legal 
protection for victims of ethnic discrimination.  Aware of 
Roma distrust for law enforcement officials, a new senior 
position was created in the Polish National Police to work 
with Roma communities.  Police undergo training programs to 
sensitize them to Roma culture and teach them about the 
prosecution of hate crimes. 
 
¶14.  (U) Some progress has been made in engaging Roma in 
public life.  The Sejm established a Common Commission for 
National and Ethnic Minorities following the adoption of the 
Law on National Minorities.  The Commission, which advises 
the Prime Minister on counteracting discrimination, reserves 
two seats for Roma and includes a Roma sub-commission with 20 
leaders of Roma organizations.  Some Roma, such as Robert 
Jakubowski, an alderman in the town of Konstantynow Lodzki, 
and Ryszard Rzepka, former commune councilor for Czarny 
Dunajec, have risen to prominent political positions.  Twelve 
Roma representatives competed in the 2002 Parliamentary 
elections; although none of them won, the campaign made Roma 
concerns public. 
 
Promotion of Roma Culture 
------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (U) Roma culture has been increasingly celebrated and 
helps promote a positive image of the community.  The two 
largest Roma music festivals, the Romane Dyvesa (The 
International Meeting of Gypsy Bands) in Gorzow Wielkopolski 
and the International Song and Roma Culture Festival in 
Ciechocinek, draw thousands of people.  There are a number of 
Roma publications, the largest being "Rrom p-o Drom," a 
monthly magazine published in Bialystok, and &Pheniben 
Dialogue,8 ARP,s quarterly magazine.   Television 
programming also provides something for the community: TVP 
Krakow produces U Siebie, a news program for minorities with 
a portion in the Roma language. 
¶16.  (U) In addition to the promotion of Roma culture, the 
population's historical struggles have been increasingly 
acknowledged.  Since 2001, several exhibitions commemorating 
Roma martyrdom have been held at Auschwitz, which celebrates 
the &Hidden Holocaust8 of the Roma every August.  In 
October 2006, Alfreda Markowska, a Roma who saved Jewish and 
Roma children during the Holocaust, was awarded the Order of 
Polonia Restituta Commander,s Cross for heroism and 
exceptional courage by President Kaczynski. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) COMMENT: Although the Roma population in Poland is 
significantly smaller than communities in other Central 
European countries, it remains an important issue to follow. 
The situation of the Roma in Poland has improved thanks to 
government initiatives, but challenges remain.  The Program 
for the Roma Community offers increasing possibilities for 
education and improved living conditions to the Roma but 
relies on individual motivation and activism in order for 
Roma to succeed.  Leading Roma authority Andrzej Mirga of the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) 
identified education as the only way to breakthrough rampant 
poverty and improve the Romas, circumstances.  Ongoing 
efforts are required to dispel negative images of the Roma. 
To make effective change, GOP initiatives must strike a 
delicate balance between allowing Roma to maintain their own 
customs and improve their situation.   END COMMENT. 
HILLAS