07WARSAW1359
POLAND'S FOREIGN ASSISTANCE DIRECTOR WANTS TO
Tue Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO2592
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHWR #1359/01 1631336
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121336Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4533
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHKW/AMCONSUL KRAKOW 1741UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WARSAW 001359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G, F, EUR/NCE 
EUR/NCE FOR BPUTNEY AND DKOSTELANCIK 
STATE PASS USAID 
USEU FOR PLERNER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL PO
SUBJECT: POLAND'S FOREIGN ASSISTANCE DIRECTOR WANTS TO 
CEMENT TIES WITH US 
 
REF: A. WARSAW 671 
     ¶B. 06 WARSAW 2255 
 
WARSAW 00001359  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Begin Summary.  Jerzy Pomianowski, Director of the 
Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs Development Cooperation 
Department (Polish AID) would like to meet with his US 
counterparts while in Washington June 25 and 26 for meetings 
with the World Bank.  Pomianowski is the GOP equivalent of 
the USAID Director.  He would like to discuss the GOP's plans 
for development assistance as the MFA builds its program, as 
well as potential areas for cooperation with the USG and 
USAID.  Pomianowski developed the GOP's new assistance plan 
amd priorities and will continue to be responsible for 
Poland's transition to a donor country.  The GOP shares the 
USG belief that development assistance can not be separated 
from democracy development and human rights.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Pomianowski holds the rank of Ambassador and his 
position is the equivalent of the USAID Director.  This will 
be Pomianowski's first visit to Washington since being 
appointed.  He would like to meet with his counterparts in 
the USG (he is seeking meetigns with Acting AID Director Fore 
and Under Secretary Dobriansky) to explain Poland's 
Development plans, gain a better knowledge of USAID programs, 
discuss potential cooperation on projects in Central Europe, 
as well as continue discussing potential cooperation on 
Poland's Belarus TV project.  Pomianowski stated that he 
would like to consult with the USG on development assistance 
and policies in order to better coordinate with USAID.  He 
believes, as he builds Poland's development capabilities, 
that it is important to hear what to do and what not to do in 
order to avoid making unneccessary mistakes.  He is also 
consulting with his counterparts in France and Germany and 
was recently in Japan.  During his meetings with the World 
Bank, he plans to discuss cooperation with the Bank, 
especially in the Balkans, Eastern Europe and Central Asia. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Pomianowski developed Poland's new strategy for 
Foreign Assistance during the past year.  Previously, Poland 
focused its small program on a limited number of countries in 
the region or with which Poland has historical ties.  As the 
GOP expands its program, it is looking for partners and 
advice on how to be most effective.  For example, Pomianowski 
stated that the MFA wants to expand programs in Afghanistan. 
One idea is to organize teaching programs for Afghanistani 
technical staff.  The GOP is planning to offer three month 
courses in Poland for technicians and nurses.  Pomianowski 
stated that he does not expect to achieve results on concrete 
projects during this visit and does not expect a USG decision 
on whether it can cooperate on the Belarus TV project.  He 
considers the trip the first step in building closer 
cooperation.  Pomianowski emphasized that the GOP supports 
the US in its belief that assistance can not be separated 
from human rights and democracy development. The GOP will 
continue to focus its assistance on democracy development and 
good governance as well as more traditional development 
assistance. 
 
Polish Foreign Assistance 
------------------------- 
¶4.  (U)  Poland's Development Cooperation Department was 
formed in September, 2005 as part of the Polish Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs as Poland transitioned from being a recipient 
to a donor country.  The Department currently has 29 
employees and manages an annual budget of $250 million, or 
-~vI;QmQQl grow as the Polish economy 
grows. Poland's donor assistance commitments to the EU will 
increase to 0.17% of GDP in 2010 and 0.33% of GDP by 2015. 
In 2005 (the last year for which figures are available), 
Poland allocated $204.9 million (0.068% of GDP) to support 
developing countries, of which $48 million was spent on 
bilateral assistance and $157 million on multilateral 
assistance.  The Department is also writing a draft Act on 
Polish Development Assistance that will regularize its 
functions as well as give the MFA more flexibility in 
responding to emergencies.  The new strategy for Polish 
assistance expands the scope of Polish activities from 
strictly development assistance to include democracy 
promotion and cooperation with other donors. 
 
Bilateral Assistance 
-------------------- 
¶5.  (U)  Poland's bilateral assistance is targeted at a 
limited number of priority countries that are Poland's 
neighbors or have historical ties to Poland.  Historically, 
priority countries for the GOP were countries of Eastern and 
 
WARSAW 00001359  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Southeastern Europe, the Balkans, and Central Asia.  Priority 
countries for Polish assistance are:  Belarus, Ukraine, 
Moldova, Georgia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Vietman, Angola, and The 
Palestinian National Authority.  In 2006 the GOP expanded its 
assistance so that countries that received Polish assistance 
now include: 
 
Ukraine 
Belarus 
Georgia 
Moldova 
The Russian Federation 
Armenia 
Azerbaijan 
Kazakhstan 
Kyrgystan 
Tajikistan 
Turkmenistan 
Uzbekistan 
Albania 
Bosnia and Herzogovina 
Montenegro 
Macedonia 
Serbia 
Sub-Saharan Africa - including Angola 
Cambodia 
Mongolia 
 
Poland's bilateral assistance is focused on European 
integration, supporting political transformation processes, 
local governance development, and the planning and management 
of economic development. 
 
Trilateral and Multilateral Assistance 
-------------------------------------- 
¶6.  (U)  Poland and Canada established the Polish-Canadian 
Development Cooperation Program (PCDC) to jointly support 
development assistance projects in developing and countries 
in transition.  In 2006, the PCDC program had a budget of 
approximately 1,400,000 Euros provided by the Polish MFA and 
the Canadian International Development Agency.  Target 
countries for this cooperation are:  Ukraine, Georgia, 
Moldova, Serbia and Montenegro, and Sub-Saharan Africa.  The 
MFA also makes contributions to the International Development 
Association, The European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, the UN, and the EU Development cooperation 
budget. 
 
Humanitarian Assistance 
----------------------- 
¶7.  (SBU)  The MFA does not have a separate budget amount 
available for responding to humanitarian or emergency 
appeals.  Any additional assistance requests must be 
coordinated within the GOP and require Ministry of Finance 
approval.  Nevertheless, during 2006, Poland provided 
approximately $300,000 in assistance and sent a medical team 
including employees of the National Centre for Coordination 
of Rescue activities to assist the victims of the Indonesian 
earthquake.  In addition, in early August Foreign Minister 
Fotyga allocated approximately $300,000 for humanitarian 
assistance in Lebanon.  Poland provided 500 soldiers to the 
UNIFIL peacekeeping forces.  At the Stockholm Conference for 
Lebanon's early recovery, the GOP announced an additional 1 
million Euro donation to Lebanon, primarily for mine and 
unexploded ordinance removal and provision of temporary 
shelters. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Comment:  The GOP is an important partner on 
security issues, but often comments that the bilateral 
relationship could be stronger on economic issues. 
Pomianowski's visit is an excellent opportunity to begin to 
build cooperation on development issues.  As Poland's economy 
strengthens its assistance program will grow, especially as 
Poland strives to meet its EU commitments.  Discussion with 
the GOP now on areas of mutual interest can help shape 
Poland's policy and programs as they are developed and will 
help ensure that Poland's development program focuses on 
projects of interest to both the US and Poland. 
ASHE