07WARSAW2409
2007 COUNTERTERRORISM REPORT - POLAND
Mon Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWR #2409 3651019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311019Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5676UNCLAS WARSAW 002409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC EFIN KCRM KHLS AEMR PL
SUBJECT: 2007 COUNTERTERRORISM REPORT - POLAND 
 
REF: SECSTATE 145633 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: There have been no reported terrorist groups or 
incidents in Poland.  Despite this, Poland addresses 
counterterrorism issues domestically and internationally and 
is a firm partner of the United States in this sphere. 
Overseas, Poland provides about 1200 troops to the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan 
while leading the multinational Division Center South 
(MND-CS) in Iraq with 900 troops.  Domestically, Poland is 
monitoring groups, especially with ties to organized crime, 
for links to terrorism.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. Poland supports antiterrorist efforts with vigorous 
participation in foreign missions.  About 1200 Polish troops 
now serve ISAF in Afghanistan without caveats.  In Iraq, 
Poland commands the MND-CS, headquartered in Ad Diwaniyah, 
and provides 900 troops engaged in active patrolling as well 
as training and advising Iraq's 8th Division. 
 
¶3. Through participation in initiatives such as the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) and the Global 
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, Poland is actively 
engaged in many international forums for combating terrorist 
threats.  In October 2007, Poland worked with Ukraine and 
Romania to conduct "Eastern Shield," an exercise to simulate 
the interdiction of materials used to construct Weapons of 
Mass Destruction (WMD) and funded by the U.S. 
nonproliferation and disarmament fund (NDF).  Poland's 21 
December integration into the Schengen zone also serves as 
another strong argument for close collaboration with European 
neighbors on counterterrorism -- a collaboration that the 
Poles describe as robust.  Poland also hosted a meeting of 
GUAM member states, European partners and the U.S. this fall 
to discuss counterterrorism issues that affect this region. 
 
¶4. The bilateral Counterterrorism Working Group (CTWG), 
formed in 2005 to further U.S.-Polish collaboration on 
counterterrorism by synchronizing counterterrorism policy and 
training counterterrorism specialists, has continued its 
collaboration.  In 2007, under the Combating Terrorism 
Fellowship Program (CTFP), Embassy Warsaw provided Poland 
with $430,000 for special operations officer training, 
regional seminars and terrorism focused programs. 
Additionally, the Warsaw Legatt,s office conducted a hostage 
taking tabletop exercise with local law enforcement, 
improving collaboration on threat management. 
 
¶5. With Poland's inclusion into Schengen, the GOP is aware 
that the largest base for terrorist threats could emanate not 
only from the east in traditional areas, such as the migrant 
Chechen population, but might also stem from western 
neighbors who have previously had problems with radical 
Islamic groups.  Polish authorities continue to be concerned 
by elements of the Muslim Chechen population who could more 
easily become radicalized.  Groups with ties to organized 
crime constitute a significant concern due to their 
experience with and access to fake documentation, weapons and 
money laundering.  The Polish government has extensive 
experience working against organized crime groups, which they 
can leverage in the fight against terrorism domestically. 
 
HILLAS