08WARSAW532
U/S DOBRIANSKY MEETS WITH POLISH MINISTERS OF
Tue Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO0647
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHWR #0532/01 1201209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291209Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6381
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 2766
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0486
RUEHKW/AMCONSUL KRAKOW 2077
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WARSAW 000532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP SENV ECON ENRG PREL PL
SUBJECT: U/S DOBRIANSKY MEETS WITH POLISH MINISTERS OF 
ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMY 
 
WARSAW 00000532  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  This cable contains a guidance request.  See para. 8. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  On April 14, Under Secretary of State Paula 
Dobriansky met with Polish Minister of Environment Maciej 
Nowicki and Minister of Economy Waldemar Pawlak to discuss 
the upcoming United Nations Framework on Climate Change's 
fourteenth Conference of the Parties (COP-14).  COP-14 will 
be held in Poznan December 1-12.  In both meetings, 
Dobriansky stressed that a comprehensive agreement on climate 
change must contain binding agreements for both developing 
and developed countries.  Environment Minister Nowicki stated 
that a planning conference for COP-14 will be held in Warsaw 
in October, and he may visit the United States in September. 
He believes COP-14 needs to develop concrete steps to adress 
climate change, and to showcase specific examples of 
technology transfer.  Economy Minister Pawlak stated he wants 
to organize a meeting of about 30 ministers of economy before 
COP-14 to discuss the "sectoral approach" to climate change. 
Dobrianksy welcomed Pawlak's interest in exploring the 
sectoral approach before Poznan, and committed to provide a 
readout of her discussions in Paris.  U/S Dobriansky was 
joined on her visit by Dean Pittman of the Secretary's Policy 
Planning Staff and Dan Rochberg, Special Assistant to U/S 
Dobriansky. 
 
End summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Environment Ministry on COP-14 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The discussion at the Ministry of Environment 
began with Dobriansky asking Minister Nowicki how he 
envisions COP-14.  Nowicki responded that he sees a change in 
attitudes about climate change since the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published its last report in 
March 2007.  He said there is no longer any doubt that 
climate change is due to human activity.  The only question 
is to what extent human activity is responsible.  He added 
that the United States seems to be modifying its attitude 
toward climate change and acknowledging the role of human 
activity.  Consequently, Nowicki believes COP-14 will take 
place at an opportune time to consider climate change 
programs.  Nowicki stated future discussions must look at 
highly specific steps if they are to be effective in dealing 
with climate change.  He criticized what he termed the 
"European strategy" of signing general agreements, claiming 
that results so far were "nothing more than paper."  He 
described his goal for COP-14 as including side exhibits of 
concrete examples of technology development and transfer. 
Nowicki announced that a preliminary conference to prepare 
for COP-14 will be held October 12-14, most likely at the 
Warsaw Sheraton.  He said he would invite thirty-five to 
forty officials from countries that were critically important 
in climate change issues, including the United States. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Dobriansky commented that the key decision of the 
UN climate conference in Bali last December was that actions 
on climate change should be measurable, verifiable, and 
reportable.  The United States wants a framework that is 
truly global, and would agree to binding commitments only if 
other major economies do as well.  Minister Nowicki agreed, 
noting that within the next ten years, eighty percent of the 
increase in carbon dioxide emissions would come from China 
and other developing countries, and to exempt these countries 
would make climate change actions by the developed countries 
ineffective. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Dobriansky asked whether Nowicki would visit the 
United States before COP-14.  He responded that he would be 
very interested in coming to Washington, probably in 
September, and participating in a round table discussion of 
Poland's approach to climate change.  Dobriansky encouraged 
him to go to the United States for this discussion, and to 
visit sites where he could observe exhibits of environmental 
technology. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Economy Ministry Seeks Meeting Regarding Sectoral Approach 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  At the Ministry of Economy, Pawlak stated that, 
 
WARSAW 00000532  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
prior to COP-14, Poland would like to hold a meeting of 
Ministers of Economy from about 30 major economies -- both 
developed and developing -- aimed at exploring the "sectoral 
approach" to climate change.  Pawlak particularly emphasized 
the importance of involving international corporations and 
representatives of internationalized industries -- such as 
steel or cement -- in such a discussion.  The meeting would 
address the problem of applying national regulatory policies 
to international businesses.  Pawlak stated he had already 
raised this idea with the OECD and the President of the 
International Atomic Energy Association, as well as EU 
Commissioner Verheugen.  U.S. suggestions and participation 
would be essential, Pawlak stated.  Marcin Korolec, Under 
Secretary of State in the Polish Ministry of Economy, is 
 
SIPDIS 
working on a proposed text addressing the question of how to 
allocate emissions allowances, especially outside the energy 
sector.  He stated that the EU is trying to find an approach 
in which allowances are more closely linked to the net needs 
of a given industry, but this requires a global perspective. 
Pawlak noted that there will be an EU working group meeting 
in Bonn in June, where Poland plans to advance its proposal. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Dobriansky welcomed Pawlak's interest in exploring 
the sectoral approach and the idea of holding a meeting 
before COP-14, noting that the USG -- especially through the 
Departments of Commerce, Energy and Treasury, with the 
Environmental Protection Agency -- is committed to engaging 
with business.  Responding to Pawlak's request, Dobriansky 
offered to provide USG views on how such an effort might be 
organized.  Dobriansky stated that the COP-14 is a bridge to 
the later meeting in Copenhagen, which should culminate in an 
international agreement on climate change.  The U.S. will 
make a substantial commitment, but she stressed consensus 
across the U.S. political spectrum that a comprehensive 
agreement must contain measurable, verifiable and reportable 
commitments for both developed and developing countries. 
Obligations would be common but differentiated. Financing 
mechanisms and technology transfer should be priorities at 
COP-14.  She specified the issue goes beyond simply setting 
up a fund, to looking holistically at economic reforms, 
energy security and other topics.  She noted that on April 16 
she would be in Paris, where the USG will be seeking ways to 
help the UN Framework Process, including long-term goals, 
short-term goals, technology, practical financing and how to 
measure progress.  Dobriansky committed to provide the Polish 
government with a readout of the Paris discussions. 
Dobriansky also noted that the U.S. will table a text at the 
G-8 summit in Japan.  She also said she would suggest 
colleagues working on sectoral issues consider visiting 
Warsaw, and offered help to set up meetings for Pawlak's 
upcoming visit to Washington. 
 
---------------- 
Guidance Request 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (U)  Post requests a readout of the Paris meetings to 
pass to Polish officials, as discussed in U/S Dobriansky's 
meeting with the Minister of Economy Pawlak. 
 
¶9.  (U)  This cable was cleared by U/S Dobriansky. 
ASHE