09WARSAW1130
BE PREPARED" -- WARSAW AND KRAKOW CONSULAR SECTIONS COMMIT
Thu Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO0180
RR RUEHKW
DE RUEHWR #1130 3091635
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051635Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9146
INFO RUEHKW/AMCONSUL KRAKOW 2328UNCLAS WARSAW 001130 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS 
DEPT FOR FSI/CMT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC CMGT ASEC PL
SUBJECT: "BE PREPARED" -- WARSAW AND KRAKOW CONSULAR SECTIONS COMMIT 
TO YEAR-LONG CRISIS MANAGEMENT TRAINING 
 
REF: (A) STATE 104542 (B) FSINFATC 02184 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. The Consular Sections at U.S. Embassy Warsaw and 
U.S. Consulate General in Krakow launched their year-long commitment 
to crisis management training by holding a full-day crisis 
management exercise using air crash and H1N1 pandemic scenarios. 
American Citizen Service (ACS) Units in Warsaw and Krakow are now 
focusing on action items identified during the exercise, such as 
meeting Polish contacts in the key ministries responsible for crisis 
handling, revising the warden system, and updating the Emergency 
Action Plan and local duty books to reflect current Department 
guidance on pandemics.  This was the first of several exercises 
planned for FY 2010.  Future exercises are aimed at a wider 
audience, involving other sections and posts in the mission, and 
later possibly host government officials or other posts in the 
region End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On October 5, 2009, the Consular Sections in Warsaw and 
Krakow launched their year-long commitment to crisis management 
training by holding a full-day interactive crisis management 
exercise focused on an air crash scenario and the H1N1 pandemic. 
The 60+ participants included the entire Embassy Warsaw Consular 
Section, two Conoffs and two LES from Krakow, and the Consular Agent 
from Poznan. Charge Mike Tulley opened the session by explaining the 
role of the Emergency Action Committee (EAC) and the Emergency 
Action Plan (EAP), and citing examples of crises successfully solved 
due to efficient EAC action and EAP guidance.  The Consul General 
(CG) then focused on consular roles and responsibilities in a 
crisis, including a review of pertinent sections of the Crisis 
Management Handbook and the Mission EAP. 
 
¶3. (SBU) During the 90-minute H1N1 pandemic session (a combination 
of a slide presentation and a town hall discussion), the 
participants learned about the latest host country developments and 
the Department's guidance, and gained an in-depth look at tripwires 
and other planning factors for a pandemic.  The afternoon training 
included an air-crash case study, followed by a 'hands-on' exercise 
with CA/OCS' participation.  As the scenario developed, the 
participants, divided into five groups, answered calls from the 
Department and the 'concerned public', devised plans of action, kept 
logs, and entered data into the Crisis Task Force application.  The 
groups also practiced information sharing and shift-work, gaining 
valuable insights into the numerous challenges of handling a crisis. 
 The session ended with an internal review, followed by a DVC 
debrief with Washington. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Warsaw and Krakow ACS Units are now focusing on action 
items identified during the exercise, such as updating American 
Citizen contact lists, identifying and meeting Polish contacts in 
the key government ministries and offices responsible for crisis 
handling, and updating the consular part of the EAP and local Duty 
Books to reflect the current Department guidance on pandemics. 
Taking advantage of his trip to Poznan on October 6-7, the CG met 
with Dariusz Dymek, Director of the Security and Crisis Management 
Department for the Wielkopolska region, which, according to Dymek, 
is a model of centralized crisis management now being implemented in 
other Polish regions.  Dymek told the CG that his Department is a 
24-hour operation center that controls police, fire brigades, 
hospitals and other emergency services except for the airport 
authorities.  During his visit to Poznan, the CG also met with 
Poznan Airport President Mariusz Wiatrowski, the head of the 
Military Police Col. Robert Stanislawski, Immigration Office 
Director Andrzej Kunicki, and Wielkopolska Regional Police Commander 
General Wojciech Olbrys.  Conoffs are planning similar meetings in 
Warsaw and Krakow. 
 
¶5. (SBU) ACS Warsaw has also revised its warden system to rely more 
on mobile phones and text messaging, the most popular means of 
communication in Poland.  In response to ref A and in close 
cooperation with the Mission's Health Unit, Management and Economic 
Sections, and Community Liaison Office, on October 23 ACS Warsaw and 
Krakow updated their H1N1 notices posted on the Embassy and 
Consulate websites and sent a H1N1 warden message, thus testing the 
revised warden system.  Together with the Economic Section, ACS 
Warsaw has also reached out to the Ministry of Health and the Chief 
Sanitary Inspectorate.  The readout of a November 5 meeting with 
health officials will be covered by septel. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment:  The October 5 exercise was the first of several 
exercises planned for FY 2010. The next one - crisis preparedness 
for consular LES and wardens -- is scheduled for December 15 during 
FSI/CMT's visit to Warsaw (ref B).  Future exercises are aimed at a 
wider audience, involving the EAC, other sections and posts in the 
mission, and later possibly host government officials or other posts 
in the region.  End comment. 
 
TULLEY