08MANAGUA1040
JUDICIAL DAZE IN NICARAGUA: ALEMAN'S GET OUT OF
Thu Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0023
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1040/01 2271442
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 141442Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3024
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, INL/LP 
NSC FOR FISK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/07/2013 
TAGS: NU PGOV PREL SNAR
SUBJECT: JUDICIAL DAZE IN NICARAGUA: ALEMAN'S GET OUT OF 
JAIL FREE CARD 
 
Classified By: CDA Richard Sanders, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary:  On July 8, Liberal Constitutional Party 
(PLC) National Assembly Deputy and Justice Committee head 
Jose Pallais proposed legislation that would give Nicaraguan 
courts a one month deadline to resolve the 9,040 criminal 
cases that have languished in the Nicaraguan justice system 
without resolution for over five years.  Under the proposed 
law, any case that is not resolved after the deadline can be 
dismissed with all relevant criminal records wiped clean. 
Many justice sector observers, including Vamos con Eduardo 
(VCE) Deputy and legal expert Augusto Valle, expressed 
concern that the law, if passed, would result in the release 
from prison of thousands of accused rapists, murderers, and 
narcotics-traffickers, as well as former President and 
convicted felon Arnoldo Aleman.  End Summary. 
 
Aleman's "Get Out of Jail Free" Card 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (C) During a criminal justice forum on July 8, PLC 
legislator and National Assembly Justice Committee head Jose 
Pallais proposed a "law to fix a reasonable time period to 
resolve pending criminal cases," pointing out that there were 
9,040 cases that have been stuck in Nicaragua's notoriously 
slow court system for over five years - a clear violation of 
the Nicaraguan constitutional right to a speedy trial 
(Article 34, Paragraphs 2-3 of the Nicaraguan Constitution). 
Under the proposed law, Nicaraguan courts would have 10 days 
from the passage of the law to provide final rulings on less 
serious cases (those with possible sentences of five or less 
years) and 30 days from the passage of the law to provide 
final rulings on serious crimes (those with possible 
sentences that exceed five years).  Should the courts fail to 
meet these deadlines, the accused citizens would then be able 
to demand complete dismissal of their case, thereby expunging 
their records of any trace of the crime they were accused of. 
 Many justice sector observers, including VCE legislator and 
legal expert Augusto Valle, expressed concern that the law, 
if passed, would result in the release from prison of 
thousands of accused rapists, murderers, and 
narcotics-traffickers. 
 
¶3. (C) Although Pallais characterized his proposal as a 
simple attempt to rectify the "violation" of the rights of 
accused criminal suspects to a speedy trial, judicial sector 
observers such as former Nicaraguan Attorney General Alberto 
Novoa decried the proposal as an audaciously "obvious 
attempt" not only to release convicted felon and ex-President 
Arnoldo Aleman (whose case is still on appeal) from his 
current "house arrest" but to also expunge his record and 
enable him to return to the political stage.  Novoa pointed 
out, though, that the law had not even passed the full 
Justice Committee (two Ortega loyalists in the committee were 
absent during the initial proposal) and said that Aleman's 
criminal record was too convenient of an "ankle-chain" for 
Ortega to give up.  He speculated that the only way Ortega 
would allow the passage of the proposed law and the 
inevitable subsequent return of his most powerful potential 
rival to the Nicaraguan political stage is if Aleman first 
gives him his dearest wish: constitutional reform allowing 
Ortega to remain in power indefinitely either as President 
for life or as Prime Minister under a new parliamentary 
system. 
 
¶4. (C)  Apart from this proposed "pending criminal cases 
law", Aleman does not have any other apparent legal recourse 
to overturn his sentence (either in physical jail or out). 
Although the passage of the new Nicaraguan Penal Code in 2007 
reduced Aleman's previous 20 year prison sentence for money 
laundering to a mere 5 to 7 years, in December of the same 
year a Nicaraguan appeals court imposed a new, combined 20 
year sentence for the crimes of money laundering, fraud, 
embezzlement, and misuse of public funds.  Had the appeals 
court not recast Aleman's sentence, it is possible that the 
ex-President could have been released on "time served" as 
early as December 2007.  Novoa said that if the "pending 
criminal cases law" passes, the courts would likely only have 
10 days to resolve Aleman's case as each of the four crimes 
he is currently charged with would be considered a less 
serious crime. 
 
Judicial Careers:  New Rules, No Real Change 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (C) Novoa also strongly criticized a judicial career law, 
that was passed by the National Assembly in 2004 and is only 
now being implemented by new regulations, as nothing more 
than a measure to legalize and perpetuate the corrupt status 
quo of the Nicaraguan judicial system.  Although the law was 
intended to modernize, professionalize, and provide the 
Nicaraguan judicial system with a degree of political 
independence, the version of the law that finally passed 
after much acrimonious debate in the National Assembly 
formally left the reins of power firmly in the grasp of 
Nicaragua's highly politicized and corrupt Supreme Court. 
The Spanish Agency for International Cooperation (AECI) 
supported the development of the law, but expressed 
frustration that the law was passed without incorporating any 
suggestions from donor countries and organizations. 
Nevertheless, AECI expressed satisfaction that at least the 
law exists to provide a legal basis for making further 
improvements to the Nicaraguan judicial sector. 
 
¶6. (C) Under the Judicial Career Law, Nicaraguan Supreme 
Court justices have the power to nominate and elect members 
of many of the groups intended to act as a "check" against 
corruption, including the Council of National Administration 
of Judicial Careers.  This Council in turn is able to 
nominate magistrates for appellate courts, district courts, 
and local courts.  Several donor countries noted inherent 
weaknesses in the law.  There are no specific procedures for 
entry into a judicial career or for how judicial career 
candidates should be promoted.  Judicial inspectors who are 
responsible for investigating disciplinary cases have no 
established procedures and their functions are not defined. 
These weaknesses allow Supreme Court justices to create their 
own set of procedures or ignore them entirely.  In a separate 
meeting, VCE Deputy Valle asserted that the judicial career 
law has only served to provide the Nicaraguan Supreme Court 
another powerful tool to "punish and reward" individuals for 
their obeisance to or defiance of the Court's political 
agenda.  Novoa concluded that there are no checks and 
balances in the Nicaraguan judicial system, as all of the 
main judicial principals are "like monkeys on the same 
branch; they only know how to sit there and scratch each 
other's behinds." 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶7. (C)  Comment:  Aleman's latest attempt to escape his legal 
and judicial difficulties and fully return to the political 
scene seems unlikely to succeed.  As Novoa points out, Ortega 
would only allow Aleman's freedom if Ortega himself attains 
an unassailable level of political power, such as he would 
achieve with a successful constitutional reform.  We do not 
think this is likely at this point.  However, the fact that 
this law was proposed by PLC deputy Jose Pallais as head of 
the National Assembly's Justice Committee does not bode well 
for the prospect of true judicial reform.  Without true 
judicial reform and the advent of a strong, independent 
Nicaraguan judiciary, the preservation of Nicaragua's already 
tenuous democracy will remain an arduous task. 
 
SANDERS