07AITTAIPEI2022
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2022/01 2472347
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 042347Z SEP 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6645
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7204
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8458UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese- and English-language dailies 
gave significant reporting and editorial coverage September 1-4 to 
the remarks by White House National Security Council senior director 
for Asian affairs Dennis Wilder last Friday that neither Taiwan nor 
the Republic of China is a state in the international community, and 
that Washington finds the DPP's attempts to call for a UN referendum 
"a little bit perplexing."  News coverage also focused on the Blue 
and the Green camps' interpretation of, and reaction to, Wilder's 
remarks; on President Chen Shui-bian's interview with Sanlih TV last 
Friday; on Beijing's alleged "opposition" to the KMT's proposed UN 
referendum; and on a Taiwan business tycoon who was reportedly 
barred from leaving China because of a dispute with its Chinese 
partner over the ownership of a department store in Beijing.  The 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" front-paged a banner headline 
September 1 that read "United States: Neither Taiwan nor ROC is a 
State."  The same paper also ran a banner headline on page two the 
same day that said "Bian:  Taiwan Will Join the UN as a New 
Country." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" criticized the United States for 
humiliating Taiwan and thus harming its own interests.  A "Liberty 
Times" column solemnly protested the United States for unreasonably 
intervening in Taiwan's efforts to pursue the normalization of the 
country.  An editorial in the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times" chimed in saying Washington is intensifying its 
efforts to block Taiwan's UN referendum.  An editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" said Taiwan needs 
not worry about the meeting between U.S. President George W. Bush 
and his Chinese counterpart at the APEC leaders' meeting this week. 
An editorial in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily," however, said 
that Taiwan's UN referendum is nothing but a "birdcage game" that 
will not change anything.  A "China Times" editorial, on the other 
hand, said the situation will deteriorate if the United States 
continues to handle Taiwan's push for the UN referendum with a rude 
and aloof approach.   An editorial in the pro-unification "United 
Daily News" said President Chen and President Bush are now engaged 
in a race to see who is the coward and who will back down from the 
game first.  An editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" argued that the ROC's statehood has 
never been "undecided," as claimed by Wilder.  End summary. 
 
A) "The United States Humiliates Taiwan and Thus Harms Its Own 
Interests" 
 
Deputy Editor-in-Chief Tzou Jiing-wen noted in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (9/3): 
 
"... Taiwan will hold a UN referendum in tandem with the 
presidential election in March, 2008, and there is no way this 
reality will be changed.  Both the DPP and the KMT proposed their 
own [versions of the] UN referendum, and the party that withdraws 
its referendum first will surely fall apart.  This fact reflects the 
self-determination and dignity of Taiwan voters.  As a result, no 
matter how mercilessly Uncle Sam beats Taiwan, it will never achieve 
the objective of getting Taiwan not to hold a referendum.  The only 
'beneficial effect' left [for the United States] to humiliate Taiwan 
is thus to let Communist China get what it wants. ... 
 
"But the fact that Uncle Sam has spent so much time and energy 
demanding that Taiwan subject itself to servile treatment that even 
a sub-colony does not deserve will stir up anti-U.S. sentiment in 
its most loyal ally.  The United States' trampling on its American 
values will also leave a deep mark in the hearts of [our] 23 million 
people, forcing the Taiwan government no longer to dare to bow to 
Washington's will when weighing American interests in Taiwan in the 
future.  In particular, Taiwan's previous strategic line of 
following no one but the United States will face challenges from 
public opinion and thus be forced to find another way out. ...  Once 
the Taiwan-U.S. alliance becomes loose, the biggest beneficiary will 
be China.  Why on earth did the United States do what it did?  It is 
such a huge mistake." 
 
B) "Taiwan's Destiny" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 720,000] noted (9/1): 
 
"... It is an irrevocable fact that Taiwan is an independent 
sovereign state, and that it and China do not come under the 
jurisdiction of one other.  Taiwan does not need the United States 
to define its national status, nor does the United States have the 
right to do so.  [White House National Security Council senior 
director for Asian affairs] Dennis Wilder's remarks, which were full 
of hegemonic thinking, have unreasonably intervened in the Taiwan 
people's efforts in pursuit of the normalization of their country. 
Taiwan thus must solemnly protest to the United States. 
 
"China attempts to annex Taiwan and has brutally and savagely 
 
suppressed Taiwan's national status, but the fact that Taiwan is 
independent outside China can best meet the common interests of the 
international community, including the United States and other 
Asia-Pacific nations.  Wilder denied Taiwan's national status and 
echoed China's position, a move that is akin to pushing Taiwan 
toward being jointly managed by the United States and China and 
towards China's jaws of death.  We want to question strongly whether 
Wilder's remarks represent a change in the United States' policy 
toward Taiwan.  Did his remarks violate U.S. interests and the 
United States' Taiwan Relations Act?  Did he make the remarks just 
for the short-term benefit of the United States colluding with 
China, regardless of the will of the 23 million people in Taiwan?" 
 
 
C) "Friends Can Be Worse Than Enemies" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (9/4): 
 
"... Forty-five years later, as President Chen Shui-bian continues 
to rattle Washington by seeking to give his people the rights that 
morally should be theirs, we can expect the US government will 
intensify its efforts to block his every move. In the coming months, 
a plethora of news, speeches and rumors seeded here and there will 
dapple politics and media here and in the US. Most of it will be 
deniable, some even outright false, but like a full orchestra the 
sum of the seemingly dissonant instruments will coalesce into a 
symphony of sorts.  And the theme will be an undeniable one, for it 
has become obvious that Washington wants the troublesome Democratic 
Progressive Party (DPP) out of power. Unless its presidential 
candidate, Frank Hsieh, drastically changes course -- which would 
represent a betrayal of the DPP's raison d'etre -- he, too, will be 
subjected to similar propaganda. 
 
"The US is an unequaled master at the game and, when it didn't 
achieve it via the CIA or militarily, it has used its political and 
economic clout, as well as its conservative media, to interfere in 
foreign elections and, occasionally, change governments. Ideological 
opponents, suspected communists, alleged state sponsors of terrorism 
or would-be nuclear proliferators are not alone in facing the threat 
of Washington's pressure. As the Diefenbaker example shows us, even 
its closest, democratic allies can fall from grace with Washington. 
..." 
 
D) "APEC Meet Holds No Big Worries" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (9/4): 
 
"In a news briefing August 30, United States National Security 
Council senior adviser Dennis Wilder confirmed that U.S. President 
George W. Bush and People's Republic of China State Chairman Hu 
Jintao will discuss the issue of Taiwan's proposed referendums on 
membership in the United Nations when the two leaders meet in a 
bilateral summit during the annual Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
forum leadership meetings, which began Sunday in Sydney, Australia. 
The Bush-Hu meeting is widely seen as a thermometer of the heat in 
the triangular relationship between the U.S., the PRC and Taiwan and 
every nuance in the wording of statements in the wake of the meeting 
will be scrutinized, interpreted and spun by Taiwan's media and 
politicians. ... 
 
"Nevertheless, despite the controversy triggered by the distortion 
of Wilder's remarks into a supposed claim that 'Taiwan is not a 
country,' we believe such worries may be somewhat exaggerated and 
may reflect the ingrained lack of confidence or even cowardice of 
politicians and pundits in the former ruling party's camp. ...  From 
the standpoint of Chen and other DPP politicians who believe that 
Taiwan is doing the right thing by applying to enter the U.N., any 
fallout from the Bush-Hu mini-summit will be important but not 
critical to the triangular relations between Taiwan, the U.S. and 
the PRC and will not endanger the long-lasting friendship between 
the U.S. and Taiwan for several reasons.  First, the cross-strait 
issue is fundamentally a political matter, and APEC remains first 
and foremost a multilateral economic forum. ... 
 
"Hence, while Hu may attempt to put pressure on Bush to take a 
harder stand against Taiwan's proposed referendum on entry into the 
U.N., the wording of any reply by the U.S. president is likely to be 
abstract and vague.  As the campaign to the November 2008 
presidential election heats up, Bush also has to be careful about 
the possibility that he and his Republican Party may be hurt by 
criticizing Taiwan and President Chen too sharply over the proposed 
U.N. referendum and Taiwan's application to join the U.N., 
especially if Washington is perceived as ganging up with the Chinese 
Communist regime in the PRC to suppress Taiwan's democracy. 
 
"Thirdly, as Washington is striving to rebuild its political capital 
in the region, any display of collaboration with the PRC to suppress 
 
democracy in Taiwan directly conflicts with Bush's own stated goal 
of 'bringing democracy and freedom to the world' and will be seen as 
a sign of craven surrender on the ideological front to the PRC's 
'rising Chinese nationalism' and neo-authoritarianism in the region 
and in the U.N. as well.  Fourthly, as the proposal for Taiwan to 
strive to enter the U.N. has overwhelming multi-partisan support, 
open opposition by Washington to this democratic demand could well 
fuel disappointment with Washington and spur anti-American 
sentiments among the traditionally pro-American 'pro-green' 
community. ..." 
 
E) "Save China's Face" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 530,000] 
editorialized (9/1): 
 
"... Frankly speaking, the United States' making a posture will not 
have any substantive influence on Taiwan.  Taiwan buying less 
weaponry will not do any damage to its national defense, either, as 
Taiwan's security does rely on the United States' Pacific Command. 
Regardless of how many unfavorable remarks Washington has made, it 
will not alter its security layout in the Asia-Pacific region.  The 
United States has a good understanding of how much Taiwan weighs in 
its mind.  This is why Washington is annoyed with A-Bian. 
 
"Taiwan's UN referendum is nothing but a birdcage game; no matter 
how excited it gets, it is limited to the island of Taiwan only. 
Both the United States and China are waiting for A-Bian to step 
down; nothing will count until A-Bian steps down.  Will China 
activate its 'Anti-Secession Law'?  Clearly that will be a move to 
ask for trouble for itself!  Why doesn't it try to save its face by 
asking Washington to scold Taipei[?]!" 
 
F) "The United States Has Finally Dealt a Heavy Blow to Taiwan" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/1): 
 
"... The United States should also examine its own mistakes when it 
comes to Taiwan's UN referendum, which is now running like a 
derailed train without knowing when it will stop.  Washington has 
always set its mind on the fact that it is President Chen who has 
been playing tricks for campaigning, so it has put the focus of its 
negotiations and pressure on Chen, with some DPP and KMT 
high-ranking officials involved at most.  But the problem is that 
the reason Chen toys with this issue in such a way that the KMT has 
to follow his game is of course because [the issue] has the support 
of Taiwan's public opinion.  The United States, when dealing with 
this issue, has completely ignored the Taiwan people's feelings; it 
has neither proactively communicated with the Taiwan people nor 
completely, sincerely and respectfully explained Washington's 
concerns to the Taiwan people.  It simply believes that the whole 
issue hinged on Chen's thinking and that once it could handle Chen, 
the matter would be resolved.  It has no idea that when the momentum 
of the issue got started, plus the public opinion, not even Chen was 
able to backpedal it. ... 
 
"Without having communicated fully with the Taiwan people, the 
[United States] dealt a heavy and early blow [to Taiwan], which got 
slapped by its old friend without having made any mistake.  Such a 
development has hurt the Taiwan people's heart badly, and the Taiwan 
people feel that they have been betrayed by a friend.  The rift 
between Taipei and Washington not only exists between the two 
governments but has also gradually grown deep between the two 
peoples.  The backlash in [Taiwan's] private sector may well 
transform itself directly into support for the UN referendum.  If 
the United States continues to deal with the matter a rude and aloof 
approach like a big brother, the situation will further deteriorate. 
..." 
 
G) "Chen Shui-bian and George W. Bush are Competing against Each 
Other to See Who is a Coward [Ed. Note: a game of "chicken"]" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/1): 
 
"... The Bush administration's definition of the 'UN referendum' as 
'a step toward a declaration of Taiwan independence and an 
alteration of the status quo' was aimed at forcing Chen Shui-bian to 
jump out of the car [Ed. Note: as in a game of chicken].  But the 
fact that Chen has even decorated the Presidential Office as a 
spiritual fortress of the 'UN referendum' with much fanfare 
indicated that he has no intent of jumping out of the car. ... 
 
"Chen seems to be on the horns of a dilemma.  He has turned the 'UN 
referendum' into such a sensational and attention-grabbing issue 
that it is like giving himself no possibility to jump out of the 
car.  But the chances are slim for Chen to allow Washington to 
change or ask him to back down on his 'cross-Strait policy.' ... 
 
The United States is the most important 'pillar' of Taiwan's 
survival in the international community.  Washington believes that 
the 'UN referendum' has harmed its policy of 'no change in the 
status quo across the Taiwan Strait' and has fundamentally violated 
the 'Taiwan interests.'  Taiwan must ponder now whether it wants to 
repudiate the United States' 'cross-Strait policy' and to deny the 
U.S. role as a pillar of Taiwan's survival in the international 
community.  Moreover, the purpose of the 'UN referendum' was never 
to 'enter the UN' but to take advantage of the 'referendum' to 
ignite public outrage. ...  Taiwan cannot possibly enter the UN, and 
it has fallen out with the United States.  Is this indeed the last 
gift Chen will give to Taiwan? ..." 
 
H) "ROC's Statehood Was Never 'Undecided'" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (9/2): 
 
"... Most likely, Mr. Wilder was referring to the international 
community's inaction on our repeated bids to take part in 
international organizations, which have been fiercely opposed by 
Beijing. Indeed, it was fortunate that Mr. Wilder appeared to leave 
a door open for a change in U.S. policy by suggesting our status was 
somehow 'undecided,' rather than choosing to comply with Beijing's 
claim that our status is 'decided,' meaning that Taiwan is a part of 
the communist People's Republic of China.  Still, we believe it 
would be better if Washington refrained from declaring our status to 
be some kind of an open question, since this may prompt Beijing to 
demand that the issue be 'decided,' such as by orchestrating a 
resolution in the United Nations Security Council or U.N. General 
Assembly. ... 
 
"With war still raging in Iraq and Afghanistan and the threat of 
global terrorism still high, it is clear that the United States has 
bigger fish to fry on the world stage than deal with our 
government's aspirations, which are clearly more aimed at scoring 
points on election day than they are at actually gaining 
international status." 
 
WANG