07KAMPALA1486
TRIPARTITE PLUS MEETING READ-OUT
Tue Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO7111
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #1486/01 2681344
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251344Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9413
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KAMPALA 001486 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV UG SU CG
SUBJECT: TRIPARTITE PLUS MEETING READ-OUT 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  The Tripartite Plus meeting in Kampala 
from September 15-17 followed several significant bilateral 
meetings between member states.  Progess on action against 
the negative forces remained slow, but the Democratic 
Republic of Congo and MONUC presented the outlines of their 
plans to deal with the negative forces.  Uganda's insistence 
on placing the names of the People's Redemption Army (PRA) on 
the Common Most Wanted List continued to block progress on 
development of a fully approved list.  Representatives from 
Rwanda and the DRC engaged in a heated exchange of 
accusations regarding support for the negative forces, but 
agreed to revitalize the Joint Verification Commission to 
check into assurances given by both sides.  Burundi will host 
the next Tripartite Plus meeting at a date to be determined 
during the last two weeks of February 2008.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - 
OVERVIEW 
- - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Deputy Assistant Secretary Jim Swan briefed 
members of the diplomatic community on September 17 on the 
proceedings and outcomes of the Tripartite Plus Commission 
held in Kampala from September 15-17.  Ambassadors Browning 
and Leader and Senior Special Advisor Tim Shortley joined 
him.  DAS Swan noted that since the beginning of the 
Tripartite Plus process in October 2004, dialogue between the 
member states had substantially increased and qualitatively 
improved.  In particular, recent meetings between senior 
officials of the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda and 
Uganda have helped reduce tensions and further discussions on 
important security issues at the bilateral level. 
Nonetheless, member states appear frustrated on the pace of 
progress on removing negative forces and were particularly 
disappointed in MONUC's slow progress on addressing these 
threat.  With the exception of a brief heated exchange 
between Congolese Ambassador Nwegje and Rwandan Ambassador 
Sezibera, the tenor of the discussions in Kampala was civil. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) There will be several issues requiring follow-up in 
the coming months.  On September 25, the Chiefs of Defense 
Staff meeting will focus on making the CHODS planning cell 
operational and convert Joint Planning Cell recommendations 
into action.  The Congolese will present a detailed briefing 
in Kisangani on the combined planning between the Congolese 
armed forces and MONUC.  The meeting to launch the Joint 
Planning Cell was set to take place in Kisangani on September 
¶20.  Congo and Rwanda agreed to convene a Joint Verification 
Commission to meet on September 21 in Goma.  Legal teams will 
meet in Bukavu from October 29-31.  The Foreign Ministers 
signed a letter to U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki Moon 
regarding MONUC's role and mandate to engage the negative 
forces.  They will request a meeting with the UNSG to present 
the letter during the U.N. General Assembly meetings.  The 
member states agreed to formalize diplomatic relations with 
each other by September 2008.  Uganda and Congo agreed to 
ratify the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region 
Pact by the end of December 2007.  An evaluation of the 
Tripartite Plus process will convene in Goma on November 1 to 
discuss gaps.  Participants will identify elements of 
agreements not implemented and produce detailed action plans 
for implementation. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
RWANDA-CONGO EXCHANGE 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  There was consensus and concern among Tripartite 
Plus countries that the security environment in eastern Congo 
had deteriorated since the last meeting in June.  Congo 
expressed concern with the role of ex-General Laurent Nknunda 
in contributing to the destabilization.  Rwanda was concerned 
about increased re-armament and military activity of 
ex-FAR-Interahamwe in eastern Congo.  A heated discussion 
between Congo and Rwanda occurred between Ambassadors 
Seraphin Ngwej and Richard Sezibera over these issues.  Ngwej 
accused Rwanda of supporting dissident General Laurent 
Nkunda.  Sezibera accused the Congolese army of collaborating 
with the FDLR to attack Nkunda.  The exchange was direct. 
Congo demanded an apology from Rwanda; Rwanda refused to 
apologize.  Congo went on the record to state that its forces 
were not collaborating with the FDLR.  Rwanda stated that it 
was not supporting Nkunda.  Rwanda stated that Nkunda was a 
Congolese matter to be dealt with by Congo as a sovereign 
matter.  Rwanda had its own views on the validity of Nkunda's 
claims, but said it would respect whatever Congo wanted to do 
to deal with Nkunda.  Rwandan Foreign Minister Murigande 
repeated this viewpoint at the press conference.  Congo and 
Rwanda decided to revitalize the Joint Verification 
Commission to verify the assurances given by both 
 
KAMPALA 00001486  002 OF 002 
 
 
governments.  The JVC would convene on September 21. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
COMMON MOST WANTED LIST 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The People's Redemption Army (PRA) issue continued 
to frustrate efforts to agree on a Common Most Wanted List. 
Uganda refused proposals to put forward the names of 
individuals that had no objections on the list.  Rwanda 
argued that the PRA is not a meaningful threat to Uganda. 
All technical attempts to deal with the PRA issue failed. 
Rwanda suggested the dropping of the Common Most Wanted List 
altogether, arguing that the negative forces and their 
leaders were known in the region.  DAS Swan said that it 
appeared that a high level political discussion was needed to 
overcome the blockage. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
ACTION AGAINST NEGATIVE FORCES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Member states were eager for action against the 
negative forces.  Congo introduced its plan to deal with the 
negative forces.  The plan was based on the need to move 
forward with "brassage" as a means to strengthen the capacity 
of the Congolese armed forces.  Brassage could be completed 
in March or April 2007.  Congo clarified that completion of 
brassage was not a prerequisite for taking action against the 
negative forces.  Some action could be taken with newly 
integrated units after they receive training.  There was 
consensus on continuing the Tripartite Plus framework because 
it provided for frequent focus on the negative forces and 
regular U.S. involvement. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  The atmospherics of the meeting were good and a 
number of follow-up activities were scheduled.  The next 
Tripartite Plus meeting will be held in Bujumbura, Burundi 
during the last two weeks of February 2008. 
BROWNING