07MOSCOW4538
ZUBKOV CONFIRMED; HINTS AT CABINET RE-SHUFFLE
Fri Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO7943
OO RUEHDBU RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #4538/01 2571526
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141526Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3857
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHLN/AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 4522
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 2400
RUEHYG/AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG 2694UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 004538 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PINR RS
SUBJECT: ZUBKOV CONFIRMED; HINTS AT CABINET RE-SHUFFLE 
 
REF: MOSCOW 4511 (NOTAL) 
 
MOSCOW 00004538  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) As expected, Prime Minister-designate Viktor Zubkov 
was easily confirmed by the Duma after a perfunctory set of 
questions and speeches September 14.  Only the Communist 
Party, and perhaps some independent deputies, voted against 
him.  Zubkov used the occasion to suggest that a cabinet 
re-shuffle is in the works.  Deputies offered the heads of 
Minister of Finance Kudrin and of Economic Development Gref 
for Zubkov's consideration, as well as that of the perennial 
candidate for early retirement, Minister of Health and Social 
Development Zurabov. Zubkov agreed only that "it is time for 
personnel changes."  End summary. 
 
Easily Approved 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) As expected, the Duma September 14 voted 
overwhelmingly to approve Viktor Zubkov, President Putin's 
nominee to succeed Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov.  The vote 
was 381 to 47, with 8 deputies abstaining.  Zubkov's 
confirmation followed a ten-minute, lackluster speech by the 
nominee, two questions from each of the five legislative 
factions, and stemwinders by faction heads and a 
representative of the independent deputies. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Zubkov, his voice hoarse and occasionally breaking, 
used his ten minutes to call, unremarkably, for stable, 
continued economic and social development, the realization of 
the national projects, more practical benefits from the oil 
and gas bonanza, and improving the working of the defense 
industry.  His remarks received only polite applause from the 
deputies. 
 
Anti-Corruption Crusade 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Zubkov's answers to the ten questions posed were 
short for a politician, confirmed that he is not a compelling 
speaker, and demonstrated, not surprisingly, only an 
occasional good grasp of the facts.  Two subjects seemed to 
galvanize Zubkov:  corruption and a possible cabinet 
re-shuffle.  His reference to the former in his speech 
amounted to little more than the hope that revenue generated 
by "pushing the economy out of the shadows," could produce 
more income for the pension fund.  Later, in answering a 
question, from For A Just Russia's Gennadiy Gudkov, Zubkov 
waxed (for him) eloquent.  He called for the passing of a law 
on corruption, saying he had participated in a team which had 
drafted a corruption bill.  He also lobbied for the creation 
of an agency, like the National Anti-Terrorism Committee, to 
attack corruption.  Elsewhere during his appearance, Zubkov 
equated corruption in government ranks with rank 
unprofessionalism, and indicated he would be on the attack 
once confirmed.  Still, Zubkov said, "repressive measures 
alone are not sufficient," and he called on "society to fight 
corruption." 
 
Possible Cabinet Changes 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Although he did not suggest an impending cabinet 
re-shuffle in his prepared remarks, Zubkov did not shy away 
from the subject when asked.  After United Russia deputy 
Andrey Isayev slammed Ministers of Housing Yakovlev, Culture 
and Mass Communications Sokolev, and Health and Social 
Development Zurabov, Zubkov described the strategy (a nod to 
Putin) "correct," but its execution "terrible."  "We will 
take steps," Zubkov said. "It is time for personnel changes." 
 Other deputies, among them the Communist Party's Aleksey 
Popov also used their time to agitate for the ouster of 
ministers.  In Popov's sights, in addition to Zurabov, were 
Minister of Finance Kudrin and Minister of Economic 
Development Gref.  At one point Zubkov seemed to endorse 
Rodina deputy Yuriy Savelyev's suggestion that Kudrin and 
Gref were "guilty of many failures."  "You are right to ask 
questions (about them)," he told Savelyev. 
 
Communists Oppose, 
Zhirinovskiy Opposes Communists 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Communist Party Chairman Zyuganov and the Rodina's 
Sergey Glotov roundly criticized the current cabinet. 
 
MOSCOW 00004538  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Zyuganov ended his attack by announcing, as expected, that 
the Communists would not support Zubkov's candidacy.  Glotov 
reported that Rodina's small faction would abstain. 
Zyuganov's opposition provoked a scathing attack from the 
LDPR's Vladimir Zhirinovskiy.  Vladimir Vulfovich reviewed 
the Communists' criminal past in dismissing their opposition 
to Zubkov.  "You are saboteurs, not revolutionaries," 
Zhirinovskiy said and, in a sentence that managed to link his 
dislike of the West with his hatred of the Communists, 
Zhirinovskiy dismissed "1917 (as) the first Orange 
Revolution." 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) As expected, foreign relations did not figure in 
Zubkov's remarks except indirectly, as when he mentioned the 
need for Russia to be able to compete in the international 
arena.  Deputies asked no questions about Zubkov's possible 
presidential aspirations.  The best capsule description of 
the newly-minted Prime Minister of the many attempted during 
the afternoon session was offered by independent deputy 
Baburin, who described Zubkov, who has traveled the ranks 
from the Soviet Union's collective farm system through the 
Communist Party apparatus to become Prime Minister in a newly 
resurgent Russia, as "an organic unity of the Soviet and 
post-Soviet" experience. The weeks and months ahead will show 
what role that "organic unity" is to play in the succession 
jigsaw puzzle being assembled by Putin. 
 
¶8. (SBU) It is difficult to know what to make of Zubkov's 
comments on possible cabinet changes.  The ministers 
mentioned by assorted deputies have been under attack in the 
Duma for some time, and Zubkov may have been merely 
attempting to placate his electorate just minutes before 
their vote.  Some of his comments, however, suggest that a 
re-shuffle of some sort is in the offing.  When it comes, it 
may amount to little more than the splitting of ministries 
like Zurabov's, or it may be of the more sweeping nature 
suggested in today's hearing. 
Burns