05VIENNA3926
AUSTRIAN FORMIN PLASSNIK HAILS IRAQ ELECTIONS
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Vienna
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS VIENNA 003926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, EUR/AGS and EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ AU EUN
SUBJECT:  AUSTRIAN FORMIN PLASSNIK HAILS IRAQ ELECTIONS 
 
¶1.  Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik issued a 
statement December 17 welcoming the Iraq elections. 
Plassnik stressed that the turnout was "an encouraging 
sign for Iraq's still-young democracy."  She also 
detailed elements of the EU's Iraq policy during 
Austria's EU presidency in the first half of 2006. 
 
¶2.  Begin press release (translation by Austrian MFA): 
 
Plassnik: "Encouraging signal for the young Iraqi 
democracy," December 17, 2005 
 
Foreign Minister welcomes high turnout in parliamentary 
elections in Iraq 
 
Vienna, 17 December 2005 - "The predominantly peaceful 
course and high turnout by all population groups in the 
parliamentary elections on 15 December are an 
encouraging signal for the still young democracy in 
Iraq," said Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik, noting 
that the election was an important stage in the 
political transformation process in Iraq. 
 
"The election has impressively demonstrated the support 
by a large majority of Iraqis for the development of a 
democratic Iraq.  When the final election results are 
in, the rapid formation of a government and review of 
the constitution will be of great importance.  Further 
stabilization is also contingent on improvements in the 
security situation and living conditions of the 
population," said Plassnik. 
 
The review of the constitution would offer the Iraqi 
people the opportunity to establish a large consensus on 
the country's future and would help to create a 
political system encompassing if possible all democratic 
groups, added the Foreign Minister, pointing out that 
this important phase in political restructuring would 
take place during Austria's EU Presidency. 
 
"The European Union is willing to provide its active 
support.  Essential elements in the European policy with 
regard to Iraq during the Austrian EU Presidency will 
include continuation of the political dialogue between 
the EU and Iraq, further implementation of the Iraq 
framework and a possible prolongation of the work of the 
Rule of Law Mission for Iraq (EUJUST LEX)," stated the 
Foreign Minister. 
 
(End press release). 
 
McCAW