04THEHAGUE1690
DUTCH PARLIAMENT ENDORSES GOVERNMENT'S PRT DECISION
Tue Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy The Hague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001690 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL PGOV AF NL NATO
SUBJECT: DUTCH PARLIAMENT ENDORSES GOVERNMENT'S PRT DECISION 
 
REF: The Hague 1240 
 
¶1. (U) On July 5 the Dutch Parliament broadly endorsed a 
recent Cabinet decision to lead a Provincial Reconstruction 
Team (PRT) in Baghlan, Afghanistan.  Only the small far-left 
Socialist Party opposed the mission.  The operation, 
announced in a June 28 government letter to parliament, will 
consist of approximately 150 troops to be deployed initially 
for one year beginning on September 1.  The PRT will be made 
up of three Military Observation and Liaison Teams (MOLT), 
an operations center, a separate protection unit that can 
act as a rapid reaction force and logistic elements 
including medical support. 
 
¶2. (U) Some parties in parliament only reluctantly supported 
the deployment citing concerns over Dutch troops' safety and 
questions as to the mission's purpose.  Defense Minister 
Kamp claimed he had engaged in "tough" negotiations to 
secure Baghlan for the Dutch because "it is relatively quiet 
there."  Despite parliamentary skepticism on this point, the 
fact that the PRT will be part of a NATO operation persuaded 
the majority.  The government also gave assurances that in 
extremis Dutch troops could seek assistance from the U.S., 
Britain and Germany. 
 
¶3. (U) MPs pressed Kamp to define the purpose of the Baghlan 
mission.  Kamp conceded Dutch troops would not be 
responsible for guaranteeing security in the province, 
stating that was the job of local authorities.  He also said 
Dutch troops are not to engage in counter-narcotics 
operations as that would cause too much friction with local 
warlords.  In general, he suggested the presence of foreign 
troops in Afghanistan has been conducive to stability, 
reconstruction efforts, and refugee returns.  Kamp specified 
that Dutch troops are to mediate in conflicts, cooperate 
with local police, assist relief organizations, help prepare 
for elections, and collect information for both NATO forces 
and the government in Kabul. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment:  This debate featured the standard 
parliamentary concerns on all Dutch post-Srebrenica military 
deployments, i.e., how dangerous will it be for Dutch forces 
and who will provide in extremis support should things go 
awry?  Dutch governments regularly have to reassure 
parliament on these points to gain endorsement for any 
overseas military missions.  End comment. 
 
Sobel