04THEHAGUE2154
DUTCH PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE ON IRAQ
Fri Aug 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy The Hague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL PGOV IZ NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE ON IRAQ 
 
REF:  THE HAGUE 2055 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary:  On August 24, the Dutch parliament 
interrupted its August recess for a special session on Iraq 
attended by Defense Minister Kamp and Foreign Minister Bot. 
The parliament endorsed the additional security measures 
taken in the wake of the August 14 ambush of Dutch troops in 
Iraq and reiterated its support for the Dutch military 
mission in Iraq.  Several members, however, noted that 
withdrawal of Dutch forces should be an option if the 
security situation deteriorates to the point that Dutch 
troops cannot operate effectively.  Bot provided a detailed 
overview of planned EU presidency initiatives regarding Iraq 
(including sending an EU exploratory mission to Iraq, 
inviting Prime Minister Allawi to the European Council in 
November, and holding an EU Troika ministerial with Iraq on 
the margins of the UNGA in September).  Bot stressed that 
the level of cooperation and coordination with the U.S. in 
Iraq remained good.  In recent public statements -- prompted 
by increasing Dutch concerns about the Iraq mission -- Kamp 
has stressed that the Dutch currently have no plans to 
extend the mission beyond its current mandate, which ends in 
March 2005.  End Summary. 
 
Tightened security measures 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U)  As noted reftel, one Dutch serviceman was killed and 
five were wounded when a Dutch patrol was ambushed in Iraq 
on August 14.  Following this incident, Dutch patrols in 
Iraq were reduced significantly and made more secure.  On 
August 19, Kamp announced supplemental measures: the troops 
will be supplied with more armored vehicles and four-wheel 
drives equipped with machine guns; two infantry platoons of 
about 60 persons are being sent to Iraq to reinforce 
security; and the intelligence-gathering capabilities of the 
Dutch troops will be expanded. 
 
Parliament approves 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) On August 24, the parliament interrupted its summer 
recess for an extraordinary session attended by Kamp and 
Foreign Minister Bot. During the session (attended by POL 
FSN) all parties expressed support for the supplemental 
security measures noted above.  The major political parties 
that endorsed the cabinet decision in June to extend Dutch 
participation in the multinational force in Iraq until March 
2005 also took the opportunity to reiterate their support 
for the mission, with only the conservative Liberal (VVD) 
party expressing support for continuing the mission until 
December 2005.  Several party representatives stated for the 
record that an earlier withdrawal should be considered a 
possibility if the security situation deteriorated to the 
point where Dutch troops could no longer adequately do what 
they were sent to Iraq to do.  The majority agreed with 
Kamp's assertion, however, that Dutch troops are able to 
function effectively under current conditions. (Note: As is 
usual in parliamentary sessions called to ask questions of 
ministers, no votes were taken.  End Note.) 
 
Kamp:  Challenges Increasing, but Mission Still Relevant 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶4. (U) In response to questions from members, Kamp conceded 
that the ability of Dutch troops to gather accurate 
intelligence had decreased with the turnover of sovereignty 
(along with primary responsibility for security) to Iraqi 
authorities.  Kamp stressed that the key to protecting Dutch 
troops was maintaining positive relations with the local 
population.  Although the majority of Iraqis remain "well- 
disposed" towards the Dutch, he said, attitudes were 
changing.  Foreign troops are often held responsible for the 
lack of economic development in their areas, for example. 
The developments in Najaf have also been manipulated to turn 
many Iraqis against any foreign presence.  Despite worsening 
relations with the local population Kamp said that morale 
among the Dutch troops remains high.  Dutch troops will 
continue to look for opportunities to convey to the 
population that their mission is to help promote stability 
and security and to offer the Iraqis the prospect of a 
better life.  They are not there to occupy the country, he 
stressed, but to help reestablish Iraqi authority so that 
they can leave as soon as possible.  Kamp noted that the 
situation in Al Muthanna was much better than elsewhere in 
Iraq. 
 
Bot:  EU Active; US Keeping Dutch Well-Informed 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5. (U) Foreign Minister Bot provided a detailed overview of 
the political situation in Iraq for the parliamentarians. 
In this context he mentioned that there are indications that 
"supplies" are being moved from Iran to Iraq, but declined 
to elaborate on Iran's possible role, saying merely that he 
could not confirm what exactly Iran may be involved in.  Bot 
also briefly reviewed EU initiatives that the Dutch, as EU 
president, were actively pursuing.  These included sending 
an exploratory mission to Iraq to assess possible areas of 
increased EU involvement, inviting Iraqi Prime Minister 
Allawi to address the European Council meeting in November, 
and holding an EU Troika meeting with the Iraqis on the 
margins of the UNGA in New York in September. 
 
¶6. (U)  Asked if the Netherlands is kept fully informed by 
the U.S. about all the developments relating to Iraq, Bot 
unhesitatingly confirmed that this was the case.  The 
Netherlands is informed and consulted every day, he said, 
through a range of fora, including regular consultations 
among troop-supplying countries in Baghdad, with the USG in 
Washington and at CENTCOM, through diplomatic channels and 
conference calls. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  COMMENT:  The August 24 parliamentary debate 
underscored both the Dutch government's commitment to 
continuing its mission in Iraq, and the broad level of 
political support the mission enjoys.  At the same time, 
press coverage of Iraq has been relatively critical in the 
wake of the August 14 attack.  Several recent opinion pieces 
have questioned whether Dutch troops should remain in Iraq 
in the face of apparently increasing Iraqi hostility; some 
newspapers have also published emotional letters from the 
family members of Dutch servicemen serving there. 
 
¶8. (SBU) While there is clear majority support for 
completing the current Dutch mission in Iraq, there is much 
less support for an additional extension (beyond March 2005) 
under current circumstances.  Kamp himself, although a 
member of the only political party (VVD) calling for a 
longer mission, told a Dutch newspaper on August 24 that 
Dutch troops would leave at the end of their current mission 
because "the Iraqis will then be able to take over; if not, 
we should be replaced."  According to press reports, Kamp 
also reportedly told a visiting Japanese parliamentary 
delegation on August 26 that a decision to extend would be 
"extremely unlikely." 
END COMMENT. 
 
MINIMIZED CONSIDERED 
 
Russel