04ANKARA6393
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, NOVEMBER 1-10, 2004
Wed Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ANKARA 006393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, NOVEMBER 1-10, 2004 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
international media sources published the following news 
articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles originally 
published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published November 10, 2004 by the Jerusalem Post: 
 
     TITLE: In Foreign Parts 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: The fact that a successful sex industry is 
     thriving in Israel is obvious to anyone who looks at 
     the sections of the newspapers offering escort, massage 
     and "health" services in every possible language. 
 
     The media that was supposed to expose the connection 
     between Mafia money and prostitution, and its attempts 
     to buy government officials in order to realize the 
     interests of organized crime, have themselves become a 
     beneficiary of the pimping business. 
 
     But only a few of the readers of those unsavory 
     sections of the newspaper are aware that Israel has 
     become a trafficking center in which women are 
     imprisoned and turned into sex slaves in sub-human 
     conditions. 
 
     In Ilana Hammerman's latest expose, In Foreign Parts, 
     some of the testimonies she records are shocking to 
     read: women testify that they were locked up without 
     food, were subject to threats and physical and 
     emotional abuse, and were humiliated and put through 
     harrowing work in the sex-service industry. 
 
     With all of the focus on the plight of the victim, one 
     deficiency of the book has to do with the profile of 
     the typical client. Hammerman, an esteemed literary 
     editor and gifted writer, leaves him as an anonymous 
     figure, merely providing an indirect sketch of the 
     group profile. The general impression is that there is 
     wide demand from a very broad range of socio-economic 
     levels and ages. 
 
     "I had a very famous rabbi who would come and order a 
     girl to have sex with him in the doggie position, and 
     would ask her to bark," a former brothel owner 
     testified at a parliamentary committee. One of the 
     working women, presented as a devout Christian, 
     expresses an aversion to her religious clients: "They 
     had a big black hat and under it a little black hat and 
     they were real perverts." 
 
     What most impressed Hammerman, however, was that the 
     clients and the business owners tended to present 
     themselves as "upright citizens," and while some of the 
     recipients of their services are aware of the 
     prostitutes' distress and try to rescue them, the vast 
     majority views them as mere service providers. 
 
     IN A journey to Moldova, the author meets two women, 
     Maria and Masha, who worked as prostitutes in Israel 
     for some time. The two, who speak fluent Hebrew, are 
     glad to meet her, and according to their testimony 
     remember their time herein a very positive light: "They 
     told me right away it was fun in Israel, a real 
     paradise; they had a good time, traveled, went to the 
     beach, ate at good restaurants - and of course made 
     money, lots of money." 
 
     Through their eyes, the experience in Israel, viewed 
     retrospectively, looks plainly wonderful. Maria 
     testifies that she worked in the sex trade in Germany 
     and Turkey before she came to Israel, where she 
     describes conditions as excellent. Interestingly, 
     though, both speakers emphasize the family dimension of 
     their personal enterprise. 
 
     One of the most fascinating elements of these anecdotes 
     is the strong and surprising resemblance between the 
     emphasis on family in the prostitutes' consciousness 
     and in the testimonies of the owners and clients of the 
     local brothels. In other words, both sides - the one 
     usually described as the victim, and the other usually 
     described as the exploiter - sound like enthusiastic 
     proponents of family sanctity. All of their actions day 
     and night are presented as supposedly aimed at one 
     supreme pure purpose - the preservation of very 
     bourgeois family values. 
 
     The two women the author met in Moldova provide 
     testimony that is actually the opposite of the 
     enlightened discourse; they announce that they chose 
     this career consciously, and do not view themselves as 
     victims. Both are interested in continuing to work 
     overseas - one as a caretaker and the other as a 
     stripper, and both continue dreaming of family and 
     children. 
 
     Masha excitedly presents her picture album, a memento 
     of the days she worked in Israel, and it appears her 
     parents and family are aware of her work here and 
     accept it with resignation. 
 
     General information about the dimensions of the 
     phenomenon in Moldova reveals that large numbers of 
     women are trafficked for prostitution, that Israel is a 
     prominent target country, and that often the young 
     women come back in an impaired emotional state, 
     socially ostracized and bereft of marriage prospects 
     because of their past. 
 
     The local rate for sex services at the Chisinau train 
     station is about NIS 0.70 for a blowjob, and that 
     illustrates the huge price gap between the homeland and 
     export countries. In most cases the prostitutes do not 
     benefit from the costliness of the service they provide 
     overseas, because most of the payment goes to the pimps 
     and sponsors. 
 
     ONE OF the strong points of the book is the author's 
     ability to meet the women who are the protagonists of 
     her narrative, portraying them as complex individuals 
     with inner lives that sometimes include literary and 
     artistic talent. 
 
     The first and quite interesting meeting was between 
     Hammerman and a young Russian-born prostitute named 
     Tania, who has been living in Israel for a long time 
     and who has documented her experiences in writing and 
     in painting. She has had varied professional 
     experiences, ranging from horrible brothels to upper- 
     scale ones where she made large sums of money, and 
     which she considers "excellent" places of employment. 
 
     After being sold into prostitution in Israel and 
     working in that world for years, Tania was arrested and 
     locked up. Now she finally feels she will be able to 
     extricate herself from the vicious world she has 
     inhabited for so long. 
 
     A former prostitute named Olga, who currently lives 
     with her Arab Israeli partner from Jaffa, told the 
     author she was forced to work in a brothel after she 
     was invited to Israel by a friend who promised to help 
     her find a job. But the indictment against the man who 
     sold her into prostitution says the two were engaged in 
     "a romantic relationship" as the judge put it, and that 
     the former had suggested she come to Israel to work as 
     a dancer, stripper and prostitute. 
 
     Katia, another young girl Hammerman met in the care of 
     the "Save the Children" association in Chisinau, kept a 
     diary of her experiences in Israel. Her testimony shows 
     that she was solicited by a local woman to come to 
     Israel to work as a caretaker and cleaner, but even 
     before she left she was aware of the real goal of such 
     a business trip. She was smuggled from Egypt through 
     the desert, raped by one of the importers, forced to 
     work in prostitution and held by force. 
 
     She managed to escape and go to the police and after 
     staying at a shelter for battered women she returned to 
     her country and came back to visit Israel only to 
     testify at the trial of the man who imprisoned her. 
     Segments of her story appear in the book in a 
     translation from the Romanian and they document a 
     humiliating experience that reflects the abuse and 
     dehumanization experienced by many of the women 
     involved in the Israeli sex industry. 
 
     THIS IS an important book, but often an embarrassing 
     one, because again and again it reveals the troubling 
     gap between enlightened discourse on the issue and 
     findings on the ground that paint a complex and very 
     problematic picture. 
     Not only is prostitution not part of a marginal back 
     yard in Israeli society, but it turns out to be a 
     profitable and thriving business located in its front 
     yard, and one that is apparently tangent to the axis 
     between organized crime, laundered capital, and senior 
     government. 
     Readers might have liked to see the phenomenon as part 
     of a dark and obscure world that stands at the opposite 
     pole of normal family life. But the prostitutes, their 
     clients and the owners alike talk about a fierce 
     yearning for family, a yearning that is repeated so 
     obsessively that it seems prostitution and warm family 
     lives are inextricably linked. 
 
     The women activists, who justifiably wish to come to 
     the prostitutes' rescue, seek to present the full 
     horror of the Israeli sex industry, and in that respect 
     there is no doubt these women are the victims not only 
     of the system, but of a global meat market that 
     traffics in body parts and bodies. 
 
     Disturbingly, though, the testimonies show that very 
     often the women are willing victims, serial and 
     habitual victims, and victims who often cooperate with 
     their pimps and members of organized crime. At the end 
     of a fascinating personal and documentary journey, the 
     writer has to admit that she entered "these gray 
     regions of trafficking in women that still today, after 
     all the efforts I have made, the trips and the 
     conversations, remain foreign and incomprehensible to 
     me." 
 
     This important book ought to generate social and 
     legislative change and raise awareness of the appalling 
     phenomenon. Yet it seems that at times it was hard for 
     Hammerman to deal with the gap between reality and the 
     enlightened view of the way things should be done as 
     she tried to bridge the gaps that emerged from the 
     women's testimonies through personal and literary 
     contemplation. 
 
     The research that started here is indicative of the 
     need for further and more intensive examination of the 
     socio-economic system that drives the industry, and the 
     dark mingling of capital, police-organized crime, 
     prostitution and Israeli party politics.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published November 10, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolia News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: BOAT CARRYING ILLEGAL MIGRANTS SINKS OFF IZMIR 
     KILLING NINE 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: IZMIR (A.A) - Nine illegal migrants died 
     and three others were rescued when the boat carrying 20 
     people sank off Doganbey hamlet of Seferihisar town in 
     western city of Izmir on Wednesday. 
 
     Seferihisar Sub-Governor Mehmet Godekmerdan told the 
     A.A that the boat which possibly departed from the 
     coast in Menderes town capsized and sank. Bodies of 9 
     illegal migrants were found in a coast near Doganbey. 
 
     Godekmerdan added, 'three illegal migrants have reached 
     coast by swimming. Investigation continues. There is an 
     information that the boat was carrying 20 people.' 
 
     Godekmerdan added that there were 1 Turkish citizen, 6 
     Somalians and 13 Mauritanians aboard the boat, stating 
     that they were trying to sneak into Greece. 
 
     Coast guards and gendarmery continue efforts to 
     identify the bodies. END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published November 9, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolia News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: TURKISH POLICE ARREST 63 ILLEGAL MIGRANTS IN 
     AMASYA 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: AMASYA (A.A) - 09.11.2004 - Turkish police 
     arrested 63 illegal migrants in Tasova town of northern 
     city of Amasya, sources said on Tuesday. 
 
     Sources said police, acting on a tip-off, searched a 
     lorry parked at a gas station on Amasya-Tasova highway, 
     and captured 63 Pakistanis who had entered Turkey 
     clandestinely. 
 
     The sources noted that also two Turks, including the 
     lorry driver, were detained in the operation. 
 
     The illegal migrants would be deported after legal 
     proceedings were completed, the same sources added. 
     END TEXT. 
¶5. (U) Published November 5, 2004 by the Reuters: 
 
     TITLE: UK, German police smash people-smuggling 
     network. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: LONDON, Nov 4 (Reuters) - British and 
     German police arrested 13 people in co-ordinated raids 
     on Thursday to smash what they said was a gang 
     smuggling people from Turkey to the UK. 
 
     Detectives from London's Metropolitan Police arrested 
     eight people in London and south-east England, while 
     officers in Hamburg and Cologne held five after 
     searching nine addresses, Scotland Yard said. 
 
     Immigration police mounted raids in other parts of 
     Europe, Scotland Yard added, declining to give further 
     details. 
 
     The London detainees are being questioned over the 
     alleged trafficking of people between Turkey and 
     Britain. 
 
     "The arrests follow a twelve-month intelligence-led 
     operation," said Assistant Commissioner Tarique 
     Ghaffur, head of Scotland Yard's Specialist Crime 
     Directorate. 
 
     "Working with our European colleagues in this way has 
     enabled us to take out an entire human trafficking 
     network, from route to source," he added. 
 
     Police believe the gang has brought hundreds of Turkish 
     people illegally into Britain in the last few years, 
     through Germany, France and Belgium. 
 
     On arrival in London, they are exploited to provide 
     cheap labour for cafes and take-away food outlets, 
     police said. 
 
     Turks need to obtain visas or work permits before they 
     can come to the UK legally. END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published November 4, 2004 by the Independent (UK): 
 
     TITLE: Eight held as police target human trafficking 
     ring; By Nick Allen, Crime Correspondent 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Police today made a series of raids over a 
     human trafficking gang thought to be responsible for 
     smuggling hundreds of Turkish people into Britain in 
     the past few years. 
 
     The illegal immigrants were brought in by air, road and 
     sea through Germany, France and Belgium. 
 
     Eight alleged members of the gang were arrested in 
     raids in London this morning. 
 
     Further raids were launched by immigration police on 
     the continent and they arrested more suspects. 
 
     Five people were held in raids on nine addresses in 
     Hamburg and Cologne in Germany. 
 
     The crackdown was a year in the planning and was part 
     of Scotland Yard's ongoing effort - codenamed Operation 
     Maxim - against human trafficking. 
     On arrival in London the illegal immigrants were being 
     exploited to provide cheap labour in cafes and 
     takeaways in London and elsewhere. 
     Assistant Commissioner Tarique Ghaffur, head of the 
     Yard's specialist crime directorate, said: "Today's 
     operation is a further example of our commitment to 
     tackling organised immigration crime that has a 
     devastating effect upon London's communities. 
 
     "The arrests follow a 12-month intelligence-led 
     operation, which has seen unprecedented co-operation 
     between the Metropolitan Police, United Kingdom 
     Immigration Service, our counterparts in Germany and 
     with other European law enforcement agencies." 
 
     The eight suspects were arrested just after 6am during 
     raids in Surrey, southwest and southeast London. 
 
     Police are still searching businesses connected to the 
     suspects. 
 
     Mr Ghaffur said: "Working with our European colleagues 
     in this way has enabled us to take out an entire human 
     trafficking network from route to source. 
 
     "Pan-European operations of this type can be very 
     successful and we expect to be mounting more of these 
     in the future. 
 
     "We are now working more closely than ever with an 
     increasing number of European law enforcement agencies. 
 
     "We continue to target the facilitators and criminal 
     entrepreneurs who cause misery on many levels, mostly 
     within their own communities. 
 
     "We are increasingly using new legislation to take 
     criminal assets from those who engage in the movement 
     of people for illicit purposes. 
 
     "Many of the crimes impact directly on the diverse 
     communities of London and by arresting these people we 
     are making London a safer city for all its 
     inhabitants." 
 
     Immigration minister Des Browne said: "This operation 
     is a real success for the Immigration Service in its 
     joint work with the police. 
 
     "It sends a clear message that those seeking to abuse 
     our immigration system will be caught and prosecuted. 
 
     "The UK welcomes all foreign nationals who come to the 
     UK legitimately - as visitors, students or workers - 
     with the intention of making a contribution. 
 
     "However, we will take tough action on people here 
     illegally and those who make money by facilitating 
     them. 
 
     "This kind of racket undermines the confidence of local 
     people and we are determined to ensure we disrupt and 
     prosecute those responsible." END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published November 4, 2004 by BBC NEWS: 
 
     TITLE: Human smuggling racket 'smashed' 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: A gang that is thought to have smuggled 
     hundreds of Turkish people into London has been 
     smashed, police have said. 
 
     Thirteen people were arrested on Thursday as raids were 
     carried out in London, Hamburg and Cologne. 
 
     Scotland Yard said they are being questioned over the 
     alleged trafficking of people between Turkey and the 
     UK. 
 
     The illegal immigrants, thought to have been brought in 
     by air, road and sea, were exploited as cheap labour in 
     cafes and takeaways in London and elsewhere. 
     The Metropolitan Police and European immigration 
     officers joined forces for operation Maxim which has 
     been more than a year in the planning. 
     Eight people were arrested after dawn raids in Surrey, 
     south, west and south-east London. Police are 
     continuing to search these addresses. 
 
     A further five people were arrested by immigration 
     officials in Hamburg and Cologne. 
 
     Met Assistant Commissioner Tarique Ghaffur said: 
     "Working with our European colleagues enabled us to 
     take out an entire human trafficking network; from 
     route to source. 
 
     "We continue to target the facilitators and criminal 
     entrepreneurs who cause misery on many levels, mostly 
     within their own communities. 
 
     Tough action 
 
     "Many of the crimes impact directly on the diverse 
     communities of London. By arresting these people we are 
     making London a safer city for all its inhabitants." 
 
     Immigration Minister for the UK, Des Browne, said the 
     success of the operation "sends a clear message that 
     those seeking to abuse our immigration system will be 
     caught and prosecuted. 
 
     "We will take tough action on people here illegally and 
     those who make money by facilitating them. 
 
     "This kind of racket undermines the confidence of local 
     people and we are determined to ensure we disrupt and 
     prosecute those responsible." END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published November 3, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     VAN 
 
     Jandarma carried out an operation in rural areas of Van 
     and near the Basegmez vilage they spotted a crowded 
     group of people walking outside the village.  The 
     Jandarma checked their IDs and found out that these 
     were 20 Afghanis and Pakistanis who came to Turkey 
     through Iran through illegal means. 
 
     The officials said that after the legal procedures 
     (based on violation of the Passport Law and violating 
     the country's borders) the illegal immigrants will be 
     deported.  An investigation is ongoing. 
 
     EDIRNE 
 
     In the last six days 150 foreigners and their six 
     Turkish guides were captured in Edirne's Kesan, Ipsala, 
     Meric and Uzunkopru townships as they wanted to leave 
     Turkey illegally. 
 
     The illegal immigrants were from Pakistan, Algeria, 
     Tunis, Sudan, Iraq, Palestine, Mauritania, Somalia and 
     Iran. 
 
     The Turkish citizens were sent to the public prosecutor 
     for being involved in human smuggling.  The foreigners 
     were sent to the Edirne police for deportation. 
 
     SIIRT 
 
     The Jandarma captured 50 foreign illegal immigrants in 
     Baykan village of Siirt. 
 
     As the Jandarma searched a small truck, they found 38 
     Pakistanis, 10 Bengalis, two Iraqis. 
 
     Meanwhile, the truck driver and six others were 
     detained. 
 
     Foreigners were deported. 
 
  ¶9. (U) Published November 2, 2004 in editions of 
  nationally distributed Aksam, Cumhuriyet, Sabah, and 
  Hurriyet Newspapers: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Mualla Ustuner (32) sent an e-mail to 
     Abdullah Gul's website to suggest that Turkey and 
     Russia sign an agreement to prevent prostitution. 
 
     Ustuner, who is a teacher, complained in her e-mail, "I 
     have two children.  My marriage came to an end because 
     of a 'Natasha.'  You, too, have a family.  The EU 
     countries adopted special laws against 'Natashas.'  If 
     you make such an initiative, it will be welcomed by the 
     EU as well." 
 
     She suggested to Gul that Turkey sign an agreement to 
     prevent human trafficking and prostitution during the 
     visit of Russian President Putin in December. END TEXT. 
 
¶10. (U) Published November 1, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
          TITLE: TURKISH GENDARMERY ARRESTS 67 ILLEGAL 
          MIGRANTS IN AGRI 
 
          BEGIN TEXT: AGRI (A.A)- Turkish gendarmery 
          detained 67 illegal migrants in eastern city of 
          Agri on Monday.  A total of 67 Pakistanis who 
          entered Turkey illegally were captured during 
          controls at Tutak town of Agri. Illegal migrants 
          will be deported after legal procedures. END TEXT. 
 
  EDELMAN