04ANKARA6599
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Silent tension grows Between US, Turkey - Sabah 
Parliamentary HR Committee: US commits `genocide' in Iraq - 
Aksam 
Nicosia signals vote for EU-Turkey entry talks - Hurriyet 
Soros warns of looming economic crisis in second Bush term - 
Sabah 
Israel concerned that `Arafatism' may continue - Milliyet 
Walesa supports `Orange Revolution' in Kiev - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Iraq tension between US,Turkey - Radikal 
Dep. PM Sahin: Turkey's economic presence in Iraq to 
continue - Cumhuriyet 
Heavy fighting prevents Red Cross convoy from entering 
Fallujah - Yeni Safak 
BBC's Iraq reporter: Conditions in Fallujah a `disaster' - 
Yeni Safak 
Resistance fighters take 60 percent of Fallujah back from US 
forces - Yeni Safak 
Pentagon board warns: US is losing Muslim world - Zaman 
Hawks warn Bush that US has `lost the war' - Yeni Safak 
Barghouti to run for Palestine presidential elections - 
Cumhuriyet 
Israel may pardon Barghouti - Zaman 
A `toughening' Yuschenko calls for general strike in Ukraine 
- Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ankara's Iraq tension with US:  The AK Party's increasing 
criticism of US policies over Iraq has stirred tension 
between Ankara and Washington, papers report.  On Thursday, 
the US Embassy in Ankara reacted to charges by parliamentary 
human rights committee chairman Elkatmis that the US is 
carrying out `genocide' in Iraq and may have used nuclear 
weapons in the Fallujah operation.  A US embassy source 
termed the charge `ridiculous,' adding that such statements 
have the potential to damage U-Turkish relations.  Elkatmis 
said that the `genocide' and `savagery' carried out by the 
US in Iraq has surpassed what was done by the Pharaohs, 
Hitler and Mussolini.' Elkatmis said that the `violence, 
barbarism and terror must be brought to an end.'  He claimed 
that `what is done in Iraq constitutes a crime against 
humanity.'  Parliamentary Speaker Bulent Arinc also 
criticizedt the US for `violating international law in 
Fallujah.'  In response to Elkatmis' reference to 
`genocide,' US Embassy sources noted that `Turks rightly 
display sensitivity to the use of the word genocide, which 
has nothing at all to do with what is happening in Iraq.' 
The embassy source noted that one of the goals of the 
operation in Fallujah was to root out the groups responsible 
for the killing of Turkish drivers and contractors in Iraq. 
The embassy source also stressed that reports about US 
forces using cluster bombs in Falujah were false.  `Turks 
may have been among those who were killed in the 
slaughterhouses found by US forces in Fallujah,' he added. 
 
Ankara vows to continue economic presence in Iraq:  Deputy 
PM Mehmet Ali Sahin said Thursday that Turkey's economic 
activities in Iraq has become a `lifeline' for the Iraqi 
people, adding that the Turkish government is determined to 
continue those activities.  Despite the fact that Turkey has 
lost more lives than some coalition member troops in the 
region, sahin said, `our support for the Iraqi people will 
continue.'  Sahin also characterized the recent US operation 
in Fallujah as a `massacre.' 
US loses `war of ideas':  A Pentagon report submitted to 
Secretary Rumsfeld said that although the US won the 
 
SIPDIS 
military battle in Iraq, it has lost the war of ideas.  US 
diplomatic and military activities are not adequately 
explained in the Islamic world, the report stressed.  The 
report said the US has mistakenly viewed Muslims as similar 
to those terrorized under the Soviet regime.  The report 
notes that in Muslim nations, `there are no masses waiting 
to be liberated.' 
 
FM Gul may visit Israel:  On a regular visit to Ankara, 
Israeli foreign ministry U/S Ron Prosor told his Turkish 
counterpart Ali Tuygan about Israeli expectations of 
Ankara's contribution to the upcoming January 9 elections in 
Palestine.  Tuygan said FM Gul could visit Israel if he is 
invited and his schedule permits.  Papers note that a visit 
by Gul to Israel seems unlikely before 2005.  Acting FM 
Mehmet Ali Sahin advised Prosor to ensure that Palestinians 
in East Jerusalem are allowed to participate in Palestinian 
elections, and to launch new peace talks with Syria and 
Lebanon. 
 
US does not `trust' Turkey on Iran:  US official 
institutions, based on the Iraq experience, do not believe 
Ankara will side with Washington in a possible crisis with 
Iran, "Hurriyet" reports from Washington.  US sources said 
that Washington has asked Ankara to enter into a 
`constructive' engagement with Tehran in an effort to help 
halt a growing nuclear crisis.  Thus far, nothing has been 
conveyed to the US regarding contacts between Ankara and 
Tehran.  The US may eventually seek permission to use 
Turkish airspace or military bases for an airstrike against 
selected targets in Iran, but Washington is inclined to 
believe that Turkey will not accept sucha request, 
"Hurriyet" notes. 
 
Nicosia wants to open consulate in Istanbul:  Turkish papers 
cite the Greek Cypriot daily "Politis" as claiming that the 
Greek Cypriot administration has applied to the European 
Commission to pressure Ankara for allowing a Greek Cypriot 
consulate.  The consulate would facilitate visa procedures 
for Greek Cypriot nationals who visit Turkey. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Ukraine; Israel-Palestine 
 
"The Hands of the US are Everywhere" 
Emin Pazarci argued in the conservative-sensational "DB 
Tercuman" (11/26):  "The US is in the process of 
establishing a new world order, and it is happening not only 
by the power of American military but also by the power of 
money and politics.  The occupation of Iraq is only a recent 
example that began with military power and now continues 
with political propaganda.  The propaganda is so powerful 
that the US has managed to claim that everyone who has stood 
against the Americans is a terrorist. . Following the 
Georgia case, where political rule was transferred to a pro- 
American figure, Ukraine is the latest example of efforts to 
reshape the world based on Washington's interests.  The 
Russian-backed Prime Minister Yanukovich and the US-backed 
Yushchenko are competing.  The election results indicate a 
victory for the former, yet Yanukovic's fate seems to be no 
different than Georgian or Serbian leaders.  The Ukrainians 
are marching to voice support for Yushchenko, as are 
intellectuals and NGOs.  It looks like the eventual winner 
of this election will be Yushchenko.  That means the 
Ukrainian elections will be one more victory for the US." 
 
"Jerusalem, the Obstacle for Peace" 
Haluk Ulman commented in the economic-political "Dunya" 
(11/26):  "Arafat is not with us any longer.  According to 
the West, the biggest obstacle before a peace settlement is 
has now been removed.  The expectation would be that, with 
the elections in Palestine at the beginning of the next 
year, a new leader will take over the Palestine Authority 
and will sign a peace agreement with Israel.  It is not 
known whether these people believe in this plan, but at 
least their expectations lie in this direction.  No one 
should have high hopes on this issue.  No matter how 
strongly the new leader supports peace, it is not possible 
for Arab-Israeli peace to be established as long as Israel 
refuses to give east Jerusalem back to Palestine.  This is 
territory that was occupied during the 1967 war.  In fact, 
the main aim of the Palestinians is to have east Jerusalem 
as the capital of the independent state they are going to 
establish." 
 
EDELMAN