04WELLINGTON951
NEW ZEALAND ASSESSES VIABILITY OF NEW AIRCRAFT
Tue Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000951 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP, OES/OA 
BANGKOK FOR ESTH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS AY NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND ASSESSES VIABILITY OF NEW AIRCRAFT 
ACCESS IN ANTARCTICA; EYE TOWARDS FIGHTING ILLEGAL FISHING 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: National Science Foundation (NSF), 
Raytheon, and Embassy representatives attended a logistics 
planning briefing hosted by the NZ Defence Force (NZDF) 
October 14 to assess the viability of allowing Royal NZ Air 
Force P-3K Orion and Boeing 757 aircraft to use the landing 
areas at McMurdo Station, Antarctica.  The use of ice runways 
at McMurdo Station by NZDF P3Ks would significantly increase 
the surveillance area under the GoNZ's Operation Mawsoni, 
which supports the inspection regime of the Commission for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) by locating vessels conducting illegal and 
unregulated fishing (IUU.)  The Boeing 757s would be used to 
offset U.S. C-130 personnel and cargo flights.  While the 
projects present logistic challenges, both are viable, and 
could be underway by the 2006 Antarctic summer season.  As of 
yet, neither project has been officially presented to members 
of the NZ Government.  The reps from NSF and Raytheon (who 
provide logistical services for USG operations in Antarctica) 
agreed at the meeting to look into housing and other 
logistical requirements for the proposed projects. 
Powerpoint presentations have been e-mailed to EAP/ANP and 
OES/OA. End summary. 
 
CCAMLR Surveillance 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Trevor Hughes, Antarctica Policy Unit, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) outlined the current status 
of Operation MAWSONI, including the policy and legal aspects. 
 Hughes pointed out that even a single P3K flight with 
increased surveillance coverage could significantly deter IUU 
fishing boats.  In concert with MFAT,s Legal Representative, 
Hughes did not foresee any legal problems raised by allowing 
P3K Orion flights into Antarctica.  Hughes noted that under 
Article 1.2 of the Antarctic Treaty, which states that the 
continent can be used "for scientific research, or any other 
peaceful purpose," use of the P3Ks would be allowed, but the 
GoNZ would have to provide prior notification of their use to 
all Antarctic Treaty nations.  He confirmed that the use of 
the aircraft has no military purpose, and is not related to 
NZ's territorial claim in Antarctica. 
 
Can A P-3K Orion Land At McMurdo? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Group Captain Short presented the NZDF's initial 
assessment of how operating P3K flights from McMurdo would 
specifically increase surveillance of the CCAMLR area, 
including patrol area scope and increased time on the ice. 
The flights could triple the area of the Ross Sea under 
surveillance, and a 5-day run in and out of McMurdo could 
produce 24 hours of patrol, versus the current 2 hours using 
Christchurch as the return point.  (NB: This would comprise 3 
6-hour patrols and 6 hours to deploy and redeploy.) 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Short noted that overall, the P3K Orion could 
operate under Antarctic conditions.  The aircraft is suitable 
to temperatures as low as )40 degrees Celsius, and the ice 
runway is long enough to accommodate the P3K's 4,600 foot 
take-off length.  Short highlighted potential concerns, 
noting especially that because of the P3K's low wing design, 
exhaust efflux could melt the runway during takeoff. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Short also said that the availability of ice 
survival training may limit available personnel, as only 
10-15 aircrew are trained annually.  However, he appeared 
optimistic that with the creation of standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) for ice flights and the crews, increasing 
familiarity with polar flying and McMurdo's facilities, there 
would be a progressive build-up of capabilities. 
 
Timeline 
-------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Barring hiccups, the NZDF could achieve full PK3 
operations by the 2006 Antarctic Season.  Short noted that 
NZ's continued commitment to the Global War on Terror (GWOT) 
decreased available resources, as did planned upgrades to 
military aircraft.  For now, the NZDF is planning to develop 
SOPs for Antarctic missions by July 2005.  This season, they 
will send two maintenance personnel to the Ice for 
familiarization, and to conduct an exhaust efflux trial. 
 
The Boeing 757 
-------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Group Captain Short also presented a summary of the 
requirements for landing Boeing 757 (B757) aircraft on the 
ice runway, which appear to be more problematic, although 
overall policies and procedures would mirror those for the 
C-130 flights.  The largest obstacle is that the planes would 
need a new Navigational fit-out, as they do not possess 
TACAN, have no radar, and no GPS.  There is no "GRID" 
navigation system available.  Another concern is that special 
equipment may be needed to load and offload cargo, as the 
hold is 13 ft off the ground.  The airfield was deemed 
suitable, with sufficient length to account for any problems. 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) The proposed B757 flights would be able to handle 
110 passengers each carrying 76 pounds (approx. 16,000 kgs.) 
Short noted that the point of no return in flying to the Ice 
was 80-110 minutes from McMurdo.  Short then pointed out that 
there were a number of procedures and concerns that had not 
been examined in detail, including maintenance procedures for 
the aircraft, risk analysis for the flights, the feasibility 
of holding spare parts on the Ice, etc.  These would be 
addressed dependent on whether or not the project receives 
approval from the Ministries of Defense and Foreign Affairs 
and Trade, neither of which have been briefed at this time. 
 
Timeline 
-------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Short indicated that the NZDF hopes to have draft 
policies by October 2005, and that operations would be 
possible by late 2006.  This program would be an NZDF 
priority decision, but not before 2006. 
 
Issues for the USG to Consider 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU)  During the course of the meeting, issues that 
would need to be addressed by the NSF and other USG agencies 
were raised.  Representatives from NSF and Raytheon offered 
to examine each of these, and to keep their GoNZ counterparts 
apprised of developments.  Concerns included: 
- Housing of crew and maintenance staff. 
- Transport to and from Pegasus. 
- Ground handling support and equipment to access the B757 
cargo hold (at 13 ft. high) 
- Housing and shipping of fuel and other spare parts. 
 
Attendees 
--------- 
(This list is incomplete) 
¶11. (U) U.S 
Art Brown, National Science Foundation (NSF) 
Michael Hush, Logistics Manager for McMurdo, Raytheon Corp 
Katherine Hadda, Political/Economic Counselor 
Dorothy Rogers, Political Officer 
Warrant Officer Michelle Barkwell, DAO 
 
New Zealand 
Trevor Hughes, MFAT Antarctic Policy Unit 
Alice Revell, MFAT Antarctic Policy Unit 
Rosemary Paterson, MFAT Legal Division 
Brigadier General Clive Lilley, NZDF 
Air Commander Graham Lintott, NZDF 
Graeme Briggs, NZDF Antarctic Liaison 
Group Captain Short 
Julian Tangere, Antarctica NZ 
Swindells