07BEIJING4132
JUNE 19 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, TIP
Tue Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9273
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4132/01 1701044
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191044Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9142
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0113
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0114
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0712
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 0146
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 2050
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1444
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0096
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1753UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 004132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM EFIN ETTC KN JA IZ SU SP PM VT CH
SUBJECT: JUNE 19 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, TIP 
REPORT, HIGH-TECH EXPORT CONTROLS, HUMAN RIGHTS, SUDAN, 
IRAQI PRESIDENT VISIT, HONG KONG ANNIVERSARY, SUPPORT FOR 
ABBAS, VATICAN RELATIONS, JAPAN TERRITORY DISPUTE, VISITS 
 
 
BEIJING 00004132  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 19 MFA Press Conference were: 
 
-- The spokesman said the DPRK's invitation to the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) affirms the DPRK's 
political will to implement the initial actions of the 
February 13 Joint Document. 
 
-- The Chinese Government places importance on protecting 
human rights and countering smuggling and will consider 
constructive criticism from human rights groups. 
 
-- Both sides should make joint efforts to promote bilateral 
trade, said Qin when asked about United States' plans to 
tighten controls on high-tech exports to China. 
 
-- Exchange between the Mainland and Hong Kong SAR continues 
to improve as does confidence in the Basic Law and "one 
country, two systems" arrangement 
 
-- Visits: King Juan Carlos of Spain will pay a state visit 
June 24-29 and UNGA President Haya is currently visiting 
China until June 24. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. At the June 19 regular MFA press briefing, spokesman Qin 
Gang asserted that the DPRK's invitation to the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) affirms the DPRK's political will 
to implement the initial actions of the February 13 Joint 
Document.  Qin thanked all parties for their constructive and 
positive efforts and expressed the MFA's hope that the 
initial actions can be implemented in a comprehensive and 
balanced way.  Qin confirmed that A/S Hill met with VFM Wu 
Dawei yesterday and that both sides agreed to take positive 
steps toward the implementation of the initial actions.  The 
starting date for the next round of Six-Party Talks is still 
under consultation, added the spokesman. 
 
TIP Report Reaction, Brickyard Slaves 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. The Chinese Government places importance on protecting 
human rights and countering smuggling, said Qin commenting on 
the recently released State Department Trafficking in Persons 
Report.  China continues to participate in international law 
enforcement cooperation and handles the trafficking issue in 
accordance with international and domestic law and with a 
humanitarian spirit, he added.  China calls on the 
international community to take joint efforts on this issue 
and hopes the United States can develop a clearer picture of 
the situation in China. 
 
¶4. China will consider constructive criticism from human 
rights groups, said Qin in response to a question on the 
recent scandal on forced labor in Chinese brickyards.  The 
Chinese Government stands firm in cracking down on illegal 
labor practices and parties that violate child labor laws 
will be punished. 
 
High-Tech Export Controls, IMF Currency Policy 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. Both sides need to make joint efforts if the United States 
wants to promote bilateral trade with China, said Qin when 
asked about U.S. plans to tighten controls on high-tech 
exports to China.  Qin remarked that one way to improve 
bilateral trade would be to relax trade controls, not tighten 
them.  The MFA hopes such controls do not become an obstacle 
to bilateral trade.  Asked about new moves by the IMF that 
support the Bush administration's efforts toward the 
revaluation of China's currency, the spokesman stated that 
the IMF is an international organization and thus should make 
policy on exchange rates in an objective and just manner. 
 
New Rules in the UN Human Rights Council 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Asked about China's proposed changes to new rules in the 
UN Human Rights Council for launching investigations against 
countries suspected of rights abuses, Qin said that the 
 
BEIJING 00004132  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Council had reached consensus with broad support of the 
Council members and would adopt new rules at 10:00 Geneva 
time this morning.  The spokesman noted China's constructive 
efforts to protect justice and seriousness of the Council and 
to prevent abuse and confrontations in the Council over 
political issues. 
 
Africa Envoy Liu's Comments on Sudan 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. Qin expressed hope that Special Envoy Liu Guijin's recent 
comments can be comprehensively and objectively understood, 
when asked by a reporter if Liu's comments that China used 
"direct language" to convince Sudan to accept the Annan Plan 
marked a change in China's non-interference policy.  China 
has taken positive and constructive efforts aimed at an early 
solution to the Darfur issue including high-level meetings, 
special representatives and cooperation with the UN and AU, 
Qin added.  China hopes relevant parties can come to a proper 
solution through fair consultation, a goal in common with 
that of the international community. 
 
Iraq President Visit, China's Hopes for Iraq 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. China's Iraq policy respects Iraqi sovereignty and has the 
goal of providing security and prosperity for the Iraqi 
people, Qin said responding to an Al Jazeera reporter's 
criticisms that China waited 50 years to invite the President 
of a now occupied Iraq to visit.  China hopes relevant 
parties support reconstruction efforts to allow Iraqis to 
live in peace.  Qin said the two sides would sign agreements 
in health and education during the visit. 
 
Ten-Year Anniversary of Hong Kong's Return 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. The spokesman stated that exchange between the Mainland 
and Hong Kong SAR continues to improve as does confidence in 
Hong Kong's Basic Law and the "one country, two systems" 
arrangement.  He stressed that the people of Hong Kong and 
the Mainland are of one history and one blood and that Hong 
Kong's future is brighter and brighter. 
 
China Supports Abbas and the Palestinian People 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶10. China supports the political cause of the Palestinian 
government so long as it is in the legitimate interests of 
the Palestinian people, said Qin when asked by an Al Jazeera 
reporter why China supported the Abbas government even though 
it did not have the approval of the Palestine Authority. 
China is deeply concerned about the violence in the region 
and hopes disputes can be resolved through dialogue so that 
the livelihood of Palestinians can improve, commented Qin. 
 
Hopes For Improved China-Vatican Relations 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶11. China hopes for improved relations with the Vatican and 
is open to dialogue with Vatican officials, said the 
spokesman hen asked about reports that the Pope would clear a 
draft of a letter to Chinese Catholics with the Chinese 
Government.  Pressed on whether China could accept the 
Vietnam model of joint input in naming bishops, Qin stressed 
that any agreement reached with the Vatican must meet China's 
two "well-known preconditions" of severing ties with Taiwan 
and not interfering in Chinese internal affairs. 
 
Japan "Islands" Actually a "Reef" 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶12. Qin emphasized that Okinotori Islands, also known as the 
Douglas Reef, constitute a reef, not islands, and thus in 
accordance with the UN Convention of the Law of the Seas do 
not fall into Japan's 200-nautical-mile exclusive economic 
zone. 
 
Panama Ties Could Lead to New Relations 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00004132  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶13. Through increasing mutual ties, China believes there is a 
brighter chapter for the development of bilateral relations 
with Panama, said Qin when asked if recent communications 
between the two countries could lead to the formal 
re-establishment of bilateral ties.  The Taiwan Question is 
the only obstacle to the realization of formal diplomatic 
relations between China and the few Central American nations 
who do not recognize the People's Republic of China, Qin 
stated. 
 
Visits: King of Spain, UNGA President Haya 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶14. King Juan Carlos of Spain will pay a state visit June 
24-29, meeting with President Hu Jintao, PM Wen Jiabao and 
NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo and will visit Shanghai and Chengdu 
as well as Beijing.  The King's visit will pay special 
attention to development opportunities in China's western 
provinces, said the spokesman. 
 
¶15.  UNGA President Haya, currently visiting China until June 
24, will meet with FM Yang and PM Wen and attend the opening 
ceremony of the International Association of Economic and 
Social Councils and Similar Institutions (IAESCSI), Qin said 
when asked about the purpose of the visit. 
PICCUTA