07BRASILIA1131
AMEMBASSY BRASILIA NOMINATES FORD AND MICROSOFT BRAZIL FOR
Mon Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO8659
PP RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1131/01 1691742
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 181742Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9268
INFO RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 0161
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 4605
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 6823UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 001131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EB/CBA FOR SMITH-NISSLEY 
RM FOR PINEDA 
WHA/EPSC FOR SALAZAR 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON BEXP ELAB ETRD BR
SUBJECT: AMEMBASSY BRASILIA NOMINATES FORD AND MICROSOFT BRAZIL FOR 
THE SECRETARY'S 2007 CORPORATE EXCELLENCE AWARD (MULTINATIONAL 
ENTERPRISE CATEGORY) 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Based upon their leadership and commitment to corporate 
social responsibility (CSR), Ambassador Sobel nominates the U.S. 
multinational companies Ford and Microsoft Brazil, as 
representatives of the 50 U.S. multinational companies that support 
the U.S. Embassy Brazil CSR Initiative, for the Secretary's 2007 
Corporate Excellence Award. 
 
¶2. (U)  Begin Text of Award Nomination 
 
In October 2006, the U.S. Ambassador, together with Microsoft, Ford, 
and a select group of American companies founded a U.S. Mission 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) initiative, aimed at 
leveraging the assets of U.S. companies doing business in Brazil. 
This initiative, which has expanded and now brings together 50 U.S. 
companies, has focused on encouraging CSR partnerships and joint 
investments while increasing the visibility and recognition of U.S. 
development efforts overseas.  It has shown that partnerships have 
the power to increase both the effectiveness and efficiency of 
public and private sector development assistance. 
 
This whole effort began when the U.S. Mission in Brazil sponsored a 
CSR roundtable, in conjunction with 31 U.S. companies in Brazil and 
the Sao Paulo American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham).  That 
represented the first step towards the development of an innovative 
Public/Private-based model for corporate social responsibility. 
However, none of this would have been possible without the 
commitment of the movement's principal private sector leaders:  both 
Microsoft and Ford Brazil.  These two companies chair initiative's 
two main committees: visibility (Ford) and partnership (Microsoft). 
Accordingly, the Ambassador nominates the U.S. multinational 
companies Ford and Microsoft Brazil, representing the group of the 
50 U.S. multinational companies that currently support this 
initiative.  Their exemplary efforts in guiding this group have been 
key to making this campaign a best practice to be replicated 
worldwide. 
 
-------------------------- ----------------------------- 
Corporate Citizenship and Exemplary Employment Practices 
-------------------------- ------------------------------ 
The group of 50 companies sponsors a wealth of social responsibility 
projects, in such diverse fields as education, the environment, and 
health.  Combined annual investments are estimated at $250 million 
(cash) and another $250 million in in-kind contributions. 
Additionally, 48 of these companies support a volunteer network of 
over 100,000 individuals.  Their 200+ projects benefit all of the 26 
Brazilian states and the country's Federal District. 
 
Specifically, the group has: 
 
-- Signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the AmCham to promote 
employment of "Youth Ambassadors" - a U.S. Embassy-funded program 
targeting young leaders from low income families/schools across the 
country that has produced outstanding results.  Over fifteen 
companies are now in the process of hiring several Youth 
Ambassadors. 
 
-- Collaborated in the establishment of the U.S.-Brazil Higher 
Education Program, yet another example of the power of partnerships. 
 This program, jointly funded by Ford, Microsoft, and the USG, aims 
at revitalizing vocational education.  This effort has been welcomed 
by the Government of Brazil's Ministry of Education and is already 
serving as a model of how industries and governments can cooperate 
to meet social and economic needs in a sustainable way. 
 
--  Sponsored a highly-regarded speech/media event, featuring noted 
economist Jeffrey Sachs, for companies participating in the 
initiative.  We have invited Microsoft CEO Bill Gates as the next 
speaker. 
 
Several other activities are currently being designed under the CSR 
Initiative and will be launched soon.  These include: 
 
--  the design of a CSR Challenge Fund, which will combine USG and 
private sector resources for programs in youth employability, 
entrepreneurship, and the environment; 
 
--  the development of a CSR Best Practices Catalogue; 
 
--  a survey of member companies on their individual CSR activities 
and willingness to partner with the Mission and others  (this series 
of surveys resulted in a matrix of CSR activities by member 
companies); 
 
--  a volunteer day during which Consulate Sao Paulo personnel can 
participate in community activities (planned for July 2007); and 
 
BRASILIA 00001131  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
--  a CSR Workshop, which would bring together the 50 member 
companies with speakers from local/international institutions such 
as the Rockefeller Foundation and the Kellogg Foundation. 
 
------------------------- ------------------------------- 
Contribution to the Overall Growth and Development of the Local 
Economy. 
-------------------------- ------------------------------ 
Member companies are highly committed to the development of the 
Brazilian economy. 
 
--  the group of 50 directly employs an estimated 1 million 
workers; 
 
--  they lead several value chains in Brazil across the entire 
economy; 
 
--  the combined annual income of this group is estimated at US$100 
billion; 
 
--  their presence in Brazil is on average 50 years.  Companies like 
Ford have been responsible for the development of an entire 
industry; 
 
--  newcomers such as Microsoft have taken the lead in key areas 
such as education. 
 
Many of these companies have established policies to promote 
minority suppliers, and the group is working towards 
institutionalizing the following new activities: 
 
--  the implementation of a minority suppliers development program. 
This work will be launched in August during the visit of the head of 
the American Minority Suppliers Development project. 
 
--  there are several ongoing initiatives related to responsible 
sourcing, including a partnership between the U.S. Embassy and 
Wal-Mart to source fair-trade coffee from Brazilian small farmers. 
 
-- In addition, work is proceeding on the design of an innovative 
minority suppliers development program focusing on cooperatives of 
people living with HIV. 
--------------------------- ------------------------- 
Development of Competitive and Innovative Activities 
--------------------------- ------------------------- 
Other group activities aimed at fostering competitiveness and 
innovation include: 
 
--  the development of a report to measure the combined social and 
economic impact of the CSR projects supported by the U.S. corporate 
sector in Brazil; 
 
--  planning for a joint volunteer day to take place in August 2007; 
 
 
--  the design of a public outreach web site within the U.S. Embassy 
Brasilia portal; and 
 
--  various CSR-related meetings and planning sessions  to take 
place in CY 2007. 
 
End Text of Award Nomination 
 
Sobel