05PORTAUPRINCE689
DG CHARLES UPDATE ON EX-FADH IN THE HAITIAN NATIONAL POLICE
Tue Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Port Au Prince
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PORT AU PRINCE 000689
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/EX PLEASE PASS USOAS 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/WHA 
DS/DSS/ITA 
DSERCC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2014 
TAGS: PGOV KCRM PHUM PREL ASEC HA
SUBJECT: DG CHARLES UPDATE ON EX-FADH IN THE HAITIAN NATIONAL POLICE
 
REF: PAP 688 
 
Classified By: Ambassador James B. Foley for Reasons: 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: During a March 9 meeting with the DCM, 
Haitian National Police (HNP) Director General Leon Charles 
said that the group of ex-FADH competing for slots in the 
17th promotion would be the last group of former military 
integrated into the HNP this year. Charles also agreed to 
make sure the ex-FADH recruits vying for a position in the 
17th class will take the written exam on or around March 16, 
and that the ex-FADH from the 15th class who did not complete 
training would return in April to complete the course. OAS 
officials charged with vetting police candidates reported 
approximately 400 ex-FADH candidates at the Police Academy on 
March 11 undergoing physical fitness testing. Charles' 
statements on HNP recruitment and training standards are 
reassuring, but his is not the final word on this issue and 
the pressure to bring ex-FADH into the HNP remains high, 
particularly following the demobilization of March 13.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (C) DCM met with Charles on March 9 to emphasize the 
importance of maintaining consistent standards regarding 
ex-FADH recruits for the HNP. Charles provided detailed 
assurances that the ex-FADH recruits competing for a slot in 
the 17th class would take the same written exam that other 
HNP applicants took.  He stated that there were approximately 
400 ex-FADH (chosen by the Managing Office for the 
Demobilized Military) vying for the planned 200 slots in the 
17th promotion. Charles said the test would be given on or 
around March 16 at the Police Academy. Those selected would 
also be subject to the OAS (USG-financed) vetting program. 
Charles also said that the ex-FADH from the 15th class who 
were rushed on to the streets last fall would return to class 
following the 16th promotion's graduation in April. Finally, 
Charles said that the ex-FADH in the 17th class would be the 
last round of ex-FADH integrated into the HNP this year. 
(Note:  In a separate, written exchange with the Embassy 
police advisor, the police chief noted that cadets from the 
17th class would, upon graduation, be deployed throughout 
Haiti on an individual basis and not as a group. End Note.) 
 
¶3. (C) On March 11 OAS officials responsible for the vetting 
program reported the arrival of the approximately 400 ex-FADH 
candidates to the Police Academy for initial health and 
physical fitness exams. The officials noted that the physical 
fitness tests were "not rigorous" but that they were being 
administered to all candidates.  They also said that HNP 
personnel assisting the OAS with the vetting program were 
afraid to interview some of the ex-FADH candidates out of 
concern they might be targeted if the panel disqualified an 
applicant. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: Charles' assurances regarding the number of 
ex-FADH and the requirement that they meet the same 
requirements as civilians for entrance into the HNP are 
welcome and follow continuous pressure from us.  We note, 
however, that Charles is not the only player involved in the 
ex-FADH-HNP issue, and ultimately is subject to the political 
pressures and decisions of PM Latortue, Justice Minister 
Gousse, and others.  We have raised this issue with them on 
countless occasions, pointing out the real danger the IGOH 
runs of losing international support for assistance to the 
HNP if the process of integrating ex-FADH into the police 
does not hew to the redlines we have laid down.  We will 
continue to monitor the recruitment, testing, and training 
process, including a review of the written exam, test scores, 
and fitness results.  We are also investigating the 
possibility of asking CIVPOL to assist the OAS with 
background investigations and interviews. 
 
¶5. (C) The March 13 arrival in Port-au-Prince of 
approximately 325 ex-FADH "demobilized" from Cap-Haitien 
(reftel) may further complicate matters, as many of them were 
reportedly hearing that they would have jobs in the HNP 
waiting for them.  All of this raises the larger issue of 
linking the MINUSTAH-led disarmament demobilization, and 
reintegration (DDR) program to the process by which ex-FADH 
are identified for HNP integration.  Until now, the Interior 
Ministry and/or the Managing Office have been in charge of 
identifying possible ex-FADH candidates for the HNP.  This 
needs to change, so that ex-FADH candidates for the police 
come out of the reintegration/counseling process that the UN 
(with U.S. support through the International Organization for 
Migration) will manage.  End comment. 
FOLEY