04TELAVIV2412
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281237Z Apr 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 002412 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  April 27 Damascus Attack 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  Israel-Hizbullah Deal 
 
¶4.  Cyprus 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that the U.S. 
Administration is inclined to present Jordan's King 
Abdullah II a "balancing message" (Ha'aretz) to the 
"letter of commitment" that President Bush presented to 
PM Sharon during his Washington visit two weeks ago. 
The radio cited the concerns of Foreign Ministry 
sources that the U.S. stance could "erode," and 
reported that in his letter to the King, Bush will 
state that issues such as borders and the right of 
return for Palestinian refugees will be resolved 
between Israel and the Palestinians.  Ha'aretz reported 
that Saudi Arabia and the Palestinians have requested 
similar letters from the U.S., and that the U.S. has 
informed Israel it will have to make a "corrective" 
move toward its European allies and the Arabs, but that 
it will under no circumstances renege on its promises 
to Sharon (Israel Radio cited a similar statement by 
sources at Israel's Embassy in Washington, which said 
the U.S. Administration would make an announcement on 
the issue).  The radio also quoted U.S. Administration 
officials in Washington as saying that Bush will 
reaffirm the United States' adherence to the road map. 
Israel Radio also quoted Secretary of State Colin 
Powell as saying Tuesday, at a reception held at the 
Israeli Embassy in Washington for Israel's Independence 
Day that the final-status issues will be resolved 
through negotiations between the parties.  Powell said 
that Sharon has provided the Palestinians a "new 
opportunity by removing some settlements, but a new 
opportunity that has to be met by other side by 
bringing an end to terror and violence."  The radio 
quoted Powell as saying that Israel has no friend like 
the U.S.  The station notes that Powell, in an 
interview with Reuters, said that Israel will leave 
buildings in the Gaza Strip at the Palestinians' 
disposal, rather than destroy them. 
 
Ha'aretz and Yediot led with concerns in Sharon's 
entourage that his plan will not pass at the Likud 
referendum slated for May 2.  Yediot quoted Sharon 
associates as saying that Sharon told them the 
referendum constituted a vote of confidence in him. 
Ha'aretz quoted settler leaders as saying Tuesday that 
senior Likud officials have told them that Sharon 
actually plans to evacuate dozens of West Bank 
settlements, rather than the four he has publicly 
announced, but that he prefers to keep this secret 
until after the referendum.  All media reported that 
Tuesday 60,000 to 70,000 protestors demonstrated in the 
Gush Katif settlement bloc in the Gaza Strip against 
the government's disengagement plan. 
This morning, Israel Radio reported that a booby- 
trapped Palestinian jeep, filled with hundreds of kg of 
explosives, exploded near the Gaza Strip settlement of 
Kfar Darom, wounding four IDF soldiers who were chasing 
the vehicle.  Hamas's military branch claimed 
responsibility for the attempted attack on the 
settlement.  Leading media reported that two Hamas 
militants and a 14-year-old Palestinian boy were killed 
in separate incidents over the Independence Day 
holiday.  Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post also reported 
that three Palestinians were killed when two of them 
demanded that the third one surrender his explosives 
belt. 
 
Leading media cited Syrian media that last night Syrian 
security forces clashed with a "terrorist band" in 
Damascus, after explosions and gunshots were heard in a 
neighborhood where foreign diplomats live and work. 
One attacker was reported killed and another wounded, 
according to AP.  Among similar statements by Syrian 
officials cited in the media, Israel Radio quoted the 
Syrian Ambassador to the U.S. as saying that the attack 
was carried out by Al Qaida. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the IDF will dig a trench 
alongside a section of the Philadelphi Road, along the 
border between Gaza and Egypt, as part of preparations 
for Israel's disengagement from the Gaza Strip.  The 
trench will reportedly help prevent digging of arms 
smuggling tunnels. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning the Jerusalem 
police arrested Prof. Sari Nusseibeh, President of Al 
Quds University and co-sponsor of the People's Voice 
initiative, for employing Palestinians illegally. 
 
Yediot reported that reports that reached the Foreign 
Ministry in recent days indicate that former U.S. 
ambassador to Israel Martin Indyk could come back to 
the country as special UN envoy to the Middle East, 
replacing Terje Roed-Larsen.  The newspaper quoted 
diplomatic sources as saying that the only obstacle 
that Indyk could face would be Arab opposition to the 
move. 
 
Leading media reported that President Moshe Katsav will 
meet with Powell in one of the many diplomatic side 
meetings that will take place on Wednesday and Thursday 
during the anti-Semitism conference in Berlin, which is 
organized by the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).  Ha'aretz reported that 
Sen. Hillary Clinton sent a letter to the World Jewish 
Congress, which was meeting in Berlin Tuesday, pledging 
to introduce in the U.S. Senate a proposal against anti- 
Semitism. 
Yediot reported that various diplomatic bodies have 
informed the GOI that the International Court of 
Justice in The Hague (ICJ) will render its opinion on 
the security fence in June. 
 
Yediot reported that Israel's income tax authorities 
want to put an end to practices involving Israeli 
employees of foreign embassies, who get cash salaries 
that are not reported by their employers. 
 
Several media quoted Florida Gov. Jeb Bush (the 
President's brother) as saying Tuesday, at a reception 
for Israel's Independence Day, that Jerusalem is the 
eternal capital of Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Anglican Bishop Abu Al Assal has 
offered Mordechai Vanunu unlimited sanctuary at St. 
George's Church in East Jerusalem. 
 
Yediot reported on a controversy in Iraq: does the 
country's new flag -- which was designed by an Iraqi 
graphic artist -- bear a similarity to the Israeli 
flag? 
 
Ha'aretz cited the results of an Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL) poll conducted in 10 European countries: only 31 
percent of respondents say that Israel is an "open, 
democratic country." 
 
----------------------------- 
¶1.  April 27 Damascus Attack: 
----------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote on 
page one of independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "There 
are apparently some new features on the map of terror 
activity in the Middle East." 
 
Senior Arab affairs commentator Smadar Perry wrote in 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Tuesday, 
the terrorist leaders appear to have conveyed an 
unequivocal message to intelligence agencies in 
Damascus: 'Either you stop cooperating with the British 
and Americans, or we will turn Syria into the next 
battleground.'" 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
¶I.  "Attack Shows Region's New Terror Reality" 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote on 
page one of independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (April 
28): "The official Syrian statement saying terrorists 
had carried out a series of attacks in Damascus against 
the Iranian embassy, the British ambassador's house and 
apparently a building belonging to the United Nations 
was highly unusual.  It was an admission of an 
intelligence failure in a country that prides itself on 
its complete control of what happens within its 
territory.  As it turns out, Syria's reputation for 
maintaining iron-clad internal security exceeds 
realities on the ground.... Syria's intelligence 
officials now face a new challenge.  Up to now, Syrian 
intelligence has been ruthlessly efficient in campaigns 
against domestic underground groups; but it is 
apparently less organized for tackling terror activity 
from outside its borders.  There are apparently some 
new features on the map of terror activity in the 
Middle East.  In Arab countries, terror targets are no 
longer exclusively Western and UN diplomatic sites, and 
terror groups now appear inclined to carry out strikes 
in all Arab countries." 
 
II.  "Assad's Double Game" 
 
Senior Arab affairs commentator Smadar Perry wrote in 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (April 28): 
"The deliberately closed eyes of the security services 
in Syria towards the waves of terrorists infiltrating 
Iraq, Jordan and Saudi Arabia are intended to safeguard 
Syria against terror attacks and the activity of 
sleeper agents.  However, Bashar Assad is playing a 
double game.  While Syria becomes a transit camp for 
terrorists, he also discreetly conveys intelligence 
information to the U.S. intelligence agencies regarding 
some of the terrorists.  Dozens of these have been 
extradited from Syria to the U.S. since President Bush 
threatened to include Syria in the 'axis of evil'.... 
Tuesday, the terrorist leaders appear to have conveyed 
an unequivocal message to intelligence agencies in 
Damascus: 'Either you stop cooperating with the British 
and Americans, or we will turn Syria into the next 
battleground.'" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Liberal columnist Gideon Samet wrote in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Those who favor disengagement - 
- the maximum political act that Sharon is ready and 
capable of advocating under the present conditions -- 
are ostensibly compelled to acquiesce in all the tricks 
he is using in order to get a majority." 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Four days 
before the [Likud] referendum, the opponents of 
disengagement are enthusiastically mobilizing support 
and showing initiative.  The supporters -- except for a 
few individuals -- are stammering or silent." 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized: "The Prime 
Minister's unnecessary entanglement in the dialogue 
with the U.S. concerning 'Arafat's elimination,' didn't 
bring Ariel Sharon much credit." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "The Referendum Paradox" 
 
Liberal columnist Gideon Samet wrote in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (April 28): "If [Sharon] does 
push the plan through the Likud, it will be an 
achievement that follows the personal success he scored 
on his visit to Washington.... There is something of a 
paradox here, because those who favor disengagement -- 
the maximum political act that Sharon is ready and 
capable of advocating under the present conditions -- 
are ostensibly compelled to acquiesce in all the tricks 
he is using in order to get a majority.  They have to 
comply mutely when he lures the opponents of the plan 
by means of threats against Yasser Arafat; to cluck 
with admiration when he complicates Jerusalem- 
Washington relations and entangles Bush with a leak (or 
a distortion) from their private conversation; and to 
say, 'Wow, what a man,' when he reverses himself all 
over the place.  In short, they have to accept Sharon 
as he is, with all the wiles and guiles of his 
ploys.... In this manner Sharon has [similarly] 
neutralized quite a bit of the criticism against him 
from the center and even the left." 
II.  "In Favor But Actually Against" 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (April 28): 
"[Hard-line Likud] Ministers Netanyahu and Livnat 
announced that they support the Prime Minister's 
unilateral withdrawal plan.  They explained their 
decision by saying that the preliminary political 
conditions they posed for supporting the withdrawal 
were met to their satisfaction.  However, when the 
ministers were asked to play an active part in the 
campaign to persuade the registered Likud members to 
vote in favor of the withdrawal, they adamantly 
refused.... What is the meaning of this refusal?  It 
has only one meaning: an implicit call -- a kind of 
wink -- to the registered Likud members to refrain from 
voting or to vote against.... The 
withdrawal/disengagement plan is fateful for Israel's 
future.  A statesperson of stature cannot evade taking 
a clear stance with regard to it.  On such an issue, 
one cannot -- from a conscience or political standpoint 
-- vacillate.... One cannot zigzag, being in favor but 
actually against.  Four days before the referendum, the 
opponents of disengagement are enthusiastically 
mobilizing support and showing initiative.  The 
supporters -- except for a few individuals -- are 
stammering or silent." 
 
III.  "The Likud Contest Enters Its Final Phase" 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized (April 28): 
"The Prime Minister's unnecessary entanglement in the 
dialogue with the U.S. concerning 'Arafat's 
elimination,' didn't bring Ariel Sharon much credit. 
Furthermore, it harmed Israel's diplomatic interests. 
According to diplomatic sources, this was evidence of 
the impetuosity of Mr. Sharon, who, out of over- 
eagerness and propaganda activity around the Likud 
referendum, talks carelessly and makes remarks that 
cause harm to Israel." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  Israel-Hizbullah Deal: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: 
"Three months have passed since the first stage of the 
prisoner exchange deal with Hizbullah was carried 
out.... But the second stage is stalled.  No new 
information about [MIA Ron] Arad has been released." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
"The Doubts Get Deeper" 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (April 
28): "Three months have passed since the first stage of 
the prisoner exchange deal with Hizbullah was carried 
out.... It is, perhaps, no accident that in the months 
since the deal was carried out, Hizbullah's role in 
planning and assisting attacks perpetrated by 
Palestinian groups from the territories against targets 
in Israel has intensified.... Three months have gone 
by, but the second stage is stalled.  No new 
information about [MIA Ron] Arad has been released, 
either because Hizbullah has been unable to secure such 
data, or because it refuses to relay the information to 
Israel." 
 
----------- 
¶4.  Cyprus: 
----------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
 
Hebrew University Professor of Political Science and 
former Foreign Ministry director-general Shlomo Avineri 
wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: 
"One could easily see how the UN and the EU -- which 
are opposed to Israeli occupation and the settlements - 
- were ready to betray their principles when it was 
about Turkey." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"There Are No Easy Solutions in Cyprus, Either" 
 
Hebrew University Professor of Political Science and 
former Foreign Ministry director-general Shlomo Avineri 
wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot 
(April 8): "One could easily see how the UN and the EU 
-- which are opposed to Israeli occupation and the 
settlements -- were ready to betray their principles 
when it was about Turkey.  It is therefore no surprise 
that Greek Cypriots viewed the Annan plan as a prize to 
Turkey and the occupation.... In Cyprus -- and in our 
region, too -- there are no easy solutions, 
particularly if such solutions are initiated by foreign 
elements.  If there is no local political willingness, 
there can be no solution to the conflict.  What can be 
done -- like in Cyprus 30 years ago -- is to shake off 
the thought that the alternative to a solution actually 
is war.  There also is room for stabilizing the 
situation, reducing violence, creating effective 
barriers between the opposite sides to lessen friction 
and conflicts.  In the absence of solutions to 
conflicts that are not ripe for resolution, one must 
aspire to stabilizing them." 
 
KURTZER