05ANKARA1878
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, Feb 16-28,
Fri Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 ANKARA 001878 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, Feb 16-28, 
2005 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
international media sources published the following news 
articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles originally 
published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published Sunday, February 27 by Cumhuriyet as part 
of a three-page supplement: 
 
TITLE: Modern Slaves; by Berat Guncikan and Ozgur Erbas 
 
BEGIN TEXT: Large, heavy, all words are insufficient.  For 
them, concepts like justice, equality, and freedom pop one 
by one on their faces and bodies.  And if "globalization" is 
the topic of discussion, they know it best.  Because 
according to UN figures, each year 4 million people are 
subject to human trafficking, including hundreds of 
thousands of women who are forced into the sex trade. 
Whether a country is at war or at peace, first-world or 
third-world, this new "slave trade" can not be prevented; 
trafficking in women grows like an avalanche.  The 
international agreements that Turkey too has signed haven't 
been any resistance against this trade, which is the third 
behind drugs and arms trafficking.  In addition, in almost 
all countries trafficking in women reportedly is conducted 
under the protection of local security forces.  Economic and 
political advantages between countries give shape to the 
market.  While some countries turn a blind-eye, others are 
threatened with economic sanctions.  In the shadow of all of 
them, hundreds of thousands of women are threatened with 
torture and assault.  Those who don't bow their heads to 
criminal organizations are murdered. 
 
One of these murders came to light last month in Istanbul. 
Ukrainian Tatyana Litvinenko's one-week baby was suffocated 
with chewing gum.  Litvinenko, who had a  one-and-a-half 
year old daughter from her first marriage, was in her second 
marriage.  She was pregnant and she desperately needed a 
job.  When she was offered a job as a nanny in Turkey, she 
accepted.  She learned what work she would actually do at 
the house she was brought to when she was picked up from the 
airport in Istanbul on July 2, 2004.  She was forced into 
prostitution despite the fact that she was pregnant.  After 
24 days, she delivered her baby early.  A week later, the 
baby was killed because it prevented the mom from working. 
The incident came to light months later as the result of a 
raid conducted on the basis of a tip. 
 
It was not a coincidence that Litvinenko was a Ukranian. 
Because after the collapse of the USSR the women trafficking 
exploded, as had been the experience in Africa and Asia 
previously.  The people of the republics introduced to 
capitalism in 1989 found themselves mired in corruption and 
unemployment.  They no longer had health and social 
security, and were bombardment of image and fantasy by the 
Western media.  Many thought that this was the life style of 
ordinary Americans and Western Europeans.  Women in 
particular decided to emigrate in order to achieve the 
living standards of those countries.  Turkey became 
acquainted with these women, who are referred as "Natashas" 
without distinguishing between borders, in the early 1990s. 
Beginning on the Black Sea coast, then moving to Istanbul- 
Laleli and the southern shores, the "suitcase trade" quickly 
turned into a "sex trade."  Even if it was on a small scale, 
criminal organizations were established in both Turkey and 
Russia, depending on this trade.  There were incidents of 
kidnapping and rape.  After being occupied for a short while 
with their "social wound" stories, Turkey then became a 
transit country.  Women brought to Turkey from Asia and the 
former Soviet republics were sold to various countries in 
Europe.  According to an attorney who deals with woman 
trafficking cases, the 1994 currency devaluation changed the 
movement of trafficking in women in Turkey.  Until that 
time, women sold by crime organizations in their own 
countries to Turkey were able to keep up to 50 percent of 
their income after paying their debts to their Turkish 
bosses, thus earning money.  But during the economic crisis 
period, they were forced into working, had their passports 
confiscated, and were barred from returning to their 
countries.  Those who refused to work were punished; one 
woman's wrists were cut with a broken glass and another was 
killed by a drug overdose.  It was not clear whether these 
incidents were suicide or murder. As the trafficking market 
has grown, incidents of abduction and forcing women for 
prostitution have increased.  Childcare, patient care, 
dancing, and modeling are the jobs offered most often. 
Behind "guaranteed" employment advertisements in Russian, 
Ukrainian, and Kazakhstani newspapers, generally lurks sex 
workership.  Tatiana, whose story was told above, came to 
Istanbul to become nanny as seen in a newspaper ad and. 
 
TURKEY IN FIGURES 
 
In recent times, Turkey has changed from being primarily a 
transit country to being a country to remain in longer.  The 
market moved particularly to Dubai, Italy and Spain. 
Certainly there are women who stayed in Turkey as well. 
Women from Moldova and the Ukraine in particular have been 
working as nannies and servants in rich households.  Rich 
"conservative" men reportedly make these women their second 
wives after convincing the first.  When marriages do not 
work or another woman is found, these women are thrown out 
in the streets. Since their visas expire, they have to live 
illegally in the country. 
 
According to Interior Ministry statistics, approximately 
400,000 foreigners were deported between 1995 and 2002.  The 
center of woman trafficking is Istanbul.  In 2001, one- 
fourth of the deportations was from this city.  In 2002, 74 
percent of them belonged to Istanbul.  According to a report 
prepared for the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM) by Prof. Sema Erder and Dr. Selmin Kaska of the 
Marmara University Labor Economics Department, each year 1.5 
million people enter Turkey from Azerbaijan, Georgia, 
Moldova, Romania, Russia and Ukraine.  According to the same 
report, 90% of deportations (between 1999-2001, 22,000 women 
in all) involved illegal prostitution and sexually- 
transmitted disease.  Contrary to popular belief, most of 
those deported because of diseases were from Georgia and 
Romania, while Russia was at the bottom of the list. 
 
According to information obtained from the Istanbul Police 
Human Trafficking Department, as a result of 76 operations 
carried out in 2004, 9,905 people were deported. 
 
The Istanbul police conducted 11 operations in connection 
with woman trafficking.  While police arrested 18 people, 17 
women were deported, and 33 victims were saved.  Most of the 
victims said that they were lured by job offers to work as 
servants, models, or show girls, but later were forced into 
prostitution.  According to reports by Amnesty 
International, while some policemen find places for victims 
to stay through their own means, some policemen take bribes 
from gangs and prostitutes.  The reports noted that last 
year 11 people were detained Erzurum for being involved in 
human trafficking, including three policemen, and a court 
case was opened against 13 police on charges of involvement 
in crime. 
 
TREATMENT OF ILLEGAL MIGRATION 
 
A report written by Leyla Gulcur  from the New York 
University and Pinar Ilkkaracan, President of the Human 
Rights For Women Foundation (KIHV) entitled "Natasha 
Incident: Immigrant Sex Workers in Turkey from Eastern 
Europe and the Former Soviet Union" agrees with Amnesty 
International.  Because of these women's illegal status and 
also their status as victims, they are unable to open a bank 
account and get health services.  Some police officials 
reportedly abuse this situation and make the women give them 
bribes. 
 
In their report, Gulcur and Ilkkaracan emphasize that it's 
also a woman's "own preference" to go from one country to 
another for sex work, and that during operations police 
should ask victims whether they were forced to come to a 
country or arrived voluntarily. Ilkkaracan said "women may 
have migrated voluntarily for sex work, as is their right. 
But keeping them in an illegal position, and their inability 
to organize, prevents their voices be heard.  Thus they 
cannot tell what they have experienced and are deported 
immediately against their will.  In addition, there are no 
NGOs in Turkey for these women.  In other countries, NGOs 
working on this issue put up a struggle with these policies 
in their states." 
 
In interviews done by the two women in the process of 
preparing this report, one of the complaints of female sex 
workers was that "the insistence of Turkish men on not using 
condoms." END TEXT. 
 
Women said that in order not to use condoms, men offered to 
pay extra money. Ilkkaracan draws attention to one specific 
danger: "women are deported due to sexually-transmitted 
diseases but men who had intercourse with these women cast a 
bigger risk than these women in spreading disease." 
¶3. (U) Published Sunday, February 27 by Cumhuriyet as part 
of a three-page supplement: 
 
TITLE: Crime Partnerships in Trafficking in Women; by Berat 
Guncikan and Ozgur Erbas 
 
BEGIN TEXT: Russian Organized Crime (ROC) has more than 200 
organizations that are active in 58 countries, including 
Turkey.  In each country they cooperate with local mafia and 
gangs.  They all resort to violence even for the smallest 
problems.  Japan's Yakuza kills women who try to escape. 
Turkish and Serbian mafia prefer to throw women from the 
balconies of high buildings.  Last year an Azeri women fell 
from the 10th floor of an apartment in Beylikduzu, Istanbul. 
According to the neighbors, she was thrown out of the 
window.  The Jandarma was called but the house was already 
evacuated.  According to a source, Turks among those who 
manage Europe's prostitution network as well.  The direct 
trade in women together with Russians, Ukrainians and 
Yugoslavs. 
 
Nobody knows how many women and children are kidnapped in 
Russia for sexual exploitation.  It is estimated that this 
figure reaches the hundreds of thousands.  According to 
estimates of the U.S. Department of Interior, in 1997 alone 
more than 100,000 women were kidnapped from the former 
Soviet Union. 
 
The corridor which has the worst reputation in woman 
trafficking is the Balkan path.  Knitting together Serbia, 
Croatia, Albania, Macedonia, Bosnia, Montenegro, and Kosovo, 
even during political clashes this road's traffickers can 
reach an agreement when the issue is "trade."  While 
Serbians and Albanians cooperate in trafficking in women, 
the Kosovo Liberation Army also uses this market.  By taking 
bribes sometimes of cash, sometimes of free sex, police and 
civil servants open the way for pervasiveness of trafficking 
in women. 
 
In Bosnia, more than 5000 East European women were involved 
in prostitution in more than 260 bars.  The Peace-keeping 
force troops and UN police were among their clients. 
Complaints of women were not taken into consideration and 
investigations were either swept under rug or interrupted. 
 
The E-55 between Dresden and Prague is one of the heavily- 
used areas of the sex trade.  Each year HIV-positive or drug- 
addicted babies are born.  Children are left in an orphanage 
close to the highway. 
 
Israel is one of the favorite countries for crime 
organizations.  According to Israeli police  sources, more 
than $400 million are made from prostitution in Israel.  The 
subject of a court case in Israel was a Russian organized 
crime organization's attempt to buy a seat in the Knesset, 
Israel's parliament. 
 
The UAE is one of the countries where kidnapped women from 
Russia are taken.  There is no information about the fate of 
the women who end up in this country. 
 
In Toronto 53 Asian women brought through illegal means and 
forced into prostitution to pay the debts from their voyage 
were arrested along with their pimps and mediating agency 
reps.  Women were accused of prostitution and violating the 
Immigration Law.  Those who brought them were accused with 
lighter crimes such as "keeping by force" rather than 
torture or sex slavery. 
 
The Internet is a network that contributes to the expansion 
of the sex trade.  World Sex Guide is the most well-known 
site, with ties to millions of people in hundreds of 
countries.  On this site men share their experiences and 
information on where to find prostitutes in any country and 
which hotels to use.  According to this website, Turkey is a 
paradise of Ukrainian women.  A man advises another one "if 
you go to Seranda in Istanbul, you will find lots of women 
from former USSR and you can take any one of them to the 
hotel next door.  You will not be hurt with the price 
either." END TEXT. 
¶4. (U) Published Sunday, February 27 by Cumhuriyet as part 
of a three-page supplement: 
 
TITLE: Punishments Were Increased; by Berat Guncikan and 
Ozgur Erbas 
 
BEGIN TEXT: In October 2000, the American government 
prepared a law on "Protecting Victims of Trafficking and 
Violence."  Countries were divided into groups depending on 
whether they turned a blind-eye, remained inefficient or 
were supportive on the issue of trafficking in persons. 
America was not in any group.  Countries reaching the 
minimum standards were put into Tier 1.  Those who showed 
some effort were put in Tier 2 and those who were not 
intervening in this trade at all were put in Tier 3. 
Turkey, along with Greece, Russia, Yugoslavia and South 
Korea, was in Tier 3 in the first Human Trafficking Report 
in 2001.  In the following years, it stayed in that 
category. 
Israel, however, moved into Tier 2 in the second report 
without showing any effort.  South Korea was pulled into 
Tier 1.  Meanwhile, figures showed that 2,000-3,000 women 
went to Israel each year for prostitution.  It seemed that 
the report was prepared depending on economic and diplomatic 
activities.  The reason for South Korea's placement in the 
first group is that there were 37,000 U.S. troops there, and 
they needed to be with women from Russia and Philippines in 
the bars next door. 
 
In the 3rd report, Turkey was moved into Tier 2.  The reason 
for this was Turkey's legal changes.  One of these changes 
was the introduction of Article 201/b of the Turkish Penal 
Code.  While Article 436 regarding forced prostitution was 
already in existence, the punishment was imprisonment for 
one year.  Article 201/b, however, prescribes a five-year 
jail sentence for traffickers. END TEXT. 
 
¶5. (U) Published Sunday, February 27 by Cumhuriyet as part 
of a three-page supplement: 
 
TITLE: 43 Women in Four Months; by Berat Guncikan and Ozgur 
Erbas 
 
BEGIN TEXT: The Human Resource Development Foundation works 
on behalf of human trafficking victims.   Along with IOM, it 
provides education police, jandarma, judges and prosecutors 
on human trafficking and how to approach victims.  Until now 
214 people have benefited from this training.  To date, the 
shelter was opened on November 1 and operated by HRDF has 
provided support to 43 victims.  There are Slavic and 
Russian speaking employees at the shelter. 
 
Victims reach the shelter as a result of raids by the police 
or jandarma.  When the Foundation receives a tip, they 
inform the police.  Wherever the operation takes place, 
victims are brought to Istanbul because there is no other 
shelter in another city.  IOM determines whether the 
interrogated woman is a victim or not, and if she is a 
victim, then she is taken into the shelter. 
 
While in the past women were deported immediately, now they 
are issued a 6-month residence permit.  Using this, the 
victim's psychological situation is stabilized, and the 
Foundation provides psychological support to the victims if 
necessary.  Women are given food and clothing, and the 
necessary travel documents are prepared.  The victim is sent 
to her country with a plane ticket bought by IOM, and IOM 
accompanies her in her home country.  If needed, she may 
receive rehabilitation in her country as well.  Foundation 
administrators think that biggest importance of the NGOs is 
the confidence they provide to the victim.  Many women 
prefer to tell their experiences at the shelter rather than 
at  the police.  Foundation officials said that many dealers 
were captured this way. END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published Sunday, February 27 by Cumhuriyet as part 
of a three-page supplement: 
 
TITLE: It's Not My "Duty," I'll Do Whatever I Want; by Berat 
Guncikan and Ozgur Erbas 
 
BEGIN TEXT: Galma Jahic, from Bilgi University Faculty of 
Law, is working on her PhD at the Rutgers University in the 
U.S. on smuggling of women in Bosnia.  She noted that states 
generally treat smuggling of women as "illegal immigration." 
Describing police attempts to prevent organized crime, she 
says that "certain privileges were provided to women who 
cooperate with the police.  No measures are taken to prevent 
victimization." 
 
Jahic stated, "In Bosnia there was almost no prostitution in 
Bosnia.  In reality, Bosnian women would not be able to find 
customers, because all people know each other.  However, you 
could ask for a foreign woman.  In some Bosnian clubs there 
were women brought from abroad and going to those clubs is 
regarded as an indication of power and status.  A night out 
at one of these clubs costs 400 Euros." 
 
When women go to a country, for a long time they are not 
paid and they regard the first money they earn as "hope for 
the future."  Jahic explains this as follows: 
 
"In their police statements, they said that if they did not 
earn money they would be disgraced, but if they go back to 
their country with money, nobody would ask them any 
questions.  The problems in source countries cause their 
people to abandon their countries.  But Bosnia is in an 
interesting position here.  During the communist period 
there was no religion, and later this ideology disappeared 
and was replaced by nationalism.  As international 
organizations did not do anything, then there was nothing 
left to believe in.  It means everything is permitted." 
 
According to Jahic, sex workers in western Europe organized 
themselves and introduced requirements on the use of condoms 
and rate "standards."  This gave direction to human 
trafficking as foreign women were forced to work below these 
standards. END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published Sunday, February 27 by Cumhuriyet as part 
of a three-page supplement: 
 
TITLE: The Doors Were Locked, The Windows Were Nailed Down; 
by Berat Guncikan and Ozgur Erbas 
 
BEGIN TEXT: Marika was from Kharkiv in the Ukraine.  She 
thought she would work as a waitress in Tel Aviv because she 
had reached an agreement with  the agency.  She was locked 
in a room along with two Ukrainians, one Russian and a 
Moldovan woman.  After putting on a see-through long 
nightgown, she was introduced to her "owner."  The man 
purchased them for $10,000 each.  He told them in strong and 
certain terms what they will face if they refuse to perform 
their jobs.  They could not object because Avi, the guardian 
who is capable of doing anything, was there and had nailed 
down all the windows of the apartment.  She tried to escape 
but nobody helped her. 
 
Tanya accepted a job offer from a friend of her mom.  She 
would serve as a servant for a family living in the UAE and 
in return would earn $4000 a month.  But instead she was 
taken to Abu Dhabi and sold to a brothel.  She found a way 
to take shelter at a nearby police station after three 
months.  She was arrested for prostitution but was released 
after three years. 
 
Olexandra (23) was a university graduate and a mother.  She 
was in severe financial difficulties.  She accepted a job 
offer in Germany and went to Poland.  After being beaten, 
raped, and forced to stay in a building, she was smuggled to 
Germany.  She was sold to men many times by Turkish 
marketers and made to work in various German brothels.  She 
was captured during a police raid.  She was sick, and was 
deported and sent back to the Ukraine.  Her disease was 
diagnosed as serious internal infection. 
 
Eastern European countries are the breaking points of women 
in woman trafficking.  Women who do not want to be 
prostitutes are taught prostitution in these countries; 
those who do not want to do it become subject to violence. 
Romanian Sophia was kidnapped by two knife-wielding men and 
was sold to a Serb.  She was put in a house where there were 
many women from Moldova, the Ukraine, and Bulgaria.  Those 
who did not follow orders were beaten and raped.  Some tried 
to commit suicide.  Sophia was "educated" by the third day 
in the house.  She was taken to Albania, and then Italy. 
 
Natalie was from Siberia.  She went to Hong Kong via China 
as a dancer.  Her working permit was immediately confiscated 
and she was made to work as a prostitute.  She was popular 
and was earning around $3000 a night.  A rich attorney from 
New Zealand fell in love with her.  When she reciprocated, 
the mafia cancelled her work permit and visa.  She was 
deported and the lawyer followed her back to Siberia.  After 
a few days the bodies of the two were found in her home. 
The attorney was shot and killed but Natalie was killed 
under torture. 
 
Twenty-seven year old Valentina was a Ukrainian psychologist 
and social worker who arrived in Israel in August 1998.  She 
thought that she would work as a company representative. 
Her passport, money and return ticket was confiscated, she 
was taken to a flat, and was forced to work as a prostitute 
there for two months.  She said, "The conditions were 
horrible.  A girl was forced to work in a basement for eight 
months.  That place was humid and the girl died of 
tuberculosis.  Most of the girls had venereal diseases.  I 
don't want the enemy of my experiences to come to my mind." 
Valentina finally managed to escape but was arrested in 
March 1999 for not having proper documentation.  She was 
afraid to testify against the man who sold her because that 
man knew where her family lived in the Ukraine. 
 
(These women's stories and information was taken from a book 
by Victor Malarek published by Bilgi Publishing entitled 
"Natashas: Inside the New Global Sex Trade.") END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published Wednesday, February 23 by Kiev Interfax- 
Ukraine: 
 
TITLE: Ukraine: Police Uncover Ring Trafficking Young Women 
From Ukraine to Turkey 
 
BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT: Kiev, 23 February: Law-enforcers 
in Zaporizhzhya and the Istanbul police have uncovered a 
criminal group, which for seven years had been involved in 
trafficking young women from various regions of Ukraine to 
Turkey. 
 
The Interior Ministry's public relations department said 
today that a female national of Ukraine was the mastermind 
of the "human trafficking". She rented two apartments in 
Istanbul where she kept about a dozen Ukrainian women at a 
time to be sold to sex businesses. 
 
The Ukrainian and Istanbul police detained the members and 
key-persons of the organized crime group during the transfer 
of the sex slaves to foreigners in the Palace Hotel in 
Istanbul. 
 
The department said that, as of today, a court in Istanbul 
has declared two Ukrainian women the victims of trafficking 
in humans. They were deported to Ukraine. Prosecutors in 
Istanbul have also opened a criminal case against the 
criminal ring. 
 
The Interior Ministry also said that the investigation 
department of the regional police directorate in 
Zaporizhzhya Region has lodged a criminal investigation 
against a member of the organized crime group, who is a 
resident of Zaporizhzhya and was also involved in recruiting 
and smuggling women to Turkey. END TEXT. 
 
[Description of Source: Kiev Interfax-Ukraine in Russian -- 
Service provided by the Russian news agency Interfax 
focusing on events in Ukraine] 
 
¶9. (U) Broadcast Wednesday, February 23 by Bucharest Antena 
1 Television: 
 
TITLE: Romanian Police Arrest Members of PKK Ring Suspected 
of Trafficking Humans 
 
BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT: 
The PKK [Kurdistan Workers' Party] is a fearsome 
organization, which is again attracting the attention of 
European intelligence services.   One of its Balkan leaders 
was arrested this morning in Bucharest.   Simultaneously, 
other PKK leaders were handcuffed in Hungary, Austria, and 
France.   There is information that the money obtained from 
trafficking in human beings, which the organization is 
alleged to be practicing, is used to finance terrorist 
actions all over the world.   Officers and prosecutors of 
the Directorate in Charge of Investigating Organized Crime 
and Terrorism have detained 11 individuals who have ties 
with the PKK.   They are illegal migrants and guides, Kurds 
and Romanians. 
 
[Begin correspondent Mile Carpenisan recording] The raid 
takes place at the home of Chyalal Gyunesh, the leader of 
the Eastern European ring trafficking human beings. 
Arrested in bed, Gyunesh is handcuffed.   Still dizzy, he 
watches the search.   The organized crime officers and 
prosecutors find passports hidden behind the paintings in 
the house.   They take deeds, cell phones, and a lot of bank 
documents with the names of the ring members, which prove 
that money was paid into their accounts. 
 
Gyunesh and his concubine are escorted to the General 
Prosecuting Magistracy.   A few minutes later, several 
police vehicles belonging to the special troops bring other 
people who were arrested last night in Varsan, Sinaia, and 
Campina. 
 
The first to fall into the net were five Kurds in Arad. 
They were caught along the border while trying to leave 
Romania.   The organized crime officers in Timisoara chased 
them into the fields for minutes on end.   The Kurds entered 
Romania legally as tourists, they landed at Otopeni Airport 
[near Bucharest] and from there they were taken by Bucharest- 
based hosts.   The Kurds paid 6,000 euros each to Gyunesh. 
The guides led them to places close to the western border. 
Sheltered by the night, they were helped to cross over to 
Hungary.   From there they were taken to Vienna, Paris, or 
London, where important PKK cells are active. 
 
According to the intelligence services, the money collected 
by Gyunesh was divided between the ring members and the PKK. 
According to the SRI [Romanian Intelligence Service], the 
PKK is a threat to our national security.   In Romania, at 
least 1,500 PKK members are active.   With the money it 
makes out of trafficking human beings, drug dealing, 
kidnapping, and extortion, the PKK buys weapons and trains 
its future terrorists.   [end recording] 
 
Antena 1 was the only television station to have 
participated in the entire action to catch the PKK leader. 
Mile Carpenisan tells us more.   Good evening.   Mile, you 
were there, how long has the ring been monitored in Romania? 
 
[Carpenisan] Good evening.   The first pieces of information 
about this ring functioning on Romanian soil emerged as 
early as September last year.   The surveillance began at 
the same time.   The specialized services joined in, and 
they tried to identify all the structures.   Now, almost six 
months on, this operation has been completed.   Today at the 
Prosecuting Magistracy, the prosecutors and the organized 
crime officers interviewed a general and several individuals 
involved in this ring. 
 
[Stoicescu] Why did it take so long to catch the 12 people? 
 
[Carpenisan] Such operations are always very meticulous and 
nobody wants to hurry, so that no leader or member of the 
ring will escape.   Hence, the first orders to field 
officers were to find out who the leader was.   After they 
found out this, they immediately tried to identify all the 
nests, the so-called nests in the country.   This is because 
the operation did not take place only in Bucharest and in 
the west of the country; it was also expanded to Sinaia, 
Brasov, Campina, Sibiu, and the Arad area. 
[Stoicescu] Thank you. END TEXT. 
 
[Description of Source: Bucharest Antena 1 Television in 
Romanian -- nationwide independent television station of 
general interest] 
 
¶10. (U) Broadcast Wednesday, February 23 by Romanian private 
Pro TV: 
 
TITLE: Romanian police "annihilate" Kurdish network of human 
trafficking 
 
BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT: [Announcer] Twenty Turkish 
citizens of Kurdish origin, alleged of being affiliates of 
terrorist organization, were picked up by police from 
various addresses in Bucharest. The Kurds are suspected of 
belonging to a human trafficking network operating on Turkey- 
Romania-Western Europe route. More details about this case 
and its implications we have from our correspondent Oana 
Maiuga. Good evening Oana. 
 
[Correspondent] Good evening Andreea. The operation that had 
been carried out for more than a year had the purpose of 
retaining some Turkish citizens of Kurdish origin who were 
carrying out a real business of human trafficking, having 
its base in Romania. The leader of this network and his 
lover were arrested less than five hours ago at an address 
in the capital. This network was very well organized. The 
migrants left Turkey legally and arrived here in Romania. On 
arriving in Bucharest they were accommodated at four 
addresses in the capital where they stayed until the ground 
was clear. What this means is that the Kurds were taken to 
the Romanian border with Hungary and there they were 
illegally taken over the border with the help of certain 
guides. In Hungary they were taken over by other guides who 
took them, illegally of course, to Austria. And from Vienna 
to other western capitals there was just only a step. The 
first arrests were made in Hungary. Seven members of the 
network were caught there by the Hungarian police. These 
members were engaged in trafficking these people. There 
followed other five arrests on the Romanian western border 
twenty five hours ago. These arrests were made by the 
Romanian Organized Crime. Finally, the arrests made today, 
four domiciliary searches with twelve persons taken in 
custody, one at the house of the network's leader and the 
others at the addresses where the migrants had been hidden. 
At this hour the persons alleged with implication in this 
case are being heard. This can be considered one of the 
largest networks of human trafficking that has ever been 
annihilated on the territory of Romania, through an 
international cooperation, to which a very important 
contribution was brought by the police in Romania and 
Hungary. We shall keep you posted with the later 
developments of this case. 
 
[Announcer] Thank you. END TEXT. 
 
[Description of Source: Bucharest Pro TV in Romanian] 
 
¶11. (U) Published Friday, February 18 by the Turkish Daily 
News; http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/: 
 
TITLE: Prostitution, a growing problem; By Gul Demir 
 
BEGIN TEXT: ISTANBUL - Turkish Daily News 
 
Many countries have implemented effective policies to 
prevent violence against women. But Turkey is at the very 
beginning of this process. 
 
Within the scope of the Copenhagen criteria and the European 
Union accession program, there is a process that is 
encouraging rapid legal arrangements to stop violence 
against women and promote equality in life. 
 
The dimension of the trade in women that we faced while 
conducting a study on how effective these legal arrangements 
reveals a terrible contradiction. Women are regarded as 
representing the honor of men and become victims of murders 
intended to protect the men's honor, but at the same time 
the trade in women is increasing. 
 
How do women, especially those following such problems in 
Diyarbakyr, explain this situation? 
 
Diyarbakyr Bar Women's Rights Desk lawyer Hamiyet Yzol says: 
"There are women who are murdered for honor on one side. 
There are families that sell women because of poverty on the 
other. We don't need scientific data; we can see this with 
the naked eye. There is a great increase in women's 
prostitution and the trade in young girls in Diyarbakyr. In 
addition there is the matter of the trade in young boys." 
 
Evaluating the increase in women's prostitution as a result 
of long-term conflict in the region, Yzol says: "The 
environment of conflict caused men to lose their jobs. The 
number of women who lost their husbands and sons rapidly 
increased. There is a transition period now, and women again 
are suffering the most. They must make a living. The fact 
that the women living in the region are not literate makes 
it impossible for them to find a qualified job. The existing 
jobs are for men, and that's why women have very little 
chance of finding a job," she continued. "Additionally, the 
number of children in Kurdish families is high. In such an 
environment women begin to sell their bodies to meet their 
needs." 
 
Stating that education alone is not enough to achieve a 
solution, Yzol stresses that the region's economy should be 
improved and unemployment sharply reduced. 
 
Noting that the Kurdish problem is related to the problems 
of women, Yzol adds: "If the Kurdish problem is 
democratically solved, it will be easier to solve the 
problems of the women and the region. But as long as the 
Kurdish problem continues, neither can the economy recover 
nor can the problems of women be solved." 
 
An important look at a vital issue finally sees light: 
 
Handan Co_kun from the Diyarbakyr Women's Problems Research 
Center (DIKASOM) conducted a study with a colleague from 
2001 through 2003 on the increase in women's prostitution. 
Cokun told the Turkish Daily News what she discovered 
during the research. 
 
"A man commits murder for honor on the one side, and another 
man besmirches honor on the other. This is a very strange 
contradiction. 
 
"I conducted a study investigating this contradiction," she 
explains. "I think the answer to the question, `Why 
prostitution?' is very clear. There are people living in 
poverty and deprivation in Diyarbakyr. People who lived with 
some confidence in the past feel themselves very lonely some 
time later. This is very clear. 
 
"There is supply and demand in the economy. This is the same 
in women's prostitution. If 1,000 women sell their bodies, 
it means they had sex with at least 10,000 men." 
 
Male involvement in prostitution was ignored in Diyarbakyr, 
says Co_kun, and the issue was handled "strangely." 
 
"Everyone got snagged on the numbers," she says. "Both the 
police department and nongovernmental organizations said, 
`It is impossible that this number of women could be 
involved in it.' But they never thought that, if men did not 
demand it, there wouldn't be so many women in prostitution. 
This caused me the greatest trouble in conducting this work. 
 
"I didn't publicly announce the study because I can't tell 
you the criticism that I received during my research. We 
talked to 26 women. I prepared their reports, but I suffered 
a lot. 
 
"I was stabbed on the street and received threats," Cokun 
says. "I didn't receive financial or spiritual support from 
any institute, not even women's organizations. I didn't 
announce it personally because it was before elections and 
everyone was focused on the elections. 
 
"I didn't say anything because my life was in danger. The 
police department and women's organizations perceived the 
issue as my own problem." 
 
"Today I feel sorry for the high school students who unfurl 
banners saying, `Stop prostitution in high schools.' My 
reaction against institutions that remain silent on this 
issue increases every day," Cokun says, expressing her 
pain. 
 
Her study found that terrible things are going on: families 
selling their girls and boys into sexual servitude. Has 
Diyarbakir really become a place where young children are 
being sold? Is poverty there so desperate? And who is going 
to investigate this matter that seems to have escaped 
everybody's eyes and attention? Or more likely, no one 
wanted to learn about it. 
 
What should be done? 
 
Rahime Karaka_ from the Diyarbakyr Women's Platform talks 
about the reasons women's prostitution has increased in the 
region. 
 
"It is said that dirtiness is where poverty is. But I think 
people have lost their honor. 
 
"Both my soul and my body suffer pain. I grieve deeply 
whenever I go out. Everyone living in this city has a role 
in women's prostitution. 
 
"There was poverty 20 years ago but no prostitution," 
Karaka says. "Men did not sell women." 
 
"Can you imagine that a person would sell his sisters or 
r 
brothers? The age of prostitution has been reduced to 13. 
Prices are very cheap and start at TL 20 million and go down 
to TL 10 million," she says. "It is said that at least 400 
families sell women in Diyarbakyr. There is not humane way 
of measuring how a married man could sell his wife and yet 
their marriage continues." 
 
Just how does this abuse occur? Those who sell women rent a 
house in the city or a room in a hotel for one hour or just 
for half an hour. Karaka gives an example of one of her 
experiences: 
 
"A quite elderly man in the Diyarbakir retirement home 
rented the house of a person whom we know. They brought a 
man who had completed his military service to this house. 
When he neared the house, this man said, `My elder sister 
lives in this house.' When he learned why the person had 
rented the house, he told his sister. The house was raided, 
and they saw that there was nothing but three beds in the 
house. 
 
"Is the environment of conflict and the evacuation of 
villages only the state's mistake?" Karakas asks. "These are 
deep issues that must be discussed." 
 
"I tell everyone who is engaged in education that mothers 
and fathers must be educated in schools at night or on 
holidays. Specialists who know the psychology of mothers and 
fathers must be asked to help. Also, economic problems must 
be solved. Otherwise, this society will disappear," she 
warns. 
 
"Accordingly, incest and homosexual relations are increasing 
in families. Three children, aged 12, had anal sex with a 
primary school child in the garden of the school during 
recess. Nothing was done in spite of the police, the 
gendarmerie, reports, etc. At least this child should have 
received psychological support. I hear such events every 
day." 
 
Karaka_ expresses a view shared by many in Diyarbakyr when 
she says: "There has been an increase in the murder of women 
by choking, throwing them into the water and forcing them to 
commit suicide. The murder of women is becoming incorporated 
among father, husband and brother." 
 
As punishments for such killings increase, she says, reports 
of such killings appear less frequently in newspapers, 
partly because they are being concealed. 
 
"Murder makes the family powerful in society," she says. "It 
is said that they secretly solved their problem." 
 
Emphasizing that the laws regarding women that were adjusted 
to EU requirements are not practically implemented in the 
southeastern region, Karaka says, "Even if it is said that 
EU membership will relieve the country, it depends on how 
much the people living in this atmosphere understand it." 
Karaka_ stresses that women, who faced emigration and 
poverty and who were sold for a bride price for years, are 
not aware of the laws favoring them. The Diyabakyr Bar 
Women's Rights Desk is expending much effort on this issue, 
Karaka says. 
 
She gives an example: "I am beaten by my husband and father 
first. Then I'll receive a document from the public 
c 
prosecutor's office proving it. I will take this document to 
the Diyarbakyr Bar and say that I am always beaten and face 
harassment. 
 
"But there are many women who don't know where to apply. How 
will the women who don't speak Turkish apply? I think they 
must be educated as to their rights and the institutions 
they can apply to. They will first learn that their husband 
and father have no right to do this." END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN