05BOGOTA3929
SENATE HEARING ON VENEZUELAN ARMS PURCHASES:
Mon Apr 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Bogota
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BOGOTA 003929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER MASS VE CO PBTS
SUBJECT: SENATE HEARING ON VENEZUELAN ARMS PURCHASES: 
REGIONAL THREAT OR SELF DEFENSE? 
 
REF: BOGOTA 3863 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  On April 19, the Senate Second Committee 
(Defense, Foreign Relations, Trade, and Borders) conducted a 
public hearing on Venezuelan arms purchases (reftel details 
the purchases).  Foreign Minister Barco and Minister of 
Defense Uribe were called to testify.  Committee Chair Ramiro 
Velasquez put Chavez in the context of a country-by-country 
leftist takeover of Latin America.  Noting Chavez's populism, 
history of coup and counter-coup, and militarization of the 
GOV, Velasquez and others expressed concern about the 
Venezuelan arms buildup, a Chinese-Venezuelan satellite deal, 
and Chavez's destabilizing impact on the region.  Independent 
senators argued that Chavez was buying arms to discourage a 
U.S. intervention, and was not a military threat to Colombia. 
 FM Barco expressed GOC respect for the GOV's right to arm 
itself, noting however that arms purchases should be 
transparent.  MOD Uribe said an arms race was in neither 
country's interest.  Poloffs consulted with leading senators 
and staff on the margins, and will attend another discussion 
of Venezuelan arms in the Senate Plenary on April 26.  End 
summary. 
 
----------------------- 
Conservatives Concerned 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Committee Chair Ramiro Velasquez (Conservative) 
stressed that the hearing was an "analytic debate."  He 
recognized the GOC's tact and diplomacy in the face of 
Chavez's "cold war."  The 1990 Forum of Sao Paolo initiated a 
movement to the left in Latin America, which he characterized 
as populist, projecting an illusion of independence, blaming 
the "oligarchy," and usurping national symbols.  Colombia is 
practically the only country without a leftist orientation 
and the only one with an internal armed conflict.  He said 
there was a country-by-country leftist takeover of Latin 
America and that Chavez was arming for offensive, external 
war.  Velasquez called for a Latin American security 
structure, ideally under the OAS. 
 
¶3.  (U) Former Senate President and GOC Ambassador to the OAS 
Luis Alfredo Ramos said Chavez is a destabilizing influence 
in the region -- a populist, "coupist," militarist. 
Venezuela remains poor despite the flow of oil money, said 
Ramos; Secretary Rice has got Chavez pegged right.  Jesus 
Carrizosa worried about the number of Venezuelans with 
Colombian identification cards and their possible impact on 
next year's elections.  Enrique Gomez requested the GOC 
provide details regarding the new Venezuelan satellite 
(Chinese origin), and if it could be used for other purposes, 
intelligence gathering in particular.  Chavez's propaganda 
was another concern for Gomez. 
 
----------------------- 
Independents Insouciant 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Jimmy Chamorro (independent; center-left) noted that 
Chavez's paranoia is new for Venezuelan presidents and that 
border incursions are worrying.  Chavez's arms purchases are 
motivated by anti-US, not anti-Colombian, sentiment -- the 
arms are a dissuasive force.  He argued that unbridled market 
forces have produced injustice, inequality and poverty in 
Latin America, and explained the leftward continental drift 
as a reaction to the damage brought about by neoliberal 
policies.  Chamorro acknowledged, however, that Chavez wants 
to export his revolution. 
 
¶5.  (U) Efren Tarapues (indigenous peoples member; left of 
center) said the indigenous in Colombia want better internal 
policies to deal with poverty.  He echoed Chamorro's view 
that Chavez is arming to protect Venezuela from the U.S.  The 
indigenous don't fear Venezuela, he said, they want the GOC 
to confront poverty. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Government Tries to Play Down Arms Sales 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) FM Carolina Barco cited public statements from the 
November 2004 Uribe-Chavez meeting and the March 
four-president summit.  "The GOC respects the decision of the 
GOV."  Every country has the right to defend its sovereignty. 
 She professed to accept at face value Venezuela's position 
that the arms were to protect the border and combat 
international crime, though she stressed the importance of 
transparency in arms purchases.  She said President Uribe had 
earlier stated that the Spanish arms would contribute to the 
struggle against narcotrafficking and terrorism and would 
help Colombia.  Barco noted that neither Colombia nor 
Venezuela were signatories of the Acquisition of Conventional 
Arms Treaty.  In view of the military assistance Colombia 
receives, the GOC has taken care not to take part in 
declarations or conventions that might compromise its own 
defense.  She also noted Colombia's planned acquisition of 
more than 20 attack aircraft. 
 
¶7.  (U) MOD Jorge Uribe stated that an arms race would be 
contrary to the interests of both Colombia and Venezuela. 
Uribe did not repeat his remarks of concern over Venezuela's 
purchases.  He stressed that the GOC intended to focus its 
resources on combating illegal armed groups and on social 
spending.  The Senate has called FM Barco and MOD Uribe for 
another discussion of Venezuean arms in full plenary session 
on April 26. 
 
--------------------- 
Little Media Coverage 
--------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) In media terms, the event was overshadowed by the 
selection of the new Pope, which took place the same morning. 
 El Tiempo columnist Juan Camilo Restrepo noted on April 20 
that oil prices have given Chavez deep pockets which he has 
used for rampant arming.  Restrepo said Chavez's arms buildup 
is dangerous for the region and remained dubious of Uribe's 
public statement that the boats and planes from Spain will be 
used to fight narcotrafficking and terrorism and are thus 
good for Colombia. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Some members of the Congress (Sens. Velasquez and 
Gomez in particular) have publicly expressed strong concern 
over Chavez for some time.  Gomez achieved a near unanimous 
Senate resolution calling for invoking the OAS Democracy 
Charter in Venezuela prior to last year's referendum on 
Chavez.  The GOC's public rhetoric on Chavez continues to be 
moderate, owing to the positive spin from the March 
four-country summit and the follow-on visit of Spanish 
President Rodriguez Zapatero. 
WOOD