05KINSHASA601
Congo/B: UNHCR - Demarche
Mon Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kinshasa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KINSHASA 000601 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
Paris for Africa Watcher 
Dept for AF/C, AF/RSA, and IO 
 
FROM BRAZZAVILLE EMBASSY OFFICE 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM CF CU UNCHR
SUBJECT:  Congo/B: UNHCR - Demarche 
 
REFS:  (A) State 44494  (B) State (C) Leader-to-Sanders 
 
email 
 
¶1. (U) Post was sent Department reftels only on April 1, and 
executed demarches at the first available opportunity April 
¶4. For future UNCHR Collective cables please send to 
Kinshasa slugged "Pass to Brazzaville" since Post does not 
have access to either Department's unclassified or 
classified systems. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Given that Foreign Minister Adada has been out of 
the country for three weeks, and is not expected back until 
the end of April, Ambassador met with Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFA) number two, Secretary-General Ambassador Serge 
Bale, to carryout demarches in reftels.  Ambassador began 
with stressing the importance of the progress in the U.S.- 
Congo bilateral relations over the last several years and 
noted the number of global human values and principles where 
there was like-mindedness between our two countries. 
 
¶3. (SBU) She then turned to the specifics of the demarches 
highlighting the points in reftels, stressing that the ROC 
see the procedural nature of the resolution. The Ambassador 
noted that the U.S. put great importance on Congo supporting 
the U.S. position, but would also put great importance and 
strongly encourage an abstention. She highlighted the other 
sponsors of the resolution, noted that the French were on 
board and had agreed to be helpful in both Paris and Geneva, 
and also explained that a "no-action" motion was equally 
unacceptable to us. Ambassador then urged the Secretary- 
General to reread the resolution several times to appreciate 
the procedural nature. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  After noting the history between the two countries 
and rereading the resolution as the Ambassador suggested, 
the Secretary-General said that he would meet with others in 
the Ministry and also consult with Minister Adada and the 
Presidency. Ambassador said she also had a request into the 
Presidency to see Public Relations Counselor Lemboumba (most 
likely April 5-6), and would be doing this demarche at 
several levels of the ROC Government stressing the 
importance of an abstention from Congo.  Ambassador pushed 
him a bit harder on abstaining and the Secretary-General 
said, as he could see the procedural nature, he would do his 
best to encourage the Ministry team to move in that 
direction, but he could not promise given the close 
historical relationship.  Ambassador asked for a definite 
answer back ASAP, and Bale said that he would seek to give a 
firm response o/a April 6. 
 
¶5. (U) BIO Note:  Ambassador Bale is a seasoned diplomat and 
the most senior person in the Ministry after the Minister. 
In the past, he has worked at the Congolese Mission in New 
York for several years, and also at their Embassy in 
Washington.  He understands the importance of this issue to 
the USG. 
 
¶6.  (U) Comment: First and foremost this will be a 
Presidential decision.  Post will provide reactions and 
feedback from the Presidency after next set of meetings. 
Foreign Minister Adada is on travel until end of April. Post 
also encourages the Department to engage ROC Representative 
in Geneva.  On occasion there are misconnects between MFA 
and their missions abroad. 
 
¶7.  Brazzaville Embassy Office - Sanders 
MEECE