05TAIPEI1591
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Fri Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

010840Z Apr 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 001591 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Coverage of the major Chinese-language 
Taipei dailies continued to focus on KMT Vice Chairman 
P.K. Chiang's visit to China and the ten-point 
consensus reached between the KMT and the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP).  Several newspapers reported on 
either their front or first few pages that KMT Chairman 
Lien Chan is likely to visit China and meet with 
Chinese President Hu Jintao in May at the invitation of 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Committee 
Chairman Jia Qinlin.  The centrist "China Times" 
reported on page two that an anonymous U.S. Department 
of State official said Thursday the United States is 
happy to see any move that could reduce cross-Strait 
tensions and welcomes cross-Strait visits to solve 
differences between Taiwan and China. 
 
¶2. A pro-independence "Liberty Times" editorial 
questioned the DPP government's "effective opening" 
policy toward Taiwan investment in China, saying that 
if the DPP continues to implement the policy, it will 
give Taiwan people sufficient reasons to suspect that 
the DPP is manipulating the Taiwan people's patriotism 
and is actually pursuing a strategy to unify with 
China.  A "China Times" editorial, however, urged both 
sides of the Taiwan Strait to give up military 
confrontation and to start a "peaceful race" with each 
other.  A news analysis in the "United Daily News" 
commented on Chiang's visit to China, saying Beijing is 
seizing this opportunity to "kill two birds with one 
stone," namely, to show the Americans that it is as 
good as its word and yet squeeze the space for "Taiwan 
independence secessionists" in Taiwan and in the world. 
End summary. 
 
A) "Can Taiwan People's Morale Incited during the March 
26 [Mass Rally] Afford to Take the Fall of the 
Government?" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
800,000] noted in an editorial (4/1): 
 
". The DPP officials, on the one hand, cried that the 
`Anti-Secession Law' is a war authorization bill and 
asked the Taiwan people to voice [their anger].  But on 
the other hand, they said that the policy of `effective 
opening' [Taiwan investment in the Chinese market] 
remains unchanged and that Taiwan is awaiting China's 
goodwill response.  Just imagine -- if the Anti- 
Secession Law is a war authorization bill, how can 
Taiwan expect any goodwill gesture from China unless 
the latter abolishes the law[?]  It is really 
astonishing to see the fallacy and confusion of our 
government's policy when it is talking about opening 
investment of high-tech and petrochemical industries in 
a country [i.e. China] that can launch a war against 
Taiwan at anytime. . 
 
"We have no intention to criticize the government; we 
just hope that the government can make up its mind and 
be determined to face the fallacy of its effective 
opening policy. . If the government fails again to obey 
the strong public view demonstrated during the March 26 
mass rally and continues to misread public opinion by 
allowing further interactions with China and pushing 
for direct cross-Strait charter flights to meet the 
needs of Taiwan investors in China, we may not be able 
to judge, but will have sufficient reasons to suspect 
and speculate that the DPP is just trying to use 
localized language to manipulate the patriotism of the 
Taiwan people.  We will suspect that what the DPP is 
doing is really pursuing final unification [with 
China]. .  We hope that under the wise leadership of 
the DPP, the March 26 mass rally will not become the 
beginning of another fall of Taiwan." 
 
B) "Facing Taiwan, China Must Make a Choice between Non- 
Peace and Peace" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] editorialized (4/1): 
 
"Beijing's enactment and announcement of the Anti- 
Secession Law in mid-March has sparked doubts in the 
international community and triggered backlashes from 
the people in Taiwan.  In terms of the long-term 
development of cross-Strait relations, the move also 
indicated that under the constraint of the 
international community, which is headed by the United 
States, the bottom lines that Taiwan must not declare 
independence and Beijing must not use force [against 
Taiwan] will become clearer and clearer.  There will be 
less space left for ambiguity or for both sides to push 
the envelope.  As a result, both sides of the Taiwan 
Strait will have to find a favorable foundation of 
their own where they can settle down under this 
framework and even develop a reciprocal cooperative 
pattern with each other. . 
 
". Therefore, we need to remind the Beijing authorities 
once again that when working out relevant policies 
toward Taiwan, it must seek to sincerely create a 
situation that is favorable for both sides to interact 
and cooperate peacefully.  It must not speak sweet 
words while being ready to plant a sword in [Taiwan's] 
back or play a double-handed strategy, nor must it 
regard every move as a means of achieving a united 
front. ." 
 
C) "Beijing Tries to Show the Americans That It Is `As 
Good As Its Word'" 
 
Journalist Wang Li-chuan commented in the conservative, 
pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
600,000] (4/1): 
 
". Beijing's move [with regard to KMT Vice Chairman 
P.K. Chiang's visit] can be viewed as `killing two 
birds with one stone;' namely, it opens up a new 
channel for dialogue for both sides of the Taiwan 
Strait, and in the meantime, it has reacted positively 
to the United States and the international community 
which expect China to adopt measures to reduce the 
cross-Strait tensions triggered by the Anti-Secession 
Law.  Beijing, seizing the chance of Chiang's visit and 
thereby pushing for talks between the KMT and CCP, 
attempts to develop an atmosphere of reconciliation 
across the Taiwan Strait and then gradually putting 
forward steps or plans to alleviate cross-Strait 
tensions.  Beijing's move has not only made the KMT 
look good but also has convinced Washington that it is 
`as good as its words.'  On the other hand, Beijing can 
complete its strategic planning for Taiwan step by step 
as it planned and squeeze the space for `Taiwan 
independence secessionists' in Taiwan and in the 
world." 
 
PAAL