05TAIPEI1840
MEDIA REACTION: SINO-JAPANESE DISPUTES
Tue Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 001840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: SINO-JAPANESE DISPUTES 
 
Summary: The focus of Chinese-language Taipei dailies 
April 19 has shifted from the weekend's intense 
interest in the Sino-Japanese disputes back to the 
usual topics of cross-Strait relations and local 
politics.  News stories about the anti-Japanese 
protests in China today were mostly wire service 
reports, and carried on the last few pages of 
newspapers.  There are a few exceptions:  the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan largest daily, ran 
a banner headline on its page 5 that said: "Japan-China 
relations drop to record low"; the pro-independence 
"Taiwan Daily," reported on its second page the 
comments by Mainland Affairs Council Chairman Joseph Wu 
that said Taiwan should avoid getting involved in the 
nationalist conflicts between China and Japan.  The 
only Chinese-language commentary on the disputes was a 
"China Times" editorial that discussed the geographical 
and economic entanglements behind the Sino-Japanese 
conflicts and urged Taiwan to learn from these 
developments.  The limited-circulation, pro- 
independence English-language "Taipei Times" editorial 
called on both Japan and China to sort out their 
problems quickly or the international repercussions 
could be immense.  The limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" said China, Korea and Japan must learn from the 
latest incidents and curb nationalism at home.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "The Geographical and Economic Entanglements behind 
the Sino-Japanese Conflicts" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] observed in its editorial 
(4/19): 
 
". It is understood that [Japanese Foreign Minister] 
Nobutaka Machimura and his Chinese counterpart Li 
Zhaoxing did not shake hands with each other before 
their meeting [Sunday], and the atmosphere of the 
meeting was very heavy.  But both sides agreed to 
negotiate about the [gas drilling] issue in the East 
China Sea in May and to discuss substantive issues 
directly.  Directly facing the problems concerning each 
party is the foundation for all meetings and a right 
way to resolve or manage problems.  Taiwan should learn 
from such developments, or it will be a waste if it 
fails to learn from a lesson [when it is] itself one of 
the reasons for the Sino-Japanese conflicts.  Leaders 
of both China and Japan will meet in Indonesia at the 
end of April.  Taiwan needs to pay attention to [see] 
if both sides will engage in a new dialogue or if there 
will be a turning point [in their relations.]" 
 
B) "Sino-Japanese Relations in Crisis" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (4/19): 
 
". If the anti-Japanese riots continue, will Beijing be 
able to guarantee that the target of the demonstrations 
will not shift and that the rallies will not get out of 
control?  Surely this consideration will make all 
foreign businesspeople fearful.  Beijing should bring a 
halt to the anti-Japanese demonstrations and deal with 
the issue itself, rather than relaying on popular 
pressure. 
 
"Tokyo should understand the perspective and feelings 
of those nations that suffered under Japanese 
occupation during the war, and reconsider its decision 
to revise its textbooks.  Japan should follow Germany's 
example and face up to the injury it inflicted during 
the war, so that its people can learn from history and 
develop a peaceful spirit that abhors and seeks to 
avoid armed conflict. . 
 
"If this problem is not sorted out quickly and 
rationally it will become much more serious.  China 
will face increased domestic pressure, as well as 
suspicion from the international community, while Japan 
will face damage to its huge investments in China. 
Both parties will suffer, and the international 
repercussions could be immense." 
 
C) "East Asia Is Europe in 1900s" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" [circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial 
(4/19): 
 
". As victims of Japan's aggression, China and Korea 
are entitled to demand Japan face up to history.  But 
the apology game has gone on too long, playing into the 
hands of not only Japanese nationalists, but also their 
counterparts in Korea and China. 
 
"China, Korea and Japan must learn from the latest 
incidents and curb nationalism at home.  Otherwise, 
East Asia threatens to become like the 19th century 
Europe, where rising nationalism caused numerous 
conflicts and ended up with two devastating world 
wars." 
 
PAAL