05TAIPEI1751
TAIWAN ACTIVELY TACKLES TIP CHALLENGE
Tue Apr 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TAIPEI 001751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AIT/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TW ASEC TIP
SUBJECT: TAIWAN ACTIVELY TACKLES TIP CHALLENGE 
 
REF: A. TAIPEI 1512 
     ¶B. TAIPEI 1434 
 
¶1. (SBU) Action request: see paragraph 10. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary.  Since AIT and G/TIP's November 2004 visit, 
Taiwan immigration authorities have demonstrated at both the 
Hsinchu and Ilan Detention Centers that they have adopted a 
comprehensive screening process for trafficking in persons 
(TIP) victims and are providing counseling and proper 
protection services to the women.  Authorities are developing 
mechanisms to allow TIP victims to cooperate safely with 
prosecutors in identifying traffickers and they are also 
working with NGOs and legislators in the Legislative Yuan 
(LY) to draft a comprehensive anti-trafficking law and hold a 
TIP training session in June and a TIP conference in August. 
Taipei has asked for USG assistance in providing TIP training 
and support to law enforcement authorities.  The government 
is also providing protection services to women from Southeast 
Asia who have been victimized by false marriages to Taiwan 
men.  Steps taken by the Taiwan government in response to AIT 
requests appear to have brought Taiwan into compliance with 
Tier I TIP standards.  AIT believes that Taiwan has 
demonstrated a clear, high level commitment to establishing 
itself as a model for the region in the field of protecting 
trafficking victims.  End summary. 
 
Visit to Ilan Reaffirms Taiwan's TIP Policy 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) AIT's visit to the Ilan Detention Center for illegal 
PRC immigrants on April 11 confirmed Taiwan's progress on TIP 
since last November.  The conditions found at Ilan are 
identical if not better than those found at the Hsinchu 
facility in March (ref A).  AIT found the center's 
environment to be clean, bright, and relaxed.  As with 
Hsinchu, immigration authorities at Ilan have enacted a 
standard screening and protection system for victims. 
Victims have access to NGOs and social workers and are 
provided better care.  Social activities are encouraged at 
Ilan and AIT witnessed a variety of entertainment options, 
including a performance by a well known Taiwan performer. 
Artwork created by the women is displayed throughout the 
center.  AIT interviewed two women, including a minor, who 
smiled frequently, laughed, and appeared to have a good 
rapport with the facility's staff.  The victims told AIT that 
they wanted to return home to the PRC but unfortunately had 
been kept waiting almost two years to be accepted back by 
Beijing. 
 
Screening Methods for TIP victims 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) TIP victims are identified based on initial police 
interviews, the circumstances of the women's arrival in 
Taiwan, and other evidence obtained by investigators.  Once 
the women arrive at the detention centers, a second interview 
is conducted with the assistance of social workers to ensure 
victims are properly classified.  The Ministry of Interior 
(MOI) and National Police Agency (NPA) officials are open to 
advice on additional methods of identifying TIP victims in 
their screening process and asked AIT for assistance and 
training.  Since the new screening process was implemented, 
Taiwan authorities have identified 179 women and girls as TIP 
victims.  Taiwan classifies minors under the age of 18 as 
victims, regardless of circumstances.  All identified victims 
are immediately isolated from the rest of the detainee 
population and housed in separate facilities with enhanced 
services. 
 
Victim Access to Health Care 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The NPA Immigration Bureau told AIT that both NGOs 
and religious social workers visit the victims at least twice 
a week and are available more often if there is a need.  End 
Child Prostitution in Asia Tourism (ECPAT) is the primary 
Taiwan NGO working with female detainees.  Religious 
organizations supply volunteer social workers to visit the 
victims.  Two to three people (more if needed) from each 
organization visit the center on each visit.  Health care 
professionals from a local hospital provide medical 
attention.  These professionals visit twice a week on 
scheduled days and administer check-ups, well baby checks, 
pre-natal care, and other routine medical services.  The 
hospital is located near the center, enabling emergency care. 
 
Cooperation in Prosecuting Traffickers 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Operating under current legislation, Taiwan 
authorities are establishing a task force to encourage TIP 
victims to cooperate with the authorities to find and 
incarcerate their traffickers.  The NPA told AIT that the 
detained women are afraid and wary of the dangers in 
providing information to authorities.  Many fear that not 
only could they be harmed, but their families could also be 
placed in jeopardy.  The Taiwan government has passed a 
witness protection law that aims to protect the women from 
retaliation and encourages them to cooperate and help 
prosecute the traffickers.  In addition, Taiwan's Executive 
Yuan (EY) has asked the NPA to establish a task force to 
examine the current screening and protection of TIP victims 
in order to improve TIP processing and increase victim 
cooperation with authorities. 
 
LY Also Working to Combat TIP 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) AIT has also engaged LY member and Democratic 
Progressive Party (DPP) International Affairs Director 
Bi-khim Hsiao over the legislative and administrative steps 
Taiwan needs to take in order to combat the island's TIP 
challenges.  Hsiao's office reported to AIT that it is 
working with Taiwan government officials and NGOs to develop 
TIP initiatives and draft TIP legislation.  (Note: Hsiao is a 
leading member of the ruling DPP and enjoys direct access to 
Taiwan's senior leadership.  End note).  Hsiao staffers told 
AIT that they have implemented a three-point plan to address 
TIP.  The first aspect of the plan, which has been completed, 
is to work with Premier Frank Hsieh's office and the MOI to 
improve efforts to screen victims and provide protection at 
the detention centers.  Hsiao has persuaded the Premier to 
become personally involved in directing immigration 
authorities to combat TIP.  Secondly, Hsiao's office is 
organizing a caucus of LY members to work with NGOs to better 
understand the issue of TIP and ensure a proper government 
response.  Finally, staff members from Hsiao's office are 
currently drafting TIP legislation based on U.S. and UN TIP 
laws.  The legislation will mirror successful TIP efforts 
from other nations, but will address Taiwan's own TIP 
circumstances. 
 
Government Working With NGOS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Taipei authorities are also working with NGOs to 
cooperate against TIP in Taiwan.  Taiwan Women's Rescue 
Foundation (TWRF) members briefed AIT after their visit to 
the U.S. to meet with various anti-trafficking entities, 
including U.S. Department of Justice offices and NGOs.  This 
visit has sparked an ambitious plan in cooperation with the 
Taiwan government to further develop TIP programs in Taiwan. 
An important component, TWRF told AIT, will be training first 
responders.  In cooperation with its partner organization, 
International Organization for Adolescents (IOFA), TWRF has 
organized the first two training sessions in June, focusing 
on the issues and problems of TIP, defining and identifying 
victims, and working with victims. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The June training sessions will present an overview 
of TIP legal issues, including difficulties of prosecution 
and understanding organized crime elements.  The target 
audience is police, prosecutors, judges, and attorneys. 
These multi-day training sessions will take place at the 
Central Police University and will be supported by Taiwan's 
Immigration Office, NPA, and MOJ, in addition to TWRF and 
IOFA.  According to TWRF, U.S. involvement is key, as 
trainers from the Department of Justice, Break the Chain 
Campaign, Cross-Sector Solutions and IOFA have been invited 
to lead the training.  TWRF is also organizing, in 
cooperation with Taiwan government officials (and assistance 
from AIT), experts from the U.S. and Taiwan NGOs to hold a 
TIP conference in August of this year.  The conference will 
cover a spectrum of TIP issues ranging from prevention to 
protection. 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) TRWF requests assistance from the USG to help 
facilitate U.S. trainer presence for these sessions and 
financial assistance to guarantee this endeavor is a success. 
 The TWRF has identified trainers for these training sessions 
and requests G/TIP assistance in facilitating their presence. 
 The trainers TRWF requests are Mr. Lou DeBaca (Department of 
Justice), Ms. Joy Zarambca (Break the Chain Campaign), Mr. 
Nick Sensley, (Cross-Sector Solutions), and IOFA officials. 
AIT will forward to G/TIP the budget proposal submitted by 
TWRF. 
 
Responding to False Marriages 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) In addition to victims smuggled into Taiwan 
directly from the Mainland, Taiwan is also taking measures to 
address the growing number of Southeast Asian women lured to 
Taiwan for false marriages and then forced into prostitution 
(ref B).  One mechanism Taiwan has instituted is to interview 
foreign and Chinese spouses in their home countries before 
arrival in Taiwan or upon their arrival to ensure the 
marriages are legitimate.  The MOI has also established a 
domestic violence hotline staffed by workers who speak 
Vietnamese, Cambodian, Thai, Indonesian, English and Chinese. 
 These workers have the authority to assist victims find 
shelters and to provide legal and financial assistance to 
abused foreign spouses. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The government has also started a program to help 
foreign brides adjust to life in Taiwan by offering resources 
before and after their arrival.  Brides are offered 
orientation classes before leaving their home countries, 
including language and cultural familiarization classes. 
Once the brides arrive in Taiwan, they are offered similar 
courses and other programs to assist their adjustment, such 
as cooking and shopping classes.  The MOI has drafted a new 
immigration law which is designed to foster a more welcoming 
environment for the increasing number of foreign immigrants 
and to develop education programs that emphasize an 
inter-cultural society in Taiwan.  The new policy is expected 
to be enacted later this year. 
 
PAAL