05TELAVIV2262
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Apr 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 002262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Bush-Sharon Meeting 
 
¶2. Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media extensively covered the Bush-Sharon Crawford 
meeting, focusing mainly in the differences between the 
two positions.  Ha'aretz reported that Prime Minister 
Ariel Sharon and U.S. President George W. Bush remained 
at odds over the issue of construction in the 
settlements, and significant differences between the 
two leaders emerged with regard to their positions on 
PA Chairman Mahmud Abbas, and the matter of the 
continuation of the peace process following the 
disengagement from the Gaza Strip and northern West 
Bank.  Despite the differences, however, the two were 
full of mutual compliments after the meeting, with Bush 
noting time and again Sharon's courage in his efforts 
to promote the pullout plan. "While the United States 
will not prejudice the outcome of final status 
negotiations, those changes on the ground, including 
existing major Israeli population centers, must be 
taken into account in any final status negotiations," 
Bush was cited as saying.  Yediot headlined that Israel 
will get a generous U.S. economic aid package aimed for 
development of the Negev and the Galilee. 
 
Ha'aretz says the Gaza Strip saw a sharp decline in 
violent incidents yesterday following a number of tense 
days. Two mortar shells were fired at Gush Katif 
settlements last night, causing no injuries.  Knesset 
Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee's chairman Yuval 
Steinitz (Likud) called on the Israel Defense Forces to 
mount a second Defensive Shield operation in the Gaza 
Strip, commenting that the terror organizations in the 
Strip were preparing the next round of shelling. 
 
Ha'aretz reported: Yesterday, Hezbollah succeeded for 
the second time in five months in flying an unmanned 
surveillance aircraft into Israeli airspace.  Israel's 
Air Force launched fighter planes in response, but they 
failed to bring down the drone.  Two senior IDF 
officers warned at yesterday's meeting of the Knesset's 
Foreign Affairs and Defense committee that Hezbollah's 
operations along the Israeli border could lead to a 
dangerous outbreak of hostilities.  Defense Minister 
Shaul Mofaz confirmed that the IDF has declared a state 
of alert, and that "we are monitoring events along the 
northern border." 
 
Maariv reported that Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom is 
leaving for Egypt today to meet with Egyptian President 
Mubarak, Chief of Intelligence Omar Suleiman, and 
Foreign Minister Ahmad Abu-al-Rit.  Speaking to 70 
visiting mayors from all over the world, Shalom said in 
Jerusalem yesterday that Egypt is playing a positive 
role in the Israeli-Palestinian process, trying to make 
sure that the territories Israel withdraws from remain 
in PA control and not under Hamas or Islamic Jihad 
rule. 
 
Yediot Aharonot reported that the Foreign Affairs and 
Defense Committee's legal adviser presented an opinion 
according to which Sharon will not be able to agree to 
having Egyptian troops secure Philadelphi Road between 
the Gaza Strip and Sinai unless the Knesset approves 
the agreement in a vote.  The legal opinion contradicts 
the prime minister's position.  The government reached 
an agreement with the Egyptian government for 750 
Egyptian troops, some of them in armored vehicles and 
APCs and perhaps even with anti-tank weapons, to be 
brought to Philadelphi Road. The agreement appears to 
contravene the peace treaty with Egypt, which ordered 
the demilitarization of Sinai. 
 
----------------------- 
¶1. Bush-Sharon Meeting: 
----------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote from Texas in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz: "The tremendous 
effort invested in flying the prime minister here, in 
staging a fabulous photo-op and in tedious preparatory 
talks by aides, was overshadowed by arguments over 
construction in the settlements and the way to get the 
peace process moving after the withdrawal from Gaza and 
northern Samaria." 
 
Senior diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "[Sharon] left the Lone Star 
State with a certain sense of aloneness.  The difficult 
task is still before him." 
 
Senior diplomatic correspondent Shimon Shiffer wrote 
from Texas in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "Sharon's statements at Crawford constitute 
the first steps in drawing Israel's permanent borders. 
For the time being he is doing so with the Americans' 
hesitant consent.  One might assume that after another 
visit or two with Bush, after it becomes evident that 
perhaps there is no Palestinian partner, the Americans 
might just come to support Sharon's approach to 
Israel's future borders." 
 
Washington-based correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz: "Bush took a big 
stride toward upping his involvement.  He still 
believes that America cannot afford to get in over its 
head when it comes to the finer details of the 
conflict, and is still not enamored with the idea of 
U.S. mediators in the region. But he is certainly 
giving his all on a number of fundamental issues of the 
conflict." 
 
Washington-based correspondent Orly Azulai Katz opined 
in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Bush 
told Sharon clearly: Israel has a partner now, and it 
must cooperate with it.  Unlike Sharon, Bush also 
believes that after the evacuation of Gaza, trust will 
be created between the two sides, which will allow 
continued, persistent political negotiations." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"The problem is that the White House continues to 
refuse to recognize that the leeway Sharon has taken 
saved the road map and is a package deal." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶1.  "Sharon's Charm Lost Some of Its Luster" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote from Texas in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz (April 12): "The 
tremendous effort invested in flying the prime minister 
here, in staging a fabulous photo op and in tedious 
preparatory talks by aides, was overshadowed by 
arguments over construction in the settlements and the 
way to get the peace process moving after the 
withdrawal from Gaza and northern Samaria.... Although 
he exchanged buddy jokes with Bush, the feeling was 
that Sharon's charm lost some of its luster during 
Bush's second term, that things have gone sour, that 
the bastards changed the rules.  Traveling to the 
ranch, Sharon sounded harsh charges against Abu-Mazen, 
saying that the resumption of fire would be central in 
the meeting.  Yesterday it seemed the Americans were 
not enthusiastic with this message.... In a rare 
interview with NBC, Sharon said that the atmosphere in 
Israel was "the eve of civil war."  Speaking at the 
press conference, Sharon tried to tone down this 
remark, but his message was clear:  He is unable to 
make additional gestures or concessions.  Still, it 
seemed neither Sharon nor Bush had much to lose by 
displaying their disagreement.  Sharon can show his 
rivals in the Likud that he isn't the Americans' yes- 
man; Bush can show his European and Arab friends that 
he isn't in Sharon's pocket.  From Sharon's standpoint, 
Bush's most important message perhaps was his 
expectation 'to work with the prime minister in the 
years to come.' That's an intriguing signal ahead of 
the Likud primaries and elections expected in Israel. 
 
¶2. "American Test" 
Senior diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (April 12): "The message 
inherent in the President's statements [in Texas] was 
clear and precise: the United States currently is 
interested in three things: disengagement, 
disengagement and disengagement.  It turns out that the 
Americans built a special model, a 'Gaza pilot,' in 
which what is actually a mini-Palestinian state is 
supposed to be established in the Gaza Strip.  The 
success of this project will have repercussions for the 
future phases of the process.... If the Gaza project is 
successful, and if a successful, independent, peace- 
seeking entity is formed there, even Sharon will be 
convinced, said Bush, that we can proceed.  By saying 
that he hinted that there was no certainty that the 
Americans would continue to back Sharon in the future 
on his insistence that all the security clauses of the 
road map must be carried out in full.  [Sharon] left 
the Lone Star State with a certain sense of aloneness. 
The difficult task is still before him." 
 
¶3. "Bush on Disengagement: Gosh, That Sounds Logical" 
 
Senior diplomatic correspondent Shimon Shiffer wrote 
from Texas in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (April 12): "Sharon emerged from the meeting 
with Bush in one piece-if we might understate matters. 
In all the press conferences, the President focused on 
one issue: sweeping support for disengagement. 'Gosh,' 
he said repeatedly about the basic premise of Sharon's 
plan, 'that sounds logical,' said the President.... 
While Bush did speak about Israel's obligation to 
refrain from construction in the settlements, he did 
not respond when Sharon said in his presence that in 
any future arrangement with the Palestinians the major 
settlement blocs (including Maale Adumim) will remain 
in Israeli possession.  Sharon's statements at Crawford 
constitute the first steps in drawing Israel's 
permanent borders.  For the time being he is doing so 
with the Americans' hesitant consent.  One might assume 
that after another visit or two with Bush, after it 
becomes evident that perhaps there is no Palestinian 
partner, the Americans might just come to support 
Sharon's approach to Israel's future borders." 
 
¶4.  "Bush Speaks His Mind" 
 
Washington-based correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz (April 12): "In his 
statements yesterday at his ranch in Crawford, Bush 
took a big stride toward upping his involvement.  He 
still believes that America cannot afford to get in 
over its head when it comes to the finer details of the 
conflict, and is still not enamored with the idea of 
U.S. mediators in the region. But he is certainly 
giving his all on a number of fundamental issues of the 
conflict. Bush is no less a friend of Israel after the 
meeting with Sharon than he was before the joint news 
conference. He still supports Sharon and the pullout 
plan, but he made it clear yesterday that this 
friendship has a limit, and that he won't stand idly by 
when he hears talk of territorial contiguity between 
Jerusalem and Ma'aleh Adumim, or that the large 
settlement blocs will be part of the State of Israel, 
'for all that this signifies.'" 
 
¶5. "Smiles and Disagreements" 
 
Washington-based correspondent Orly Azulai Katz opined 
in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (April 
12): "On the eve of the summit people in Israel hoped 
that the matter of construction in the settlements 
would be pushed aside in order not to cloud the 
meeting, which was meant to be festive and supportive. 
But the subject came up in the meeting and remained 
controversial.... This was not the only disagreement. 
Sharon believed that he would be able to present Abu 
Mazen as the bad boy of the region, the 'rais' [late PA 
chairman Yasser Arafat] who let them down and was not 
doing a thing against terrorism.  It did not work. 
Bush told Sharon clearly: Israel has a partner now, and 
it must cooperate with it.  Unlike Sharon, Bush also 
believes that after the evacuation of Gaza, trust will 
be created between the two sides, which will allow 
continued, persistent political negotiations." 
 
¶6.  "Sharon Gets the Ranch Treatment" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(April 12): "Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's first visit 
to US President George W. Bush's ranch was picturesque, 
as expected, but the diplomatic picture was of two 
leaders dancing around areas of disagreement..  [Their] 
statements can be seen as a classic example of agreeing 
to disagree, or put in a slightly more positive sense, 
of constructive ambiguity..  The problem is that the 
White House continues to refuse to recognize that the 
leeway Sharon has taken saved the road map and is a 
package deal. By committing to dismantling settlements 
long before final-status talks, Sharon went far beyond 
the road map's obligations.  But to do this Sharon must 
also, he has once again made clear, take leeway in the 
other direction, namely solidifying Israeli control 
over the settlement blocs.  The continued White House 
refusal to even tacitly recognize such a bargain 
creates a tension that is harmful not just to Israel's 
interests, but to US policy. It does not build US 
credibility with the Palestinian side; it only serves 
to distract from the pressure that must be exerted to 
force Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmud Abbas to 
take real steps to dismantle terrorist groups..  The 
other tension that should be resolved is over how to 
"help" Abbas.  It seems that neither Sharon nor Bush is 
willing to use the real leverage that the international 
community has to force Abbas's hand, namely withholding 
further financial and diplomatic support pending his 
using the ample forces under his command to take 
concrete actions.  Instead, what we see from the PA 
leadership is a continuation of the Arafat-style 
tactics of denying responsibility and claiming 
weakness." 
----------- 
¶2. Mideast: 
----------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                        ------- 
 
Veteran print and TV journalist Dan Margalit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "The currently practical 
option ... is to march in the direction of a unilateral 
arrangement.  To withdraw not in order to flee but 
rather to ameliorate our situation.  The decision 
makers have not yet come to accept that we are marching 
alone, and that is a shame.  Since precious time is 
being squandered." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Back to the Unilateral Track" 
 
Veteran print and TV journalist Dan Margalit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (April 12): "The IDF 
refrained from responding with fire to the barrage of 
mortar shells the Palestinians showered on the Gush 
Katif settlements, and that ..., for the time being, 
was the wise course of action.  And Ariel Sharon voiced 
his disappointment with Abu Mazen's conduct in his 
conversation with George Bush, and even that, to a 
certain extent, was the wise course of action.  Okay, 
but what next? ... Any political planning that is 
undertaken must take into account the possibility that 
there will be no Palestinian partner in the foreseeable 
future.  Given these circumstances Sharon is now forced 
back to square one.  He should admit that disengagement 
is a unilateral step, just like it was in its original 
guise.  The political significance of this is that 
Sharon will be obliged to implement the disengagement 
plan with large numbers of opponents to his Right, and 
with the absence of a supporting flank from the Left, 
which will abandon him.... Therefore, the currently 
practical option -- which might engender Palestinian 
willingness to eradicate terrorism and to negotiate a 
final status arrangement in the future -- is to march 
in the direction of a unilateral arrangement.  To 
withdraw not in order to flee but rather to ameliorate 
our situation.  The decision makers have not yet come 
to accept that we are marching alone, and that is a 
shame.  Since precious time is being squandered." 
CRETZ