07SHANGHAI6
CODEL BARTLETT'S VISIT TO SHANGHAI: JANUARY 1-2
Thu Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO8459
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0006/01 0040316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040316Z JAN 07
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5404
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0714
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0377
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0359
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0473
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0382
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0323
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 5738UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHANGHAI 000006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR H -- PLEASE PASS TO U.S.-CHINA WORKING GROUP AND 
HASC/SSANOK 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FOR JOHNSON/SCHINDLER; SAN 
FRANCISCO FRB FOR CURRAN; NEW YORK FRB FOR CLARK/CRYSTAL/MOSELEY 
CEA FOR BLOCK 
USDOC FOR ITA DAS LEVINE AND OCEA/MCQUEEN 
USDOE FOR INTERNATIONAL/GELBERT, PUMPHREY, PRICE 
USDOE FOR NNSA/SHINEMAN 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - DOHNER/CUSHMAN 
NSC FOR KURT TONG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PREL ENRG CH
SUBJECT: CODEL BARTLETT'S VISIT TO SHANGHAI: JANUARY 1-2 
 
REF: 06 STATE 200708 
 
This cable is Sensitive But Unclassified.  For official use 
only, not for dissemination outside USG channels. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In a January 1 meeting with Zhou Muyao, Vice 
Chairman of the Shanghai Municipal People's Congress, CODEL 
Bartlett discussed China's efforts to address energy issues, 
especially in the rural sector.  Zhou highlighted the strong 
ties between the United States and Shanghai and gave an overview 
of World Expo 2010 preparations, indicating the United States 
had expertise to offer in the area of transportation and 
infrastructure.  Both parties emphasized the importance of 
people-to-people contact through events like the World Expo and 
the Olympics and hoped that these events would encourage 
cultural understanding, as well as foster constructive dialogue 
on important global issues.  CODEL Bartlett also met with 
Suntech Power Chairman and CEO Shi Zhengrong to discuss the 
critical role of government support in developing renewable 
energy technologies and the need to increase Chinese awareness 
of the importance of sustainable energy.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 1, 2007, Representative Roscoe Bartlett 
(R-MD) and an eight member Congressional delegation (see list at 
paragraph 15), accompanied by Acting Consul General Simon 
Schuchat, met with Shanghai Municipal People's Congress (SMPC) 
Vice Chairman Zhou Muyao.  Zhou was joined by National People's 
Congress Foreign Affairs Committee Deputy-Director General Hong 
Yingchun, as well as SMPC Standing Committee members Qian 
Yongming and Wang Yaoxi. 
 
An Auspicious Start to Deepening U.S.-Shanghai Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Vice Chairman Zhou welcomed the delegation as 
Shnaghai's first official delegation in 2007, noting that this 
demonstrated the importance Shanghai placed on close relations 
with the United States.  As further evidence of this close 
relationship, Zhou added that the United States was the number 
one destination for Shanghai's students studying abroad, number 
three (behind the European Union) for expatriate residents in 
Shanghai, number two in terms of foreign direct investment, and 
number one and two for imports and exports, respectively. 
 
Energy Cooperation: Work Together or Suffer Together 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Rep. Bartlett indicated that the main purpose of the 
delegation's visit was to understand China's efforts to address 
energy issues.  During his warm welcome in Beijing, Bartlett had 
been impressed by the National Development and Reform 
Commission's five point energy development plan, comprising: 1) 
energy conservation; 2) domestic energy supplies; 3) 
diversification of reliance on energy sources; 4) environmental 
protection; and 5) international cooperation, which Bartlett 
believed was essential -- and would continue to increase in 
importance -- as the world faced a deficit in fossil fuels in 
the coming decades.  He stressed that energy was a global issue 
and that nations that did not work together would suffer 
together.  He also noted that officials at the National 
Development and Reform Commission in Beijing recognized the need 
to diminish reliance on dwindling oil and natural gas stocks and 
develop alternative energy resources for the future "post-oil" 
era. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In particular, Bartlett said the delegation was 
interested in learning more about China's plans for fostering 
sustainable energy in the rural areas and that some members were 
contemplating a return visit to China this summer.  He lauded 
China's progress in rural energy development, including creating 
gas from animal waste and harnessing solar energy to generate 
electricity. 
 
 
SHANGHAI 00000006  002 OF 003 
 
 
World Expo 2010: An Opportunity for All 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Rep. Mark Kirk (R-IL) expressed an interest in 
Shanghai's plans for the World Expo 2010 and inquired about the 
role the United States could play.  He offered that Chicago, a 
sister city of Shanghai, was keen on spurring international 
interest in the World Expo and that during a planned May 2007 
trip to China, Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley would likely 
announce that 2009 would be "The Year of China" in his city. 
Kirk passed to Zhou a written proposal for further cooperation 
between the two cities. 
 
¶7. (SBU) According to Vice Chairman Zhou, preparations for the 
World Expo 2010 were progressing smoothly.  Out of the 200 
invitations sent to countries, Zhou noted that between 40 and 50 
percent have already accepted, and there are still three years 
until the event.  Zhou emphasized that in this information age, 
people-to-people contact was still paramount and that Shanghai's 
chief reason for hosting the event was to give people a greater 
understanding of Shanghai and China and to allow the Shanghai 
population to learn from other countries, especially in science 
and technology development.  With the theme "Better City, Better 
Life," Zhou said that renewable energy could be an important 
area to showcase during the Expo.  He also underscored that the 
SMPC's Eleventh Five Year Plan pledged to decrease Shanghai's 
energy consumption by 20 percent and promote the development of 
sustainable energy strategies. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Zhou indicated that transportation and infrastructure 
would be a key component of the World Expo and that the United 
States had lots of expertise to offer.  Shanghai had prioritized 
transportation development in the hopes of creating a better, 
smarter public system.  He added that the World Expo site was in 
a former industrial district of the city, an area which city 
leaders wanted to transform into a more environmentally 
friendly/ecological area.  Zhou believed the World Expo would 
bring about "development opportunities" that Shanghai hoped to 
"share with its friends."  In the past 10-20 years, Shanghai's 
development has increased at a rapid pace due to its cooperation 
with countries like the United States and Zhou said that he 
would continue to share updates on World Expo preparations with 
the Consulate. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Rep. Rick Larsen (D-WA) underscored the importance that 
global events such as the World Expo, the Olympics, and even 
athletic exchanges (such as Yao Ming playing for the Houston 
Rockets) had on fostering cultural understanding and cooperation 
between nations.  He inquired as to Shanghai's role in the 2008 
Summer Olympics in Beijing. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Zhou indicated that Shanghai was slated to host some 
soccer competitions and would likely receive many visitors who 
would attend the Beijing games.  Like the World Expo, Zhou 
believed the Olympics would be a prime opportunity for people to 
"see and feel" what was going on in China.  He said that 
Shanghai's athletes were enthusiastically preparing for the 
Olympics.  Zhou noted that Yao Ming is a "Friendship Ambassador" 
and thanked the American people for warmly supporting him. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Following the meeting, Zhou hosted the delegation to 
dinner where Zhou and Bartlett discussed history, culture and 
places of interest in Shanghai. 
 
Renewable Energy: Government Support Equals Development 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Rep. Bartlett and the delegation, along with Acting CG 
Schuchat, also met with Dr. Shi Zhengrong, Chairman and CEO of 
Suntech Power Holdings Co., Ltd.  Shi believed that government 
support was necessary to foster development of renewable energy 
technologies.  Pointing to Japan and Germany, Shi said that 
 
SHANGHAI 00000006  003 OF 003 
 
 
subsidies "kicked off the market" in those two countries almost 
ten years ago by reducing costs exponentially and that their 
programs now serve as two global models.  He explained the 
Japanese model focused on installation of solar cells by 
providing an initial 75 percent subsidy for installation costs. 
Over time, the subsidy was reduced gradually and was now 
currently zero.  According to Shi, the German model created a 
self-sustaining market for renewable energy by compensating for 
the distortions in the conventional electricity market.  Shi 
explained that the German model required power companies to 
purchase, at peak prices, a fixed amount of energy created from 
renewable energy sources, creating a market for solar power 
generating facilities.  He noted that many German farmers 
converted their land to "solar farms" and were reaping 
substantial profits.  Shi believed that Germany, Spain, and 
France continued to have the best regulatory environments for 
enabling renewable energy development. 
 
China: Increased Awareness is Key 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Shi indicated that the PRC government initially gave 
Suntech Power a three year tax holiday, followed by an 
additional three years at 50 percent of the prevailing rate. 
Currently the company is taxed at 15 percent of its profits. 
While this incentive greatly assisted Suntech Power's rapid 
development, Shi believed that China could do even more to 
foster the development of renewable energy.  He said that while 
authorities have focused primarily on wind power, emphasis on 
solar energy would likely be forthcoming.  Part of China's 
problem, he believed, stemmed from a lack of awareness and 
understanding of global environmental issues.  He noted that 
only recently have Chinese people realized that rapid economic 
growth at the expense of a healthy, sustainable environment was 
meaningless. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Shi also gave an overview of Suntech Power, a leading 
solar energy company that specializes in the design, 
development, manufacture and sale of photovoltaic cells for a 
wide range of commercial and residential applications.  Shi 
started the company in 2001 with USD 6 million (mainly from 
government shareholders) and expanded production at a low cost 
when the company acquired equipment from a fledgling company in 
¶2004.  Shi noted that Suntech was the first private Chinese 
company listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: STP).  He 
explained that the initial public offering raised USD 400 
million.  While the company had mainly focused on the European 
market, specifically Germany, Spain and Italy, Shi noted that 
the company was expanding into the U.S. market.  In 2006, the 
company did over USD 650 million in sales, and the 2007 plan is 
to increase the efficiency of Suntech's products while 
decreasing their weight and manufacturing costs.  Suntech 
Power's main competitors are Sharp and Sun Power. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Rep. Bartlett's delegation included: Rep. Mark Kirk 
(R-IL), Rep. Rick Larsen (D-WA), Rep. Steve Israel (D-NY), Del. 
Madeleine Bordallo (D-Guam), Rep. Thelma Drake (R-VA), Rep. Phil 
Gingrey (R-GA), Rep. Randy Neugebauer (R-TX), and Rep. Susan 
Davis (D-CA). 
SSCHUCHAT