05ANKARA5634
TURKISH MEDIA COVERAGE - VISIT OF APNSA HADLEY
Tue Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

271445Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 005634 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA COVERAGE - VISIT OF APNSA HADLEY 
SEPTEMBER 23 - 24, 2005 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. Turkish media coverage of APNSA Hadley's September 23-25 
visit to Ankara has generally been straightforward, 
accurate, and positive.  Not surprisingly, most papers 
focused on Hadley's public remarks on the the need for the 
United States to do more to address Turkey's concerns about 
PKK terrorism.  They also highlighted US concerns, expressed 
by APNSA, about Iran and Syria.  Many media outlets 
characterized the visit as a sign of the continuing 
importance of the strategic relationship between the two 
countries, and claimed that it demonstrated that the Turkish 
parliament's March 1, 2003 decision not to allow US troops 
to cross Turkish territory on their way to Iraq has been 
relegated to history.  In addition to the substantive 
coverage, APNSA Hadley was portrayed positively in his visit 
to a municipal youth center in Ankara.  Most papers carried 
photos of Hadley with Turkish young people doing folk 
dances, playing in rock music, or challenging him at table 
tennis.  These images were also carried repeatedly on major 
Turkish television channels following the visit.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
STRAIGHTFORWARD REPORTING ON APNSA VISIT 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Turkish media coverage of the visit was largely 
straightforward and accurate, drawing heavily on Hadley's 
public statements.  A representative sample follow: 
 
"Yeni Safak" (Islamist-oriented, pro-government):  "Now is 
the Time to Struggle Against the PKK" - The United States, 
which has made continual promises to struggle against the 
PKK but hasn't taken any action, has raised hopes once 
again.  US National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley, 
visiting Turkey on his first trip abroad in his new 
position, said that the time has come for the struggle 
against the PKK.  It has also been learned that a 
consultation mechanism will be established between Turkey 
and the United States to help bring an end to the PKK 
presence in northern Iraq.  Hadley signaled that "various 
means" must be found to address the PKK problem in northern 
Iraq, and said that coalition forces must work on this issue 
with Turkey and Iraq.  Following his discussions with MFA 
Undersecretary Tuygan, TGS Chief General Ozkok, and NSC 
Director Alpogan, Hadley said that "we need to eliminate the 
safe haven that the PKk is exploiting in northern Iraq."  He 
added that "we also need to cut off financing and other 
kinds of support for the PKK," and said the United States 
"needs to to better" on this. 
 
"Hurriyet"  (mainstream secular):  "We Have Forgetten About 
March 1" -- There are important messages from President 
George W. Bush for Ankara.  Stephen Hadley brought these 
messages.  But who is Hadley?  When Condoleezza Rice became 
Secretary of State, he was the key man who took over for her 
 
SIPDIS 
at the NSC.  As the Natioanl Security Advisor, he is 
President Bush's right-hand man.  The messages President 
Bush is sending to Turkey were very clear.  Bush is saying 
this: "Let's reestablish our strategic partnership.  I am 
determined.  We have completely turned the page.  March 1 is 
now history.  Let's melt the ice completely.  Let's fight 
against terrorism in the Middle East together, and build 
democracy."  Bush, who said two years ago that "nothing is 
left of our strategic partnership with Turkey," now wants to 
shore up the bridges once again.  It's as if Washington has 
understood how difficult it will be to establish democracy 
in the Middle East, and wants to work together with Turkey. 
 
Bush also had an important message on the PKK.  Hadley said 
that "the President understands in his heart the pain you 
feel as the result of PKk terrorism, because every morning 
when he sits down at his desk, he feels that same pain. 
Every day we are losing US soldiers to terrorism.  Don't 
worry, we will get rid of the PKK."  But when?  Even if 
Talabani promises a hundred times, nobody in Ankara believes 
that he is going to eliminate the PKK.  The Turkish side 
told Hadley that "the strategic partnership includes the PKK 
issue.  If Iraq breaks apart and a Kurdish state is 
established, fire will engulf the region.  It will be a 
disaster."  Hadley replied that "we also oppose a Kurdish 
state.  Talabani and Barzani also need Turkey.  Be patient." 
Maybe 6 months.  Maybe 1 year.  But why?  Because Bush's 
first goal is to gain passage of the new constitution on 
October 15.  He is also trying to get a new government 
elected in December.  The Americans are also working to 
establish an Iraqi army.  So Bush cannot give the green 
light for a US military operation at this point.  He is 
insisting that we wait.  Hadley also told Ankara that the 
tension on the Syria issue is now behind us.  "We were 
looking to isolate Assad completely.  We may not always view 
things in exactly the same way.  We have a lot to learn from 
you," he said.  I also heard that there was an interesting 
exchange between Hadley and PM Erdogan.  When Erdogan was 
explaining Turkey's democratic experience, he said "I am a 
religious person, but I am prime minister of a secular 
country."  Hadley was impressed by this. 
 
"Zaman" (Islamist-oriented, pro-government):  "Hadley Takes 
the Pulse in Ankara on Syria and Iran" - US National 
Security Advisor Stephen Hadley, who said he was visiting 
Turkey "to show the importance of the strategic 
relationship," spoke in a way that gave hope that the PKK 
presence in Iraq could be eliminated.  Hadley also tested 
Turkey's approach on Iran and Syria, which he said had 
"engaged in behavior that is very worrisome."  Hadley told 
the press that there are many problems in Iraq, and that the 
PKK presence is one of those problems.  He said "we need to 
work together.  We need to eliminate the safe haven that the 
PKK has been exploiting in northern Iraq."  When asked 
whether the United States is stringing Turkey along on the 
PKK issue, Hadley answered that "the time has now come."  He 
added that "we have done some things, but there are many 
other things we will do.  We need to cut off financial 
support for the PKK.  We need to find some things we can do 
in northern Iraq.  Coalition forces need to work together 
with Turkey and Iraq."  Syria and Iran were among the 
important issues on Hadley's agenda in Ankara.  "Some of 
Syria's behavior is a source of concern for us - their 
support for terrorism, and the limitations on freedom for 
their people.  We also have concerns about Iran - the lack 
of freedom, the neclear program , and the support for 
terrorism.  These are difficult issues, and it is important 
from our point of view to learn about each other's ideas," 
he said.  According to information we have obtained, the 
Turkish side said that "every country has the right to 
benefit from nuclear energy for peaceful uses.  But this 
needs to proceed in an open and transparent way, in 
cooperation with the IAEA."  The need for "an appropriate 
level of consultation for cooperation between the two 
countries" was also discussed.  With this in mind, the two 
sides will work on a consultation mechanism. 
 
"Milliyet" (mainstream secular): "Hadley: Time to Intervene 
Against the PKK" - US National Security Advisor Stephen 
Hadley, who can be described as President Bush's right-hand 
man on foreign policy and national security issues, told 
Ankara that the US supports Turkey against the PKK and in 
the EU process, and said that "the time has come to struggle 
against the PKK."  Hadley stressed in all of his comments 
the determination of the United States to act against the 
PKK.  When he was asked when the time for an intervention 
will come, he replied that "the time has come now.  It was 
useful for me to come and to learn what your government and 
your people think about this issue.  The PKK is one of the 
issues that needs to be resolved in Iraq.  We condemn PKK 
terrorism.  We need to prevent northern Iraq from being a 
safe haven for this organization.  We have taken some steps. 
Coalition forces will continue this struggle, along with 
Turkey and Iraq."  Hadley stressed that one of the US 
priorities in the struggle against the PKK is the cutting 
off of financial sources.  Hadley also met with young people 
at the Youth Center in Sincan, where Turkish tanks rolled 
through the streets following a performance of "Jerusalem 
night" as part of the February 28 process.  It was learned 
that the visit was part of a plan to engage in a close 
dialogue with people in Muslim countries in order to repair 
the US image. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
COMMENTARIES FOCUS ON SYRIA, MIDDLE EAST 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Editorial comment on the Hadley visit was sparse, and 
focused more on Syria and the Middle East rather than the 
PKK.  Several examples follow: 
 
"Regime Change Scenarios for Syria" (Asli Aydintasbas in 
"Sabah"): "The expectation in Washington, as well as in 
international circles, is that as the result of the ongoing 
Hariri investigation, regime change in Syria is a an 
increasingly likely possibility.  The Bush administration 
views Assad as a weak leader, and does not see any progress 
by the regime regarding security and democratization issues. 
Ankara and other Western capitals have started discussing 
possible names to replace Assad.  This issue was brought up 
during National Security Advisor Stephan Hadley's recent 
visit to Ankara as well. . Ankara worries about possible 
chaos in the event of a regime change in Syria, even if it 
comes about through the UN investigation.  On the other 
hand, the Turkish government does not intend to continue to 
play a `big brother' role for the Assad administration any 
longer.  But Ankara does not want to see instability in 
Syria similar to what we have seen in Iraq.  Moreover, 
Ankara wants to see tangible evidence from the UN 
investigation if it points to Syrian complicity.  This 
message was also conveyed to Hadley." 
"New Game Plan for the Middle East" (Murat Yetkin in 
"Radikal"): On Hadley's announced agenda were the war 
against terrorism, Iraq, Syria, Iran, Israel-Palestine, and 
Lebanon.  The fact that of the seven political crisis topics 
the United States is now dealing with on a global basis, six 
- excluding only North Korea -- are focused in this region, 
in which Turkey is a key player. The United States, while 
hoping the chaos in Iraq will end as soon as possible, wants 
to focus its full attention on the situation in the Broader 
Middle East.  It believes that developing its relations with 
Turkey will be in its interests in this regard.  Israel's 
withdrawal from Gaza, and the possibility of a secular and 
democratic state being established in Palestine, the Syrian 
military's having been forced to withdraw from Lebanon 
following the February murder of former Prime Minister Rafik 
al-Hariri and the holding of the first free elections in 
Lebanon in decades, have all brought the United States' 
Middle East game plan to a new stage.  The fact that German 
prosecutor Detlev Mehlis, who is investigating the Al-Hariri 
killing on behalf of the UN, engaged in questioning 
yesterday in Damascus regarding the Syrian connection, 
enhances the importance of the report that he will present 
in October.  The United States currently sees Syria as the 
greatest obstacle to the environment of stability that it 
plans for the region.  US intelligence sees Syria as a place 
where the armed groups fighting in Iraq gather and 
infiltrate into Iraq; the most recent operation in Tall Afar 
came in this context.  The government of Bashar al-Asad is 
at the head of the list of regimes that, in Washington's 
view, have to be "brought into line" in short order or else 
overthrown. 
"Strategic Partnership?" (Uluc Gurkan in "Star"): "Given the 
fact that National Security Advisor Hadley made his first 
tour abroad to Turkey, the Hadley visit was a very important 
event.  During the visit, Hadley conveyed President Bush's 
message about forgetting the past and reestablishing the 
strategic partnership.  When Turkish authorities asked about 
the PKK, Hadley confirmed that the issue is covered by the 
strategic partnership as well.  The meaning of this message 
is very clear.  The US wants Turkey to accept and assume the 
role designed for it within the Broader Middle East 
Initiative.  The message also indicates that meeting this 
expectation is the only way to eliminate the PKK threat in 
northern Iraq. . Turkey is now being dragged into an 
adventure that will result in a redesign of the Middle East 
map.  It is vitally important that Turkey stand on its own 
feet instead of fooling itself with carrots, such as 
possible US action on the PKK issue.  Any adventure taken 
with the US will bring nothing but lost lives, blood, and a 
threat to our territorial integrity." 
 
MCELDOWNEY