05ANKARA5277
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (AUGUST 2005)
Fri Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, JGABRYSZEWSKI, VLE 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC IZ KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (AUGUST 2005) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
  ¶1.      Summary:  EXBS Advisor continued to monitor the NP 
projects that are underway in Turkey, including Internal 
Control Program (ICP), Commodity Identification Training 
(CIT), Product Identification Tool (PIT) and Second Line of 
Defense (SLD). Work continued to progress despite being in 
the middle of the summer holiday season for most Turkish 
Government officials.  EXBS Advisor also coordinated Turkish 
participation in several events including a PSI workshop, 
Border Security Workshop and several NP conferences. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          August 2 - EXBS Advisor met with Department Head 
for Customs Enforcement Ender Gurleyik to review EXBS program 
work with the Turkish Customs and prepare for expansion of 
EXBS activities following the upcoming ratification of the NP 
Cooperation Agreement.  Equipment, training and joint 
cooperation activities were discussed. Additionally, Gurleyik 
reviewed recent cases, cooperation activities with other 
countries in the efforts to improve Turkish Customs 
procedures. Finally, the status of plans to upgrade the Habur 
Gate border crossing with Iraq was reviewed. Installation of 
the upgraded SLD equipment during the upgrade would decrease 
the disruption of border activities that could occur if the 
work was done following the upgrade project; efforts will be 
made to try to incorporate this factor into the overall SLD 
project once the NP Cooperation Agreement is ratified by the 
Turkish Parliament. 
 
2)          August 5 -  EXBS Advisor met with Turkish Atomic 
Energy Authority (TAEK) Nuclear Safety Department Head Aysun 
Yucel.  EXBS Advisor and Yucel reviewed the current status of 
the CIT milestones and upcoming events.  Yucel agreed that 
September would be a good time for the CIT Refresher course 
and next review of the project with DOE INECP personnel. 
EXBS Advisor reviewed information which was obtained during 
stateside consultation in regards to cooperation between the 
United States and Turkey in the area of Nuclear Threat 
Reduction.  EXBS Advisor expressed the desire of the United 
States to have the President of TAEK attend the September 
12-14 border security workshop in Amman Jordan.  This 
workshop would be a good time for TAEK President to meet his 
counter-parts in Jordan and Iraq and to discuss areas of 
common interest.  (Note: TAEK President will not attend this 
workshop due to scheduling conflicts. A meeting between the 
Iraqi , Jordanian and Turkish Atomic Energy leaders will be 
rescheduled at a later date and location.) 
 
3)          August 10 - EXBS Advisor accompanied Economic 
Counselor and Commercial Attach at the initial Embassy 
courtesy visit to the new Acting Undersecretary of Customs 
Cihat Ancin.  EXBS Advisor outlined in general the various NP 
Cooperation projects that are in progress between the United 
States and Turkey, including the SLD, CIT and PIT.  EXBS 
Advisor explained that following the ratification of the NP 
Cooperation Agreement by the Turkish Parliament, there could 
be a significant increase in activity including the 
purchasing of equipment and the design and installation of 
SLD equipment at border crossings.  Ancin informed the EmbOff 
that the modernization project for the Habur Gate crossing is 
scheduled to begin in early September and should take 
approximately 15 months to complete.  EXBS Advisor informed 
Ancin that it would be helpful to have the SLD project 
install the monitors at Habur during this project, so as to 
limit both disruption at the border and decrease costs. 
Ancin agreed and told EmbOffs that he would look into seeing 
what Customs could do to encourage MFA to seek ratification 
of the Agreement quickly. 
 
4)           August 16- EXBS Advisor met with MFA Arms 
Control and Disarmament Head of Department Osman Yavuzalp to 
conduct monthly update meeting on all current projects in 
progress in Turkey.  Yavuzalp informed EXBS Advisor that the 
support package for the NP Cooperation Agreement has been 
completed and submitted with the Agreement to Parliament for 
approval.  Approval is expected in September or early October 
at the latest.  Finally, EXBS Advisor discussed Turkey's 
involvement in PSI and inquired as to any effect the recently 
announced changes in TGS could effect Turkish PSI activities. 
 Yavuzalp stated that with the new interministerial council 
for PSI, Turkey's involvement towards PSI should be more 
consistent and focused. 
 
EXBS Advisor met with Department Head for Customs Enforcement 
 Mehmet Guzel to review EXBS program work with the Turkish 
Customs, including CIT, PIT, and Risk Management Workshop. 
Guzel informed EXBS Advisor that there have been several 
changes within the Turkish Customs and some of his 
interagency contacts for this projects have changed.  This 
could slow down the progress on some of the projects but 
should not have any other negative impact.  EXBS Advisor 
reviewed the potential upcoming U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection visit, outlining the purpose and the goals for the 
visit.  A more detailed itinerary will be developed later. 
Finally, EXBS Advisor and Guzel discussed the importance of 
properly monitoring the upcoming modernization of several of 
the Turkish Border crossings in an attempt to install the new 
SLD equipment during these modernization projects. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: None 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Sep 19- 23- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT Refresher 
Course 
 
¶B.         Oct 11-14- EXBS Advisor to attend Black 
Sea/Caspian Sea Workshop in Baku with Turkish Coast Guard 
delegation 
 
¶C.         Oct 23-29- CITS/UGA visit to Turkey to conduct 
evaluation of Turkish export control system. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY