05BAGHDAD3695
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - September 8, 2005
Thu Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003695 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - September 8, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of Iraqi, Arabic language websites on 
September 8, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "What Justice?"  (Iraq4all News, 9/8) 
¶B. "Has the Iraqi Constitution Achieved Justice for Women?" 
(Modern Discussion, 9/8) 
¶C. "Demonstration in Sulaimaniyah: An Early Test of the 
Credibility of the Constitution" (Al-Jeeran, 9/8) 
¶D. "The New Iraqi Constitution: The Selling of Kirkuk to the 
Kurds" (Iraqi Papers, 9/8) 
¶E. "Farewell Iraqi Unity" (Al-Rayah, 9/8) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
 
¶A. "What Justice?" 
(Editorial by Wahab Baderkhan  - Iraq 4 all news: 
http://iraq4all.org) 
 
"It's been observed that Arab governments have been silent 
over the Iraqi draft constitution which is normal since this 
is an Iraqi domestic issue. But this doesn't mean these 
governments don't hold opinions in this regard, but their 
choice to remain silent is due to Iraqi leaders' decisions 
to deal with the important issue of the constitution in the 
same manner they have dealt with other issues since the 
start of occupation. 
 
"Iraqi leaders have sent out messages to Arab leaders (in 
diplomatic, and sometimes, non-diplomatic manners) informing 
them that they have neglected Iraq and demonstrated that 
fact with their support for the previous regime and lack of 
sympathy or support for qhe opposition to Saddam (that was 
sponsored only by the U.S. which has now a3tmed power). So 
the only party with the right to assess the new constitution 
is the U.S., but George Bush's administration has shown that 
it only needs a constitutional document, any constitutional 
document, to defend its policy by illustrating that 
everything is going according to schedule, and that 
ratifying the draft is a step on the way to "withdrawal from 
Iraq" which has become a popular American demand. 
 
"There's no doubt that the Arab League will encounter the 
problem created by the Iraqi constitution through asking the 
question: Is Iraq an Arab country? And it's normal that no 
decision will be made to force Iraq into anything it doesn't 
seek, but it's also normal that the `Arab identity' isn't 
related to a specific religion or sect. 
 
"There are many who have decided to stick to their opinions 
and submit the current draft to a referendum next month, but 
the fact is that the Arab identity isn't the only drawback 
in this draft. The other problem resident in the document is 
the proposal to form a new system, (i.e. federalism and 
other divisive mechanisms). The best assessment of the 
constitution should be presented by its drafters by drawing 
a clear image for what Iraq will look like in the next five 
years. Except for Kurdistan, no one can really predict what 
Iraq will look like. 
 
"Many items in the constitution have been linked to laws 
that are to be issued later, which only means one thing, the 
constitution's drafters have stated principles they can only 
attempt to enact in the future, which has led to the 
omission of personal freedoms and the decreasing likelihood 
of achieving justice." 
 
¶B. "Has the Iraqi Constitution Achieved Justice for Women?" 
(Editorial by Catrine Mikhael - Modern Discussion: 
http://www.rezgar.com) 
 
"The composition of the National Assembly was based on 
ethnic, religious, and political power sharing that was 
clearly reflected in the constitutional committee and 
resulted in a draft constitution unrepresentative of the 
ambitions of large sectors of Iraqis (i.e. women). And since 
women represent 60% of the Iraqi population, it's not 
possible to build a democracy while neglecting over half the 
population. But despite this, I consider voting for the 
draft constitution a very important step for us, with 
amendments to some items in the `rights' section of the 
draft (where certain items are contradictory: stating that 
no legislation could oppose Islam and that no legislation 
should contradict the principles of democracy). I have no 
idea how these two articles can be reconciled. 
"When religious principles become the source of national 
legislation and the basis of family law, this means granting 
social authority to those monopolizing the interpretation of 
religion and will result in conflicting visions among 
clerics with women and minority groups ending up as the main 
losers. 
 
"So here, I state the demands of the Iraqi Women's Movement 
that include: 
 
   ¶1.   Acknowledging the rights of Iraqi women as mothers, 
     workers, and citizens in the constitution. 
¶2.   Constitutional guarantees preventing all forms of 
violence and discrimination against women. 
   ¶3.   Constitutional guarantees for no less than 40% of 
     women's representation in all decision making posts. 
   ¶4.   Constitutional acknowledgment of all international 
     agreements and treaties as a source of legislation. 
   ¶5.   Maintaining personal status laws and preventing any 
     replacement by sectarian alternatives." 
 
¶C. "Demonstration in Sulaimaniyah: An Early Test of the 
Credibility of the Constitution" 
(Uncited Editorial - Al-Jeeran:  http://www.aljeeran.net) 
 
"A Kurdish citizen was killed and 16 were injured in one of 
the most violent demonstrations the government of 
Sulaimaniyah has ever faced in Kurdistan which is led by the 
PUK party. More than 1,500 people from the Kalar district 
took part in the demonstration which witnessed ferocious 
confrontations. They were requesting improvement of 
essential services, specifically water and electricity when 
demonstrators started throwing stones at the mayor's 
building and security forces started shooting which led to 
the killing of one demonstrator and the injury of 16 others. 
Later, demonstrators gathered in front of the hospital where 
the injured were transferred and new clashes erupted. 
 
"Mr. Majeed Saleh, a public relations official in the PUK 
stated that, "The demonstrators burned the directorate of 
education in the city, the fire station, the pediatric 
hospital, a building of the Kurdistan Women's Union, and a 
radio station. 
 
"Accordingly, security forces detained hundreds of 
demonstrators in a scene most observers believe has had a 
negative impact and provoked inquiries regarding freedom of 
assembly in Kurdistan. What is required from the authorities 
in Sulaimaniyah and Kalar is an investigation into the 
reasons behind the use of deadly force against 
demonstrators. 
 
"One of the demonstrators, who spoke on condition of 
anonymity, stated that a group of demonstrators had 
requested official permission for the demonstration from the 
mayor and security directorate but `the authorities refused 
to grant permission.' As a matter of fact he said, it 
encouraged demonstrators to practice their democratic rights 
under the new Iraq." 
 
¶D. "The New Iraqi Constitution: The Selling of Kirkuk to the 
Kurds" 
(Editorial by Sabri Tarbeh - Iraqi Papers: 
http://www.iraqipapers.com/9_5_5_sabri.htm) 
 
"The following passage was written in the American 
Constitution of Iraq: `The Arab people in Iraq are part of 
the Arab nation.' It is well known who is behind this 
article and that it's a scheme (on behalf of many parties) 
to divide Iraq and transform it into sectarian and 
nationalist cantons despite the fact that Iraq is a founding 
member of the Arab League; and it is illogical to accept 
Iraq's partial [i.e. divided] membership in the Arab League. 
 
"The most dangerous element in the American Constitution of 
Iraq is the concession of the agent's authority over Kirkuk 
for the interest of the Kurdish/ Zionist partners. These 
powers claimed patriotism and said in public that Kirkuk, 
which produces 60% of Iraq's oil, is an Iraqi city whose 
ownership is considered a red line that shouldn't be 
crossed. 
 
"Those under orders from their American masters turned into 
sheep and sold Kirkuk to the Kurds when they omitted item 
`C' from Article 53 of the TAL which prohibited the joining 
of Kirkuk or Baghdad with any federal region. Instead, in 
the most despicable constitution, two substitute articles 
(136 & 137) gave the Kurds two, one-year opportunities to 
manipulate Kirkuk's demography to fabricate and fake a 
constitution to allow them to annex Kirkuk with Kurdistan. 
When that happens Iraq will lose the majority of its oil 
fortune because of a deal among agents to resurrect the 
Haifa/ Kirkuk oil project which aims to provide the Zionist 
Entity with its oil needs. 
"Through that deal the agent of the coalition unveiled his 
ugly face. The image is now more transparent after the sale 
of Kirkuk. But the victorious Iraqi people won't accept 
national treason for a constitution--they will absolutely 
reject it." 
 
¶E. "Farewell Iraqi Unity" 
(Uncited Editorial - Al-Rayah: 
http://www.raya.com/site/topics/article.asp?c u_no=2&item_no= 
95558&version=1&template_id=27&parent_id=23) 
 
"Apart from the total destruction of the infrastructure, 
killing of children, the elderly and women, humiliating and 
detainingQn, and torturing people of all categories, the 
greatest problem Iraq and Arab nations face is Iraq's 
division and disintegration into small states, in the name 
of federalism, among Shiites, Kurds and Sunnis--especially 
following the Iraqi parliament's approval of the draft 
constitution which carries the poisons of discord and 
division and hasn't maintained Iraq's rights, freedoms or 
unity of land, people and identity. 
 
"Bush's intention is clear and what the American occupation 
seeks through Iraqi federalism, the division of the country, 
will be repeated to tear the Islamic nation apart and dilute 
Arab unity. 
 
"What we are witnessing through Iraq's war: the occupation, 
humiliation, torture and disintegration of the country is 
very painful. We as Arabs and Muslims should intervene 
immediately and support Iraq politically, financially, and 
morally to help it maintain its Arab nature and unity 
otherwise we will bid it farewell forever and bid farewell 
to our Arab unity." 
 
SATTERFIELD