05FRANKFURT6995
Hesse to Deport Afghan Hate Preacher
Wed Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 006995 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER KISL PHUM GM AF
SUBJECT: Hesse to Deport Afghan Hate Preacher 
 
Ref: Berlin 562 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for Internet distribution 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The German state of Hesse has initiated 
deportation proceedings against Mr. Said Khobaib Sadat (DPOB 
1 January 1959 in Logar, Afghanistan), an Afghan imam living 
in Offenbach, near Frankfurt, for reportedly being a "hate- 
preacher," a crime under the immigration law that went into 
effect 1/1/2005 (reftel).  Sadat is also alleged to have 
ties to Afghanistan's Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.  Sadat disputes 
the allegations and has appealed the expulsion order. 
German courts could rule on the case in the coming days. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On August 10, Hesse Interior Minister Volker 
Bouffier (CDU-Christian Democrats) announced that the state 
intends to deport Mr. Sadat.  According to press reports, 
authorities have been monitoring the activities of Sadat, a 
preacher at the Pak Dar Ul Islam Mosque in Frankfurt, since 
at least 2003.  The mosque is co-located with the Bangladesh 
Islamic Mosque at the same address. 
 
A Hate Preacher to Be Taken Seriously 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The state Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution (LfV), which monitors extremists, documented a 
number of "hate-sermons" Sadat delivered in 2002 and 2003. 
Press reports claim he routinely advocated violence in his 
sermons.  On July 29, Sadat urged followers to "not fear 
death" and "defend our faith against non-believers even if 
it means dying for it as martyrs." Additionally, he 
preached, "today all of us must defend Islam together 
against enemy forces--with every means, even with death." 
Sadat also allegedly conveyed messages from Gulbuddin 
Hekmatyar.  Sadat is suspected of having ties to pro-Taliban 
forces in Afghanistan.  The German media portray Sadat as a 
charismatic speaker who appeals to young Muslims and new 
converts.  Hesse LfV President Lutz Irrgang described him 
publicly as a "hate-preacher to be taken very seriously." 
 
¶4. (U) Sadat has resided in Germany since 1991.  He had 
enjoyed protection from removal proceedings due to the 
situation then prevailing in Afghanistan but no longer does, 
according to authorities, paving the way for deportation. 
NOTE: Germany has determined that conditions in Afghanistan 
are such that involuntarily returning Afghans to their 
homeland is now possible.  END NOTE. 
 
"Dear God, Destroy them All" 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) A spokesperson for the Frankfurt prosecutor's 
office described the case as complex, noting that Sadat's 
sermons often took the form of a prayer calling on Allah - 
rather than fellow Muslims - to punish "non-believers," 
raising the question of whether he was actually engaging in 
incitement.  During sermons delivered between 2001 and 2003 
Sadat is reported to have preached: 
 
"Death to the Americans, death to the English." 
 
"If these people do not leave (us) alone, then cripple their 
legs.  Dear God, cripple their hands . . . make their wives 
into widows . . . let their kids become orphans.  Dear God, 
let their families be destroyed." 
 
"Dear God, destroy and punish all those who do not want 
peace in Afghanistan.  Dear God, destroy them all." 
 
¶6. (SBU) Another legal problem concerns his referring to 
potential future events in Afghanistan (rather than 
Germany), again making it difficult under German law to 
convict him of incitement of people in Germany.  In 
addition, Sadat is married and has six children, four of 
whom were born in Germany.  This could further complicate 
deportation proceedings should Sadat seek a stay on 
humanitarian grounds. 
 
Lost in Translation? 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Sadat rejects allegations that he has ties to the 
Taliban or Al-Qaida.  He also denies close and ongoing 
contact with Hekmatyar, claiming the relationship dates back 
to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan--a time when, 
according to Sadat, Hekmatyar enjoyed U.S. support.  Sadat 
admits to a "friendly" telephone conversation with Hekmatyar 
in April 2001 but denies any subsequent contact.  Arguing 
his case is merely one of misunderstanding, Sadat claims his 
sermons were incorrectly translated and misconstrued. 
Sadat's claim is contradicted, however, by some members of a 
mosque where Sadat previously preached.  They claim his 
extremely radical views led to his dismissal from that 
position.  Sadat has appealed his deportation order to a 
lower court in Offenbach; the court could rule in the coming 
days.  Under German law, Sadat must remain in Offenbach 
until the courts rule. 
 
¶8. (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE