05LIMA3907
Request for speaker on Intellectual Property Rights
Fri Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 003907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA (CBARONE), INFO WHA/PDA (SLEBENS/MDCONNERS/ 
NKLOPFENSTEIN, WHA/PD (GGALLEGOS), WHA/AND (JMONSERRAT) 
 
E.O. 12958:    DECL: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PE
SUBJECT: Request for speaker on Intellectual Property Rights 
 
 
¶1.   Program Description:  The American Chamber of Commerce has 
requested our support in co-sponsoring the tenth annual 
conference on intellectual property rights to be held on October 
19, 2005.  The theme of this year's conference concerns the 
development and opportunities of IPR in international free trade 
agreements.  Indecopi (the GOP's IPR administrative agency), the 
Swiss Embassy, Alafarpe (an association representing the 
international pharmaceutical industry in Peru), and the Business 
Software Alliance will sponsor the event. 
 
¶2.   Time frame:  October 19, 2005 (arrival date October 17), 
FY06, Q1. 
 
¶3.   Program Objectives:  To educate Peruvians on the importance 
of intellectual property rights protection with regard to the 
current U.S.-Andean Free Trade Agreement negotiations. 
 
¶4.   MPP goal:  Economic Development 
 
¶5.   Justification:  In 2002, the GOP received unilateral trade 
benefits from the U.S. under the Andean Trade Preferences and 
Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA) and committed to take certain steps 
to improve IPR enforcement.  Nevertheless, Peru's continuing high 
rates of piracy and lack of adequate IPR protection could hinder 
the GOP's ambitious foreign trade agenda to consolidate the 
economic gains made through a bilateral free trade agreement. 
While the FTA IPR chapter will include high levels of copyright 
and enforcement obligations, Peruvian political support for IPR 
protection remains inconsistent.  The speaker's visit will serve 
as a valuable opportunity to stress the connection between 
adequate IPR enforcement and the development of increased global 
trading partnerships. 
 
¶6.   Audience:  GOP representatives; prosecutors and judges; 
patent, trademark, and copyright officials; legal experts; 
academics; domestic and international representatives of 
industry; journalists; and students. 
 
¶7.   Proposed topic to be discussed by panelist and type of 
event:  The speaker should discuss the importance of IPR 
enforcement to the promotion of free trade; need for trade 
capacity building initiations to address IPRT enforcement; best 
practices from U.S. experiences.  Speaker may also want to 
address topics relevant to the U.S.-Andean FTA negotiations, 
including data protection and optical disc piracy issues. 
 
Type of events:  Speaker will give a keynote address at the 
American Chamber of Commerce conference; participate in private 
meetings; have a representation event; and a media interview. 
 
¶8.   Speaker requirement:  Post requests a speaker with 
experience with IPR and FTA issues from any of the following 
departments:  Department of State, USTR, department of Commerce, 
or the U.S. Patent and Trade Office. 
 
¶9.   Language:  Fluent Spanish speaker required. 
 
¶10.  Supporting materials:  Post would appreciate any Spanish 
language version material related to the program to be sent via 
email or fax prior to event. 
 
¶11.   Funding:  FY2006 I bucks 
 
¶12.  Name of Program Officer and contact information:  Program 
Officer is ACAO Abigail Gonzalez, office phone (51-1) 618-2634, 
fax 434-1299 or 434-0100.  Program coordinator is Grace Sanchez 
618-2565.  Thanks and regards. 
 
Struble