05MANAMA1361
Ramadan 2005 Public Diplomacy Strategy
Wed Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211505Z Sep 05UNCLAS MANAMA 001361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO KIRF PREL BA
SUBJECT: Ramadan 2005 Public Diplomacy Strategy 
 
REF:  MANAMA 01292 
 
¶1. Summary:  Ramadan presents an opportunity to promote 
mutual understanding, support democratic dialogue and 
demonstrate respect for religious traditions in Bahrain.  It 
is also an opportunity to show a side of America that 
listens and has a voice of its own in matters of faith. 
Programs will include the Ambassador's nightly visit to 
Ramadan majlises (social salons), a traditional Iftaar 
dinner with local contacts, a speaker program featuring an 
American Imam, a women's event at the DCMs, and a food-drive 
for charity. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  The key to Embassy Manama's 2005 Ramadan Strategy is 
outreach.  We are seeking to engage a broad range of 
contacts and reach deep into Bahraini society, particularly 
among youth and women.  Participating in traditional 
cultural events such as the majlis, the Iftaar and women's 
Ghabqa shows sincerity in our respect for Islam, and 
establishes a setting where dialogue can take place.  It 
shows our desire to build closer relations with our Bahraini 
friends and colleagues, including reaching beyond elites. 
Our visiting U.S. speaker, Imam Yahya Hendi of Georgetown 
University, will reflect Islam's role in American 
contemporary culture and religion, and lay the groundwork 
for further engagement and exchanges involving religious 
leaders in Bahrain.  The CLO food drive shows American 
generosity in the context of the zakat, or charity, that is 
one of the five pillars of Islam. The Ramadan strategy 
directly supports mission program goals of increasing mutual 
understanding through outreach to foreign audiences. 
 
Ambassador and Embassy to visit Ramadan Majlises 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3. The Ambassador will lead a team of Embassy officers on a 
nightly round of visits to Ramadan majlises hosted by 
prominent Bahrainis.  On average, they will visit five to 
six majlises per evening for the first three weeks of 
Ramadan.  These majlises provide a unique opportunity for 
the Ambassador and Embassy staff to have hundreds of 
encounters with Bahrainis, from the senior most level to 
average citizens, during a month of great religious 
significance for Muslims.  While the visits are social, they 
offer an opportunity - in addition to showing respect for 
Ramadan - to engage with a wide range of Bahrainis on 
domestic and international concerns, including democratic 
reform, civil society, and Iraq. 
 
 
Muslim American Speaker Program 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. In mid-October, post will host U.S. speaker Imam Yahya 
Hendi, of Georgetown University.  His program includes 
participation in a majlis at the Grand Mosque in downtown 
Manama, meeting with key religious figures, a public lecture 
to youth leaders, and giving the convocation at an Iftaar 
dinner held at the Ambassador's residence.  The Iftaar will 
include a diverse audience of religious, cultural, 
political, and civil society leaders.  The Bahraini Ministry 
of Islamic Affairs is helping design a program for Imam 
Hendi and getting him center-stage in local Ramadan 
activities.  We are planning for major press coverage. 
Note:  This initial program lays the foundation and creates 
linkages for a special IV program post will request for FY 
2006 in septel (Ref  A). 
 
 
Women's "Ghabqa" 
---------------- 
 
¶5. DCM will host a traditional Ramadani late meal for women, 
with audience from Bahraini civil society, human rights, 
ministries, royal family, and embassy community.  This event 
will show our continuing support for the empowerment of 
women in Bahraini civil society.  Women journalists and 
opinion-leaders will also be invited. 
 
 
Food-Drive 
---------- 
 
¶6. In respect for Islam's special emphasis on zakat, or 
charity, during Ramadan, Manama CLO will spearhead a food 
drive, and will accept food and cash donations for the 
needy. 
 
 
MONROE