05NAIROBI3944
SUDANESE REFUGEES IN KAKUMA: MORE ARRIVING, FEW
Thu Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS NAIROBI 003944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/A AND PRM/AFR, POSTS FOR REFCOORDS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF SU KE
SUBJECT: SUDANESE REFUGEES IN KAKUMA: MORE ARRIVING, FEW 
RUSHING HOME 
 
 
 ¶1. SUMMARY. Sudanese refugees are not excited by the 
prospect of returning to Sudan; in fact, as many as 6,000 new 
Sudanese refugees have arrived in Kakuma refugee camp since 
January. Theft of roofing material on vacant former Somali 
Bantu dwellings led to their destruction by the weather. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. Refugee Specialist accompanied the visiting Sudan Desk 
Officer on a day trip to Kakuma on September 9, 2005. Due to 
the limited time, IRC, the host, set up a brief meeting with 
25 to 30 Sudanese refugees to enable the desk officer to hear 
general Sudanese views on repatriation to Sudan. The 
prevailing sentiment was that Sudanese refugees are hesitant 
to return. Most are willing to go but subject to improved 
conditions, when infrastructure such as roads, hospitals, 
clinics and schools are provided. Without these improvements, 
some said they would rather be resettled to a third country. 
As one refugee said, "The difference between those who came 
to Kenya and those who stayed (is that) refugees are more 
educated, more civilized. There is no water except river 
water (in Southern Sudan). It is difficult to accept 
repatriation without modern amenities now." 
 
¶3. Security is another primary concern for most. One refugee 
described an attack in the last few weeks in Equatoria where 
people were killed, property looted and women and children 
abducted (NFI). 
 
¶4. While visiting Kakuma III, the former site of housing for 
the Somali Bantu, Refugee Specialist observed many tents 
being used as dwellings and many mud brick houses under 
construction. Refugee Specialist was informed that since 
January as many as 6,000 new Sudanese refugees had arrived in 
the camp, 1,200 of whom had arrived since June. Reasons for 
the arrival of the new Sudanese refugees included "no 
infrastructure" and "no medical care" in the areas from which 
they arrived. Only registered refugees and locals may access 
health clinics in the camp. Old Somali Bantu dwellings could 
not be used because they were destroyed when theft of the 
roofing material allowed disintegration of the mud brick 
walls from wind and rain. 
 
¶5. Refugee Specialist also visited a health clinic and a 
President's Emergency Plan funded VCT (Voluntary Counseling 
and Testing) center for HIV/AIDS activities. The health 
clinic was small with tiny, dark and dusty offices and 
examination and treatment rooms. Twenty-five or 30 people 
waited outside in a makeshift waiting area while 10 to 15 
were already being assisted. The staff said it catered for 80 
or more patients per day. The VCT center is housed in a 
building significantly larger than the clinic. The center 
includes a waiting room, a counseling room and other offices. 
 A TV and VCR stood ready for use in the waiting area, which 
like the offices was large, airy and well-lit. The staff said 
up to eight persons were seen per day. The other buildings 
house classrooms for use in HIV/AIDS education and other 
activities. 
 
¶5. COMMENT: It is frustrating to see peace yield such slow 
results, but Sudanese refugees will not repatriate quickly 
and others will likely continue to arrive until there is 
something better to go home to. Until then, Sudanese refugees 
will continue to make use of the health care facilities, 
schools and other services available to them in Kakuma 
refugee camp.  The differences between the VCT center and the 
clinic vividly reflect the contrast between levels of funding 
available for HIV activities as compared to primary health 
care. 
BELLAMY