05PARIS6381
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Nuclear Issues - North Korea
Tue Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201018Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Nuclear Issues - North Korea 
European Issues - German Elections - European Defense 
PARIS - Tuesday, September 20, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
¶1. Nuclear Issues - North Korea 
¶2. European Issues - German Elections - European Defense 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Many front pages continue to focus on Germany's elections and 
the lack of political consensus they reveal. Several 
commentators make analogies with the political situation in 
France and most acknowledge that the political stalemate in 
Germany is indicative of Europe's social and political 
immobility. In La Tribune Francois-Xavier Pietri comments: "A 
weak coalition in Germany pleases no one in Europe. Everyone 
knows that a coalition is never fertile ground for reforms." 
For Catholic La Croix, "the losers are the winners and vice-a- 
versa." while Gerard Dupuy in Liberation comments that "for 
once, the austere German political game is a bit more sexy." 
(See Part C) 
 
Inside, nuclear issues are one of today's major international 
stories, with the six-party talks with North Korea and the 
agreement reached yesterday highly profiled. Most reports pay 
tribute to the achievement, but warn about the need to "wait 
and see." President Bush is quoted about the need to be able 
to "verify" North Korea's commitments. (See Part C) Other 
reports on Iran stipulate that the EU-3 "is determined to 
bring Iran before the UNSC." 
 
Right-of-center Le Figaro reports on European defense 
cooperation (See Part C) and on a press conference between 
Ambassador Stapleton, General Jones and France's General Henri 
Bentegeat, who is quoted: "Military relations between Paris 
and Washington are numerous, in spite of the political 
turbulence of the past three years. Our relations continued 
and they have now gone back to the level before the Iraq 
crisis. There will be no quarrel about NATO and Afghanistan 
between Paris and Washington, except possibly about wording." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Nuclear Issues - North Korea 
 
"North Korea Gives Up Its Nuclear Arsenal" 
Jean-Jacques Mevel in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/20): "The 
North Korean commitment which Beijing was able to extract from 
Pyongyang is the first tangible sign of success after two 
years of on and off negotiations. On paper, Washington and 
Pyongyang are a step closer to settling their conflict. But it 
is only a promise. The Beijing declaration sets no deadline, 
gives no detail and no means of verification. President Bush, 
who cautiously saluted the agreement, insists on the need to 
be able to ensure that Pyongyang respects its commitment. But 
the declaration leaves for later the settlement about light 
water nuclear commercial plants, which North Korea is asking 
for. Down the road, the most difficult phase will be the 
verification stage. Success depends on trust and sincerity 
from both sides, two things which have been missing until now. 
Just as they were missing from Iraq and the U.S. before their 
lack led to war." 
 
European Issues - German Elections - European Defense 
 
"The Lessons of a Missed Opportunity" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/20): "One 
thing is certain: Germany is paralyzed. One hopes that when 
the time comes, Germany's political leaders will know how to 
put Germany's interests before their partisan calculations. 
Not only have the Germans postponed their country's much 
needed economic reform, they have thrown the EU into a period 
of political immobility. But the Germans voted pretty much 
like the French would have. One of the lessons from this 
ballot where almost everyone loses concerns the choices being 
offered to the voters: no one had the right answers or the 
creativity to help the voters overcome their fear of change." 
 
"A Paralyzed Europe" 
Francois-Xavier Pietri in right-of-center La Tribune (09/20): 
"It is clear that Germany's uncertainties do not help Europe's 
affairs. The period of political turbulence in which Germany 
is being propelled is rather unwelcome. The business world is 
wary of a political maelstrom just when Europe's number one 
economy was beginning to show signs of recovery. They know 
that coalitions are never fertile ground for reform. 
Governments themselves are in a quandary. France has nothing 
to gain from a weak coalition when it is looking to boost the 
Franco-German locomotive. 2005 started badly for Europe's 
construction with the double `no,' from France and the 
Netherlands this past spring. Germany's uncertainties will 
weigh in on European affairs, and most specifically on the 
difficult negotiations for Turkey's EU membership. This year 
will not go down as a good year for Europe's construction." 
 
"Europe's Military Industry At Stake" 
Arnaud de La Grange in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/20): "The 
president of the European Defense Agency, Nick Witney, in 
spite of being a staunch supporter of transatlantic ties, has 
pulled the alarm about the future of the industrial and 
technological base of Europe's defense industry. Because of 
his Atlanticism, his warning takes on added weight. Europe's 
research capabilities are in his view alarming: the U.S. 
spends five times what Europe spends in defense research. And 
he sends home the message when he says that all governments, 
`no matter what their strategic and political relations with 
the U.S.,' must realize that a true transatlantic defense 
cooperation is nothing but an illusion. `It would be 
different,' he adds, `if the Americans opened, in a reasonable 
manner, their markets to the Europeans, which they do not.' 
While Europe buys American, `the American market is closed to 
European products.' This is why both politicians and 
industrialists are convinced that the solution lies in `the 
development of a European armament market.' Defense Minister 
Alliot-Marie defends herself against accusations of 
protectionism by insisting on the `industrial, technological 
and operational needs.' The term `European preference' could 
trigger the beginnings of a conflict. This is why the French 
Ministry prefers to talk about a natural rather than an 
imposed preference." STAPLETON