05QUITO2127
CIVAIR COMMUNITY EAGERLY AWAITS NEW GPS PROCEDURE
Thu Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

151445Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR PGOV EC
SUBJECT:  CIVAIR COMMUNITY EAGERLY AWAITS NEW GPS PROCEDURE 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Global Positioning System (GPS) procedures for 
Quito's Mariscal Sucre airport are close to becoming a 
reality.  GOE civil aviation regulators, the airlines, and 
the Quito Airport all see positive benefits to introducing 
GPS procedures.  Benefits include preventing frequent 
weather-related diversions, facilitating the airport's 
transition to 24-hour operation, and rehabilitating the 
airport's reputation.  Although local regulators see the 
introduction of GPS as a foot up in their effort to regain 
Category 1 status, the connection between the two is 
essentially non-existent.  End Summary. 
 
ON THE CUSP OF GPS 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  Triggered by a $300,000 investment by an American 
carrier, the regulatory process necessary for implementing a 
GPS procedure at Quito's Mariscal Sucre airport is nearing 
its end.  Drawing on available, on-board technology, pilots 
would utilize GPS procedures to help them land aircraft when 
weather-related conditions limit line-of-sight capacity. 
Ecuador's Direccion General de Aviacion Civil (DGAC), which 
has regulatory oversight on the matter, has agreed in 
principle to implementing the GPS procedure.  The DGAC 
currently is awaiting a technical review by FAA to give 
carriers and the Quito Airport the green light.  FAA has 
completed the review and is preparing an official, positive 
response to the DGAC.  A parallel regulatory process between 
American carriers and the FAA also is nearing completion. 
 
GPS A POTENTIAL SAVIOR 
---------------------- 
 
¶3.  A number of GPS-derived benefits drive interest in the 
procedure.  Most importantly, an approved GPS procedure 
would allow airplanes to land at Quito's main airport under 
disruptive weather conditions.  For years, shifting winds, 
heavy fog and other weather-related problems have diverted 
incoming air traffic to Guayaquil, neighboring Colombia or 
Panama.  Passenger traffic -- some 80 flights per year are 
diverted -- has garnered a majority of the attention, but 
cargo flights are also affected.  The diversions disrupt 
passenger itineraries and generate fuel and passenger 
accommodation costs for the airlines. 
 
¶4.  GPS procedures also would allow authorities to expand 
airport operations to 24-hours.  While a shift to around-the- 
clock operations does not directly influence passenger 
schedules, cargo carriers will benefit.  Profiting the most 
is Ecuador's floral industry, which relies on timely 
shipments for its cut flower exports. 
 
¶5.  A less tangible benefit of the GPS procedure is one of 
status.  In discussions with EconOff, DGAC Director William 
Birkett frequently has expressed concern about the airport's 
reputation, which is negatively affected by both weather- 
related diversions and limited operation schedules.  A GPS 
procedure addresses both concerns while also allowing 
airlines to utilize the newest available technology.  With 
slight adjustments, these GPS procedures also could be used 
at the new Quito airport, scheduled to open in 2009. 
Birkett believes that the GPS procedure, by helping reduce 
uncertainty, also will have a positive spillover effect on 
investment across Ecuador's economy. 
 
INTEREST IN CATEGORY ONE CERTIFICATION PERSISTS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6.  Less certain is any positive impact the implementation 
of a GPS system would have on the GOE's efforts to regain 
Category 1 certification of its safety oversight system. 
Ecuador lost Category 1 status in 1994 and with it the right 
for Ecuadorian airlines to fly directly to the U.S. and to 
maintain beneficial code-sharing relationships with American 
carriers.  The first step toward regaining Category 1 is the 
passage of an adequate Civil Aviation Law, which currently 
is up for a second debate in Congress.  Despite FAA review 
of draft legislation based on FAA standards, over the past 
year special interests have watered down language in the 
proposed law. 
 
¶7.  Meanwhile, inspections last year by the Transportation 
Safety Administration (TSA) of safety protocols at Quito and 
Guayaquil airport revealed no substantial security 
violations.  Despite the positive nature of the inspections, 
the FAA notes that regaining Category 1 would still require 
a formal technical review of airport safety once an adequate 
Civil Aviation Law is passed.  Birkett, who is working with 
a timetable that ends in December 2006, has expressed 
frustration over the need for a technical review.  In turn, 
he has suggested that productive steps forward on matters 
such as GPS procedures should suffice toward satisfying 
further Category 1 concerns. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  Regaining Category 1 status appears to be a top priority 
for Birkett, a former Air Force General and former President 
of the Ecuadorian military-owned airline TAME.  He takes the 
status of civil aviation in Ecuador personally. 
Unfortunately, his belief that progress on GPS can 
facilitate the Category 1 process is misguided.  However, 
Birkett seems to have brought a new sense of purpose to the 
DGAC and cooperation with the Civil Aviation Commission has 
been much improved.  Still, despite Birkett's productive 
work, the GOE's legitimacy on civil aviation is hampered by 
its previous lackluster effort to help Category 1 
legislation pass, even as the USG expended a lot of energy 
toward that end. 
 
JEWELL