05TELAVIV5597
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121122Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 005597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  IDF Withdrawal From Gaza 
 
¶2.  Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina 
 
¶3.  Global War on Terror 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The IDF withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, after 38 years 
of Israeli military rule, dominated the headlines 
during the weekend.  The last Israeli troops left the 
Strip this morning at around 7:00 Israel Time. 
 
Israel Radio quoted Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz as 
saying this morning that, from now on, Israel would 
hold the PA responsible for attacks from the Gaza 
Strip. 
 
Yediot quoted the next U.S. ambassador to Israel, 
Richard Jones, as saying that the ball is in the 
Palestinian court, and that they must now prove 
themselves in administering Gaza, improving the 
Palestinians' lives, and eradicating terror.  Jones met 
on Sunday with Israeli Consul General in New York Arye 
Mekel, in advance of his arrival in Israel this 
weekend.  Yediot reported that, during his meeting with 
Mekel, Ambassador Jones heard briefings on the 
political developments in the region, and mainly about 
the disengagement plan.  Jones reportedly congratulated 
Israel for its brave step, and emphasized that the Arab 
states must now extend economic aid to the PA. 
 
The electronic media reported that Palestinians set 
fire to at least four empty synagogues in the Strip, as 
PA forces failed to protect them.  Jerusalem Post 
reported that Sephardi Chief Rabbi Shlomo Amar received 
promises this week from King Mohamed VI of Morocco and 
Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali that they 
would intervene to protect synagogues in the Gaza Strip 
from destruction and desecration by Palestinians. 
Israel Radio reported that State Department 
Spokesperson Sean McCormack criticized the decision 
made by the Israeli cabinet on Sunday not to demolish 
the synagogues, saying that it "puts the Palestinian 
Authority into a situation where it may be criticized 
for whatever it does."   On Sunday, the cabinet had 
voted by a huge majority to leave them intact. 
The media reported that on Sunday, the cabinet approved 
the termination of Israeli presence along the 
Philadelphi route.  Egyptian troops started deploying 
there the same day.  The cabinet also authorized PM 
Sharon, Vice Premier Shimon Peres, and Defense Minster 
Shaul Mofaz to determine future security arrangements 
for passage between Gaza and Egypt. 
 
On Sunday, Maariv reported that The Washington Post 
would publish an interview with Sharon that day, in 
which he would declare that Israel will continue to 
build in the large settlements despite the fact that 
Israel has not received U.S. approval for this. 
 
The media reported that PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud 
Abbas announced last night that Israel has not yet 
ended the occupation of Gaza, and that "the Strip is 
one large prison, and the army's departure does not 
change this situation."  The media reported that the 
PA's Civilian Affairs Minister Muhammad Dahlan 
criticized Israel's closure of the Erez crossing and 
the practical consequences for Palestinians of the 
temporary arrangement made by Israel at Kerem Shalom. 
Palestinian National Security Adviser Jibril Rajoub was 
quoted as saying in an interview with Jerusalem Post 
that the PA will take all necessary steps to fight 
terror in Gaza provided Israel withdraws completely and 
gives hope there will be negotiations over a 
Palestinian state and more pullbacks from the West 
Bank. 
 
On Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that Saudi Arabia 
has agreed to lift certain aspects of its boycott 
against Israel in an attempt to satisfy U.S. demands 
regarding the Saudi request to join the World Trade 
Organization. 
 
All media noted, and various TV stations broadcast 
special programs on the fourth anniversary of 9/11. 
The media reported on 9/11 memorial ceremonies in the 
U.S.  Jerusalem Post reported that Dr. Helena Kane 
Finn, Counselor For Public Affairs at the U.S. Embassy 
in Israel spoke Sunday at a local ceremony on behalf of 
U.S. Ambassador to Israel Daniel Kurtzer.  U.S. Consul 
General in Jerusalem Jacob Walles also spoke. 
Jerusalem Post reported that Latin Patriarch Michel 
Sabbah, the senior representative of the Catholic 
Church in the Holy Land, called on the GOI at the event 
to stop the "vicious cycle of violence." 
 
On Sunday, Yediot reported that Sharon called Egyptian 
President Hosni Mubarak on Friday to congratulate him 
upon his reelection.  Mubarak received 88 percent of 
the votes. 
 
Major media quoted Iraqi President Jalal Talabani as 
saying Friday, during a lecture he delivered before the 
Brookings Institution's Saban Center for Middle East 
Policy in Washington, that there is no hostility 
between Iraq and Israel.  Talabani was responding to 
questions from Israeli reporters.  However, Talabani 
reiterated his view that bilateral relations will start 
only when Israel withdraws to the 1967 borders and a 
Palestinian state is founded. 
 
On Sunday, Maariv cited reports in the Turkish media 
that Israel would open interest sections within Turkish 
embassies in Muslim countries such Pakistan, Malaysia, 
and Indonesia. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Israel is negotiating with the 
Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, to 
arrange a first ever meeting with Al-Thani and Sharon 
at the UN General Assembly this week. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that former PM Ehud Barak officially 
stepped down from the race for the Labor Party 
chairmanship Sunday. 
 
Leading media reported that Doron Almog, former head of 
the IDF's Southern Command, escaped arrest on Sunday by 
Britain's anti-terrorist and war crimes unit, when he 
remained on an aircraft that had landed at Heathrow 
Airport and returned with it to Israel several hours 
later.  The allegations concerned Almog's involvement 
in military actions during the Intifada. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported on humanitarian aid provided by 
the Jewish American community to the victims of 
Hurricane Katrina. 
 
----------------------------- 
¶1.  IDF Withdrawal From Gaza: 
----------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
PA will have to ... carry out what is required of it 
according to the road map.  If it does so, the chances 
are good that in the foreseeable future, the exit from 
Gaza will not be Israel's last exit from occupied 
territories." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one 
of popular, pluralist Maariv: "The time has come to 
draw a border for this country, to put up a fence along 
it, to affix a metal gate and gather inside." 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote on page one 
of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Let no 
one delude himself.  The IDF's freedom of action in 
response to terror attacks issuing from the Gaza Strip 
will not increase -- on the contrary." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Regardless of how the border control issues are worked 
out, it is already clear that the fate of Gaza is in 
Palestinian hands." 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Back to the Border of Sanity" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(September 12): "Thirty-eight years after Gaza was 
occupied in what most of the public still believes was 
a war of no choice, Israel is returning the Gaza Strip 
to its legal owners as they are embodied in the 
Palestinian Authority.... Although this was not Prime 
Minister Ariel Sharon's declared intention when he 
initiated and carried out the disengagement, the exit 
from the Gaza Strip is a very significant step on the 
long road to Israeli-Palestinian peace.  Now Israel is 
entitled to expect that the PA will respond to the 
Israeli move with steps of its own that will bring 
peace a step closer.  For this, the PA will have to 
promise, first and foremost, that the border between 
the Gaza Strip and Israel will be quiet, so that there 
will no longer be any need for the IDF to cross it, as 
well as carry out what is required of it according to 
the road map.  If it does so, the chances are good that 
in the foreseeable future, the exit from Gaza will not 
be Israel's last exit from occupied territories." 
 
II.  "End of Gaza Era" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one 
of popular, pluralist Maariv (September 12): "Within 
just over five years, Israel has completed the final 
determination of two of its borders: the northern 
border with Lebanon, and the southern one along the 
Gaza Strip.  The two moves were carried out 
unilaterally, but with international agreement and the 
approval of the UN.  The new borders are known all over 
the world.  What could make the new line of Gaza 
effective is what makes the 'blue line of Lebanon' 
effective: sweeping international legitimacy, global 
recognition, the air umbrella of the nations of the 
world, and the knowledge, that from now on, in the 
absence of occupation, the rules of the enlightened 
world will be enforced here.... The dream of Greater 
Israel has ended, buried dishonorably, hastily, almost 
without any suffering.  The next prime minister, 
whoever it will be ('even Bibi') will continue the 
process.  The time has come to draw a border for this 
country, to put up a fence along it, to affix a metal 
gate and gather inside." 
 
III.  "No Illusions" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote on page one 
of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot 
(September 12): "Let no one delude himself.  The IDF's 
freedom of action in response to terror attacks issuing 
from the Gaza Strip will not increase -- on the 
contrary.... The impact of an artillery shell in a 
populated area of the Gaza Strip, which is one of the 
densest regions on the face of the planet, will create 
a human and political catastrophe.  The [IDF's] Judge 
Advocate General will immediately declare this a 
'disproportionate' action.  No one will authorize such 
a response.  Artillery can be fired at open areas.  But 
Qassam rockets and mortar shells are not fired from 
open areas, but rather from yards, from populated 
neighborhoods.  Then how exactly can the sentence 'we 
too have mortars' be backed up?.... An electronic wall 
has been built facing Gaza.  The Air Force is planning 
an electronic ceiling that will enable it continuous 
monitoring of Gaza from the air, intelligence gathering 
and immediate responsive fire.  It will take a long 
time until this ceiling is built and becomes effective. 
Until then, we will have to invest a great deal in 
protective measures." 
 
IV.  "Gaza's Gate" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(September 12): "Since the launching of Oslo, Israel 
has been saying to the PA, 'Take a state, please.' 
Only now is it beginning to dawn on the international 
community that it is the PA, not Israel, which has been 
saying no.... If the Palestinians decide to start 
building the peaceful state they claim they want, 
Israel will not only refrain from interfering, but 
stands ready and able to do much to help.  Throughout 
Oslo's heyday, Israeli ministers cooked up elaborate 
plans for economic cooperation through industrial parks 
and international-financed joint megaprojects.  Under 
Arafat, the PA would have none of it.  Mahmoud Abbas 
also seems to be in no hurry to engage Israel 
economically, despite claiming that improving 
Palestinian lives is his top priority.  Regardless of 
how the border control issues are worked out, it is 
already clear that the fate of Gaza is in Palestinian 
hands. Now we will see if they are ready to make 
constructive use of it." 
 
----------------------------------- 
¶2.  Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina: 
----------------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Yahad-Meretz Knesset Member Yossi Sarid wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "George Bush is 
without a doubt the most terrifying president America 
has ever had.... Who is going to tell a shepherd what 
is good for his flock while it is drowning in a flood?" 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"After Bush -- the Deluge" 
 
Yahad-Meretz Knesset Member Yossi Sarid wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (September 12): 
"George Bush is without a doubt the most terrifying 
president America has ever had.... When there is a 
messianic vision composed of faith-based pie-in-the- 
sky, the earth seems to be jolted off its axis and 
begins to spin out of control.... Instead of running 
the world and its inhabitants, as one may expect of the 
leader of the free world, Bush acts as someone who is 
reinventing the world on a mission from God.... What 
[does] Bush ... care if the ozone layer is 
disintegrating, the greenhouse effect is intensifying, 
the oceans are warming up, the desert is expanding not 
only in Africa and Asia but also in Europe, and the 
number of hungry is growing by the hundreds of 
millions?.... It may very well be that the warming of 
the oceans contributed to Katrina, but who is going to 
tell a shepherd what is good for his flock while it is 
drowning in a flood?" 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------- 
¶3.  Global War on Terror: 
------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "Contrary to forecasts by bin Laden (and by 
the part of Western public opinion that is attracted by 
dreams of the decline of America) ... the American 
empire hasn't disintegrated." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Islamic Terror's Largest Attack Against Itself" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (September 11): "Now, as [during the fall of 
Communism,] the United States, in particular its 
president, who is imbued with a militant ideology, has 
played a key role in pushing for democratization [of 
the Middle East].  Then and now, its enemies haven't 
properly assessed the natural attraction of 
democracy.... [But] positive developments can still be 
reversed; fanatic Islam is far from being vanquished. 
It has actually been strengthening in Middle Eastern 
areas occupied by the U.S. and its charm is great among 
young Arabs from Western Europe, who lack identity.... 
Contrary to forecasts by bin Laden (and by the part of 
Western public opinion that is attracted by dreams of 
the decline of America) ... the American empire hasn't 
disintegrated.  What has -- gradually -- been falling 
apart is the evil empire of the Islamic fanatics.  In a 
sober retrospective outlook, the planes that were made 
to crash four years ago into the World Trade Center and 
the Pentagon represented Islamic terror's largest 
attack against itself." 
 
KURTZER