09CHENGDU155
NEW TELEMEDICINE CENTER AIMS TO EXPAND QUAKE ZONE HEALTHCARE
Mon Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO4100
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0155/01 2291102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171102Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3344
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/USAID WASHDC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4020UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000155 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SOCI CH
SUBJECT: NEW TELEMEDICINE CENTER AIMS TO EXPAND QUAKE ZONE HEALTHCARE 
ACCESS 
 
CHENGDU 00000155  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Introduction and Summary:  In the aftermath of the 
massive, May 2008 earthquake in Sichuan, ConGen Chengdu has 
closely monitored disaster reconstruction and response efforts, 
including attempts by U.S. firms to build goodwill through 
in-kind donations and technical assistance.  In this context, 
Pol/Econoff recently learned about Sichuan Province's first 
video teleconferencing telemedicine system, which links to both 
other hospitals and remote mobile units, and has been installed 
by U.S-based Cisco Systems at the Sichuan First Provincial 
Hospital.  Rapidly deployable mobile units will enable medical 
personnel in the field to quickly and efficiently share 
information.  Cisco will donate USD 44 million worth of 
equipment and services over a three-year period for cooperative 
healthcare and education projects with the Sichuan Provincial 
Health Bureau.  Cisco plans to establish telecommunications 
links to several additional hospitals, expand the current pilot 
project to the First Provincial Hospital's earthquake 
rehabilitation center, and incorporate additional mobile health 
vehicles.  Effective training and long-term funding will be 
critical to the system's success.  End Introduction and Summary. 
 
 
 
A Post-Quake Public-Private Partnership 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (U) In July 2008, Cisco Systems and the Sichuan Provincial 
Government signed a memorandum of understanding initiating the 
"Connecting Sichuan" program, described on Cisco's website as "a 
three-year public-private partnership to aid the rebuilding 
effort, with a focus on improving healthcare and education in 
earthquake-damaged areas."  Under the healthcare and education 
initiatives, Cisco is piloting new systems that it hopes will be 
replicable on a wider scale.  Cisco's report on the first year 
of the partnership is available online at: 
http://tinyurl.com/sichuan-cisco. 
 
 
 
Telemedicine Technology Launched at Sichuan First Provincial 
Hospital 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) The pilot "Health Presence" site (HPS), located at the 
First Provincial Hospital in Chengdu, includes a 
videoconferencing system that links hospitals with each other as 
well as to truck-based treatment rooms.  Sichuan Provincial 
Hospital HPS site is now linked to the Prince of Wales Hospital 
in Hong Kong.  The HPS system supports twenty simultaneous 
telephone conversations and video conferences simultaneously on 
three monitors, either through the Internet or satellite links. 
 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) By October 2009, Cisco plans to add Sichuan's Ninth 
Provincial Hospital to the network of medical centers linked to 
the Sichuan Provincial Hospital.  A Cisco employee said that the 
Ninth Provincial Hospital would have cameras located in patient 
treatment rooms so that specialists in the HPS will be able to 
observe and advise during medical procedures.  Sichuan's Third 
and Tenth Provincial Hospitals will also join the network before 
the project is completed in July 2011.  Mobile health vehicles 
described below will be deployable to rural quake-hit areas and 
other areas of medical need. 
 
 
 
Mobile Telecom-Equipped Units Convey Expert Advice to Rural 
Health Providers 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000155  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) CNA, a Singaporean company, is working with Cisco to 
build the mobile health vehicles at a cost of slightly less than 
3 million RMB (440,000 USD) per vehicle.  The vehicles are built 
in Nanjing on an Isuzu truck platform that weighs roughly 7 tons 
depending on the final configuration.  Cisco and hospital staff 
gave Congenoffs an informal tour of the first vehicle, which is 
already in operation and has been deployed several times for 
non-emergency use in the quake zone.  The vehicle has a patient 
treatment room and small conference area.  Cameras in the 
meeting and treatment areas can link back to the HPS either by a 
wired Internet connection or a satellite dish with microwave 
transceiver mounted on the roof.  An employee of CNA told 
Congenoffs that the satellite communication will be routed 
through a Thai satellite. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The vehicles also have an externally-mounted camera 
that can be used to provide real-time video of disaster areas to 
workers at the HPS.  Cisco and CNA plan to build several 
additional vehicles by mid-2011, each with a dedicated function. 
 A second vehicle like the one described above is now in Beijing 
for demonstration purposes.  Additional vehicles planned include 
two "emergency command center" models-that will have an 
emergency communications center instead of a patient treatment 
room-and one "health checkup" vehicle.  This one will be based 
at a hospital currently under construction in Wenchuan, near the 
quake's epicenter.  At least one of the additional vehicles will 
carry X-ray and ultrasound equipment. 
 
 
 
Project Could Face Long-term Sustainability Challenges 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Cisco has committed to providing three-years of pro 
bono post-installation maintenance service for all equipment 
donated under the "Connecting Sichuan" program, after which the 
hospitals involved will bear all related costs.  One Cisco 
contact noted that from a budgetary stand point, this will be 
"no problem" for the hospitals as they are well funded. 
However, he noted that Cisco has encountered significant 
resistance to accepting their donated equipment among some 
hospital officials.  Many hospital officials are accustomed to 
receiving large kickbacks from medical equipment contracts, he 
said, and donated equipment cuts into this income source.  In 
the long-term, how this will translate into support for 
maintaining the system remains to be seen. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment: During equipment demonstrations, which 
included separately conferencing Hong Kong and the mobile health 
vehicle connected via a wired LAN, representatives seemed 
unfamiliar with the equipment.  Connecting to Hong Kong took 
several minutes.  The connection to the vehicle worked well, but 
the operator did not know how to switch to a camera located in 
the patient room.  As the number of linked facilities and 
vehicles increases, the effectiveness of the training employees 
get to use the technology will probably determine the overall 
success of the project. 
BROWN