09CHENGDU157
SW CHINA:  JUNE FOURTH DISSIDENT, U.S. LPR ZHOU YONGJUN
Wed Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO6030
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0157/01 2310958
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190958Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3347
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4023UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000157 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC PHUM PGOV CH
SUBJECT: SW CHINA:  JUNE FOURTH DISSIDENT, U.S. LPR ZHOU YONGJUN 
TRIAL SET FOR AUGUST 21 
 
REF: CHENGDU 141 
 
CHENGDU 00000157  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)   Summary:  US LPR Zhou Yongjun, who was reportedly 
seized by PRC mainland authorities in Hong Kong in September 
2008 and subsequently detained in Guangzhou and Sichuan, will go 
on trial in Suining, Sichuan on August 21.   Zhou's lawyers at 
the Beijing "Mo Shaoping Law Firm" legal opinion on the case 
presented to the Suining Public Security Bureau points to 
serious violations of PRC law in the handling of this case. 
Zhou is charged with fraud, although his role as 1989 student 
leader in Tiananmen may well be behind the charges, especially 
given the recent June 4th-linked prosecutions in Chengdu this 
August of dissidents Huang Qi and Tan Zuoren.   On August 18, 
Consulate Chengdu sent a diplomatic note to the Sichuan Province 
FAO requesting to send a consular officer to attend the August 
21 trial of Zhou Yongjun.   End Summary. 
 
 
 
Arrested U.S. LPR  Zhou Yongjun was First Tiananmen Student 
Commander 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Zhou Yongjun (aka Yungjun Zhou) of San Gabriel, 
California was the first leader of the Union of Autonomous 
Student Unions, an organization of students who occupied 
Tiananmen Square during May- June 1989.  Because of his 
pro-democracy activities, he was  imprisoned from 1989 - 1991. 
He came to the U.S. as an asylum seeker in 1991, and became a 
U.S. legal permanent resident in 1993.  He was also imprisoned 
from 1998 - 2002 during a subsequent visit to China.  In 
September 2008 he arrived in the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, travelling on a Malaysian passport in the 
name of Wang Xingxiang, and upon arrival was questioned by Hong 
Kong police in connection with a fraud.  The Hong Kong SAR 
police determined that he was not the Wang Xingxiang they were 
seeking and released him.  Thereupon, reportedly, PRC Public 
Security arrested him and transported him across the Hong Kong 
SAR border with mainland China to Shenzhen in Guangdong 
Province. 
 
 
 
Zhou Yongjun Timeline 
 
--------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A September 2008-to-Present Timeline of Zhou Yongjun 
follows: 
 
-- September 2008, arrives in Hong Kong.  Briefly detained and 
released by Hong Kong SAR police; then  detained again and taken 
to detention across the Hong Kong SAR border to Shenzhen. 
 
-- On November 8, 2008, confronted with public security officers 
from his hometown of Suining, Sichuan, he finally admitted to 
Chinese Public Security that his name was Zhou Yongjun. 
 
--  On November 27, 2008  Zhou was moved to the Yantian 
Detention Center in Guangdong Province. 
 
-- December 12, 2008 query to Consulate General  Guangzhou about 
Zhou Yongjun.  Embassy Beijing and State Department notified 
that day. 
 
-- On December 17, 2008 Consulate General Guangzhou sent a 
diplomatic note to the Guangdong Province Foreign Affairs Office 
asking for information on the status of Zhou and that he be 
given access to a lawyer and his family. 
 
-- On March 24, 2009, the Guangdong FAO replied to ConGen 
Guangzhou:  "Having consulted the relevant agencies, the Foreign 
Affairs Office does not possess any information about Zhou 
Yongjun in Shenzhen so far. " 
 
-- On May 4, 2009 Zhou was moved to a detention center in 
Sichuan Province, apparently near his hometown of Suining. 
 
-- June 4, 2009, Zhou Yongjun's lawyers send legal opinion 
(summary translation below) to Suining Public Security Bureau. 
 
--  August 13, 2009, ConGen Chengdu consular section notified by 
Zhou's sister who sends materials from Zhou's lawyer. 
 
-- August 15, 2009  ConGen Chengdu notifies Embassy and China 
Desk. 
 
-- August 18, 2009  ConGen diplomatic note sent to Sichuan 
Province FAO requesting assistance on consular officer 
attendance at Zhou Yongjun's trial that begins on August 21, 
2009, at the Shehong County Courthouse in Suining, Sichuan. 
 
CHENGDU 00000157  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
 
Chengdu Diplomatic Note Requests Attendance at Zhou Yongjun's 
Trial Which Begins August 21 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  Zhou is now represented by the Beijing Moshaoping Law 
Office.   The two lawyers defending  Zhou Yongjun presented 
their legal opinion dated June 4, 2009 on the case (summary 
translation in the appendix)  to the Suining, Sichuan Public 
Security Bureau.  Zhou's lawyers argue that: 
 
-- The law was violated by the PRC authorities when they took 
him across the Hong Kong SAR; 
 
-- PRC mainland authorities have no jurisdiction over a fraud 
case in Hong Kong SAR; 
 
-- Public Security violated the law by the 140-day delay in 
reporting Zhou's arrest to his family, which is far above the 
37-day delay permitted under PRC law. 
 
-- There is no evidence against Zhou Yongjun apart from the name 
on his Malaysian passport being the same as the person involved 
in the Hong Kong fraud case.  The authorities in Hong Kong SAR 
released Zhou after determining that he was not the person he 
sought.  The PRC mainland authorities, who do not have 
jurisdiction in this matter, are holding him in this matter 
although the authorities in Hong Kong have already determined 
that Zhou is not involved. 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Comment:  This appears to be the third June 4-linked 
political prosecution in Sichuan Province this August, 
following the cases of Huang Qi (August 5) and Tan Zuoren 
(August 12, see reftel). 
 
 
 
¶6.   (U)  This cable has been coordinated with Embassy Beijing 
and Consulate General Guangzhou. 
 
 
 
¶7. (U)  Appendix:  Summary Translation of the Beijing, "Shaoping 
 Law Office" (Beijing Mo Shaoping Lushi Shiwusuo)on Zhou Yongjun 
Case Sent to Suining, Sichuan Public Security 
 
 
 
BEGIN SUMMARY TRANSLATION 
 
 
 
Zhou's lawyers argue that: 
 
 
 
-- Since Zhou was detained in Hong Kong because of a letter from 
outside of China mainland to a Hong Kong bank requesting that a 
funds transfer be made was signed by a person with the name Wang 
Xingxiang, the same as  the spelling of the name in Wang 
Xingxiang  in the Malaysian passport he held.  The lawyers argue 
that since the crime for which he was arrested occurred outside 
mainland China, mainland China Public Security does not have 
jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
-- The lawyers also argue  that since U.S. Immigration has 
already sent him a notice to be sworn in as a U.S. citizen, then 
the Chapter Six of the PRC Nationality Law that stipulates "Any 
Chinese citizen who resides outside of China, who has 
voluntarily become or acquired foreign citizenship, thereby 
automatically loses their PRC citizenship"  and that Chinese 
Embassy and local  has repeatedly refused to issue him a PRC 
passport.  The lawyers mention that Chapter 7 of the PRC 
Criminal Law, PRC applies only to PRC citizens overseas, not to 
foreigners and so PRC Public Security does not have 
jurisdiction.   The lawyers add that according to PRC law and 
the Vienna Convention, if a person of foreign nationality is 
detained, or their nationality is unclear, the consulate of 
their country should be contacted. 
 
 
 
-- The lawyers argue that since the case involves a crime 
 
CHENGDU 00000157  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
outside the borders of mainland China and does not involve a 
person from mainland China, then the question of any harm to 
China's national interests does not arise.  Therefore Public 
Security does not have jurisdiction in this matter. 
 
 
 
--- The evidence:   The lawyers argue that there is no evidence 
linking Zhou Yongjun to this criminal case other than the name 
on his identity document is the same as the name of the person 
Wang Xingxiang involved in the case.   Zhou Yongjun stated that 
the Malaysian passport he applied for through an immigration 
company and that the English name on the passport is that same 
as the envelope presented as evidence in the case.  But states 
that signature is not his and he never saw it before.   Zhou 
Yongjun mentioned that when this problem came up with the Hong 
Kong police, they not only released him but apologized as well. 
The only authorities who have jurisdiction in this case - the 
Hong Kong authorities - have already determined that Zhou 
Yongjun is not the person in question. 
 
 
 
-- How this case has been handled:  Zhou's lawyers argue that 
when Zhou was detained  by Shenzhen police  in October 2008 but 
refused to tell them his name and identity.  On November 7th or 
8th,  public security from Zhou's hometown of Suining, Sichuan 
sent their police to interview him.  Among them was someone who 
recognized him,  so Zhou on that day told the Shenzhen Public 
Security his true name and identity.   The police had the duty 
under the Chapters 75 and 96 of the PRC Criminal Procedure Law 
to notify a relative or legal counsel with 37 days but this was 
not done in a timely way so Zhou  was illegally detained for a 
total of 144 days excluding the period before Zhou  told Public 
Security his real name.   The lawyers say that they will bring 
charges against the Shenzhen Public Security for this serious 
illegal detention of Zhou Yongjun. 
 
 
 
The lawyers conclude: 
 
 
 
-- According to Chapters six, seven, and eight of the PRC 
Criminal Code relating to jurisdiction, the Public Security of 
mainland China do not have jurisdiction. 
 
-- There is insufficient evidence to indicate that Zhou Yongjun 
was involved in this criminal case.  He should not have been 
charged nor should compulsory criminal measures be taken against 
him. 
 
-- The detention of Zhou Yongjun is a serious violation of the 
law. 
 
 
 
Zhou Yongjun was involved in the "June 4th" of 1989 as the first 
chairman of the union of autonomous student unions  (Gao 
Zilian).  This year is the 20th anniversary and so the 
international community is paying close attention to this issue 
so we look to the Public Security Bureau to handle this case 
strictly according to the law, and swiftly determine the facts 
about this case and according to law dispose of the case of Zhou 
Yongjun. 
 
 
 
Submitted to the Suining City, Sichuan Public Security Bureau 
 
Beijing Mo Shaoping Law Office 
 
(signed)  Huang Shaoping 
 
(signed)  Chen Zerui 
 
June 4, 2009 
 
 
 
END SUMMARY TRANSLATION 
BROWN