09KABUL2437
Afghan Elections Situation Report Five - 1200 Local, August
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #2437/01 2320850
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200850Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0950
INFO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 7770
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3797
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS KABUL 002437 
 
DEPT FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS TASK FORCE 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM AF
 
SUBJECT: Afghan Elections Situation Report Five - 1200 Local, August 
20, 2009 
 
¶1. (SBU) The next sitrep is scheduled for 1600 local on August 20. 
 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶2. The security situation is unusually good, but as of 1200 hrs, 
ISAF has reported some security incidents directed at the election, 
but none significant enough to affect election structure. 
 
Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
Regional Command (RC) - North: Kunduz: PRT reports rocket attacks 
continued this morning, with four rockets hitting the city shortly 
before 8 am. No reports yet of casualties. 
 
Faryab:  Voting centers in the Khowaja Kinti and Khowaja Asfalan 
Villages of Qaysar District have not opened because ANP scheduled to 
patrol there were pulled away to reinforce other officers involved 
in a firefight in an unspecified neighboring village.  The PEO has 
not been able to contact the polling site in Qasaba Qala Village of 
Pashtun Kowt District of Faryab, since yesterday.  He therefore 
cannot confirm if the polling site opened.  He reported all 12 
voting centers in Gormach District opened. 
 
Baghlan:  Anti-coalition forces in Sar-e Khona district have been 
conducting significant harassment and interdiction in the district 
area.  It is not clear if this is directed at voters.  ISAF 
responded to requests for in extremis support in the form of a show 
of force by air power, which they are providing.  A community elder 
in Amer Abubakar reported to USAID PRT Rep that Baghlan's Jadid 
district chief of police was killed in an attack in the Tapa Pashaee 
area of old Baghlan around 8:30 AM this morning by insurgents. 
USAID LES reports there is a critical situation in the whole 
district of Baghlan Jadid especially along the main road of Baghlan 
and Kunduz, with fighting in different locations between insurgents 
and ANP and ANA.  The main road is reportedly blocked.  Three 
rockets were fired into a residential area next to district center 
of Baghlan Jadid with no reports of damage or casualties. 
 
RC - South: Uruzgan:  The governor reported to PRT DOS Rep that a 
rocket fired into the city of Chora killed one civilian and injured 
another.  Uruzgan and ISAF security forces are presently engaged 
with Taliban fighters in Khas Uruzgan and Deh Rahwod , which may 
jeopardize the voting is select areas of those two districts.  The 
governor also reported that his intelligence sources reported the 
placement of B1 rockets along a nearby mountain range, with the aim 
of striking the governor's compound (NFI).  Roads have been shut to 
vehicle traffic for the duration of the vote, adding to the sense of 
calm in the capitol.  ANA, ANP and NDS generals are all currently 
monitoring the security situation at Uruzgan's OCC-P as are U.S., 
Dutch and Australian military commanders and civilian political 
advisors.  Situation has become more tense in the capitol city and 
elsewhere in the province as there have been at least three separate 
rocket attacks, the most recent fell near a police check-point, 
close to the governor's compound.  Separately, the governor reported 
and a UN contact confirmed that the polling station in Hussinea, 
within Khas Uruzgan district, is surrounded by Taliban and attacking 
the station.  Election workers a attempting to secure the sensitive 
election material and flee the location.  Despite these attacks 
voter turnout remained steady throughout the morning and a mobile 
polling stationed has been established to reach those police and 
army officials who cannot leave their assigned locations. 
 
Helmand:  There was a flurry of attacks from 0700-0730, including an 
IED strike on PRT convoy and multiple IDF, but does not appear to be 
deterring most voters.  Many centers opened late.  Mixed reports on 
turnout from observers and LE staff.  Security at PCs is reasonably 
good; we have a report of one candidate agent (Karzai's) who was 
instructing people how to vote being ejected by IEC staff. 
Irregularities include some voting using entire families' cards and 
a man in Kajaki telling IEC workers there would be 20,000 votes for 
Karzai there.  Widespread problems with hole punches so IEC staff 
are ad hoc mutilating or cutting off the laminated corners of cards; 
however, some reports that voters just re-laminate the card and go 
vote again.  Sporadic reports of underage voters, voters refusing 
ink for fingers, and some campaigning within polling centers, but 
this does not appear widespread.  Local IEC head says turnout less 
than expected in Lashkar Gah, though NDS says turnout is good. 
 
RC - East: Kabul: Global Securities official reports a bomb blast at 
0800 at center #125, 2 ANFREL observers are fine.  MOI and NATO 
report ongoing gun-battle in PD-8 district of Kabul - Post is 
tracking these developments. 
 
 
Takhar: Global securities reports a bomb blast near polling station 
and voters fled to other polling stations in nearby areas.  An IED 
was found and defused by ANP, though the device later exploded in 
the warehouse where it was taken for storage.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
Kapisa: Swedish embassy reports shots fired at Abdullah Office, in 
Shar-e-Nau.  More reports of three centers in Balkh Province where 
hole-punchers were not working.  The poll station officials were 
improvising by using scissors to clip the corner off the voting 
cards. 
 
Khost:  PRT Khost reports there was a rocket attack directly outside 
the PRT at around 0900 local time.  There were no reported 
casualties.  While some polling sites opened late as elections 
workers got themselves organized, the PEO reports all polling 
centers are open and operational.  Despite a high number of 
harassing incidences of direct and indirect fire across the 
province, local contacts report strong turnout, primarily male, in 
Tani, Gorbuz, Mandozai, Nader Shah Kot, Dwamanda, Matun, and Jaji 
Maidan Districts.  Female turnout is generally low, but there are 
reports from Tani, Mandozai, and Matun Districts suggesting robust 
female turnout at some individual polling centers.  Voting in Khost 
City got off to a slow start, but picked up throughout the morning; 
long lines are now reported in the city.  Many people have come from 
more rural areas to vote in the city, believing security will be 
better in the urban center.  Some of these same voters asked polling 
station workers to not stain their fingers with ink for fear of 
insurgent reprisals; IEC workers refused their requests. 
 
Ghazni: DOS OCC-P reported three rockets landed in Ghazni City, one 
near the Governor's Compound at about 0750 locat time.  The rockets 
or mortars are being fired from Qalay Qazi west of the city center. 
According to OCC-P, ANP found mines on the road to Zana Khan 
district around 0800 local time, and believes the mines have been 
planted to prevent people from traveling there to vote.  OCC-P 
reports that the polling center in Qareh Baghi village on the 
southern border of Ghazni District has been closed due to security 
reasons.  ANP is reportedly moving the election materials back to 
Ghazni City.  People are being directed to vote in nearby Mungur 
village. 
 
Kabul: According to Observation teams, polling center 223 opened a 
bit late but is now functioning.  No weapons are allowed in the 
voting areas.  Private vehicles are circulating; mostly taxis are 
seen.  Several checkpoints throughout the city, cars are being 
stopped for ID checks.  At Kabul station #219, no long lines, but a 
steady stream of voters, more men than women, no problems reported. 
At Poll Station #184, 1/8 hole punches broken and officials are 
improvising using scissors and cutting triangle in corner of card. 
Team 6 Reports the punches at Station #194 are also broken. 
However, the polling staff is improvising by cutting a small 
rectangular notch out of the IDs with scissors.  Station 194 appears 
to be otherwise working smoothly. Team 6 received information from 
another observation team that Station #182 also experiencing 
problems with card punches also.  Team 4 at polling station #214 
states station well organized, but sparse attendance.  Observed 
approx. 15 voters. 
 
Paktia:  PRT Gardez reports there were 12 attacks on polling centers 
or city/village centers throughout Paktya province before 9am.  In 
Jani Khel District, IEC Provincial Director Najibullah Ahmadzai 
reported that polling stations were closed temporarily due to 
missile attacks and were reopened by 10:00 am.  DFC Salihuddin 
reported that the polling stations in Azbad Shah appeared to be 
locked and were taking continuous rocket attacks by 
Taliban/insurgents.  In Gardez City, a suicide bomber detonated 
himself at about 10:00 a.m. near UNAMA offices and the Governor's 
Compound.  There are no reports of injuries from the attack.  There 
is no apparent effort to block people from going to the polls and 
voting.  There is good voter turnout, including among women.  In 
Chamkani district, the District Field Coordinator reported all 
polling centers opened on time, but security is unstable, with 
several bombs having detonated along the main Chamkani road to the 
polling station.  There have been eight reported civilian deaths. 
Additionally, eight RPG's were fired at the polling station before 
10:00 a.m.  In Zarmot District, DFC reported the security atmosphere 
is permissive in the Nik Nam polling station with no reports of 
missiles or IED's. Men and women alike are voting and there are no 
reports of intimidation at this time. 
 
Nangarhar:  Security incidents have focused on the volatile southern 
border districts of Nangarhar Province. An IED in Khogyani District 
killed the Deputy Police Chief and one policeman and seriously 
 
injured another policeman. There were several small arms attacks 
overnight and this morning on polling stations, mostly resulting in 
minor damage that did not effect polling stations' operations.  In 
Pachir Wa Agam District, however, one RPG and two mortar attacks on 
polling stations resulted in minor injuries to two ANP.  In 
Jalalabad there was one small explosion near a polling station that 
temporarily halted voting, but voters did not leave the line. 
Initial reports indicate there were no casualties. 
 
Paktika:  Paktika has witnessed robust voting throughout the 
province, particularly in Sharana, where the volume of early morning 
voters necessitated the deployment of additional ANSF assets to 
assist with crowd control.  Election-related violence, generally 
through indirect fire, in the district centers of Naka, Orgun, 
Bermel, Khushamond, and Gomal appears not to have deterred 
participation.  Turnout is so strong in the southern districts of 
Terwa and War Mamay that DFCs have requested additional balloting 
material.  Roullah Muslimyar, of Paktika's ECC office, told PRT that 
his office had received a spot report from an ECC representative 
observing voting in Sharana that a man presented seven to ten valid 
registration cards and was attempting to vote on behalf of these 
individuals.  The man, according to the ECC, was given ballots for 
each of the cards by polling site staff and voted.  Muslimyar said 
that when representatives from ECC HQ arrived at the site to stop 
this individual from voting, they were barred from entering by the 
polling center manager, who said he had guidance that ECC HQ staff 
were not allowed to enter. 
 
RC - West:  Ghor:  Election day is proceeding with minimal problems. 
 Two polling centers in Dolatyar district were closed for 30 minutes 
due to interference of a PC candidate.  ANSF restored order and the 
PCs are open as of 1010.  Voting in Chaghcharan is proceeding with 
few problems.  Balloting procedures are generally being observed and 
polling centers are orderly with good turnout (especially women). 
The biggest problem is that at the women's polling center, where 
Kuchi women did not seem informed on the presidential election. 
Some IEC officials handing out ballots told them "just vote for 
Karzai."  According to both the IEC and Afghanistan Independent 
Human Rights Commission, 99 of the 250 polling stations in Ghor 
Province are without ANP presence.  Earlier reports that insurgent 
commander Mullah Mustafa was in control of eight polling sites were 
false.  We are working to follow up with our PRT Rep in Ghor. 
 
Badghis:  DOS Reps observed the main polling centers in central 
Qala-e-Now.  At the men's polling center, polls opened 35 minutes 
late due to the delayed arrival of Governor Arman for an opening 
ceremony.  The voting process appeared orderly and without major 
problems.  Several candidates were observed lingering in the polling 
center, while one voter was wearing a campaign button and several 
cars parked within ten meters of the center had campaign posters 
prominently displayed.  In the women's center, the scene was 
chaotic.  Women were patted down (by women) at the entrance, 
resulting in a long delay to enter the polling area.  In contrast, 
men were not searched at their polling center and could enter 
immediately.  Police outside the polling center were abusive towards 
the waiting women, pushing them back with their arms and their 
weapons, and occasionally hitting them with scarves.  More than one 
hundred women waited outside.  Inside, the atmosphere inside was 
calmer, and poll workers appeared to be observing all procedures. 
However, the ANP chief in Mogur district reported that two centers 
had not yet opened and it wasn't clear if the Taliban would allow 
their opening. 
 
---------------------------- 
Voting & Counting Activities 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) According to Embassy observer teams and news reports, polling 
sites have opened as scheduled across the country, with no current 
reports of any sites not opening as planned. 
 
¶4. (U) Ghazni:  OCC-P reported at 0830 good voter turnout at  Deh 
Yak district, while Governor Usmani reported the same in Andar 
district.  An American soldier located in Ajiristan reported via 
radio that 20-30 people have showed up to vote so far, and appear 
enthusiastic, even while Taliban are moving about to confiscate 
voter registration cards. 
 
¶5. (U) Kabul:  Post has received reports that holepunches at polling 
stations 182 and 183 have malfunctioned.  Due to the malfunctions, 
four of six polling stations at site 183 have stopped functioning 
pending repair of the punches.  Observers report growing lines as 
the IEC officers await a solution.  German embassy reported 
unauthorized persons seen at polling sites - wearing colored 
armbands that said "volunteer." 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Kunduz: Some polling centers in three districts not open. 
According to IEC and UNDP sources, election materials have yet to 
make their way to at least some polling centers in Chahar Dara, 
Dasht-e-Archi, and Aliabad districts. IEC did not have an exact 
number of how many polling centers were affected but says efforts 
are under way to transport materials to those polling centers. 
 
¶7.  (U) Nangarhar: Balloting material was delivered to all 492 
voting centers in Nangarhar with the exception of one remote 
location in the Markhanie area of Pachir Wa Agam District near the 
Pakistani border, according to Nangarhar IEC officials.  The 
material could only be transported by donkey, and police refused to 
provide security to the polling site because of insurgent activity 
in the area and threats received by insurgents, according to IEC 
officials. 
 
------------- 
Voter Turnout 
------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Thus far, voter turnout appears to be lower than expected. 
 There is considerable speculation that many Afghans are waiting to 
ensure it is safe to vote, which could result in an increased 
turnout in the afternoon.  Polling began generally on time, with 
President Karzai and Independent Election Commission Chairman Ludin 
having been televised casting their votes on local and international 
television. 
 
Khost:  OCC-P Khost reports good turnout at many polling locations 
so far this morning.  We will report more fully when able to confirm 
specifics. 
 
Nangarhar:  Anecdotal reports indicate voter turnout in Jalalabad 
started slowly, as voters waited to assess the security situation, 
but has been picking up during the morning.  The Nangarhar 
Provincial Police Chief reports good voter across the Province. 
Presidential and Provincial Council campaigns have been offering 
free transportation to voters to the polls in all Districts.  In the 
border districts of Achin and Khogyani, tribal elders have been 
encouraging citizens to assist the police with security and to vote. 
 Tribal elders report good voter turnout in Khogyani, while in Achin 
male turnout has been high but female turnout low due to the IEC's 
inability to recruit female polling station workers. 
 
----- 
Fraud 
----- 
 
¶9. (U)  Nangarhar:  Election Observers and Provincial Council 
Candidates complained to the IEC in the morning that certain IEC 
workers in Kama and Kuz Kunar Districts, as well as Jalalabad City, 
were reportedly urging voters to cast their ballot for specific PC 
candidates, IEC officials reported.  The IEC sent representatives to 
balloting sites and fired the IEC workers on the spot, according to 
Abdullah Safar, the IEC Administrative and Logistic Director 
reported.  The IEC reported that a Provincial Council candidate from 
Mohmand Dara, Fida Mohammad Gardawal, was openly campaigning in 
front of a polling station and urging voters to cast their ballot 
for him.  IEC officials sent a team in the morning to investigate. 
Additional reports indicated that IEC workers at the same voting 
center were urging voters to vote for Gardawal. 
 
------------ 
Atmospherics 
------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) Paktika OCC-P reports robust voter turnout in Sharana, 
leading ANP to request additional ANSF support to handle the large 
crowds.  PEO Taj Ali reports all polling sites in Paktika opened as 
scheduled this morning and that there is "good turnout" throughout 
the province.  He confirmed OCC-P's report of large voter turnout in 
Sharana, and said that there has been no attack or threat 
perpetuated against the province's polling sites overnight or this 
morning. 
 
Uruzgan: Atmospherics: At of 0900 local time, all is quiet in the 
capitol city of Tarin Kowt with reported long lines forming at the 
various polling stations around the city.  Governor Hamdam and his 
line ministers, along with about 50 guests, kicked off the election 
by voting at a small polling station established in the governor's 
garden.  PRT DOS rep and a Dutch Civilian Representative, who was 
also dual-hatted as an EU observer attended. 
 
-------------- 
 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) AFGHAN MEDIA HIGHLIGHTS: 
 
The leading story in the Afghan media was the opening of polling 
stations throughout the country.  President Karzai cast his vote at 
Amani High School in Kabul. He called on Afghans to take part in the 
elections and expressed hope that the elections would lead to a more 
secure and prosperous Afghanistan. He added that the elections are a 
great democratic achievement for Afghanistan.  Abdullah Abdullah, 
Karzai's main rival, cast his vote at Nadiria high school in Kabul. 
There were reports of high turnout in some provinces, including 
Herat, Badakshan, Mazar, Bamyan and Jalalabad. However, there were 
reports of technical problems with voting equipment in Kabul and 
some other provinces. Tolo TV reported that underage boys were seen 
casting their votes at some polling centers in the provinces of 
Bamyan, Kunar and Takhar. 
 
Pajhwok News reported that bad quality ink is being used in two 
polling stations in Kabul.  Ramadan Bashardost, one of the 
presidential candidates, said that the ink came off easily and 
called it a fraud. 
 
Ariana TV reported that the Afghan police confiscated a car laden 
with explosives in Logar province. 
 
Pajhwok Afghan News reported that two suicide bombers were arrested 
in Takhar province.  According to security officials, the suicide 
bombers were attempting to attack polling sites in the province. 
 
Pajhwok Afghan News also reported on a lack of police presence in 90 
polling sites in Ghor province.  The IEC and the Afghanistan 
Independent Human Rights Commission confirmed the report and 
expressed concern over the fairness of elections in the province. 
 
BBC reported that 31 polling sites were closed in Gardez, Zurmat and 
Jani Khail districts of Paktia province due to security concerns. 
Provincial security officials said that security threats and the 
fact that the IEC staff did not report for work were the reasons for 
the closure. 
 
Radio Azadi reported on three explosions in Kabul this morning.  The 
Ministry of Defense confirmed the report and said there were no 
casualties. 
 
BBC reported that two people were killed when a rocket landed near a 
polling station in Helmand province.  Taliban claimed the 
responsibility for the attack. 
 
Radio Azadi features interviews with people on the streets of Kabul 
and southern Kandahar province. One of residents of southern 
Kandahar province says he was very happy and willing to take part in 
the election and vote for his favorite candidate without fear. A 
female teacher of a school in the capital Kabul says she had not 
registered for elections and would not vote because according to 
her, the next Afghan president had already been selected and going 
to the polling box was useless. She says it the foreign countries 
are the real decision-makers in Afghanistan and that foreigners have 
been the real role-players in Afghanistan for the past 30 years. The 
report also reports optimism and increased enthusiasm and interest 
of people in southern Kandahar province in the voting process. But 
the reporter says not many women could be seen coming to polling 
stations to vote expecting law turnout of women in the polls. 
 
Provincial Media Reports: 
 
Tolo TV in central Bamyan province reports participation of boys 
under the age of 18 (not voting age) in the voting process. A 
reporter says he saw boys under age 15 coming to polling stations to 
vote. The reporter also says he saw cars with the pictures of some 
candidates tagged on their windshields stopping in front of groups 
of people walking towards polling stations. According to the 
reporter, people inside these cars were asking people to go with 
them to the polling stations and vote for the candidates whose 
pictures were tagged on their cars. 
Tolo TV also reports on optimism and large numbers of women 
participating in the voting process in Pul-e-Khomri, the capital of 
northern Baghlan province. 
 
Tolo TV:  A resident of the capital Kabul in interview with Tolo TV 
reporter says he was fed up with poverty and will carry out a 
suicide attack unless the government does something to improved his 
living condition. Another angry resident of Kabul criticized the 
current government for failing to improve the lives of ordinary 
 
people, saying he is undecided who to vote for and that he might not 
even go to the polling box and vote. Yet another resident of Kabul 
says he was happy to take part in the elections, which is an 
important opportunity for all Afghans. 
 
Tolo TV also reported a smooth move-ahead in the voting process in 
central Ghazni province, stating that people were standing in long 
lines to vote. 
 
A Tolo TV reporter in eastern Nangarhar province says he saw groups 
of people walking towards polling centers to vote. The TV presenter 
reports that a lack of voting materials at some polling stations in 
remote districts of northern and southern Afghan provinces are 
hampering the province. 
 
A 'Tolo TV' reporter from central Maidan Wardak province quotes 
residents as saying that the ink used in marking the voters is 
removable.  According to report, polling centers in some other 
districts of the province were still not clearly identified by the 
provincial Independent Election Commission (IEC) and people did not 
know where to go to vote. 
 
Tolo TV reports from southeastern Paktia on fires in Gardez. 
According to the reporter, two rockets were fired on the city this 
morning and landed in non-residential areas. The reporter also says 
residents in groups were walking towards polling stations to vote. 
There were no casualties. 
 
A Tolo TV reporter from western Herat reports on a lack of polling 
stations in the province, quoting residents as saying that they had 
to wait hours at the polling stations to vote. The reporter says the 
city of Herat was under a tight security precaution and that the 
police and national army forces could be seen everywhere in the city 
searching cars and people. 
 
¶12. (SBU) MESSAGING:  Messaging remains consistent with Afghan 
Elections Situation Report One.  We will review and update as 
necessary for the next report. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY