09KABUL2368
PROVINCIAL OFFICIALS: LAGHMAN ELECTION PREPARATIONS ON
Sun Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3573 
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL 
DE RUEHBUL #2368 2280516 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
R 160516Z AUG 09 
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0838 
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 002368 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: PROVINCIAL OFFICIALS: LAGHMAN ELECTION PREPARATIONS ON 
TRACK 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: According to both the Laghman governor and the 
chief of Laghman's Independent Election Commission (IEC), the 
province is well prepared for the distribution of election-related 
materials, a fact confirmed by a Provincial Reconstruction Team 
(PRT) inspection of the IEC's facilities. At a large meeting on 
August 1, area mullahs adopted a declaration supporting the 
elections. Concerns remain over staffing and security for polling 
places for female voters and over the status of the province's 
Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC). At a PRT-supported shura 
(tribal gathering/meeting) in Alingar District, the governor was 
told that residents intended to fully participate in the elections. 
End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a meeting on August 2, Laghman governor Lutfullah Mashal 
told the PRT that the August 20 elections will be his top priority. 
He expressed satisfaction with the preparations for the elections, 
claiming that the province had 200,000 registered voters, half of 
whom were women. 
 
¶3. (SBU) He told the PRT that there was a meeting of 800 mullahs in 
Mehtarlam on August 1 to rally support for the elections. According 
to the governor, the mullahs adopted a declaration stating in part 
that (1) they supported the elections, and did not want non-Laghmani 
Taliban to create a rift among the locals (according to the 
Governor, "Laghmani Taliban are an ethnic and not a political 
movement"; he did not clarify that distinction); (2) Muslims had a 
duty to vote, in order to create an Islamic government; (3) the 
mullahs will vote as well. The governor told the PRT that he will 
ask the mullahs to issue a statement to the general public 
expressing their support for the election, and asked for assistance 
in getting the statement printed. (Note: In a subsequent meeting 
with Afghan National Police (ANP) Provincial Commander General 
Omaryar, the PRT was told that the meeting consisted of 500 mullahs. 
Information from other local sources indicated that the declaration 
included a call for a timetable for the withdrawal of international 
forces from Afghanistan. End Note.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Mashal requested USG assistance in providing fuel to 
district governors so that they could travel more extensively in 
support of the elections, and for the province's radio/television 
bureau, in order that it could broadcast 24 hours a day in advance 
of the election. The transmitter in Alishang District had been 
forced to shut down due to a lack of fuel, the governor claimed. 
The governor added that some candidates and campaign workers were 
being "intimidated" in Alishang District. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The PRT also met with Laghman Provincial IEC Chief Dr. 
Daoud the same day. Daoud told the PRT that all "sensitive" 
materials required for the election (including ballots, ink, and 
other controlled materials) had been received, and showed the PRT 
samples of those materials held in locked conex containers under 
guard on the IEC compound. He also showed the PRT a detailed plan 
for the distribution of those materials to the province's polling 
places in advance of election day. Addressing the subject of 
communications, Daoud said that district coordinators had been given 
cellphones with SIM cards, and that an additional ten satellite 
phones had also been distributed. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Daoud said that the Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC) 
for Laghman Province had been "late in setting up." He said the ECC 
in Laghman consisted of three local residents, and added "they say 
they're busy, but they're not." Daoud admitted to concern over 
staffing of polling stations for female voters. Polling place 
workers need a certain level of education in order to perform their 
functions, and finding literate women (especially in rural 
districts) is very difficult, according to Daoud. 
 
¶7. (SBU) At a PRT-supported shura held at Watangatu in Alishang 
District on August 4, locals told the governor they intended to 
participate in the elections despite threats of violence. Tribal 
elders urged residents to fully research and discuss the merits of 
presidential and provincial council candidates. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment. Both Governor Mashal and IEC Chief Daoud appeared 
confident in their assertions that preparations for the election 
were well in hand, and the PRT's brief examination of the IEC 
facilities, plans, and election materials seemed to confirm those 
assertions. However, concerns remain over security of the 
province's polling stations, especially those located in remoter, 
more troubled districts such as Dalat Shah. The matter of 
administration and security of polling stations for female voters is 
of special concern. The PRT will continue to monitor and report on 
election preparations. End Comment. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY