09KABUL2366
Karzai Shows Strength in Herat Rally
Sun Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3553 
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL 
DE RUEHBUL #2366/01 2280333 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
R 160333Z AUG 09 
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0835 
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002366 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: Karzai Shows Strength in Herat Rally 
 
REF: KABUL 1662, KABUL 1663, KABUL 2260, KABUL 2303 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Begin Summary. In an August 14 campaign rally in Herat 
City (Afghanistan's second largest city), President Karzai drew a 
capacity crowd of more than 10,000 people, and demonstrated a show 
of unity among local and national powerbrokers. Flanked by Ismail 
Khan, FM Spanta, Herat's Ulema Shura Chairman Mullah Khodadad Saleh, 
MP Mohaqqeq, a Hazara and head of the Afghan People's Movement, 
Governor Nuristani, and Provincial Council Chairman Dr. Azizi, 
Karzai stressed the achievements of the past seven years in 
infrastructure (mentioning the Ring Road, a USAID project in Herat 
province), education, health, government structures. Signs above 
the speakers during the rally captured the unmistakable unity theme 
Karzai sought to project: "All ethnic groups of Afghanistan are 
brothers and equal." Karzai reportedly was pleased with the 
successful rally, and his campaign will be well positioned to 
utilize the presence of a diverse group of powerful backers in the 
final days of campaigning before the election. Still, many 
commentators in Herat were less enamored by this show of unity, as 
reflected in cartoons circulating in Herat that satirize the 
perceived deals Karzai and Ismail Khan have made for jobs and power. 
End Summary. 
 
Friday Rally at Capacity 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Karzai spoke at a two-hour campaign rally prior to Friday 
prayers in Herat's main stadium on August 14. The large capacity 
crowd (easily 10,000 and probably more) filled the stadium and was 
enthusiastic and overwhelmingly male (but there was a small women's 
section of about 200 women in burkas and chadors, and included many 
Pakhtuns). White doves were released when Karzai appeared. 
Hundreds in the crowd waved Afghan flags. And Karzai ventured 
briefly into the crowd to shake hands, surrounded by security 
guards. Supporters not just from Herat city but from most of 
Herat's 15 districts, many bussed in especially for the occasion, 
were in attendance. 
 
¶2. (U) Karzai flew in by helicopter amidst the tightest security in 
Herat in several years. After the Qur'anic opening, Karzai's 
campaign manager in Herat Dr. Homayoun Azizi (and Provincial Council 
Chairman, who is not running for reelection) introduced the 
President. Karzai delivered a stemwinder, complimenting liberally 
Herat and Heratis, praising the dignitaries on the podium with him, 
reviewing his seven-year record of accomplishments, and stressing 
Afghans setting their country right, not foreigners. Karzai 
stressed the achievements of the past seven years in infrastructure 
(mentioning the Ring Road, a USAID project in Herat province), 
education, health, government structures (functioning Parliament, 
Provincial Councils, etc.). While urging the audience to 
participate in the election, Karzai did not directly ask for their 
votes. 
 
Ismail Khan Present, But No Endorsement 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Despite prior indications that former governor and warlord 
in Herat Ismail Khan would throw his support to Karzai at the event, 
Khan was indirect in his support. Khan spoke briefly without 
directly asking his supporters to vote for Karzai; he focused his 
remarks on developing Herat, stating more roads would be asphalted 
and electricity extended into the districts -- a not very subtle 
reminder of his signature accomplishments in Herat city when he was 
warlord/governor and had almost exclusive access (to the detriment 
of the central government) to the sizeable customs revenues at the 
border crossing point with Iran. 
 
Key Local Leaders Line up Behind Karzai 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Provincial Ulema Shura Chairman Mullah Khodadad Saleh, an 
active Karzai campaigner, also spoke. Additionally, signaling 
support across ethnic lines, MP Mohaqqeq, a Hazara and head of the 
Afghan People's Movement, accompanied Karzai from Kabul and spoke 
last at the event. On the platform were Herati FM Rangin Spanta and 
Herat Governor Nuristani, neither of whom spoke. Karzai made 
reference to how happy he was to have two Herati native sons with 
him on the platform, i.e., Ismail Khan and Rangin Spanta. 
 
¶5. (U) One of the largest billboards at the stadium (and also 
erected overnight prominently at the entrance to the downtown park 
where the stadium is located) showed Karzai, next to Ismail Khan, 
next to Spanta, with "All ethnic groups of Afghanistan are brothers 
and equal" written above their heads. Others showed Karzai with his 
two VP nominees, Fahim and Khalili, Karzai alone in national dress 
and before a map of Afghanistan, and one nicely customized to Herat 
of Karzai in front of the two thousand year old Citadel. Some of 
the banners at the stadium bore these slogans: "Hamed Karzai: 
Symbol of Afghan Unity," "Afghanistan: Proud and Developed," "A 
Vote for Karzai Means Opposition to War and Conflict," "Today's 
Election is Tomorrow's Guarantee." 
 
RTA Devotes Long Segment to Rally Coverage 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) Local RTA evening news on the evening of August 14 led with 
a ten-minute feature on Karzai's stadium campaign rally. Unlike its 
coverage of the other major presidential candidates (Abdullah 
Abdullah, Ashraf Ghani, and Mirwais Yasini) rallies in Herat, RTA 
actually broadcast footage of the candidate speaking, rather than 
just commentary. And after the regular newscast RTA carried a 
ten-minute excerpt of Karzai speaking. 
 
Governor says Karzai Pleased With Rally; Speculates on Khan Deal 
------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Governor Nuristani told State PRT Rep that Karzai was very 
happy with the rally. Karzai reportedly told the Governor it was 
both the largest and most enthusiastic crowd he has had this 
campaign season. Nuristani discounted observations that Ismail Khan 
had only given lukewarm support for Karzai and said Khan supports 
Karzai. Ismail Khan, at least as of Aug 12, was still seething at 
the appearance of a cartoon circulating on the streets of Herat, 
which he called "blasphemy" and which he believes is the work of 
Abdullah campaigners. The cartoon, entitled "Karzai comes to 
Herat," shows Karzai riding a donkey, whose face is Ismail Khan's 
and with FM Spanta pulling the reins of the donkey. Cartoon 
captions satirize the widely believed deals Karzai and Ismail Khan 
have made for jobs and power. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Earlier the Governor (strictly protect) had told State PRT 
Rep that among the deals between Karzai and Ismail Khan is the 
appointment of a strong Ismail Khan supporter as mayor of Herat 
after the election; reportedly the Independent Directorate for 
Local Governance (IDLG) has already prepared the paper work. Still, 
Governor Nuristani suggested Ismail Khan does not have as much 
influence in Herat as he used to, saying that people at the rally 
were not listening to his speech and were starting to leave the 
stadium. 
 
Security Ensures Incident-Free Event 
--------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Karzai's Herat campaign stop came off without a security 
incident. The Governor confirmed all stops were pulled to secure 
Herat for the rally. Troublemaker Ghulam Yahya Siwashwani (AKA 
Akbari), who operates in villages in Guzara district just 20-30 km 
from Herat city, sent around a shabnamah (night letter) the eve of 
Karzai's visit boasting that he would stop Karzai from coming to 
Herat. However, the evening after Karzai left seven 107 mm rockets 
were fired at the Herat airport, one impacting near a runway, 
causing ISAF to close the airport to all aircraft until 1500 August 
¶15. Ghulam Yahya, as he has done before, is believed to have fired 
off those rockets. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Karzai appears to have greatly improved as a public 
speaker. Speaking without notes, employing rhetorical devices, 
playing to the Herat crowd, and using expressive hand and arm 
movements, Karzai delivered a good speech, at least the excerpt 
shown on RTA. The fact that Ismail Khan did not come out and 
directly endorse Karzai leads some observers in Herat to speculate 
that negotiations are still continuing between Karzai's camp and 
Ismail Khan over senior jobs and power arrangements for himself and 
supporters. The Governor believes otherwise, that the deals have 
been cut already. Whatever the truth, the powerful billboard 
showing Karzai and Ismail Khan side by side (and with FM Spanta) and 
the fact that Ismail Khan appeared on the platform with Karzai will 
no doubt be used by the Karzai campaign to suggest he supports 
Karzai. 
 
EIKENBERRY