09KHARTOUM895
MASSIVE GRAIN CONTRACTS THREATEN SOUTHERN SUDAN BUDGET
Tue Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4006
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0895/01 2160822
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 040822Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4184
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000895 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A/S CARSON, AF/E, DRL 
NSC FOR MGAVIN 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EPIN EAGR ECON SU
SUBJECT: MASSIVE GRAIN CONTRACTS THREATEN SOUTHERN SUDAN BUDGET 
 
REF: Khartoum 880 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY.  Speaking on July 28 before the Southern Sudan 
Legislative Assembly (SSLA), David Deng Athorbei, the Government of 
Southern Sudan's (GOSS) newly-appointed Minister of Finance, 
publicly confirmed that the GOSS has committed six billion Sudanese 
pounds (appx. 2.7 billion USD) to off-budget purchases of grain. 
These funds - equal to more than 150 percent of Southern Sudan's 
entire budget for 2009 - were intended to create a strategic food 
reserve, but the program has been riddled with bureaucratic 
ineptitude and possible fraud.  These contracts now represent a 
potentially debilitating drain on government coffers.  Faced with 
strong legislative criticism, Athorbei pledged to report within 45 
days on the results of the government's ongoing investigation.  This 
legislative oversight will be reinforced by Southern Sudan's donors, 
who have made resolution of the grain contracts issue a prime focus 
of the recent donor compact with the GOSS. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
STRATEGIC GRAIN RESERVE A BUDGET-BUSTING BUST 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (U) John Oromo Itorong, a National Congress Party (NCP) member of 
the Southern Assembly, reported to the latter on June 28, that 
beginning in 2008 the GOSS Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
has issued contracts for the purchase of grain worth approximately 
6.26 billion Sudanese pounds, or approximately $2.7 billion.  The 
value of these contracts, which were issued to Southern Sudanese 
entrepreneurs for the purchase of some 50 million bags of maize and 
sorghum, exceeds the Government of Southern Sudan's entire budget 
for 2008 or 2009 (5.5 billion and 3.6 billion pounds, respectively. 
No provision was made for these purchases in either year's 
appropriations.  Additionally, although the grain was purchased to 
create a strategic food reserve, storage facilities and security 
were inadequate in many of the areas to which grain was delivered. 
Consequently, there has been spoilage and public "ransacking" of the 
grain stores. 
 
¶3. (U) Summoned before the Assembly, Athorbei, did not challenge 
Itorong's report, which was consistent with information previously 
released in donor-attended budget sector working groups.  In 
addition, he had no explanation of how the contracts had been 
approved.  Athorbei said that he suspended grain purchases upon 
taking office after the May 30 cabinet reshuffle.  The Ministry's 
technocrats were unable to explain to him, he said, how the 
contracts had been approved without authorization by the Council of 
Ministers or the legislature.  Ministry officials had also "lost 
count," he said, of the value of grain contracts issued since 
February. 
 
¶4. (U) Athorbei committed to report, within 45 days, on the 
government's ongoing investigation of the contracts.  The Minister 
noted that only 478 million pounds of the multi-billion pound total 
have actually been paid out to date, but he expects that the 
government may be legally obligated to pay many of the outstanding 
contracts.  Athorbei stated that future work to develop strategic 
grain reserves would be handled outside the Ministry of Finance. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Ministry advisors indicated to ConGen staff that 
senior GOSS officials had ordered Finance Ministry staff to override 
financial controls that would have prevented the issuing of these 
contracts.  Ministry officials confirmed that the Ministry also has 
no account of actual grain deliveries, or the amount of grain in 
storage, multiplying opportunities for fraud.  Finance Ministry 
staff and expatriate advisors are currently creating a central 
registry for the grain contracts and tallying contract amounts.  The 
total liability may grow as previously-unknown contracts come to 
light. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
ASSEMBLY MEMBERS BLAST GOVERNMENT, BUT WILLING TO WAIT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (U) The Assembly members who participated in the debate were 
sharply critical of the GOSS for jeopardizing Southern Sudan's 
finances, but they trod lightly on the newly-installed Athorbei. 
Itorong criticized what he called the Ministry of Finance's 
"managerial diarrhea," charging that unregistered companies 
regularly walked away with ministry funds under Athorbei's 
predecessor.  He also lamented that the performance of the grain 
contracts had been particularly poor in areas where food insecurity 
was the most extreme, including Northern Bahr el-Ghazal State. 
Peter Bashir Bendi, a Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) 
committee chairman who backed Itorong's push to debate the contracts 
issue, expressed appreciation for Athorbei's candor, but compared 
 
KHARTOUM 00000895  002 OF 002 
 
 
the Ministry's actions to "committing genocide against our own 
people." (Note: An unfortunate turn of phrase. End Note.) 
 
¶7. (U) Given the otherwise sharp rhetoric, the Assembly members were 
restrained in discussing next steps.  The members voted to accept 
Athorbei's timeline and declined, for now, to create an 
investigative committee of their own.  No member suggested summoning 
the former Finance Minister, Kuol Athien Mawien, and only one called 
for sanctions beyond seeking the return of the improperly authorized 
funds. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Placing the grain contracts issue on the Assembly's agenda 
required months of pressure from members and exposed tensions within 
the SPLM on the proper approach to government oversight.  Itorong, 
an NCP member, and a handful of supporters from other opposition 
parties and the majority SPLM, first sought to raise the issue four 
months ago.  Members of the SPLM caucus pushed to debate the issue 
in a less public forum, according to ConGen contacts in the 
Assembly, but eventually relented.  Still, an SPLM member tried to 
interrupt Itorong's July 28 presentation with a procedural 
objection, but was shouted down by Bashir Bendi and the Acting 
Speaker, another NCP member.  Bashir Bendi urged his peers not "to 
hide behind the SPLM when we do wrong things." 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
GOSS RESPONSE UNDER WAY, DEGREE OF COMMITMENT NOT YET CERTAIN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT.  In its broad June 30 compact with donors, the 
Government of Southern Sudan committed itself to undertake austerity 
measures to freeze the issuance of grain contracts and review those 
already issued.  Athorbei is taking encouraging first steps, but 
Ministry advisors are concerned that he has not ordered a 
comprehensive legal review of the authorization behind each 
contract.  Such a review would help ensure that grain contracts are 
paid on the basis of their validity, rather the political influence 
of individual contractors. 
 
¶10. (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED.  USAID and a TDY Treasury Department 
advisor on detail to State are assisting the GOSS in strengthening 
its contracting and expenditure procedures,  The GOSS's endorsement 
of the donor compact is arguably a sign of senior-level political 
commitment to abide by these controls.  Continued senior-level 
follow-up will be an essential complement; however, to any technical 
reforms.  The stakes are high: as Athorbei noted, the gap between 
monthly oil revenues and the monthly wage bill is forcing the 
government to make hard choices, even in the absence of these 
enormous, additional liabilities. 
 
WHITEHEAD