09PHNOMPENH581
PRIME MINISTER HUN SEN DEFENDS HIS RIGHT TO RESPOND TO HIS
Fri Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO2113
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0581 2260140
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140140Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1058
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000581 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, P, D, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CB
SUBJECT:  PRIME MINISTER HUN SEN DEFENDS HIS RIGHT TO RESPOND TO HIS 
CRITICS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Prime Minister Hun Sen, known for his 
off-the-cuff remarks, lashed out spontaneously in a graduation 
speech August 12, during which he railed against real and perceived 
criticism from opposition parties and the international community. 
He warned that while he would use legal means to respond to his 
critics, he would meet political or military challenges in kind, 
using force if necessary.  Separately, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs issued a statement asserting that Cambodia is more than ever 
committed to the protection of human rights and that freedom of 
expression must be exercised within the rule of law.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Prime Minister used the occasion of his speech August 
12 at the graduation ceremony at University of Law and Economics to 
give his own views on the meaning of the "rule of law."  He stated 
that lawsuits against him would be met with countersuits and he 
threatened that he would meet political or military challenges with 
like force.  Local English language media quote the Prime Minister 
as further boasting that he would be able to silence all opposition 
voices "in two hours" if he were to decide to use force, rather than 
pursue the matters in court.  "You wouldn't be able to run.  All of 
you would be arrested," he is quoted as saying. 
 
¶3. (SBU) He made emotional and personal attacks on his critics, some 
of which were clearly directed at Mu Sochua, and repeated the same 
derogatory phrase against an unnamed woman who filed a suit against 
him which ignited the defamation suits in the first place.  The 
Prime Minister repeated previous complaints that some civil society 
representatives are mere mouthpieces for the opposition.  Noting the 
growing popular support for the CPP evidenced in the 2008 election 
results, the Prime Minister said that he expected to remain in power 
until 2023. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Prime Minster also directed his ire towards the 
international community, accusing its members of favoring the 
opposition by applying different standards to their actions.  His 
remarks were directed at representatives of the European Union, who 
met with Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) officials August 7 to 
express concern about freedom of expression and rule of law, 
following the spate of defamation and disinformation lawsuits 
against opposition politicians, journalists, and private citizens. 
(NOTE:  In response, the MFA issued a statement August 11 asserting 
that Cambodia is more than ever committed to the protection of human 
rights and that freedom of expression must be exercised within the 
rule of law.  We will send a scanned copy of the statement to the 
Desk.  END NOTE.)  The Prime Minister's message to the international 
community was to give equal weight to his rights (referring to his 
right as a private citizen to dignity and the right not to be 
defamed), as well as those of the opposition. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The U.S. drew fire for its involvement in Cambodia's 
domestic politics in the 1970's.  The Prime Minister accused the 
U.S. of the coup which installed the Lon Nol regime and led to the 
civil war and is quoted as having said that U.S. soldiers came to 
Cambodia "to die."  He also had sharp words for opposition 
politicians who have political leanings towards the U.S., warning 
against allowing another country to manage Cambodia's destiny. 
 
Comment 
 
¶6. (SBU) Hun Sen is given to making extemporaneous remarks which 
often offer a window into his current concerns and pet peeves.  His 
attacks against his critics, civil society, and the international 
community all reflect his (and members of his government's) 
assertion of their right to respond to perceived unjust attacks 
against their dignity and honor.  This is consistent with messages 
from other RGC officials that use of defamation and disinformation 
suits is not an attack on human rights, but a protection of the 
victim's rights.  As noted in the August 11 MFA statement, freedom 
of expression must be exercised within the rule of law, and as the 
Prime Minister perhaps less eloquently stated, such freedoms need to 
be exercised responsibly, without infringing on the rights of 
others.  However, the government position for honor and against 
"defamation" leaves little to be said for fair comment against 
public figures, basic freedoms of expression contained in the 
Cambodian constitution, or the use of criminal charges of 
disinformation and incitement to jail critics. 
 
ALLEGRA