09SOFIA483
BULGARIA:  MLADENOV BRINGS STRATEGIC VISION TO
Wed Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO1573
OO RUEHSL
DE RUEHSF #0483/01 2381446
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 261446Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6275
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SOFIA 000483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/21/2029 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA:  MLADENOV BRINGS STRATEGIC VISION TO 
MOD, VOWS REFORM 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Ordway for reasons 1.4 (b)/(d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  The new government is serious about 
military reform and cleaning up the MOD.  Prime Minister 
Borisov picked 37-year old Nikolay Mladenov to carry out this 
task.   Mladenov is widely respected for his talent, 
political savvy and work ethic.  His lack of military 
experience may be a plus in Bulgaria as he is not personally 
beholden to entrenched interests inside the military 
establishment.  A fluent English-speaker who spent nearly 
five years overseas, including stints in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, he has worked for NDI, IRI and the Open Society 
Foundation, is strongly pro-NATO and committed to continuing 
Bulgaria's engagement in international security affairs.  He 
is eager to deepen U.S.-Bulgaria security cooperation and 
increase the impact of Bulgarian overseas deployments.  In 
the short-term, he will be forced to devote his attention to 
cleaning up the legal, structural and budgetary mess left 
behind by the previous government.  To accomplish this, he 
has requested additional IMET or other funds for U.S. 
advisory teams to assist in the formulation and 
implementation of urgently needed procurement, accounting, 
planning and professional education reforms.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
TOUGH ROAD AHEAD 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Mladenov takes charge of a military that is short on 
funds and has habitually misallocated its limited resources. 
The Bulgarian Armed Forces are reliant on outdated equipment, 
some of which (particularly in the Air Force) absorb funds 
while providing zero capability.  It is also still adjusting 
to a complicated merger of the MOD and Joint Staff and the 
transition to an all-volunteer force.  While his lack of 
military experience could be an asset in overseeing wrenching 
reforms, he has wisely selected three former officers as his 
deputies and chief of staff who share his reform agenda, but 
who also have the years of personal experience he does not. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Mladenov tells us he is excited about the 
possibilities of expanding the U.S.-Bulgaria security 
partnership.  This will only be meaningful if he can set the 
MOD's house in order, a task that currently has his full and 
undivided attention.  The bottom line:  Mladenov is the best 
chance Bulgaria has had in a decade to turn its military into 
a modern capable force.  The looming budgetary crisis, 
ironically, strengthens his hand in ending corrupt 
procurement practices and re-focusing resources on 
acquisition and mantainence of real capabilities that will 
modernize the armed forces and support the country's 
strategic needs. 
 
REFORM PLAN IN PLACE 
-------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  For over a year, the Center for Civil-Military 
Relations (CCMR) based out of the Naval Post-graduate School, 
has advised Bulgaria on defense transformation and prepared a 
series of recommendations on structural reform, defense 
planning, procurement and professional training.  In line 
with these U.S. recommendations, Mladenov said he intends to: 
 
- realign the MOD bureaucracy to consolidate financial 
management operations and reduce staff; 
 
- institute a &capabilities-based defense planning model8 
in order to link the acquisition of new systems to the 
ministry's strategic requirements; 
 
- completely overhaul the defense procurement process to 
reduce waste and ensure transparency; 
 
- amend or completely re-write the Defense Law to clarify 
chain of command authority in peace and wartime. 
 
 
HOW WE CAN HELP 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Unlike the previous Defense Minster, Mladenov is 
prepared to fully implement the CCMR recommendations, but 
emphasized that his ministry needs continued support from the 
organization to ensure that reforms are successfully 
implemented.  The MOD has proposed a series of CCMR-led 
workshops, training events, staff exercises and mentored 
courses at its professional development institute to fully 
develop and implement necessary policy, planning, budgeting 
and educational reforms.  Current OSD funding expires at the 
 
SOFIA 00000483  002 OF 002 
 
 
end of this fiscal year, making additional funds an urgent 
priority.  Mladenov commented that CCMR's work to date has 
been invaluable in identifying the areas most in need of 
reform and it would be a shame to end the program prematurely 
at precisely the moment the ministry and CCMR's experts are 
preparing to develop and implement solutions.  In other 
countries, CCMR has made use of end-of-year IMET funds to 
extend or enlarge its programs.  Post requests that if 
end-of-year IMET money or similar resources are available, 
Bulgaria be given strong consideration for supplemental 
support. 
 
 
¶6.  (C)  COMMENT:  Although Bulgaria has remained a strong 
partner in international security operations (steadily 
increasing its forces in Afghanistan despite public opinion) 
and increased the scale and tempo of joint military 
exercises, the previous government failed to implement 
significant internal reform.  Corruption and mismanagement 
have drained the ministry's coffers and saddled the Bulgarian 
Armed Forces, particularly its Air Force, with obsolete, 
non-deployable and non-NATO interoperable systems.  U.S. 
assistance has helped, but in the past, lack of political 
will prevented systemic improvement.  Mladenov's presence 
creates a rare window of opportunity for deep and enduring 
reform, particularly on defense procurements.  Modest 
increases in U.S. assistance to Bulgaria at this crucial 
juncture will have greater impact than ever, helping Bulgaria 
to transform its entire defense acquisitions process and 
begin proper allocatioQof its defense resources.  For the 
first time, political will exists to end wasteful and corrupt 
procurements, terminate obsolete systems and bring planing, 
budgeting and education practices up to NATO standards. 
Mladenov seeks and deserves our support. END COMMENT. 
 
¶7.  (C)  BIO NOTES:  Although Mladenov did not serve in the 
military, he graduated from King's College London with an MA 
in War Studies and is a respected voice in Bulgaria on 
international security issues.  In the 1990,s he held 
positions in Sofia as a program director for the Open Society 
Foundation and as a consultant for the World Bank, NDI and 
IRI.  Mladenov entered the political scene at 28 and became 
an MP for the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) in 2001.  He 
was seen as a protege of UDF leader Nadezhda Mihailova, a 
previous Minister of Foreign Affairs.  Through skill and his 
ties with Mihailova, he rose quickly through the UDF ranks, 
and was named Deputy Party Chairman in 2004.  Mladenov 
resigned his post following the resignation of party leader 
Mihailova in 2005.  Unlike Mihailova, however, he left the 
UDF a year later to join Citizens for the European 
Development of Bulgaria (GERB), then an unknown new political 
party. 
ORDWAY