09STATE86626
CONSULTATIONS ON SUDAN ELECTIONS - BUDGETARY
Wed Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO6599
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHC #6626 2312233
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192216Z AUG 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 7406UNCLAS STATE 086626 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UNSC SU
SUBJECT: CONSULTATIONS ON SUDAN ELECTIONS - BUDGETARY 
IMPLICATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 84997 
 
¶1.  This is an addendum to State 84997, and USUN may draw 
upon the points below during consultations on elections 
preparations in Sudan scheduled before the Security Council 
on August 20, 2009. 
 
¶2.  Begin points: 
 
--The United States continues to be a staunch supporter of 
holding fair and credible elections in Sudan at the earliest 
feasible time.  We recognize the enormity of the task and the 
extraordinary expense of planning and conducting an election 
under less than ideal circumstances, and thank the 
Secretary-General for providing the cost implications for the 
planned elections.  Holding multiparty, national elections in 
Sudan will require the assistance of not only the UN Mission 
in Sudan (UNMIS) but the UN/AU Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), 
and it is crucial that they provide this support.  While we 
support elections in Sudan and would like to support the 
request for additional funds, the sum of $46.6 million is 
substantial.  It requires an analysis of the projected uses 
of the funds, particularly in light of the funds already 
dedicated to the election effort by USAID and the 
international community. 
 
--Preliminary cost estimates provided in Addendum 1 of 
S/2009/391 indicate more than $28 million is estimated for 
air transportation alone - more than half the total projected 
amount.  Included in the projection is the cost of operating 
21 helicopters for varying periods.  The United States 
believes a comprehensive and carefully detailed line item 
explanation for this item is necessary, as well as a full 
description of the services and tasks to be accomplished 
utilizing air transportation. 
 
--Similarly, over $15 million is projected to be expended for 
police and civilian personnel.  In order to assess the 
utility of such expenditures, it would be helpful to have a 
detailed description of the types of personnel to be employed 
and their specific functions relating to elections processes 
in Sudan.  There may be opportunities to reduce these and 
other costs and we would be remiss not to explore them.  If 
no cost reduction opportunities exist, then we will have 
completed our due diligence and can justify lending our 
support to this increase. 
 
--The United States firmly believes elections in Sudan are a 
critical part of implementing the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement and establishing durable peace and reconciliation 
in Sudan; however, it is essential to optimize all 
expenditures for election preparations.  In principle, we 
strongly support adequately funding the elections effort, but 
before the United States can commit to an increase in force 
levels or mission funding, we may need to notify the U.S. 
Congress with the details of the increase.  We therefore urge 
the Secretary-General to provide a more detailed and exact 
projection of all costs, by line item and subcategories, of 
all projected expenditures included in the financial 
implications of Addendum 1.  With additional information we 
believe we will be able to justify our support for the 
additional resources. 
 
Thank you. 
CLINTON