09TRIPOLI658

Wed Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO0676
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHTRO #0658/01 2241444
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 121444Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5153
INFO RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 0557
RUEHVT/AMEMBASSY VALLETTA PRIORITY 0433
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 5694
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TRIPOLI 000658 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG; STATE PLEASE PASS USTR; LONDON AND PARIS FOR 
NEA WATCHERS; COMMERCE FOR NATE MASON; ENERGY FOR GINA ERICKSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  8/12/2019 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PGOV EPET LY

1.(C) Summary: A Libyan Government attempt to enforce a 2007 decree specifying requirements for shop signs and advertisements has stirred confusion within the main commercial areas of Tripoli recently, as businesses have torn down or covered up their signs in an effort to avoid taxation. Shops located outside Tripoli's commercial centers, as well as those in other cities, have managed to maintain their original signs. In true Jamahiriya ("state of the masses") fashion, there is little clarity on either the goal of enforcing the decree or on the compliance process. Expatriate business owners believe the sudden rush to cover up signs is due solely to GOL preparations for the 40th anniversary of Qadhafi's revolution, and they expect the situation to return to normal after September 1. End summary.

WHERE DID ALL THE SHOP SIGNS GO?

2.(SBU) Several weeks ago, signs on shops in Tripoli suddenly began to disappear, with the fashionable shopping area along Gagaresh Street particularly hard hit. Many clothing stores, high-end furniture stores, and restaurants now appear nameless. Only pharmacies and private dental clinics are still displaying their signs. The sign removal campaign appears to be focused on Tripoli, at least for the moment. On a recent drive through Zouera, the last large town on the coast before the Tunisian border, Econoff did not see any shops without signs or with signs covered-up.

SIGNS BEING REMOVED DUE TO 2007 DECREE

¶3. (C) The sign removal campaign appears to be the result of a recent GOL attempt to enforce a 2007 decree (Number 504) outlining requirements for advertising and promotional signs and billboards. The decree stipulates that all words and figures on signs and billboards be written in Arabic and "must not conflict with the achievements, logos, or purposes of Qadhafi's revolution." Businesses must receive clearance of sign content from the General People's Committee for Culture and Information (Ministry of Culture/Information-equivalent) prior to displaying their signs. Furthermore, said signs and billboards must not violate "public decency and morals." The decree also lists complicated size and registration requirements but does not clarify annual fee calculations. Finally, the decree warns that all signs in contravention of these rules will be removed at the owner's expense ten days after the notification of the violation. The xxxxxxxxxxxx manager of a new cafe told us that the expatriate business community believes this formerly obscure decree is being enforced solely in preparation for the 40th anniversary of Qadhafi's revolution. He fully believes that businesses will be allowed to return to business as usual after the September 1 festivities.

BUSINESS OWNERS SCRATCH THEIR HEADS...

4.(C) A variety of businesses have been caught up in the frenzy to abide by the sign decree. The owner of an xxxxxxxxxxxx business told Econoff that he had applied for permission to display his sign three months ago. Even so, the commercial inspector for his area directed the sign to be covered up. The owner commented that the sign was in Arabic, not in English, so he did not understand why it had to be covered; he attributed this action to the whims of the individual commercial inspector. While the lack of a sign has not greatly affected his business, the owner commented that having a sign would make it easier for new customers to find his shop.

5.(C) Emboffs have observed no discernible consistency to the application of the decree. Along a primary business avenue, some signs remain, as do the names of shops that are affixed directly onto the front of stores xxxxxxxxxxxx. Even xxxxxxxxxxxx has its name (in English) painted directly onto its front window. On a popular block containing a string of inexpensive carry-out restaurants, however, employees had no idea why their signs had been removed. xxxxxxxxxxxx An xxxxxxxxxxxx cook at the barbeque restaurant next door believed that the row of restaurants was slotted for demolition by a government actor wanting to take over the land to build something new in the prime business TRIPOLI 00000658 002.2 OF 002 location.

6.(C) Even private offices have been affected by the sign removal campaign: a xxxxxxxxxxxx company had displayed a sign on a main road for their office that is located on a nearby side street. Even though their sign was in Arabic, it was torn down and thrown into a gutter. The manager of the company commented that he did not know how to seek permission to replace his sign. In terms of the effect on their business, another employee noted that most visitors already knew the location of the office and any newcomers would find it according to landmarks or directions. (Note: There are no real addresses or prominently marked street names in Tripoli - thus, the removal of shop signs renders the entire city nameless. Most Libyans find new locations according to well-known landmarks, and many local Embassy contacts seem to be apathetic about the absence of signs, simply explaining it away as one of the many bizarre aspects of living under the Qadhafi regime. End note).

...WHILE BILLBOARDS ABOUND

7.(C) In contrast to the preponderance of nameless stores in Tripoli, the 2007 decree does not seem to apply to the removal of billboards, as many new billboards have appeared with advertisements for consumer goods, in Arabic and also in English. A preponderance of the new billboards feature new images of Qadhafi, in celebration of the upcoming anniversary of his 40 years in power (on September 1). One billboard is particularly colorful, featuring the flags of Africa along the borders with Qadhafi - the "king of kings of Africa" - as the centerpiece.

8.(C) Comment: While the practical effects of the sign removals on Tripoli businesses may be somewhat limited, the haphazard implementation of the 2007 sign and billboard decree is yet another example of the hoops the small private sector must go through here in their daily operations. One Libyan businessman commented the latest sign removals are simply another measure to keep people "off balance" and make them wonder what hindrance to businesses may be coming next. The willy-nilly enforcement of the sign law may be a means for commercial inspectors to extract "fees" from business owners, in an operating environment that is known for graft at all levels of the government. It remains to be seen whether implementation of this decree will prove to be yet another barrier to doing business or whether creative shopkeepers xxxxxxxxxxxx will be able to maintain business via alternative means of marketing their products. End comment. POLASCHIK