07PANAMA1738
PANAMA: SOMBER 1ST VP & FM UNLOADS PRIVATELY WITH
Fri Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
SECRET
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #1738/01 3061855
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 021855Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1366
INFO RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3679
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1152
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0083
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUCNFB/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUMIAAA/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 001738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DNG: CO 11/02/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON KCRM KJUS PTER CU VE MX PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: SOMBER 1ST VP & FM UNLOADS PRIVATELY WITH 
AMBASSADOR 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William A. Eaton.  Reasons:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  "I do not trust Pedro Miguel Gonzalez (PMG)," First 
VP and FM Samuel Lewis confessed to Ambassador while 
conceding that President Martin Torrijos was unlikely to 
dissuade PMG from stepping down from the Presidency of the 
National Assembly thereby clearing the way for the U.S. 
Congress to consider the U.S.-Panama Trade Promotion 
Agreement (TPA).  (Note:  PMG is federal under indictment on 
five counts in connection with the 1992 murder of a U.S. 
serviceman.)  This aspirant to succeed Torrijos as president 
acknowledged that his political future at risk; "That is what 
is in play."  Lewis preidcted that current Minister of 
Housing Balbina Herrera might well be the governing 
Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) candidate for president. 
 Lewis also predictedhis views on the state of play in the 
opposition and touched upon Cuba, Venezuela, and Mexico.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------- 
PMG Unlikely to Step Down 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S) "President Torrijos is in the midst of delicate 
discussions with Pedro Miguel," Lewis told Ambassador, 
seeking a way for PMG to step down.  "We realize that the 
window of opportunity for the TPA is closing and that we have 
to do something this week."  Lewis asked that the Embassy 
"keep radio silence" for the next week so as not to 
complicate these sensitive negotiations.  Sighing, Lewis then 
broke from his "talking points" and confessed, "I do not 
trust Pedro Miguel."  Lewis was pessimistic that anything 
would come from Torrijos' discussions with PMG and added that 
PMG did not really care if he scuttled the TPA. 
 
----------------------- 
Lewis' Political Future 
----------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) "I'll be keeping a very low profile over the next few 
months," Lewis said, avoiding the press and steering clear of 
public events as much as possible.  "I've become a lightning 
rod within the PRD.  My visibility at this time will hurt 
Martin and what we have been trying to accomplish within the 
PRD."  Expressing his frustration with the "leftward and 
backward drift" of the PRD, Lewis asserted that the PRD's 
future was in pragmatic and pro-trade policies, not nostalgic 
frolicking with echoes of the past.  He expressed his worries 
regarding the current divisions within the PRD, the weakening 
of Torrijos' political position, and belief that the PRD's 
prospects for reelection in 2009 could be jeopardized.  "We 
had hoped the party would choose continuity as its path to 
reelection.  That path is in jeopardy."  Asked if all this 
meant that he would not be the PRD's candidate for president, 
Lewis shrugged, frowned and confessed that he did not know 
what political future he might have; "That is what is in 
play."  He said that he needed to lie low for awhile to see 
if the political panorama changed in his favor. 
 
-------------------------- 
Balbina's Political Future 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  Balbina and her supporters are behind the scenes 
making a very strong and aggressive push for candidacy for 
president, Lewis said.  "She has enormous support within the 
party," he said, "and barring any major change in the 
political climate, she will be the PRD candidate for 
president."  Allegedly, PMG was also toying with the idea of 
throwing his hat in to the ring in the race for president, 
but Lewis dismissed that as evidence of the "dream world" in 
which PMG lived. 
 
-------------------- 
Opposition Politics 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Lewis commented that Torrijos and he had been 
"surprised" with Democratic Change (CD) Party President 
Ricardo Martinelli's sustained high standing in the polls. 
Regardless of whatever efforts the opposition might undertake 
to unify themselves behind a sole candidate, Lewis said he 
believed that Martinelli would run for president.  "The 
problem with the opposition," he said, "is that they are 
spending all their time debating who should be their leader 
instead of designing a compelling political platform to unify 
the opposition and gain widespread public support."  Former 
President Mireya Moscoso was pushing Alberto Vallarino's 
candidacy to lead the opposition, but Vallarino was awaiting 
his "coronation" rather than doing the hard work of 
campaigning nationwide, Lewis said.  "Do not discount 
(Panamenista Party President) Juan Carlos Varela's ability to 
scuttle Vallarino's ambitions despite La Dona's (Moscoso's) 
support."  "The election of Pedro Miguel has handed the 
opposition an election-winning issue on a silver platter," 
Lewis asserted.  There were some in the PRD who still thought 
that the PRD's organizational strength and nationwide 
presence would guarantee reelection, Lewis explained; "Do not 
count on that any more.  The PRD is on the ropes now," 
because of the PMG and TPA issue. 
 
---- 
Cuba 
---- 
 
¶6.  (C) Lewis reminded Ambassador that he would be heading to 
Cuba next this weekend to lead a Panamanian trade delegation. 
 He acknowledged that some in the U.S. would "misread" his 
trip.  Lewis said that he would call WHA A/S Shannon to 
inquire whether there was "any water" that he could carry for 
the U.S. during his visit to the island.  Lewis committed to 
share with Ambassador his impressions and insights from his 
visit once he had returned. 
 
--------- 
Venezuela 
--------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Asked if recent newspaper gossip column items 
asserting that Torrijos would visit Chavez soon were true, 
Lewis laughed and said that the current Venezuelan Charge 
d'Affaires in Panama was "even crazier" than the former 
Ambassador.  Though he had never met with the him, Lewis 
explained, the Venezuelan Charge was telling his 
interlocutors that he had met Lewis, and was "quoting" 
conversations that never happened and promises that were 
never made.  "I could not even pick him out of a crowd." 
Lewis confirmed that Torrijos had asked to meet Chavez on the 
margins of the Ibero-American Summit in Chile where Torrijos 
would talk about energy and push back on Venezuela's proposed 
ambassador to Panama.  Though Panama had denied agrement, 
Chavez refused to withdraw the nomination and continued to 
push it.  Panama was concerned about the proposed Venezuelan 
ambassadorial candidate's reputation and track record as 
Consul General in Sao Paolo for inciting leftist groups. 
Torrijos would complain to Chavez about the interference of 
his Charge in Panamanian internal affairs, including his trip 
last weekend to Bocas del Toro province where he pushed 
leftist groups to support the "Bolivarian movement." 
 
------ 
Mexico 
------ 
 
¶8.  (C) Lewis noted that he just returned from Mexico where 
he had tried unsuccessfully to negotiate an agreement between 
Panamanian airline COPA and Mexican airline Mexicana.  Lewis 
said he was struck by how well the Calderon Administration 
was doing.  "Fox said the right things, but could not 
deliver.  Calderon's folks are tough negotiators, but when 
 
you reach agreement, they actually deliver on their 
promises," Lewis commented. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  (S) Lewis clearly sees the writing on the wall that his 
presidential candidacy, barring some intervention from a 
benevolent God, is dead.  Also, for the first time, he seemed 
genuinely depressed and pessimistic about the prospects for 
the TPA in the U.S. Congress. Furthermore, he was quite blunt 
about his frustration with the Torrijos Administration's 
ability to "fix" the PMG problem and the long-term disastrous 
effects that this failure would have on Panama, on the PRD, 
and him.  Lewis came across as beleaguered and sad.  Lewis 
seems to be increasingly uncomfortable in the PRD where he 
feels like an outsider. 
EATON