09PANAMA15
PANAMA: NEW MOGJ MINSTER LAYS OUT PLANS
Wed Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0015/01 0072022
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 072022Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2817
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2737
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 1963
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000015 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/02/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: NEW MOGJ MINSTER LAYS OUT PLANS 
 
REF: PANAMA 00008 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 1.4 (b) 
and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Security has become the government's weak spot, newly 
appointed Minister of Government of Justice Dilio Arcia told 
the Ambassador December 19. He described plans to address 
gang violence, including tougher sentences and implementation 
of community policing initiatives. In discussing the FARC 
presence in the Darien, Arcia said that increased mobility 
for GOP police forces was key, as Panamanian forces could not 
arrive quickly enough to confront FARC incursions. He also 
spoke about the need to improve governance in the Darien. He 
reaffirmed GOP policy that the U.S. should not have a 
permanent physical presence in the Darien, and forcefully 
asserted his and the President's authority to decide on any 
increase in temporary presence or qualitative change in the 
nature of USG presence. He and his Vice Ministers described 
recent outreach to the Embera Indians, following a FARC 
incursion into their autonomous comarca. They also discussed 
forthcoming equipment upgrades, including the arrival of 
helicopters in February and March. End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
It's the Crime, Stupid! 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Dilio Arcia, who was appointed Minister of Government 
and Justice on November 18 replacing Daniel Delgado, met with 
the Ambassador and EMBOFFs on December 19, together with Vice 
Minster of Public Security Rodrigo Cigarruista and Vice 
Minster of Government Severino Mejia. Arcia said that his top 
priority was to develop and implement policies to confront 
the crime wave affecting the country. He complained that the 
political opposition was using the security issue to 
politically weaken Martin Torrijos' government and Balbina 
Herrera's presidential campaign. He said security had become 
the "weak spot" of the government. Arcia complained that 
 
Panama was being overwhelmed by the effects of "Plan Mexico." 
(Comment: Arcia was referring to the Merida Initiative. End 
Comment) He said foreign drug traffickers were hiring local 
gangs to kill people as a result of lost drug shipments 
seized by the authorities in Panama. He said the MOGJ, the 
Supreme Court and the Attorney General's Office were working 
together on an anti-gang strategy, that would focus on 
combating illegal weapon possession. The MOGJ proposed an 
increase in the penalty for weapon possession to four-six 
years, so that preventive detention could be used against 
offenders. (Note: Under the current Penal Process Bridge Law, 
which is in effect until the judicial system switches over to 
the new adversarial law system, preventive detention can only 
be requested for crimes that carry a prospective sentence of 
four years or more. The current sentence is two-four years. 
End Note) Arcia said this will allow gang members caught with 
guns to be investigated for other crimes while in detention. 
He said the police needed to focus on the retail sale of 
drugs, the main source of funds for the gangs. 
 
------------------ 
Community Policing 
------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C)  Arcia also asserted that the MOGJ was interested in 
implementing community policing programs. He emphasized 
getting NGOs and business groups to work with the police, 
citing a pilot program in the province of Veraguas he said 
had been successful and an existing program called "Vigilant 
Neighbors." He also praised the Integral Security Program 
(PROSI), which is an IDB-funded crime prevention program that 
focused on building up recreational infrastructure in poor, 
gang prone neighborhoods. He also stressed the need to bring 
in other elements of the GOP, like the Ministry of Education 
and the Ministry of Social Development to help develop a 
coordinated GOP strategy to prevent kids from finding their 
way into gangs.  Arcia complained that prisoners were 
continuing to run their criminal operations from prison, and 
said he would like to see a program to build new prisons that 
were smaller and easier to control and improve the old ones. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
To Forward Deploy, or Not to Forward Deploy? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  Asked by the Ambassador about the Darien, 
Cigarruista said Panama was primarily a transit and R&R zone 
for the FARC, though he also noted the 57th Front charged 
tolls for cargo being smuggled into the Darien. Arcia said 
Panamanian police forces needed greater mobility to be able 
to deal with the FARC effectively.  He said even if the 
security forces heard about incursions, they could not get to 
the scene quickly enough to do anything about it. He asserted 
that with the National Frontier Service (SENAFRONT) police's 
separation from the Panamanian National Police (PNP), Panama 
would now have a permanent presence along its borders, noting 
that 350 new police graduates would make it possible to keep 
SENAFRONT police deployed on the borders, and not bring them 
into Panama City to reinforce the PNP, as had often happened 
in the past. Arcia said the plan was to concentrate large 
groups of SENAFRONT police in a few places, and then respond 
quickly by helicopter to any reports of incursions. Mejia 
said the Darien was a big, tough area to patrol and that it 
could only be patrolled by helicopters and boats. He said 
that to be effective, SENAFRONT needed to deploy closer to 
the border and that to do so they needed helicopter lift 
capability. Asked by the Ambassador if SENAFRONT would then 
be moved closer to the border, Cigarruista said they would 
not/not be deployed on the border, but would observe and 
react from bases further back. Mejia stressed that the GOP 
had great cooperation with Colombia, and that the GOC would 
help them. Arcia interjected that the situation was far from 
imminent hostilities, noting that the main threat from the 
FARC was their use of Panamanian territory for R&R, drug 
trafficking and kidnappings. Mejia agreed, noting the FARC 
was not looking to start a two-front conflict, while 
Cigarruista noted that Panama also did not want a regional 
conflict. He said the GOC would support them, but that the 
answer would be the extension of Panama's effective control 
over its own territory. Arcia said the extension of effective 
governance was the key, and that the GOP was going as far as 
to consider the development of new towns in the Darien as a 
solution to the difficult challenge of providing essential 
services in such a thinly populated area. 
 
-------------- 
Need any Help? 
-------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  EMBOFF asked about the deployment of SOUTHCOM Joint 
Planning Assistance Team (JPAT) and Counter Narco-Terrorist 
(CNT) training teams currently in-country to the Darien to 
support the development of SENAFRONT. (Note: These teams are 
currently forbidden by the GOP to train SENAFRONT police in 
the Darien, thought they are permitted limited "technical 
assessment" visits. All USG training for GOP police deployed 
to the Darien takes place in training areas closer to Panama 
City. End Note)  Arcia  said the GOP did not want a permanent 
U.S. physical presence in the area that might create 
misunderstandings. Mejia said an increased U.S. presence 
depended on SENAFRONT Director Commissioner Frank Abrego. 
Arcia immediately and forcefully cut Mejia off, and said 
Abrego could recommend such a change to him, the Minister, or 
directly to President Torrijos, but could not/not decide this 
on his own. Arcia justified this assertion of authority by 
saying that he was a lawyer, and wanted to make sure 
everything was "legal". 
 
-------------------------------- 
Taking Care of the Little People 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Arcia said they had met with indigenous leaders in 
the Darien (Embera) to assure them they would not be 
abandoned by the GOP, following a recent FARC incursion in 
their territory (see reftel). He said the President himself 
had gone to Puerto Indio to meet with the Gran Cacique of the 
Embera and had promised that the GOP would have a presence in 
their areas. Mejia said the MOGJ would train the Embera 
"police" - traditional Embera figures who help maintain 
internal order in the Embera semi-autonomous comarcas - to 
get intelligence for them, and would set up meetings for them 
with SENAFRONT police to increase cooperation. Arcia said 
they had explained to the Embera that despite their 
semi-autonomy in their comarcas, they were Panamanians under 
the security responsibility of the President. He said a GOP 
official in the past had decided to withdraw the police from 
the comarcas, but that following the recent incursion, the 
Embera were ready to cooperate with the GOP. 
 
------------------------ 
New Equipment on the Way 
------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (C)  Cigarruista said that the MOGJ was refurbishing 5 
Bell-212 helicopters, and the first one would be delivered on 
March 1, after which two more would be delivered each month 
and a half. He also said that another new helicopter the MOGJ 
had bought would be delivered on February 15. He said two new 
boats would also arrive in February for the National 
Aero-Naval Service (SENAN). Mejia noted that SENAN assets, 
especially the helicopters would be used for multiple 
missions, including search and rescue, moving teachers into 
remote areas, disaster relief, and flying foreign 
dignitaries, in addition to law enforcement.  Cigarruista 
said Panama had an immediate need for helicopters, especially 
for maritime patrol and border support. He added that Panama 
was buying six small target acquisition radars  that had sea 
and air capability for $4.5 million. He said they also 
planned to use radars of the Panama Canal Authority (ACP) 
that could see 180 n.m. into the sea and air. He said the ACP 
was only using 30% of its radar capacity, so the SENAN would 
be able to use them as well. Mejia said the MOGJ was 
interested in acquiring mobile computers for the police to 
give them the information to "enact a plan," and not just 
react to crime. Cigarruista noted that the MOGJ was working 
on a computer system to amass crime data that could then be 
used to target areas of high crime in real time, similar to 
the COMPSTAT program used by U.S. law enforcement agencies. 
He said the MOGJ needed assistance to bring in experts to 
train their personnel in how to interpret the data so they 
could use it effectively. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Arcia's embrace of community policing is a welcome 
change from Delgado. Arcia is in many ways the anti-Delgado, 
focusing on urban crime and community outreach, while Delgado 
framed the issue as a choice between democracy and law and 
order, and did not really care what civil society thought. 
Arcia has been quoted in the papers calling for NGOs and 
community involvement in the fight against crime. This brings 
the MOGJ in line with Post, as we are both now focused on 
urban police reform and anti-gang programs. While the reason 
for Arcia's embrace of community policing might be to help 
undo some of the political damage Delgado and Torrijos 
himself did, it is a further step towards institutionalizing 
the idea of community policing as the best way to respond to 
Panama's crime/gang problem. 
 
¶9.  (S//NF)  This meeting also reinforced the fact that MOGJ 
does not have operational control of the security forces in 
Panama. While Arcia was quick to point out that Abrego could 
not decide on increased cooperation with the U.S. on his own, 
he added a telling line that he had to check with him - or 
the President. In reality, it is Torrijos and the National 
Intelligence and Security Service (SENIS), under Erik 
Espinosa and his deputy Javier Fletcher, who really control 
the operations of the security services. The confusion shown 
here among Mejia and Cigarruista about how far forward the 
SENAFRONT would deploy indicates they might not be the ones 
who would decide. The heads of the PNP, SENAFRONT and the 
SENAN all report directly to Torrijos, who then delegates 
operational control and oversight for major operations to 
Fletcher. Under Delgado MOGJ had the political weight to 
challenge Espinosa/Fletcher, but under Arcia this influence 
is likely to wane. The real mission of the MOGJ is to 
administer these services and buy supplies, a limited mission 
in which the MOGJ's effectiveness is highly questionable. 
Post will continue to coordinate training issues with the 
MOGJ and the service chiefs in parallel, but high-level 
planning for law-enforcement operations will continue to be 
done through Fletcher or the service chiefs. 
STEPHENSON