08TORONTO273
Ontario Film Industry Reels From High Loonie, Fears Loss of
Fri Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO2939
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0273 2562005
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 122005Z SEP 08 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2592
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS TORONTO 000273 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV PGOV CA
SUBJECT: Ontario Film Industry Reels From High Loonie, Fears Loss of 
Federal Funding 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified - protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Despite local incentives and new filmmaking 
facilities, the strong Canadian dollar and Ottawa's arts funding 
cuts threaten to further cripple an already weak Ontario film 
industry.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Toronto's strong film and television industry has suffered as 
the Canadian dollar has risen against the U.S. dollar.  The Toronto 
films and television industry peaked in 2000, with C$1.3 billion in 
on-location shooting.  It fell to C$704 million in 2006, rebounding 
slightly to C$755.8 million in 2007.  New U.S. incentives, such as a 
35% tax credit in New York on filmmakers' expenditures, make 
shooting in Canada relatively less attractive to producers than 
before.  In addition, a months-long strike in 2007 by the Alliance 
of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists also furthered 
industry woes.  The resulting dearth of productions has taken its 
toll on Ontario's film and television industry.  In 2007, Toronto's 
Cinespace Studios was forced to close, reducing the city's 
production space by 20 percent. 
¶3.  (U) In addition to relying heavily upon American productions, 
Ontario's film and television studios depend on a steady stream of 
smaller Canadian productions to remain profitable.  Canadian content 
laws and federal arts subsidies have helped to keep these Canadian 
productions coming.  However, local media analysts fear that federal 
funding cuts will dry up these Canadian productions.  The Harper 
government announced in early August that it would cancel Heritage 
Canada's C$9 million Trade Routes export support fund as well as the 
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade's PromArt 
program, a C$4.7 million artist travel support fund.  In addition, 
Bill C-10, introduced in Ottawa in February, would allow Canada's 
Heritage Minister to deny tax credits to productions he deems 
contrary to public policy.  Local arts personalities have decried 
these moves, fearing they will cripple Toronto's film industry and 
defund its annual HotDocs international documentary festival and the 
Toronto International Film Festival. 
 
¶4.  (U) The governments of Ontario and Toronto have moved to attract 
more productions.  The Ontario Media Development Corporation (OMDC) 
offers a tax credit to Canadian or foreign-controlled production 
companies equal to 25 percent of their Ontario labor expenditures. 
In addition, Ontario gives local Canadian-controlled corporations 
tax credits worth 35 to 45 percent of their Ontario labor 
expenditures.  The Toronto Film Board has begun offering U.S.-based 
productions incentives such as free location permits, a reduced rate 
on city services and free use of all City of Toronto-owned 
facilities and properties.  Finally, on June 17, OMDC announced a 
C$2 million initiative that would award early-stage film, television 
and other Ontario-based media companies up to C$100,000 each. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Investors in a new film production complex hope to lure 
American producers back north.  On September 8, econoff and PAO 
toured Filmport, a C$80 million, 47 acre film studio on Lake 
Ontario.  When completed, Filmport's seven sound stages will cover 
120,000 square feet and include a 46,000 square foot sound stage, 
the largest soundproof sound stage in North America.  Filmport is 
largely funded by private companies and individuals, who invested 
their own money and also borrowed C$24 million from GE Capital. 
Filmport is on the site of a remediated industrial site acquired by 
the Toronto Economic Development Corporation for a token amount. 
The first phase of the complex opened on June 5, and its grand 
opening was on August 20.  As of July 8, the complex had lost C$3 
million.  According to executives at Filmport, it can host up to 
four major productions at any given time, as well as a number of 
television series.  Only one feature film is currently scheduled to 
shoot at Filmport. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment:  Provincial and municipal incentives and 
increasingly desperate local studios may make filmmaking in Ontario 
slightly more attractive to American producers in the short term. 
However, despite the optimism of Filmport's investors, Ontario's 
film industry will suffer as long as the Canadian dollar hovers near 
parity. End Comment. 
 
NAY