03ANKARA3830
Turkish Customs Undersecretary on Iraqi Border
Fri Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 003830 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/NGA - NJENSEN AND EUR/SE 
DEPT PASS TO USAID FOR OFDA 
 
 
CORRECTED COPY 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ENRG EAID PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT:  Turkish Customs Undersecretary on Iraqi Border 
Crossing, Fuel Smuggling 
 
 
¶1.   (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  Turkey's Customs Undersecretary told 
us that two-way crossings at Habur total about 1,500 
vehicles daily, and that he expects this traffic to more 
than double in the near future.  Following a stoppage at 
the border prompted by a Kurdistan Democratic Party 
attempt to collect higher fees from truckers last week, 
traffic is now flowing smoothly.  Turkish Customs 
continues to confiscate smuggled fuel oil coming from 
Iraq.  Despite reports that that Turkey had decided 
today to open its borders to Iraqi imports, Foreign 
Trade sources have told us that it will take at least 
several days to implement this.  MFA noted interest in 
reestablishing air transport links with Baghdad, and 
asked for the U.S. view on whether bilateral trade and 
transport agreements negotiated with the old regime in 
Iraq are still valid.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Econ Counselor, Econoff and Econ Specialist 
discussed Turkish-Iraqi trade and the Habur border 
crossing with Customs Undersecretary Nevzat Saygilioglu 
and with Acting Director General for EC and External 
Relations Sebahattin Kocas on June 11.  Econ Counselor 
thanked Saygilioglu for Turkish cooperation in securing 
the flow of humanitarian supplies to Iraq, and stated 
that U.S. authorities were working to create a uniform 
trade and tariff policy throughout Iraq. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Saygilioglu stated that, with sanctions lifted, 
Turkey's only border crossing with Iraq at Habur was now 
handling a combined flow of about 1,500 vehicles daily 
(though Turkey has yet to establish procedures to allow 
imports from Iraq).  Customs has extended its working 
hours to a daily 07:30 to 01:00 schedule.  Saygilioglu 
predicted that traffic between Turkey and Iraq would 
increase in the near future to 3,000 to 4,000 vehicles 
daily.  He offered his "personal" opinion that a second 
border crossing would be necessary, but noted that an 
interagency group would decide whether or not to pursue 
this project.  A second crossing would require up to 35 
kilometers of new roads. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Saygilioglu acknowledged that border operations 
had been disrupted last week by Kurdish Democratic Party 
attempts to raise fees to USD 120 per truck, but that 
KDP had apparently reduced its demand to USD 20 per 
truck.  Traffic is now flowing smoothly across the 
border. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) While agreeing with the U.S. goal of 
encouraging Turkish-Iraqi trade relations, Saygilioglu 
complained about Iraqi smuggling of fuel oil into 
Turkey.  He said that Turkish prices for this product 
were currently 15 times higher than those in Iraq and 
that this provided the stimulus for smuggling. EconCouns 
suggested that importing cheaper fuel should be positive 
for Turkey.  However, Saygilioglu condemned the trade as 
subjecting Turkish businesses to "unfair" competition 
and pointed out the poor quality of smuggled fuel.  He 
stated that Customs had confiscated 100 tons of such 
fuel on June 10. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Undersecretary stated that Customs 
facilities at Habur were in need of extensive 
renovation, and that the GOT was considering use of the 
build-operate-transfer (BOT) model to secure private 
sector investment.  He pointed out that the BOT model 
had been successfully used to build customs facilities 
on the Greek and Iranian borders. 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Following our meeting at Customs, we received 
reports that the government had decided to open the 
border to Iraqi imports, implementing the UN sanctions 
lift resolution.  However, Foreign Trade Director 
General for Agreements clarified to us on June 12 that, 
while this decision has been taken in principle, many 
details have yet to be worked out and the opening to 
Iraqi imports will not be implemented for at least 
several days.  Other sources told us the government was 
still waiting for the Turkish military to bless the 
decision. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) In a separate meeting, MFA Ambassador Okcun 
told Econ Counselor that the GOT is organizing a visit 
to Baghdad by Turkish airline representatives to survey 
the airport, Turkish airline offices and discuss the 
possibility of renewing air links with Baghdad.  He also 
said Turkey hopes to find out soon whether its bilateral 
trade and transport agreements with Iraq were still 
considered valid. 
Pearson