04ABUJA1461
DARFUR TALKS, DAY TWO AND THREE
Wed Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abuja
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 001461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/C, AF/SPG, LONDON AND PARIS FOR 
AFRICAWATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV NI CH SU DARFUR
SUBJECT: DARFUR TALKS, DAY TWO AND THREE 
 
REF:  ABUJA 1456 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTERNET OR INTRANET. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Despite initial wrangling over agenda 
items and the presence of the international community 
during negotiating sessions, talks between the Sudanese 
Government and rebel movements started on August 24.  The 
parties emerged from several closed-door sessions with an 
agenda to frame the discussions, but the rebel movements' 
objections to including the cantonment of troops on the 
agenda threatened the start of the discussions.  Overnight, 
international observers were able to convince the rebel 
movements to drop their objections, and a United Nations 
Representative kicked-off the proceedings August 25 with a 
bleak presentation of the humanitarian situation in Darfur. 
Discussions recessed again to allow all parties to review a 
U.N. status report.  International observers, concerned 
that the talks appear to have little direction, are working 
with the African Union team to formulate a more cohesive 
mediation strategy with defined goals and desired outcomes 
from the various sessions.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
REBELS INSIST ON PRESENCE OF INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.   (SBU) On August 24, the Sudanese Government, rebel 
movements and African Union emerged from three closed-door 
sessions with an agenda (reftel) for the discussions that 
includes humanitarian, security, political, and socio- 
economic issues.  The rebel delegations insisted, much to 
Nigerian President Obasanjo's displeasure, that 
international observers (U.S., UK, EU) be allowed to 
participate in negotiation sessions.  Obasanjo insisted 
Darfur is an African problem requiring an African solution, 
but AU delegation members accepted that the rebels would 
not drop their insistence on the presence of international 
observers, and that the international delegations were 
important in helping keep the rebels at the table. 
Eventually, the AU and Obasanjo relented and agreed to 
allow the international community to be present during the 
talks. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The rebels also objected in the closed-door 
session to the inclusion of cantonment of troops on the 
agenda.  Obasanjo over-ruled them and left cantonment on 
the agenda.  As the talks opened later that evening, the 
rebels once again raised their objection.  Several 
mediators attempted to convince the rebel movements that 
the cantonment issue was up for discussion and its 
inclusion on the agenda did not constitute their agreement 
to canton their fighters.  AU Special Envoy Hamid Al-Gabid 
adjourned the discussion and requested that international 
observers persuade the rebels to drop their objections to 
the agenda. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The U.S., UK, EU and Swedish delegates met with 
JEM and SLM/A representatives to discuss their concerns and 
advise them to move ahead with the agenda.  Both movements 
admitted that they had made a tactical mistake, but they 
said they were under pressure from their field commanders 
not to concede anything on cantonment.  Skittish from their 
experience at the Humanitarian Cease-Fire talks in Ndjamena 
in April, the rebels expressed their fear of being rail- 
roaded by African heads of states.  We emphasized the 
importance of getting the talks focused on the situation on 
the ground and not procedural issues and pointed out the 
opportunities that the agenda offered to them.  Both JEM 
and SLM/A listened to our advice and dropped their 
objections to move the talks forward. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Talks resumed on August 25 as the rebels dropped 
their objections to the agenda.  A humanitarian update from 
the United Nations kicked-off the session.  Unfortunately, 
the representative was waiting for the report of the Joint 
Implementation Mission (JIM), which was expected later in 
the day.  Nonetheless, the UN painted a bleak picture of 
the humanitarian situation and outlined the overwhelming 
needs yet to be met.  The presentation emphasized the lack 
of protection for civilians, sexual and gender-based 
violence, and involuntary return as key issues for UN 
partners.  The Sudanese Government responded that they have 
documents, maps, and other information to be formally 
presented after they see they UN's JIM report.  The meeting 
was adjourned until August 26 while all parties could 
review the JIM report and develop their response. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
BUILDING CONFIDENCE IN THE MEDIATION TEAM 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In an effort to instill more confidence in the 
mediation team, we arranged for Ahmed Togod Lissan (JEM), 
Tagledin Niam (JEM), Dr. Sharif Harir (SLM/A), and Mini 
Minawi (SLM/A) to meet with Nigerian Special Envoy 
Abdulsalami Abubakar on Darfur.  Abubakar is part of the 
mediation team and had traveled to IDP camps in Darfur in 
early July.  Abubakar told the rebels to trust the 
mediators because their personal integrity is on the line. 
He also emphasized the importance of talking versus 
fighting and the strategic value in working through the 
agenda as presented.  The rebel leaders expressed their 
reservations about the cantonment issue but assured 
Abubakar that they would continue with the items on the 
agenda.  We are planning to arrange similar meetings to 
help familiarize the rebels with key members of the 
mediation team that will allow informal discussions away 
from the table. 
 
- - - - - - 
STAY TUNED 
- - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (SBU) We are also working with the African Union 
mediation team to help conceptualize the objectives of the 
talks.  The sessions so far are unfocused and consist of 
each party presenting its position without any follow-up by 
the mediators to press the parties on key issues.  We 
discussed this concern with the mediation team and are 
working together to define what is to be achieved and how 
the mediators, facilitators, and international observers 
can move both parties toward those goals. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The talks are moving forward, albeit in 
procedural fits and starts.  We expect the discussion of 
the humanitarian situation to continue on August 26.  For 
now, the AU mediators and international community are 
working together to focus the direction of the discussions. 
Finally, we are working to convince rebel movements not to 
go ahead with their previously planned conference in 
Germany on August 28 and 29. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize Considered. 
CAMPBELL