04AMMAN3956
U/S LARSON MEETING WITH AFGHAN MINISTER OF FOREIGN
Wed May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003956 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EINV AF SA
SUBJECT: U/S LARSON MEETING WITH AFGHAN MINISTER OF FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS ABDULLAH ABDULLAH 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) U/S Larson met with Afghan Foreign Minister Abdullah 
Abdullah on the margins of the World Economic Forum (WEF) on 
Saturday, May 15. Larson asked Abdullah to review the latest 
draft of the G-8 plan of support for reform.  After handing 
over a copy, Larson outlined the scope of the initiative and 
stressed that regional input was key to make this G-8 effort 
a success.  Larson praised Education Minister Dr. Ghani's 
willingness to serve as one of the chairs of the literacy 
reform program.  Larson informed Abdullah that he would be 
meeting with his G-8 counterparts in the next few days to 
shape the initiative and it was crucial that he consult with 
all countries interested in participating.  He added that it 
was particularly critical for President Karzai, an advocate 
for reform in the region who has agreed to endorse the 
initiative at Sea Island, to have a full understanding of the 
programs. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Abdullah commented that he had a sense of the 
regional view on the initiative but wanted to know how the 
other G-8 partners viewed it.  Larson said that his G-8 
partners were largely supportive but some have raised 
questions over the region's willingness to commit to some of 
the programs, particularly democracy.  Larson said that the 
contacts the USG has made suggest that participants were at 
the WEF to confirm regional views.  As long the program is 
perceived as a genuine offer to support those countries who 
would like assistance, and not as a one-size-fits-all 
prescription, the program will have the support of the 
region. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Abdullah suggested that the region will be ready if 
it hears the right noises.  He went on offer a word of 
caution.  The main allies of this package are the 
intellectuals in the region and because of recent 
developments and perceptions, their support may be waning. 
It is critical that the USG find a people to people mechanism 
to insure that you do not lose this valuable support base. 
Larson replied that the USG is working to deepen these ties. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Larson turned the conversation toward a discussion 
on Afghan priorities.  Abdullah answered by saying that the 
Afghan people are facing some of the same kind of challenge - 
perception - that the U.S. faces in the region.  Abdullah 
recounted a discussion that he had with the Saudis last week, 
in which they had suggested that the Afghan people are not 
ready for democracy and granting rights to women.  He had 
told the Saudis that democracy is the wish of the Afghan 
people and that they as a democracy had decided to proceed. 
Despite these differences, Larson assured Abdullah that the 
USG would work with the Gulf countries to insure that they 
are willing to provide the political and economic support 
Kabul needs over the coming years.  Abdullah conceded that 
his government has not made a sufficient effort to woo the 
Persian Gulf donors, but said that it understands that it 
must do a better job and is trying to do so.  He cited, as 
one example, a proposal from government of Qatar for an 
irrigation project. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Moving the donor discussion the next step, Larson 
probed for Afghan efforts into tapping the private sector. 
He mentioned that he had met with several members of the Arab 
Business Council the previous night, who recognize that there 
is great opportunity in Afghanistan, as a hub for business 
and trade in the region.  Abdullah agreed saying that at an 
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) meeting last week, 
the 11 members agreed that they must overcome their 
differences to push economic development forward.  Abdullah 
agreed that he must pursue not only the private sector and 
must also tap into nongovernmental organizations to provide 
technical assistance to the public sector. 
 
¶6. (U) This message was cleared by Under Secretary Larson. 
 
¶7. (U) Kabul minimize considered. 
GNEHM