04AMMAN2395
JORDANIANS RALLY AGAINST YASSIN KILLING; VIOLENCE
Mon Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INFO ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC IS JO KPAL PTER
SUBJECT: JORDANIANS RALLY AGAINST YASSIN KILLING; VIOLENCE 
MARS CAMP PROTESTS 
 
REF: AMMAN 2197 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Jordanian expressions of anger and frustration 
after Israel's killing of HAMAS founder Sheikh Yassin were 
capped by large demonstrations throughout Jordan following 
Friday prayers on March 26.  Security sources reported that 
the vast majority received prior approval from the government 
and came off without incident, but an unlicensed 
demonstration in an Amman refugee camp turned violent, 
resulting in property destruction, clashes with security 
forces, and arrests.  The Islamic Action Front accused police 
of beating one of its members of Parliament during the fray, 
and Parliament is forming a committee to investigate the 
incident.  For its part, the GOJ continued its show of 
solidarity with the public in protesting the assassination. 
King Abdullah in a press interview again condemned the 
attack.  PM Faisal al-Fayez condoled Sheikh Yassin at the 
Palestinian Embassy and members of Parliament started a fund 
to raise money for the families of those killed in the 
attack.  Jordanian officials thus far appear to have stayed 
one step ahead of the demonstrators by joining in street 
protests and sanctioning rallies to allow people to express 
their anger.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
FRIDAY PROTESTS LARGELY PEACEFUL, EXCEPT IN THE CAMPS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Jordanian expressions of outrage over the March 22 
Israeli killing of HAMAS leader Sheikh Ahmad Yassin continued 
throughout the week, culminating in large protests after 
Friday prayers throughout Jordan on March 26.  The GOJ 
authorized the vast majority of requests to demonstrate, and 
the security services were out in force throughout Jordan in 
anticipation of the protests.  The largest protest again 
occurred at al-Hussein Mosque in downtown Amman (ref), where 
approximately 2,500 people rallied March 26 after Friday 
prayers, according to police sources.  An estimated 700 also 
gathered at the Professional Associations building for a 
pro-Palestinian rally which highlighted political speeches. 
Many others demonstrated in separate rallies in Irbid, 
Ramtha, Mafraq, and Zarqa.  The Islamic Action Front also 
organized protests in Ajloun, Sweileh, and Madaba, according 
to local press. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Police reported that violence again erupted during 
demonstrations at al-Baqaa and al-Wihdat refugee camps when 
demonstrators and/or roving bands of youths carried out acts 
of vandalism and burned tires, resulting in clashes with 
police and arrests.  The unruly situation in al-Wihdat 
prompted the Governor of Amman to seek intervention from 
member of Parliament and Islamic Action Front member Tayseer 
al-Fityani (presumably because the IAF had a role in 
organizing the rally).  According to a statement from the IAF 
on the incident, al-Fityani, his son, and an attorney were 
beaten severely by police in the fray. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The Interior Ministry provided a slightly 
different take on events, saying in a public statement that 
the demonstrations took an "unexpected turn," and "violated 
security and public order. (Protesters) attacked 
al-Ashrafiyah Police Center and the shops located on the main 
road, and set fire to tires in the middle of the road."  It 
said that police intervened after demonstrators and shop 
owners and others clashed, resulting in arrests.  According 
to Jordan's local news agency, a delegation representing 
al-Wihdat met with Interior Minister Habashneh the next day 
and denounced the "acts of sabotage" during the protests.  MP 
Mohammad al-Kuz said citizens of the camp do not accept what 
happened, adding that there were a number of "intruders" who 
came only to lead the riots. 
 
¶5.  (U)  During Parliament's session on March 28, Speaker 
Abdul Hadi Majali referred to the "regretful incidents" at 
al-Wihdat camp, saying: "The incidents, which we completely 
reject, include the destruction of private property and the 
burning of the Jordanian flag as well as an assault on MP 
Tayseer al-Fityani."  According to press reports, the 
Parliament will form a committee to investigate the incident. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
KING CONDEMNS "EMBARRASSING" CRIME; MPS START MARTYRS FUND 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  GOJ officials continued to show solidarity with 
Jordanians' opposition to the Israeli attack.  In an 
interview with London-based al-Hayat newspaper (carried by 
Jordan's local press on March 29), King Abdullah described 
Yassin's assassination as a shocking crime, and called on the 
world community to put an end to Israel's "arbitrary 
measures."  The King said: "This crime was very embarrassing 
to us because it occurred two days after I met with Israeli 
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon."  He said the meeting with 
Sharon had left him with the impression that Israel would 
work with Jordan in moving the peace process forward, but 
Sharon instead carried out the attack.  He added that he 
hoped during his Washington trip to determine "what we can do 
in support of the roadmap peace plan despite the fact that 
the Americans will be occupied with the forthcoming 
elections." 
 
¶7.  (U)  Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez on March 24 visited 
the Palestinian Embassy to offer condolences.  Members of 
Parliament and Arab ambassadors in Amman also visited the 
Embassy to pay their respects.  In addition to the 
Palestinian Embassy in Amman, the Muslim Brotherhood and 
Najjar Family (cousins of Sheikh Yassin) also accepted 
condolences for the HAMAS leader.  The Muslim Brotherhood -- 
which has close ties to HAMAS -- on March 24 and 25 also 
organized a ceremony in front of the Islamic Hospital in the 
Abdali area of Amman to "celebrate the martyrdom" of Sheikh 
Yassin. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs earlier in 
the week announced special prayers would be held in Jordan's 
mosques for Sheikh Yassin.  The Jordanian Cabinet and 
Parliament started their respective sessions on March 24 with 
a moment of silence and recitation of the Fatiha for the soul 
of the HAMAS leader.  Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez declared 
that Jordan was "the first country to condemn Israeli crimes, 
and we shall not cease our moves until these crimes stop," 
according to local press reports. 
 
¶9.  (U)  On March 24, more than 30 members of Parliament 
committed to giving 9JD ($12.50) a month to the families of 
HAMAS members killed in the Israeli strike against Sheikh 
Yassin.  In the days after Yassin's killing, many Jordanian 
cars displayed pictures of the deceased HAMAS leader in the 
rear window of their vehicles -- a place usually reserved for 
portraits of Jordan's kings.  Jordanian newspapers were 
filled with condolences to HAMAS and Yassin's family. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  The GOJ managed to stay ahead of the 
demonstrators and limit incidents of violence by joining 
protests and making the decision from the beginning to allow 
people to rally and release steam.  However, much anger 
remains, as well as even deepening skepticism about the 
roadmap process.  Jordanians perceive that diplomatic efforts 
to revive the peace process are hopelessly stalled, and 
challenge the sincerity of Israeli leaders' commitment to a 
political process.  Conversations with our interlocutors are 
tainted with a sense of foreboding that the situation across 
the river will only get worse. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM