04ANKARA2152
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS: MFA REPORTS ONGOING
Wed Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 002152 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS: MFA REPORTS ONGOING 
EFFORTS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In an April 13 meeting with MFA Deputy 
Director General for Consular Affairs Haldun Otman, 
visiting USDOJ Civil Rights Division Chief Al Moskowitz 
discussed USG efforts to combat trafficking in the United 
States, noting success in USG methods for 1) identifying 
victims, 2) distinguishing between willing prostitution and 
victimization through smuggling or trafficking, 3) 
providing safe shelter to victims, 4) collecting evidence, 
and 5) prosecuting traffickers.  Otman discussed Turkey's 
TIP challenges (para 2) and reviewed GOT responses (para 
5).  Moskowitz noted that the USG faces similar challenges 
in combating TIP.  Otman asserted that, in March 2004 
consultations, the GOT and Governments of Belarus and 
Ukraine agreed to sign anti-TIP international cooperative 
protocols (para 6).  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) General TIP challenges enumerated by Otman and 
echoed by Moskowitz include: 
 
 
- The majority of victims choose to return home 
immediately.  Victims refuse to stay in Turkey because 1) 
they want to put the trauma of a terrible experience behind 
them, 2) they don't want to wait for potentially drawn-out 
and painful legal proceedings, and 3) they lack general 
qualifications such as language skills to find substantial 
legal employment. 
 
 
- Cases against alleged traffickers are hard to build 
because, in general, the few victims who choose to remain 
in Turkey have very little information about their 
traffickers.  Police assert that most victims only see the 
inside of the hotel in which they are held captive.  They 
don't know the names of their handlers or other essential 
details that would help prosecutors build 201/b-type 
trafficking cases. 
 
 
- Beyond notification of IOM, police have no standard 
structure for providing shelter.  If victims do not remain 
in the country to testify against traffickers, prosecutors 
have a tough time building cases. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Otman noted difficulties in maintaining accurate 
statistics for TIP prosecutions.  He said, overzealous 
prosecutors who, in an effort to take advantage of much 
stronger penalties, try any case that has international 
elements under Turkey's much harsher trafficking law -- 
Section 201(b), Turkish Penal Code.  Too frequently, Otman 
asserts, the court determines that the defendant should 
instead be tried under Section 201(a), for human smuggling 
crimes.  As a result, courts acquit on 201(b) (trafficking) 
and charge defendants on 201(a) crimes (smuggling). 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Under entertainment visa application requirements 
implemented in March 2004, Otman asserted, the GOT now 
calls for a special contract (published in Russian or 
English and translated into Turkish) signed by the visa 
applicant in the presence of a consular/immigration 
officer.  At the time the contract is signed, Otman notes, 
the immigration officer is required to highlight a section 
of the accompanying application that instructs applicants 
to contact police at a general 911-style hotline (in Turkey 
155 and 156) if their employment becomes abusive or 
compulsory.  Applicants are also given contact phone 
numbers for the Human Resource Development Foundation; 
Turkey's lead TIP NGO.  Otman said this "public awareness 
campaign" targets exactly the people, "so-called 
entertainers", who are most at risk of falling victim to 
traffickers. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Begin text of MFA Dipnote: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs encloses further 
information on the efforts of the Republic of Turkey in the 
fight against human trafficking: 
 
 
----------------- 
RAISING AWARENESS 
----------------- 
 
 
A meeting with media representatives was organized in 
January 2004 at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to raise 
public awareness in the fight against trafficking in human 
beings. Human trafficking issues are now covered more 
widely in media. ("Radikal" (Turkish daily newspaper) dated 
March 30, 2004 and April 5, 2004) 
 
 
Updated country reports on the fight against trafficking in 
human beings and illegal migration has been displayed on 
the web site of the MFA since February 2004. 
 
 
The General Directorate of the Status and Problems of Women 
organized panels on the fight against trafficking in human 
beings on December 19, 2002 and December 18,2003. Chiefs of 
Security of several cities, several NGOs and local press 
representatives participated in the said panels. During the 
panels, representatives of NGOs and governors' offices have 
reached a consensus on establishing cooperation to combat 
human trafficking. 
 
 
---------------------- 
FREE MEDICAL TREATMENT 
---------------------- 
 
 
Free medical treatment is now being provided to the victims 
of human trafficking. The statistical data concerning the 
use of free medical treatment has not been available yet, 
however a form has been prepared and sent to Directorates 
of Health by the Ministry of Health to get the relevant 
statistical data. According to the decree, which provides 
free medical treatment, as an example, the case of a Kyrgyz 
citizen (woman) has been brought to the attention of The 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. She was hospitalized on 
February 7,2004, in Trabzon Women's and Children's Hospital 
and discharged from the hospital on February 11, 2004. The 
cost for her medical treatment, 380.000.000 TL 
(approximately $300) was provided according to the said 
decree. 
 
 
---------------- 
ERZURUM TIP CASE 
---------------- 
 
 
Ukrainian citizen Oksana Tobor was detained as a result of 
the operation organized by the Erzurum Directorate of 
Security. After the screening process, it was determined 
that she was not a victim of trafficking. She was diagnosed 
of HIV -positive and Hepatitis C virus. She was then sent 
to Ankara Numune Hospital for medical treatment (CD4Niral 
load). Oksana Tobor was granted a temporary residence 
permit, medical care and shelter. She insisted on returning 
to Ukraine. The Turkish Authorities assured her departure 
to Odessa, Ukraine on January 7, 2004 from the budget of 
Istanbul Security Department and informed the Embassy of 
Ukraine in Ankara about her departure by the Note, dated 
December 30, 2003. According to the information received 
from the Ministry of Justice, in her testimony she stated 
that she came to Turkey for prostitution by her own will. 
 
 
Oksana Tobor's appearance on the media has created a 
negative reaction within the public. To this end, Minister 
of Interior has sent a circular letter dated January 21, 
2004 to all governors' offices in order to prevent similar 
future instances. 
 
 
-------------------- 
OPERATION IN TRABZON 
-------------------- 
 
 
According to the information received from the Ministry of 
Interior about the summer raid in Trabzon, it was a local 
raid conducted upon the detailed intelligence of 
prostitution, not TIP, which was provided by the Consulate 
of Russian Federation in Trabzon. 
 
 
------------------------------------------ 
TRAINING SEMINARS AND COOPERATION WITH IOM 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
Human Resources Development Foundation has organized 
seminars and trainings, in cooperation with the 
International Organization of Migration (IOM), the Ministry 
of Justice and Interior. In 2004, the seminars and 
trainings in the fight against human trafficking that were 
organized or planned to be organized are as follows: 
 
 
- January 26-27, 2004 IKGV/Ministry of Justice/IOM 
- January 29-30, 2004 IKGV/Ministry of Justice/IOM 
- February 25-27, 2004 IKGV/Ministry of Interior/IOM 
- Mar 30 - Apr 1, 2004 IKGV/Ministry of Interior/IOM 
- April 14-16, 2004 IKGV/Gendarmerie/IOM 
 
 
After victims of trafficking are determined, they are 
provided physical and psychological assistance as well as 
legal counselor services. Victims are granted humanitarian 
visas and residence permits. If the victims insist to 
return to their countries, their exit is provided by the 
assistance of IKGV (HRDF) in coordination with IOM. 
Moreover, victims who would like to return to their country 
are not subjected to pay a fine due to their illegal 
overstay. The travel documents of foreigners while exiting 
Turkey are stamped with only an "exit" stamp; there is no 
other stamp, which is specially used for victims of TIP or 
deported persons. 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
INTERNATIONAL AND BILATERAL COOPERATION 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
As a recent development, during the consular consultations 
between Turkey and Belarus, both countries agreed to sign a 
protocol proposed by Turkey to countries of origin on 
bilateral cooperation in combating trafficking in human 
beings. The said protocol is going to be signed during the 
visit of Turkish Ministry of Interior in Belarus on April 
27-30, 2004. 
 
 
NOTE: TEXT OF PROTOCOL IN PARA 6 
 
 
On March 23, 2004, during consular consultations between 
Turkey and Ukraine, Ukrainian side accepted to conclude the 
said draft protocol with some changes foreseen by their 
Ministry of Justice. In particular, at the consultations it 
is agreed to broaden cooperation in combating trafficking 
in human beings by providing direct communication between 
the concerning authorities of both parties. According to 
the information received from the Ministry of Interior, 
Ukrainian side has already asserted its plan to visit the 
Foreigners, Border and Asylum Department on April 2004. 
 
 
---------------- 
Circulars on TIP 
---------------- 
 
 
The Ministry of Interior regularly sends informative 
circulars to governors' offices to ensure the 
implementation of administrative measures taken in 
combating human trafficking. Recently, a circular dated 
March 30, 2004 was sent to governors' offices and police 
forces, to refer the calls of hotlines 155 and 156 
concerning TIP cases to a specialized unit of human 
trafficking for investigation and IKGV for protection and 
rehabilitation.  Please find below the date of the 
informative circulars of Ministry of Interior about 
legislation in human trafficking and implementation of 
administrative measures; 
 
 
March 30, 2004 
February 26, 2004 
November 21, 2003 
October 24, 2003 
July 3, 2003 
January 9, 2003 
August 19, 2002 
 
 
The Ministry of Interior has recently sent a new circular, 
dated April 9, 2004 to authorize governors' offices to 
extend the duration up to 6 months for temporary residence 
permits which have been issued to victims of TIP, in order 
to allow them to stay in Turkey for rehabilitation and 
treatment. In case of necessity, this duration can also be 
prolonged. 
 
 
Turkey issued the following humanitarian visas for 
trafficking victims: 
 
 
Ukrainian citizen (woman)-January 23,2003 
Ukrainian citizen (woman)-January 23, 2003 
Moldova citizen (woman)- January 23,2003 
Moldova citizen (woman)- January 23,2003 
Uzbek citizen (woman)- January 23,2003 
Iranian citizen (woman)-February 6, 2003 
Iranian citizen (woman)- February 6,2003 
Moldova citizen (woman)- May 29,2003 
Moldova citizen (woman)- May 29, 2003 
Russian citizen (woman)- June 25,2003 
Moldova citizen (woman)- September 3, 2003 
Moldova citizen (woman)- September 3, 2003 
Kyrgyz citizen (woman)- February 6,2004 
Kyrgyz citizen (woman)- February 6,2004 
Kyrgyz citizen (woman)- February 6,2004 
Kyrgyz citizen (woman)- February 6,2004 
Kyrgyz citizen (woman)- February 6, 2004 
Kyrgyz citizen (woman)- February 6,2004 
Moldova citizen (woman)-March 11,2004 
Moldova citizen (woman)-March 12, 2004 
 
 
Further information on the cases of TIP (with reference to 
the Non-paper dated April l, 2004); 
 
 
Trabzon Criminal Court filed two public cases; 
 
 
A) 3 Russian citizens (women) as plaintiffs and 12 
accused persons, filed on February 12, 2003. The trial 
will be held in April 2004. 
 
 
B) 6 Kyrgyz citizens as plaintiffs and 4 accused 
persons filed February 17, 2004. First trial of the 
case is going to take place in April 2004.  END TEXT 
 
 
¶6.  Begin text.  PROTOCOL BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENTS OF THE 
REPUBLIC OF TURKEY AND UKRAINE ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
FIRST ARTICLE OF THE COOPERATION AGREEMENT AGAINST CRIME 
 
 
Pursuant to Article 1 of the "Cooperation Agreement Against 
Crime between the Governments of the Republic of Turkey and 
Ukraine", the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the 
Government of Ukraine hereinafter referred as "Parties"; 
 
 
Deeply concerned by the fact that trafficking in human 
beings, which constitutes one of the transnational 
organized crimes and is spread out every other day in the 
world and in our region, provides huge profits to organized 
crime networks and is also related to narcotics and arms 
trafficking, as well as smuggling of migrants; 
 
 
Realizing that trafficking in human beings can be coped 
with, through timely and effective international 
cooperation; 
 
 
Emphasizing the importance of providing judicial, 
humanitarian, psychological and medical assistance to 
victims of trafficking in human beings, facilitating their 
return to their countries and assuring their reintegration 
and taking the necessary measures in arresting the 
perpetrators and creating public awareness; 
 
 
Recognizing the importance of the e.fforts in stopping the 
trafficking in human beings by bringing to light the crime 
networks; 
 
 
Stressing the need to strenghten the cooperation and 
coordination between the Republic of Turkey and Ukraine in 
combating trafficking in human beings; 
 
 
Have agreed, to promote measures, in accordance with their 
respective national legislation and procedures with a view 
to: 
 
 
¶1. Completing the necessary national legal infrastructure 
in the field of trafficking in human beings and taking the 
other necessary administrative and institutional measures; 
 
 
¶2. Establishing a regional network between the Non- 
Governmental Organizations (NGO) in the countries which 
face this problem; 
 
 
¶3. Supporting the victims of trafficking in human beings, 
following the establishment of the conditions by the 
Parties in the framework of humanitarian, psychological and 
medical care; 
 
 
¶4. Ensuring the victims to testify in the framework of the 
national legal systems of the Parties, in order to arrest 
the perpetrators and protecting these victims; 
 
 
¶5. Creating public awareness and awareness in the relevant 
institutions on trafficking in human beings; 
 
 
¶6. Creating awareness, in their respective countries, among 
the persons traveling abroad and might be subject to 
trafficking in human beings; 
 
 
¶7. Designating point of contacts in their respective 
countries, where information on victims of trafficking in 
human beings will be collected and which will coordinate 
the issue of trafficking in human beings and sharing the 
collected information with the other Party; 
 
 
¶8. Training of law enforcement agents in combating 
trafficking in human beings, organizing joint training 
programs, exchanging experts of each country and increasing 
cooperation opportunities; 
 
 
¶9. Providing cooperation between the scientific and 
academic institutions, exchanging experts of each country 
in order to share experience and knowledge; 
 
 
¶10. Tasking the competent authorities in the two countries 
with the implementation of this Protocol. 
 
 
This Protocol shall enter into force upon notification in 
writing by both Parties to each other that they have 
completed their national procedures. 
 
 
Each Party may propose amendments to the present Protocol, 
Amendments shall enter into force upon their acceptance by 
all parties in accordance with the provisions of the above 
mentioned paragraph. 
 
 
Each Party may give notice of withdrawal from the Protocol 
by written notification to the other Party. 
 
 
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized 
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this 
Protocol. END TEXT. 
 
 
EDELMAN