04ANKARA6810
TURKISH TRUCKERS' STRIKE THREATENS SUPPLIES FOR
Tue Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006810 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB ETRD IZ PREL PTER TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH TRUCKERS' STRIKE THREATENS SUPPLIES FOR 
IRAQ 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Turkish truck drivers delivering sustainment 
supplies and refined products into Iraq called a wild cat 
strike December 7.  It is not clear how widespread is the 
support for the strike among truckers. Officials from the 
Defense Energy Support Center (DESC) and one of its largest 
contractors -- Petrol Ofisi -- confirmed that loading of 
trucks has been affected and that striking truckers have 
threatened other drivers, in an effort to prevent them from 
loading their trucks. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Petrol Ofisi Land Transport Coordinator Alper Peker 
reported that the strike initially was aimed at trucking 
companies working for Iraq Oil Company SOMO.  However, Peker 
reported that the strike has spread to include loadings of 
all deliveries to Iraq, including deliveries of sustainment 
and humanitarian supplies under U.S. contract.  The strikers 
are demanding a doubling of payments for deliveries.  Strike 
leaders have circulated flyers with their demands -- see para 
¶4.  Most of the demands concern security and support for 
drivers in convoys, compensation for delays or losses, and 
complaints about harassment by Kurdish authorities in 
northern Iraq.  It is not yet clear who organized the strike. 
 A similar wild-cat strike in 2003 was organized by two 
large, family-owned trucking companies.  That strike lasted 3 
days; the strikers won significant increases in their 
payments. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Comment:  So far it does not appear that the strike 
has affected the flow of supplies across the Turkish border; 
the journey from the depots to the border takes a couple 
days.  There does not appear to be any effort on the part of 
strikers to stop already loaded trucks from completing their 
deliveries.  However, if the strikers can stop all loading at 
the Turkish depots, we expect the number of trucks crossing 
into Iraq will drop sharply in a few days.  Based on past 
experience, a strike lasting more than 10 days or so could 
affect the supply situation for U.S. personnel and programs 
and the overall fuel situation in Iraq heading into winter. 
 
¶4.  (U) Text of truckers' grievances: 
 
Attention to Our Driver Friends 
 
¶1.  Safety Coordination must be increased.  Convoys are being 
attacked in an organized manner; our driver friends are being 
killed and burned.  Loading of trucks should not take place 
without greater safety guarantee. 
 
¶2.  USA:  Emergency (first aid) EMT teams are requested with 
convoys. 
 
¶3.  USA:  Mechanics/engineers requested with convoys.  With 
any small mechanical failure trucks are being left behind and 
burned. 
 
¶4.  Translators that know both English and Turkish are 
requested. 
 
¶5.  Insurance is requested for the trucks/drivers to 
compensate for losses sustained. 
 
¶6.  Terminals where fuel is emptied.  Drivers are made to 
wait 15-20 days under danger.  Request that drivers are paid 
to wait after 2 days. 
 
¶7.  At the terminals where fuel is emptied, 
duties/taxes/bribes are being asked for.  If drivers don't 
pay, they are being told that their fuel is old.  1,000-2,000 
liters of fuel being taken; needs to stop. 
 
¶8.  Drivers are being taxed at the Habur and Halil Abrahim 
control site and suffering monetary losses.  Needs to stop. 
 
¶9.  Tickets/traffic penalties are being issued at the above 
control site unnecessarily.  Needs to stop. 
 
¶10.  The below adjustments need to be made to prices.  See 
attached.  (Note:  Attachment not provided to us.  End Note.) 
 
Support if requested from all drivers. 
 
End text. 
 
¶5.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
EDELMAN