04BRASILIA727
BRAZIL: EXPANDING TIES WITH CENTRAL AMERICA
Thu Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PGOV PINR PREL BR UNSC
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: EXPANDING TIES WITH CENTRAL AMERICA 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary. The directors of Brazil's foreign policy 
have traditionally placed Central America on their periphery. 
 Brazil has a history of peacekeeping in that region and runs 
a trade surplus, but the GoB has generally not expended a 
great deal of resources to expand its influence there.  As 
part of his hemispheric outreach, however, President Lula da 
Silva is attempting to improve Brazil's ties to the region, 
building on initiatives undertaken in the latter stages of 
the previous Cardoso administration.  End Summary. 
 
 View From Brasilia 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Julio Espirito Santo and Antonio Carlos Atunes of 
the Brazilian Foreign Ministry's Mexico, Central America, and 
Caribbean Division (DCC) told Poloff on March 23 that the 
Ministry places Central American countries outside of 
Brazil's normal "sphere of influence" because of Mexico's 
proximity and the long-standing U.S. role.  President Lula 
has certainly boosted Brasilia's focus on South American 
integration, but less so with the rest of Latin America, 
according to the two Brazilian diplomats.  Brazilian 
academics have argued that Lula's Workers' Party (PT) has not 
cultivated close relations with many of the Central American 
leftist parties because of differing formative experiences 
and base constituencies. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Brazil nonetheless has a history with Central 
America that provides a foundation for closer ties.  Brazil 
contributed limited numbers of peacekeepers, monitors, and 
demining experts in the aftermath of Central America's sundry 
Cold War insurgencies.  Brazil participated in the UN 
Inspection Mission in Guatemala (MINGUA) and provided 
training to public security forces in the region.  In 
addition, Brasilia donated significant quantities of 
assistance and forgave El Salvador's debt after Hurricane 
Mitch, the DCC officials pointed out.  Besides working with 
the Central American countries in OAS fora, Brazil has 
interacted with these nations in the Rio Group setting, where 
Central American countries comprise almost a third of the 
membership, Espirito Santo said. 
 
Getting Past the G-20 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Former President Fernando Henrique Cardoso became 
the first Brazilian head of state to travel to the isthmus 
when he attended a trade conference in San Jose in 2000. 
That conference sought to increase ties between Mercosul and 
the Central American Free Trade Area (CAFTA).  Brazil's trade 
with the region is relatively small, but it involves a 
significant trade surplus with all the countries.  For 
example, Brazil's exports to Honduras in 2000 were valued at 
more than 31 million dollars, while it imported less than 
700,000 dollars worth of Honduran products. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The seminal event for Brazil's future relations 
with the isthmus was the formation of the G-20 for the WTO 
Cancun meeting, Espirito Santo noted.  He told Poloff that El 
Salvador, Guatemala, and Costa Rica were charter members 
along with Brazil of the G-20, but Washington's "natural 
leverage" soon spliced off the Central Americans.  The DCC 
officials underscored that Brazil has not written off Central 
America as a potential partner in trade negotiations after 
the G-20 experience, but will likely focus on the formal 
multilateral (Mercosul-CAFTA) exchanges.  Brazil will also 
continue to work with individual countries, as occurred with 
Honduras on coffee pricing issues, the MFA officials added. 
 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Atunes concurred with press reports that Panama is 
likely to be of the greatest interest to Brazilian investors 
and business in the foreseeable future.  Brazilian/Panamanian 
trade reportedly increased 43 percent from 2002 to 2003 and 
Brazilian construction companies are anxious to participate 
in Canal maintenance contracts.  Espirito Santo noted that 
Brazil has yet to actively engage the Central American 
countries on the GoB's bid for a permanent seat on the UNSC, 
but that Brazil's past peacekeeping-related activities in the 
region and planned PKO contribution in Haiti will be used as 
selling points.  While Brazil's approach to foreign policy 
makes Costa Rica its most natural partner in multilateral 
fora, the DCC officials assessed that President Lula appears 
to be developing a good relationship with conservative 
Guatemalan President Oscar Berger. 
 
HRINAK