04QUITO2680
ECUADORIAN ELECTIONS UPDATE #2
Tue Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002680 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM KCOR PREL EC
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN ELECTIONS UPDATE #2 
 
REF: QUITO 2578 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  This cable provides an update of 
developments related to the upcoming October 17 provincial 
and local elections.  Most procedural issues are moving 
toward resolution, the OAS has confirmed an electoral 
observation mission which Embassy volunteers will participate 
in, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) has preempted 
Congress on the issue of how to allocate council seats.  End 
Summary. 
 
TSE "Resolves" How to Allocate Seats 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On September 28, the TSE approved the "Imperial" 
method to divide seats on provincial and municipal and rural 
councils among political parties based on the number of votes 
won by party.  By doing so, the TSE filled a vacuum in the 
electoral law since the previous, which had artificially 
boosted representation by smaller parties, was challenged and 
struck down as unconstitutional.  The accord was supported by 
the three largest parties (PSC, ID and Pachakutik), and by 
the TSE president (of the PRIAN).  Small party leaders 
(including President Gutierrez) have criticized the right of 
the TSE to "legislate" electoral law, and hope to muster 
enough votes in Congress to pass a new law.  Cesar Montufar, 
coordinator of the electoral watchdog NGO "Citizens 
Participation," has also challenged the constitutionality of 
the TSE move and urged Congress to act to correct it. 
 
OAS Observation Mission Confirmed 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The OAS has confirmed it is sending an Election 
Observation Mission led by Edgardo Reis and composed of 5 
core staff who arrive in Quito on October 5.  This group will 
be supplemented by 15 additional observers who will arrive 
shortly before the election. 
 
Embassy Observation Plans 
------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Embassy will offer volunteers to supplement the 
OAS Election Observation Mission.  The tentative plan is to 
deploy 5-10 teams of two U.S. mission observers to 
Quito/Pichincha, Guayaquil/Guayas, Esmeraldas, Manta/Manabi, 
Cuenca/Azuay and possibly Tena/Napo and/or Otavalo/Imbabura 
province.  Details remain to be worked out this week with OAS 
EOM chief Reis. 
 
Electoral Dry Runs Go Smoothly 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (U) On October 2, provincial electoral councils conducted 
a successful simulation of election procedures with 
assistance from the OAS electoral unit.  On the same day, 
Citizens Participation (PC) carried out its own electoral 
observation simulation throughout the country.   A total of 
2,300 volunteer electoral observers simulated observation 
activities and 120 young volunteers registered the data at 
PC's call centers in the capital.  Data was then processed by 
PC's divisions of Analysis, Recovery, Emergencies, and 
Communications in order to test the entire set of operations 
planned for its observation and quick count on election day. 
 Minor technical and communications problems were detected 
and will be adjusted before October 17th. 
 
TSE Improves Observation Rules 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) On October 4 the TSE issued the final version of the 
regulation for Electoral Observation, which eliminated 
cumbersome requirements in earlier drafts.   The modification 
was praised by Citizen Participation, which plans to field 
3,100 domestic volunteer observers on elections day. 
 
Campaign Spending Excesses 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) According to Citizens' Participation, some candidates 
have already exceeded artificially low campaign spending 
limits in the races for mayor of Guayaquil and Quito, and for 
prefect of Pichincha, including Jimmy Jairala (PRE), Rodrigo 
Paz (Quito in Action), and Federico Perez (DP), respectively. 
 PC also reported major increases in municipal spending on 
publicity during the electoral campaign in Quito and 
Guayaquil, and by the national government ($536,633) to 
publicize public works. 
Invitation to Federal Elections Commission 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The TSE has provided the Embassy with a copy of a 
letter sent September 21 inviting Bradley A. Smith, President 
of the Federal Election Commission, to witness Ecuador's 
local and provincial elections October 17 (copy of letter 
faxed to WHA/AN D). 
Quito Gun Threat 
---------------- 
¶9.  (U) On September 28, Rodrigo Paz, the challenger for 
mayor of Quito, filed a complaint with authorities claiming 
his life had been threatened by a guard at municipal 
trolley-bus station.  The incident reportedly occurred while 
Paz and his campaign workers were attempting to distribute 
campaign material.  The guard, who was subsequently taken 
into custody by police, reportedly shot twice in the air 
during the confrontation.  Trolley officials claimed the 
guard was reacting to physical threats from the campaign 
workers after attempting to enforce the ban on campaign 
activity on public property. 
KENNEY