05BRASILIA40
FIRST TEST OF BRAZIL'S NEW ENERGY REGULATORY MODEL
Wed Jan 05 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRASILIA 000040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR RENIGAR, DEMPSEY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - DAS LEE AND FPARODI 
STATE PASS TO FED BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR ROBITAILLE 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/JANDERSEN/ADRISCOLL/MWAR D 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USCS/OIO/WH/RD/DDEVITO/DANDERSON/EOL SON 
DOE FOR SLADISLAW 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EINV ECON PGOV BR
SUBJECT: FIRST TEST OF BRAZIL'S NEW ENERGY REGULATORY MODEL 
GENERATES CONCERN 
 
REFS:  A) 04 BRASILIA 2834 NOTAL 
 
       B) 04 RIO DE JANEIRO 518 
       C) 04 SAO PAULO 591 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable reflects input from Consulates General 
Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY.  The GoB took a long-awaited first step 
towards implementing its new energy regulatory model with a 
December 7 auction of electricity supply futures.  The 
Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) trumpeted the auction as 
an unqualified success, but analysts, investors and 
regulators have criticized both the conduct and results of 
the auction, which resulted in unexpectedly low energy 
prices.  While some observers see the results simply as a 
function of current excess supply and other market factors, 
many analysts are concerned that the low prices will 
decapitalize existing power producers and fail to generate 
sufficient investments to match future energy needs. 
Although the auction was the first real test of the GoB's 
new energy regime (reftels), additional auctions to be held 
in early 2005 should more clearly indicate the new model's 
fate.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND: FINALLY A NEW ENERGY MODEL 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Since 1995, GoB energy policy has acknowledged the 
need for reliance, to some degree, on market forces and 
private sector involvement, including some privatization of 
the sector.  Upon taking office in 2002, however, the Lula 
administration was determined to establish a new model for 
the sector (reftels).  While the Lula administration did 
not want to pursue further privatization of existing power 
companies, which are primarily parastatal, it recognized 
that it still needed to bring in new private investment 
into the sector.  The result was a new hybrid model, 
enacted in March 2004, designed to stabilize the energy 
sector by increasing state control while maintaining 
aspects of market competition. 
 
¶4. (U) To account for the differences in cost structures 
among older, already-amortized power plants and new 
investment, the complicated new model divides power 
generators into two competition groups: "old energy" 
(generators that came on-line before January 1, 2000) and 
"new energy" (future generators and those that came on-line 
after January 1, 2000).  (Note: existing generators whose 
projects came on-line after the cut-off date for "old 
energy" are sometimes referred to as "Energia de Botox" - 
i.e., old energy, but with a new face.  End Note.) 
 
THE FIRST TEST OF THE NEW MODEL 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The December 7 "old energy mega-auction," run by the 
newly-created Electrical Energy Commercialization Chamber 
(CCEE), was widely seen as the first real test of the new 
GoB energy model.  The 17,000-megawatt auction was for the 
"captive" consumers -- primarily households and small 
businesses -- who represent a little over 60% of current 
power demand, and who purchase energy through the large 
distributors.  (Note: Large industrial and commercial power 
consumers may negotiate power-supply contracts directly 
with the energy producers, including some private companies 
who did not sell their energy at the auction, through the 
Free Contract Market (ACL).  End Note.) 
 
¶6. (U) Brazilian Minister of Mines and Energy Dilma 
Rousseff publicly called the auction a "success," and 
declared it would bring stability to the energy sector 
through longer-term contracts and lower consumer prices. 
The national average price for energy at the time of the 
auction was R$61/MWh.  For the 8-year contracts auctioned, 
the average results were as follows: 
 
     Year        Price        %-of-Demand Contracted 
     ----      --------       ---------------------- 
     2005     R$57.51/MWh          98.9% 
     2006     R$67.33/MWH          91.7% 
     2007     R$75.46/MWh          100% 
 
¶7. (U) Although there is currently a surplus of energy -- 
in part because recent rains have replenished the country's 
hydro reservoirs -- the auction resulted in even lower 
prices than either analysts or the GoB expected.  Investors 
and analysts responded negatively immediately after the 
auction and stock prices for many energy companies plunged; 
in the three days after the auction, the stock of 
Eletrobras (a parastatal and also the country's largest 
electricity generator) fell 21.5% and the electric power 
index on the Bovespa stock exchange fell 7.9%.  Many 
analysts expressed concern that the prices were too low for 
the state-owned companies to invest in future generating 
capacity and that the low prices would not attract private 
sector investment.  Other analysts believe, however, that 
the Bovespa's quick return to pre-auction levels indicates 
that the market initially over-reacted to the results. 
They note that the prices were still substantially higher 
than the current spot price (Reais 18.59), and that, when 
adjusted for inflation, 2007 prices approach the lower 
bounds of the system's marginal cost of expansion (at 
current exchange rates). 
 
TWEAKING THE AUCTION RULES 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) One of the Directors of ANEEL (the Brazilian 
Electricity Regulatory Agency), Isaac Averbuch, told 
Brasilia EconOff the low prices were the result of GoB 
rules for the auction.  Averbuch does not consider it to 
have been a true auction since the rules created a 
"permanent imbalance" between supply offered by generators 
and demand.  Indeed, by separating the auction of "old 
energy" from "new energy", the initial auction benefited 
the primarily state-owned companies whose debts were 
amortized and could thus offer lower prices. 
 
¶9. (U) The state-owned companies also did not face the same 
pressure as private companies in terms of bottom-lines and 
investment returns.  During the auction itself, 6 of the 18 
participating producers reportedly dropped out after the 
first round of bids.  We are not aware of any state-owned 
companies that withdrew from the pool even as the prices 
continued to drop.  To the contrary, Eletrobras 
subsidiaries were reportedly responsible for 65% of the 
energy auctioned.  Although the GoB plays a central role in 
the auction, the distributors ultimately sign contracts 
directly with the generators. 
 
¶10. (SBU) During the auction, when the prices dropped below 
a certain level, the energy companies participating could 
withdraw their energy offer from the auction.  Under more 
traditional rules, supply would have been below demand, 
forcing the price to rise again until enough power was 
offered to meet the demand.  However, the GoB created a 
mechanism that allowed it to keep forcing prices down. 
According to Averbuch, the GoB could adjust the demand to 
keep demand less than the supply so that prices would 
continue to drop.  The energy demand removed from the 
auction would then be met with power sold on the spot 
market rather than the long-term contract auction. 
PRIVATE SECTOR PERSPECTIVE 
--------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) U.S.-owned energy firms Duke Energy and AES told 
Sao Paulo EconOff they believe the GoB conducted the 
auction in a manner that favored state-owned generators and 
distributors.  Duke Energy Director for Regulatory Affairs 
Paulo Born lends support to Averbuch's assertion of GoB 
manipulation of the auction rules.  Born said that, in the 
second phase of the auction, the GoB lowered forecasted 
demand while state-owned generating firms offered a 
consistent supply.  This resulted in a downward pressure on 
bid prices that private companies found difficult to match. 
(Note: Although it is not clear how much of the energy 
demand was removed from the auction through this method, 
many companies withdrew their energy supplies from the 
auction as the prices dropped and not all of the demand was 
met for contracts beginning in 2005 and 2006. End Note.) 
Born described the auction as a GoB play for political 
advantage and "popular support" by holding energy prices 
down.  AES Vice President for Business Development Ricardo 
Lima told us that, although the auction resulted in lower 
than anticipated prices, the outlook for energy 
distributors has improved, citing guarantees provided for 
distribution companies under the new energy model.  He said 
the prospects for energy generation firms were still 
worrisome, and that it will likely be several years before 
the country will be able to attract new investment. 
 
SHORT-TERM VS. MID-TERM PROGNOSIS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) The Minister of Mines and Energy has publicly 
stated that the auction results will mean lower prices for 
the consumer.  Many reporters have repeated the same 
prediction, at least for the short-term.  Lima from AES 
predicts that prices may drop 2.5%.  Averbuch, however, 
says the prices will probably not go down so much as they 
may just not rise as quickly. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Averbuch, Born, Lima and other energy analysts 
predict that Brazil faces a possible shortage of energy in 
the short-term (2008-2009) similar to the crisis the 
country suffered in 2001.  This may be the case given the 
approximately 4 years a new hydroelectric plant -- the 
GoB's preferred type of power plant -- takes to progress 
from concession to operation, especially if a future 
drought leads to water shortages at the main reservoirs. 
The GoB did not solicit bids for the construction of new 
power plants during 2003 and 2004, and the press reports 
that of the 45 hydroelectric plant concessions auctioned 
between 1997 - 2002, only 21 have begun construction.  Many 
projects are delayed because of environmental licensing 
problems.  While a new thermal power plant can be built in 
2 to 3 years, the GoB policy views thermal power primarily 
as emergency back-up. 
 
¶14. (SBU) In the medium-term (2010-2012), however, Averbuch 
predicts precisely the opposite problem, because in the new 
model the GoB has reserved for itself the role of 
predicting how much new generation capacity is needed. 
These predictions will be made by a newly formed and 
purportedly independent Energy Research Enterprise (EPE). 
The GoB plans to auction concessions for new power plants 
to supply energy based on the EPE energy consumption 
projections.  Averbuch fears that because the GoB will 
likely over-estimate the energy needs based on overly 
optimistic economic growth projections, Brazil may have an 
energy surplus by 2010 that will lead to a ballooning bill 
for contracted energy. 
 
UPCOMING "NEW ENERGY" AUCTION 
------------------------------ 
 
¶15. (U) Although there is considerable concern over the 
results of the December auction, investors are watching the 
upcoming auction of "new energy" even more closely.  The 
"new energy" auction is expected in March or April for 
contracts beginning in 2008 and 2009, and the GoB will 
conduct up to four additional auctions during 2005 for 
contracts to supply estimated new future demand.  Wary of 
the timeframe to bring new generation capacity on-line, in 
the new auction the GoB will only solicit bids from 
companies with already-approved environmental licenses. 
However, according to news sources, even among companies 
with approved licenses, such as Tractebel, the decision 
whether to construct the new plants is pending the results 
of the next auction. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) While the results of the December "old energy" 
auction were less than encouraging, existing generators had 
little option but to minimize their losses and make their 
peace with the new model.  Beyond the lower than expected 
prices, of perhaps greater concern is the apparent GoB 
manipulation of the auction rules and the influence of the 
large, state-owned energy producers.  That said, the 
outlook for private investment hinges more on the results 
of the "new energy" auction, which should show starkly how 
much confidence private investors have in the new model. 
 
DANILOVICH