05BUENOSAIRES138
CODEL DODD MEETS WITH PRESIDENT KIRCHNER
Thu Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BUENOS AIRES 000138 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
WHA FOR A/S ROGER NORIEGA, PDAS DERHAM, WHA/BSC 
NSC FOR TOM SHANNON 
USCINCSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV OVIP AR CODEL
SUBJECT: CODEL DODD MEETS WITH PRESIDENT KIRCHNER 

 

REF: SECSTATE 10956 

 

¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  President Kirchner told Codel Dodd that 

Argentina appreciated President Bush,s and the U.S.,s help 

and understanding the past few months.  Kirchner reiterated 

his support for President Mesa and Bolivian democracy.  He 

counseled engaging with Chavez rather than isolating him. 

Kirchner reaffirmed Argentina,s desire to integrate itself 

in the world economy and said U.S. capital had open doors in 

Argentina.  The Codel praised Kirchner for Argentina,s 

economic recovery and thanked him for the GOA,s cooperation 

on the War on Terrorism and its decision to deploy troops in 

Haiti.  The meeting was cordial and productive.  End Summary. 

 

¶2.  (SBU) On January 13, Senators Christopher Dodd (D-Conn), 

Bill Nelson (D-Fla) and Lincoln Chafee (R-RI), accompanied by 

Ambassador Lino Gutierrez, called on President Nestor 

Kirchner at the Casa Rosada.  GoA Minister of the Presidency 

Alberto Fernandez, GoA Consul General in New York Hector 

Timerman, and local businessman Julio Werthein also sat in. 

 

----------- 

The Economy 

----------- 

 

¶3.  (SBU) After initial pleasantries were exchanged, Senator 

Dodd congratulated President Kirchner for his handling of the 

Argentine economy.  Dodd said it was almost incredible how 

the Argentine economy had bounced back after the 2001-2002 

crisis.  Kirchner said the whole crisis had been incredible 

and extremely painful for Argentina.  Had Argentina followed 

IMF prescriptions after the default, ""we would have 

uncontrolled social problems,"" he affirmed.  Instead, 

Argentina opted for a ""gradual"" policy that has achieved 

results.  IMF policies have to be revisited ""there has to be 

comprehension.""  ""We are still in hell, but we are gradually 

getting out,"" he added. 

 

¶4.  (SBU) Expressing optimism for the future, Kirchner 

explained:  ""Argentina is potentially a powerful country ... 

we are not a Peru.  In ten years, we will be an important 

reference point in the region.""  Kirchner stressed that 

Argentina now had a fiscal surplus, and its well-targeted 

social policies had avoided a social explosion.  Tax 

collections have increased as well.  As to the more than 

forty percent of Argentines who are below the poverty line, 

Kirchner noted that Argentina measures poverty rates 

differently than others.  ""A poor Argentine would be lower 

middle class in Brazil or Chile."" 

 

¶5.  (SBU) Important challenges remain.  Kirchner mentioned 

controlling inflation as a priority.  The energy problem has 

to be dealt with.  There has to be more investment and 

training for the work force.  Of course, the debt issue looms 

large.  ""Yesterday we launched our debt offer,"" he observed, 

and said that the offer was ""the best that Argentina can do"" 

at this time. 

 

¶6.  (SBU) Kirchner predicted that Argentina would earn the 

world,s confidence and become a ""predictable"" nation in 

time.  ""We want to integrate ourselves to the world,"" he 

assured.  ""We want to be a serious country.""  Kirchner 

thanked the United States and President Bush for their 

support for Argentina during difficult moments.  He said U.S. 

capital was welcome in Argentina.  ""We have never had a 

strange (i.e., corrupt) proposal from a U.S. company,"" he 

boasted.  ""As I told the president of General Electric 

yesterday, we mean to fight corruption in Argentina, and U.S. 

companies have open doors,"" he stressed. 

 

--------- 

Terrorism 

--------- 

 

¶7.  (SBU) Senator Dodd also thanked Kirchner for his 

country,s cooperation in the fight against international 

terrorism.  He related that the Codel had visited Iguazu and 

had received briefings from Argentine law enforcement 

authorities.  Kirchner said Argentina is ""overwhelmed"" 

because of the length of its borders.  ""We need radars ... 

Paraguay is a problem,"" he said, although President Duarte is 

an improvement over his predecessors.  Smuggling is a way of 

life in that area.  Senator Dodd said that the Codel had been 

able to observe how 6000 people cross the Friendship Bridge 

each day in Ciudad del Este. 

 

¶8.  (SBU) Senator Chafee expressed his condolences over the 

recent loss of life in the Buenos Aires nightclub fire.  He 

said that there had been a similar tragedy in Rhode Island, 

and that his state would be glad to share its experiences 

with Argentina (We have provided government of the City of 

Buenos Aires a copy of  Rhode Island,s legislative measures 

after its fire).  Senator Chafee praised President Kirchner 

for maintaining a budget surplus, noting that the U.S. 

currently had a budget deficit.  Kirchner bragged that he had 

always had a budget surplus during his 12 years as Governor 

of Santa Cruz.  ""Deficits are dangerous,"" he agreed. 

 

------------------------ 

Latin America: Haiti ... 

------------------------ 

 

¶9.  (SBU) Senator Dodd commented that if there is one thing 

that Fidel Castro and Milton Friedman have in common, it is 

their negative opinion of the IMF.  Turning to the situation 

in the region, Senator Dodd and Senator Nelson praised 

Argentina,s decision to send troops to Haiti.  Kirchner said 

Argentina wanted to avoid ""total chaos"" in that country. 

 

¶10.  (SBU) Kirchner opined that the situation in Latin 

America had improved somewhat.  He said he hoped that when 

the Summit of the Americas takes place in Mar del Plata next 

November, the U.S.-Latin American relationship would be at 

another (i.e., higher) level.  Kirchner said he would be 

receiving Uruguayan president-elect Vazquez later that day. 

He expressed his confidence that Vazquez would provide 

""continuity"" to Uruguay. 

 

--------------- 

... Bolivia ... 

--------------- 

 

¶11.  (SBU) President Kirchner told the senators that the GoA 

had been helpful to President Mesa of Bolivia.  Mesa, 

Kirchner ventured, is a very good president -- Bolivia cannot 

hope for a better one.  He has numerous problems, including 

an ""archaic left"" and a ""confrontational right,"" and he needs 

support.  Argentina is helping by buying gas.  President Lula 

of Brazil is also helping.  Bolivian stability is important 

to the region, Kirchner emphasized.  (Comment:  Thus 

President Kirchner has come a long way from his initial trip 

to Bolivia shortly after his election in 2003, when he met 

with Evo Morales and ""did not have time"" to meet with Mesa. 

End Comment.) 

 

----------------- 

... and Venezuela 

----------------- 

 

¶12.  (SBU) On Venezuela, Senators Dodd and Nelson noted that 

they had just traveled to Caracas and had a meeting with 

President Chavez.  Senator Nelson said that Chavez had said 

that he wanted a ""new beginning"" with the United States. 

Should the United States believe him?  President Kirchner 

said that all countries have to work together to ""integrate"" 

Chavez into the Hemisphere.  It is better to work with him 

than to exclude him.  After all is said and done, Chavez 

listens.  Kirchner is convinced that Chavez is less dangerous 

than is believed. 

 

¶13.  (SBU) The reality is that Chavez is the elected 

president of the Venezuelans, Kirchner continued.  Chavez is 

neither a communist nor a socialist -- he (Venezuela) has 

important investments in the U.S.  Better to have Chavez in 

MERCOSUR and talking to the U.S. and the EU than left out. 

Kirchner said Chavez ""treats Argentine businessmen better 

than he treats us (the GoA).""  Kirchner admitted that Chavez 

often tries Kirchner,s patience.  ""He talks too much!"" 

(Comment:  Sources close to Kirchner have told us that the 

Argentine President was livid when he shared a stage with 

Chavez during the latter,s last trip to Argentina and Chavez 

launched a 45-minute diatribe against the U.S.  Kirchner 

reportedly said that he would never let that happen again. 

End Comment.)  Kirchner believes that he and Lula can help 

democracy in Venezuela.  He reminded that he had met with the 

Venezuelan opposition a number of times, including in his 

last trip to Caracas. 

 

¶14.  (SBU) As to the Venezuelan opposition, they need to 

analyze why they did not win the referendum and have to 

present an alternative, Kirchner counseled.  ""People 

sometimes choose the lesser evil,"" he said.  ""If the U.S. 

acts with intelligence, Chavez will be neutralized,"" Kirchner 

asserted.  Senator Dodd said that President Uribe of Colombia 

shared that view.  Kirchner ended the Venezuela discussion by 

reiterating that, ""As I told President Bush, we will 

collaborate with the U.S. to improve the situation in 

Venezuela."" 

 

-------------- 

Final Comments 

-------------- 

 

¶15.  (SBU) Consul Timerman noted that the U.S. Congress had 

been helpful for many years during the Argentine military 

dictatorships.  He said Argentina wanted to attract more U.S. 

investment.  Senator Dodd said it is important to continue to 

have a good dialogue with the U.S. through the Embassy and 

the Executive and Legislative Branches.  He congratulated 

President Kirchner on emphasizing human rights and pursuing 

those guilty of the ""Dirty War.""  ""It is important for the 

young to understand what happened,"" he said. 

 

¶16.  (SBU) President Kirchner agreed that understanding the 

past is important and stressed that Argentina is indeed 

trying to do just that, but warned that it is a long process. 

 Kirchner thanked the senators for their visit.  He repeated 

his oft-stated description of Argentina ""trying to get out of 

hell -- maybe we,re close to purgatory.""  He said Argentina 

""treasures the U.S.,s understanding"" of his country.  He 

ended the meeting by saying he hoped to see the senators in 

Buenos Aires, Washington, or ""in my favorite city:  New 

York.""  (COMMENT:  The meeting was extremely cordial. 

President Kirchner was relaxed and at ease with the Codel.) 

 

¶17.  (SBU) Codel Dodd did not have the opportunity to clear 

this message prior to its departure. 

GUTIERREZ