05HARARE911
PROCEDURES FOR ZIMBABWE,S SANCTIONS REGIME
Tue Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 000911 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
AF FOR DAS T. WOODS 
AF/S FOR B. NEULING 
OVP FOR NULAND 
NSC FOR DNSA ABRAMS, SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR C. COURVILLE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR CVIS ZI
SUBJECT: PROCEDURES FOR ZIMBABWE,S SANCTIONS REGIME 
 
-------- 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) As the USG prepares to adjust the Zimbabwe sanctions 
list, Post offers the recommendations below concerning 
classification of the visa sanction list, notifications of 
sanctioned individuals, and entry of names into the visa 
lookout system.  Post will send via septel suggested 
additions/deletions from the visa sanctions list. 
 
------------------------------ 
List Access And Dissemination 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) Post recommends that the visa sanctions list be 
de-classified from Secret to SBU.  The Secret classification 
complicates use of the list in the Consular Section, which is 
outside the CAA, and appears at odds with our required 
notification of each sanctioned individual.  SBU designation 
would still afford a degree of control and confidentiality. 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to our records, AF notified many currently 
sanctioned individuals of their status via letter signed by 
the then Assistant Secretary.  However, many other sanctioned 
individuals were apparently not notified.  We would propose 
that the Bureau notify by letter the remaining sanctioned 
individuals and also be responsible for notifying 
subsequently designated individuals. 
 
------------------------------------ 
List Maintenance And Implementation 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) The sanctions lists are currently not consistent 
with one another, which we believe resulted from the entry of 
sanctioned individuals by the Bureau or Post without full 
consultation with or notification of each other.  We propose 
that henceforth either the Bureau or Post can propose 
additions or deletions to the list but must receive 
concurrence from the other before an individual is added or 
deleted.  Upon such concurrence, CA would be responsible for 
entering relevant data on the sanctioned individual into the 
Visa Lookout System. 
 
¶5. (SBU) We would propose the same approach for the financial 
sanctions list.  We understand that this list must go through 
additional vetting in an interagency process.  However, we 
would propose that any relevant agency can suggest an 
addition or deletion to the list but that the change must be 
agreed interagency before it is put into effect, and that one 
agency, such as State/AF, be designated to make the changes. 
We also understand that a pending new executive order will 
allow greater flexibility in adjusting the list, which we 
welcome. 
 
--------------------------------- 
SAO Requests and Other Exceptions 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Post has implemented procedures to handle sanctioned 
individuals and others who may be sanctionable through the 
SAO process in visa adjudications, allowing one-time travel 
to, for instance, GOZ financial officials to attend IMF/World 
Bank annual meetings, a practice that provides leverage with 
the GOZ and that we plan to continue. 
SCHULTZ