05ISTANBUL2077
PATRIARCH EXPRESSES APPRECIATION FOR DEPARTMENT
Thu Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISTANBUL 002077 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL TU OSCE
SUBJECT: PATRIARCH EXPRESSES APPRECIATION FOR DEPARTMENT 
STATEMENT 
 
 
REF: A. ISTANBUL 1359 
     ¶B. ISTANBUL 1333 
     ¶C. ISTANBUL 1199 
 
1, (SBU)  During an unscheduled call to conduct routine 
consular business, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew expressed 
to us his deep appreciation for the Department's December 5 
statement affirming the U.S. view that he is a "religious 
leader of global standing."  "Of course we know this has 
always been your position," he said, but it was "very useful" 
to have it written explicity in terms of his effort to 
influence Turkish public opinion on the issue. 
 
¶2. (U) As part of that effort, the Patriarch has been active 
on a number of fronts.  In a long interview for the daily 
newspaper "Milliyet" published December 1 and 2, he pressed 
for the opening of Halki Seminary, stressing that there is no 
legal hurdle and the problem instead is a lack of "political 
will."  He also reviewed the property issues that beset the 
church, and explained the origins of the "Ecumenical" title, 
noting that it was used "during the Byzantine, Ottoman and 
Republic periods" and asking why it is an issue now.  He 
dismissed the argument that it contravenes the Lausanne 
Treaty, noting that in any case the treaty was never 
implemented in full.  He also scoffed at the argument that 
his goal is to recreate Constantinople or to create a 
Vatican-like structure, noting that "we are devoted to our 
country, the Republic of Turkey," and have "never created a 
problem for our country." 
 
¶3. (U) The Patriarch amplified these points in his message on 
the annual feast of St. Andrew on November 30.  Speaking to 
an invited audience that included prominent business leaders, 
media, diplomats, cultural figures, representatives of the 
"World Conference of Religions for Peace" (which held its 
annual Trustees' meeting in Istanbul), and a Vatican 
delegation headed by Cardinal Kasper, Bartholomew outlined 
the history of his See, and argued that according to the 
tradition in Western countries (and pointedly in those that 
"follow their example), a country "will not interfere in the 
internal affairs of the various religions within its polity, 
for it respects their self-governance and...remains 
tolerant."  He stressed that the Patriarchate does not become 
involved in politics, but does advocate on behalf of human 
rights and "an amelioration of the circumstances of human 
life."  In closing he expressed support for Turkey's European 
vocation, underscoring his belief that through EU accession 
"not only shall religious freedom be better protected," but 
"minority issues (shall) be dealt with more effectively," and 
the "prosperity of the Turkish people shall increase." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Note: The Patriarch will be traveling to Florida 
next month for the "Blessing of the Waters," followed by a 
possible side trip to New Orleans to conduct a prayer service 
for victims of Hurricane Katrina, and will remain out of 
Turkey for much of the rest of January and early February 
with follow on trips to Mexico and Brazil.  End Note. 
JONES