05JERUSALEM3983
DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 24, 2005
Wed Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 003983 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE, NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN/MUSTAFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID PINS IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 24, 2005 
(AS 0F 1600 LOCAL TIME) 
 
 
This is a joint message from Consulate General Jerusalem and 
Embassy Tel Aviv. 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: As of 1800 local time August 23, all 
settlers were evacuated from Sa Nur and Homesh settlements, 
completing evacuation of all residents and protesters from 
the Gaza Strip and four northern West Bank settlements. 
Israeli forces told Israeli press that they were prepared for 
heavy resistance, but that the evacuations were faster and 
easier than expected.  A total of 42 Israeli police, soldiers 
and residents/protesters were lightly injured in the course 
of the Sa Nur and Homesh evacuations.  In the Gaza Strip, the 
situation remained generally calm and quiet, with all 
settlements evacuated as of August 22.  One mortar was fired 
at the Gush Katif block August 23 (currently in the process 
of being dismantled and demolished), but no injuries or 
damage resulted.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.    (SBU) SETTLER EVACUATION STATUS: 
 
Gaza Strip: 
 
-- All residents of Gaza settlements departed or have been 
evacuated.  Construction personnel and soldiers remain in the 
settlements to demolish homes and prepare for the turnover of 
assets to the PA.  Israeli press reports, citing IDF Chief of 
Staff Dan Halutz, said that demolition of settlement 
structures continues, concentrating on the Gush Katif area 
August 24, and will be completed by September 3. 
 
-- According to the IDF disengagement update (August 23 at 
2345 local time), preparations are presently being made for 
the relocation of the cemetery in Neveh Dekalim next week 
(including 48 graves), the first in a number of very 
sensitive actions that are a part of the disengagement plan. 
 
West Bank: 
 
-- Sa Nur and Homesh: The IDF completed evacuation of all 
residents and protesters in Sa Nur and Homesh settlements 
August 23 by 1800, with Israeli press quoting IDF and police 
sources as saying that there was less resistance in these 
settlements than expected.  According to Israeli media, a 
total of 40 plice and protesters were lightly injured during 
te operation in addition to two IDF soldiers, one sabbed 
with a screwdriver by a teenage, female setler, and one hit 
in the eye with a stone.  The efense Ministry told Israeli 
press that removal f asbestos and other toxic materials 
began in Sa ur and Homesh August 24, and that demolitions ofstructures 
ere will commence August 25. 
 
-- Al four West Bank settlements evacuated are under hevy 
guard August 24, according to Israeli newspaprs, to prevent 
settlers or protesters from returnng.  All settlement 
structures are expected to b demolished by early September, 
with the Israelimilitary base near Jenin to be removed not 
later than September 20, accordng to Israeli newspapers 
citing GOI Ministry of Defense sources. 
 
-- Kadim and Ganim: Soldiers and construction workers are 
demolishing structures in Kadim and Ganim August 24, 
according to Israeli newspapers, and expect to be finished by 
August 25. 
 
 
¶3.    (SBU) SECURITY SITUATION: 
 
West Bank: 
 
-- Northern West Bank: 700 Palestinian Security Forces (PSF) 
from various branches are deployed east of Jenin August 24 to 
prevent looting of evacuated settlements or interference with 
Israeli forces overseeing demolition of structures in Kadim 
and Ganim.  These forces are not permitted by the IDF to 
operate outside Jenin's city limits. 
 
-- Northern West Bank Checkpoints: Jalamah checkpoint is 
closed to all movement except for the IDF, using the road 
past the checkpoint for evacuation of Kadim and Ganim.  Salem 
checkpoint north of Jenin is open to all traffic except 
trucks from 0800 to 1800, with prior coordination. 
Palestinian security sources reported that the IDF closed the 
road linking Qalqiliya and Nablus August 23 prior to 
evacuation of Sa Nur and Homesh settlements, and that it 
remains closed to Palestinian travel August 24.  Passage to 
Tulkarm from the West Bank remains open. 
 
-- The IDF took over three private Palestinian homes in 
Hebron August 23 for use as military observation points, 
according to Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Incursions: The IDF entered Qalqiliya August 23 and 
arrested a Fatah activist there, according to PA security 
sources. 
 
-- Closures: IDF closures of all roads leading to the Burqa 
village, south of Homesh settlement, and Bizzariya village, 
east of Homesh, are still in place for Palestinian traffic 
August 24, according to Palestinian sources. 
 
 
Gaza Strip: 
 
-- The situation is Gaza is generally calm and quiet.  All 
settlements there have been evacuated. 
 
-- The IDF reported one mortar fired at southern Gaza 
settlements August 23, but no injuries or damage resulted. 
 
 
¶4.    (SBU) PALESTINIAN REACTIONS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media sources, PA President 
Mahmud Abbas (Abu Mazen) (with PA Deputy PM Nabil Sha'ath, 
PLO Negotiations Chief Sa'eb Erekat and presidential advisor 
Nabil Abu Rudaynah) met with Egyptian PM Ahmad Nathif August 
23 and President Husni Mubarak August 24 in Cairo to discuss 
the Egyptian-Israeli border guards agreement and Gaza/Egypt 
border arrangements, and with Arab League Secretary General 
Amr Musa about Palestinian post-disengagement political 
priorities. 
 
-- PA PM Ahmad Quraya' and Minister of State (with 
responsibility for Jerusalem) Hind Khury expressed concern to 
Palestinian television and print journalists August 24 about 
announced Israeli plans to build the separation barrier 
around the Adumim settlement block, enclosing East Jerusalem, 
Ma'ale Adumim (and the planned E-1 expansion), and other 
Adumim settlements,  extending up to 16 kilometers east of 
Jerusalem, but leaving out several Palestinian towns, such as 
Abu Dis and al-Azariyah (Bethany).  Khury said that the next 
PA Cabinet meeting will be held in Abu Dis to bring attention 
to the Jerusalem-area barrier, and that she will be 
organizing tours for the diplomatic corps around lands being 
expropriated to build the barrier.  (Septel). 
 
-- Hamas held large rallies in Gaza City and Khan Yunis 
August 23 to celebrate Israel's disengagement from Gaza. 
 
-- A group of prominent Gazan businessmen told Ambassador 
Kurtzer at an August 24 roundtable that their primary concern 
post-disengagement is freedom of movement.  They said that 
they also seek to maintain the existing customs envelope "as 
is."  Post-disengagement, they do not object to the Israeli 
proposal for goods passage at Kerem Shalom, but insisted that 
passengers be permitted to cross at Rafah.  Ambassador 
Kurtzer urged the businessmen to seek ways to address Israeli 
security concerns.  Businessmen applauded the recent USG 
decision to move ahead with the water carrier project for 
Gaza, and emphasized the need for donor countries to begin 
projects now, and not to wait until the day after 
disengagement. 
 
¶5.    (SBU) GOI POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Israeli High Court of Justice ruled August 23 that as 
much as possible should be done to maintain the memory of the 
synagogues in the Gaza Strip, but those that could not be 
moved would be destroyed after their sanctity was withdrawn 
according to halachic procedures. 
 
-- In an August 24 interview on IDF radio, MK Netanyahu 
criticized PM Sharon for going farther (on Gaza 
disengagement) than ex-Labor party chairman Amram Mitzna. 
Netanyahu accused MOD Shaul Mofaz of firing former IDF chief 
of staff Ya'alon "because he told the truth" (i.e., that 
disengagement could lend a "tailwind to terrorism"). 
 
¶6.    (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/HUMANITARIAN ACCESS: 
 
-- Gaza Coastal Road: The coastal road is now open with free 
movement of traffic in both directions, according to 
Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Erez Crossing and Industrial Zone: According to Gaza 
private sector contacts, Erez remains officially closed to 
Palestinians, but the IDF continues to allow a small number 
of people to pass based on humanitarian/medical grounds with 
prior coordination.  Some factory workers were also permitted 
into the Erez industrial zone, according to Palestinian 
sources. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal: According to UNRWA, Rafah remains open 
August 24 for passenger movement in and out of Gaza, although 
coordination is still required for Palestinian males aged 16 
to 35 years. 
 
-- Abu Khuli Junction: Opened at 2255 hours August 23 and 
closed at 0530 hours August 24. 
 
-- Karni Terminal: Karni remains open on August 24.  It had 
been closed temporarily on August 22 as settlers were 
evacuated from Netzarim. 
 
-- Kissufim: The main crossing used to enter Gush Katif and 
Kfar Darom settlements, Kissufim is closed except for 
traffic/persons leaving Gaza. 
WALLES