05JERUSALEM3557
WB/G SITREP: AUGUST 8, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) --
Mon Aug 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 003557 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN/MUSTAFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: AUGUST 8, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
TWO PALESTINIANS, TWO ISRAELI SETTLERS SHOT IN WEST BANK 
VIOLENCE; NETANYAHU RESIGNS TO PROTEST GAZA PULLOUT 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  The IDF shot and injured two Palestinians 
in Tulkarm August 6 during an incursion into the city, 
according to Palestinian security sources.  Two Israeli 
settlers, including a 10-year-old boy, were shot and injured 
by Palestinian gunmen near Ateret settlement, north of 
Ramallah, according to Israeli newspapers.  Al-Aqsa Martyrs 
Brigades took responsibility for the attack.  In Gaza, three 
UNRWA workers were kidnapped and released by militants in 
Khan Yunis, UNRWA reported one Palestinian fatality, 
militants targeted IDF soldiers in a number of shooting 
attacks, and up to 4,000 Hamas supporters demonstrated over 
the weekend.  Finance Minister Netanyahu resigned from the 
Israeli government on August 7 to protest the disengagement 
plan.  End Summary. 
 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF shot and injured two Palestinians in 
Tulkarm August 6 during an incursion into the city, according 
to Palestinian security sources. 
 
-- Injuries: Israeli settlers in Hebron beat and injured 
three Palestinians in the Hebron old city on August 6, 
according to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Injury: At Qalqiliya checkpoint August 6, IDF soldiers 
beat and lightly injured a Palestinian who witnesses said 
argued with the soldiers about being allowed through the 
checkpoint, according to Palestinian security sources. 
 
-- Injuries: Two Israeli settlers, including a 10-year-old 
boy, were shot and injured by Palestinians gunmen near Ateret 
settlement, north of Ramallah, according to Israeli 
newspapers.  Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades took responsibility for 
the attack. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested four Palestinians on security 
charges in Nablus August 6, according to PA security sources. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested four Palestinians in Allar and 
Ein al-Bayda villages near Tulkarm on August 6, according to 
Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested 13 Palestinians in the Bethlehem 
area on security charges August 6, according to Palestinian 
security sources. 
 
-- Arrest: Israeli police raided Hind al-Husseini college in 
East Jerusalem on August 6 and arrested DFLP political bureau 
member Ali Abu Hilal, who was taking part in a seminar at the 
college, according to school officials. 
 
-- Arrest: Israeli police arrested Hamas political leader 
Hamid al-Bitawi in Jerusalem August 6 for being present in 
Jerusalem without a permit, but released him with a warning, 
according to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF arrested a Palestinian in Dura, near 
Hebron, on August 7 after discovering an air rifle and 
collection of knives near his residence, according to 
Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Attack: Palestinian gunmen fired on two Israeli vehicles 
near Qalqiliya and Alfe Menashe settlement on August 7, but 
no injuries or serious damage resulted, according to Israeli 
radio. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Administrative Detentions: According to Israeli media, 
Defense Minister Mofaz ordered that three Kach activists, one 
reportedly an American citizen, be placed under 
administrative detention for two months during disengagement. 
 
-- PA President Abbas instructed all Fatah Central Committee 
(FCC) members to remain in Gaza for the duration of Israel,s 
pullout, and began political discussions to include work on 
setting a date for PLC elections. 
 
-- PA Prime Minister Quraya and several other cabinet 
ministers were in Jenin August 8 to discuss Israel,s pullout 
from the northern West Bank, according to Palestinian media. 
 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Death/Shooting: Palestinian sources and UNRWA reported 
that one man was killed by IDF fire near an IDF outpost south 
of Rafah on August 7. 
 
-- Injury/Shooting: Palestinian sources claimed that several 
civilians were injured when the IDF fired warning shots at a 
group approximately one kilometer outside of an IDF outpost 
near Rafah on August 6.  UNRWA reported that one Palestinian 
male received gunshot wounds in the leg. 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported five shooting incidents in 
addition to the two listed above in "death" and "injuries." 
On August 6 IDF troops came under fire on three occasions: 
once south of Rafah, once southeast of Neve Dekalim, and once 
east of El Murage.  On August 7 IDF troops were targeted near 
an outpost south of Gush Katif and near an outpost west of 
Khan Yunis.  Israeli media reported one additional incident 
near Netzarim. 
 
-- Shootings/Intra-Palestinian: UNRWA reported that an armed 
dispute between Fatah members in the Jabalia camp started on 
August 4 and resumed on August 5-6 when mediators ended the 
fighting. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported three mortar shells fired over 
the weekend: one targeting civilians south of Dugit on August 
5, one targeting IDF troops at an outpost northwest of Morag 
on August 7, and one targeting IDF troops three kilometers 
northeast of the Nachal Oz crossing on August 7. 
 
-- Rockets: UNRWA reported that Palestinians fired two 
rockets at Gush Katif on August 7.  According to the Israeli 
media, Palestinians fired one Qassam rocket at Sderot on 
August 8.  UNRWA said the rocket was launched from an area 
east of Beit Lahia. 
 
-- Explosive Devices: The IDF reported five explosive devices 
found and dismantled between August 5-8.  On August 5 one 
device was located approximately one kilometer west of Gan 
Or.  On August 6 Palestinian police found two devices: one 
south of Kissufim crossing and one near an IDF outpost south 
of Gush Katif.  On August 7 Palestinian police located two 
additional devices: one two kilometers south of Kissufim 
crossing and one near Gush Katif. 
 
-- Kidnappings: UNRWA reported that three of its staff (a 
British national, a Swiss national, and a Palestinian) were 
kidnapped by militants in Khan Yunis on August 8.  All three 
were released unharmed later in the day and traveled to Gaza 
City.  UNRWA has prohibited all movement by its 
non-Palestinian staff south of Gaza City until further notice. 
 
-- Arrests/Civil Unrest: UNRWA reported that PA security 
forces arrested two members of Faruk Qaddumi's "popular army" 
in Khan Yunis on August 7.  As a result, dozens of armed 
militants forced shops to close and occupied the Red Crescent 
building until PA officials and mediators convinced them to 
leave. 
 
-- Demonstration: UNRWA reported that 4,000 Hamas supporters 
in the Jabalia camp protested against the killing of Israeli 
Arabs in Shfaram on August 6.  UNRWA noted that masked and 
armed Hamas members participated in the demonstration and 
vowed to avenge the attack. 
 
-- Protest: UNRWA reported that on August 6 Palestinians 
wounded during the Intifada erected a protest tent near the 
PLC building in Gaza City and demanded that the PA provide 
them with jobs. 
 
-- Incursion: According to UNRWA, an IDF tank, bulldozer, and 
patrol entered the Palestinian village of Al Moghraga, near 
Netzarim, on August 6 and withdrew without incident after 
searching two houses. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli radio announced that police arrested nine 
Israelis (seven at the Kissufim Junction and two at Kfar 
Maimon) for smuggling right-wing activists into Gush Katif. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Erez crossing was open for Palestinians.  On August 5, 923 
workers and 185 Palestinian merchants used the crossing.  On 
August 6, the numbers were 12 workers and 22 merchants.  On 
August 7, the numbers were 1,1743 workers and 213 merchants. 
On August 8, the numbers were 386 workers and 245 merchants. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed for the weekend, but 
open on August 7, when 484 Palestinian workers were admitted, 
and on August 8, when 483 workers were admitted. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions, but closed to 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35 on August 6. 
UNRWA reported that on August 7 the IDF allowed Palestinian 
males in this age group to cross provided they had 
coordinated their travel with Israeli authorities through PA 
officials. 
 
-- The Karni terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for construction materials. 
 
-- Netzarim Junction at Salahadeen Road was closed. 
 
-- The Netzarim Coastal Road was open. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing was open during most 
daylight hours.  The Abu Houli-Gush Katif road was closed for 
part of August 7 due to a demonstration by settlers. 
 
-- Salahadeen Road was open at Sufa/Morag. 
 
-- The Abu Al-Ajeen bypass road was closed. 
 
--- The Toufah checkpoint was closed on August 6 and has not 
been reopened. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Israeli cabinet voted on August 7 to approve the first 
stage of the disengagement from Gaza and PM Sharon publicly 
reiterated that implementation would start on August 15 and 
"will be carried out in full." 
 
-- Finance Minister Netanyahu resigned from the Government on 
August 7 and repeated his criticism of the disengagement plan 
(see septels from Embassy Tel Aviv). 
 
-- The Israeli press announced that 1,000 of the 1,700 
Israeli families affected by disengagement have filed 
compensation claims with the Disengagement Administration. 
 
-- Arab media quoted Hamas leader Ismail Haniya as saying 
that the group will work with other factions and the PA 
during disengagement to "protect our national heritage and 
our legitimate rights to freedom, return and independence." 
WALLES