05KABUL4985
CODEL MURPHY/SKELTON MEETS KARZAI
Thu Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 004985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/FO, SA/A, S/CT, EUR/RPM 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
CENTECOM FOR POLAND, CG CFC-A. CG CJTF-76 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: OVIP PREL PGOV SNAR PARM MASS AF
SUBJECT: CODEL MURPHY/SKELTON MEETS KARZAI 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Congressmen Murphy, Skelton, and Marshall, 
accompanied by Ambassador Neumann, met with President 
Karzai on November 24 to discuss U.S. engagement in 
Afghanistan.  Karzai expected the inauguration of the newly 
elected Parliament to occur December 18 or 19 since 
announced for the 19th.  He felt that ISAF has done a good 
job, but noted that NATO had not yet been tested.  He added 
that the replacement of American troops by NATO forces in 
some areas, did, in fact, engender a sense of unease. 
Karzai and the Congressmen discussed the overall security 
situation: disbandment of armed groups and reconciliation; 
counter-narcotics performance; U.S. assistance, including 
Afghanistans desire for additional military equipment; and 
the Strategic Partnership.  End Summary. 
 
National Assembly Inauguration 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) President Karzai told the Congressmen that he 
expected the inauguration of the newly elected national 
Assembly to take place on December 18 or 19.  He said he 
was feeling very good about the make-up of the National 
Assembly, and was working hard to make preparations. 
Saying that the MPs were broadly representative of all 
political groups in Afghanistan, he added, with pride in 
the Afghan people, that the turnout during the elections 
was highest in the regions were the insurgency was worst. 
He noted he was meeting daily with MPs-elect, including the 
woman who had received the largest number of votes in 
Herat.  The 249 MPs were busy trying to elect a speaker. 
Karzai claimed he was resisting appeals for support from 
various candidates, and would not interfere.  The Afghan 
President commented cheerfully that the elections had 
ushered in a new era, with Cabinet Ministers becoming more 
alert and on top of their briefs, because they could see 
the National Assembly coming up behind them. 
 
Security Conditions Around Afghanistan 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  In response to a question about what Afghan 
regions needed enhanced security, Karzai responded 
immediately that the areas bordering Pakistan needed 
heightened protection.  There had been periods of tension 
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, he said, adding that what 
Pakistan was now doing on border security was all right, 
but Afghanistan would like to see Pakistan doing more. 
. 
Karzai also pointed out that much hate material against 
Afghanistan originated in madrassas in Pakistan, which made 
the man in the street in Afghanistan angry.  The Afghan 
leader said that ISAF had done well, but NATO had not yet 
been tested.  He acknowledged that there was lingering 
concern among some people when U.S. troops, who had 
shouldered the burden of bringing security to the most 
troubled areas, were replaced by troops from other nations. 
Karzai opined that the Bonn Agreement had been implemented 
in an exemplary manner, but that the possibility still 
remained that Afghanistan could fall back into trouble, and 
that there would be danger for years to come.  The 
Congressmen stressed they were a bipartisan delegation (one 
Republican and two Democrats), and that the U.S. was in 
Afghanistan for the long haul, and was not going to abandon 
Afghanistan. 
 
Reconciliation Process 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Karzai told the Congressmen that there had been a 
a 
great reduction in the number of weapons around 
Afghanistan.  Virtually all of the large weapons had been 
collected through the DIAG process, though it was harder to 
collect the small weapons.  He added that Professor 
Mojadedis reconciliation process was working very well. 
Over 600 former Taliban and others had come back to 
Afghanistan from Pakistan, including 250 more senior former 
officials and commanders.  Karzai said that most had been 
reabsorbed into their villages and communities, noting that 
some who had committed particularly heinous acts were hated 
by the people and would not come back. 
 
Counter-Narcotics 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Karzai emphasized in standard language his 
governments commitment to counter-narcotics work, 
repeating familiar statistics about last years 21 percent 
reduction in the area under cultivation, a decrease of 
27,000 hectares.  Citing a bomb set off near the site of a 
recent anti-poppy rally, Karzai said it was a tough war 
war 
that the GOA has to win.  The Afghan leader and the 
Congressmen discussed the nexus between 
insurgents/terrorist and narco-traffickers, which Karzai 
said had a long history in modern Afghanistan, particularly 
under the Taliban.  Karzai noted that alternative 
livelihoods were essential, and described Afghanistans 
potential as one of the worlds best fruit producers.  He 
cited the success of Afghans in re-planting orchards around 
the country over the last year, and exporting pomegranates 
to Japan  a healthy, high value fruit. 
 
Positive Relations with the U.S. Beyond Doubt 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  President Karzai thanked the U.S. for its 
presence and contributions to Afghan stability, saying that 
Afghanistan would always be a strong partner for the U.S. 
in the war on terror.  Before his last trip to the U.S. to 
announce the Strategic Partnership between the U.S. and 
Afghanistan, he had met with a group of some 1200 shura 
ura 
(traditional tribal council) leaders to discuss the 
Strategic Partnership.  Only two had offered mildly 
critical comments overall the group had been 
overwhelmingly. 
 
Assistance Programs 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU)  The Afghan President expressed satisfaction with 
the monetary levels of assistance from the U.S. and the 
international community.  He noted that there were some 
losses through contractors and sub-contractors.  Karzai 
praised U.S. road construction, education, and health 
programs.  The backbone roads system was essential to 
enable the farmer to market his crops and grow the economy, 
vital for counter-narcotics progress, bringing government 
and governance throughout the provinces, as well as for 
enabling security and transportation for the military. 
President Karzai noted that the power sector had problems, 
even though electricity availability was better than three 
years ago.  Congressman Murphy asked Karzai if Afghan 
hospitals could use supplies from American hospitals in his 
district, which had surpluses that they would like to 
donate.  Karzai replied that the Ministry of Health would 
be happy to accept such donations. 
 
¶8. (SBU)  With respect to strengthening ANA forces in 
Afghanistan, Karzai expressed satisfaction with their 
training, but urges the USG to consider supplying 
additional equipment, including airlift capability.  He 
said he did not want the ANA to go back to old Soviet 
equipment, and that he was not allowing the GOZ to engage 
with the Russians (who, he implied were ready to be 
helpful).  Karzai acknowledged that increasing equipment, 
and that he was not allowing the GOA to engage with the 
Russians (who, he implied were ready to be helpful). 
Karzai acknowledged that increasing equipment would be a 
financial/budget challenge for the GOA, which already 
relies heavily on assistance to pay the ANAs costs.  He 
noted, however, that when a U.S. helicopter had been shot 
down in a mountainous area, it had taken the ANA 17 days to 
get to the site because the ANA had no airlift capability. 
 
 
Thanksgiving 
---------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU)  President Karzai was gracious and made frequent 
reference to his fondness for the U.S., and Afghanistans 
reliability as a partner in the war on terror.  He spoke 
warmly about his experiences visiting his brother in 
Maryland, and his pleasure driving himself (without and 
entourage and security) and enjoying coffee at Starbucks, 
as well as his enjoyment of country music in Nashville.  He 
said that all of his brothers had now returned to 
Afghanistan.  Karzai recounted how much he had enjoyed 
partaking of turkey and celebrating Thanksgiving (his 
meeting the Congressmen which took place on Thanksgiving 
Day).  The Congressmen and President Karzai closed the 
meeting with some banter about exporting pomegranates to 
the U.S. and making them part of the traditional 
Thanksgiving feast. 
 
 
¶10. (U) This cable had been cleared by Codel Murphy. 
NEUMANN