05MASERU176
MFA STRESSES POSITIVE U.S.-LESOTHO RELATIONS TO AF/S
Fri Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Maseru
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MASERU 000176 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/S 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ETRD KDEM KHIV WZ ZI LT KICC HIV MCC
SUBJECT: MFA STRESSES POSITIVE U.S.-LESOTHO RELATIONS TO AF/S 
DIRECTOR MOZENA 
 
REF: A) MASERU 149    B) 04 MASERU 675 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  During his familiarization visit to Lesotho, 
AF/S Director Dan Mozena met April 4 with Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Monyane Moleleki.  Ambassador Perry and DCM (notetaker) 
accompanied.  Topics covered included the upcoming local 
elections,  Zimbabwe, Swaziland, HIV/AIDS, Article 98, the U.S. 
- Southern African Customs Union (SACU) Free Trade Agreement 
(FTA) and the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) .   In 
particular, Mozena noted the sizeable progress in 
democratization in Lesotho since the 1998 unrest, contrasting it 
with recent developments in Zimbabwe, and stressed the keen 
attention being paid to the local government elections.  He 
urged that the GOL sign an Article 98 agreement as soon as 
possible and that progress be made on the FTA.  Praising the 
U.S. as a loyal friend of Lesotho, Moleleki said his government 
had similar concerns regarding Zimbabwe.  He assured Mozena that 
the Article 98 issue was a top priority, although the matter had 
to be approached with a certain sensitivity towards Lesotho's 
role in creating the ICC.  The Minister also expressed Lesotho's 
support for advancing the FTA negotiations and the MCA project 
approval process.   The meeting's very positive overall tone 
highlighted the common interests of the U.S. and Lesotho on 
several important issues.   GOL action is needed also, however. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Mozena began by emphasizing the strong interest of the 
U.S. in Lesotho's April 30 local government elections, the first 
since independence, both as another advance in Lesotho's 
consolidation of democracy and as part of the overall trend 
towards democratic rule in southern Africa.   Lesotho had made 
huge progress since the political turmoil and violence of 1998, 
holding free and fair national elections in 2002; the upcoming 
local elections would be another milestone.  In addition, they 
would offer an especially stark contrast with the lamentable 
recent polls in Zimbabwe which are now the exception in the 
region.   One hopes that the leadership in Swaziland will also 
take note of Lesotho's democratization, he added. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Moleleki expressed deep concern with the situation in 
Zimbabwe, opining that the current regime is so entrenched that 
meaningful change may have to wait for a new generation of 
leaders.  The GOL leadership is frustrated with Zimbabwe and 
while Chair of the SADC troika, had visited Mugabe urging him to 
address the serious issues facing the country. The GOZ, however, 
had not acknowledged the very difficult situation.   Regarding 
Swaziland, Moleleki said that the GOL encourages King Letsie to 
talk to his Swazi counterpart about good governance.  In 
addition, the SADC heads of state strongly engage King Mswati 
whenever the group meets. 
 
¶4. (SBU) A significant amount of discussion focused on Article 
98/ICC.  Mozena and Ambassador Perry stressed the importance the 
USG attaches to this matter.   Having an Agreement would be a 
real signal of the maturing U.S. - Lesotho bilateral 
relationship.  The number of countries engaged by the U.S. on 
this issue who have not signed such a document continues to 
shrink, making Lesotho an increasingly conspicuous exception. 
While asserting that getting an Agreement was "at the top of my 
personal agenda and the right thing to do," Moleleki said the 
issue had to be approached with a certain sensitivity and "sense 
of timing,"  as  Lesotho had played a prominent role in drafting 
the Rome Treaty.   Mozena noted that  Treaty provisions allow 
for an agreement of the type the U.S. desires, thus, there is no 
inconsistency with signing the latter; many other countries 
which had worked on the Treaty have, in fact,  subsequently done 
an Article 98 Agreement with the U.S.     The Minister promised 
to determine the right moment to try to secure the government's 
approval on this and that he may move to create that opportunity. 
 
¶5. (U)  Other topics were discussed briefly.  Mozena reiterated 
the USG's commitment to helping Lesotho regarding HIV/AIDS; 
ultimately, however, the people and government of Lesotho will 
be the ones to win or lose the battle.  He noted the progress 
made on Lesotho's MCA proposal, but stressed the importance of 
keeping the approval process moving forward.  Progress on the 
U.S. - SACU FTA has stalled, and while we know Lesotho's 
commitment to pursuing such an agreement, there may come a 
point, unless the situation changes,  when the USG is no longer 
is interested.  Moleleki expressed his complete support for the 
advancing the MCA process expeditiously.  Similarly, the FTA 
negotiations need to make progress; an upcoming meeting of SACU 
members (minus Swaziland) would take up this matter. 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT.  The overall tone of the meeting was very 
cordial, with Moleleki concurring with much of the USG position 
on the various subjects discussed.  The session also reinforced 
the positive relationship post and the USG have with both the 
minister and his government.  The ultimate test of the GOL's 
commitment and effectiveness on the issues raised, however, 
will be action.  Much progress has been made on the MCA 
 
MASERU 00000176  002 OF 002 
 
 
proposal, for example, but a good deal of technical work remains 
to be done by the GOL (ref A).  SACU has not meaningfully 
reengaged the USG on the FTA, regardless of Lesotho's genuine 
interest and leadership in pursuing an agreement.   Moleleki 
seems to be our ally regarding Article 98, but the GOL's 
timelines have slipped since the end of last year (ref B). 
(Septel to follow.) 
 
 
 
 
PERRY