05PARIS7838
AVIAN AND PANDEMIC INFLUENZA INFORMATION - FRANCE
Thu Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR OES/IHA (SINGER/DALEY), INR (LESTER), AND EUR/WE 
HHS FOR INTERNATIONAL STEIGER/BUDASHEWITZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO SENV ECON EAGR EAID PREL FR
SUBJECT: AVIAN AND PANDEMIC INFLUENZA INFORMATION - FRANCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 209622 
 
     ¶B. PARIS 7573 
     ¶C. PARIS 7132 
     ¶D. PARIS 6191 
     ¶E. PARIS 5816 
 
¶1. (U) Detailed GOF reactions and responses to date to the 
possibility of an avian flu pandemic are contained in reftels 
(B) - (E). The following paragraphs respond to reftel A 
queries. 
 
-------------------------- 
Preparedness/Communication 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Following news that the H5N1 virus had hit the Urals 
in August 2005, the GOF announced the appointment of an 
interministerial delegate to coordinate the GOF's pandemic 
prevention measures, Professor Didier Houssin, who serves 
concurrently as the Director General of Health in the 
Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health serves as the lead 
French agency, although a number of French ministries and 
agencies are also engaged 
in preparation efforts. During a meeting with the Ambassador 
in September, Minister of Health Xavier Bertrand expressed 
his opinion that an influenza pandemic constituted a "real 
risk," and pandemic preparedness consumes much of his time. 
 
¶3. (U)  Assuring a concerned public, fanned in large part by 
recent front-page reports of the H5N1 virus in birds in 
Romania and Turkey, Prime Minister de Villepin confirmed on 
October 14 high French government priorities: to prevent the 
spread of the disease in birds, and to protect the health of 
the population. While the GOF sought to strike a reassuring 
note, Professor Houssin sees his goal as preparing France "as 
if the pandemic was to occur tomorrow."  In October, the GOF 
earmarked an additional 200 million euros from the 2005 
budget to fund preventive measures.  Paris also announced it 
would revise its national plan to fight a "pandemic flu" on 
which experts started working five years ago.  The plan was 
last revised in May 2005 (text, in French, available on the 
Health Ministry website: http://sante.gouv.fr.  An updated 
version is expected shortly. 
 
¶4. (U) In material terms, the pledge to "protect" the 
population consists largely of quantities of sanitary masks 
and anti-viral medicine: France has stockpiled some 50 
million masks, which have been distributed amongst French 
hospitals and other authorities which deal with the public. 
Another 150 million will be available by 2006, with a 
reported GOF goal of eventually stockpiling 600 million 
masks.  Government health authorities claim to be in 
possession of between five to nine million  anti-viral 
treatments,and have announced that 14 million more such 
treatments will be available by end 2005. GOF officials 
reportedly plan to cover the anti-viral needs of 30 percent 
of the French population, both in France and abroad. In 
anticipation of the emergence of a Tamiflu-resistant virus, 
the GOF has also reportedly begun negotiations with 
GlaxoSmithKline to stockpile anti-viral treatment,  Relenza'. 
 Health Minister Bertrand has said that the GOF will maintain 
the stockpile of anti-virals and distribute them -- under the 
strict supervision of the French army -- at no cost as needed 
in case of a pandemic. 
 
¶5. (U) France's plan to "prevent" the spread of the disease 
in birds, thus far,follows closely EU guidance concerning 
domestic poultry. GOF does not deem it necessary to vaccinate 
poultry, however it has announced a number of measures to 
ensure: 
 -- The confinement of poultry in 26 departments at 
particular risk of contact with migratory fowl, covering 
roughly 25 percent of French territory; 
 -- Banning of certain types of hunting 
 -- Suspension of the assembling of birds at markets 
 -- Increased surveillance of migratory birds; 
 -- Screening of domestic poultry for avian flu; 
 -- Stricter controls to prevent the introduction in 
 France of already banned birds and bird products 
 (feathers, etc.); 
 -- Improved reporting of suspect deaths by both farmers 
 and people in contact with wild birds (hunters, people 
 working in natural parks, environmentalists). 
 
¶6. (U) On November 3-4, French authorities sealed off a 
poultry farm in Brittany to test their ability to handle a 
bird flu outbreak.  The purpose of the exercise was to 
validate containment mechanisms in infected areas, test 
coordination, and evaluate numbers of personnel and equipment 
necessary in case of a real emergency. The exercise 
quarantined poultry and assessed the threat. Additionally, 
following the postulation of a confirmed contaminated bird, 
personnel engaged in the slaughtering of poultry and 
protection of deployed personnel. 
¶7. (U) In mid-November, Embassy officers contacted France's 
Sanofi-Pasteur to inquire about its H5N1 vaccine production 
activities.  At the moment, the company is undertaking 
clinical trials of a prototype vaccine based on the H5N1 
strain, and plans to reveal results by the end of the year. 
When asked how long it would take to fill the GOF's order 
when and if the mutated human strain is identified, a company 
representative said it depends on the productivity of the 
strain. The representative estimates anywhere between 
four-and-a-half to six months will be required to produce 
vaccine.  Sanofi-Pasteur will ask all governments purchasing 
its vaccine to assume liability for the vaccine it receives 
from the company. 
 
¶8. (U) In addition to news articles, Paris informs its 
citizens and health community about the avian flu in a number 
of ways.  Both the Ministry of Health and the Institute for 
Veille Sanitaire have websites with information about the 
virus, including a phone number for people to call for 
information and recommendations about traveling outside of 
France (websites in french include: 
www.invs.sante.fr/display/?doc=presse/2005/ 
le point sur/grippe aviaire 141005/index.html; and 
www.sante.gouv.fr/gtm/dossier/grippe/interfac e.htm). 
Further, posters are located at major airports to inform the 
public about precautions to take when traveling to or from 
contaminated countries (you can view these in English at 
www.sante.gouv.fr/htm/dossier/grippe aviaire/affiches.htm). 
 
¶9. (SBU) We consider the GOF highly capable of executing its 
national avian flu preparedness plan.  The well-established 
public health system, biological research laboratories and 
domestic vaccine production capabilities are all positive 
factors.  Additionally, we believe the GOF would be truthful 
in reporting an outbreak of avian flu in either the human or 
animal populations.  While the Embassy has not reviewed 
national laws to ensure they are consistent with 
International Health Regulations, France takes pride in its 
internationally reputed medical and surveillance systems. 
France, together with the U.S., calls for early 
implementation of the new WHO International Health 
Regulations. A member of the U.S.-initiated International 
Partnership on Avian Pandemic Influenza, France is fully 
engaged internationaly on pandemic preparedness with an 
emphasis on supporting the work of the WHO, FAO, and OIE. 
 
---------------------- 
Surveillance/Detection 
---------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) The medical and biological research communities, 
including Institut Pasteur, as well as the veterinarian 
community possess the capability to detect new strains of 
influenza among people and animals as quickly as the 
detection techniques allow.  Institut Pasteur is involved in 
recent detection of H5N1 cases in Asia.  In addition to 
reference laboratories, Institut Pasteur and its affiliates 
maintain 15 P3 containment facilities in France and six in 
Asia where isolation and detection tests can be conducted. 
Further, Institut Pasteur is developing a rapid detection 
technique to help decrease the time it takes to diagnose 
H5N1.  At the current rate, it can take several days to 
diagnose a suspect virus. 
 
-------------------- 
Response/Containment 
-------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The government of France is engaged in a major 
effort to stockpile antiviral medicine and protective gear, 
particularly masks--see paragraph four above.  Embassy 
believes that French authorities would order quarantines and 
social distancing measures as the circumstances warrant. We 
further expect that if required, the GOF would call on its 
police and military to effect critical measures. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The veterinary community is also well positioned to 
contain an outbreak amongst poultry, as guidelines are 
already in place and much poultry in France is confined to 
commercial spaces (see paragraph five above).  For those 
regions deemed to be more vulnerable because either they are 
on the path of migratory birds or they have significant areas 
of lakes and dormant waters, which attract waterfowl, the 
poultry are confined indoors, (although this regulation will 
be difficult to enforce). 
 
¶13. (SBU) We believe France's ability to respond and contain 
an outbreak to be good given its centralized public health 
sector, its experience containing other contagious illnesses, 
and its reasonably large, per capita, stockpile of 
anti-virals, mentioned above.  In Paris the GOF has selected 
two public hospitals as the first line of defense for all 
cases of the avian flu in order to reduce the risk of 
contamination to other hospitals.  Further, the GOF has 
identified SAMU, an ambulance service, to serve as first 
responders to any potential case of the avian flu to limit 
contamination.  While the details to coordinate these efforts 
are not yet fully transparent, it is clear that preparatory 
action is well underway. 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
Stapleton