05PANAMA331
SCENESETTER: CODEL TAYLOR'S FEBRUARY 20-22 VISIT
Mon Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 PANAMA 000331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
VANCOUVER FOR CG ARREAGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PGOV PREL EINV AMGT ASEC PM POLITICS FOREIGN POLICY
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER: CODEL TAYLOR'S FEBRUARY 20-22 VISIT 
TO PANAMA 
 
 
¶1. (U) This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
protect accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On behalf of Embassy Panama, I would like to 
extend our warmest welcome on the upcoming February 20-22 
visit of your delegation to Panama.  You will have the 
opportunity to review a wide range of issues including 
security and law enforcement.  Your visit here, as the 
government of Martin Torrijos enters its sixth month, 
signals the great interest of the United States in 
strengthening our excellent relations with the Panamanians. 
(Secretary of State Powell visited Panama on November 3, 
2003, to attend Panama's Centennial celebrations and 
again on September 1, 2004, to attend the presidential 
inauguration.  Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld visited Panama 
November 13-14, 2004, to discuss ongoing security and law 
enforcement cooperation and Canal issues.)  Cooperation on 
a wide range of issues -- including security, law 
enforcement policy, and trade -- promises to reach new 
levels under the Torrijos government.  Elected as a 
modernizing, anti-corruption reformer by the largest post- 
1989 plurality on record, Torrijos has made clear that his 
most important foreign policy priority is relations with 
the United States and that he intends to deepen our mutual 
focus on counter-terrorism capabilities, combating 
international criminal networks, and expanding trade and 
investment. Torrijos is the first Panamanian president 
elected after the handover of the Canal on December 31, 
1999, and the final withdrawal of U.S. forces.  U.S. 
relations with Panama are more mature than in the past, 
based on mutual economic and security interests. 
 
--------------- 
A Brief History 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (U) From its founding in 1903 until 1968, the Republic 
of Panama was a constitutional democracy dominated by a 
commercially-oriented oligarchy focused on Panama as an 
entrepot for international trade.  In October 1968, Dr. 
Arnulfo Arias Madrid, the deceased husband of former 
Panamanian President Mireya Moscoso, was deposed from the 
presidency by the Panamanian military.  General Omar 
Torrijos (d. 1981), the deceased father of current 
Panamanian President Martin Torrijos, became dictator and 
was succeeded in infamy by General Manuel Noriega.  On 
December 20, 1989, President George H.W. Bush ordered the 
U.S. military into Panama to restore democracy, protect 
AmCits and their property, fulfill U.S. treaty 
responsibilities to operate and defend the Canal, and bring 
Noriega to justice.  Noriega is still serving a 30-year 
sentence in Miami for drug trafficking.  Panama has held 
free and fair elections three times since 1989, 
transferring power from/to opposition parties. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
President Torrijos and a New Generation 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) In his September 1, 2004, inaugural address, 
Torrijos clearly identified his government's principal 
priorities as sustainable economic development and poverty 
alleviation, investment, fiscal reform, increased 
government transparency, and job creation.  The new 
president and his Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) -- 
largely purged of its former anti-democratic, anti-U.S. 
tendencies and holding an absolute majority in the 
Legislative Assembly -- has faced large challenges from the 
outset: a serious budget shortfall and tide of red ink left 
by the outgoing government; urgently required action to 
right the nation's foundering retirement and medical system 
(the Social Security Fund); restoring public confidence in 
government institutions and the rule of law; completing the 
Free Trade Agreement negotiations with the United States; 
launching a more activist and "coherent" foreign policy 
(including closer relations with Western Europe and a 
review of Panama's relations with Taiwan and China); and a 
decision on how to proceed with Canal expansion, leading to 
a 2005 national referendum.  The GOP has responded to the 
deficit with belt-tightening measures, including  passing 
an unpoular fiscal reform package in late January. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Martin Torrijos Espino won Panama's May 2, 2004, 
general elections by what amounted to a local landslide (47 
percent of the popular vote), which propelled his 
Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) into control of the 
Legislative Assembly (42 out of 78 legislative seats). 
Torrijos has surrounded himself with young, primarily U.S.- 
educated professionals like himself, and has marginalized 
"old guard" supporters of former President Ernesto Perez 
Balladares (1994-99).  Torrijos and those closest to him 
have indicated that they intend to work closely with U.S. 
officials, especially on security, law enforcement, trade 
and investment.  Overall, his cabinet appointments have 
been inspired choices -- many of them technocrats with a 
pro-U.S. outlook.  Most (but not all) of Torrijos's 
cabinet-level and other high-level appointments are 
respected professionals without excessive baggage from 
Panama's 21-year military dictatorship or the PRD's anti- 
U.S. faction, a promising sign.  Anticipated pressures from 
a well-entrenched oligarchy could frustrate the Torrijos 
administration's reform plans. 
 
¶6. (SBU) After campaigning on a "zero-corruption" platform, 
Torrijos launched a number of anti-corruption 
investigations and initiatives in the opening weeks of his 
administration. His most controversial action was the 
removal and replacement of Supreme Court President Cesar 
Pereira Burgos, who had passed retirement age, in a bid to 
clean up Panama's politicized Supreme Court.  The Embassy 
continues to build its strong Good Governance initiative, 
which began with Ambassador Watt's 2003 speech against 
official corruption. That speech resonated firmly with 
Panamanians from all walks of life and generated front-page 
headlines.  The Ambassador has also stated publicly that 
poverty could pose dangers for democracy and that skewed 
income distribution and social injustice increase the 
appeal of unscrupulous populist demagogues.  The Embassy 
currently supports good governance activities directed 
toward judicial reform, civic education, business ethics, 
and strengthening the anti-corruption prosecutors' 
institutional capacity.  An important element of the 
Embassy's Good Governance initiative is its visa 
revocation program.  Based on Embassy recommendations, the 
State Department in summer 2004 revoked the U.S. visas of 
two former senior GOP officials, which provoked a spate of 
mostly favorable press commentary and huge support (85 
percent according to one poll) from average Panamanians. 
Several other corrupt officials have lost their visas for 
money laundering or related issues and we are ever alert to 
ensure that other corrupt officials who have harmed USG 
interests may not travel to the United States. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Security and Law Enforcement Policy 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) President Torrijos came to office with a clear 
focus on security, particularly regarding canal and 
maritime security, and combating terrorism and 
transnational crime.  His government is taking steps to 
impose order, efficiency, and organization on Panama's 
security agencies.  On May 12, 2004, the U.S. and Panama 
signed a Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) 
Shipboarding Agreement, underscoring the excellent 
bilateral cooperation that the new GOP has assured us will 
continue or improve.  The Government of Panama (GOP) must 
sort out its financial priorities to address issues such as 
how to adequately patrol Panama's long Caribbean and 
Atlantic coastlines and how to secure Panama's porous 
border with Colombia against guerrilla infiltration. 
 
¶8. (SBU) A centerpiece of U.S.-Panamanian relations in 
recent years has been a steadily improving law enforcement 
and security relationship.  Close bilateral cooperation 
with our Panamanian counterparts has yielded many successes 
including, but not limited to, steadily increasing 
narcotics seizures, more sophisticated investigations, an 
active maritime law enforcement relationship, the 
development of specialized units, and an enhanced ability 
to combat money laundering and other illicit financial 
flows.  While the USG's relationship with the Torrijos 
Administration has been positive, there remains work to be 
done to solidify these gains and enhance the effectiveness 
of joint operations.  Panama's law enforcement institutions 
remain weak and all suffer from a paucity of resources and 
limited professional capacity.  Through our assistance 
programs, we are trying to address these shortcomings, but 
real success will require additional resources from the 
Panamanian budget. 
 
-------------------- 
Security Cooperation 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Panama's former sovereignty sensitivities are 
slowly receding with recognition that the challenge of 
securing the Canal and Panama's borders requires a more 
mature and collaborative bilateral relationship.  Panama 
early on gave political support to the Coalition of the 
Willing.  It signed and, on October 8, 2003, ratified a 
bilateral Article 98 Agreement.  Related to Canal and 
border security, Panamanians have become much more willing 
to accept mil-to-mil security training, equipment, and 
other assistance, as was shown during the August 2004 
multinational Panamax naval exercise that centered on Canal 
defense.  The GOP has welcomed Ambassador Watt's initiative 
to increase the number of Medical Readiness Exercises and 
other DOD humanitarian programs that provide much-needed 
assistance to rural Panamanians.  During the 2003 New 
Horizons exercise, both the GOP and local press praised 
U.S. military for constructing schools and clinics.  The 
next New Horizons begins February 2005.  Together, these 
programs highlight the humanitarian side of the U.S. 
military and foster positive public perceptions of the USG. 
 
---------------- 
Our Third Border 
---------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Panamanian planning, layered defenses and 
security resources are generally well-regarded, although 
the Canal remains an attractive and vulnerable threat to 
terrorists.  Continued U.S. training, equipment and other 
assistance reduce GoP vulnerabilities to any potential 
terrorist attack.  To protect water resources, the Panama 
Canal Authority (ACP) has committed to match dollar-for- 
dollar AID's three-year USD 2.5 million integrated 
watershed management program.  Panama committed to a robust 
maritime security agenda, which led to its timely adoption 
of the new International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
International Shipping and Port Security (ISPS) Code, which 
entered into force July 1, 2004.  Despite significant 
progress, Panama continues to be an important transit point 
for drug smugglers, money launderers, illicit arms 
merchants, and undocumented immigrants heading north. 
 
----------------- 
Maritime Security 
----------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The GOP has sent strong signals that it intends 
to clamp down on what it calls abuses countenanced by 
previous governments in administering Panama's open ship 
registry and mariner identification documents.  Panama's 
ship registry now is the world's largest and comprises 
around one-quarter of the world's ocean-going fleet (5,525 
large commercial vessels).  About 13 percent of U.S. ocean- 
going cargo transits the Canal each year.  Panama's 
seafarer registry currently licenses over 264,000 
crewmembers.  In response to our homeland security 
concerns, the new GOP had announced intentions to greatly 
improve security and transparency in documenting ships and 
the crews that work on them.  Panama has privatized and 
developed some former U.S. military ports and other related 
facilities.  Port services grew dramatically from about 
200,000 containers per year in the early 1990s to 2 million 
by 2003.  Panama now boasts the leading complex of port 
facilities in Latin America. 
 
---------------------------------- 
International Trade and Investment 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Panama's approximately $14 billion economy is based 
primarily on a well-developed services sector that accounts 
for roughly 80 percent of GDP.  Services include the Panama 
Canal, banking and financial services, legal services, 
container ports, the Colon Free Zone (CFZ), and flagship 
registry.  Panama also maintains one of the most 
liberalized trade regimes in the hemisphere.  U.S. 
bilateral trade with Panama came to USD 2.1 billion in 
¶2003.  U.S. exports were USD 1.8 billion and imports were 
USD 301 million in 2003.  The stock of U.S. Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) in 2002 was USD 20 billion.  U.S. FDI is 
primarily concentrated in the financial sector.  Per capita 
GDP is around $4,000. 
 
-------------------- 
Free Trade Agreement 
-------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Former President Moscoso pushed to move forward 
quickly on a bilateral Free Trade Agreement (FTA). 
Negotiations began in April 2004; to date, the U.S. and 
Panama have held eight negotiating rounds.  The last round 
held January 31 to February 6 in Washington failed to close 
the agreement, primarily because of Panamanian agricultural 
sensitivities surrounding rice, poultry, and pork.  Panama 
also has a strong desire to increase its existing sugar 
quota.  It's not clear when a new round will be scheduled; 
however, the GoP needs to be more realistic regarding its 
aspirations if the agreement is to close.  The Torrijos 
administration views a bilateral FTA as imperative to 
attract investment, increase exports, and make Panama 
competitive with the CAFTA countries.  Jerry Wilson, 
President of Panama's Legislative Assembly, has commented 
to Embassy officials that, once negotiated, the FTA 
agreement "will pass." 
 
----------------- 
Canal Stewardship 
----------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) During the past five years, the Panama Canal 
Authority (ACP) has proven itself an able administrator, 
turning the Panama Canal into an efficient and profitable 
business.  Since the 1999 handover, the ACP has reduced the 
average Canal transit times by one-third (from 36 hours to 
24 hours), has reduced accidents in Canal waters 
significantly, and has overseen large-scale upgrade and 
maintenance projects, such as widening the Gaillard Cut to 
allow simultaneous two-way transits.  The ACP also has 
increased revenues, which in FY 2004, exceeded USD one 
billion for the first time.  The government of Panama 
received USD 332 million from the Canal in FY 2004 
(payments for government services, tolls, and profits). 
 
--------------- 
Canal Expansion 
--------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) The Torrijos team plans to make Canal expansion a 
top priority.  The proposed Canal expansion project to 
construct a third-set of locks has an estimated price tag 
of USD 4-6 billion and is expected to take 8-10 years to 
complete.  It expects the project to be a transforming 
event for Panama that will provide jobs and set the tone 
economically for years to come.  Given the driving forces 
of international shipping -- containerization, construction 
of "post-Panamax" mega-ships currently unable to traverse 
the Canal, and growing trade between East Asia and the U.S. 
eastern seaboard -- the expansion is central to maintaining 
the Canal's future viability.  The expansion is expected to 
be financed through a combination of Canal revenues, new 
user fees, and bridge loans.  However, Panama's 
constitution requires a national referendum first be 
submitted to the Panamanian people for their approval.  GOP 
officials have stated this referendum will most likely 
occur in late 2005 or early 2006. 
 
WATT