05QUITO2132
COLOMBIAN AMBASSADOR CONCERNED ABOUT ECUADOR
Thu Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

151631Z Sep 05UNCLAS QUITO 002132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CO EC
SUBJECT: COLOMBIAN AMBASSADOR CONCERNED ABOUT ECUADOR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 166733 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Colombian Ambassador Carlos Holguin 
Molina told the Ambassador on September 13 that his 
government is concerned about deteriorating bilateral 
relations with the Palacio government.  The impending exit of 
FM Parra would help, but likely not resolve the festering 
dispute over aerial CN fumigation along the Colombia-Ecuador 
border, he said.  The GOE referral of the dispute to the 
IACHR would set an unfortunate precedent which the GOC 
regrets.  The Ambassador told Holguin we would encourage 
dialogue between the two neighbors.  Holguin was grateful and 
said another opportunity to improve relations could come 
later this month, when President Uribe visits Quito.  End 
Summary. 
 
Tough Start:  Amb. Faces Fumigation Issue 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Holguin, who arrived in Quito shortly before the 
Ambassador and presented his credentials on the same day, was 
eager to establish rapport.  He lamented the recent 
deterioration of traditionally friendly bilateral relations 
between the two neighbors, blaming FM Parra for politicizing 
the fumigation issue.  Asked by the Ambassador whether 
Parra's impending departure would ease pressure on the issue, 
Holguin demurred.  Parra and Human Rights Ombudsman Claudio 
Mueckay, who recently filed a petition on behalf of alleged 
Ecuadorian victims affected by glyphosate spraying, had "put 
Palacio in a box" on the issue. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Holguin appeared surprised to learn that the IACHR 
might request the "precautionary measures" requiring the GOC 
to halt its spraying within 10 km of the border (RefTel).  He 
admitted that he had not received a copy of the Mueckay 
petition.  (Note: We have, but did not share a copy with 
Holguin.  We have faxed a copy to WHA/AND on September 12). 
 
Ambassador Encourages Dialogue 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Ambassador agreed that bilateral dialogue is 
preferable to international appeals to resolve the fumigation 
issue.  That is exactly what we are encouraging the GOE to 
pursue.  For his part, President Palacio has expressed hope 
that dialogue would bring mutual understanding, she said, 
offering an opening for President Uribe. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Holguin expressed gratitude for USG support, adding 
that President Uribe had accepted Palacio's invitation to 
meet in Quito (with President Toledo of Peru) to discuss FTA 
strategy.  The Ambassador expressed hope that the visit, 
focused on mutual interests, could help both countries 
overcome current differences.  Holguin agreed. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The bumps in the relationship with Colombia are 
more a function of the Palacio government's weakness than GOC 
behavior.  To prevent further damage which could affect USG 
interests, we will coordinate closely with Holguin while 
trying to move the GOE towards dialogue and away from 
unilateral action.  Parra's impending departure will 
help--Palacio assured the Ambassador on September 12 of his 
interest in "useful dialogue" to get the Ecuador-Colombia 
relationship "back on track."  We agree that an Uribe visit 
focused on mutual interests could also help shift debate here. 
JEWELL