06ABIDJAN758
LATEST ON CORA DE COMSTAR U.S. BUSINESS DISPUTE
Fri Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #0758 1951632
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141632Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1591
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000758 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD IV EINV
SUBJECT: LATEST ON CORA DE COMSTAR U.S. BUSINESS DISPUTE 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Ivoirian Telecommunications Agency (ATCI) 
announced last week that it had revoked Cora de Comstar's 
cell phone license because of non-use of the license by Cora. 
The unexpected decision follows the signing of a draft, 
non-binding agreement in February 2006 between Western 
Wireless and the ATCI Managing Director, Sylvanus Kla, in 
which Cora shareholders agreed to relinquish their interest 
in the company in exchange for a payment of $6 million.  The 
government would issue Cora's cell phone license to a new 
operator who would be responsible for making the $6 million 
payment to Cora shareholders. If the new operator did not do 
so, the government committed to pay the $6 million by 
December 31, 2006. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Cora has told us they were taken by surprise by the 
announcement that its license had been resold.  However, they 
added that Kla has told them that the February draft 
agreement remains in effect and that ATCI has the $6 million 
available and can effect the transfer of funds to Cora. Cora 
shareholders would like to send a representative (a senior 
manager of the Modern Africa Two fund) on or about July 19 to 
collect the payment and, if possible, to obtain the 
government's signature on a final settlement agreement. (Cora 
shareholders are concerned that without a settlement they may 
face further litigation from erstwhile partner Alexander 
Galley.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) We told Cora shareholder representatives that we 
doubted that Kla had the authority to make the payment or 
sign a settlement agreement and that such a transaction would 
likely require the approval of the Prime Minister.  We added 
that with various looming deadlines related to the peace 
process, it seemed unlikely that the PM would be ready to 
approve the transfer or sign the settlement agreement by next 
week. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Guy Mbengue, director of the Ivoirian Export 
Promotion Agency, APEX-CI, who has been actively involved in 
trying to resolve this dispute, has told us that the Prime 
Minister's office has been blocking final settlement of the 
case.  For the past several weeks, post has been 
unsuccessfully attempting to schedule an appointment with the 
Prime Minister's chief of staff to discuss the case.  On July 
14, we spoke again with Mbengue, who told us that he had 
talked with the Director General of Economy and the acting 
Minister's chief of staff at the Ministry of Finance.  The 
two told him that the government had not approved ATCI's 
revocation of Cora's license or the payment of the $6 million 
to Cora shareholders. The officials said they had convoked 
Kla for a meeting on the morning of July 14 to review the 
case and Kla's actions. The Finance officials said the 
government is still considering the case based on the 
February draft agreement. They confirmed that the government 
would have to approve the $6 million to Cora and they agreed 
that there should be a final, signed settlement agreement 
between the government and Cora shareholders. Mbengue 
promised to brief us on the outcome of Kla's meeting at the 
Ministry of Finance.  Despite the mixed signals coming from 
the GOCI, Mbengue felt that the latest developments could 
help precipitate a decision by Prime Minister to settle the 
case. 
 
¶5. (SBU) We are continuing to try to meet with the Prime 
Minister's chief of staff. The Ambassador also plans to raise 
the issue with President Gbagbo and Prime Minister Banny in 
the next few days. 
Hooks