06ABUDHABI850
IRAN ENVOY MOSTAFAVI VISIT TO UAE
Mon Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abu Dhabi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABU DHABI 000850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL IR AE GCC IAEA
SUBJECT: IRAN ENVOY MOSTAFAVI VISIT TO UAE 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister, Mehdi Mostafavi, 
was scheduled to meet with the UAE leadership March 6 to 
brief them on Iran's nuclear issue and other regional 
developments.  Mostafavi was to meet at the MFA, according to 
an Embassy source, but we have no further details about the 
meeting participants or topics of discussion at this time. 
Some of the major expected issues might include calling for 
support for Iran's nuclear position, the recently detained 
Emirati fishermen, and the long-standing dispute over the 
three islands claimed by both Iran and the UAE.  Mostafavi 
reportedly visited the grave of the late UAE President Sheikh 
Zayed.  As President Ahmadinejad's special envoy in the Gulf 
region, Mostafavi has been touring Bahrain, Qatar, and UAE. 
 
¶2. (U) The English daily "Gulf News" (published in the UAE) 
quoted Mostafavi telling reporters the night of March 4 in 
Manama that Iran does not believe "the U.S. is considering an 
attack despite its hostile policy and Israel does not want to 
attack Iran because it fully realizes the consequences of 
such an act and will not make this mistake."  Mostafavi 
added, "Iran is not developing nuclear capabilities for 
political or military reasons, and we have no intention to 
pose ourselves as the leaders of the Muslim world or to use 
the nuclear threat to achieve international political or 
military gains. ... All we want is to meet our energy needs 
and upgrade our scientific abilities.  Iran is continuing its 
peaceful nuclear research activities under International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards and we are ready to 
cooperate with other countries to produce nuclear fuel." 
Mostafavi said Iran would not suspend its research because 
Europe demands it.  He also played down reports that the U.S. 
was planning to set up a division with the State Department 
to strengthen ties with Iranian dissidents and monitor 
developments in Iran.  "Establishing newspapers and TV 
stations targeting Iran is not new.  At one time, the U.S. 
carried out such activities secretly, but today they are 
public," he said. 
 
¶3. (U) According to Iran's official state-run news agency, 
IRNA (article on web site dated March 4), Mostafavi responded 
to a question about the three islands claimed by Iran and the 
UAE by saying that Iran "has always been interested in 
strengthening ties" with the UAE and has "taken positive 
steps to solve this misunderstanding." 
SISON