06ASHGABAT1220
TURKMENISTAN'S UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS AN EXERCISE IN
Wed Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ashgabat
VZCZCXRO1324
RR RUEHAST RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHMRE RUEHROV RUEHSR
RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHAH #1220/01 3331306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291306Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY ASHGABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8040
INFO RUCNOSC/OSCE POST COLLECTIVE
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 2585
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0018UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ASHGABAT 001220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE; SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/ACE, SCA/CEN (TPERRY), IIP/G 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KPAO SCUL SOCI TU TX
SUBJECT: TURKMENISTAN'S UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS AN EXERCISE IN 
NATIONALISM, CORRUPTION 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Since 1991 the number of students studying at higher 
educational institutions of Turkmenistan has decreased dramatically. 
In line with a 2006 presidential decree, only 3,175 students were 
accepted to Turkmenistan's universities for the session beginning 
September 2006, in comparison with an annual admittance quota of 
40,000 students prior to Turkmenistan's independence in 1991. (Note: 
The 2006 figure was reported in the state-controlled press.  End 
Note.)  In concert with policies that systematically erode the 
quality and years of education at every level of schooling, the 
gutting of higher education in Turkmenistan ensures the host 
country's loss of specialization in every sector.  The Government of 
Turkmenistan has thus poised this nation for a dramatic regression 
in quality of life as well as depleted prospects for democratic and 
economic development in the long term.  End Summary. 
 
ENROLLMENT AT ALL INSTITUTES IS SLASHED 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Though MOE representatives claim their annual quotas for 
student admission have not changed, a check against figures reported 
in state media reveal a drop of 3.5 percent, from 3,290 in 2005. 
Below is a breakdown of admissions for all higher educational 
institutions in Turkmenistan (Note: These numbers were announced by 
the president at his April 8, 2002 meeting with education officials 
and teachers at Turkmen State University.  End Note.): 
 
Magtymguly Turkmen State University - 500 
Azady Institute of World Languages - 170 
International Turkmen-Turkish University- 350 
Seidi State Pedagogical Institute (in Turkmenabat) - 150 
Agriculture University - 350 
Polytechnic Institute - 500 
Institute of National Economy - 250 
Institute of Transport and Communication - 230 
Institute of Sports and Tourism - 80 
Medical University - 280 
Institute of Culture - 60 
National Conservatory- 75 
Arts Academy - 45 
Institute of Energy - 180 
Military Institute - 550 
Police Academy - 150 
 
¶3.  (U) Starting in 2002, fewer than 4,000 students have been 
admitted annually to local universities.  Currently, there are more 
than 17,000 students studying at all 16 instutionals of higher 
education.  This year, 11,727 individuals applied for university 
admission; the majority of applicants were from Ashgabat.  Given 
that about 105,000 students graduate from Turkmenistan's high 
schools every year, the number of applicants suggests that only 10% 
will even attempt to get a higher degree in Turkmenistan.  (Note: 
The 2006 figures were reported in the state-controlled press and on 
the pro-government Turkmenistan.ru website.  End Note.) 
 
¶4.  (U) For comparison, Turkmen Medical Institute used to accept 
20,000 students annually; only 280 new students were admitted to the 
Institute's five departments, joining a depleted student body of 
1,500.  In the dental department alone, enrollment has declined from 
100 to 15 students in the past 5 years.  Five nursing vocational 
schools or colleges, which also supply many of the Medical 
Institute's new students, operate throughout Turkmenistan.  But 
enrollment to these schools has also been restricted. 
Turkmenistan's President Niyazov specifically ordered most art and 
music schools -- vocational as well as secondary -- closed in late 
2005, but contraction has occurred in all sectors. 
 
SELECTION: A MIX OF NATIONALISM, EUGENICS, AND MONEY 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5.  (U) According to a presidential decree issued in 2002, all 
stages of the admissions process for Turkmenistan's universities are 
regulated by a central admission committee headed by Deputy Chairman 
for Education, Health, and Science of the Cabinet of Ministers 
Gurbanguly Berdimuhammedov and including representatives of the 
Supreme Council for Science and Technology, the Minister of 
Education, and the rectors of all universities.  Each university 
selects its own admission committee, approved by the MOE, which 
collects applications and conducts tests and interviews.  Selection 
committees tend to travel to the regions to conduct interviews, 
though this year several interviewed only in Ashgabat. 
 
¶6.  (U) The Institute of Culture, National Conservatory and State 
Art Academy were the first to begin the admissions process this 
year.  These and the Polytechnic Institute, Medical Institute, 
 
ASHGABAT 00001220  002 OF 003 
 
 
Turkmen-Turkish University and Institute for Sports and Tourism 
conducted admissions interviews in Ashgabat only.  The extensive 
exam system that determined the Soviet-era admissions process was 
abolished in 2000; the current system places emphasis on the 
interview. 
 
¶7.  (U) General requirements for all applicants to any university, 
in order of priority, consist of: 
 
¶A. Oral examination on the Ruhnama and history of Turkmenistan, as 
well as the subject the applicant hopes to study.  (Note: This 
requirement was introduced in 2002.  End Note.) 
¶B. Labor record book, which is used to prove that an applicant has 
at least two years' work experience, preferably in the field to 
which the student is applying. 
¶C. Recommendation from a current or former employer. 
¶D. Diploma of graduation from a secondary school. 
¶E. Results of Ruhnama exam. 
¶F. Any certificates, diplomas from competitions, Olympiads, records 
of achievement. 
¶G. Certificate from the residence address. 
¶H. Medical certificate. 
¶I. (If an orphan) Death certificate of parents. 
¶J. A minimum height of 67 inches for males and 65 inches for females 
(required by the Institute of Culture). 
 
The maximum age at which one can apply to university is 31, although 
preference is given to those who have not attended studies after 
high school (i.e. younger candidates). 
 
¶8.  (U) Post has received anecdotal reports of admissions committee 
members at other institutes making comments about applicants' 
physical attributes.  These rumors correspond with the fact that 
every higher education institute -- including technical institutes 
such as the Institute for Oil and Gas -- have their own dance 
troupes who perform during national holiday celebrations.  (Note: 
Post knows of at least three students admitted to Azadi World 
Languages Institute with the express understanding that they would 
fulfill representational roles as dancers, singers or models for 
national cultural events.  End Note.) 
 
¶9.  (U) Each University's admission committee administers an oral 
exam in Turkmen, the results of which are confidential.  According 
to rumor, this is the point of the process where the most fraud 
occurs -- when bribes can be offered or other deals cut with the 
members of the committee.  The admission committee consists of 
teachers and department heads, a vice-rector of each university, as 
well as representatives of the MOE Higher Education Department and 
Supreme Council for Science and Technology.  Interviews are 
conducted in the following subjects for all applicants applying to 
universities: 
 
¶A. Ruhnama (in Turkmen). 
¶B. History of Turkmenistan (in Turkmen). 
¶C. Subject of the field to which applicant is applying (in Turkmen); 
foreign languages are tested in that other language. 
 
The university admission committee forwards the finalists list to 
the MOE, which forwards it to Deputy Chairman Berdimuhammedov, who 
clears on the lists. 
 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION POSITIONS BECOMING MORE LUCRATIVE 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶10.  (U) The reduction in places available has increased competition 
among applicants to the point that only the wealthiest or 
best-connected applicants can gain access.  The Institute 
experiencing the greatest competition among applicants this year was 
the Institute of Culture, to which 360 applicants vied for 60 slots. 
 (Comment:  Prospective students may believe a job in the official 
cultural sphere is relatively secure, given heavy and growing state 
expenditure on the promotion of the country's culture and other 
"cultural" events that praise the regime.  End Comment.)  The 
pedagogical department of Turkmen State University and the 
Turkmenabat Pedagogical Institutes experienced the second tightest 
competition, with five applicants per slot.  Other institutes 
fielded three to four applicants per slot on average. 
 
¶11.  (U) The bribe system that has sprung from these conditions 
carries no security for those involved, and doubtless has 
discouraged many students from attempting to study after high 
school.  Students can easily be out-bribed by a higher bidder, 
causing them a loss of hundreds to thousands of dollars that will 
not be repaid, and again leaves them without a place at university. 
 
 
¶12.  (U) The size of bribes differs from one institution to another, 
 
ASHGABAT 00001220  003 OF 003 
 
 
depending on the department and the major.  The most prestigious 
(and thus, the most expensive) departments requiring a bribe of 
$8,000 to $15,000 are the English language department, the law and 
international relations department of TSU, the English language 
department of the Azadi Institute, the oil and gas department of the 
Polytechnic Institute, and international business management and 
finance at the Institute of National Economy.  Other departments at 
various institutes require a bribe of at least $4,000, depending on 
how many people parents need to go through to get to the "decision 
maker."  Professional vocational schools (12 medical, pedagogical 
and art schools) require a bribe of at least $2,000 on average.  The 
competition to these schools is tough as well, because graduates of 
these schools are qualified to apply to a relevant university after 
completion of their studies without the two-year work requirement, 
and therefore have an advantage over other "ordinary" applicants. 
 
 
¶13.  (SBU) At Turkmenistan's cornerstone higher education 
institution, Turkmen State University, this jockeying has become 
visible at the highest levels.  In October 2005 the former rector, 
Rejep Kalayev, was fired by Niyazov for corruption in admissions and 
management.  From October 2005 to July 2006, the position lay 
vacant, leaving the vice-rector in charge of all matters, including 
nominating all 16 members of the university's admission committee. 
Post confirmed with a reliable source at the university that the 
vice-rector's suggested committee was sent three times to the MOE 
for approval -- an unusually difficult round of this process.  Just 
before the admission committee started its trips to the provinces, 
President Niyazov appointed the new rector, Ashyrgeldi Gulgarayev, 
who was and remains the Minister of Justice.  Teachers say that 
Minister of Education Shemshat Annagylyjova had been vying for a 
different candidate, someone notoriously corrupt, at the university. 
 Annagylyjova had reportedly been so sure that her favored candidate 
would be chosen that the candidate had already begun to appoint 
assistants and prepare to move into his new office.  When Niyazov 
announced the new rector, Annagylyjova looked visibly shaken by the 
surprise.  (Note: Not only does this anecdote suggest that 
Annagylyjova has little influence over President Niyazov, but that 
Annagylyjova will be powerless when dealing with the new rector 
because of his superior position as Minister of Justice.  End Note.) 
 
 
¶14.  (U) The new vice rector immediately appointed a new admissions 
committee, in a closed-door process that ensured even the teachers 
at the university were unaware of the members.  On July 25-26, the 
university's teachers were told to take a two-day vacation, while 
members of the admission committee conducted interviews at the 
university for applicants from Ashgabat.  (Note:  This is especially 
unusual as Turkmenistan's teachers are never considered to be 
off-duty, even during summer vacation, and are often called in for 
extra work in their off hours.  End Note.) 
 
¶15.  (U) Following these changes at Turkmen State University, 
similar processes took place at the Azadi Institute and Agricultural 
Institute.  However, the president did not take this opportunity to 
hail a clean-up of the system, and according to teachers at those 
institutions, traditionally corrupt actors continued to hold sway. 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶16.  (U) Post suspects that this reshuffling was an effort to 
centralize the bribing mechanism and strengthen the chain of 
command, and to funnel the "revenue" thus collected to Deputy 
Chairman Berdimuhammedov.  It appears to be another example in which 
Niyazov's "Golden Age" is being built at the expense of 
Turkmenistan's educational system and social services.  End 
Comment. 
 
BRUSH