06BEIJING1057
SENATOR MURKOWSKI HIGHLIGHTS U.S. CONCERNS ON
Tue Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3019
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #1057/01 0171039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171039Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5902
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OREP CH KN
SUBJECT: SENATOR MURKOWSKI HIGHLIGHTS U.S. CONCERNS ON 
DPRK, ENERGY ISSUES IN BEIJING MEETINGS 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Senator Murkowski highlighted U.S. concerns 
about the status of the Six-Party Talks during 
meetings with NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo and CCP Central 
Committee International Department Vice Minister Ma 
Wenpu.  Wu blamed mistrust between the United States 
and DPRK for the current impasse in the talks, said 
the Chinese leadership was fully engaged in trying to 
persuade the DPRK to re-engage and urged U.S. 
patience.  Ma said the "last thing" China wants is 
nuclear weapons on the Korean Peninsula.  Neither Wu 
nor Ma would comment on whether Kim Jong-il is 
currently in China.  With Wu and Vice Foreign Minister 
Qiao Zonghuai, the Senator stressed the need for 
energy cooperation and urged further bilateral 
discussion concerning energy technology, efficiency 
and expertise.  Wu said China is prepared to work with 
the United States on more issues of common interest. 
He expressed appreciation for the United States' 
consistent Taiwan policy, but stressed China's 
continuing concerns about Chen Shui-bian's Taiwan 
independence agenda.  Qiao in turn shared Chinese 
concerns about Japanese visits to the Yasukuni shrine. 
Senator Murkowski reviewed plans for continued inter- 
parliamentary exchanges and expressed interest in 
returning to China to deepen her relationships and 
understanding in discussions with Wu and NPC Vice 
Chairman Sheng Huaren.  End Summary. 
 
Meeting with NPC Chairman 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo emphasized the 
importance of strengthening ongoing exchanges between 
the NPC and U.S. Congress in a January 13 meeting with 
Senator Lisa Murkowski, noting that President Hu 
Jintao had instructed him to "meet with more U.S. 
Congressional representatives."  The Ambassador 
accompanied the Senator.  Noting recent Summit 
meetings between President Bush and President Hu, Wu 
pointed to their agreement to develop constructive, 
cooperative relations for the 21st century as a firm 
basis for deepening bilateral relations.  The United 
States and China maintain close cooperation on "hot 
issues" in the world such as counterterrorism, 
nonproliferation, the DPRK and Iranian nuclear issues 
and UN reform, he stated. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Turning to the issue of Taiwan, Wu said the 
cross-Strait situation has become more relaxed 
recently.  In 2005, there were two important Chinese 
Government cross-Strait initiatives: passage of the 
anti-secession law and more active promotion of 
people-to-people and economic ties.  There has also 
been a change in popular will on Taiwan and a shift 
away from support for Taiwan independence, as 
evidenced in the results of the December mayoral 
elections.  He noted, however, that the root cause of 
cross-Strait tensions remains and that Chen Shui-bian 
is intent on pursuing his Taiwan independence agenda. 
The key to maintaining stability is to check Taiwan 
independence moves.  China is grateful to the USG for 
maintaining its one-China policy, voicing opposition 
to Taiwan independence and to unilateral changes to 
the status quo in the Taiwan Strait.  Senator 
Murkowski replied that the United States interest was 
in a resolution that maintained peace and stability in 
the region. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Noting that the United States appreciated 
and relied on Chinese efforts to make progress on the 
DPRK nuclear issue, Senator Murkowski asked for Wu's 
ideas on moving the Six-Party Talks forward.  Wu 
responded that China's position supporting the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula through 
dialogue is consistent and that China sees eye-to-eye 
with the United States on the need to start the next 
phase of the talks as early as possible.  There is a 
big gap in confidence between the United States and 
DPRK, making the issue more complicated.  The Talks 
are further complicated by other issues, such as the 
recent financial sanctions imposed on the DPRK by the 
United States.  Wu urged patience on the part of the 
United States, noting that the next stage of the talks 
would be extremely difficult.  He hoped that the issue 
of sanctions, which he said is of great importance to 
the DPRK, could be resolved.  Senator Murkowski said 
that the issue of counterfeiting is extremely 
sensitive in the United States and could not be 
 
BEIJING 00001057  002 OF 003 
 
 
treated lightly.  Wu noted that Macau authorities had 
launched an independent investigation into the case, 
which he hoped would provide a clearer picture of the 
situation.  In response to Senator Murkowski's comment 
about DPRK leader Kim Jong-il possibly being in China, 
Wu only noted that China's leadership raises the 
nuclear issue with Kim Jong-il at every opportunity. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Senator Murkowski expressed interest in 
bilateral cooperation on energy development and 
detailed U.S. efforts in exploration and development 
of energy and in conservation.  Wu said that 90 
percent of China's energy comes from coal and that 
Chinese annual oil imports decreased by 5.6 percent in 
¶2005.  He welcomed future bilateral energy 
cooperation, noting China is pursuing a robust program 
to develop nuclear, hydro and wind power.  The Chinese 
Government is subsidizing development of household 
methane gas in the countryside, which Wu said has met 
with considerable success. 
 
Meeting with CPC Vice Minister 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) At a meeting with Senator Murkowski on 
January 12, Communist Party of China (CPC) Vice 
Minister of the Central Committee International 
Department Ma Wenpu lauded the steady and sound 
development of Sino-American ties.  President Hu 
Jintao had very successful meetings with President 
Bush in New York and Beijing last year, reaching 
consensus on the comprehensive promotion of bilateral 
relations in the 21st Century. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Noting this was her first trip to China, 
Senator Murkowski said she discussed North Korea and 
the Six-Party Talks with leaders in South Korea and 
Japan prior to her Beijing stop and asked for Ma's 
views on prospects for progress.  Ma stated that China 
seeks peace, stability and denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula.  The last thing China would want to 
see is nuclear weapons on the Korean Peninsula. 
China's most important diplomatic relations are with 
the United States and there is bilateral cooperation 
and consensus on the North Korean nuclear question. 
At the same time, China has traditional and neighborly 
relations with the DPRK.  China is working to persuade 
North Korea to return to the Six-Party Talks, but 
wishes for the Parties to avoid any actions that 
incite or add complexity to the issue. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The previous four Rounds of the Talks have 
brought about good results, Ma continued, and the 
September 2005 joint agreement was a hard-won success. 
Future Talks must resolve implementation of the 
September agreement in concrete detail, so the Six- 
Party Talks have become more complex and difficult. 
The United States should trust China's good offices as 
China works officially and privately to bring the Six- 
Party Talks back on track.  But it is hard to say when 
the next round of Talks will begin. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Senator Murkowski pressed Ma with the lack 
of optimism she heard in Korea and Japan and the 
importance of the five consensus Parties speaking with 
one voice on denuclearization of North Korea.  Ma said 
that he shares the same view, and reiterated that 
China could not see its neighbor develop nuclear 
weapons. 
 
Meeting with Vice Foreign Minister 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) On January 13, Senator Murkowski and Vice 
Foreign Minister Qiao exchanged views about bilateral 
cooperation, the North Korean nuclear issue, China's 
relations with Japan, Taiwan and energy.  Qiao 
expressed appreciation for the Senator's visit as an 
important way to begin 2006 and continue the pattern 
of important bilateral exchanges established during 
¶2005.  Senator Murkowski agreed, and said she looks 
forward to continuing involvement in parliamentary 
exchange. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Responding to the Senator's question about 
the Six-Party Talks, Qiao said China believes that if 
the nuclear issue can be resolved, other issues 
ranging from financial sanctions and counterfeiting to 
the abduction issue, can then be dealt with.  On 
Japan, Qiao repeated China's oft-heard position that 
visits to the Yasukuni Shrine and Japan's refusal to 
 
BEIJING 00001057  003 OF 003 
 
 
acknowledge responsibility for WWII remains 
unacceptable.  Developing good relations with Japan, 
however, remains a priority for China. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Senator Murkowski raised energy cooperation 
and urged further bilateral discussion concerning 
energy technology, efficiency and expertise.  Qiao 
raised Taiwan, noting that the Mainland's invitation 
for Taiwanese political leaders to visit, the zero- 
tariff it applied to Taiwanese fruit and the decision 
last week to send two pandas to Taiwan illustrate the 
Mainland's goodwill and desire to resolve the Taiwan 
issue peacefully. 
 
Meeting with National People's Congress Vice Chairman 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) During a dinner meeting January 12, National 
People's Congress (NPC) Standing Committee Vice 
Chairman and Secretary General Sheng Huaren told 
Senator Murkowski that friendships forged through the 
NPC-Congress Interparliamentary Group increase mutual 
understanding and trust between the United States and 
China.  Noting that he met Senators Stevens and Inouye 
(co-chairmen of the U.S. Senate-China NPC 
Parliamentary Group) in Hawaii January 4-5, Sheng 
reported that they had decided to hold the next 
official round of NPC-Congress exchange meetings 
August 6-11 in China, with August 6-9 in Guilin, 
followed by August 10-11 meetings in Beijing with PRC 
leadership.  They agreed that the topics for 
discussion would be energy, international and regional 
issues including the nuclear issue on the Korean 
peninsula, national defense and security, China-U.S. 
trade and China's peaceful development.  Sheng said he 
anticipates the 2007 round to be held in Alaska in 
response to Senator Stevens' invitation. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Senator Murkowski thanked Sheng for his 
hospitality and remarked that as the East Asia 
Subcommittee Chair she anticipates returning to China 
again to build on friendships and continue dialogue to 
gain better understanding of the relationship between 
China, Korea, Japan and the United States.  Indicating 
that she is eager to learn about China's growing 
energy needs and its leadership role in the Six-Party 
Talks, Senator Murkowski said Alaska appreciates China 
as an export market for timber and remarked that a 
trade delegation would visit in March to promote 
Alaska wild salmon exports. 
 
¶15.  CODEL did not clear this cable. 
Randt