06DAKAR527
GUINEA-BISSAU: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Thu Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO4680
RR RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0527/01 0610747
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020747Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4413
INFO RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 DAKAR 000527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, AF/RSA, AF/W, G, INL, DRL, PRM, AND G/IWI 
BAMAKO FOR TIP OFFICER 
CONAKRY FOR TIP OFFICER 
BANJUL FOR TIP OFFICER 
ACCRA FOR USAID/WARP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KCRM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF PU
SUBJECT: GUINEA-BISSAU: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 003836, 
 
¶B. DAKAR 0325 
¶C. 05 STATE 000674 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) Guinea-Bissau is a source of children trafficked 
for forced agricultural work and begging, primarily in 
Senegal.  Muslim Koranic teachers, known as marabouts, 
travel from Senegal or send intermediaries to convince 
parents to send children purportedly for a religious 
education.  Children are routinely beaten and subjected to 
harsh treatment and often their families never hear from 
them again.  There are no statistics or reliable estimates 
on the scope of the problem.  The GOGB has demonstrated 
that it has the political will to combat this issue, 
particularly in terms of prevention and assistance to 
victims, and has devoted scarce resources to trafficking. 
However, prosecution would mean getting tough with widely 
revered Muslim teachers, a politically unpopular measure. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Children have been required to beg for food and 
money to receive education from Koranic schools for 
generations.  Some fathers and community leaders who send 
children away to learn to read the Koran experienced 
similar situations, although abuse appears to be growing 
and education dwindling.  Public discussion, radio 
programs and solid NGO efforts, often in conjunction with 
police and Government, have started to bear results, 
pushing traffickers into more remote areas to find 
subjects.  However, there is also a strong sense among 
Muslim communities, local officials and national 
parliamentarians that parents will continue to send 
children away until Bissau-Guineans have local Koranic 
schools. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The NGO "Associaco de Mulher e Crianca" (the 
Association for Women and Children or AMIC) leads 
coordination efforts for the Government, police and civil 
society in terms of prevention and helping returned 
victims find their families.  In order to get better data 
on the extent of the problem and assist NGOs and police to 
do a better job of prevention, repatriation and 
enforcement, Mission requests that the Department fund 
post's anti-trafficking project proposal (Ref B).  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Responses are keyed to questions in Ref A. 
 
Begin TIP report: 
 
Para 21.  Overview of a country's activities to eliminate 
trafficking in persons: 
 
¶A.  Is the country a country of origin, transit or 
destination for international trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Specify numbers for each group; how were they 
trafficked, to where, and for what purpose?  Does the 
trafficking occur within the country's borders?  Does it 
occur in territory outside of the government's control 
(e.g. in a civil war situation)?  Are any estimates or 
reliable numbers available as to the extent or magnitude 
of the problem?  Please include any numbers of victims. 
What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
trafficking in persons or what plans are in place (if any) 
to undertake documentation of trafficking?  How reliable 
are the numbers and these sources?  Are certain groups of 
persons more at risk of being trafficked (e.g. women and 
children, boys versus girls, certain ethnic groups, 
refugees, etc.)? 
 
Guinea-Bissau is a country of origin for trafficked 
children for forced begging, primarily to Senegal and to a 
lesser extent Mali and Guinea.  Children are sent by their 
parents with a marabout or intermediary to study the 
Koran.  Key source areas are the cities of Bafata and Gabu 
in the east.  Instead of getting an education, children 
are generally forced to beg and remit daily payments of 
anywhere from 50 cents to one U.S. dollar plus a kilo of 
rice to the marabout.  Failure to meet daily quotas earns 
severe beatings.  Some Koranic schools in Guinea-Bissau 
also require children to beg in the long-standing 
 
DAKAR 00000527  002 OF 009 
 
 
tradition of these schools, but with less abuse and more 
education than they get abroad.  Some marabouts have 
plantations and require children, primarily boys but also 
some girls, to work in fields doing seasonal agricultural 
work.  Boys then are sent to cities to beg in the off 
season. 
 
No studies have been completed on the scope of human 
trafficking in or from Guinea-Bissau and no reliable 
estimates exist.  The GOGB has repatriated 28 children 
since November 2002 but says there are many more.  Police 
and NGOs working together helped to intercept another 24 
children from being trafficked out of the country. 
 
¶B.  Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the country and any changes since the last 
TIP Report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also briefly 
explain the political will to address trafficking in 
persons.  Other items to address may include: What kind of 
conditions are the victims trafficked into?  Which 
populations are targeted by the traffickers?  Who are the 
traffickers?  What methods are used to approach victims? 
(Are they offered lucrative jobs, sold by their families, 
approached by friends of friends, etc.?)  What methods are 
used to move the victims (e.g., are false documents being 
used)? 
 
Parents of young children are approached by religious 
leaders or intermediaries, usually from neighboring 
Senegal, and offered the chance to send children for a 
religious education where they will be taught to read the 
Koran.  Because of traditional links between Islamic 
communities across borders and the existence of extended 
families where distant relatives may be considered 
"uncles," the trafficker is often known to the parents. 
There are only a few Koranic schools in Guinea-Bissau, but 
they are not highly regarded; so parents often feel that 
sending sons abroad is the only hope for a religious 
education.  Marabouts are highly respected in Muslim 
society (the majority population in target areas) and are 
able to operate with little interference.  Parents receive 
no compensation for sending their children and in many 
cases, pay for the initial travel. 
 
Begging is a traditional cultural and religious practice 
at Koranic schools and some middle-aged adults interviewed 
by PolOff had similar experiences in their youth. 
However, physical abuse of children and profits for 
marabouts appear to be growing while education has all but 
disappeared.  The historical link of begging and Koranic 
schools creates a level of acceptance among community 
members and impedes efforts by NGOs and governments to 
convince parents to stop sending children.  AMIC noted 
that some institutions (which they term "madrassas") are 
better than others and require little begging. 
 
The primary route to Senegal is through the town of 
Pirada, where there are police and migration controls. 
Another key exit point is the town of Sao Domingos in the 
northwest.  Almost all traffic is overland, reportedly by 
foot, taxi or animal driven carts to the border.  Non- 
vehicular traffic can easily avoid border outposts by 
walking on foot trails through the bush.  Border guards 
are aware of the problem and, according to the leading 
national NGO on trafficking, AMIC, cooperate on 
interdiction and repatriation.  Yet remoteness, low 
salaries, which sometimes go unpaid for months at a time, 
and respect for marabouts makes guards vulnerable to 
bribes. 
 
Living conditions for trafficked children on the streets 
of Senegal's cities can be heartbreaking.  Children who 
cannot raise the daily payment are beaten so severely that 
they often don't return, choosing to sleep in the street 
rather than face punishment.  It is common for families to 
go years without receiving any word from children.  Some 
children seek help from the Ginddi Center, NGOs, 
neighborhood women whom they adopt as mother figures, or 
the Bissau-Guinean Embassy in Dakar.  Others simply walk 
back to Guinea-Bissau.  Some parents seek help from police 
or NGOs to reunite with children, but they are the 
exception.  There have been a few successful cases of 
 
DAKAR 00000527  003 OF 009 
 
 
cross-border government-police-NGO cooperation to reunite 
families with children. 
 
Political will exists to assist victims and prevent 
trafficking through raising awareness, especially in key 
institutions such as the government's Institute of Women 
and Children, the Ministry of Justice, the Foreign 
Ministry, and among individuals throughout the police 
force.  However, there is no high-level coordinated effort 
to fight TIP.  There is little evident political will to 
confront TIP in terms of law enforcement.  According to 
several people interviewed from local governments and 
NGOs, enforcement against marabouts is a politically 
complicated issue because politicians believe any action 
against them will be interpreted by a major voting bloc as 
action against the Islamic faith. 
 
¶C.  What are the limitations on the government's ability 
to address this problem in practice?  For example, is 
funding for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is 
overall corruption a problem?  Does the Government lack 
the resources to aid victims? 
 
Guinea-Bissau lacks almost everything.  Police forces have 
received no training on trafficking.  They do not have 
vehicles to patrol borders; instead they rely on foot 
patrols.  Communication from border police in Pirada to 
the central police headquarters in Gabu, about two hours 
away by bus and where traffickers are supposed to be sent 
once detained, is by landline phone that often does not 
function.  Police in Gabu have only one computer and no 
effective archive system to facilitate case research. 
While police are now receiving regular salaries, they are 
still owed nine months of arrears from 1999, when they 
worked essentially for free.  Repatriated victims 
sometimes live with the Gabu police commissioner until 
parents can be located, a process that sometimes takes 
months because children do not remember where they are 
from.  The Bissau-Guinean Ambassador to Senegal also 
houses children awaiting repatriation when no alternative 
can be found.  There is no shelter in Gabu, which receives 
a steady trickle of children returning from Senegal in 
search of families. 
 
Another major limitation is a political crisis that has 
pitted the President against the African Party for the 
Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde (PAIGC) the 
largest party in the Popular National Assembly (ANP).  No 
significant legislative or policy advances are likely to 
be made until the ANP approves the government's program 
and budget and the PAIGC drops its claim that Prime 
Minister Aristides Gomes' appointment is unconstitutional. 
 
While corruption is likely a factor in the remote towns 
and border areas, AMIC believes there is no high-level 
corruption on this issue and no one in the Government is 
getting rich off the trafficking of children. 
 
¶D.  To what extent does the Government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, 
its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The GOGB does not make systematic efforts and does not 
publish assessments of its performance.  A police 
inspector under the Ministry of Interior has official 
responsibility for coordinating enforcement and 
cooperation with UNICEF, but these efforts are nascent and 
poorly organized. 
 
PARA 22.  PREVENTION: 
 
¶A.  Does the Government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in that country?  If no, why not? 
 
The Government recognizes the trafficking problem and 
combats it on many fronts.  The Institute of Women and 
Children in cooperation with UNICEF and Muslim NGO 
ALANSAR, sponsored a four-day conference in April 2005 to 
study the issue, identify root causes and educate the 
 
DAKAR 00000527  004 OF 009 
 
 
public.  The Government contributes eight million CFA 
francs (about USD 16,000) per year to the operating budget 
of AMIC, the country's strongest advocate in fighting 
trafficking of children. 
 
¶B.  Which government agencies are involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
Agencies involved include the Ministry of Justice, 
Ministry of Interior, and the Institute of Women and 
Children.  There is no task force; so no agency has a 
clear lead. 
 
¶C.  Are there or have there been government-run anti- 
trafficking information or education campaigns?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their 
objectives and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target 
potential trafficking victims and/or the demand for 
trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor). 
 
The Institute of Women and Children sponsored a conference 
to raise awareness (see paragraph 22 A).  AMIC, which 
receives government funding, conducts regular awareness 
efforts on radio stations in the area of Gabu.  The Bissau- 
Guinean Ambassador to Senegal has also contributed to 
awareness efforts on the radio.  These efforts are aimed 
at parents in Muslim communities, notifying them of the 
dangers of sending their children away for Koranic 
studies.  AMIC notes some effectiveness, saying Gabu 
itself has seen a drop in trafficked children, but 
traffickers are moving out to outlying areas where people 
are not yet as well informed.  AMIC and police also use 
radio as a last resort in searching for parents of 
repatriated children. 
 
¶D.  Does the Government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking (e.g., to promote women's participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school)?  Please explain. 
 
The Ministry of Justice, in cooperation with UNICEF, 
conducted a significant prevention campaign in January 
¶2006.  Over the course of a month, 28,000 children were 
registered and given identity papers in the Gabu region as 
an anti-trafficking measure.  While this may seem like an 
effort the Justice Ministry should conduct regardless, 
what makes it remarkable is that the Ministry dedicated 
resources to take the registration effort to the field. 
Three main factors work against parents registering their 
children in the Gabu region: distance to the capital, cost 
and ignorance.  The Justice Ministry overcame those and in 
so doing, made it harder for traffickers to pass through 
border checks with children who are not their own. 
Migration officials at the main border crossing of Pirada 
claim they now do not let anyone leave the country with a 
child unless the parent is present, due to trafficking 
concerns.  Of course the border remains porous and guards 
may be corrupt or unprofessional. 
 
There is no Question E. 
 
¶F.  What is the relationship between government officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements of 
civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
Relevant actors cooperate well and recognize the 
importance of close coordination.  AMIC reports that it 
gets very good cooperation from local police in assisting 
repatriated children and finding parents.  There is a good 
understanding of issues and updated policies by border 
police and migration officials to stop traffickers from 
moving children out of the country.  AMIC and police work 
with religious and community leaders in the regions of 
Gabu and Bafata.  UNICEF says the Ministry of Justice and 
the Muslim NGO ALANSAR are very strong on the issue. 
Perhaps the biggest and most noticeable gap is the courts, 
which could only point to two pending trafficking cases 
and none that had been successfully prosecuted with 
traffickers serving time.  Another concern is the 
inspector at the Ministry of the Interior who claims to be 
 
DAKAR 00000527  005 OF 009 
 
 
the coordinator on enforcement, but does not have a clear 
picture of prosecution efforts in the Gabu region. 
 
¶G.  Does it monitor immigration and emigration patterns 
for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement agencies 
screen for potential trafficking victims along borders? 
 
The Government does not systematically monitor its borders 
for TIP, but border guards have been educated by AMIC. 
Police provided migration officials at Pirada with photos 
of four men who were detained trying to traffic boys to 
Senegal.  Migration officials described a process they 
follow when they identify a potential trafficker: they 
detain the person if the adult cannot prove he is the 
father, contact the police in Gabu and arrange 
transportation back to police headquarters in Gabu. 
Unfortunately, these are barely treated as crimes and 
trafickers are generally released while parents arecontacted to pick up their children. 
 
Police clai to have increased foot patrols of the border 
onthe many paths through the bush into Senegal to stm 
trafficking. 
 
¶H.  Is there a mechanism for cordination and 
communication between various agecies, internal, 
international, and multilateral o trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi-agncy working group or a task 
force?  Does the Govrnment have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the 
Government have a public corruption task force? 
 
With a number of security concerns in the country, such as 
increased international drug trafficking and the urgent 
need for security sector reform of the bloated, civil-war 
prone military, and numerous social problems, such as a 
lack of access to adequate education and health care for 
most of its citizens, TIP has not surprisingly been low on 
the priority list.  However, even with these other 
challenges, the Government is doing what it can with the 
few resources it has available to it.  The Ministry of 
Interior has an inspector in charge of crimes against 
children who is responsible for coordination on law 
enforcement of TIP and cooperation with UNICEF.  The 
Institute of Women and Children has taken the lead with 
respect to public awareness and marshalling government and 
international community efforts.  The National Assembly's 
Ad Hoc Committee for Women's and Children's Issues is also 
focused on TIP and has managed to get it introduced to the 
legislature's agenda this year.  However, the most 
effective actors are the NGOs and international 
organizations. 
 
There is no Question I.) 
 
¶J.  Does the Government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies 
were involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in 
the process?  What steps has the Government taken to 
disseminate the action plan? 
 
There is no national plan of action to combat TIP. 
 
PARA 23.  INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
For questions A-D, posts should highlight in particular 
whether or not the country has enacted any new legislation 
since the last TIP report. 
 
¶A.  Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons--both trafficking for sexual 
exploitation and trafficking for non-sexual purposes (e.g. 
forced labor)?  If so, what is the law?  Does the law(s) 
cover both internal and external (transnational) forms of 
trafficking?  If not, under what other laws can 
traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws 
against slavery or the exploitation of prostitution by 
means of coercion or fraud?  Are these other laws being 
used in trafficking cases?  Are these laws, taken 
together, adequate to cover the full scope of trafficking 
in persons?  Please provide a full inventory of 
trafficking laws, including civil penalties (e.g., civil 
 
DAKAR 00000527  006 OF 009 
 
 
forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt). 
 
There is no law specifically prohibiting trafficking in 
people.  Other laws are currently being used, although 
they are weakly applied.  The local judge in Gabu 
described one case in which a father and his brother were 
being prosecuted under Art. 196 of the penal code, removal 
of minors.  Other laws against sexual exploitation, abuse 
and kidnapping of minors may also be useful in prosecuting 
trafficking cases.  Prostitution is illegal, as is 
pimping. 
 
¶B.  What are the penalties for traffickers of people for 
sexual exploitation?  For traffickers of people for labor 
exploitation? 
 
There is no trafficking law, but the law against 
kidnapping, which may be used in child trafficking, 
carries a penalty of two to ten years in prison. 
 
¶C.  What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the penalty for sex 
trafficking? 
 
The penalty for rape is between one and five years in 
prison.  Sex trafficking is not specifically covered under 
the law and in fact does not appear to be a widespread 
problem in Guinea-Bissau. 
 
¶D.  Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers 
criminalized?  Are these laws enforced?  If prostitution 
is legal and regulated, what is the legal minimum age for 
this activity?  Note that in many countries with 
federalist systems, prostitution laws may be covered by 
state, local and provincial authorities. 
 
The activities of the prostitute, brothel owner, pimp, and 
customer are all criminalized.  There are no statistics on 
enforcement of this crime. 
 
¶E.  Has the Government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions and sentences, including details 
on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and available. 
Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced:  If no, 
why not?  Please indicate whether the Government can 
provide this information, and if not, why not?  (Note: 
Complete answers to this section are essential.  End 
Note.) 
 
There have been no successful prosecutions of traffickers. 
Two cases are pending in the courts.  In one case in the 
Court of Gabu, an uncle of a trafficked child was released 
by the court and ordered to find his brother, the child's 
father, as they are both implicated in trafficking.  The 
father has not yet appeared, but if he does not, the court 
will summon the uncle to be tried within the next two 
months.  The judge was confident the defendant would not 
flee and would return to face justice.  In another case in 
Bafata, a man was accused by a mother of selling her 
child.  The mother was so persistent, even taking her case 
to the National Popular Assembly, where she continues to 
demand justice, that the alleged trafficker was finally 
arrested.  Due to poor health, he was released to house 
arrest after eight months detention and is awaiting trial. 
The child in that case, who disappeared 16 years ago, has 
never reappeared. 
 
¶F.  Is there any information or reports of who is behind 
the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers 
freelance operators, small crime groups, and/or large 
international organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, 
travel and tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting 
for traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
Are government officials involved?  Are there any reports 
on where profits from trafficking in persons are being 
channeled (e.g. armed groups, terrorist organizations, 
judges, banks, etc.)? 
 
 
DAKAR 00000527  007 OF 009 
 
 
Marabouts from Senegal are the primary traffickers.  They 
sometimes use intermediaries with community connections to 
recruit and transport children to Koranic schools.  In 
most cases, they are known to communities in which they 
operate, AMIC and the police.  Some have been photographed 
by police for the purpose of prevention.  They operate in 
the open, protected by their stature in the Muslim 
community and the fact that most Bissau-Guinean and 
Senegalese politicians do not have the temerity to 
confront them.  For example, the marabout implicated in 
the case described above involving a father and uncle is 
named Tcherno Babacar Djalo, DOB Jan. 9, 1946.  His 
passport identification is on file with other court 
documents, but he is not a defendant in the case.  The 
Bissau-Guinean Ambassador to Senegal can list several 
marabouts that traffic children; one of them is his 
cousin. 
 
¶G.  Does the Government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking?  (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.)  Does the 
Government use active investigative techniques in 
trafficking in persons investigations?  To the extent 
possible under domestic law, are techniques such as 
electronic surveillance, undercover operations, and 
mitigated punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects 
used by the Government?  Does the criminal procedure code 
or other laws prohibit the police from engaging in covert 
operations? 
 
The Government does not actively investigate most cases of 
trafficking. 
 
¶H.  Does the Government provide any specialized training 
for government officials on how to recognize, investigate 
and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
The Government does not provide any special training on 
trafficking, but has said it would welcome any training 
that foreign governments or international organizations 
can provide. 
 
¶I.  Does the Government cooperate with other governments 
in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? 
If possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations on trafficking? 
 
Guinea-Bissau is one of nine countries in the 15-member 
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) that 
cooperate to combat trafficking in persons.  Police in 
Gabu contacted police in Kolda, Senegal, in January 2006 
to request assistance in identification of trafficked 
Bissau-Guinean children.  This is a positive step that 
shows an increasing understanding of the need for 
cooperation in confronting TIP. 
 
¶J.  Does the Government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post 
provide the number of traffickers extradited?  Does the 
Government extradite its own nationals charged with such 
offenses?  If not, is the Government prohibited by law 
form extraditing its own nationals?  If so, what is the 
Government doing to modify its laws to permit the 
extradition of its own nationals? 
 
The Government is not prohibited from extraditing its 
nationals but has no record of being asked to do so for 
TIP. 
 
¶K.  Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional 
level? If so, please explain in detail. 
 
There is no evidence of government involvement in TIP. 
 
¶L.  If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the Government taken to end such 
participation?  Have any government officials been 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or trafficking- 
related corruption?  Have any been convicted?  What actual 
sentence was imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if 
available. 
 
DAKAR 00000527  008 OF 009 
 
 
 
No GOGB officials are known to have been involved in 
trafficking. 
 
¶M.  If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the Government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin?  Does the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial 
coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
 
There is little tourism in Guinea-Bissau, and there are no 
reports of child sex tourism. 
 
¶N.  Has the Government signed, ratified, and/or taken 
steps to implement the following international 
instruments?  Please provide the date of 
signature/ratification if appropriate. 
 
ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor. 
 
No. 
 
ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor. 
 
Both ratified 21 February 1977. 
 
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child 
prostitution and child pornography. 
 
Signed September 8, 2000, and in the process of being 
ratified after the ANP was dissolved for a number of 
years. 
 
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing 
the UN Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. 
 
Signed December 14, 2000, but not yet ratified. 
 
PARA 24.  PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
¶A.  Does the Government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care 
facilities?  If so, can post provide the number of victims 
placed in these care facilities? 
 
A lack of resources keeps the Government from providing 
any services for victims besides basic transportation back 
from Senegal.  Benevolent individuals, some with the 
Government, some with police, and some NGOs, provide most 
other assistance. 
 
¶B.  Does the Government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to 
victims?  Please explain. 
 
The Government contributes about USD 16,000 to AMIC's 
annual operating budget.  It cooperates and coordinates 
closely with UNICEF, Save the Children (Dakar) and other 
foreign NGOs. 
 
¶C.  Is there a screening and referral process in place, 
when appropriate, to transfer victims detained, arrested 
or placed in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities to NGO's that provide short- or long-term 
care? 
 
Police in the primary source areas of Gabu and Bafata 
generally coordinate with AMIC to assist victims and 
locate parents. 
 
¶D.  Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims 
also treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, 
or deported?   If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are 
victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of 
 
DAKAR 00000527  009 OF 009 
 
 
other laws, such as those governing immigration or 
prostitution? 
 
Victims are not punished or persecuted in any way by 
anyone other than their traffickers. 
 
¶E.  Does the Government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to 
such legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in 
a court case against the former employer, is the victim 
permitted to obtain other employment or to leave the 
country?  Is there a victim restitution program? 
 
Nothing impedes victims from seeking justice from their 
traffickers other than a cultural perception that 
marabouts are above the law. 
 
¶F.  What kind of protection is the Government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the Government provide?  Does it provide shelter or 
any other benefits to victims for housing or other 
resources in order to aid the victims in rebuilding their 
lives?  Where are child victims placed (e.g. in shelters, 
foster-care type systems or juvenile detention centers)? 
 
See above. 
 
¶G.  Does the Government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in recognizing trafficking and in 
the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, 
including the special needs of trafficked children?  Does 
the Government provide training on protection and 
assistance to its embassies and consulates in foreign 
countries that are destination or transit countries?  Does 
it urge those embassies and consulates to develop ongoing 
relationships with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
 
The GOGB embassy in Senegal is a leader in the fight 
against trafficking.  It coordinates closely with NGOs in 
Senegal and the Red Cross to identify, assist and 
repatriate victims.  It uses its operating budget to fund 
assistance efforts and is reimbursed upon justification to 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
¶H.  Does the Government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its 
repatriated nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
The GOGB provides shelter, medical aid and food generally 
with the assistance of NGOs and the Red Cross. 
 
¶I.  Which internationals organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims?  What type of services do 
they provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive 
from local authorities? 
NOTE: If post reports that a Government is incapable of 
assisting and protecting TIP victims, then post should 
explain thoroughly.  Funding, personnel, and training 
constraints should be noted, if applicable.  Conversely, a 
lack of political will to address the problem should be 
noted as well. 
 
As noted above, the Government has no funds to support 
even a modest victim assistance program.  It relies 
heavily on international donor and NGO support not just 
for TIP assistance but for many basic functions of a 
government, including payment of civil service salaries. 
A non-exhaustive list includes the Red Cross, AMIC, RADDHO 
(Dakar), Save the Children (Dakar), UNICEF and the IOM. 
 
¶5.  (U) TIP officer for Guinea-Bissau, Gregory Holliday, 
who is resident in Dakar, Senegal, can be reached by 
telephone at 221-823-4296, x2415 and by e-mail at 
hollidaygx@state.gov.  Embassy TIP officer spent 
approximately 50 hours preparing this year's TIP report. 
Our sole FSN in Bissau spent about 35 hours. 
 
JACKSON