06GUANGZHOU30952
Baise, Guangxi: Poor Amidst a Wealth of Resources
Fri Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO4362
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0952/01 2720702
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 290702Z SEP 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4191
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC 0914
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 030952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND DRL 
USDA FOR FAS/ITP AND FAS/FAA 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON SOCI PGOV CH
SUBJECT: Baise, Guangxi: Poor Amidst a Wealth of Resources 
 
REFERENCE: A) Guangzhou 4033 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Baise, Guangxi, is one of China's poorest 
prefectures and despite relatively successful anti-poverty efforts, 
accounts for one-fourth of the poor population of Guangxi.  The 
prefecture has rich agricultural, mineral and tourism resources, but 
is only now developing its economy; earlier, military conflicts with 
Vietnam had impeded its efforts.  Trade frictions with Vietnam could 
arise as agricultural products in both areas compete with one 
another. End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Baise is located in the mountainous northwestern area of 
Guangxi Zhuang People's Autonomous Region and borders two Chinese 
provinces, Yunnan and Guizhou as well as Vietnam.  It has a 
population of about 3.7 million people, and an area of 3.63 million 
square kilometers.  There are seven major ethnic minorities in the 
Prefecture and the Zhuang people account for 80% of the population. 
It generally is hard to distinguish them from Han nationality on the 
basis of looks or lifestyle. 
 
Rich in Resources...Moving Out of Poverty But Staying Poor 
----------------- -------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Baise reportedly has more than 57 types of different mineral 
reserves, including aluminum, gold, coal and petroleum; it claims 
one billion tons of aluminum reserves, which is half of China's 
total and is said to be large enough to allow for more thal one 
hundred years of0mini~g.  Bcise'ssubtRopiaaovteS$txeted%gu}pe$ `rkd Vmyet}!ofmQ 
pm4motiad bmlngical vesources e.d ha3 bretdD"#gntitan~s for"lkcQnmQ 
aeibMltu}%Fvm&t}!dQ0o~`}gkQmV&bnxayj(qtgoZq0b {nnQJQ} SvQ`E`,$Wyu5xVQcQRuQQoQaHdR$tQ|}E-zIsnciPItQ~ "+x:axag&|`)Q:Aocl?1@Qources, Baise is among the poorest areas 
in China.  Officials explained that conflicts with Vietnam through 
the late 1970s prevented the prefecture from developing 
economically.  The municipality has 12 counties and one-county level 
city; 10 of them are recognized by the Central Government as 
national level poverty counties while the remaining two are 
classified as Regional/Provincial poverty counties.  In fact, 
prefectural officials told Congenoff that all 12 counties and the 
county-level city are equally poor, but since the prefecture had a 
quota limit from the central governments, only ten were granted 
national-level status; this results in a higher level of monetary 
and material support.  The average rural net income in Baise was RMB 
1,850 (USD 233) in 2005, compared with Guangxi's RMB 2,500 (USD 314) 
and China's RMB 3,255 (USD 410).  Eight percent of the total 
population in Baise belongs to the poorest social group, according 
to central government standards.  (Note: according to the State 
Statistics Bureau's standard in 2005, "poor people" refers to those 
with an average annual income of lower than RMB 683, or USD 86.  End 
note.)  Baise's poor account for one-fourth of Guangxi's total 
population in abject poverty. 
 
¶5. (U) Currently, Baise is predominantly an agricultural economy. 
The Government's priority in its rural work is to increase farmers' 
incomes, especially by guiding farmers to grow cash crops.  The 
income gap between rural mountain areas and flat lands is huge.  In 
flat areas, the average annual income is RMB 3,095 (USD 389) and can 
be as high as RMB 40,000 (USD 5,060).  In contrast, in remote and 
mountainous areas, people's average annual income can be as low as 
RMB 300 to 500 (USD 38 to 63), well-below China's abject poverty 
line. 
 
Industry: just starting up 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) As noted, Baise's industrial development in the past had 
been limited by fighting between China and Vietnam in the late 
1970s.  Only in recent years has Baise gradually begun developing 
its industrial sector, focusing on primary processing of mineral 
resources, especially aluminum.  Baise's goal is to become the 
world's capital of aluminum.  The central government is investing 
RMB 70 billion (USD 8.8 billion) to build a large aluminum refinery. 
 
GUANGZHOU 00030952  002 OF 002 
 
 
 The Prefecture's ultimate goal is to build an annual aluminum 
refining capacity of five million tons.  Local reserves of 
low-quality coal and hydroelectricity provide strong support to the 
aluminum industry, though this also raises environment concerns, 
though will need to be addressed. 
 
¶7. (U) Congenoff visited a local aluminum enterprise ("Yinhai"), 
which began operations in Baise in January 2003.  It has an annual 
refining capacity of 100,000 tons but currently only produces 70,000 
tons because of shortages of mined bauxite.  The company's output 
ranks 30th among China's 90 aluminum refining enterprises.  All of 
its refined aluminum bars are sold to aluminum processing 
enterprises in Nanhai, Guangdong Province.  Employees have an 
average income of RMB 15,000 to 20,000 a year (USD 1,900-2,500). 
 
¶8. (U) Baise also has oil reserves.  With oil prices rising, the 
Baise government plans to expand the annual refining capacity of its 
refinery from one million tons to five million tons with investment 
from the central government.  The prefecture also plans to develop 
higher value-added processing industries of manganese, construction 
materials, pharmaceuticals, and drinking alcohol. 
 
Benefit from Pan-PRD 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Baise is actively seeking opportunities from the Pan 
Pearl-River Delta (Pan-PRD) Forum (nine provinces plus Hong Kong and 
Macau).  Currently, Baise is supplies electricity to Shenzhen. 
Guangzhou, Guangdong's capital city, was assigned by the central 
government as the Baise's sister city to help the latter with 
poverty-relief issues; Guangzhou provides monetary support and 
introduces investors to Baise.  Baise officials hope the prefecture 
will benefit from its geographic location as the major channel of 
cargo from Yunnan Province to Hong Kong, and one of China's gateways 
to Vietnam. 
 
Competition with ASEAN Imports 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (U) Baise is only now beginning to face competition from 
Vietnam, ASEAN countries, and elsewhere due to the importation of 
agricultural products.  Officials believe the influence of rice 
imports is limited since they complement Baise's current rice 
structure.  The impact from fruit imports would be much stronger 
since fruit varieties in ASEAN, particularly Vietnam, could compete 
with Baise's produce and ASEAN fruits have the advantage of earlier 
harvest seasons.  The impact on Baise's sugar sector is less from 
Thai sugar imports than from Cuba, as Cuba's much lower price 
negatively affects local production.  Officials noted that, as 
Baise's agriculture grows, the ASEAN impact on its nascent cash crop 
industry will become more evident, and they expect Baise will need 
to upgrade its agriculture system to adjust.  Xinhua news service 
recently reported that Guangxi more than doubled the importation of 
farm produce as of August this year, up to USD 142 million, largely 
due to the cancellation of import duties on most agricultural 
products from ASEAN countries.  Of the total, USD 120 million worth 
of products came from Vietnam. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11.  (U) Rich in material resources, the prefecture has the 
potential over time to substantially raise its GDP through increased 
industrialization.  However, Baise's large rural population, the 
economy's gradual development, and increasing agricultural 
competition from Vietnam means the poor will likely remain poor for 
a while longer. 
 
GOLDBERG