06HELSINKI110
FINLAND: REACTION TO TURKISH INITIATIVE ON CYPRUS
Tue Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HELSINKI 000110 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CY TU FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: REACTION TO TURKISH INITIATIVE ON CYPRUS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 16987 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Poloff delivered reftel demarche to officials from 
the MFA's Southeast Europe and EU Affairs offices.  The Finns 
expressed disappointment with the rapidity of the Cypriot 
government's rejection of the Jan. 24 Turkish proposal; 
however, the GoF was not surprised by the Cypriot rejection 
and expects further posturing from both sides.  Upcoming 
Cypriot elections (May) probably influenced the decision 
since many politicians are adopting a hard line toward 
Turkish initiatives in hopes of bolstering their public 
support.  The GoF will continue to work with and through the 
EU to encourage both sides to resume dialogue as soon as 
possible. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The Finns opined that Turkey's initiative was 
helpful as a basis for further discussion and as an attempt 
to jump-start the stalled process; however, there was nothing 
new or groundbreaking in the Turkish proposal, only a 
restatement of existing Turkish obligations.  Referring to 
the statement by EU Commissioner for Enlargement Olli Rehn (a 
Finn), the Finnish officials said that by signing the Ankara 
Protocol in 2005, Turkey had made commitments to the EU and 
all its Member States, including Cyprus, and was expected to 
meet them fully.  In particular, Turkey was already obligated 
to open ports to Cyprus and to take immediate and concrete 
steps to end the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community. 
From this perspective, the Turkish proposal, while welcome, 
was not as substantive as it could be.  An indication of 
Turkey's willingness to clarify and implement reasonable 
regulations governing assistance and aid programs to the 
Turkish Cypriots was an important next step. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Finally, when asked what the U.S. could do to 
facilitate a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue, 
the Finnish officials said that the U.S. could play an 
important role in the UN Security Council.  Russia was 
blocking Security Council endorsement of the UNSYG 
recommendations for a comprehensive settlement.  American 
efforts to encourage Moscow to drop its opposition to an 
official endorsement would be helpful. 
HYATT