06HONGKONG3633
AIR POLLUTION:  HURTING HONG KONG'S ECONOMIC
Tue Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO7568
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #3633/01 2550136
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 120136Z SEP 06
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8547
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HONG KONG 003633 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND OES/E 
STATE PASS USDOE FOR SKELLY, INTERNATIONAL/PUMPHREY/PRICE 
STATE PASS HQEPA FOR INTERNATIONAL/THOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ENRG SENV CH HK
SUBJECT: AIR POLLUTION:  HURTING HONG KONG'S ECONOMIC 
COMPETITIVENESS 
 
REF: HONG KONG 3601 
 
(U) THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE 
PROTECT ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR RELEASE OUTSIDE U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CHANNELS.  NOT FOR INTERNET PUBLICATION. 
 
1.(SBU) Summary:  In an American Chamber of Commerce survey 
of 140 top executives in Hong Kong, 95% expressed concern 
over the long term health effects of breathing Hong Kong,s 
polluted air.   The study indicates that Hong Kong businesses 
experience difficulties in recruiting and retaining top 
talent due to a perceived deterioration in air quality.  59% 
of respondents said that the lack of concrete government 
attention to the environment might cause them to invest 
elsewhere.  The Hong Kong government (HKG) reacted by 
reiterating its commitment to improving air quality through 
two programs it rolled out this  summer, &Action Blue Sky8 
and an emissions trading scheme.  While the public has 
welcomed signs of government action, current initiatives 
appear designed more for political impact than environmental 
results.  AmCham officials hope their survey will help build 
momentum for more substantive proposals by the government. 
End Summary. 
 
The Economic Consequences of Bad Air 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong (AmCham) 
published its 2006 Environmental Survey on August 28, 2006. 
The AC Nielsen survey encompassed 140 top executives from 
AmCham member companies with collective employment figures of 
approximately 250,000 Hong Kong residents.  The survey 
quantifies anecdotal evidence that foreign companies find 
Hong Kong a less attractive place to do business due to 
deteriorating air quality.  95% of respondents were &very 
worried8 or &somewhat worried8 on the long-term impact of 
Hong Kong,s air quality on their health or the health of 
their children.  79% felt that Hong Kong,s attractiveness to 
foreign investors will decrease over time if current air 
quality trends continue; 59% said that current trends may 
cause them to invest their money outside of Hong Kong.  39% 
experienced difficulties in recruiting employees into Hong 
Kong, while 55% reported having colleagues who refused to 
come to Hong Kong because of recent environmental trends. 
This study underscores the points made by James Connaughton, 
Chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality, 
that investing in environmental protection has long-term 
economic benefits.  (See Reftel) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Alan Siegrist, AmCham Environmental Committee 
Chairman, told EconOff the study provides concrete data that 
the environmental degradation ) particularly air pollution 
) is having economic consequences.  He noted that the HKG 
had not responded seriously to previous calls to develop 
concrete programs to address air quality.  Siegrist 
characterized current efforts as largely public relations 
campaigns in preparation for the upcoming elections. 
Siegrist echoed criticisms by NGO leaders, energy executives, 
and legislators that recent HKG initiatives fail to address 
the root causes of deteriorating air quality: maritime/port 
pollution, outdated transportation systems, and unprecedented 
industrial growth in the Pearl River Delta (PRD). 
 
¶4. (U) The Hong Kong government has responded to the widely 
publicized survey by reaffirming its determination to fight 
air pollution.  It stated that Hong Kong would meet its 
emission reduction targets for 2010, but did not propose new 
initiatives.  Some, however, have acknowledged the extent of 
the problem.  Victor Fung, Chairman of the government-backed 
Greater Pearl River Delta Business Council, publicly stated 
that pollution &up to a year ago really hadn,t hit our 
pocketbook, now people are not coming to Hong Kong.8 
 
&Clean Air for a Cool Hong Kong8 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Prior to the publication of the AmCham survey, the 
Hong Kong government initiated two environmental programs in 
¶2006.  Chief Executive Donald Tsang announced the first, 
&Action Blue Sky,8 in July by requesting Hong Kong 
citizens, businesses, and schools help the government combat 
air pollution.  He urged the public to raise air-conditioner 
settings in homes and offices to 25.5 degrees Celsius, take 
public transportation, and shed their jackets and ties in 
summer.  In this public awareness campaign, he and Sarah 
Liao, Secretary for the Environment, Transport and Works, 
reiterate continually that the public must bear the price of 
 
HONG KONG 00003633  002 OF 003 
 
 
cleaning up the air by changing daily activities and must not 
depend on the government alone for action. 
 
¶6. (U) &Action Blue Sky8 has received much publicity, but 
old habits die hard.  Surveys by the local media reveal that 
the majority of Hong Kong office buildings and hotels have 
yet to raise air temperatures, while the outer doors of many 
Hong Kong shopping centers and restaurants remain open 
despite air-conditioning use.  Furthermore, &Lights Out,8 
an event sponsored by local environmental groups to urge Hong 
Kong residents to turn off their lights in a symbolic protest 
against worsening air pollution, received lack-luster 
response from the public with participation from only 15 to 
20 percent of residents and businesses in Central Hong Kong. 
The government also refused to cancel the Hong Kong harbor 
light show that evening, claiming that the cancellation would 
negatively impact tourism.  Organizers stated that the 
government,s failure to participate ran contrary to its own 
calls for action. 
 
¶7. (SBU) A local air quality expert told us that &Action 
Blue Sky8 was repackaged old news.  He argued that the 
government simply finesses the problem, but continually fails 
to address broader issues behind worsening air quality, such 
as marine emissions, factory pollution in Guangdong, poor 
urban planning and continued use of low-grade automobile 
fuels from the PRC. Representatives from local NGO,s all 
concurred that &Action Blue Sky8 did not constitute a 
viable, long-term energy and environmental policy. 
 
Emissions Trading:  Lofty Words with No Specifics 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8. (U) As part of the Hong Kong/Guangdong Cooperation Joint 
Conference, Donald Tsang announced the second 
environmental/energy program, the &Emission Trading Pilot 
Scheme for Thermal Power Plants.8  The HKG and Guangdong 
government will present the plan to power producers later 
this year, but initial reports indicate that it will allow 
polluters in the energy sector to buy and sell emissions 
rights for three types of pollutants:  sulfur dioxide, 
nitrogen dioxide and particulates.  Emissions levels and 
other details remain unclear.  The government argues that the 
plan will provide Hong Kong power companies with a 
cost-effective mechanism to meet emissions requirements.  All 
reports indicate that this scheme will apply only to 
electricity producers, not to polluters in other industries. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The trading scheme proposal currently lacks 
substance.  Hong Kong energy companies remain concerned over 
the sole focus on the energy sector and the failure to 
include PRD manufacturers, who rely on diesel power to keep 
production running.  They criticize the plan for failing to 
address 1) how legal issues would be resolved between the two 
jurisdictions; 2) how quotas and costs would be decided; 3) 
how transparency can be assured in Guangdong, particularly 
given the low salaries of inspectors, the lack of rule of 
law, and ample opportunities for corruption.  As a Civic 
Exchange representative put it, the power companies fear they 
) and by default the Hong Kong consumer ) will be forced to 
&dump money into the black hole of the Mainland8 without 
any guarantee of results.  The power producers appear to be 
easy targets because the government has political leverage 
over this sector with the upcoming decisions over the 
soon-to-expire Scheme of Control agreement between the HKG 
and Hong Kong power firms. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The media and public have questioned the ability of 
both Hong Kong and Guangdong to set up an effective emissions 
trading program due to differences in their regulatory and 
legal systems.  Success clearly depends on a willingness of 
localities in the mainland and Hong Kong to give up some 
short-term economic interests for longer-term environmental 
benefits. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Roy Tang of the Hong Kong Environmental Protection 
Department told EconOff that the HKG has a comprehensive 
package of programs to address environmental quality that 
includes cross-border agreements, emissions trading, and 
public awareness campaigns.  He stated that the government 
will roll out further details on the proposal by the end of 
the year.  He noted that the scheme, which is not mandatory, 
is just one tool to assist power producers to reduce 
emissions.  He reiterated Hong Kong,s willingness to address 
the pollution issue and its ability to meet its 2010 
reduction targets. 
 
 
HONG KONG 00003633  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶12. (SBU) Nonetheless, pressure is mounting on the 
government.  The Chief Executive,s office announced that the 
environment will be the focus of his annual policy address in 
October, and a recent address by the CE to Hong Kong's 
consular corps led off with a long recitation of all the 
effort the HKG is mounting to combat pollution.  Air quality 
continues to be a common topic in private discussions across 
Hong Kong, particularly since air quality has deteriorated so 
rapidly in the past ten years.  In fact, during a Consulate 
meeting on a different topic, a senior executive of an 
American firm commented on the AmCham study, saying air 
pollution was a deciding factor in his decision to move their 
regional office from Hong Kong to Singapore.  Civic groups, 
academics and opposition party members also have stepped up 
political pressure to act.  With Hong Kong natives and the 
international business community in the HKSAR beginning to 
raise their voices, the HKG remains under the gun to come up 
with comprehensive and viable proposals to address air 
quality issues, particularly cross-border environmental 
problems. 
 
Cunningham