06KABUL462
PRT/HELMAND: NEW HELMAND GOVERNOR PLEDGES
Fri Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 000462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR SA/FO (AMB MQUINN), SA/A, S/CR, SA/PAB, 
S/CT, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
OSD FOR BREZINSKI 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76, POLAD 
REL NATO/AUST/NZ/ISAF 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER SNAR AF
SUBJECT: PRT/HELMAND: NEW HELMAND GOVERNOR PLEDGES 
IMPROVEMENTS 
 
1.(SBU)SUMMARY: Helmand Provinces new governor, 
Engineer Daoud, told PRTOFF on January 24 that he 
he 
will address corruption, security, and narcotics. 
Lack of government capacity is a major constraint. 
Most citizens support the government, but feel 
disconnected due to corrupt officials.  The opium 
problem can be solved with a balanced and gradual 
approach.  The Provincial Council is a useful body 
and will serve as a good bridge between citizens and 
the provincial government.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.(SBU)Governor Daoud, who succeeded Shir 
Mohammed in mid-December, said that he had been 
very comfortable in his advisory role in Kabul in 
the National Security Council.  He had had no 
ambitions to be Helmands governor.  However, 
President Karzai prevailed upon him to take on the 
assignment.  The President said that he wanted Daoud 
to improve provincial administration and to ensure a 
smooth transition as the British take over security 
and reconstruction efforts in Helmand Province. 
 
3.(SBU)Governor Daoud previously served under 
National Security Director Dr. Rassoul.  (Embassy 
mbassy 
Note: He was our main contact on detainee and 
reconciliation issues.  End Embassy Note.)  He also 
has worked for non-governmental organizations and 
humanitarian projects under UN auspices.  He 
described himself as an Arab/Pashtun, which he 
said is a small ethnic minority, consisting of 
probably no more than 10 to 15 families.  Helmand is 
a tribal-centric province; the Governor said that 
his lack of tribal affiliation is an advantage, 
giving him an opportunity to serve as an honest 
broker between other tribes.  Governor Daoud was 
born and raised in Gereshk, Helmands second largest 
city.  His spoken English is near fluent. 
 
4.(SBU)HELMANDS MAJOR THREAT IS FROM WITHIN: 
Governor Daoud said that, while the security 
situation in the province is difficult, the 
greater, long-run problem is governance.  Capacity 
among the provincial government departments is very 
weak.  The lack of capacity, along with rampant 
corruption, are two major impediments to improving 
improving 
governance in the province, and are causing many of 
Helmands citizens to feel disconnected from the 
government.  Specifically, he cited corruption 
allegations concerning the chief of the provincial 
police and the Lashkar Gah (Helmands provincial 
capital) mayor for their corrupt land dealings.  On 
the bright side, most citizens support the 
government in a general sense.  It is up to the 
provincial government to work for the people to 
prevent them from going over to our enemies. 
 
5.(SBU)Governor Daoud has already been active, 
despite his short tenure.  He directed the police to 
arrest eleven (11) individuals accused of taking 
bribes on behalf of provincial officials.  They are 
in jail while the case is investigated.  The 
Governor said that the investigation could lead to 
further arrests, including of local officials. 
Within the past several weeks, Daoud has replaced 
the provincial agriculture director, the Sangin 
district chief and the Garmser police chief. 
 
hief. 
 
6.(SBU)The Governor said that he will improve 
governance in the province, although he cautioned 
that it would take time.  The problems are deep and 
must be resolved on a step by step basis.  The 
Governor noted that if he removed every corrupt 
provincial official, there would not be many offices 
open. 
 
7.(SBU)OPIUM  NEED A BALANCED APPROACH: The 
Governor acknowledged that opium is a major problem. 
Drugs are at the root of much of the violence in the 
province.  The Governor said that his view was to 
take a balanced approach, addressing cultivation, 
smugglers and markets.  He suggested an aggressive 
approach in Baram Cha (the area along the southern 
Helmand border with Pakistan), including military 
operations to address smuggling and production of 
opium and heroin.  The Governor also advocated the 
arrest of smugglers, especially those who are more 
significant.  He admitted that this would be 
difficult, since the provincial police are both 
corrupt and inept, and would like to see an elite, 
elite, 
independent force to engage smugglers.  The Governor 
said that it might be possible to build on the 
current counter-narcotics police unit. 
 
8.(SBU)Concerning cultivation, Governor Daoud 
said that eradication must be a part of any counter- 
narcotics program.  Again, a dedicated, non-corrupt 
force is necessary if any eradication program is to 
be successful.  A key component is to convince the 
small farmers not to cultivate poppy.  This should 
be done through appealing to Islamic principles, 
implementing alternative livelihoods and law 
enforcement.  The Governor said that his idea was to 
focus eradication efforts on larger planters 
(including government officials) to set an example 
and demonstrate to small farmers that they should 
cease poppy cultivation.  The Governor said that he 
did not advocate immediate and complete eradication 
of the fields of small, poor farmers; this would 
further impoverish the countryside and alienate 
ordinary citizens. 
 
9.(SBU)Governor Daoud said that, in the long 
ong 
run, alternative livelihoods was the key to success. 
Many farmers have told him that they had been 
waiting years for some assistance, such as repairing 
irrigation canals and alternative cash crops.  The 
Governor said that he hoped that USAIDs alternative 
livelihoods program would address these needs.  He 
also plans to appeal to other international donors 
for additional assistance.  Daoud said that there is 
no reason that one day Helmand cannot return to its 
standing as the leading agricultural province in 
Afghanistan. 
 
10.(SBU)PROVINCIAL COUNCIL  A POSITIVE 
INFLUENCE: The Governor said that he fully 
supports the Provincial Council and would 
facilitate their ability to act as a bridge between 
citizens and the provincial government.  They meet 
weekly and have an office within the Governors 
compound.  Daoud said that he has asked the 
Provincial Council to visit various provincial 
offices and suggest improvements or point out 
corrupt practices.  He has also asked the Council to 
uncil to 
provide him a list agreed to by all the members, of 
potentially qualified people for positions in 
provincial officers. 
 
11.(SBU)COMMENT: Compared to Helmands previous 
governor, Daoud has a vision of where he wants to 
take Helmand Province.  His open mindedness 
concerning the Provincial Council is also 
encouraging.  He faces an uphill struggle for just 
the reasons he outlined  endemic corruption, little 
capacity/human capital and a provincial economy 
essentially based on opium cultivation and 
production.  While the Governor presents himself as 
a neutral player in this province dominated by 
tribal loyalties, he will face challenges as he 
navigates the many tribal-based issues.  Strong 
support and patience will be required in one of 
Afghanistans most difficult provinces.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
12.(U)Dushanbe minimize considered. 
 
NORLAND 
 
RLAND