06KABUL275
AFGHAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY: UPCOMING AGENDA
Thu Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000275 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR SA/FO AMBASSADOR QUINN, S/CT, SA/A 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 
TREASURY FOR LMCDONALD, WBALDRIDGE, APARAMESWARAN, ABAUKOL 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID 
USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KDEM AF
SUBJECT: AFGHAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY: UPCOMING AGENDA 
 
REF: KABUL 18 
 
¶1. (SBU)  SUMMARY.  The Afghan National Assembly (NA) will 
resume session on Saturday, January 21.  On the immediate 
agenda are continued discussion on rules of procedure and the 
formation of political groups and committees.  Debate on 
approving the Cabinet and transitional laws will most likely 
occur after the London Conference (January 31-February 1). 
Approval of the Supreme Court justices is not yet on the NA 
agenda.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Immediate Agenda Remains Non-Controversial 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Both the Wolesi Jirga (WJ - lower house) and 
Meshrano Jirga (MJ - upper house) have provisionally adopted 
rules of procedure for a three-month period without 
substantial revision to the version of the rules drafted 
before the inauguration (Reftel).  The rules will be referred 
to a soon-to-be formed committee on rules and administration 
for further review.  The only remaining section of the rules 
to be debated in the WJ is the article relating to approval 
of the Cabinet.  This final article is expected to be the 
first item on the agenda upon the return of Parliament, and 
will govern how the WJ approves the Cabinet (i.e., 
individually or as a group slate, and within what period of 
time). 
 
¶3. (SBU) After completion of the rules of procedure, the WJ 
will turn to the formation of political (or parliamentary) 
groups.  These groups, which must be formed based on ideology 
and contain a minimum of 21 Members of Parliament, will in 
some ways take on the function of parties within Parliament. 
Seats on the 19 planned committees will be determined based 
on the principle of balancing the power of the different 
groups, with representatives from each of the political 
groups.  Group and committee formation is expected to take 
approximately two weeks. 
 
Cabinet Likely to be Debated in February 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) After completing its internal structure, the WJ will 
likely turn to the approval of Cabinet ministers.  One rumor 
is that WJ Speaker Yunus Qanooni has cut a deal with 
President Karzai to smooth the approval of his Cabinet by 
approving it as a group - rather than minister by minister - 
and within thirty days.  Approval of the Cabinet members as a 
slate will need the approval of a majority of the Wolesi 
Jirga.  Meshrano Jirga approval is not needed for the 
cabinet.  Whether Cabinet members are approved one by one or 
as a slate, there is a fair amount of nervousness in 
ministerial circles about job security, particularly given 
reports that the number of ministries will be reduced from 24 
to 19. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Debate on the decrees passed by President Karzai 
since his election is likely to begin after the approval of 
the Cabinet.  Most MPs, in conversation with POLOFFs, have 
stated that each decree will be considered individually by 
the appropriate committee before it is sent to the floor for 
a general vote.  The debate on decrees is likely to last 
several months and, as with all legislation, the decrees 
could be reconsidered by the National Assembly at any time in 
the future.  The Constitution states that all decrees will 
remain in effect unless negated by Parliament. 
 
"Thirty Day Rule" Not a Factor 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) While the transitional provisions of the 
Constitution (Chapter 12) mention that the National Assembly 
should approve the Government and Supreme Court within thirty 
days of sitting, due to the practical need for time to 
organize the Assembly itself, these matters are being treated 
more in line with the regular provisions of the Constitution 
on interaction between the executive and legislative branches 
(Chapter 5).  Chapter 5 states that government legislation 
should be voted upon by the WJ within 30 days of its 
presentation to Parliament.  In a variety of discussions with 
POLOFFs, no MP has mentioned approval of Supreme Court 
justices as an upcoming agenda item for the National 
Assembly.  Supreme Court nominees are not likely to come on 
the agenda until Karzai announces the slate of judges he 
intends to nominate.  It will be an executive-driven process. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The attitude of most MPs seems positive, and focused 
on progress in establishing the parliamentary framework. 
Whatever private deals are being made regarding committee 
memberships and whatever their private ambitions, in public 
MPs of all stripes are using the rhetoric of harmony and 
cooperation with each other and with the Karzai 
administration. END COMMENT. 
NORLAND