06KABUL295
PRT/KUNDUZ ? TAKHAR GOVERNOR ASKS FOR
Mon Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000295 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR SA/FO AMBASSADOR QUINN, S/CT, SA/A 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID 
USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
TREASURY FOR APARAMESWARAN 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SNAR EAID AF GE
SUBJECT:  PRT/KUNDUZ ? TAKHAR GOVERNOR ASKS FOR 
ALTERNATIVE LIVELIHOODS FOR FARMERS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  During a meeting with PRToff, the 
Governor of Takhar made his usual requests for 
increased international assistance to Takhar Province, 
particularly on road construction and alternative 
livelihoods (AL).  The Governor's claims of neglect of 
his province were disingenuous given ongoing AL 
programs.  The meeting also revealed the Governor's 
lack of interest in consulting with the Takhar 
Provincial Council.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) On January 16, military and civilian members 
of the Kunduz PRT met with the Governor of Takhar, 
Khwaja Khausuddin Abu Bakr, and seven members of the 
Takhar Provincial Council (PC).  The meeting was held 
to introduce to the PC the various development and 
reconstruction projects the PRT, the German Ministry 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (MECD), and 
USAID have completed or that are currently under 
construction.  The PRT used this meeting as an 
opportunity to request the PC develop a priority list 
of projects and sectors that need development 
assistance during calendar year 2006. 
 
Governor Claims Nobody likes Takhar 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Governor Abu Bakr began the meeting with his 
typical 30 minute mantra on the lack of investment in 
the province and lamented the number of projects 
needed.  He claimed, as he has in all public meetings 
for the past six months, that Takhar is continually 
ignored by the international community and that 
investment is never commensurate with that in other 
provinces. Representatives from MECD and the U.S. 
PRTOff addressed the Governor?s claims and read off a 
litany of projects that have been funded in Takhar 
over the last 2 years.  German Ministry of Interior 
Police also reminded the Governor of the $400,000 
investment in Takhar?s new provincial police HQ and in 
police stations in Kalafgan and Rustaq Districts 
during fiscal year 2005. 
 
District Roads are Top Priority 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Construction of roads connecting the 
outlying districts to Taloqan remains the Governor?s 
priority for future development.  He asked 
specifically for connecting roads from Baharak to 
Dast-e Qala and from Chah Ab to Rustaq.  He expressed 
frustration that all of the northern and northeastern 
districts were virtually cut off from the provincial 
capital due to the poor quality of the roads.  As an 
alternative to road construction, the governor asked 
for road maintenance equipment, including graders and 
bulldozers. The governor claimed he had met with the 
PC and that he was speaking for them as well as 
himself; however, the female members of the PC 
dissented and stated that, although they agreed with 
the governor on the need for more roads, there might 
be other priorities they would like to develop, if 
given the opportunity. The PRT promised to come back 
and meet with the PC about their list of priorities. 
 
Farmers Seek to Cultivate Poppy 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Governor then unexpectedly raised the 
subject of poppy cultivation in Takhar Province, 
claiming that Takhar farmers have no choice 
economically but to turn to poppy cultivation, and 
asking for additional international assistance to 
Takhar.  PRTOff pressed Abu Bakr to reveal information 
on cultivation rates for this planting year, but the 
Governor would not speculate. He simply reiterated the 
need for alternatives ? anything besides law 
enforcement. 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Governor?s cry for alternative livelihood 
investment was disingenuous at best, and primarily 
indicative of his inability to enforce the law by 
cracking down on drug trafficking and cultivation. 
PADCO, USAID?s AL contractor for Badakhshan and Takhar 
Provinces, has committed to over 179,000 labor days of 
work on Takhar?s canals through its Cash for Work 
(CFW) program and will employ over 16,000 day laborers 
between November 2005 and March 2006. 
PADCO had invested over $200,000 in such CFW programs 
by the end of 2005 and plans to spend over $950,000 by 
the end of March 2006. Moreover, the Governor sent a 
letter of commendation to PADCO officers thanking them 
for the outstanding work they are doing in the 
province. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED: In PRTOff's view, the 
economic plight of Takhar farmers is not the real 
problem in Takhar.  The real problem is the drug 
traffickers that use Takhar as a super-highway, 
unimpeded by police.  Historically, Takhar farmers 
have not relied on poppy proceeds as a primary source 
of income, and cultivation rates were among the lowest 
in the country.  Although that amount increased (by 79 
percent) last year to 1,300 hectares, it was still not 
an indicator of economic dependence on the crop.  The 
problem the Governor faces is not an economic 
dependence on poppy, but a criminal problem with 
people now seeking illegal sources of income.  While 
the international community remains committed to 
helping the Governor develop the security and economic 
sectors of society, the law must still be enforced. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED: The combined meeting 
showed an unfortunate relationship between the 
Governor and the PC.  Abu Bakr was less than willing 
to share time with the PC members in attendance.  He 
appeared to ignore their presence through most of the 
meeting, and resolutely stated that he spoke for them 
all with one voice.  Such statements were clearly 
untrue when the female members of the council were 
separately asked for their comments on development 
priorities.  The PC will need considerable attention 
and mentoring to form them into a working body with an 
integral role in provincial politics.  PRT Kunduz is 
keen on meeting with the Provincial Council and 
helping empower them in their advisory role.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
NORLAND