06KHARTOUM1469
Sudan/CPA:  AEC receives briefing on SPLM/NCP
Thu Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7212
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1469/01 1731201
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221201Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3354
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 001469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID PREL SU
SUBJECT:  Sudan/CPA:  AEC receives briefing on SPLM/NCP 
Meeting 
 
REF:  Khartoum 1308 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Paragraph 3 contains the final Joint Communique 
from the recently held NCP/SPLM senior level meetings 
(reftel).   At the Assessment and Evaluation Committee 
meeting on June 20, both sides were invited to brief the 
results of the meeting.  For the NCP, Sayed el-Khatib, 
Director of the Center for Strategic Studies, read the 
document, adding little commentary, except to say the 
meeting was a success.   SPLM Ann Itto, Minister of State 
for Agriculture, made the following comments: 
 
-- The meeting was important.   It went on for 3 days. 
It should have gone on for five.  There was a lot to 
discuss. 
 
-- There was too much focus on form; not enough on 
substance.   More committees were set up.  No timelines 
were established.  Tough divisive issues were discussed 
at length, but none was resolved. 
 
-- Abyei remains a key issue.  Absent its resolution, the 
security situation could deteriorate.  The four options 
agreed upon (see section on Abyei below) have been sent 
to the Presidency for decision. 
 
¶2.   (SBU) Itto's intervention was a strong, coherent, 
and rare intervention on the part of the SPLM with regard 
to its frustration over the pace of CPA implementation. 
NCP Khatib listened but did not respond.  Vraalsen urged 
the parties to tackle these issues quickly and 
substantively.  He also announced that he would be 
traveling to Abyei in the next 2 weeks, hopefully to pave 
the way for an AEC visit. 
 
¶3.  Begin text: 
 
The  1st  Joint Meeting between the NCP's Leading  Office 
and the SPLM's Politbureau 
 
        The Final Communique and Recommendations 
 
27-29 May 2006 
 
 
The  meeting  held closed sessions in which it  discussed 
joint  working  and  partisan  papers  on  the  following 
issues: 
  ¶1.   CPA implementation. 
¶2.   The security situation. 
¶3.   Partnership: concept and machineries. 
¶4.   Relations with the other political forces. 
¶5.   Darfur. 
¶6.   Eastern Sudan. 
¶7.   Regional and international relations. 
¶8.   Media. 
 
The  two  partners decided to strengthen the  principles, 
programs  and  institutions  of  their  partnership   and 
affirmed  that  this  partnership  does  neither  aim  at 
isolation  nor  marginalization of  the  other  political 
forces.   Rather  it is partnership for consolidation  of 
peace  and  stability  as  well  as  boosting  democratic 
transformation.   The two partners welcome  the  DPA  and 
appealed  to  the other sides that fail to  undersign  to 
join.    They  welcome  the  launching  of  the  Eritrean 
initiative for achieving peace in eastern Sudan. 
 
After  thorough evaluation of the achievements since  the 
CPA  signature,  the joint meeting formed five committees 
that reached the following recommendations: 
 
In the political and executive field: 
 
The two sides agreed on: 
  ¶01.    The   necessity  of  existence  of  coordination 
     machineries for guaranteeing the CPA implementation and 
     treatment of partnership questions. 
¶02.  Approval of Catching-up Program for implementation 
of the CPA delayed provision and resort to arbitration in 
the questions that prove difficult to resolve through 
direct consultations. 
¶03.  Approval of coordinated media method between the two 
partners. 
¶04.  Development of comprehensive media policy in 
accordance with the representation weight. 
¶05.  Multiplication of the efforts of the two partners 
for propagation and generalization of the CPA and the 
INC. 
¶06.  Upgrading the reconciliation process and boost 
 
KHARTOUM 00001469  002 OF 004 
 
 
understanding among the Sudanese people. 
¶07.  Confidence building between the two partner parties 
at all political levels and structures. 
¶08.  Improve and extend dialogue in the process of 
democratic transformation and basic freedoms embodied in 
the CPA and INC. 
¶09.  Strive to involve the other political forces in the 
CPA implementation. 
¶10.  Paying respect for institutionalism and boosting 
cooperation. 
¶11.  Establishment and construction of institutions of 
governments at all levels for boosting the rational rule. 
¶12.  Affirm the two partners' commitment to the tenets of 
foreign policy embodied in the CPA and the INC and 
normalization of relations with the neighbouring states. 
¶13.  Speed-up the implementation of the DPA. 
¶14.  Speed-up the process of peace talks in eastern 
Sudan. 
 
In the economic field 
 
First, the JNTT 
The  two  parties call the Presidency of the Republic  to 
review the mandate granted to the JNTT in conformity with 
the CPA. 
 
Second: the MDTF 
The meeting calls for: 
  a.     The   GoNU  shall  urge  the  MDTF  to  speed-up 
     implementation of the JAM programs in conformity and in 
     accordance with the priorities of this program and the 
     CPA. 
b.   The GoNU shall encourage the donors to speed-up 
provision and pumping of necessary resources for 
reconstruction and development. 
c.   The GoNU strives to confirm the effective 
participation of the communities especially the war- 
affected and less-developed ones in the programs and 
projects that are implemented through the MDTF. 
 
Third:   The   National   Fund   for   Development    and 
Reconstruction: 
The  meeting  apeals to the Presidency  to  speed-up  the 
formation  of  the  National  Fund  for  Development  and 
Reconstruction  for assuming its role  in  reconstruction 
and  development  of the war-affected and  less-developed 
areas outside the southern Sudan. 
 
Fourth: The National Petroleum Commission: 
The  two  sides  call the NCP and SPLM leaders  in  their 
capacities  as  alternating chairpersons of  the  NPC  to 
speed-up  the effectuation of the NPC works  through  the 
technical committees for undertaking the following: 
  ¶1.    Revision of the petroleum act to conform with the 
     provisions of the CPA. 
¶2.   Formulation of the policies and directives of the 
petroleum sector. 
¶3.   Look into the report of the SPLM committee on the 
valid petroleum contract. 
¶4.   Assessment of the material, ecological, and social 
impact of petroleum investment. 
 
Fifth: Petroleum development: 
The  two  parties  call all the levels of  government  in 
Sudan  to  protect  the  production  and  development  of 
petroleum  in  their  areas in conformity  with  the  CPA 
provisions. 
uiQ\Q1/ilding. 
 
Seventh: Issuing the new currency: 
The  meeting calls the Bank of Sudan to speed-up  issuing 
the new currency. 
 
Eighth: The National Lands Commission: 
The  meeting calls the Presidency to speed-up composition 
of the NLC. 
Nineth: Non-oil revenues: 
The  two  sides call the Ministry of Finance and National 
Economy  to  speed-up laying down the system  of  non-oil 
revenues in the southern Sudan as the two sides call  the 
GOSS and the concerned state governments to assist in the 
establishment of such system in conformity with  the  CPA 
provisions. 
 
Tenth: Public and private companies and corporations: 
 
KHARTOUM 00001469  003 OF 004 
 
 
  a.   The two sides call all the levels of government in 
     the south to facilitate the activities of the public and 
     private companies and corporations in accordance with the 
     criteria of competence, law, CPA provisions, and the best 
     international practice. 
b.   The two sides call all levels of government in the 
Sudan to encourage the development of the Sudanese 
private sector in appropriate competitive atmosphere. 
 
In the security field 
 
First:   Recommendations  in  the   Field   of   Security 
Arrangements: 
  a.   The Security Committee: mindful that the conclusion 
     of the protocol of security arrangements has constituted 
     the major breakthrough for reaching the CPA 
b.   As it is highly praising the strict commitment to 
ceasefire as no single confrontation between SAF and SPLA 
was recorded since Year 2002 
c.   As it takes cognizance of the machineries formed in 
accordance with the CPA such as: 
       ¶1.   The Joint Defense Council. 
¶2.   The joint forces. 
¶3.   Ceasefire observing committees. 
¶4.   Cooperation committee for treatment of the 
situations of the other armed groups. 
¶5.   DDR National Commission and North and South two 
commissions. 
¶6.   The National Organ for Mines Combat. 
  d.   As it takes  cognizance of the steps and procedures 
     adopted by the two sides for carrying out the operation 
     of redeployment north and south of 1956 line. 
e.   Inspired by the above-mentionedand based on the 
achieved appreciated successes, it recommends the 
following: "Giving the required political momentun for 
the organs and machineries mentioned in Para. (c) by 
composition of the branch security committee within the 
machineries of partnership at high representation level 
for: 
       ¶1.    political  supervision of these  organs  and 
          machineries and strive to solve the problems that inhibit 
          performance of their missions for guarantee of their 
          efficiency. 
¶2.   Treatment of the situations of the armed factions in 
accordance to the provisions of the CPA in a time range 
to be approved by the two sides. 
¶3.   Support the redeployment process to be completed in 
the specified and agreed-on calendars and dates as well 
as verification of the information of the two sides in 
this repsect. 
¶4.   Supervision and support the process of completion of 
the composition of the joint forces and guarantee their 
performance of their duties. 
 
Second: In the field of Security Situations: 
The Committee reviewed the security reports presented  by 
the  two sides in the joint meeting as it took cognizance 
of  the  constructive step which was  undertaken  by  the 
Federal  Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of  Police 
and  Security  in  the southern Sudan of  undersigning  a 
joint   memo  of  understanding.   In  this  field,   the 
Committee recommends the following: 
  a.   Extol the provisions of that understanding memo and 
     call for speeding-up implementation of these provisions 
     in order to boost the spirit of joint action and the 
     mutual support for of the various levels of govt to each 
     other and urge the other govt organs to follow suit. 
b.   Endorsement of the formation of high coordiantion 
machinery from the specialized bodies at the various 
levels of govt for undertaking the coordination of police 
and security activities in general and shall be vested 
the following mandate: 
       ¶1.   Boost the coordination and contacts among the 
          various police levels in the north and south. 
¶2.   Supervision of the process of treatment of the 
situation of police in the south, southern Kordofan and 
Blue Nile. 
¶3.   Treatment of the questions related to the control of 
the systems of passports, immigration, customs works, and 
civil aviation in accordance with the INC and law. 
¶4.   Approval of the GOSS initiative for solving the 
problem of LRA in accordance with the options presented 
by the GOSS.  The two sides shall coordinate their 
efforts to execute it. 
¶5.   Exchange of information and recommend necessary 
treatment by the specialized authorities. 
¶6.   Affirm that the phenomenon of widespread of the 
small arms is highly-complicated.  Social, economic and 
cultural variables are jointly responsible for this 
problem a matter that requires deep surveying studies 
 
KHARTOUM 00001469  004 OF 004 
 
 
that radically treat the reasons behind this phenomenon 
and build plans and strategies for controlling them. 
¶7.   Lay down the smooth treatments to the process of 
disarming the individuals who are not affiliated to armed 
factions. 
¶8.   Lay down treatments for avoiding skirmishes between 
transit pastoralists and farmers and lay down the 
arrangements that guarantee the safety of move and travel 
for the citizens in the touch points. 
 
In the Abyei Question 
Firstly: 
There is no difference between the NCP and SPLM over  the 
special administrative position of the Abyei area and the 
formation of the institutions provided for in the CPA. 
Secondly: 
The  two sides agreed to form the administration  of  the 
Abyei  area  from all the resident citizens in accordance 
with the CPA. 
Thirdly: 
The  two sides differed on the ABC Report. While the SPLM 
recommends  implementation of that Report  as  final  and 
binding,  the  NCP  objects it  on  the  ground  that  it 
bypassed the mandate granted to the experts. 
Fourthly: 
We  present  the following options to the  Presidency  to 
solve the problem: 
  a.   Reach solution based on political grounds. 
b.   Invite the experts to come and defend their report. 
c.   Refer the question for solution via the legal means 
i.e. to the constitutional court. 
d.   Refer the question to arbitration through a third 
party approved by the two sides. 
 
In the field of political partnership 
The two sides agreed on the following: 
The Joint Annual Meeting 
*Composed  of  the  NCP  Leading  Office  and  the   SPLM 
Political and Interim Office (60-60) 
*Meets annually. 
The Leading Coordination Committee 
*Shall be headed by the NCP and SPLM leaders. 
*Includes  the  two  deputy  leaders,two  sec-gen.,   and 
others.   Total  membership: Leader+5 members  from  each 
side. 
*Hold  a regular meeting once every three months and  may 
hold emergency meetings. 
The Political Committee for Follow-up: 
*Shall  be  headed by the two sec.-gen.  and  includes  5 
members from each party beside the Sec.-Gen. 
*The  NCP and SPLM shall be represented in this Committee 
on  high-level by leaders in the executive,  legislative, 
and political bodies. 
*It  may  form  branch  committees and  specialized  work 
teams. 
*Hold  a  regular  meeting once per month  and  may  hold 
emergency meetings. 
Finally: 
The  two  partners,  for  realizing  national  consensus, 
decided to initiate holding a meeting with the leaders of 
the  Sudanese  political forces as soon  as  their  joint 
meeting concludes for running consultations with them  on 
the  constructive cooperation in the light of the CPA and 
the INC. 
 
HUME