06KHARTOUM1942
LRA Talks Remain in Limbo Due to Ceasefire
Tue Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0330
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1942 2270414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 150414Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4156
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0025
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 0015UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS UN UG SU
SUBJECT:  LRA Talks Remain in Limbo Due to Ceasefire 
 
Ref: Khartoum 1894 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Although the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) walked 
out of talks on August 9, demanding a ceasefire, consultations 
between mediators and the parties have continued and talks are 
resuming.  Observers commented that the walkout was not a serious 
threat, only an attempt to gain leverage.  GoSS President Salva Kiir 
met with the LRA team on August 11 and secured an agreement to 
re-engage the Ugandans over ceasefire arrangements.  The Ugandan 
delegation wants any ceasefire arrangement to include cantonments 
where LRA fighters would gather and be counted.  The UN has agreed 
to provide a legal expert to facilitate discussions on a ceasefire. 
Norway is also considering establishing a technical peace 
secretariat.  The fundamental issue, that the negotiators do not 
 
SIPDIS 
truly represent Kony's point of view, has not been resolved.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Talks Continue in Fits and Starts 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Both the UN OCHA observers and the mediators from 
Sant'Egidio believe that talks will continue because LRA leader 
Joseph Kony realizes these talks are his last chance.  However, they 
warn that LRA threats to walk out will likely remain a regular 
fixture of the talks.  The current disagreement stems from the 
timing of a ceasefire.  The LRA has announced a unilateral ceasefire 
and asked the government of Uganda to reciprocate.  Uganda has 
refused, fearing the LRA would use a ceasefire to regroup as it has 
done before.  The Ugandans have said they will only accept a 
ceasefire as part of a final agreement.  The Ugandan negotiating 
team has pointed out that the September 12 deadline indicates a de 
facto ceasefire, but the Ugandan army reserves the right to deal 
with the LRA units that have continued to loot villages and steal 
food in northern Uganda. 
 
¶3. (SBU) To break the deadlock, GoSS President Salva Kiir summoned 
the LRA on August 11.  The LRA delegation then agreed to return to 
full talks on August 14 if ceasefire arrangements were the only 
agenda item.  Over the weekend, mediators continued talks with each 
side, and the Ugandan team indicated that it would consider a 
ceasefire separately from a final agreement if there were safe-haven 
rally points for all LRA fighters to gather at and be counted. 
Observers feel it is unlikely that the LRA will agree to this 
requirement.  The UN is now providing Riek Machar, GoSS Vice 
President and head mediator, with a legal expert to advise on the 
wording of a ceasefire and provide other technical assistance. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Uganda Announces Killing of LRA Leader Raska Lukwiya 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Uganda team announced over the weekend the UPDF had 
killed one of the five International Criminal Court indictees, Raska 
Lukwiya, who has been looting villages in Northern Uganda.  Unlike 
the October announcement that another indictee, Dominic Ongwen, was 
believed dead, which later turned out to be false, the Ugandans 
claim Lukwiya is confirmed dead and has been identified by defected 
LRA members.  This reinforces the LRA's demand for an immediate 
ceasefire, but may not affect long-term prospects for the talks.  A 
high- ranking UNMIS official said he believes that the continued 
military operations in Uganda, the ICC indictments, and the threat 
of a Security Council resolution all maintain pressure on Kony to 
remain committed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
To be Effective, Talks Need to Involve True LRA Leaders 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Most observers, and even the mediation team, agree that the 
talks will not make much progress until they are led by true 
military leaders from the LRA, and not just the Acholi diaspora 
calling themselves the Lord's Resistance Movement (LRM).  However, 
the groups see value in continuing the talks until there is enough 
momentum to draw the LRA leaders out of the bush and into the 
discussions.  Along these lines, the Norwegian Consulate General has 
asked Oslo to establish a technical secretariat for the 
negotiations.  A response from the Ministry of International 
Cooperation is expected this week. 
 
HUME