06MONTEVIDEO175
UNIONS SHOW THEIR MUSCLE THROUGH RASH OF PLANT
Wed Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Montevideo
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMN #0175/01 0530948
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220948Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5419
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDCUNCLAS MONTEVIDEO 000175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/BSC 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB ECON EINV PGOV UY
SUBJECT:  UNIONS SHOW THEIR MUSCLE THROUGH RASH OF PLANT 
OCCUPATIONS 
 
REF: MONTEVIDEO 10 
 
¶1. Summary:  Ever since it took office in March 2005, the 
Frente Amplio administration has engineered a shift in 
labor relations in favor of workers, starting with the 
derogation of a decree enabling police to intervene in 
plant occupations and culminating with the recent passage 
of the Union Protection Law (""Ley de Fuero Sindical""). 
The predictable result has been a rash in the number of 
plant occupations.  Recent violent incidents shocked 
Uruguay's traditionally peaceful population and catalyzed 
the government's announced intention to regulate 
occupations.  However, the GOU's view of occupations as a 
natural extension of the right of workers to go on 
strike"" collides squarely with property rights.  It is 
clear that the pendulum has swung too far in favor of 
trade unions, and how far the GOU will be able to back- 
track and how effective regulations will be in controlling 
the situation will be clear signals to investors, likely 
to impact on job creation.  End Summary. 
 
GOU shifts labor relations in favor of workers 
--------------------------------------------- - 

¶2.  Since taking office in March 2005, the left-of-center 
Frente Amplio government has progressively shifted labor 
relations in favor of workers.  Its first action was to 
derogate a 1966 decree that enabled the employer to 
request police action to evict occupying workers.  The GOU 
then established mandatory salary councils and finally 
passed a union protection and promotion law (Reftel). 
These actions triggered the creation of unions in 383 new 
firms, a growth in the union affiliation of 31,000 new 
workers, and a sharp overall deterioration in the climate 
of labor relations. 
 
Labor situation deteriorates rapidly as occupations soar 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 

¶3.  The strengthening of unions --blessed and promoted by 
the GOU--, led to an eight-fold increase in plant 
occupations, which rose from an average of 0.8 per month 
in January/April 2005, to 2.9 in May/December 2005, and to 
6.0 in January/mid-February 2006.  Several firms, 
including public ones, were occupied by a minority of 
workers and against the open opposition of the rest of the 
staff (Note:  In several cases, the majority of workers 
opposed to the occupation decided to create a competing 
union within the very same firm. End Note.)  The 
overwhelming majority of occupations have been against 
Uruguayan firms.  While foreign companies have not been 
targeted, several have been affected, including a dealer 
of US-sourced Exxon Mobil/ESSO, an Italian chemical 
factory, and a Spanish security firm. 
 
 
Taped violent incidents were the last straw... 
--------------------------------------------- - 

¶4.  The recent televised transmission of violent incidents 
at Naussa, a leather tanning factory, shocked Uruguay's 
traditionally peaceful society.  The February 14 evening 
news showed a violent clash between Naussa's owner --who 
broke into"" his own plant with a group of employees 
opposed to the ongoing occupation-- and 18 occupants.  The 
next day, a 300-person crowd led by the union leaders 
threatened to re-enter the plant by force, at which time, 
unable to control the situation, the police convinced the 
owner to leave his factory.  The crowd then assaulted the 
owner and his group of employees as they were exiting the 
plant and smashed the windshields of three vehicles, while 
police stood by (Note:  The police say that the derogation 
of the 1966 decree has taken away their only means of 
intervening in such situations.  End Note). 
 
...that prompted the GOU to take action 
--------------------------------------- 

¶5.  The Naussa case may have catalyzed the GOU into action 
to restrain the rash of occupations, as it realizes that 
they are getting out of control.  However, the GOU views 
occupations as a ""natural extension of the right to go on 
strike"", and its intentions are to regulate rather than 
prohibit them.  The GOU is thus reportedly considering the 
imposition of a three-step process before workers can 
occupy a plant.  It would also rule on specific traits of 
the occupation (e.g. necessary majorities to decide to 
occupy and guarantees of appropriate preservation of 
firms's machinery).  The Labor Ministry has announced that 
the new regulations would be passed within two weeks. 
 
Comment: Collision between occupation and property rights 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 

¶6.  It is certainly good news that the GOU, prompted by 
President Vazquez himself, has decided to take action to 
control the escalation of occupations.  The quality and 
effectiveness of the new regulations remain to be seen, 
however.  Even if additional stages are imposed to delay 
an occupation, the alleged ""right to occupy"" will 
eventually collide with the owner's property rights.  The 
GOU's handling of this delicate issue will have a direct 
impact on the quality of the investment climate and on job 
creation.  End Comment. 
 
NEALON