06NDJAMENA1113
SENATOR OBAMA VISITS REFUGEE CAMPS IN EASTERN CHAD
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXYZ0029
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNJ #1113/01 2491605
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061605Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4318
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS NDJAMENA 001113 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, D, DRL, PRM; LONDON AND PARIS FOR 
AFRICAWATCHERS; GENEVA FOR CAMPBELL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREF ASEC CD SU
SUBJECT: SENATOR OBAMA VISITS REFUGEE CAMPS IN EASTERN CHAD 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Following meetings with the African Union, UNHCR 
and partner organizations, and the Sudanese refugees, the 
message to Senator Obama was clear: a United Nations force 
was needed to bring security to the region. 
 
¶2.  (U) On September 2, Senator Barack Obama, accompanied by 
members of the CODEL, ten journalists from American media 
outlets, CDA and E/C officer, and UNHCR representative Serge 
Malle, visited the Mile refugee camp in the eastern Chadian 
town of Guereda.  Prior to the trip to Guereda, Senator Obama 
met with the African Union Mission in Sudan force commander 
in Abeche to discuss the current security climate in Eastern 
Chad. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
SENATOR OBAMA WITH THE AFRICAN UNION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (SBU) During a meeting with AMIS Force Commander Colonel 
Dominique (?), Senator Obama asked the Force Commander to 
describe the current security climate in Chad and Sudan, and 
note challenges AMIS faced in both Chad and Sudan.  Dominique 
stated that from the African Union perspective in Chad, camp 
security was improving.  The African Union was working with 
Chadian authorities to ensure the security of refugees.  He 
pointed out that refugee committees were also maintaining 
order within the refugee camps.  Dominique stated that 
concerns arose outside the refugee camps.  African Union 
observers, as well as Chadian authorities, lacked the 
logisitical means (such as radios and vehicles) to monitor 
all activities directly outside the camps.  The potential for 
attacks against refugees who were roaming outside the camps 
was high, and difficult to deter.  Since the AU mission 
maintained a Chapter VI mandate in Chad, and was only 
required to report to Chadian authorities, their own capacity 
to stop violent acts was severely limited. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Dominique pointed out that even with improved 
relations between Chad and Sudan, insecurity along the border 
remained a concern.  He noted that any conflict in Darfur 
could result in a spillover, in the form of incursions by 
Janjaweed militas, that Chadian forces would be unable to 
counter.  While the Chadian forces had reinforced their 
positions in several areas, the lack of an adequate number of 
soldiers meant that certain areas were left unprotected, and 
would be vulnerable to Janjaweed attacks.  Insecurity along 
the Chad-Sudan border also meant that the AU's monitoring 
activities would be restricted.  Dominique pointed out that 
the deterioration of Chad-Sudan relations and the increased 
attacks along the Chad-Sudan border during February and March 
limited any movement of AU monitors along the border.  He 
added that the AU mission in Abeche lacked the appropriate 
number of vehicles and helicopters to fully survey the border 
region. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Prior to his departure to Abeche, Senator Obama 
briefly met with major William Robert, AU Military Observer 
from the AMIS in El Fasher.  Major Robert reported that a 
military build-up was taking place in Darfur, and that 
continued violence was likely.  He also noted that the 
current AMIS mission lacked the capabilities and leadership 
to effectively gurantee security for the civilian population 
in Darfur.  The Senator said that he would push for the 
implementation of a UN Peacekeeping force following the 
passage of UN Security Council resolution 1706. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
VISIT TO THE REFUGEE CAMPS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (U) Senator Obama's 90 minute visit to the Mile refugee 
camp included a meet-and-greet with local authorities (which 
included the Governor, Prefect, and Sultan of the region), 
with the Chadian gendarmes providing security to the camp, 
the humanitarian workers affiliated with UNHCR and partner 
organizations, and the refugees residing in the camps.  He 
visited a incoming-generating artisan workshop operated by 
members of the refugee community, and spoke briefly to the 
camp's refugee committee.  During a meeting with the 
committee, Senator Obama said that his visit was intended to 
examine current needs of the refugees in eastern Chad, and 
called upon the refugees to voice their concerns. 
 
¶7.  (U) The refugees told the Senator that they welcomed the 
United States' efforts to support the humanitarian assistance 
and bring peace to Darfur, but they were still concerned 
about the likelikehood of return to their homes if violence 
in the region escalates.  There was a round of applause when 
one refugee noted the need for a United Nations peacekeeping 
force in Darfur.  Following the meeting, a number of refugees 
staged a peaceful demonstration condemning the Bashir regime 
and calling on the United States to assist in rapidly 
bringing in a peacekeeping operation.  Media traveling with 
the Senator interviewed a number of refugees and humanitarian 
workers in the camp. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
SIDEBARS DURING THE CAMP VISIT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (SBU) During Senator Obama's visit, CDA was able to speak 
to UNHCR security officers in Guereda to ascertain current 
conditions in the area.  The officers stated that the GOC had 
increased the number of Chadian military around the town of 
Guereda (the Governor of the region told Senator Obama that 
the Chadian soldiers were positioned around Guereda to 
prevent further incursions by Chadian rebels into the area). 
The GOC had also appointed a new prefect to the area, who had 
already discussed with UNHCR and partner organizations ways 
to ensure the level of safety for humanitarian workers and 
the refugee population.  However, the security officers noted 
that humanitarian organizations were still concerned with the 
GOC's inability to arrest local perpretators affiliated with 
past attacks and thefts against humanitarian organizations 
operating in Guereda.  They also said that an escalation of 
violence in Darfur could mean increased activity by Sudanese 
rebels on the Chad side of the border to recruit refugees 
from the camps. 
 
¶9.  (U) This message was cleared by Senator Obama's staff. 
 
¶10. (U) Tripoli Minimize Considered. 
JAMES