06PARIS7199
France: Telecom and Information Technology Update
Fri Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  11/07/2006 02:57:17 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS    SENSITIVE     PARIS 07199

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: ECON
    INFO:   FCS POL ORA AMB ENGO SCIO TRDO LABO DCM ECNO
            UNESCO AGR ECSO ESCI SCI

DISSEMINATION: ECONOUT /1
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: ECON:SDWYER
DRAFTED: ECON:FRADOVIC/HSULLI
CLEARED: NONE

VZCZCFRI494
RR RUEHC RUCPDOC RUEAFCC RUEAWJA RUCNMEM
DE RUEHFR #7199/01 3071337
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031337Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2821
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAFCC/FCC WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007199 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP AND EUR/WE 
USDOC FOR NTIA AND ITA 
FCC FOR INTERNATIONAL 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
BRUSSELS FOR USEU JUNDERWOOD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ETRD FR
SUBJECT: France: Telecom and Information Technology Update 
 
¶1. This is another in a series of periodic updates on the French 
telecommunications and information technology sectors, including 
internet and e-commerce. 
 
Contents: 
-- SFR takes over Tele2 and becomes the second fully integrated 
operator after France Telecom (FT)(para 2) 
-- Neuf Cegetel acquires AOL France (para 3) 
-- Free launches Fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) throughout France by 2012 
(para 4) 
-- FT's new "unik" service (para 5) 
--  Launch of Microsoft's "instant messaging" on Orange (para 6) 
-- Consumer group seeks damages for price fixing by mobile phone 
operators (para 7) 
-- The French electronic communications market on the up and up 
(para 8) 
-- Mototrola seriously eyeing French communications equipment firm 
Sagem (para 9) 
-- Debates begin on the GOF draft bill on the television of the 
future (para 10) 
 
¶2.  French mobile operator SFR has become the second largest fully 
integrated operator in France following its 451.6 million dollar 
acquisition earlier this month of Tele2 France.  Under the deal, SFR 
will take over Tele2's fixed-line operations including its broadband 
unit, and would have to operate the business under the Tele2 brand 
for up to three years.  (Note: SFR will not purchase Tele2's 
multiple virtual network operator (MVNO) operations in France (i.e. 
business from renting airspace from other companies), which 
accounted for 300,000 customers at the end of June 2006. End Note). 
At the same time, SFR remains the country's second-largest mobile 
operator as well as the largest stakeholder in France's second 
largest fixed operator, Neuf Cegetel.  SFR, a joint venture between 
Vodafone and Vivendi, took-over Tele2 after Neuf backed down from 
the bid.  The future of the SFR/Neuf Cegetel alliance will 
ultimately have to be defined in the coming months. 
 
¶3.  Independent executive agency the French Competition Council has 
just approved Neuf Cegetel's purchase of AOL France from Time 
Warner.  With this 288 million euros (USD 360) acquisition, Neuf 
Cegetel will gain over 500,000 high-speed Internet customers to 
bring its total to more than 2 million.  The deal brings Neuf 
Cegetel into close competition with the Illiad Group's subsidiary 
Free for the title of second-largest broadband provider in Europe. 
 
 
¶4.  French alternative broadband provider Free announced in 
mid-September that it will spend one billion euros building a fiber 
network in France through 2012.  This fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) 
rollout will begin in central Paris, followed by the Paris suburbs 
and other parts of France.  Free officials said their plan 
contributed to French public authorities' declared aim of 
positioning France at the leading edge of information technology. 
Meanwhile, France Telecom (FT) is piloting a fiber optic program in 
Paris to assess the economic feasibility of such a large project in 
cities.  Despite being the first French operator to trial FTTH in 
January 2006, FT believes there is no available content to warrant 
an immediate investment in nationwide FTTH deployment.  FT retains 
50 percent of the French broadband market, while Free has 18 
percent. 
 
¶5.  In early October, FT's mobile arm Orange France launched new 
phones allowing customers to make phone calls on mobile and Wi-Fi 
networks.  Dubbed Unik, the service allows a person to make free 
phone calls inside France over the Internet connection and to switch 
over to the mobile phone network when leaving home.  FT customers 
will pay 10 euros (USD 12.50) per month for fixed-line calls within 
France, in addition to 99 euros (USD 123.75) and more for the phone 
itself and charges for Livebox, a system which connects users to 
broadband lines.  For 22 euros (USD 27.50) per month customers can 
get unlimited calls to both Orange mobiles and fixed lines.  Though 
Unik can be cheaper for Orange customers, people who call a Unik 
line will be charged for a mobile phone call, rather for a fixed- 
line call.  Calling a mobile phone is generally more expensive and 
the adoption of mobile phone rates for converged phones has elicited 
concern from some consumer groups. 
 
¶6. On October 16, Microsoft Chief Executive Steven Ballmer announced 
an "instant messaging" product to be offered by Orange.  When the 
service starts in December, Orange subscribers will be able to 
conduct real-time chats by voice, text, or video on their phones or 
personal computers, using a version of Microsoft's messaging 
software.  The companies are now calling the service Orange 
Messenger by Windows Live.  Yahoo is launching a rival internet 
messaging product with France-based Bouygues Telecom. 
 
¶7.  French consumer group UFC-Que Choisir announced in mid-October 
that it had submitted a request for damages at the Paris Tribunal of 
Commerce for price fixing by French mobile phone operators Bouygues, 
Orange and SFR.  UFC said it had received 12,530 requests for 
damages and was requesting 750,000 euros, or roughly 60 euros (USD 
75) per person.  Last year, the French Competition Council fined the 
three operators 534 million euros (USD 667.5 million) for forming a 
cartel and freezing mobile phone prices between 2000 and 2002. 
 
¶8.  The number of telephone service subscriptions (37.2 million 
subscribers) is up almost 6 percent at the end of the first quarter 
of this year, mostly due to the very rapid development of telephony 
using broadband Internet connections (VoIP-Voice-over-Internet 
Protocol).  Full unbundling has also contributed to this extremely 
rapid growth, with some one million lines established at the end of 
the first quarter.  During that same period, high-speed Internet 
continued to grow, totaling 10.5 million subscribers.  Similarly, 
mobile telephone continued its expansion, adding up to 48.6 million 
subscribers thanks to the arrival of multiple virtual network 
operators (MVNO).  All in all, income generated by the electronic 
communications market in France reached 10.1 billion euros (USD 12.6 
billion). 
 
¶9. Motorola Mobile Devices President Ronald Garriques, in an 
exclusive interview with the Figaro on October 26, indicated a 
"serious interest" in acquiring French communications equipment firm 
Sagem, a subsidiary of Safran.  Garriques indicated that acquiring 
Sagem "is an option in a sector that is in the process of 
consolidating ... I do not know yet if we will get it." Garriques 
praised Sagem's management for being among the most respected in the 
mobile telephony sector and indicated that, in determining which 
firms to acquire, Motorola considered first the human resources of 
the target firm more than its technology or brand.  In September 
French aero engines and telecoms group Safran said it was studying 
all options for its Sagem division, which has been dogged by a 
series of financial losses.  Motorola has made a series of recent 
acquisitions in Europe including Mitsubishi Europe based in Rennes, 
France-based TPP Com, UK-based Sendo, and Danish firm BenQ. 
Garriques signaled Motorola's intention to continue acquisitions as 
part of its strategy of increasing market share in France and the 
rest of Europe. 
¶10.  With the advent of TV services on mobile phones and the 
extension of the French digital terrestrial TV (DTT) platform, the 
French Culture Ministry has drafted a bill on "the modernization of 
audiovisual broadcasting and the future of television," currently 
before the Senate.  The bill would foster television broadcasting 
over mobile phones, the introduction of high definition television 
(HDTV), and the replacement of analog television by digital TV in 
¶2011.  Debates are due to take place November 20, 21 and 22.  After 
passage, the draft bill will then move to the National Assembly. 
Stapleton