06PARIS719
EMBASSY PARIS SUBMISSION TO THE 2005/2006 REPORT
Fri Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 PARIS 000719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR PM/SNA, EUR/WE; OSD FOR OSD/PA&E, OASD/ISA/EUR, 
OASD/ISA/NP, OASD/ISA/AP, OASD/ISA/NESA AND OASD/ISA/BTF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR MCAP FR
SUBJECT: EMBASSY PARIS SUBMISSION TO THE 2005/2006 REPORT 
TO CONGRESS ON ALLIED CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE COMMON DEFENSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 223383 
     ¶B. PARIS 000005 
 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Not for 
Internet dissemination. 
 
Due to its length, this is part two of a three part message 
 
¶40.  (U) In Africa, France has provided 80 million euros to 
Darfur through the African Union and provides support to 
Chad on a bilateral basis.  The French transported the 
Senegalese units of the AU force to Sudan and the Nigerian 
police contingent. (See paragraph 72 for more detail). 
 
¶41.  (U) In response to natural disasters in 2004 and 2005 
France contributed substantially to Pakistan Earthquake 
relief efforts, the South Asian Tsunami relief efforts, and 
relief efforts after hurricane Katrina hit the southern 
United States. (See paragraphs 73-81 for more detail). 
 
¶42.  (U) The major part of France's efforts at capacity 
building in the world is focused on Africa where France 
relies on its forces stationed in seven nations to conduct 
most of its capacity building operations (see paragraphs 
82-85 for more detail).  Also, 4000 French troops stand 
alongside UNOCI in Operation Licorne in Cote d'Ivoire in 
support of the UN operation, in addition to the French 
permanent base in Abidjan. 
 
¶43.  (U) French Gendarmerie has taken the lead in the 
development of the European Gendarmerie Force.  French 
Gendarmes are also deployed in Lebanon (UNIFIL), Haiti 
(MINUSTAH), Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Chad, and the Central Africa Republic.  They 
also conducted training in Kinshasa, Kenya (see paragraphs 
86-89 for more detail). 
 
¶44.  (U) In the summer of 2004, the French also began a 
joint fighter pilot training school in Cazeaux, France (see 
paragraph 90 for more detail). 
 
¶45.  (U) As a nuclear state, France endorses deterrence 
theory and holds to long-standing NATO doctrines.  It has 
consistently supported international arms control regimes 
as a means of bolstering stability and transparency.  In 
addition to its continued support for international 
mechanisms to limit proliferation, France with their 
British and German colleagues pursued EU3 negotiations to 
obtain Iranian compliance with Iran's Safeguard Agreement 
commitments.  EU3 efforts led to the signing of the Paris 
Agreement in November 2004.  Iranian resumption of 
conversion in August 2005, and research on enrichment in 
December 2005, led to suspension of Paris Agreement 
discussions.  France and its EU partners, with U.S. 
support, continue to pursue efforts to convince Iran to 
suspend its nuclear ambitions. (See paragraphs 91-93 for 
more detail). 
 
¶46.  (U) The French military continues to maintain strong 
contacts with the U.S. and other NATO countries for 
contingency planning.  During 2004 and 2005, France 
conducted planning and exchanges with EUCOM and CENTCOM. 
French and U.S. analysts and planners share information on 
terrorism and WMD proliferation as well as political- 
military developments.  From the beginning of operations in 
Afghanistan (both OEF and ISAF), and the Lebanon crisis, 
French and U.S. planners have continued to work together to 
produce effective, timely results.  French forces 
permanently or temporarily stationed in Africa and Central 
Asia have assisted U.S. operations in the EUCOM and CENTCOM 
theater of operations. 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
-------------------------------------- 
REF A PARAS 9-10:  DIRECT COST-SHARING 
-------------------------------------- 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶47.  (U) No direct cost sharing activities occur in France 
 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
------------------------------------- 
REF A PARA 11:  INDIRECT COST SHARING 
------------------------------------- 
------------------------------------- 
¶48.  (U) No indirect cost-sharing activities as described 
in Ref A paragraph 11 occur in France.  However the U.S. 
did receive several types of miscellaneous indirect cost- 
sharing benefits from France as described below. 
 
 
Overflight Clearances, Port Access, Use of French 
Facilities 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶49.  (U) In 2004, France granted overflight and landing 
clearances to 1842 USG missions.  977 of these missions 
were in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.  76 of these 
missions supported operations in the Balkans.  During 2005, 
France granted 2061 overflight and landing clearances to 
USG missions.  811 of these missions supported OIF while 68 
supported Balkan operations.  France continued to grant 
blanket overflight clearances to most USG missions allowing 
over flights of and landings in France without notice. 
 
¶50.  (U) The 744 Expeditionary Air Base Group operated 
three KC-135 tanker aircraft from Istres Airbase in 
southern France during most of 2004.  This group of 100 US 
military personnel flew air refueling missions supporting 
operations in the Balkans.  The French provided fuel tax- 
free.  The mission ended in December 2004. 
 
¶51.  (U) Tax concessions on fuel and landing fees for non- 
operational missions during 2004 totaled approximately 4000 
dollars.  During 2005 these concessions totaled 8450 
dollars. 
 
¶52.  (U) During 2004 the US Navy made 14 port calls to 
facilities in metropolitan France.  In 2005 the number of 
port calls was 29.  In all cases, the French Navy provided 
excellent support and force protection services without 
cost.  Additionally, no taxes were imposed for supplies or 
parts for US ships visiting French ports. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
REF A PARA 12 RECENT CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS, MILITARY 
ASSISTANCE, HUMANITARIAN RELIEF OPERATIONS, CAPACITY 
BUILDING, COUNTERPROLIFERATION, AND NUCLEAR THREAT 
REDUCTION 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Subparagraph A:  Recent Contingency operations (See French 
Force Disposition and External Operations Table for 
personnel numbers) 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶53.  (U) The French were among the first nations to 
volunteer troops to the International Security Assistance 
Force (ISAF) mission in Afghanistan and France continues to 
be responsible for Kabul International Airport and the area 
north of Kabul to the U.S. base at Bagram.  A French 
battalion has been a part of ISAF since December 2001. 
From August 2004 to February 2005, a French general 
commanded the NATO-led ISAF.  France has proposed an 
increased role in ISAF and offered to lead Regional 
Command-Kabul as part of the NATO reorganization and 
expansion of ISAF.  In October 2005, France and Turkey 
announced that they would co-lead Regional Command-Kabul. 
The French are planning to augment their forces from the 
current 700 in ISAF to between 1,000 - 1,200 personnel to 
support the increased responsibilities of the regional 
command to include providing a Quick Reaction Force (QRF) 
battalion.  The French have continued to provide a military 
police detachment in support of ISAF. 
 
¶54.  (U) Supporting OEF, the French Armed Forces continue 
to be actively involved in the fight against terrorism. 
200 members of the French Special Forces are currently 
deployed in the South of Afghanistan alongside U.S. Special 
Forces in military operations against the Taliban. 
¶55.  (U) France assigned liaison officers to the U.S. staff 
headquarters in Tampa to ensure the interface between the 
military authorities of the two countries.  French forces 
were directly involved in the fight against terrorism by 
carrying out the following missions: 
 
¶56.  (U) The air and sea group took part in air operations 
above Afghanistan in April-May 2004 (84 aircrafts were 
involved in operational missions for 450 flight hours). 
The French Air Force deployed within less than 48 hours six 
Mirage 2000D and two refueling aircraft from metropolitan 
France to the deployable airbase in Manas (Kyrgyzstan) 
which played a key role in the prosecution of air 
campaigns. 
 
¶57.  (U) In addition, two C160 airplanes with 130 soldiers 
of the Air Force have been operating in Dushanbe 
(Tajikistan) since December 3, 2001, totaling 10,000 flight 
hours. This detachment is focused on airlifting the French 
Forces operating in different areas in Afghanistan. 
 
¶58.  (U) In October 2004, three Mirage F1CR and one tanker 
C135FR were deployed in Dushanbe to carry out tactical 
reconnaissance missions for ISAF and the coalition against 
terrorism.  To help promote the development of democracy in 
Afghanistan in close collaboration with its allies, the 
French Air Force again deployed an air detachment in 
Dushanbe, from August through November 2005 during the 
parliamentary elections.  Within ISAF, the detachment, 
which includes three Mirage F1CR, three Mirage 2000D and 
two tankers C135FR based in Manas, was intended to 
establish an air presence throughout the country and 
support ground forces operations to deter any action likely 
to disrupt the elections.  It was also entrusted with the 
mission to undertake reconnaissance and fire support 
operations supporting OEF. 
 
¶59.  Finally, the French military participates in the fight 
against terrorism within the OEF Task Force 150 (TF 150). 
The Task Force is actively involved in the following 
operations: 
- monitoring air and sea movements in the Red Sea, the Sea 
of Oman, the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf, 
- prohibiting the filtration of terrorists to the Arabian 
Peninsula or the Horn of Africa, 
- fighting against illegal trafficking (weapons, drugs 
etc.), 
- fighting against piracy and banditry acts. 
 
¶60.  (U) Since February 2003, a EUROMARFOR task group is 
part of the TF 150 and operates under the command of the 
U.S. staff.  The French Navy greatly contributes to the TF 
150 (about a quarter of the Task Force) with three ships 
operating on a permanent basis. France took command of TF 
150 twice from September 2003 to January 2004 and from June 
to September 2004. 
 
¶61.  (U) An aircraft based in Djibouti, which was 
incorporated into the Task Force 57 (TF 57), is intended to 
patrol in coordination with the TF 150 ships.  The 62 
French ships involved in Operation Enduring Freedom since 
15 December 2001 totaled more than 6,000 days at sea. 
 
¶62.  (U) The French Navy's strong participation in CTF-150, 
both by continuously providing ships and often providing a 
command staff in the Indian Ocean, particularly off of 
Somalia and the Gulf of Oman, and the presence of French 
Navy liaison personnel at NAVCENT Headquarters in Bahrain 
makes possible a good degree of interaction and cooperation 
in this key region.  The French also maintain maritime 
patrol aircraft worldwide and cooperate with the U.S. Navy 
where there is common interest. 
 
¶63.  (U) The French also participate in the US Counter-Drug 
effort with Naval Forces.  A French military officer is 
assigned to the Joint Interagency Task Force South (JIATF 
South) in Key West, to ensure coordination with French 
forces in the Caribbean.  Fort-de-France in Martinique 
supports U.S. Navy and Coast Guard units with port visits 
and the Navy Command in Fort-de-France has assisted the 
U.S. Navy and U.S. Coast Guard with the movement of 
personnel and weapons between various ships and aircraft. 
The direct participation of the French Navy in counter-drug 
operations consists of the deployment of frigates to the 
region to work with U.S. forces on a regular basis and the 
use of Maritime Patrol Aircraft deployed to the region. 
 
¶64.  (U) In 2004, the French Navy stopped three drug 
trafficking ships in the Antilles and one Togolese ship in 
the Gulf of Guinea with 450 kg of cocaine.  The counter 
drug effort of the French Navy in 2004 was 199 days at sea, 
156 hours of flight, 2058 ships queried, four ships 
intercepted, and 1020 kg of drugs ceased. 
¶65.  (U) In 2004, the French Navy effort against 
clandestine immigration equaled 683 days at sea, 904 flight 
hours, three ships intercepted, 43 clandestine immigrants 
turned over to border police. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Subparagraph B.  Military Assistance: 
NRF/NTMI/Afghanistan/NATO PKO. 
---------- -------------------------- 
 
¶66.  (U) The French Army has been training the Afghan 
National Army within the overall U.S.-led program since its 
inception.  Since 2002, the French have trained more than 
2,000 Afghans.  This includes three of the initial 
battalions; they have set-up the officer basic course and 
the staff officer's course.  The French are currently 
participating in the Embedded Training Team concept with 
French Army soldiers assigned to mentor an Afghan battalion 
in Kandahar. 
 
¶67.  (U) The French have consistently expressed a desire to 
be part of NATO's transformation and interoperability 
initiatives as evidenced by their significant national 
contributions to the NATO Response Force (NRF).  By 
participating in NRFs 1 through 6, the total French 
military contribution equals up to 40 percent of ground 
units, 30 percent of air assets, and 20 percent of naval 
capabilities.  The French air force provides the deployable 
combined air operations center (CAOC) for the European led 
NRF.  In January 2005, the French air force conducted AIREX 
2005, a training exercise, to prepare for command of NRF-05 
in July. On July 1st, the French air force became the Joint 
Forces Air Component Commander (JFACC) of NRF-05 for six 
months.  In 2004, NATO sent the NRF's Land Component 
Command Headquarters, the French led EUROCORPS, to lead the 
ISAF in Afghanistan.  As part of NRF 5, NATO activated 
France's Joint Forces Air Component Commander (JFACC) to 
coordinate the air movements for the Pakistan earthquake 
relief effort.  On 1 October 2005, the French formally 
created a multinational headquarters to serve as the Land 
Component Command for future rotations of the NRF. 
 
¶68.  (U) In 2005, the French also established a Maritime 
Component Command HQ to serve in future iterations of 
NATO's NRF.  The French Navy successfully stood-up the 
High-Readiness Force - Maritime (HRF-M) staff in Toulon and 
qualified the staff during an at-sea exercise in 2005. 
This staff, will serve its rotational duties as an on-call 
force, ahead of schedule, and is being used by the French 
for out-of-area operations, for example, during the 
upcoming Arabian Sea/Indian Ocean deployment of the Charles 
de Gaulle Carrier Battle Group in early 2006.  There is one 
U.S. Naval Officer assigned to the HRF-M staff. 
 
¶69.  (U) The French government has forbidden its military 
from contributing troops to the NATO training mission 
inside Iraq (NTM-1).  One French officer is working on the 
training mission staff at SHAPE Headquarters in Belgium, 
and the GoF pledged 660,000 euros in February 2005 to help 
finance NTM-1.  In 2005, the GoF took initial steps to 
contribute to the development of Iraqi defense and security 
capabilities.  Under the European Union's EUJUSTLEX 
program, France has pledged to train 200 Iraqi police 
officials and judges in rule of law training in France, 
making France the top EU contributor to this program. 
Approximately 40 Iraqi police officials (non-military) 
completed month-long training at the Ecole Nationale 
Superieure des Officiers de Police and the Ecole Nationale 
de Police in 2005.  A third course started at the end of 
2005 for judicial instruction at the Ecole Nationale de la 
Magistrature.  At the same time, a French offer to train up 
to 1,500 Iraqi paramilitary police (gendarmes) outside Iraq 
remains unimplemented, although an Iraqi Ministry of 
Interior delegation visited France in July 2005 to further 
discuss the proposal.  Currently there is a single Gendarme 
Officer in Iraq, responsible for provision of security for 
French embassy staff in Baghdad. 
 
¶70.  (U) In the Balkans, French forces remain among the 
largest contributors to operations in Kosovo.  French 
participation in the former NATO SFOR mission in Bosnia 
continued under the EU Force, Operation Althea.  210 
Gendarmes supported both the United Nations Interim mission 
in Kosovo and the NATO Intervention Forces in Kosovo. 
French Lieutenant General de Kermabon transferred authority 
as COMKFOR on 1 September 2005 after one year of command, 
the second time France has commanded KFOR.  The French 
government provided approximately 60 gendarmes, including 
20 officers to help combat organized crime under the Office 
of the High Representative in Bosnia-Hersegovina. 
Additionally, they provided European Union Police and 
military police in support of European Union Forces in 
Bosnia. 
 
¶71.  (U) The French continue to maintain a small French 
military presence (15 personnel) in Macedonia providing 
international police in support of the European Police 
Mission.  They also provide a small presence force (three 
military observers) in Georgia to help support the U.N. 
monitoring mission. 
 
¶72.  (U) Regarding peacekeeping efforts in Africa, there 
has been ongoing debate as to NATO's role in Africa.  This 
debate was most evident during the 2005 crisis in Darfur 
with France focusing its support for the AU through the EU. 
France, however, honored its pledge to SECSTATE that it 
would not oppose a NATO role in the crisis.  France has 
provided 80 million euros to Darfur through the African 
Union and provides support to Chad on a bilateral basis. 
French troops and aircraft are conducting ground and air 
border security.  During 2005, France provided refueling 
support to NATO and EU aircraft at Abech?in Eastern Chad, 
as well as personnel recovery capabilities using three C- 
160 transport aircraft and three Puma helicopters.  The 
French transported the Senegalese units of the AU force to 
Sudan and the Nigerian police contingent. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Subpara C:  Humanitarian Relief Operations 
NATOHMRO/Pakistan/Katrina/Tsunami 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶73.  (U) In 2003, France allotted 9.3 million euros (USD 
11.2 million) to what it termed Emergency Humanitarian 
Assistance, all of which was channeled through the 
Emergency Humanitarian Aid Fund of the MFA.  In 2004, the 
initial allotment was 9.3 million euros (USD 11.2 million). 
The fund may be increased on an extraordinary basis to 
finance unexpected operations; this was the case in 2005, 
when France announced an emergency increased allotment of 
2.8 million euros (USD 3.4 million) in favor of the victims 
of natural disasters or civil crises, primarily focused on 
the victims of the tsunami in Thailand, Sri Lanka, 
Maldives, Indonesia, and India, and an additional 
allocation of 5.6 million euros (USD 6.7 million) for the 
victims of the earthquake in Pakistan (see paragraphs 
below).  The additional aid is imputed into the 2005 
balance sheet bringing the total amount of emergency 
donations to 16,147,081 million euros.  Allotments in 2006 
are projected to increase to benefit victims of 2005's 
Hurricane Katrina in the United States.  For an economic 
analysis of general Grant Aid and Humanitarian Assistance 
see paragraphs 117-221. 
 
¶74.  (U) Pakistan Relief.  The French contributed 82 
military personnel to the Pakistan relief effort.  In 
addition, the French air force deployed two C-130 Hercules 
military transport aircraft to deliver relief supplies. The 
effort included medical service personnel, a surgical team, 
and support personnel (communications, equipment, and 
logistics) in Pakistan.  Forty-six of the military 
personnel were inserted into the various NATO elements in 
Islamabad, Lisbon, Germany, and Turkey.  Additionally, as 
part of NRF 5, NATO activated France's JFACC to coordinate 
the air movement piece of the relief effort.  The JFACC at 
Taverney, near Paris has 23 French, five UK, and one U.S. 
officer assigned. 
 
¶75.  (U) KATRINA Relief.  The NRF was activated in 
September 2005 after hurricane Katrina.  At the same time, 
France used its Joint Forces Air Component (JFACC) to task 
the French Air Force to collect and deliver the 150 tons of 
European supplies for Louisiana.  This support was 
delivered to Ramstein airbase, Germany.  The French air 
force also provided two transport aircraft to move over 
four tons of supplies, including tents, tarps, and 1000 
rations, to the US from the Caribbean.  Along with these 
supplies, the French provided a team of four civil security 
personnel to help assess future U.S. needs and distribute 
assistance.  Two French liaison officers were posted to the 
Joint Forces Commander in Lisbon to help coordinate all 
European assistance.  An Airbus Beluga aircraft also 
delivered 12.7 tons of emergency equipment to Mobile, 
Alabama; 
 
¶76.  (U) The French Navy deployed a team of 17 Navy divers 
to assist with the Katrina disaster.  This was facilitated 
by the fact that the French maintain a liaison officer with 
the U.S. Mine Warfare Command in Corpus Christi, Texas. 
The 17 French divers worked from September 11, 2005 to 
October 8, 2005 helping to clear waterways of debris and 
recover vessels. 
 
¶77.  (U) The GOF also offered the following contributions 
to assist with Katrina disaster recovery: 
--The "Gendarmerie nationale" offered experts in forensic 
police; 
--The GOF (with Airbus) offered to send an additional 20- 
30,000 food rations. 
 
¶78.  (U) Tsunami Relief.  The French Navy worked with U.S. 
forces and other willing partners following the December 
26, 2004 Tsunami in South East Asia.  In response to this 
disaster, the French Navy re-routed its helicopter carrier, 
Jeanne D'Arc, and, after picking up extra emergency 
supplies from the French base in Djibouti, sent the units 
into the disaster region.  By February 1, there were 1,390 
French Military personnel assisting in the disaster area, 
most aboard the three ships involved.  The French 
Helicopter Carrier, Jeanne D'Arc, and the Destroyer George 
Leygues DD-644 deployed to Indonesia on January 4 until 
February 9 while the Destroyer Dupleix DD-641 deployed to 
the Maldives from January 5 until February 1, 2005.  The 
Jeanne D'Arc supplemented the normal on-board complement of 
helicopters with an additional two heavy-lift helicopters. 
Embarked were 12 medical doctors and support personnel. 
 
¶79.  (U) There was one French Maritime Patrol Aircraft 
deployed to Thailand from January 1, 2005 that worked in 
cooperation with the U.S. Navy P-3 aircraft.  One 
additional French Maritime Patrol Aircraft deployed to Sri 
Lanka from December 30, 2004 to January 1, 2005.