06PARIS632
UNESCO-AMBASSADOR'S DISCUSSION WITH
Tue Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000632 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TAGS: EU IT FI AU IS XF UNESCO
SUBJECT:  UNESCO-AMBASSADOR'S DISCUSSION WITH 
COUNTERPARTS ON US-EU RELATIONS, UNESCO REFORM, THE NEW 
ADG FOR CULTURE AND ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN RELATIONS AT 
UNESCO 
 
Ref:  Paris 536 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  During the week of January 23, 
Ambassador Oliver met with the Ambassadors of Austria 
(current EU president), Finland (upcoming EU 
president), Italy (a major player at UNESCO) and Jordan 
to discuss US relations with EU states, UNESCO reform 
and a substantive agenda, as well as other matters, 
including the Mideast peace process as it plays out at 
UNESCO. 
 
US-EU RELATIONS AT UNESCO 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In separate discussions with Finnish 
Ambassador Pertii Majanen and Austrian Ambassador 
Harald Wiesner, Ambassador Oliver emphasized that 
strengthening transatlantic relations at UNESCO is as 
important as strengthening EU coordination. (Note: 
relations were strained by negotiations on the cultural 
diversity convention.)  She also said that she was 
disturbed by the current trend of internal EU debates 
resulting in the US being "informed" of EU positions 
that will shape the UNESCO agenda.  Ambassador Oliver 
asked that the US be engaged in discussion with the EU 
earlier and emphasized that UNESCO must remain an 
organization where individual states can continue to 
express opinions, and not just a place for presenting 
group positions.  Majanen agreed that was necessary but 
said he would have to figure out the appropriate way to 
do that given all the different internal positions on 
issues within the EU.  Wiesner also reported that the 
Finn had told him that repairing transatlantic 
relations at UNESCO was one of his top priorities. 
Weisner mentioned that he and Majanen had put this 
topic on the agenda at one of the EU's last 
coordination meetings and that it had received great 
support. 
 
EVERYONE AGREES, UNESCO NEEDS RESULTS AND REFORM 
 
¶3.  (SBU) UNESCO reform was a recurring theme at all 
meetings.  Ambassador Oliver emphasized with all her 
interlocutors the need to produce real results in the 
next two years.  With the Finn she highlighted the 
possibility of working closely with the Nordics in the 
education and natural science sectors, an area of vital 
importance to the US at UNESCO.  In her meeting with 
Italian ambassador Giuseppe Moscato, she spoke of the 
need to work closely between now and the April 
Executive Board on a common agenda.  Moscato also 
shared Ambassador Oliver's concerns about the 
decentralization process at UNESCO and the need for 
accountability and expressed particular concern about 
the UNESCO institute in Trieste, Italy, which the 
Italian government supports to the tune of USD20 
million a year.  He indicated that since Italy gets no 
feedback and has no idea if good results are being 
achieved, continued funding for the institute is being 
questioned during the present budget crunch. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Moscato was supportive of a suggestion by 
Amb. Oliver for an Executive Board resolution asking 
the heads of a certain number of institutes be required 
to present detailed briefings on their programs 
annually.  (Note: The Czech Ambassador told the DCM 
that she is also disturbed by the Trieste institute's 
handling of funds for projects in Kosovo.) 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Ambassador Oliver also discussed reform with 
Jordanian Ambassador Dina Kawar.  Kawar agreed that 
there is a need for common priorities, especially in 
education.  She offered to lend her support to the US 
and will work to create a common agenda for the next 
Executive Board. 
 
THE RACE FOR THE NEXT ADG CULTURE 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Moscato also indicated that he was sure that 
Francoise Riviere (France) will be chosen as the next 
ADG for Culture over a well-qualified Italian, 
Francesco Bandarin, the current director of the World 
Heritage Center.  (septel) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) During the Jordanian meeting, Ambassador 
Kawar expressed concern that the Arab Group will lose a 
key ADG post with the departure at the end of February 
of Mounir Bouchenaki (Algeria) who combined 
professional expertise with political sensitivity. 
There will be an Arab group meeting this week to 
discuss this topic. (reftel) 
 
UNESCO'S ROLE IN THE MIDEAST PEACE PROCESS 
¶7.  (SBU) In recent years, UNESCO has been playing a 
positive role in the Mideast peace process.  Several 
resolutions on cultural and educational activities in 
the Palestinian territories and Jerusalem have been 
negotiated and passed the Executive Board by consensus. 
The EU, US and Arab states have all participated in the 
negotiations.  Recently, the Israeli delegation made it 
clear that they will not negotiate a new declaration, 
only an updated version of what has been passed 
previously.  Both the Austrian and Finnish ambassadors 
indicated that they intend to play active roles 
facilitating this process in upcoming Executive Board 
meetings. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Jordanian Ambassador Kawar agreed with the 
need for consensus resolutions and said that the 
external political context should not drive decisions 
at UNESCO that focus solely on education and culture. 
She also agreed to support the concept of an un-amended 
Secretariat document at the next Board meeting but 
 
SIPDIS 
added that at some point the resolutions might have to 
reflect changes on the ground. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment.  We are hearing many expressions of 
goodwill about working with the United States to reform 
UNESCO and achieve measurable results.  The next couple 
of months will be crucial in the lead-up to the first 
Executive Board of the new biennium.  Is there a will 
for change?  We will see. 
 
OLIVER