06PHNOMPENH534
CAMBODIA: TIP ASSESSMENT VISIT
Tue Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6287
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0534/01 0800959
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 210959Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6308
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1357UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PHNOM PENH 000534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS AND EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA: TIP ASSESSMENT VISIT 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Representatives from G/TIP and EAP/RSP met with 
Cambodian government officials and NGOs on March 17 to gauge 
the Cambodian government's efforts to combat TIP. 
Anti-trafficking NGOs unanimously agreed that the government 
has significantly increased its efforts and NGOs are 
receiving good cooperation from officials, although more 
remains to be done,.  The MOI reported that it held a 
national seminar on law enforcement against trafficking, 
which brought together NGOs, government ministries, 
provincial police and governors, and international 
organizations to discuss strategies to improve cooperation 
and anti-trafficking efforts.  MOI and MOJ reported increased 
arrests and prosecutions of traffickers.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  G/TIP program officer Sally Neumann and David Atkinson of 
EAP/RSP traveled to Cambodia March 17-18 to gauge the 
Cambodian government's efforts to combat TIP.  The team met 
with multiple anti-trafficking NGOs, international 
organizations, and government ministries to assess the TIP 
situation. 
 
The Government Perspective 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Prum Sokha, MOI Secretary of State, explained that 
political will and actions to combat TIP have steadily 
increased in the past year.  Sokha cited the MOI's annual 
national seminar on law enforcement against sexual abuse, 
exploitation, and trafficking of women and children that was 
held on March 15.  Minister of Interior Sar Kheng opened the 
event, which was attended by all government ministries, 
provincial governors, provincial police commissioners, and 
many international organizations and NGOs.  Sokha noted that 
there has been a steady and significant increase in the 
numbers of trafficking victims rescued and perpetrators 
arrested over the past years.  Sokha attributed this to 
increased police training and the implementation of the 
National Action Plan (which was created after Cambodia was 
given a Tier 3 ranking last year) that focused on five target 
provinces.  Sokha noted that the National Action Plan will 
now expand to cover all 24 provinces and also to the district 
level.  Sokha noted that cooperation between law enforcement 
agencies and NGOs has improved during the past year.  He did 
express his concern, however, that some NGOs are overstepping 
their boundaries by conducting investigations, which Sokha 
believes should be done by law enforcement officials. 
Finally, Sokha explained that the recently-drafted 
trafficking law has been sent to the National Assembly and 
should provide clearer guidelines for government officials. 
 
¶4.  Minister of Women's Affairs Ing Kantha Phavi stated that 
her ministry continues to be heavily involved in combating 
trafficking.  She stated that labor migration and TIP are 
closely linked and she has requested that the government 
place labor attaches at its embassies so that migrant workers 
have assistance abroad should their rights be violated. 
Phavi noted that labor recruitment agencies should be more 
involved in educating workers of their rights and should 
conduct periodic inspections to ensure that workers are not 
being abused.  Phavi remarked that Women's Affairs is deeply 
involved with prevention and awareness campaigns throughout 
the country, but that more needs to be done.  She noted that 
these campaigns need to be focused not only on those 
vulnerable to trafficking, but on those who are responsible 
for prosecuting traffickers, i.e., judges and police.  Phavi 
also noted that the government is heavily dependent on NGOs 
for providing shelters to victims and she is concerned about 
their security.  Finally, Phavi said that without an improved 
economy and increased job opportunities, many victims will 
become re-trafficked. 
 
¶5.  Ministry of Justice Secretary of State, Neou Kassie, 
explained that the Cambodian government's will to combat 
trafficking is strong and that there has been an increase in 
convictions of traffickers over the past year.  Kassie 
remarked that the government is currently pursuing the 
extradition of an Australian pedophile who escaped to 
Australia.  He said that it appears that the Australian 
government is willing to cooperate and that the MOJ will 
secure a conviction.  Kassie noted that the MOJ is currently 
cooperating with the Department of Homeland Security to 
prosecute an accused AmCit pedophile in the U.S.  Kassie 
remarked that the will to combat TIP goes to the highest 
levels of the government, citing a recent directive by Prime 
Minister Hun Sen, which instructed the judiciary to issue 
strong sentences for convicted traffickers.  Nonetheless, 
Kassie mentioned that there are inter-ministerial turf 
battles, such as a recent memo sent out by National Police 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000534  002 OF 003 
 
 
Commissioner Hok Lundy that stated that judicial police would 
remain under his authority, even though according to Kassie, 
they should be under MOJ authority.  Kassie also mentioned 
that progress has been made on corruption, as evidenced by 
the recent arrest of a police officer who accepted a bribe 
from a suspected Korean pedophile. 
 
¶6.  G/TIP program officer informed Kassie that $200,000 of 
program money has been set aside to fund a judicial training 
program on TIP.  Kassie noted that very little has been done 
in this sector and that the funding would be very useful to 
everyone involved in the judiciary.  He remarked that the new 
trafficking law should be approved by the National Assembly 
soon and that the timing for this training would be optimal. 
 
 
NGOS: THE GOVERNMENT IS IMPROVING 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Anti-trafficking NGOs universally noted that cooperation 
with the government is good and that they are seeing a 
greater will by the government to combat trafficking.  NGO 
AFESIP co-founder Mam Somaly said that she recently met with 
National Police Commissioner Hok Lundy to discuss TIP-related 
cooperation.  Somaly stated that AFESIP had some difficulties 
getting police action in the past, but now she speaks 
directly to Lundy regarding complaints and that cooperation 
with the police is good.  Lundy provided Somaly with the 
Deputy Police Commissioner's direct phone number so that she 
could report any difficulties with inaction on the part of 
the police.  Somaly noted that AFESIP has very good 
cooperation with the Ministry of Women's Affairs and that the 
Ministry of Justice is continually improving.  AFESIP 
continues to receive victim referrals from government 
officials. 
 
¶8.  NGO Hagar reported that the anti-trafficking environment 
has greatly improved because there is now the political will 
necessary to take significant action.  Hagar has seen an 
increased success rate on its court cases and an overall 
improvement in the legal environment.  He noted that TIP is 
part of a greater gender-based violence problem in Cambodia 
and that there has been an inordinate amount of attention 
given to trafficking for sexual exploitation, when domestic 
violence and sexual assault are much bigger problems.  Hagar 
noted that there is a strong need to train judges, as they 
are not very sensitive to the needs of children. 
 
¶9.  NGO World Vision reported that there has been a steady 
improvement in the government's efforts to combat 
trafficking; however, the government still needs to be 
monitored.  World Vision noted that it has seen a significant 
improvement in cooperation with high-level officials when 
cases are not receiving action from local officials.  World 
Vision explained that its relationship with the 
anti-trafficking police and Phnom Penh police continues to be 
very good. 
 
¶10.  MOI law enforcement advisor Christian Guth and NGO 
International Justice Mission (IJM) Director Kaign Christy 
reported a steady increase in government cooperation and 
action, despite an initial slow-down following the Chhay Hour 
II/AFESIP incident.  According to Guth and Christy, arrests 
and rescues have increased significantly during the past year 
and the government's will to combat trafficking has 
strengthened.  Both men remarked that there is much work to 
be done, but they believe that the government is committed to 
fighting TIP. 
 
¶11.  During a briefing on labor trafficking, the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the 
International Labor Organization (ILO) informed that 
trafficking for labor exploitation is a serious problem in 
Cambodia, although it does not receive the attention that 
trafficking for sexual exploitation does.  Both organizations 
reported that the Ministry of Labor is committed to fighting 
trafficking, but it lacks the capacity to do so.  According 
to these organizations, there are 180,000 registered 
Cambodian migrant workers in Thailand, but the number of 
irregular workers is unknown.  They reported that one of the 
most significant problems for trafficked Cambodian workers is 
Thailand's failure to recognize them as victims, but as 
illegal migrants. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000534  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶12.  The Cambodian government has made good progress over the 
past year in addressing trafficking in persons issues on a 
variety of fronts:  prevention programs, law enforcement 
actions, and judicial prosecutions.  The Prime Minister and 
senior MOI officials have been reinforcing the message that 
the RGC takes this issue seriously and is committed to 
reducing TIP in Cambodia.  NGOs are unanimous that 
cooperation with the government has improved.  Post welcomes 
the proposed judicial training program, which will complement 
some of our other rule of law programs.  End comment. 
 
Mussomeli