06PHNOMPENH2172
PM'S BODYGUARD LEADS MONKS IN PATH TOWARDS HARMONIOUS
Mon Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO1551
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #2172/01 3451113
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111113Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7709
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 002172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EAP/MLS, DRL and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KDEM CB
SUBJECT:  PM'S BODYGUARD LEADS MONKS IN PATH TOWARDS HARMONIOUS 
SUPPORT FOR CPP 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  Hing Bun Heang, the Commander of the Prime 
Minister's Personal Bodyguard Unit, was appointed in September 2006 
as Supreme Consultant to a newly formed Monk Assembly, which is 
designed to investigate and resolve disputes involving monks across 
Cambodia.  The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) announced Bun 
Heang's appointment shortly after Cambodia's most senior Buddhist 
monk reversed his 2002 ban prohibiting all monks from voting. 
Observers believe Hing Bun Heang's appointment is designed to 
monitor the activities of monks who do not support the CPP, and 
stifle opposition political activity among Cambodia's main religious 
body.  End Summary. 
 
Hing Bun Heang's Role in a Monk Assembly 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  According to a September 6, 2006 subdecree, Hun Sen 
appointed General Hing Bun Heang, Commander of the PM's Personal 
Bodyguard Unit, to be the Supreme Consultant to a newly formed Monk 
Assembly.  Bun Heang said in an October 24 press report that his 
role in the religious council would be to advise the assembly on 
conflict resolution.  He added he was appointed to the post because 
of his experience with Buddhist principles, although Post notes 
there is no evidence he has been ordained and served as a monk. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Bun Heang was appointed as Supreme Consultant two weeks 
after the Government approved the formation of a Monk Assembly upon 
a request from Venerable Tep Vong, Supreme Patriarch of Buddhist 
Monks.  The PM's subdecree issued on August 24, 2006, approved the 
formation of a Monk Assembly which, according to Article 1, is 
designed to act as the supreme organization to settle all disputes 
related to Buddhism in Cambodia.  Article 2 states that the Assembly 
is led by a composition of eight ranking monks from different 
pagodas in and around Phnom Penh.  The assembly reportedly will 
function like a court; it will investigate and adjudicate conflicts 
among monks or between monks and laymen across Cambodia. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Hing Bun Heang's appointment comes shortly after Tep 
Vong's August 2006 directive lifting his June 2002 prohibition on 
monks' voting in elections.  On November 29, this ban was formally 
lifted during the annual Buddhist Monk Congress in Phnom Penh; 
during this same Congress, Tep Vong warned monks against 
participating in any mass political movement critical of the 
government. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  There is some recent history of monks clashing with their 
political and religious leaders.  In early 2003, the head monk of 
the historic Wat Lanka, Sam Bun Thoeun, was shot dead near his 
pagoda after he encouraged monks to register to vote in defiance of 
Tep Vong's ban.  A few years earlier, some monks were severely 
injured by police who used violence to disperse a rally in Phnom 
Penh protesting the 1998 election results.  Four monks were listed 
among 53 victims of "politically motivated disappearances" after 
those same demonstrations. 
 
Comments from Another Member of the Assembly 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Venerable Chhoeung Bun Chhear, one of the eight senior 
monks in the new Monk Assembly and Director of Supreme Patriarch Tep 
Vong's Cabinet, compared the function of the Assembly to the Supreme 
Court in Cambodia.  Bun Chhear stated that the Assembly was formed 
to settle disputes between monks and lay people in the Mohanikay 
sect.  He could not answer why Hing Bun Heang had been named to the 
assembly.  (Note: Cambodian Theravada Buddhism is composed of two 
sects: Mohanikay and Thamayuthikak Nikay.  Tep Vong leads the 
Mohanikay sect which manages the vast majority of monks and pagodas 
in Cambodia.  Bou Kry, a mentor of King Sihamoni, leads the 
Thamayuthikak Nikay sect, which is primarily confined to the 
religious affairs of the royal family.  The monk assembly will 
oversee only the Mohanikay monks.  End Note.) 
 
SRP MP Voices Concern 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Opposition Sam Rainsy Party MP Ho Vann believes Bun 
Heang's appointment was politically motivated and designed to 
maintain CPP control over Cambodia's most prominent religious order. 
 The Phnom Penh MP commented that Bun Heang's appointment, as well 
as the work of the Assembly, could become a concern for Buddhist 
monks who do not support the ruling CPP.  If embroiled in disputes, 
Ho Van warned that anti-CPP monks could be targeted by the Assembly 
and the Consultant.  According to Ho Van, a sizeable number of monks 
in both urban and rural areas support the SRP.  He further explained 
that some head monks permit human rights NGOs to use their pagodas 
for meetings; Bun Heang's appointment could be an attempt to stop 
this practice.  The Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) had 
staged public forums at pagodas, but Tep Vorn ordered all pagodas 
off limits for political purposes in late 2004/early 2005. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00002172  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  With respect to the eight-member composition of the 
Assembly, Ho Van said at least three members - Chhoeung Bun Chhear, 
Noy Chhrek, and Moung Ra - are CPP supporters.  Tep Vong, himself, 
is the former Vice-President of the People's Republic of Kampuchea, 
the name of the country in the early 1980s under Vietnamese 
occupation.  He recently asked monks to thank the CPP for liberating 
Cambodia from the Khmer Rouge. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Concerning the voter registration period that ended on 
October 24, Ho Van estimated approximately 10% of monks in Phnom 
Penh were registered to vote for the coming elections, compared with 
90% in the countryside.  Regarding the discrepancy, Ho Van said many 
head monks in Phnom Penh pagodas had not permitted monks under their 
supervision to register; monks need their monk ID card as well as 
residence permits to register.  Whereas, monk ID cards are easily 
obtainable, head monks may be slow or reluctant to issue or update 
residence documents. 
 
 
Civil Society Echos Concerns on Appointment 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Though he regarded the creation of a Monk Assembly as a 
positive development, Kul Panha, Executive Director of the Committee 
of Free and Fair Elections (COMFREL), stated that Hing Bun Heang's 
appointment could be intimidating to monks and discourage them from 
participating in politics.  Hang Punthear, Director of the Neutral, 
Impartial, Committee for Free and Fair Elections in Cambodia 
(NICFEC), added that Bun Heang cannot be a neutral party in 
politically-related conflicts. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  Punthear went on to add he has been told that 20 monks 
living in Svay Pope Pagoda were unable to register to vote when the 
head monk failed to issue them residence certificates.  Puthear 
stated that he was told the head monk is a CPP supporter and wanted 
the monks to join the CPP; however, the 20 monks refused to do so. 
The Monk Assembly is charged with judging conflicts such as these -- 
but with a politically aligned composition, neutral judgments will 
be unlikely. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12. (SBU)  Post will monitor the development of this new monk 
institution but Hing Bun Heang's affiliation to it is disturbing. 
We concur with sources who believe that the CPP intends to keep firm 
control over potential political agitation within the main Buddhist 
religious order like all other important national institutions in 
Cambodia.  End Comment. 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Bio note:   In late 2005, Hing Bun Heang filed a lawsuit 
against Sam Rainsy's wife Tioulong Saumura and former SRP 
Secretary-General Eng Chhay Eang, for their alleged roles in the 
 
SIPDIS 
distribution of a DVD that implicated Hing Bun Heang in the 1997 
grenade attack against Rainsy and other opposition protesters across 
from the National Assembly.  The case is still pending at Phnom Penh 
Municipal Court but Post has learned that government lawyers have 
agreed to take no further action in the case. 
 
 
MUSSOMELI