06QUITO2625
RELIGION IN ECUADOR'S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN
Mon Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #2625/01 3031920
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301920Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5572
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 6122
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 2130
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ OCT 0182
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 1105
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 1357
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 002625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS ALSO TO USOAS AND USAID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM EC
SUBJECT: RELIGION IN ECUADOR'S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 
 
REF: QUITO 2517 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Rafael Correa has taken a page from his 
presidential rival Alvaro Noboa's success in the first round 
by increasing his use of religion as a campaign crutch, 
drawing criticism and public comment from the Catholic Church 
and political observers.  Meanwhile, evangelical groups are 
not energized by either candidate--the largest indigenous 
evangelical group here will not offer its endorsement.  Since 
both candidates are now engaging in shallow religious 
appeals, the effect of religion in this campaign is unlikely 
to be decisive in second round voting on November 26.  Voters 
are more apt to be swayed by secular populist hopes of jobs 
and benefits for the poor.  End Summary. 
 
Candidates Invoke Religion 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Since first round voting on October 15, both the 
Correa and Noboa campaigns have taken on religious trappings. 
 For Noboa, this is nothing new (see reftel).  Since the 
outset of the campaign he has brandished a Bible, sported a 
heavy crucifix, prayed, anointed himself the "candidate 
chosen by God" and even "laid hands" on the sick.  Typical of 
the Noboa style is his invocation of God's will in his favor: 
 "Yes, we can build houses for Ecuadorians, glory to God and 
Viva Ecuador!" 
 
¶3.  (U) What is new is Correa's effort to show his own 
religious faith: he has conspicuously attended mass almost 
every day since running second to Noboa in the first round, 
participating in the ceremony by reading from the Bible, and 
publicly affirming his Catholic faith, trumpeting his 
Catholic upbringing and education and his year serving as a 
Salesian missionary to indigenous areas after graduation. 
 
Church Rebukes Both Campaigns 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Catholic Church's Episcopal Conference issued a 
statement on October 20 rebuking both candidates for their 
crass religious appeals, urging them instead to focus on 
offering proposals to help the poor, develop the country, and 
promote political stability.  Ecuadorian Episcopal Conference 
President Monsignor Nestor Herrera and Vice President 
Monsignor Jaime Bravo on October 23 told PolOff the Church 
was particularly appalled at Noboa's use of religion to sway 
voters by proselytizing and claiming miraculous healing 
powers.  Correa's publicized church appearances were 
considered more appropriate by the Church leaders.  Bravo and 
Herrera said the Church would remain impartial, but would 
continue to speak out against abuse of religion to win votes. 
 Meanwhile, on October 28, Noboa lashed out against the 
Church,s statements, saying, &no church should intervene in 
Ecuadorian politics - not the Protestants, not the Catholics, 
not the Jehovah,s Witnesses.8  He pledged to continue 
invoking God in the campaign and said the Church should mind 
its own business. 
 
¶5.  (U) Other secular voices have criticized the use of 
religion as making a spectacle of Ecuador's political 
process, and attempting to return Ecuador to the dark ages of 
its colonial past, when the Church had a direct role in 
politics. 
 
Indigenous Evangelicals Pessimistic, Not Aligned 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Marco Murillo, national director of FEINE, an 
evangelical Christian indigenous organization formerly 
supportive of ex-president Gutierrez, told PolOff on October 
27 that FEINE will not support either presidential candidate 
or, for that matter, any political party.  Murillo claimed 
neither campaign has made any overtures to his movement. 
Since both candidates are Catholic, Murillo did not think 
 
most evangelical Christians would be motivated to support 
them on religious grounds.  (Note: Evangelicals make up about 
12% of the Ecuadorian population.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) According to Murillo, FEINE's interests are to 
promote religious tolerance, indigenous and campesino 
development and political reform, regardless who wins.  He 
doubted a businessman like Noboa would be truly committed to 
help the indigenous poor.  Murillo was no more positive about 
Correa; he worried the political instability and 
confrontation Correa represents would undermine prospects for 
progress. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Murillo believed both candidates were using 
religion in their campaigns only for populist appeal. 
Despite Noboa's use of evangelical signals during the 
campaign, including brandishing a Gideon rather than Catholic 
Bible, and casting campaign events in the style of 
evangelical revival meetings, Murillo did not believe Noboa 
would be any more sympathetic to evangelicals or religious 
tolerance.  He was dismayed that the story about Noboa's use 
of a Gideon Bible was criticized by fervent Catholics as an 
outrage.  Murillo said he doubted Noboa was attempting to 
reach out to evangelicals--more likely he accidentally 
grabbed the wrong bible from his hotel room. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Religious appeals likely will not benefit either 
candidate in the second round.  Indeed, informed pollsters 
predict that Noboa's more "mystical" appeals could actually 
hurt Noboa.  In contrast, Murillo and others believe Noboa's 
blatant promises and handouts are having a real impact on 
poor voters.  For many indigenous poor, by this view, 
Correa's talk of political reform, corruption, and other 
esoteric subjects cannot compete with a bag of rice. 
JEWELL