06QUITO2458
ECUADOR ELECTIONS: Andean Parliament Sideshow
Tue Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #2458/01 2831205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101205Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5416
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 6049
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ OCT LIMA 1024
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 2075
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 1240UNCLAS QUITO 002458 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR ELECTIONS: Andean Parliament Sideshow 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On October 15, many Ecuadorians may be surprised 
to learn that they must also decide, in addition to selecting among 
the candidates for president, Congress, provincial and municipal 
council officials, who will represent them in the little known, 
little respected, Andean Parliament.  The race has significance, 
however, to the older, distinguished, and sidelined politicians 
seeking to fill Ecuador's five slots in the Parliament.  It also 
counts to the parties supporting them, who receive a boost to their 
survival prospects with every vote.  Exceptional candidates like 
Ivonne Baki even have hopes of making the Parliament relevant. 
Ultimately, however, the Parliament has yet to prove its importance 
to the average voter.  End Summary. 
 
Background and Electoral History 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On October 15, Ecuadorians will go to the polls to elect a 
new president, congressional deputies, mayors, provincial officials 
and five parliamentarians to the Andean Parliament.  The Parliament 
is currently composed of members from Ecuador, Colombia, Peru and 
Bolivia, with Venezuela opting out and Chile joining as an associate 
member in 2006.  The Parliament's assembly, its main decision-making 
body, currently consists of twenty members, five from each member 
country, with a two-year revolving presidency and three vice 
presidents.  The Parliament's main objectives include integration of 
the member states, harmonization of laws, and coordination and 
cooperation among its member parliaments.  The Parliament is based 
in Bogota, and Colombia currently occupies the presidency.  One of 
Ecuador's newly elected Parliamentarians will assume the presidency 
in 2007. 
 
¶3.  (U) The Parliament is part of a set of Andean regional 
institutions.  The Andean Community of Nations (CAN), created in 
1969 under the Cartagena Accord, is a sub-regional economic and 
political organization based in Lima, Peru.  In 1979, the CAN signed 
a treaty creating the Andean Court of Justice, the Andean Parliament 
and the Andean Council of Foreign Ministers.  The CAN's five 
original members were Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and 
Venezuela.  In April 2006, Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez withdrew 
Venezuela from the CAN in protest against the signing of Free Trade 
Agreements between Colombia and Peru with the United States, and 
joined MERCOSUR. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Parliament has a credibility problem, and is widely 
viewed as irrelevant since it does not have binding regional 
legislative powers.  Luis Fernando Duque, current Andean Parliament 
president, acknowledged in press reports that the organization's 
main challenges were to further integration and finally become 
relevant to member states' citizens.  Duque cited as a key step 
forward prospective implementation in 2007 of a new "Andean 
passport," which will allow citizens unimpeded travel and freedom to 
work in any of the member states.  He also claimed as a modest but 
notable success the recognition of university degrees from all 
member countries. 
 
¶5.  (U) Prior to the 2002 elections, Ecuador's Congress selected its 
five Andean Parliament members.  Beginning in 2002, the candidates 
were chosen by popular vote.  Unlike on other ballots, where voters 
may choose between voting for individuals or by party list, voters 
may only vote by party list for the Parliament.  The votes count 
toward the five percent minimum required to retain official party 
registry.  The five winning candidates, in descending order of 
popularity, were Juana Vallejo (PSC), Blasco Pena Herrera (PSC), 
Freddy Ehlers (NP), Hector Solorzano (PRE), and Jorge Fantoni 
(PRIAN). 
 
The Current Race 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) In the election on October 15, 35 Ecuadorian candidates, 
from nine political parties, are vying for five Parliament 
positions.  Among the most prominent and heading each party list are 
former Ambassador to the U.S. Ivonne Baki (PSP), former president 
Sixto Duran Ballen (UDC), and former congressman Marcelo Dotti 
(PSC), Wilson Sanchez (PRIAN), and Guillermo Landazuri (ID). 
 
Ivonne Outshines the Rest 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Baki served in 1998 as Ecuador's first female ambassador 
to the U.S., ran unsuccessfully for president in 2002, and served in 
Lucio Gutierrez' government as Commerce minister.  A long-time 
friend of the Embassy with many influential friends in the U.S., 
Baki told PolOff on October 5 that her friend and fellow 
environmentalist Bo Derek had recently visited Ecuador for the fifth 
time to promote the Galapagos Foundation and to offer her support 
for Baki's candidacy.  In April, Ms. Derek was named as U.S. Special 
Wildlife Envoy of the Secretary of State for wildlife trafficking. 
Her current trip was again to promote the foundation's conservation 
efforts in the Galapagos Islands and to offer her personal support 
for her close friend's candidacy. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Baki admitted she had not done much campaigning for the 
Parliament because most Ecuadorians are not familiar with the 
Parliament.  As a parliamentarian she would lead the effort to 
expose her countrymen to the Parliament's functions and importance. 
She believed the current group of Ecuadorian parliamentarians had 
failed to do so, partly due to contentious relations between the 
Ecuadorian members. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) If elected, Baki would work on lowering unemployment and 
poverty, improving education and health care, attracting foreign 
investment, creating business opportunities and promoting peace.  In 
the latter Baki referred to Colombia's internal conflict.  She would 
also support expanding the Parliament's power to legislate, along 
the lines of the European Community, to increase its relevance. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Touching on national politics, Baki commented that 
Ecuador's middle and upper classes were demoralized about politics 
and instability, and many would abstain from voting.  She confided 
that if front-runner Rafael Correa won the election and insisted on 
convoking a Constituent Assembly without congressional support, 
chaos could ensue.  If Correa were to force the issue by calling his 
supporters into the streets, she worried that "civil war" could 
break out. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The Andean Parliament is viewed as irrelevant to most 
Ecuadorians, a sinecure for older or sidelined politicians.  Baki's 
candidacy strikes us as an exception, given her aspirations, 
background, and force of personality.  Ever optimistic and 
forward-looking, Baki told the DCM she had already lined up support 
to assume the Parliament's presidency in 2007.  Her dire warnings of 
civil war should Correa win the Ecuadorian presidency give us pause, 
but could be exaggerated.  If recent history is any guide, 
Ecuadorians are more likely to give a new president a chance before 
taking to the streets.