06TAIPEI409
ANTI-AMERICAN DEMONSTRATIONS AT AIT-TAIPEI AND THE
Thu Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

090427Z Feb 06UNCLAS TAIPEI 000409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/DSS/IP, DS/IP/EAP, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/IP/FPO, 
DS/PSP/PSD AND EAP/TC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV TW
SUBJECT: ANTI-AMERICAN DEMONSTRATIONS AT AIT-TAIPEI AND THE 
AIT-KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
 
¶1. (U) On Tuesday 07 February 2006, sixteen members of the 
Taiwan Southern Society staged a brief demonstration outside 
the commercial office building housing the AIT-Kaohsiung 
(AIT-K) branch office.  The purpose of the protest was to 
present a written statement to AIT-Kaohsiung protesting the 
U.S. government's criticism of Taiwan President CHEN 
Shui-bian's call to abolish the National Unification Council 
(NUC).  Arriving at 1430 hours local time, the demonstrators 
were also accompanied by seven members of the local press, 
including one television cameraman and a radio reporter.  The 
group shouted slogans and delivered a letter addressed to 
President BUSH, to an AIT-Kaohsiung representative. 
Posturing for the local media, one of the protest leaders 
launched into a ten-minute harangue claiming that Taiwan 
democracy is not compatible with the "One-China" policy and 
demanding the U.S. not pressure Taiwan on the international 
stage.  The protesters and accompanying press disbanded at 
approximately 1440 hrs without further incident. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Kaohsiung City Foreign Affairs Police positioned 
fifteen uniformed and five plainclothes officers at the 
ground floor entrance of the building housing AIT-K branch 
office to maintain order.  Local Guard Force (LGF) personnel 
remained at post on the fifth floor to ensure that regular 
office operations were not disrupted.  No unusual incidents, 
arrests or injuries were reported. 
 
¶3. (U)  The following day, Wednesday 08 February, the 
American Institute in Taiwan (AIT-Taipei) received a fax 
notification from the Taiwan Northern Society, indicating 
they would be holding a rally outside AIT-Taipei to condemn 
U.S. "interference" in Taiwan's domestic affairs.  Initially 
scheduled to conduct their protest at 1300 hours local time, 
representatives from the Taiwan Northern Society did not 
arrive until 1600 hrs.  The small band of only eleven 
demonstrators unfurled a large banner that read "Taiwan 
People Deserve the Right to Self-Determination" and then 
delivered a statement to the police, which was later passed 
to an AIT security officer.  In the one-page statement 
written in Chinese, the Taiwan Northern Society labeled 
opposition to Taiwan President CHEN Shui-bian's proposal to 
abolish the NUC "disrespectful" and called upon the U.S. 
government to immediately apologize to the Taiwan people.  It 
also accused the U.S. of acquiescing to the PRC's 
interpretation of the "One-China" policy which presupposes 
Taiwan's eventual reunification with the mainland.  Once the 
statement was delivered, the protesters departed the area on 
foot without incident at 1620 hrs. 
 
¶4. (SBU) RSO Taipei notified National Police Administration 
(NPA) contacts in advance about the planned protest and the 
local Da-An police precinct commander responded by deploying 
additional uniformed officers in front of the Consular 
section to maintain order.  Police also kept the 
demonstrators confined to a pre-designated area away from the 
Consular entrance to ensure that AIT operations were not 
hampered.  SDT units and LGF personnel were also put on 
alert, and no unusual incidents, arrests or injuries were 
reported. 
 
¶5. (U) In Kaohsiung, three local papers reported the 
demonstration, mainly concentrating their coverage on the 
content of the Taiwan Southern Society's protest statement, 
including their support of President CHEN's call to abolish 
the NUC.  In Taipei, the protest received limited coverage by 
the broadcast media and was only reported in one local 
newspaper. 
DAVISON