06TRIPOLI383
GOVERNMENT OF LIBYA ANNOUNCES EFFORTS TO SUPPORT LEBANON
Tue Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tripoli
null
Brooke F Adams  08/06/2006 03:26:20 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Brooke F Adams

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        TRIPOLI 00383

SIPDIS
CXCAIRO:
    ACTION: POL
    INFO:   RSO PA ORA OMC LEGAT IPS ECON DEA DCM DAO CONS
            AMB AID

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

VZCZCCRO461
PP RUEHEG
DE RUEHTRO #0383/01 2131547
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011547Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1061
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 1190UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TRIPOLI 000383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL LY IS LE
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT OF LIBYA ANNOUNCES EFFORTS TO SUPPORT LEBANON 
 
REF: TRIPOLI 377 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and Comment. The Government of Libya announced 
on Monday a three-step initiative to express its solidarity with 
the people of Lebanon and denounce Israeli attacks in the 
country.  1) The General People's Committee for Foreign Liaison 
and International Cooperation was instructed to hold a meeting 
with ambassadors from the P-5 countries Monday, calling for an 
immediate ceasefire and an investigation into alleged genocide 
against the people of Lebanon (reftel).  2) A Libyan-government 
sponsored daily cargo plane stocked with medical supplies and 
food will reportedly be sent to Lebanon via other Arab 
countries. 3) Local media are being asked to highlight the 
confrontation, and have been particularly praising leader 
Moammar Qaddafi's alleged prediction of the attacks during a 
speech ten years ago. Several relatively calm 
government-sanctioned demonstrations have taken place in 
Tripoli. Comment:  The three-step initiative is clearly a 
low-cost attempt by the Libyan government to counter criticism 
it is facing on opposition websites and elsewhere, that it is 
not doing enough for the cause in Lebanon.  End Summary and 
Comment. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On Sunday, July 30, the General People's Committee (GPC 
- i.e. the Cabinet) held an emergency session to "support the 
steadfastness of the Lebanese brotherly people in facing the 
Israeli barbarous aggression taking place these days." After the 
meeting, the GPC ordered three steps to put these words into 
action, conveying to the Libyan public their commitment to 
supporting the Lebanese people.  In carrying out the first step, 
the GPC for Foreign Liaison and International Co-operation 
(GPCFLIC, i.e. the MFA) called in the ambassadors from the P-5 
countries to insist on an immediate stop to attacks in Lebanon 
(reftel).  Television and newspapers highlighted the Charges 
d'affairs from the United States and China, along with 
ambassadors from Russia, Britain and France, meeting with 
GPCFLIC Secretary for European Affairs Obeidi, who in press 
accounts, called for an end to "state terrorism, unwarranted 
aggression, and war crime against the Lebanese people and 
genocide that require an international investigation."  (See 
Reftel for a full report on the actual content of the meeting 
and Charge's response.) 
 
 
3 (SBU) The second announced step is the commencement of an 
immediate "air bridge" between  Libya and Lebanon to transport 
food and medical supplies via Jordan, Syria, and Cyprus. On 
Monday evening, local media reported that the first cargo plane 
of the air bridge, carrying 50 tons of medicine, medical 
equipment, food stuffs, and ambulances, took off from Mitiga 
International Airport.  Daily relief flights are planned. The 
government also reported that Libyan medical teams are available 
to be deployed to Lebanon, and that injured Lebanese civilians 
are welcome for treatment in local hospitals.  According to 
local media sources last week, the Qaddafi Foundation for 
Charity Societies,  a quasi-NGO run by Qaddafi's son Seif 
Al-Islam, in conjunction with Libyan Red Crescent, announced 
separate plans to send air shipments of medical and health 
supplies to Lebanon. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) The GPC also announced that the state-run Libyan media 
has been called upon to "highlight the confrontation of the 
Lebanese people in face of the Israeli barbarous and brutal 
attacks and the war crimes committed against the people of 
Lebanon. " As in many newspapers in the region, the front page 
of all the daily newspapers report almost solely on the violence 
in Lebanon, many showing graphic photographs of dead Lebanese 
civilians, especially following the attacks in Qana. On the 
evening of the July 30 bombing in Qana, the state run news show 
highlighted leader Moammar Qaddafi "predicting" the attack in a 
May 1996 speech in which he said the April, 1996 "Grapes of 
Wrath" attack on Qana would not be the last.  The station 
rebroadcast a clip of Qaddafi addressing an audience in Kano, 
Nigeria on May 9th, 1996, in which the leader encouraged people 
to wear t-shirts with pictures of children who had died in the 
attack Qana that year.  "... look at this high training of the 
Israeli airmen to target and kill infants and children.  Look at 
the disgrace and shame. The world must look at this little girl, 
this is a photo, and this is an example of the Israeli terrorism 
and barbarism". The media broadcaster commented that the world 
should have listened to Qaddafi at the time, who predicted this 
week's attack. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Editorials in state run newspapers echoed highly 
critical statements against the government of Israel and the 
western powers that back it. In an article from "Azzahaf 
Al-Akhdar" from July 31, 2006 "The Zionist hegemony is beyond 
description and goes unpunished just because it enjoys the 
protection of Great Powers." In "Ashames" on the same day, in an 
editorial entitled "Qana Again!", the author condemned Arab 
countries' silence towards the attacks in Qana.  He also 
referred to Qaddafi's speech in Kano, Nigeria in 1996 warning of 
an Israeli "death train." A great deal of coverage has been 
devoted to Saturday's "New York Times" article about the 
expedited delivery of US produced precision-guided bombs to 
Israel. As a result of this article, some here have started 
referring to Secretary Rice as "Hamalat al Khatab," or "carrier 
of fire", a Quranic reference to the wife of the uncle of 
prophet Muhammad, who was known to be an instigator or a fire 
starter. 
 
 ¶6. (SBU) Several government sanctioned demonstrations have been 
held since the commencement of the violence in Lebanon and 
Israeli. This weekend, following Friday prayers, demonstrators 
gathered in Green Square, the traditional spot for protests, 
chanting anti-Israeli slogans. Friday's broadcast sermon on 
state-sponsored television mainly focused on criticizing Israel, 
Jews and other Arab leaders. The imam particularly criticized 
wealthy oil states, which "should have power, but also stand by 
and do nothing." A pointed criticism of the US was also made for 
blocking the UN Security Council's attempt at a cease fire. On 
Monday, July 31, a separate demonstration composed mostly of 
youth, organized by Aisha Qaddafi's Watasimo Charity 
Organization, also took place in Green Square. The 
demonstrators, many of whom were affiliated with the Libyan 
version of the Boy Scouts, marched to the UN headquarters in 
Tripoli and delivered a letter condemning the attacks in Qana 
and praising the foresight of Moammar Qaddafi in forecasting 
this event years ago while in Kano, Nigeria. "Where is the UN? 
Where are its role, mission and charter called human rights? 
Where are the Security Council, and its resolutions regarding 
this terrible massacre?" Media reported approximately two 
thousand people took part in this demonstration, which was also 
televised extensively. 
BERRY