07ABIDJAN600
THE ROCKY ROAD TO UNHCR'S JUNE 30 RETURN DEADLINE
Thu Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO8226
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0600/01 1580935
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070935Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3070
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0561UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ABIDJAN 000600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO PRM/AFR/CACHANG AND AF/W 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
STATE PASS TO USAID/OFDA/DDEBERNARDO 
MONROVIA FOR USAID/OFDA/RQUINBY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL PHUM IV LI GU
SUBJECT: THE ROCKY ROAD TO UNHCR'S JUNE 30 RETURN DEADLINE 
 
REF: A. MONROVIA 617 
     ¶B. STATE 38825 
     ¶C. FREETOWN 330 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  The Abijan-based Refugee Coordinator for 
West Africa (RefCoord), traveled by road from Monrovia to 
Abidjan from May 1 to May 17.  RefCoord passed through 
Gbarnga, Voinjama, Macenta, Nzerekore, Danane, 
Duekoue/Guiglo, and Tabou during the trip.  RefCoord visited 
a number of villages where PRM-funded partners are working 
and met refugee groups from several camps (Kuankan, Laine, 
Nicla) and towns (Danane, Tabou) to assess preparations for 
the conclusion of UNHCR's assisted return program on June 30. 
 More than 97,000 Liberian refugees have returned with UNHCR 
assistance since November 2004 and UNHCR has communicated a 
clear message on the June 30 return deadline to Liberian 
refugee communities RefCoord visited.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The Abijan-based Refugee Coordinator for West Africa 
(RefCoord), traveled by road from Monrovia to Abidjan from 
May 1 to May 17.  RefCoord passed through Gbarnga, Voinjama, 
Macenta, Nzerekore, Danane, Duekoue/Guiglo, and Tabou during 
the trip.  RefCoord visited a number of villages where 
PRM-funded partners are working and met refugee groups from 
several camps (Kuankan, Laine, Nicla) and towns (Danane, 
Tabou) to assess preparations for the conclusion of UNHCR's 
assisted return program on June 30.  This was the first time 
RefCoord was able to conduct such a trip by road in almost 
two years.  (Note:  Please see ref. C for a report on Sierra 
Leone.  End note.) 
 
REFUGEE NUMBERS 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) According to UNHCR's official statistics, UNHCR has 
assisted 10,930 Liberian refugees to return so far in 2007 
(as of April 27).  The majority of returning refugees in 2007 
are from Sierra Leone (5,796) and Guinea (3,195).  Overall, 
the total number of Liberian refugees who have returned with 
UNHCR's assistance since November 2004 is now over 97,000. 
Fifty percent of returnees are from Guinea (48,366), followed 
by Sierra Leone (23,960), Cote d'Ivoire (18,239), Ghana 
(5,117), and Nigeria (2,049).  UNHCR reports a total of 
86,391 Liberian refugees still remain in countries of asylum, 
with the largest population in Ghana (24,058), followed by 
Cote d'Ivoire (23,010), Sierra Leone (16,994), Guinea 
(15,714), and Nigeria (4,825).  These numbers continue to 
decrease, however, particularly from Sierra Leone and Guinea, 
as organized and spontaneous return movements continue. 
(Note:  some of the figures on remaining caseload are derived 
using UNHCR's estimates of "spontaneous" returns.  These 
estimates have not been verified in all cases and may be 
inaccurate.  End note.) 
 
LIBERIA 
------- 
 
¶4.  (U) In Liberia, RefCoord visited Bong and Lofa Counties, 
including the towns and villages of Gbarnga, Foequelleh, 
Bellemu, Garmue, Gbarnga-Siaquelleh, Gbalatuah, Fissebu, 
Voinjama, Kolahun, and Foya.  David Karp, UNHCR Gbarnga Head 
of Office, said he was prioritizing remote villages for 
assistance in the coming year in Bong County.  For example, 
UNHCR will support a school rehabilitation and agricultural 
development project in Gbarnga-Siaquelleh (Panta District), a 
village just minutes from the Guinea border.  Although 
overall return numbers to Bong County are relatively low 
(5,153) when compared to the overall numbers, some 28% of all 
returns to Bong County have been to villages in this 
District, and 32% of those returns have come in 2007 alone, 
the highest percent for any year since 2004.  The American 
Refugee Committee (ARC) is working with a number of villages 
in this region to establish Savings and Loan Clubs, many of 
which are already generating significant revenue from club 
members.  In the Zota District, on the road to Lofa County, 
RefCoord met several school teachers who had worked with the 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) in Guinea, specifically 
from Laine Camp.  RefCoord later read the names of these 
teachers out to surprised refugees still living in Laine Camp 
who immediately recognized the names of their friends and 
former colleagues. 
 
¶5.  (U) UNHCR has assisted more than 57,000 Liberians to 
 
ABIDJAN 00000600  002 OF 004 
 
 
return to Lofa County.  This figure represents 59% of all 
official return movements.  PRM funds several NGOs in upper 
and lower Lofa County, including ARC, IRC, the Christian 
Children's Fund (CCF), the International Medical Corps (IMC), 
and the Center for Victims of Torture (CVT).  RefCoord noted 
significant and continued changes in Lofa County (ref. A). 
Workers in Voinjama and Kolahun were digging permanent 
drainage ditches in the town centers, lining them with cement 
blocks for the first time in years; stacks of fresh lumber 
were seen lying next to the road, ready to be used in local 
construction projects; and road crews were putting the 
finishing touches on the tremendously improved Voinjama to 
Foya road (travel time has been cut by several hours on this 
road over the last two years).  RefCoord met ARC staff in 
Voinjama who had returned from refugee camps in Guinea within 
the last year and almost all of the employees working with 
CVT are returnees from Sierra Leone and Guinea.  In contrast 
to these positive signs, IRC reported an increase in the 
number of malnutrition and TB cases at their referral clinic 
in Kolahun.  Most international and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) RefCoord spoke to agreed the health care 
sector still needed much attention and that access to more 
remote villages off the main roads is still an area of 
concern. 
 
GUINEA 
------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) RefCoord crossed into Guinea with UNHCR on May 11 
to visit the Kuankan and Laine refugee camps.  Soldiers in 
the town of Macenta, an important crossroads just after 
entering Guinea from Liberia, had started a protest early 
that morning over non-payment of salaries and were walking 
the streets with their weapons.  Businesses in Macenta town 
were closed but some locals continued to go about their daily 
chores, apparently unconcerned by the occasional, random 
gunfire from the protesting soldiers.  Several soldiers 
stopped the UNHCR vehicle RefCoord was traveling in, looking 
for some change "to buy some cigarettes."  Local shops in 
Nzerekore were also closed, ostensibly to prevent soldiers 
from looting their goods as had happened in protests earlier 
that same month. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In the refugee camps, RefCoord met with IRC staff 
(all Liberian refugees) working in the IRC schools and on 
IRC's child protection committees.  RefCoord was surprised by 
the frank and open discussions with refugees who admitted 
that they, and many others in the camps, traveled regularly 
back and forth to Liberia.  They revealed that at least one 
NGO had recently submitted a list of 67 newly "abandoned" 
children in the camp that was made up of young men and women 
over the age of 18.  They explained that many of those on the 
list were in fact former IRC clients who lied to this NGO 
about their age.  They also said the Refugee Committee in 
Laine Camp had recently submitted the names of three 
"abandoned" children to UNHCR.  The IRC staff said that after 
some investigation they found the children were actually in 
the camps with their mothers who had "abandoned" them hoping 
to obtain additional food rations. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Cesar Ortega, UNHCR Voinjama, traveled with 
RefCoord to Kuankan Camp.  He said that most of the refugees 
participating in our larger group discussion that morning had 
only recently been in Voinjama within the last couple of 
weeks, including the Refugee Committee Chairwoman, as well as 
many of those he saw receiving food distributions.  Although 
current UNHCR figures report approximately 6,000 Liberian 
refugees in each of the two remaining camps, Ortega believes 
the number of legitimate refugees staying in these two camps 
to be approximately half that number.  Salif Kagni, Head of 
Office for UNHCR Nzerekore, confirmed that recent head counts 
revealed the numbers are indeed lower than their official 
figures. 
 
¶9.  (U) Some of the refugees RefCoord spoke to said they 
intended to return after May 24, when the schools closed. 
Several teachers said they are seriously considering the 
UNHCR-IRC-Ministry of Education package to add qualified 
teachers to the Ministry payroll in Liberia, and most 
refugees still hold out hope the U.S. will offer another 
group resettlement for Liberian refugees.  Other refugees are 
waiting for their P-3, family reunion cases to be processed, 
and a large number of Liberians remaining in the camps are 
physically handicapped and will require closer attention from 
UNHCR.  RefCoord also visited with IRC the villages of 
 
ABIDJAN 00000600  003 OF 004 
 
 
Simkoly, Kerezaghaye, Loula, and Kermanda, all located 
outside the two refugee camps.  RefCoord and IRC officials 
were struck by the signs of widespread malnutrition among 
many children in these villages. 
 
COTE D'IVOIRE 
------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The worst roads during this trip were located 
between the Guinea/Cote d'Ivoire border and Danane, a town 
located just north of the former Zone of Confidence (ZOC) in 
Cote d'Ivoire.  The border point on the Ivoirian side is 
still manned by oddly dressed and young looking Forces 
Nouvelles (FN) soldiers.  The FN provided a security escort 
that accompanied us on the two hour, fifty kilometer dirt 
road to Danane and helped wave us through the various FN 
checkpoints.  The road between Man and Duekoue is still 
monitored by UNOCI forces, although security escorts are no 
longer provided.  A reported up-tick in violence in April 
around the town of Bangolo, more or less halfway between Man 
and Duekoue in the former ZOC, forced ONUCI to provide an 
armed escort for all travelers between these two points for 
several weeks.  However, Auguste Kpognon, Country Director 
for CARE, said it appears that incidents between Man and 
Duekoue have actually decreased now that the joint FN and 
FANCI (regular Ivoirian military) patrols have started as 
called for under the Ouagadougou Peace Agreement. 
 
¶11.  (U) RefCoord met Liberian refugee groups in Danane, 
Guiglo, and Tabou.  Refugees in Danane and Guiglo asked 
questions as to why they had not been resettled to the U.S. 
In Guiglo they were very concerned about the future status of 
the Nicla refugee camp and what sort of services can be 
expected after June 30.  Questions such as property rights 
and legal documentation for refugees who remain in Cote 
d'Ivoire after June 30 were raised several times.  In Tabou 
many of the Liberians on the refugee committee asked specific 
questions about return assistance, such as how many kilos and 
what type of goods they could bring with them to Liberia if 
they returned now.  Many of the Liberians in Danane spoke 
comfortably in French and claimed to have their own small 
businesses or work in local plantations. 
 
USG MESSAGE ON THE END OF ASSISTED REPATRIATION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶12.  (U) RefCoord talked to refugees and NGO staff in all 
locations to see how well informed they were of the June 30 
deadline and if they understood the status of the U.S. 
resettlement program for Liberian refugees.  Although 
RefCoord did not see the U.S. statement in all locations 
(ref. B), it was clear that almost everyone had been well 
informed that UNHCR's return and reintegration assistance in 
Liberia will end on June 30 and that the U.S. is only 
resettling P-3, family reunion cases.  Most refugees prefaced 
their requests for renewed resettlement with statements 
indicating they are aware of the already expired September 
30, 2006, deadline to submit P-3 petitions, and many even 
asked RefCoord to encourage other countries, such as Canada 
and Australia, to consider resettling Liberian refugees now 
that the U.S. program is over. 
 
¶13.  (U) In Cote d'Ivoire UNHCR had posted the OPE-provided 
P-3 lists in all locations RefCoord visited and UNHCR had 
used the U.S. statement to prepare specific responses to the 
questions posed on the post-June 30 situation.  When asking 
questions, refugees referred to recent missions from the 
Ivoirian refugee office, SAARA, on their legal rights in Cote 
d'Ivoire as well as a recent information mission organized by 
UNHCR, SAARA, and the Liberian Ambassador to Cote d'Ivoire. 
Refugees sought clarification of specific points from these 
missions that revealed their close attention to the different 
messages each delegation had delivered.  RefCoord spoke to 
one Liberian refugee in Tabou town and asked him if he was 
aware of the June 30 deadline.  He replied that he is going 
to stay in Cote d'Ivoire after June 30, that he will request 
his permanent refugee card from UNHCR as explained during a 
recent information discussion with the Liberian Ambassador, 
and pointed to his wood shop across the street where he said 
he plans to continue working. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The areas RefCoord visited on this trip encompass 
 
ABIDJAN 00000600  004 OF 004 
 
 
the largest concentration of Liberian refugee returnees as 
well as the largest number of Liberian refugees still 
officially registered outside Liberia.  In Liberia, 
PRM-funded NGOs and UNHCR are playing a key role in ensuring 
that return is sustainable.  PRM's partners are rightly 
concerned that the transition from relief to development 
remains unclear, but the signs of progress and level of 
refugee repatriation in the last two years is impressive.  At 
the same time, IRC's data on malnutrition in upper Lofa 
County highlight that real needs are still there.  Outside 
Liberia, at least in Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire, UNHCR has 
clearly communicated information on the June 30 deadline to 
all refugee populations RefCoord visited.  Refugees have also 
received information from the USG statement on repatriation 
and the P-3 family reunion program, either directly from 
reading the notice or indirectly from friends.  The real 
challenge for UNHCR lies outside Liberia.  UNHCR will have to 
promote local integration in an uneasy political environment 
in some host countries.  Some refugees still face a long 
review process for their P-3 petitions and will likely remain 
outside Liberia during that time.  And there is the obvious 
issue of existing needs within the local, non-refugee 
communities, whose well-being also needs to be considered. 
All of these issues will influence UNHCR's programming for 
the rest of 2007 and into 2008. 
HOOKS