07ANKARA757
DENIZLI: TEXTILES REIGN SUPREME NEAR TURKEY'S "COTTON
Tue Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2747
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0757/01 0930946
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030946Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1556
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2442
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1815
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTDA FOR DAN STEIN 
PASS EXIM BANK FOR CRAIG O'CONNOR 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON BEXP KTEX TU
SUBJECT: DENIZLI: TEXTILES REIGN SUPREME NEAR TURKEY'S "COTTON 
CASTLE" 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Turkey's Denizli province, located just east of 
the Port of Izmir, is yet another example of how Turkey's economic 
recovery is trickling down to its diverse regions.  One of Turkey's 
largest textile producing regions, companies who previously lost 
U.S. business at the end of the WTO Multi-Fiber Agreement have 
"moved up the value chain" and been able to reacquire lost customers 
because U.S. consumers are willing to pay more for Turkish quality 
and reputation.  In addition to textiles, the region produces iron, 
steel and copper products, exports the largest amount of Turkish 
travertine and marble of any region, and is developing vineyards and 
greenhouse facilities.  Even though this economic boom has brought 
above-average growth, Denizli's unemployment rate still rests at 
around 5%.  The city's leadership must be mindful, however, that 
growth brings problems of its own and plan accordingly for the 
future.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) During a recent regional outreach meeting with business and 
political leaders in Denizli, officials painted a positive image of 
the city's growth and export potential.  Turkey's 16th largest 
regional economy and one of its fastest growing industrial areas, 
Denizli's share of Turkish exports amounted to $2 billion in 2006, 
70% of which were textile exports.  Located in the southwestern 
region just east of the port of Izmir, Denizli province also 
contains the thermal springs tourist destination of Pamukkale, which 
translates to "Cotton Castle." 
 
Textiles Still King 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Surprisingly, Denizli textile producers provided a very 
different story about their business potential than their 
counterparts from other regions.  During a meeting with the Denizli 
Chamber of Industry, representatives from companies currently 
producing home textiles and towels for such well-known U.S. 
companies as Pottery Barn, Williams-Sonoma, Restoration Hardware and 
T.J. Maxx told us that they experienced significant losses after the 
end of the WTO Multi-Fiber Agreement, when U.S. companies shifted 
orders to China and other low-cost suppliers.  The U.S. companies 
have, however, subsequently returned to the Denizli producers 
because of the quality of their products and reliability of their 
services.  One business representative told us that Williams-Sonoma 
had returned to his company exclusively for the production of its 
kitchen textiles because U.S. consumers will pay more for products 
"Made in Turkey" than those "Made in India," even though he conceded 
that the Indian quality is catching up to Turkish.  The sector did 
experience significant losses in the production of low cost high 
volume ready-made apparel.  One company previously produced large 
quantities of garments for Victoria's Secret but lost the business 
to China. 
 
Expanding Export Potential 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Textiles are not the only sector flourishing in Denizli. 
According to the Denizli Chamber of Commerce, the area is also 
Turkey's largest exporter of marble and travertine (the region 
boasts Turkey's third largest reserves) and also produces iron, 
steel and copper products, including copper cables that are used by 
NASA.  Vineyards in the region are trying to distinguish Denizli as 
a wine-producing region, and entrepreneurs are also trying to tap 
into the natural energy of the area's hot springs and develop 
geothermal greenhouses to grow tomatoes and possibly flowers. 
According to Denizli's Mayor, Nihat Zeybekci, Denizli's thermal 
springs provide a continuous energy source that could provide free 
energy to greenhouses throughout the year.  He added that about 25% 
of the cost of operating greenhouses in Turkey's Antalya province is 
for energy production. 
 
Dealing With Growth 
------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Denizli's city center population is about 700,000, while 
the population for the province is approximately 1.5 million.  Due 
to the city's vibrant economy, it has attracted many workers from 
Turkey's smaller villages, leading to an average 3% growth rate 
(Turkey's average is about 1.7%).  Its current rate of unemployment 
is one of the lowest in the country, between 4.5 - 5%, well below 
Turkey's overall 10% rate, and the Chamber of Industry told us that 
there are about 170,000 registered workers.  While city officials 
tell us that Denizli can handle the influx of migrant workers, they 
do have concerns about the strain on its ageing infrastructure.  As 
with other developing cities in Turkey, its waste water treatment 
system needs renovation.  The Mayor told us that the current system 
 
ANKARA 00000757  002 OF 002 
 
 
loses about 50% of the water it transports, but the city has 
received a 70 million euro grant from the World Bank for water 
pipes. 
 
Anatolian Tigers Moving West 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment:  Denizli is yet another example of how Turkey's 
strong economic growth is driving the growth of new regional 
business centers.  Its businesspeople have shown the strategic 
thinking needed for Turkey to remain a significant producer in the 
world textile market.  Its vibrant business community works well 
with the city's business-minded administration (the Mayor also owns 
a successful textile manufacturing company), and the results show. 
With growth, however, comes new problems, and leaders must continue 
to plan well into the future to ensure that Denizli's population 
growth does not overwhelm its infrastructure. 
Wilson