07ANKARA2959
TURKEY: 2007 DECA INSPECTION FOCUSES ON INCIRLIK
Fri Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #2959/01 3481114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141114Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4645
INFO RHMFIUU/CDR USTRANSCOM TCJ3 SCOTT AFB IL PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/USAFE AMOCC RAMSTEIN AB GE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP:PDUSDP/ISA:EUR/ISA:NESA/DSCA// PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5// PRIORITY
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU PRIORITY
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU PRIORITYUNCLAS ANKARA 002959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: 2007 DECA INSPECTION FOCUSES ON INCIRLIK 
CONSTRUCTION ISSUES 
 
REF: ANKARA 0026 
 
1.(SBU) SUMMARY: The annual Turkish General Staff (TGS) 
inspection of US basing facilities made progress in resolving 
the construction delay issue and turn-over of recently 
constructed buildings at the 39th Air Base Wing at Incirlik 
Air Base.  It proposed establishment of a joint working group 
to conduct an environmental assessment of the Yumurtalik Sea 
Terminal property prior to the facility's turn-over to the 
Turkish government.  As in past years, TGS highlighted US 
responsiveness to Turkish concerns.  While some outstanding 
issues, such as the employment of US dependents at Incirlik, 
were left unresolved, there appeared to be a concerted effort 
by TGS and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to address issues 
amicably. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) As required under Article XI of the bilateral 
Defense Economic Cooperation Agreement (DECA), TGS J-5 
Agreements Division Chief MajGen Mehmet Cetin led an 
inter-agency team of TGS, Turkish Air Force, Foreign 
Ministry, Customs, Labor and Environment and Forestry 
representatives to conduct an inspection November 27-30, 2007 
of the 425th Air Base Group facility at Bayrakli Park and 
Cigli Air Base in Izmir, and the 39th ABW at Incirlik Air 
Base outside of Adana.  Although General Cetin took a 
business-like approach to his first DECA inspection, notably 
canceling his team's participation in a US-hosted luncheon in 
Izmir and both reciprocally-hosted dinners planned for 
Incirlik, TGS staff cited mutual solidarity, good will, and a 
desire to achieve positive progress.  The results of the 2006 
DECA inspection may be found in reftel. 
 
TURKEY PLEASED WITH US CONTRIBUTIONS IN IZMIR 
 
¶3. (SBU) At Cigli Air Base, the 425th ABG provided up-date 
briefings at facilities where the US has made improvements, 
including the document control and logistics building, cold 
storage warehouse, enlisted dining hall, vehicle service 
station, and an aircraft maintenance hanger.  Renovations and 
upgrades to sole and joint-use facilities were funded by the 
annual $1M Cigli support fund that is part of the Cigli Air 
Base turnover agreement.  The Turkish delegation appeared 
pleased by the USG contributions and expressed appreciation 
for good coordination on the renovation work. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The 425th ABG, which supports US troops at NATO's 
Component Command Air Izmir and US military operations in 
Eskisehir, Istanbul and Ankara, is located on a 
privately-leased compound in Bayrakli Park, Izmir.  General 
Cetin led a 90-minute inspection tour of the facility, 
punctuated by a series of briefings by base personnel.  The 
Turkish delegation asked about communications systems in use, 
number of weapons and amount of ammunition stored at the 
facility, perimeter security monitoring and alarms, disposal 
of hazardous waste, and medical facilities available on the 
compound.  No major issues were raised. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The municipality of Karsiyaka, on which the Bayrakli 
property is located, has re-zoned Bayrakli Park and adjacent 
land as commercial property; the US expects to have to vacate 
the compound at some point in the future.  The facility 
occupies four parcels of land owned by separate landowners, 
with current individual leases expiring between November 2008 
and December 2011.  The primary long-term option under 
consideration is a drawdown of the Bayrakli Park facility and 
relocation of the main support functions to on-site locations 
at the NATO Air Izmir facility.  The movement plan, once 
approved by the 39th ABW and USAFE, will require future 
discussion with and approval from TGS. 
 
INCIRLIK AB -- GOOD FOLLOW UP ON PREVIOUS ISSUES 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Following the three-day inspection of the 39th Air 
Base Wing (ABW) at Incirlik Air Base, TGS expressed 
appreciation for US cooperation on issues raised during and 
since the 2006 inspection.  Maj Gen Cetin and his team were 
pleased with: 
 
- maintenance of effective base security through use of the 
main gate large vehicle inspection station and the new 
electronic ID bar code check now mandatory for all local 
employees entering and leaving the base; 
 
- treatment of waste water on-base before discharge; building 
 
and effective use of an incinerator for medical waste; and 
establishment of a temporary storage area for hazardous 
waste; 
 
- remedial action taken for asbestos containment in the 
demolition of old buildings and new contracts for 
construction debris removal and disposal; and, 
 
- good maintenance of base roads and water drainage lines. 
 
INCIRLIK -- TGS PLEDGES HELP WITH CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING 
TURN-OVER ISSUES 
 
¶7. (SBU) ODC raised with TGS and MFA the US frustration with 
delays of important construction and maintenance projects at 
Incirlik.  The delays, experienced since August 2007, were 
initially caused by the failure of 10th Tanker Base Command 
to allow certain construction materials on to Incirlik Air 
Base because they were not manufactured in Turkey.  According 
to regulations contained in the MFA's 2002 circular governing 
construction at US facilities in Turkey, all projects are 
required to use materials procured locally whenever possible. 
 ODC disagrees with MFA's interpretation of the construction 
circular.  Confusion on the issue of place of procurement 
versus place of manufacture caused TGS to reevaluate 
construction materials lists, resulting in delays in the 
delivery of materials which forced a halt to work on a range 
of projects, including:  new base housing construction, 
communications infrastructure, waste water systems, and 
essential, on-going runway repair work.  TGS and MFA agreed 
to review the issue of the procurement of construction 
materials and pledged to find a solution to this problem. 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) The US side also discussed the delays in allowing 
the 39th ABW to occupy three US-only buildings constructed 
within the last year for the storage of hazardous materials. 
Construction of the buildings was completed in March and 
April 2007 and registration with Ministry of Defense 
completed.  The 10th Tanker has refused to allow occupation 
and use of the buildings, however, due to lack of a turnover 
protocol document.  TGS agreed to complete negotiations for a 
protocol to facilitate the formal transfer and use of the 
buildings as soon as possible. 
 
INCIRLIK -- OUTSTANDING ISSUES FLAGGED BY TGS 
 
¶9. (SBU) Issues cited by TGS as requiring resolution: 
 
- Fire arms accountability:  The quarterly ammunition list 
contained in Memo 60-2 should be updated and approved, and 
serial numbers of all fire arms in the US inventory are to be 
included in the inventory. 
 
- Overtime payment for Customs and Immigration officers at 
the Cargo Hub:  Customs repeated its request, first made in 
2006, for US payment of overtime salaries and transportation 
expenses to cover Customs officers' travel to and from the 
base.  In response, ODC reiterated the response made 
following the 2006 DECA inspection that a formal request for 
payment be transmitted via an MFA diplomatic note.  The 
Embassy has not yet received such a request.  Subsequent to 
initiation of Cargo Hub operations, Customs notified the 39th 
ABW of an inspection requirement and requested payment of 
overtime fees for one Customs officer to ensure 24-hour 
coverage.  Customs Ministry officials have since confirmed 
that Customs does have the authority to check all cargo 
transiting Turkey but that it typically does not exercise 
this authority except in cases of suspicious cargo. 
 
- Communications plan: TGS requested that the Master 
Communications Plan prepared annually should be prepared for 
2007, inspected by the 10th Tanker Base Command, and 
forwarded to TGS. 
 
- US Dependent Hires:  The Labor Ministry repeated its 
complaint that the 39th ABW has not provided a list of 
specific jobs for which it would like to hire US dependents 
and is not applying for work permits for US dependent hires 
in accordance with Turkish labor law.  This issue was 
initially raised at the 2005 DECA, after which ODC offered to 
meet to discuss this issue.  The MFA subsequently notified 
the Embassy that the Turkish side could not come to an 
agreed-upon position and therefore preferred not to meet.  At 
 
the 2006 inspection, the Turkish delegation reiterated a 
request for this information for the record but did not press 
the issue. 
 
- Domestic employees working on-base: Domestic employees 
working for American personnel on the base are subject to 
Turkish labor laws requiring their employers to pay social 
security insurance, according to Social Insurance Law No. 
¶506.  Contracts for all such employees should be prepared and 
should be in compliance with Ministry of Labor regulations. 
 
- Environmental issues: Formal permission should be obtained 
from the Adana municipality, with coordination of the 10th 
Tanker Base Command, for the discharge of treated waste water 
into the Adana sewage system.  In addition, the US should 
maintain the proposed schedule for the rehabilitation of the 
former landfill site on the base, originally proposed to be 
completed in 2009 and recently postponed to 2014. 
 
NEED FOR ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY OF YUMURTALIK SITE 
 
¶9. (SBU) General Cetin led both delegations on a walking tour 
of the Yumurtalik Sea Port facility, located about 30 miles 
east-southeast of Adana.  The turn-over to Turkey of this 
fenced, 12-acre 1950s-era US fuel terminal and storage 
facility was the most significant issue raised during the 
previous year's Incirlik inspection.  The facility has not 
been used for several years and has no resident US personnel. 
 While the perimeter fence appeared intact, the Turkish 
delegation expressed concerns about security for the site. 
TGS requested: 
 
- The formation of a joint working group to schedule the 
transfer of the facility and assess any environmental damage 
at the site, including any possible soil or groundwater 
contamination, and make preparations for any remedial action 
that may be required. 
 
- Continued USG oversight of the facility during the interim 
between the departure of US personnel and the removal of USG 
equipment and TGS assumption of responsibility for the 
facility following signature of a Turnover Agreement. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON