07ANKARA1756
Second Turkey-Iraq-US Gas Study Meeting in Istanbul
Tue Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8164
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHAK #1756/01 1911303
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101303Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2901
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0984
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 1654
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2992
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2121UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001756 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET EINV PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: Second Turkey-Iraq-US Gas Study Meeting in Istanbul 
 
Ref: A) Ankara 756; B) Ankara 614 
 
ANKARA 00001756  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. During the second trilateral gas working meeting 
held in Istanbul on Saturday June 30, Turkey's Under Secretary for 
Energy Sami Demirbilek reassured Iraqi PM Maliki's oil advisor Abd 
al-Ilah al-Amir and the Iraqi Ambassador, Dr. Jawad al Hindawi, of 
Turkey's intention to find ways to cooperate with the Iraqi central 
government in energy and to do so in "a respectful way and as a 
neighbor."  Although unwilling to make formal commitments, Advisor 
al-Amir expressed willingness to "listen to all ideas" for 
cooperation and encouraged Turkey's Ministry of Energy to write 
letters formally suggesting cooperation projects in electricity, in 
the acceleration of the gas master plan, and in oil and gas 
exploration plans in the al-Nasiriyya region. Deputy Assistant 
Secretary Bryza noted the first goal for Iraqi gas is domestic use, 
 
SIPDIS 
but Bryza also described the great opportunity for Iraq to export 
gas to Europe and foster European and global energy security through 
supply diversity. After presentations by BOTAS and TPAO, and 
discussions of the status of security and the hydrocarbon law in 
Iraq, the working group concluded with an agreement to meet again in 
September. The first gas working group meeting was held March 9 in 
Istanbul.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Al-Amir: Listening to all ideas but, first, hydrocarbon law and the 
gas master plan 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) Iraqi Oil Advisor Abd al-Ilah al-Amir opened and ended his 
remarks stating that he is "all ears on the ways and means" for 
Iraq-Turkey energy cooperation, but he also described the "hard 
situation" in Iraq due to security. He explained the gas sector has 
been neglected for 30-40 years, but Iraqi thinking on gas has 
changed. The five non-associated fields in the north are not the 
only sources of gas, and gas and condensate resources are also in 
the Western Desert. Domestic needs are important. Power stations 
will be converted from liquids to gas. Gas will be needed for oil 
field maintenance and industrial uses. Furthermore, Iraq has agreed 
to join the Arab Gas Pipeline project with a spur to the line 
running from Egypt through Jordan and Syria to Turkey. Al-Amir 
explained "many unknown issues" exist and the purpose of Iraq's 
master gas plan is to clarify these. Al-Amir also detailed Iraq's 
"new circumstances" for hydrocarbon development once the new 
hydrocarbon law has been passed. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Bryza and Demirbilek: EU is excited for the prospects of Iraqi gas 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (SBU) Bryza expressed hope that excess Iraqi gas can be exported 
to Europe in the future. Bryza also explained how Iraq fits into the 
EU energy security strategy. The possibility of obtaining gas from 
Iraq would give the EU more confidence in resisting Russian 
pressure, even if Europeans would need to be "patient" before 
actually receiving the gas. A "smarter" EU energy strategy would 
avoid exclusive long-term contracts with Russia, and instead seek 
leverage from access to Caspian and Iraqi supplies to negotiate more 
favorable terms with Gazprom. Undersecretary Demirbilek echoed these 
remarks explaining, "If Iraqi gas were available, it would provide 
an important alternative to Russia." Demirbilek suggested working 
towards an MOU or IGA between Turkey and the Iraqi Central 
Government to allow a framework for oil and gas exploration. 
Al-Almir explained that Iraq is not ready now for such agreements 
but did declare that Iraq will export gas in "all directions". Bryza 
re-emphasized that "we are here for Iraq" in a gesture of good will 
and shared interests, and would apply no pressure as our Iraqi 
friends make their sovereign decisions. Demirbilek clarified 
Turkey's view that Iraq is a good friend and neighbor. Turkey is 
willing to support all forms of bilateral energy cooperation, gas, 
oil, refineries, and electricity. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Representatives from Turkey's BOTAS and TPAO put into 
context oil and gas cooperation with Iraq, including past projects, 
Turkey's strong interest in restoring the Iraq-Turkey 
(Kirkuk-Ceyhan) oil pipeline to active use, estimates of future gas 
production (with exports growing to 40-50 bcm), the potential for 
export through TGI Nabucco, and LNG from Ceyhan, as well as 
BOTAS/TPAO willingness to assist in completion of the gas master 
plan.  TPAO and BOTAS said that while their previous work in the 
1990s had focused on the five non-associated gas fields in the 
north, they were currently looking at Iraq as a whole, including 
ways to exploit currently flared associated gas in the south.  TPAO 
estimated approximately 1 trillion cubic meters of gas reserves in 
northern Iraq, approximately evenly split between associated and 
non-associated gas. 
 
ANKARA 00001756  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
- - - - - - 
Next Steps 
- - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Turkish MFA Energy Affairs DDG Vural Altay asked al-Almir 
how best to cooperate while emphasizing only the central government 
of Iraq is the counterpart to the Republic of Turkey. He explained 
that GOT is currently advising Turkish companies can only proceed 
with exploration and cooperation if the central government approves. 
Demirbilek further explained that as a neighbor Turkey is not 
thinking of "taking product out" for commercial motives, rather 
Turkey is seeking a way to open the door to energy cooperation that 
will strengthen Iraq politically and economically. Altay referred to 
a letter that was sent from Turkey's Ministry of Energy to the Iraqi 
electricity minister with concrete proposals for how Turkey could 
help in the electricity sector (Note: We understand this letter was 
delivered during the course of the Neighbors' working group on 
energy on June 28-29. A copy of the letter is in para 10. End Note.) 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Al-Amir responded by ranking completion of the gas master 
plan as the highest priority and asked TPAO to write a letter to the 
Turkish Ambassador, which mentions this meeting, formally inquiring 
about how TPAO might support efforts develop the gas master plan in 
conjunction with ongoing efforts by the GOI with Shell's help. He 
also suggested that Turkey can help in oil and gas development and 
re-injection efforts, including at the provincial level. At 
Al-Amir's suggestion, TPAO also agreed to send a letter to the Iraqi 
central government and to the provincial government of al-Nasiriyya 
offer to assist in the development of oil and gas resources in that 
province. On the matter of contracts, al-Amir reminded everyone that 
the Iraqi Government will recognize no contracts that do not comply 
with the new hydrocarbon law.  TPAO repeatedly sought confirmation 
that existing production sharing agreements with Iraqi Kurdish 
authorities would need to be reconciled with the hydrocarbon law 
once that legislation is passed.  Turkish Under Secretary Demirbilek 
warned that should Turkish companies choose to proceed with existing 
PSA's, they risked finding themselves of either having to 
restructure their projects in accord with the new hydrocarbon law or 
cease developing their projects.  Al-Amir affirmed this was indeed 
the case.  The Turkish Government stressed that it will not approve 
any actions by Turkish state-owned companies in Iraq without the 
express authorization and agreement of the Iraqi Government.  The 
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs noted the same applies to access 
to the Iraq-Turkish pipeline.  As a side note, the Turkish MFA 
reported that it rebuffs requests from the Norwegian oil company DNO 
"every two weeks' for permission to ship its oil from a Kurdish 
field through the Iraq Turkish pipeline. 
 
¶7. (SBU) From a Turkish suggestion, the Iraqis agreed to organize a 
meeting for Turkish companies in Iraq laying out what the GOI sees 
as investment needs in the energy sector and explaining the 
conditions and requirements for the Turkish private sector in Iraq. 
At Bryza's suggestion, all agreed to meet again, perhaps in 
September. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment: This second trilateral meeting was positive in 
that it discussed a broader range of specific projects, and 
highlighted areas for potential cooperation.  It was also useful to 
brief a higher level Iraqi delegation on the significant potential 
for Iraqi gas exports through Turkey. It was also clear that the 
Turks have to figure out how BOTAS and TPAO will work with various 
Iraqi parties, including the KRG, once the hydrocarbon law is 
passed.  Overall, we agree with the observation made by several GOT 
delegates that we need to work together to make the GOI more 
comfortable in participating in this dialogue, including sending a 
larger delegation with higher representation at the next meeting. 
End Comment. 
 
¶9. (U) Participating in the Meeting: 
 
Iraq 
- Ambassador Dr. Jawad Al Hindawi 
- Oil Advisor, Prime Minister's Office, Abdulilah al-Amir 
 
Turkey 
- Under Secretary for Energy Sami Demirbilek 
- MFA Energy Affairs Deputy Director Vural Altay 
- Several other representatives from Turkey's Energy Ministry, 
Ministry of Foreign Affiars, BOTAS, and TPAO 
 
U.S. 
- Deputy Assistant Secretary Matt Bryza 
- Director, NEA/I-ASSIST, Laird - Treiber 
 
ANKARA 00001756  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
- Robert Boynton, ECON, Embassy Baghdad 
- Thomas Goldberger, ECON, Embassy Ankara 
- Mike Mauel, Embassy Ankara 
 
¶10. (SBU) Letter sent by Turkey's Minister for Energy Dr. Hehmet 
Hilmi G|ler to Iraq's Minister of Electricity Dr. Kareem Waheed, 
dated 20 March 2007. 
 
Begin text: 
 
H.E. Dr. Kareen Waheed 
Minister of Electricity 
Republic of Iraq 
 
Excellency, 
 
As a follow up to our bilateral meeting of March 20, 2007, which I 
have found very useful and promising in the field of energy 
cooperation between Turkey and Iraq, I would like to underline once 
again that upon your request Turkey is ready and willing to help to 
overcome its difficulties in the energy sector. 
 
In this vein, we are ready to cooperate with you to meet Iraqi 
electricity demand for which you have asked assistance during our 
meeting. As I have mentioned in our meeting, supply of cheap crude 
oil and natural gas by Iraqi side to Turkey would play an essential 
role to meet your electricity demand in the short term. Different 
mechanisms can be jointly developed to extend cooperation in this 
field. Our immediate proposals for this cooperation can be 
summarized as follows: 
 
-- making Kerk|k-Ceyhan crude oil pipeline fully operational as soon 
as possible, 
 
-- receiving crude oil from Iraq through existing infrastructure for 
the sole purpose of producing electricity for Turkey and Iraq at the 
initial stage, 
 
-- constructing a new electricity power plant in Turkey following 
your statement that Iraqi side is ready to allocate resources for 
the financing of the power plant project, 
 
-- transmitting electricity from Turkey to Iraq through new 
transmission lines which were planned to be constructed, 
 
-- with reference to your call for Turkish companies operating in 
the field of energy to invest in Iraq, utilizing the experience of 
TPAO in oil and natural gas exploration and other related 
activities, 
 
Details of the proposals can be worked out jointly at your earliest 
convenience and as we have agreed during our meeting, I also would 
like to mention that we are ready for your further proposals for 
developing new projects and concrete mechanisms to realize these 
projects. An "Action Plan" for the next 5 to 10 years can be 
prepared to guide our cooperation in the energy sector in a 
structured manner. 
 
Please accept, Your Excellency, the assurances of my highest 
consideration. 
 
Sincerely Yours, 
 
(signature) 
 
Dr. Mehmet Hilmi G|ler 
Minister 
 
End text. 
 
¶11. (U) Deputy Assistant Secretary Bryza cleared this cable.