07ANKARA1372
CONGRESSIONAL STUDY GROUP ON TURKEY, CODEL NELSON
Mon Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #1372/01 1551355
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041355Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2394UNCLAS ANKARA 001372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS TU US IZ SY AM LE
SUBJECT: CONGRESSIONAL STUDY GROUP ON TURKEY, CODEL NELSON 
WITH PRIME MINISTER ERDOGAN: IRAQI STABILITY PARAMOUNT 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  PM Erdogan and FM Gul met May 28 with 
Codel Nelson and the Congressional Study Group on Turkey.  An 
unusually upbeat Erdogan focused on the solid footing of the 
US-Turkish strategic relationship and Turkey's efforts to 
contribute to regional peace and stability, including in 
Afghanistan and Lebanon. A unified, stable Iraq was 
essential; it would be disastrous for the region if coalition 
forces left without setting a specific timetable.  Turkey 
also remained between a rock and hard place on the PKK as 
civilians and soldiers continued to die.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) In an hour long joint meeting May 28, PM Erdogan told 
Codel Nelson and the Congressional Study Group on Turkey that 
US-Turkish relations are in good shape.  Occasional bumps in 
the road can be worked through.  Parliamentary and 
Congressional visits are a key element of the relationship. 
Based on common values, they enrich our dialogue and provide 
a sound footing to deal with military, political and economic 
challenges. 
 
¶3. (U) Erdogan commended Senator Lott for having nominated a 
Turkish-American from Mississippi to serve on the US Southern 
District Court - an important first.  He pointed to the large 
numbers of Turkish students studying in the US as another 
driver in relations.  The PM also thanked the Congressional 
Study Group on Turkey for meeting the day before with the 
"TRNC Ambassador" to Turkey, noting the group's travel two 
years ago to northern Cyprus as having created an opening 
that others could follow and fostering an atmosphere more 
conducive to moving toward a final settlement. 
 
¶4. (SBU) With respect to our common war on terrorism, the PM 
referred to the terrorist PKK's ability to shelter in 
northern Iraq, which he described as a source of serious 
discomfort to the Turks. The May 22 suicide bombing in a 
crowded marketplace in the heart of Ankara could have, he 
stressed, had considerably graver consequences.  In addition, 
Turkey continues to lose many soldiers to mines and IEDs. 
While FM Gul and Secretary Rice talked frequently and contact 
with the Ambassador was good as well, Turkey would like to 
achieve results as soon as possible. 
 
¶5. (SBU) As this drags on, the Turkish people are slowly 
losing confidence in America.  If there is a rise in 
anti-Americanism, this is its source.  Citing a Turkish 
proverb, he said, "Friends tell friends the bitter truth." 
 
¶6. (U) With respect to Iraq, there was room for increased 
US-Turkish cooperation.  For Turkey, Iraqi territorial 
integrity and political unity are key.  Should coalition 
forces pull out precipitously, it would be a disaster for the 
entire region.  A timeline for withdrawal might, however, 
give Iraqis the sense that they need to take charge. 
Unfortunately, substantial ethnic violence continues.  The 
GOT regularly tells all Iraqis that violence is not the way 
out, the PM emphasized, reviewing Turkey's efforts to 
convince Sunni leaders to participate in the Iraqi elections. 
 Failure in Iraq is not an option; the USG must attain its 
goals, and it must start to achieve success soon.  Otherwise, 
as losses increases, so will hopelessness and despair. 
 
¶7. (U) Regarding Kirkuk's final status, Erdogan stated that 
Kirkuk belongs to all Iraqis, not to a specific ethnic 
component.  It represents a microcosm of what is happening in 
the rest of Iraq.  Were it to go to one ethnic group, it 
would be like a bomb, ready to explode. 
 
¶8. (U) In Afghanistan, Erdogan focused on Turkish 
contributions:  the Turks have twice commanded ISAF and 
recently assumed control over Kabul central regional command. 
 They also run a PRT in Wardak province.  He cited serious 
contributions to rebuilding efforts, including hospitals that 
have already cared for over 650,000 patients and schools for 
45,000, mostly dedicated to girls' education.  Recently, 
President Karzai had asked the GOT to open two more girls' 
schools in Kandahar, which the GOT would do. 
 
¶9. (U) Elsewhere in the region, Lebanon's stability was 
essential.  The GOT had already sent to parliament the 
extension of Turkey's participation in UNIFIL, in order to 
prevent any gap in Turkey's commitment there.  (NB: 
Parliament on May 29 approved a one-year extension until 
August 31, 2008, but it was a bruising fight, with the 
secular CHP opposition accusing the GOT of aligning itself 
with Israel.)  Turkey, working with the US, could also 
contribute to solving the ongoing Arab-Israeli conflict. 
 
¶10. (U) On Syria, the PM referred to his recent travel with 
the Turkish Fenerbahce soccer team to open a new stadium in 
Aleppo, which occurred at the same time as Speaker Pelosi and 
 
Representative Lantos were in Damascus to see President Asad. 
 This was, he said, a useful opening. 
 
¶11. (U) On the possibility of a congressional Armenian 
genocide resolution (AGR), the PM said that he viewed this as 
the realm of historians, archaeologists and legal experts. 
It was the job of governments and parliaments to move forward 
and provide the basis for prosperity.  The PM added that he 
had proposed a way forward on historical issues to Armenian 
President Kocharian but had received no response.  It 
appeared to him that Armenia had economic reasons for wanting 
to engage, judging by the 40,000 plus Armenians living and 
working illegally in Turkey, and to whom Turkish authorities 
were turning a blind eye. 
 
¶12. (U)  The PM was grateful as well for continued US support 
for Turkey's EU aspirations, a process the Arab world 
followed closely.  Turkey's relations with Israel, combined 
with those with the US, provided a solid contribution to 
peace in the region.  Turkey and the US were also engaged in 
a joint fight against trafficking in persons, narcotics and 
arms, all key for the region.  Efforts to improve peace and 
security in the region included economic security in the form 
of gas and oil.  Here, Turkey was working to help develop a 
new project to bring energy from the Caucasus and Central 
Asia to western markets.  On Kosovo, the PM regretted that 
movement had been delayed and hoped it would move forward 
soon. 
 
¶13. (U) Senator Nelson, speaking on behalf of his Codel, 
thanked the PM for Turkey's leadership on regional security 
issues, including in Afghanistan and Iraq.  He agreed that 
the issue of Kirkuk could not be neglected, and recognized 
the challenges Turkey faces with the PKK.  The Senator noted 
that when he visited Iraq three weeks ago, he told PM Maliki 
that the American commitment was not open-ended.  He 
previewed for Maliki the timeline, with benchmarks, later 
passed in the House, on which a continuing American presence 
would be based, and made it clear the GOI must seek peace 
with Shi'a and Sunni politicians rather than resolve its 
issues by military means.  Nelson agreed that a divided Iraq 
was in no one's interest except perhaps that of the 
terrorists.  He expressed condolences for the Ankara bombing 
and Turkey's recent loss of soldiers in Sirnak province.  As 
a Senator, one of his more difficult duties was to call 
families in Nebraska who had lost soldiers in Iraq; that 
number now stood at 50. 
 
¶14. (U) Congressman Whitfield, on behalf of the Congressional 
Study Group on Turkey, acknowledged the host of difficult 
issues the PM and FM face daily.  Among those issues, he 
listed their fight against the PKK, combined with the fact 
that the USG has asked them not to enter Iraq; the EU's 
decision to admit Cyprus despite the "no" vote on the Annan 
plan and the EU's concurrent request that Turkey open its 
ports to Greek Cypriot shipping; and the potential impact of 
an AGR.  He thanked the PM for sending delegations of Turkish 
MPs to Washington to help explain Turkish thinking and 
sensitivities on the issues and judged their effort as 
helpful. 
 
¶15. (U) Codel Nelson and the Congressional Study Group on 
Turkey have cleared this message. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON