07BASRAH94
PRT/USACE WORKSHOP GETS PROVINCIAL COUNCIL AND GOVERNATE
Sat Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO8824
RR RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0094/01 2860959
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130959Z OCT 07
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0613
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0196
RUEPGAB/MNF-I C2X BAGHDAD IZ
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0647UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BASRAH 000094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: PRT/USACE WORKSHOP GETS PROVINCIAL COUNCIL AND GOVERNATE 
WORKING TOGETHER 
 
BASRAH 00000094  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: In an August 31 - September 5 conference at the 
Dubai School of Government, the Basrah PRT and U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers introduced best practices by successful UAE and 
Jordanian municipal services providers to Basrah municipal 
service directorate (sewage, water and electricity) managers, 
provincial council members (PC) and Basrah University 
professors.  Participants noted that they had never been able to 
debate municipal management together.  Participants worked with 
various project management models, including that taught by U.S. 
Military Academy professors, capping a summer-long USMA training 
visit to Basrah.  A field trip to Abu Dhabi municipal service 
plants showed best practices in action.  Lively debates showed 
that many basic governance issues concerned with budgeting and 
project control still need to be sorted out between central and 
provincial governments and between the provincial governate and 
the PC.  Nevertheless the workshop took participants down the 
crucial road from passively accepting coalition-funded 
infrastructure projects to budgeting and maintaining these 
projects for the long term.  End Summary. 
¶2. (U) From August 31 through September 5, the Basrah Provincial 
Reconstruction Team, the U.S. Military Academy (USMA) and the 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Gulf Region Division South 
(GRS), conducted an infrastructure workshop as part of the PRT's 
Basrah Public Works Initiative (BPWI).  The event was held at 
the Dubai School of Government (DSG, affiliated with the JFK 
School of Government), with experts also discussing best 
practices from the U.S., Jordan and other members of the United 
Arab Emirates.  The UK Department for International Development 
(DFID) funded the workshop.  Attendees included professors in 
Engineering and Management from the University of Basrah, 
members of the Basrah Provincial Council (PC) and directors or 
deputy directors from the various provincial municipal service 
(state-owned) companies: water, sewage and electricity.  The 
workshop in management followed a series of workshops and 
assessments previously done by ACE and the Basrah PRT, and tying 
in with their infrastructure reconstruction projects. 
¶3.  (U) The BPWI is a multi-faceted approach to developing 
sustainable capacity for municipal infrastructure services 
beyond construction or renovation of water, sewage and 
electricity projects.  BPWI uses an assessment/gap analysis 
model and a key is capacity building for Basra University as 
well as the infrastructure sectors.  GRS and the Basrah PRT 
developed BPWI using a GRS capacity development model.  USAID 
assisted with implementation.  GRS connections with USMA led to 
Academy engineering and project management experts, who as 
professors were able to go TDY to Basrah for the entire summer, 
to enhance BPWI for several months.  For this conference the 
USMA professors recapped more detailed training from past 
training conferences, explaining the USMA strategic planning 
process.  PRT members trained participants in a number of 
management models, including that of the European Foundation for 
Quality Management. 
¶4.  (SBU) Small group reactions to the PRT's model for 
infrastructure planning and decision-making revealed a lively 
debate.  The Basrawis from academia, the PC and service 
directorates commented that the workshop was valuable as, in 
Basrah, they were unable to be seen in the same room together, 
let alone have a vocal debate on how to budget and operate 
public utilities -- due to threat of violence by militias.  The 
section on Governance produced a robust discussion on the roles 
and responsibilities of the Governor's Office, the PC and the 
Technical directorates especially in relation to prioritization 
of projects and spending decisions. 
¶5. (U) Workshop debate also indicated that disagreements exist 
between PC and governate representatives over who should have 
control or veto power over projects, management and budgeting. 
Further disagreement erupted over modeling that showed how the 
central government would have a role in budgeting for provincial 
municipal services.  It was noted by some Basrawis that Dubai's 
success in managing municipal services had something to do with 
its non-democratic governance. 
¶6. (U) Some of Dubai's success was shown to come from some basic 
management practices lacking, but with potential in Basrah. 
Billing residents for services promotes conservation.  Producing 
job descriptions and employee incentives (lacking in Basrah's 
provincial government offices) motivates a quality workforce. 
Basrah suffers the high unemployment and lack of middle-aged 
technical people that occurs elsewhere in the country.  It was 
noted that young university graduates in engineering are 
frequently lacking in English skills, important for receiving 
international training and working with English-language 
management systems. 
¶6. (U) The USMA academic connection with Dubai School of 
Government was useful for bringing in academics in engineering 
and related fields at the University of Basrah. The fusion of 
academic thinking from the U.S. and Dubai on good governance, 
engineering and project management proved beneficial.  Best 
practices workshops on the Dubai, United Arab Emirates and 
Jordan experiences were also beneficial.  The DSG administrators 
 
BASRAH 00000094  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
were committed to determining how they could support Basra 
University, and agreed to provide scholarships for Basra 
University faculty to spend a semester teaching and studying at 
DSG; assistance in developing curricula for Executive Education 
programs; and information sharing. 
¶7. (U) A field trip provided a hands-on look at successful 
municipal services.  Participants were divided into two groups 
so that technical participants could get technical training 
while "political" participants were exposed to a strategic view 
of a public utility operation in Abu Dhabi.  The technical 
participants did exercises in project management, learned how to 
use Microsoft Project software using a complex building 
construction problem, and learned about alternative power 
generation.  The political group visited Abu Dhabi Sewerage 
Services Company (ADSSC) and Marfraq Waste Water Treatment 
Works; they learned about increasing efficiency, including HR 
issues surrounding redundancy of 500 staff; developing 
relationships with contractors and proposed privatization. 
¶8. (U) Several coordinating committees grew out of this 
workshop.  Participants agreed to the Governor's office 
suggestion for a coordinating group comprising governor's 
office, technical directorates, the PC, and where appropriate, 
other specialists (from industry, donors or academia) to improve 
communication in planning and prioritizing projects. 
Participants also agreed to establish two other committees: 
Establishing excellence in Basrah - this group will determine 
how to introduce the concepts of public sector management 
excellence and will include Basrah University; and Finalizing 
the Provincial Management Cycle - a group to incorporate the 
management models introduced in this workshop.  GRS' connection 
with the Basrah University was a key to bring them on board; now 
GRS and the PRT are trying to get Basrah University BU to take 
the lead in training the municipal directorate staff with 
assistance from the DSG. 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  This workshop helped to remedy a frequent 
criticism of public works projects in Iraq: after a project is 
built, there is frequently little attention to maintaining the 
facilities or services to the public.   Sending more 
university-educated Basrawis to English training courses would 
be a benefit for the work force.  There are clearly basic 
governance issues still to be worked between the legislative and 
executive branches of municipal government, but this workshop 
got the main players on the right road.  Clearly some of the 
barriers between the Governor's Office and the PC (which months 
ago held a vote to dismiss the Governor) were broken down, 
further aided by a participant soccer game at the end.  The PRT 
will be working with all of the actors to institutionalize 
management concepts learned at the workshop. End Comment. 
¶10. (U)  For workshop materials, attendee list or further 
information, contact Andrew Doust (aad@enterplan.co.uk) of the 
Basrah PRT (based in Dubai), FSO Clifford Sorensen 
(deputyprtbasra@hotmail.com) of the Basrah PRT or LTC Kenneth 
McDonald (Kenneth.Mcdonald@tac01.usace.army.mil) of the USACE 
Base in Basra.  This cable was cleared with Basra PRT and USACE 
GRS Basra office. 
BONO