07BAGHDAD2981
NINEWA: SUNNI WOMEN'S GROUPS ACTIVE AND READY TO
Wed Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO8698
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2981/01 2481421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051421Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3206
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/I, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KWMN SOCI KDEM IZ
SUBJECT: NINEWA: SUNNI WOMEN'S GROUPS ACTIVE AND READY TO 
WORK 
 
This is a message from the Ninewa Provincial Reconstruction 
Team. 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) Women's group leaders associated with the Iraqi 
Islamic Party (IIP), a Sunni Arab political party, in Ninewa 
Province told the PRT August 12 that they were dedicated to 
making Mosul, Iraq,s second-largest city, a better place to 
live for women and children.  This cable outlines the 
activities of these groups, their funding, membership and 
programs.  While the leaders of the women's groups used the 
meeting as an opportunity to vent their complaints about 
Coalition Forces, they also explained the issues facing these 
organizations and projects they would like to accomplish in 
the future.  We will follow up with these groups to find out 
more about their political orientation, and to identify areas 
where it would be appropriate to help. 
Sunni Women in Mosul - Dedicated to the Future 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶2. (SBU) Sunni Women's Groups in Mosul associated with the 
Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) told the PRT Rule of Law Section 
August 12 that they were dedicated to making Mosul a safe and 
secure city for all Iraqis, specifically women and children. 
The women felt that, despite risks to their own safety from 
insurgents, raids from security forces, and terrorist acts, 
they were making a difference in the lives of many in Mosul. 
 
Groups Are Active in Mosul 
-------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU) In general, the women's groups in attendance 
conducted mostly women's and children's programs.  The 
functions of some of these organizations overlapped, but 
among them they covered a wide range of issues serving a 
broad swath of Mosul's Sunni population.  While some groups 
helped a small number of women (20-30), many groups helped 
300 or more families.  One group claimed to have provided aid 
and assistance to over 40,000 families in Ninewa province 
over the past three years. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Some of the programs the leaders said they supported 
were: 
- Assistance to families with children with serious 
illnesses. 
 
- Programs that targeted high school and college youth with 
activities and training, including: sports programs, cultural 
awareness, computer training, programs to increase learning 
capacity such as speed reading and examination preparation 
courses, writing classes, and classes focused on conflict 
resolution. 
 
- Vocational training for youth.  For example, a carpentry 
factory to give youth a means to help support their families, 
especially if the father has been killed. 
 
- Aid distribution to thousands of needy families within 
Mosul's Sunni community -- especially families with orphan 
children and widows. 
 
- Operation of two kindergartens and one private elementary 
school. 
 
- Training programs for women, including: literacy classes, 
computer training, sewing and knitting classes, hair styling 
classes, wedding planning and organization services, lectures 
on religion, culture and family issues, classes aimed at 
developing "women's roles in society," and issues surrounding 
women working alongside men. 
 
Obstacles Block the Way Forward 
------------------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) Funding for all of the women's organizations was 
exclusively through donations, primarily traditional Islamic 
charity.  The women complained that security and funding were 
major stumbling blocks to their programs.  Although the women 
spent some time complaining about the actions of "American 
Forces," they expressed a halting desire to begin 
coordinating with the PRT in the future.  One young woman who 
conducted sports and community improvement programs asked the 
PRT officer whether the United States could help support her 
in her work.  When the response was positive, she 
incredulously pushed further asking, "Really?  We hope so." 
 
And There Are Plans... 
---------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) Despite the security concerns, each of the 
organizations had relatively clear plans for future projects, 
including: building a cultural center andQibrary for women 
 
BAGHDAD 00002981  002 OF 002 
 
 
only, increased capacity for aid to widows and orphans, 
secure city parks for children, and development of a 
vocational training center for youth, among others. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶7. (SBU) It is surprising and impressive that there are so 
many women's groups committed to improving the lives of the 
Sunni community in Ninewa. While Mosul,s second-largest 
group is Kurds, these organizations do not appear to have a 
bridge to counterpart organizations in that community. 
Although it may take some time to find out the political 
leanings of these groups, the leaders are extraordinary 
women, continuing their work under dangerous conditions.  The 
very fact that Sunni women's NGOs are willing to engage with 
the PRT is a major step.  Although it may take some time and 
effort to build enough trust between these organizations and 
the PRT to begin effective coordination on projects, we look 
forward to engaging these groups regularly. 
CROCKER