07BELGRADE1529
ANTI-CUBAN EMBARGO RESOLUTION PASSES SERBIA'S PARLIAMENT
Thu Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Belgrade
VZCZCXRO1900
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBW #1529/01 3122059
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 082059Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BELGRADE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1750
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BELGRADE 001529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UN CU SR
SUBJECT: ANTI-CUBAN EMBARGO RESOLUTION PASSES SERBIA'S PARLIAMENT 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The Serbian Parliament overwhelmingly approved a declaration 
condemning sanctions against Cuba, in principle.  The text of the 
declaration reflects the vigorous debate between the democratic and 
radical MPs that resulted in only one explicit mention of the United 
States.  While Serbia has voted before in the UN against USG Cuba 
sanctions policy, this is the first time that parliament has adopted 
a position on the matter.  Recent trade and travel between Cuba and 
Serbia suggest a deepening relationship.  Serbia's own experience on 
the wrong side of sanctions explains the nearly unanimous support 
for this declaration, but the declaration may be nothing more than a 
cheap shot at the USG in the midst of Kosovo commotion.  End 
Summary. 
 
Declaration Condemns Sanctions, in Principle 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Serbia's Parliament on November 5 adopted a declaration "on 
the Necessity of Ending the Sanctions and Isolation of the Republic 
of Cuba."  The Radical-sponsored declaration won 209 of 250 votes, 
with most of the remaining members of parliament absent or 
abstaining.  Approximately 10 MPs from the Liberal Democratic Party 
(LDP) and the League of Vojvodina Social Democrats (LSV) opposed the 
declaration (an exact count of nays was not available). 
 
¶3.  (U) The text declares Serbia's solidarity with the people of 
Cuba "who have been living for decades in conditions established by 
economic blockade and isolation" and opposes any policy that 
"imposes force, sanctions, or isolation."  The text explicitly 
affirms Serbia's support of the UN General Assembly (UNGA) 
resolution against the U.S. embargo of Cuba, but otherwise does not 
mention the United States.  The full text of the declaration appears 
in paragraph 9. 
 
A Matter of Principle or Spite? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The Radical Party (SRS) introduced the declaration, which 
parliament nearly unanimously accepted for consideration on October 
¶1.  Only LDP MPs objected to putting the item on the legislative 
agenda.  The Radicals' sharply-worded text had accused the United 
States of leading an economic war against Cuba, which amounted to a 
genocidal crime and which had hindered the social, economic, 
political, and democratic development of Cuban society.  The LDP 
reportedly attempted, unsuccessfully, to insert language condemning 
the government of Cuba for undemocratic practices.  While supporting 
in principle the UNGA resolution, LDP questioned why the parliament 
should, for the first time, adopt its own declaration.  LDP MPs 
accused the SRS of introducing the declaration on orders from Russia 
and Cuba, in retaliation against the United States because of 
Kosovo.  SRS accused LDP of acting under orders of the U.S. Embassy. 
 
 
¶5. (U) The ruling coalition secured the wording of the final text, 
in large part thanks to Democratic Party (DS) and G-17 MPs who 
wanted to focus only on condemning sanctions.  Speaker of 
Parliament, Oliver Dulic of DS, had previously told poloff that DS 
would oppose the declaration if the party was unsuccessful in 
removing the criticism of the United States. 
 
Closer Relations with Cuba? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Other recent activity signals development of Serbia's ties to 
Cuba.  Serbia's Minister of Agriculture, Slobodan Milosavljevic 
(DS), announced in Belgrade on November 5 an agreement to export $50 
million of agricultural products to Cuba as part of a plan to 
develop the countries' economic cooperation.  Milosavljevic had 
recently returned from a trip to Cuba, with other officials and 
Serbian executives, for the second meeting of the Non-Aligned 
Business Forum, November 2 and 3.  Current imports to Serbia from 
Cuba consist of approximately $200,000 of cigars, and Serbia's 
exports to Cuba are negligible. 
 
¶7. (U) Cuba has apparently captured the interest of 
parliamentarians.  Approximately 11% (29 of 250) of Serbian 
parliamentarians applied for inclusion in the nascent Cuba 
Friendship Group, putting this group only second to the Russian 
Friendship Group in popularity.  (The United States pulled 25 
applicants.) 
 
Declaration Text 
---------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) Following in unofficial translation of the Declaration 
text: 
 
Begin Text:  Declaration of the National Assembly of the Republic Of 
Serbia on Necessity of Ending Sanctions and Isolation of the 
Republic of Cuba: 
 
BELGRADE 00001529  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Proceeding from the fact that the economic sanctions are affecting 
the population and leaving permanent devastating consequences to the 
economy, social situation, and health of the citizens of the 
countries exposed to international sanctions; 
 
Acknowledging the internationally recognized principles of 
tolerance, cooperation, peaceful resolution of problems without 
pressure and through dialogue and mutual consideration; 
 
Having regard to the fact that Serbia itself has also suffered 
economic sanctions imposed by the international community: 
 
-- The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia expresses its 
full solidarity with the people of the Republic of Cuba who have 
been living for several decades in conditions set by economic 
blockade and isolation. 
 
-- The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia opposes any 
application of the policy of force, sanctions, and isolation to 
countries, seeing that it consequently always leads to the suffering 
of the population. 
 
-- The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia supports the 
efforts of the Republic of Cuba aimed at lifting of the blockade and 
isolation and establishing full cooperation with the world. 
 
-- The National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia fully supports 
the Resolution of the United Nations General Assembly on necessity 
of ending the economic, commercial, and financial embargo imposed by 
the United States of America against Cuba. 
 
End Text of Declaration. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Radical-led declaration represents the considerable 
political strength the party still enjoys in Serbia.  As 
right-minded Democratic Party and even Democratic Party of Serbia 
officials assure embassy officials that Serbia wants to move quickly 
toward European integration, the unproductive and overbearing acts 
of the parliament portray Serbs more as unreconstructed 
Cominformists.  The waste of time spent on a resolution meaningless 
to the Serb public agenda also shows the Radicals' intent to use 
their parliamentary superiority to hijack the significant domestic 
agenda for political posturing.  The parliament remains mostly an 
unformed institution in need of serious reform.  The lack of ability 
of rational-minded parliamentarians to prevent another "crazy Serb" 
act also represents the serious work the serious parties must do to 
build their electoral constituencies and educate the public.  End 
Comment. 
 
MUNTER