07BRASILIA53
Brazil and Russia Sign Space Cooperation MOU
Wed Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0013
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0053/01 0101901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 101901Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7805
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 3671
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 8977
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0319UNCLAS BRASILIA 000053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC DBARNES AND JGRONDELSKI 
STATE FOR WHA/BPOPP 
STATE FOR OES RBRAIBANTI, MSTEWART AND RFORD 
 
PLEASE PASS TO NASA/PAHLF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSCA TBIO TPHY TRGY BR
SUBJECT:  Brazil and Russia Sign Space Cooperation MOU 
 
REF: 06 Brasilia 2692 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1.  (SBU) One of the agreements signed by Brazil with Russia during 
the December 14-15, 2006, visit of Foreign Minister Serguei Lavrov 
to Brasilia was an MOU for Cooperation in Space.  According to the 
newspaper Jornal do Brasil, the principal beneficiary of the 
agreement will be Brazil's rocket launching facility, Alcantara. 
Inter alia, the Russians have agreed to supply liquid fuel for the 
Brazilian satellite launching vehicles, which is less prone to 
explosions. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Brazil - Russia MOU follows: 
 
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Science and 
Technology of the Federative Republic of Brazil and theFederal Space 
Agency Regarding Cooperation in Space Activities 
 
The Ministry of Science and Technology of the Federative Republic of 
Brazil And The Federal Space Agency (the Russian Federation) 
(hereinafter referred to as "the Parties"), 
 
Guided by the terms of the Agreements between the Government of the 
Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Russian 
Federation on Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space 
for Peaceful Purposes of November 21, 1997 (hereinafter referred to 
as "the Cooperation Agreement"); 
 
Recalling the terms of the Basic Agreement for Scientific, Technical 
and Technological Cooperation between the Government of the 
Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Russian 
Federation of November 21, 1997; 
 
Pursuant to the laws and regulations and with respect to the 
international obligations of their respective countries related to 
non-proliferation and the export control, including the Missile 
Technology Control Regime, 
 
Recognizing the importance of joint space activities in fostering 
political, socio-economic, and science and technological cooperation 
between the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Russian 
Federation, 
 
Have agreed as follows: 
 
ARTICLE I 
 
1) The objective of the present Memorandum of Understanding 
(hereinafter referred as "the Memorandum") shall be to define within 
the framework of the Cooperation Agreement the conditions for the 
implementation of the Brazilian-Russian Program of cooperation in 
the field of space (hereinafter referred to as "the Program"). 
 
2) The Parties shall implement, as mutually agreed, the Program, 
including: 
 
a. the development of the modified version of the Brazilian launcher 
VLS-1, based on its existing model with the third liquid propellant 
stage; 
 
b. the joint development based on the Brazilian and Russian 
technologies, of a new generation launchers capable of placing 
satellites into geo-stationary orbit; 
 
c. the joint development of Brazilian geo-stationary satellites for 
the purposes of the implementation of programs in the interest of 
the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil; 
 
d. the development of the ground space infrastructure of the 
Alcantara Spaceport. 
 
3) In order to ensure the conditions for the implementation of 
various joint activities pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article, 
the Parties shall define within the shortest possible timeframe, the 
format and contents of specific cooperation projects, including the 
type of and procedures related to the technologies used within the 
framework of such projects, aiming at carrying out in 2005 
negotiations to elaborate and finalize: 
 
a. an intergovernmental agreement on mutual protection of space 
technologies used in joint projects within the Program, and an 
intergovernmental technology safeguards agreement for the use of 
the Alcantara Spaceport; 
 
b. an arrangement on the financing of the Program; 
 
c. other arrangements necessary for the implementation of the 
Program. 
 
ARTICLE II 
 
The Brazilian Party shall appoint the Brazilian Space Agency as 
implementing agency to execute the activities within the framework 
of the Program. 
 
The modalities of the implementation of the Program shall be 
detailed by the Parties as they identify the joint activities aimed 
at implementing the present Memorandum and other agreements and 
arrangements referred to in paragraph 3 of Article I of the present 
Memorandum. 
 
ARTICLE III 
 
1) For the purposes of the implementation of the Program the 
responsibilities of each Party shall be defined, including, inter 
alia: 
 
The responsibilities of the Brazilian Party: 
- to cover expenses and attract investments for the implementation 
of the Program, as agreed by the Parties; 
- to ensure to the Russian Party, under mutually agreed conditions, 
the use of the technologies involved in the Program, the access to 
the respective facilities of the ground space infrastructure at the 
Alcantara Spaceport, as well as the access to the information and 
technical data related to such technologies and facilities; 
 
The responsibilities of the Russian Party: 
- to ensure the Brazilian Party, under mutually agreed conditions, 
the use of technologies involved in the Program, the access to the 
respective facilities of the Russian ground space infrastructure, as 
well as the access to the information and technical related to such 
technologies and facilities; 
- to train the Brazilian personnel as necessary and under agreed 
conditions; 
 
2)  For the purposes implementation of the Program the mutual 
responsibilities of the Parties shall also be defined, including, 
inter alia, to provide for scientific cooperation aiming at the 
establishment of laboratories, workshops, testing and other 
facilities and technical means deemed necessary for the 
implementation of the Program. 
 
ARTICLE IV 
 
Pursuant to the laws and regulations of their respective countries, 
the Parties shall endeavor to identify potential investors to 
participate in the Program. 
 
ARTICLE V 
 
1) Pursuant to the laws and regulations of their respective 
countries, the Parties shall agree on the conditions of the transfer 
or use of technologies and for their treatment in the course of the 
implementation of joint activities within the framework of the 
Program, which shall be later incorporated in the corresponding 
intergovernmental agreements. 
 
2) Pursuant to the laws and regulations of their respective 
countries, the Parties shall consider the issues of development of 
national scientific, research and technological potentials, 
including training and upgrading of skills of personnel, 
organizational and technical assistance in the establishment of 
laboratories, workshops, testing and equipment acceptance 
facilities, as well as in the integration of industries of both 
Parties. 
 
ARTICLE VI 
 
Pursuant to the terms of the Cooperation Agreement concerning the 
issues of intellectual property and the exchange of information and 
technical data, the Parties shall agree that the procedures of the 
implementation of such exchange of information and technical data, 
as well as the scope of the information transferred in relation to 
the Program, shall be detailed in the agreements referred to in 
subparagraph 1 of paragraph 3 of Article I of the present 
Memorandum. 
 
ARTICLE VII 
 
The Parties within their competences shall undertake their best 
efforts to ensure that the customs clearance of goods necessary for 
the implementation of the Program based on the terms of the 
Cooperation Agreement, shall be done as expeditiously as possible 
and on the priority basis when necessary. 
 
ARTICLE VIII 
 
Any disputes and/or controversies between the Parties regarding the 
interpretation and/or implementation of the present Memorandum shall 
be resolved through consultations and/or negotiations between the 
Parties, except if otherwise agreed by the Parties. 
 
ARTICLE IX 
 
Upon consent of both Parties the present Memorandum may be amended, 
which shall be agreed in writing pursuant to the respective laws and 
regulations of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Russian 
Federation. 
 
ARTICLE X 
 
1) The present Memorandum shall enter into force upon the date of 
its signature. 
 
2) The present Memorandum shall remain in force indefinitely. Any of 
the Parties may terminate the present Memorandum by notifying the 
other Party in writing of its intention to terminate it. Such 
termination shall be effective six months upon the receipt of the 
notification of the other Party, except if otherwise agreed by the 
Parties. 
 
Done at Brasilia on November 22, 2004, in duplicate, each in the 
Portuguese, Russian and English languages, all texts being equally 
authentic. In case of any divergences of interpretation of the 
provisions of the present Memorandum the text in the English 
language shall be used. 
 
FOR THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF THE FEDERATIVE 
REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL 
EDUARDO CAMPOS 
Ministry of Science and Technology 
 
FOR THE FEDERAL SPACE AGENCY 
ANATOLY NIKOLAEVITVH PERMINOV 
Director of the Space Agency 
 
SOBEL