07BRASILIA2326
BRAZIL: FTC CHAIRMAN MEETINGS IN BRASILIA
Thu Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO0319
PP RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #2326/01 3611456
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271456Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0716
INFO RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 1379
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 5610
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 7529
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 002326 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ECIN BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: FTC CHAIRMAN MEETINGS IN BRASILIA 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On November 29, Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 
Chairman Deborah Majoras met in Brasilia with Ministry of Justice 
(MoJ) and Administrative Council for Consumer Defense (CADE) 
officials.  Majoras discussed deepening the cooperation between the 
FTC and the MoJ on consumer protection issues with Ricardo Morishita 
Wada, Director of the Department of Consumer Protection and Defense 
(DPDC), and Mariana Tavares, Secretary of Economic Law.  Tavares 
proposed establishing an exchange program with the FTC for MoJ 
employees, similar to an existing program between FTC and CADE.  She 
described a planned GoB national security program that will have a 
consumer protection component and noted the introduction of a new 
bill in the Brazilian Congress that would combine the antitrust 
functions of two other GoB agencies with that of CADE.  Majoras and 
Tavares also explored the possibility of incorporating Brazil into a 
multinational consumer complaint database maintained by the FTC.  In 
a separate meeting with Majoras, Vice Minister of Justice Luiz 
Barreto enthusiastically supported an enhanced relationship between 
the FTC and MoJ and noted concerns about low quality Chinese 
imports.  Majoras later met with CADE president Elizabeth Farina and 
the organization's commissioners.  The CADE officials were 
interested in the FTC pre-merger review process, the U.S. "state 
action" doctrine, and other details about the FTC's organizational 
structure.  End Summary. 
 
-------- 
OVERVIEW 
-------- 
 
¶2. (U) In the U.S., antitrust enforcement is divided between the FTC 
and DOJ while consumer protection falls under the FTC.  In Brazil, 
antitrust issues are handled by the Administrative Council for 
Consumer Defense (CADE), the Secretariat of Economic Monitoring 
(SAEA) at the Ministry of Finance and the Secretariat of Economic 
Law (SDE) at the Ministry of Justice.  Consumer protection in Brazil 
is the responsibility of the Department of Consumer Protection and 
Defense (DPDC), also under the Secretariat of Economic Law at the 
Ministry of Justice. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Meetings at the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Majoras discussed the need to strengthen cooperation 
between USG and GoB consumer protection agencies with Ricardo 
Morishita Wada, Director of the Department of Consumer Protection 
and Defense (DPDC), and Mariana Tavares, MoJ Secretary of Economic 
Law.  Majoras and her MoJ interlocutors agreed that consumer 
protection cooperation has lagged behind the FTC's antitrust 
dialogue with GoB agencies.  In particular, Taveras was interested 
in establishing an exchange program with the FTC for MoJ employees, 
similar to the existing employee exchange program between FTC and 
CADE.  Majoras said the FTC program, made possible by a new law that 
eliminated some of the confidentiality issues that previously 
limited participation by officials from other governments, applies 
equally to both antitrust and consumer protection exchanges. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Majoras noted the need for enhanced international 
cooperation in light of increasing global interest in eliminating 
consumer fraud.  She called for sharing best practices such as the 
U.S. consumer fraud database, accessible to over 1,600 U.S. law 
enforcement agencies.  Majoras noted that the FTC has made consumer 
protection a high priority and had increased its efforts in areas 
such as internet fraud, health care fraud, and consumer education 
targeting at-risk groups such as Hispanic immigrants.  Majoras and 
Tavares also discussed the possibility of incorporating Brazil into 
a multinational consumer complaint database maintained by the FTC. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Tavares described a planned GoB national security program 
that will include a consumer protection component and will utilize a 
consolidated state and federal consumer complaint database (launched 
in 2005) to identify and focus on regions of the country most in 
need of consumer protection assistance.  This program will also 
incorporate existing GoB consumer education programs at consumer 
protection units around the country in order to target teenagers and 
young adults.  Tavares also described a bill recently introduced in 
the Brazilian Congress that would combine the antitrust functions of 
the MoJ and the Ministry of Finance (MoF) into those of CADE.  The 
bill would also revise the country's licensing and anti-cartel 
systems. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In a separate MoJ meeting with Vice Minister Luiz Barreto 
and Secretary for Economic Law Tavares, Barreto told Majoras that 
the MoJ would be open to strengthening its consumer protection 
cooperation with the FTC.  He outlined GoB concerns regarding 
competition with China and regarding the quality of imported items 
from China that may pose a direct danger to consumers.  He said it 
was easier to police product quality in cases where Chinese-made 
products were not entering Brazil using accepted brand names. 
 
BRASILIA 00002326  002 OF 002 
 
 
Majoras noted the USG is monitoring Chinese implementation of its 
new competition law in order to determine the law's overall 
effectiveness in light of Chinese market dynamics. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Tavares told Majoras that, while Brazil was in "good 
shape" on competition issues, the country needed further 
improvements in addressing consumer protection.  She said the GoB 
would like to share more information with the USG on its experiences 
in working on consumer protection issues with multi-national 
companies. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Meeting at the Administrative Council for Consumer Defense (CADE) 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (U) Majoras next met with Elizabeth Farina, President of the 
Administrative Council for Consumer Defense (CADE) and the 
organization's commissioners at CADE headquarters.  CADE is an 
autonomous GoB agency charged with adjudicating whether business 
mergers or suspected cases of anticompetitive business conduct 
violate Brazilian antitrust law based on investigations conducted by 
the Secretariat of Economic Law at MoJ and the Secretariat of 
Economic Monitoring at the Ministry of Finance (MoF).  It is 
comprised of a Plenary Council or Board with a Chairman and six 
Commissioners who are appointed to two-year terms by the Brazilian 
President with the consent of the Senate. 
This agency has a history of close bilateral cooperation with the 
FTC and the meeting explored several technical issues. 
 
¶9. (SBU) CADE Commissioners were interested in the FTC pre-merger 
review process, the respective roles of lawyers and economists at 
FTC, the function of Commissioners at the FTC in the case review 
process, the role of Administrative Law Judges in the FTC's work, 
and the circumstances in which FTC meetings are open or closed to 
the public.  CADE officials also asked about the U.S. "state action" 
doctrine, which limits the ability of antitrust agencies to review 
allegedly anticompetitive activities authorized and supervised by 
the states.  At Farina's request, Majoras agreed to allow the CADE 
employee currently working at FTC to participate in pre-merger 
review work there.  After the meeting, Majoras answered questions 
from around 40 CADE employees on the functioning of the FTC in the 
U.S. 
 
¶10.  (U) Comment: The Chairman's visit provided an excellent 
opportunity to further U.S.-Brazilian information exchange on 
antitrust issues and provided an important opening for expanding 
U.S.-Brazilian cooperation on consumer protection. End Comment. 
 
¶11. (U) This cable was cleared by the Federal Trade Commission 
delegation. 
 
 
 
 
Chicola