07GUANGZHOU787
Devouring Dragon, Disappearing Tigers: A Look at South
Thu Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO0153
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0787/01 1930522
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120522Z JUL 07
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6248
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 3813
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1453
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC 0970
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUANGZHOU 000787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO PASS USTR 
PACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SENV EINV KIPR CH
SUBJECT: Devouring Dragon, Disappearing Tigers: A Look at South 
China's Tiger Farms and Reserves 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: China has launched a number of conservation efforts 
to save the remaining tigers in China, including the nearly extinct 
South China tiger.  However, the demand for tiger products persists, 
much of it related to the vaunted health, medicinal and preservative 
qualities of the tiger; there are also questions as to the 
motivation of these tiger conservation efforts and it appears that 
the two preserves visited by Econoff really can't sustain themselves 
without undertaking some commercial actions that would affect the 
well being of the animals they are supposed to protect.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
Endangered Species at Guilin Xiong Seng Tiger and Bear Farm 
---------------------------- ------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The Guilin Xiong Seng Tiger and Bear Farm is located 
approximately 30 minutes outside of the city center of Guilin in 
Guangxi province.  The farm boasts having 400 Asiatic black bears 
and 1300 rare tigers, including south China tigers, white tigers, 
and Siberian tigers.  All of the animals are either endangered 
species, or in the case of the South China tiger, nearly extinct. A 
placard on the front gate of the farm indicated that the farm 
received funding from the State Forestry Administration. Econoff 
made an unofficial visit to the farm and had no official contact 
with the farm's management.  At the time of Econoff's visit, there 
were only approximately 20 visitors to the farm. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In April 2007, the British-based Independent Television 
Network and the Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post reported 
that the farm was selling tiger meat at its restaurants as well as 
tiger paw and wine with tiger bone.  During Econoff's visit there 
were newly-erected signs throughout the farm stating: "for the 
protection of Guilin Xiong Seng's Intellectual Property Rights, any 
photography, videotaping... or news-gathering is STRICTLY 
FORBIDDEN."  However, there appeared to be no effort to enforce this 
regulation. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The farm consists of two large open air areas for the black 
bears.  Based on a quick count by Econoff, nearly 200 black bears 
were visible.  Many of the bears appeared obese.  Several bears that 
were close enough for us to observe had small patches of hair shaved 
off of their torsos. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The tigers are divided by species and kept within open air 
areas or small caged pens.  The tigers numbered up to five in an 
open area or up to three in a small pen.  They appeared to be well 
fed and in good health.  There were also a number of cages which 
visitors were not allowed access to, but tigers could be spotted 
inside the cages.  Econoff estimated the total number of tigers he 
saw at more than 500. The farm also had a small number of African 
lions. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The farm included a theater where bear cubs and tigers 
performed in a circus-like environment.  During the performance, 
Econoff witnessed several tigers being struck with a metal pole, 
while other tigers were whipped.  The farm also has a dirt race 
track where several animals, such as camels and horses, raced.  In 
addition, a mock Chinese marriage procession was performed with 
black bear cubs acting as bride and groom. 
 
¶8. (SBU) There is also a large open space area that is allegedly a 
training area for tigers which are to be introduced into the wild. 
During Econoff's visit, visitors watched tigers hunt and kill oxen 
or water buffalo, which in theory could be useful in training a 
tiger to hunt and kill.  Econoff also visited the nursery area of 
the farm where young animals were being raised.  The tiger cubs in 
this area were eager to congregate near Econoff in anticipation of 
food.  None of the cubs exhibited any fear of humans. 
 
¶11. (SBU) The only educational area was a small museum at the far 
end of the farm, consisting of stuffed tigers and bears.  Adjacent 
to the museum is a store selling powdered black bear bile and tiger 
wine, i.e. wine laced with powdered tiger bone.  There were also a 
few tiger dolls, but they were not prominently displayed.  Econoff 
could not find a building that was used for research or scientific 
purposes.  Staff said there were no research facilities at the 
farm. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Comment: The staff of the store was initially very 
suspicious and reluctant to discuss their products.  However, 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000787  002 OF 003 
 
 
Econoff convinced the staff that he was Korean and the staff became 
eager to sell items to the Econoff.  The staff stated that up to 
three tour groups of Koreans came a day, numbering more than 30 in 
each group.  The Koreans were among the most enthusiastic purchasers 
of both the black bear bile and the tiger wine, according to store 
staff.  The staff also said that the export of these products to 
South Korea was not illegal, but was illegal to ship to Europe.  The 
price for 500 ml of black bear bile was RMB 396 (approximately USD 
52).  Staff noted that it took approximately 5000 ml of bear bile to 
produce this powder, which allegedly has powerful medicinal 
attributes.  The price of the tiger wine varied depending on the age 
of the wine.  One year old wine cost RMB 80 (USD 10.50).  Three 
year-old tiger wine cost RMB 420 (USD 55) and eight year-old tiger 
wine cost RMB 896 (USD 117).  In the store, Econoff could see four 
large vats, allegedly full of tiger wine, on display. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Comment: At the entrance of the farm were two restaurants 
but they both appeared to be closed. Locals said that until 
recently, both restaurants served tiger meat and that it was 
possible to purchase tiger skin but buyers were required to reserve 
them in advance.  The staff denied tiger meat or tiger skin was 
available for purchase. 
 
An Overview of Longyan Tiger Reserve 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶14. (U) Longyan Tiger Reserve is located approximately 3 hours 
outside of Xiamen in Fujian province.  The Reserve was established 
by the Forestry Department in 2001 with a goal of increasing the 
number of nearly extinct south China tigers through natural 
breeding.  Neither Forestry Department nor Reserve officials were 
willing to facilitate an official visit.  Econoff spoke instead with 
working staff.  Initially starting with six South China tigers, the 
reserve now boasts a population of 22 tigers.  At the time of 
Econoff's visit, there were no other visitors to the reserve. 
 
¶15. (U) The reserve consists of an inn with rooms and a restaurant, 
an abandoned monkey habitat, an abandoned bird habitat, and an 
operational tiger habitat.  There is no evidence of a research or 
scientific facility at the reserve.  Monitoring cameras at the tiger 
habitat were all unplugged. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The inn had a stuffed South China tiger as a display in 
the main entrance with three stuffed tiger cubs.  The inn also sold 
tiger wine from Guilin among other souvenirs.  However, the staff 
denied that the store sold any other tiger products. 
 
¶17. (SBU) The tiger habitat consisted of eight cages and four large 
open space areas.  Econoff was able to observe 4 tigers in the open 
space areas as well as six tigers in the caged areas, including 
tiger cubs.  The tigers appeared to be well fed and in good health. 
Several signs attached to the tiger enclosure indicated that four 
companies had previously sponsored the care of particular tigers. 
 
¶18. (SBU) The staff stated that they were not aware of any plans to 
improve the marketing of the reserve, nor were they aware of plans 
to reintroduce tigers into the wild.  When asked about scientific 
research, reserve staff, which included one member with daily 
contact with the tigers, said that he knew of no research being 
conducted at present. 
 
Lions and Tigers and Bears, Oh My!: Conservation or Consumption? 
-------------------------- ------------------------ 
¶19. (SBU) Comment: Although Econoff was unable to confirm 
allegations that tiger meat was available at the Guilin Tiger Farm, 
the commercial nature of the farm was troubling.  The large number 
of endangered tigers and bears present with no current plans to 
reintroduce to them into the wild raises concern regarding the 
motivation of such a farm.  Given the cost of feeding and caring for 
the numerous tigers, lions and bears, it appears highly unlikely 
that the farm would be able to meet its costs based solely on the 
admission price and government subsidies.  One local alleged that 
the farm was selling or leasing out tigers to other places.  The 
source was unable to provide more detailed information regarding the 
fate of those animals and Econoff is unable to confirm this 
allegation. 
 
¶20. (SBU)  The Longyan reserve at this time does not appear to be a 
commercial operation similar to the Guilin farm.  However, the lack 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000787  003 OF 003 
 
 
of a plan regarding the future of the South China tigers located at 
this park, its similarities in the design and layout of the reserve 
compared to the Guilin farm, and no obvious sources of funding to 
provide for the care of the tigers raise troubling questions 
regarding the long-term purpose of the facility. 
 
GOLDBERG