07HONGKONG583
2007 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT:  MACAU
Thu Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #0583/01 0601000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011000Z MAR 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0711
INFO RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK PRIORITY 0113
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY 1960
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORITY 1657
RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY 3255
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0396
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 5083
RUEHUM/AMEMBASSY ULAANBAATAR PRIORITY 1109
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS HONG KONG 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR DENNIS WILDER 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP, EAP/CM, 
USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KWMN KFRD ASEC ELAB PHUM PINR PGOV PREF
SMIG, HK, CH, MC 
SUBJECT: 2007 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT:  MACAU 
 
REF: A. (A) SECSTATE 00202745 
     ¶B. (B) HONG KONG 004537 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Per ref A, the following are post's contributions 
to the seventh annual Trafficking in Persons report for the 
Macau Special Administrative Region (MSAR) of the People's 
Republic of China.  (Note:  Per instructions, subheadings, 
questions, and paragraph letters correspond to those in 
paragraphs 27-30 of ref A.  End note.) 
 
Overview of Trafficking Problem 
------------------------------- 
 
(A) (U) Is the jurisdiction one of origin, transit, or 
destination for internationally trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for 
each group; how they were trafficked, to where, and for what 
purpose.  Does the trafficking occur within the 
jurisdiction's borders?  Does it occur in territory outside 
of the government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)? 
Are any estimates or reliable numbers available as to the 
extent or magnitude of the problem?   What is (are) the 
source(s) of available information on trafficking in persons 
or what plans are in place (if any) to undertake 
documentation of trafficking? How reliable are the numbers 
and these sources?  Are certain groups of persons more at 
risk of being 
trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus girls, 
certain ethnic groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
-- (SBU) The Macau Special Administrative Region (MSAR) of 
the People's Republic of China (PRC), is not a source of 
trafficked persons, but it is a destination and transit point 
for illegal immigration and prostitution.  There are no good 
estimates of how many of these illegal migrants and 
prostitutes may fit the broad definition of "trafficked 
persons" used for this report, but anecdotal evidence 
suggests the number is probably rather small.  Furthermore, 
no information is available on government investigations into 
cases of "procurement" (i.e., the exploitation of 
prostitution).  While most known cases involved women who 
were believed to be willing participants in the sex industry, 
in 2006, 17 women claimed to have been brought to the MSAR 
under false pretenses and four complained of abuse.  (Note: 
Post cannot confirm that all these cases occurred after March 
of that year.  End note.)  The number of procurement crimes 
has remained relatively unchanged in recent years.  From 
1999-2003, there was an annual average of 18 procurement 
cases and one case of sexual coercion.  In 2004, there were 
17 complaints from women who claimed they were brought to the 
MSAR under false pretenses, and 5 complaints of abuse.  In 
2005, 10 women complained of being brought to the MSAR under 
false pretenses, and three complained of abuse. 
 
-- (SBU) A senior Immigration Department (ID) official told 
us that although the ID, which is subordinate to the Public 
Security Police (PSP), was not directly involved in any 
trafficking investigations, there were 21 prostitution cases 
-- not necessarily involving elements of trafficking -- 
handled by the PSP throughout 2006.  Throughout the year, a 
total of 1,800 women (including 212 foreigners) had been 
detained or investigated for overstaying visas and/or 
prostitution-related crimes, and that in January 2007 alone, 
158 individuals also had been detained/investigated.  Of the 
1,800 in 2006, 1,600 were PRC citizens, usually with legal 
visit permits, and of those that were illegally in the MSAR, 
"most were sent back, via bus, under administrative 
punishment" and not allowed to return to the MSAR for three 
years.  The non-Chinese cases often involved (not in order of 
frequency): Colombians, Uzbeks, Russians, and Mongolians. 
Non-governmental organizations cited a particularly high 
number of potential trafficking victims from Mongolia, and 
although officials in Macau's ID could not confidently attest 
to the extent Mongolians may have been trafficked into or 
through the MSAR, ID officials were looking into the matter 
as of January 2007. 
 
(B) (U) Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the jurisdiction and any changes since the last 
TIP Report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also briefly explain 
the political will to address trafficking in persons.  Other 
items to address may include:  What kind of conditions are 
the victims trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted 
by the traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods 
are used to approach victims?  (Are they offered lucrative 
jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends of 
friends, etc.?)  What methods are used to move the victims 
(e.g., are false documents being used?). 
 
-- (SBU) The leading Hong Kong English-language daily "South 
China Morning Post" reported in July 2005 that women were 
being brought to Macau under false pretenses and forced or 
coerced into prostitution.  The report alleged the women had 
their passports taken away, were kept under surveillance, 
were subject to debt bondage, and were threatened with 
physical violence to themselves or their families.  There was 
one report of child trafficking for prostitution, but no 
reports of victims being forced or coerced to work in 
sweatshops or other jobs. 
 
-- (SBU) According to reliable contacts in the Macau 
government, most trafficking victims came from Russia or 
other East or Southeast Asian countries, and were typically 
told they were coming to Macau to work as dancers.  Criminal 
organizations reportedly provide assistance to some of them 
to travel from their home countries, enter Macau, and/or 
settle in the city.  The government told us that Chinese, 
Russian, and Thai criminal syndicates are involved, and 
usually pass the women to local triad groups once they enter 
Macau.  The terms of repayment for such "employment 
assistance" reportedly can be onerous, often more onerous 
than the women had been led to believe.  Living and working 
conditions were also problematic, according to NGO and press 
reports, and probably involved close monitoring during off 
hours, crowded boarding arrangements, confiscated identity 
documents, long working hours, and threats of violence; 
however, the authorities investigated reports of such 
activities promptly.  Organizers of prostitution rings, 
whether or not involved in trafficked persons, were 
prosecuted under laws that criminalize profiting from the 
proceeds of another person's prostitution.  Prostitution 
itself, is not illegal. 
 
-- (SBU) The Chi Tang Women's Association (CTWA), an 
organization that represents the concerns of women in Macau, 
advocated for laws and the institutional protection of sex 
workers.  CTWA conducted a research survey in October 2006 to 
evaluate the conditions in Macau's sex industry.  Although 
the survey sample was small, the findings suggest that more 
than 90 percent of Macau's sex workers were self-employed and 
operated independently of control or coercive forces. 
However, 53 percent of the respondents said they were treated 
with violence by customers and police, and 98 percent of the 
respondents said they were afraid of calling or reporting to 
the police.  Similarly, 98 percent of respondents also said 
they were afraid of being found illegally working in Macau 
and therefore could not continue to earn money. 
 
-- (SBU) The only well-documented case of trafficking in 
Macau during the reporting period, published in the MSAR's 
only English-language newspaper, "The Macau Post Daily," 
detailed a "routine anti-crime swoop on 'street walkers'" by 
Macau's Public Security Police, which rounded up 23 persons, 
including a 15-year old girl and her "mamasan" (female pimp). 
 A police spokesperson said the girl told police she had 
entered Macau three times, each time looking for work as a 
prostitute.  The girl allegedly told police that other young 
women from her mainland village were earning good money as 
prostitutes in Macau, despite having to pay the mamasan a 
10,000 yuan (USD 1,250) "introduction fee" to prostitute in 
Macau.  The girl claimed she had already paid the mamasan 
4,000 yuan (USD 500), but the girl claimed she was on the 
hook to pay a "protection fee" to someone else, reportedly 
also living in the same mainland village where she and the 
mamasan lived, to protect her.  The police have not provided 
information on the status of the girl, but under Macau law -- 
because she is under the age of 16 -- she cannot be held 
criminally responsible for her actions. 
 
-- (SBU) A senior security officer at one of Macau's many 
casinos told us there was no shortage of women wanting to be 
prostitutes, and in general there was no need to lock them up 
or use other forceful or coercive tactics.  Without 
prompting, he added that there was "no child sex activity" 
and that the police would take such activities very 
seriously.  He also said that Macau's prostitutes fell into 
the following ethnic groups (largest to smallest numbers): 
PRC, Vietnamese, Thai, Mongolians. 
 
(C) (U) What are the limitations on the government's ability 
to address this problem in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
-- (SBU) The same security officer mentioned in (B) above 
told us that Macau was experiencing an inordinate level of 
"social tension," which was straining almost all aspects of 
life in the MSAR.  He went on to say that a drain of civil 
servants from the government to the entertainment 
industry/commercial sector further complicated the 
government's ability to effectively deal with social issues. 
For example, following pressure from Hong Kong to arrest Ao 
Man-long, then Macau's Secretary for Transport and Public 
Works, the Commission Against Corruption (CCAC) had 
effectively been "closed down" and that not a single other 
corruption case could be handled.  He also told us that even 
seemingly trivial issues, such as language differences, had a 
relatively destructive effect on the government's ability to 
operate. 
 
-- (SBU) Comment:  One of Macau's greatest challenges in 
recent years has been to channel the MSAR's booming economy 
into sustainable social growth.  In mid-February 2007 at his 
Lunar New Year message, Chief Executive (CE) Edmund Ho 
promised to strengthen the SAR's "social policy measures" in 
an effort to promote the "fair and rational distribution of 
the fruits of economic growth."  His objective, he said, was 
to "safeguard the stability and prosperity for our 
population."   The theme of his address, although not 
specifically focused on trafficking, underscores one of the 
dominant challenges facing the government.  Moreover, several 
MSAR Government officials welcomed -- and at times 
proactively sought -- the USG's assistance to combat 
trafficking throughout the reporting period.  End comment. 
 
(D) (U) To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, its 
assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of any efforts on the part of the 
Macau government to systematically monitor a comprehensive 
approach throughout the SAR to combat trafficking in persons. 
 That said, in recent months the Macau Government has been 
increasingly responsive to post's requests for information, 
and has supplied relatively detailed information on its 
efforts to deal with the problem. 
 
Prevention 
---------- 
 
(A) (U) Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in the jurisdiction?  If not, why not? 
 
-- (SBU) While Government officials generally acknowledge 
that some trafficking exists in Macau, they do not consider 
the problem serious or widespread enough to warrant separate 
programs.  They claim that current policies and efforts are 
sufficient to address the issue.  According to these 
officials, the overwhelming majority of prostitutes know why 
they are coming to Macau and continue to work of their own 
free will. 
 
-- (SBU) A senior police official told us "our police forces 
undertook great effort to address trafficking, and we 
recognize it as a problem in Macau."  However, the government 
still has not taken the significant steps necessary to 
prosecute trafficking crimes and to find and protect victims 
of trafficking. 
 
-- (SBU) In late-January 2007, the Macau Post Daily published 
an article titled "US State Department bashes Macau over 
human trafficking," following publication of our TIP Interim 
Assessment (IA).  The director of one Macau NGO told us that 
the article would certainly increase government and public 
consciousness of the problem.  The article published the 
entire IA, adding only that it criticized the alleged failure 
of the Macau Government to recognize the seriousness of the 
problem.  The article concluded with "(t)here was no 
immediate response by the Macau government to the rather 
alarming report." 
 
(B) (U) Which government agencies are involved in 
anti-trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
-- (SBU) No officer or agency leads the MSAR government's 
anti-trafficking efforts.  However, the Department of 
Administration and Justice, the Unitary Police Service 
(Macau's lead police agency), the Social Welfare Institute, 
and the International Law Office all play key roles in 
combating trafficking. 
 
(C) (U) Are there, or have there been, government-run 
anti-trafficking information or education campaigns?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target potential 
trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking (e.g. 
"clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
 
-- (SBU) Efforts to raise public awareness of the threat of 
trafficking in persons were absent and the authorities of the 
MSARG did not initiate any policy discussions that would lead 
to a policy and action plan for dealing with trafficking in 
the territory. 
 
(D) (U) Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking? (e.g., to promote women's participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school.)  Please explain. 
 
-- (SBU) In 2005, the MSAR government established a 
Consultative Commission on Women's Affairs (CCWA) to improve 
the participation of women in the formulation, implementation 
and review of government policies, and to create better 
channels for promoting women's rights and interests.  The 
CCWA is organized into four groups, one of which focuses on 
reviewing laws related to women's issues, and it is now 
reviewing Macau's laws and covenants -- including those 
related to trafficking -- with an aim toward revising them in 
a coherent way. 
 
-- (SBU) In late-February 2007, CE Edmund Ho, addressing a 
reception hosted by the Women's General Association of Macau 
in celebration of International Women's Day, praised the 
increased attention paid by women to family issues, as well 
as social issues and development of the city, according to a 
press report.  CE Ho is also the titular head of the CCWA. 
(Comment:  Since his policy address in November 2006, CE Ho 
has increasingly engaged social issues in a public way, 
evidenced by his involvement in women's groups, as well as 
his frequent promotion of a more "harmonious society" in the 
MSAR.  End comment.) 
 
(E) (U) What is the relationship between government 
officials, NGOs, other relevant organizations and other 
elements of civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
-- (SBU) Coordination between the MSARG and NGOs, including 
provision of social welfare services related to trafficking, 
is not well-developed but does occur. 
 
(F) (U) Does the government monitor immigration and 
emigration patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law 
enforcement agencies screen for potential trafficking victims 
along borders? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau has effective immigration controls, but its 
long border with Mainland China makes illegal immigration a 
continuing problem.  Macau has land border control points 
with the PRC and an international airport with regional 
flights to China, Bangkok, Manila, Singapore, Taipei and 
Moscow.  Ferries land regularly from Hong Kong, Zhuhai, and 
Shenzhen.  It is a common practice for prostitutes to go back 
and forth across the Chinese border when their visas expire 
in order to get new visas and continue to work.  Macau 
immigration authorities try to control such activity, and 
often refuse to issue new visas if they suspect abuse. 
However, the increasing volume of visitors attracted by 
Macau's booming casino industry makes it easier for people to 
enter illegally. 
 
(G) (U) Is there a mechanism for coordination and 
communication between various agencies, internal, 
international, and multilateral on trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi-agency working group or a task 
force?  Does the government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the 
government have a public corruption task force? 
 
-- (SBU) There is no integrated government effort in Macau to 
control or combat trafficking in persons.  While Government 
officials generally acknowledge that trafficking exists in 
Macau, they do not consider the problem serious and believe 
current policies and efforts are sufficient.  Macau has 
several laws related to trafficking, and the Immigration 
Department and local police aggressively enforce those laws. 
Macau actively participates in international meetings on 
trafficking and adheres to all international treaties 
governing trafficking in persons to which the PRC is a 
signatory.  MIGRAMACAU was established in 2004 to, among 
other things, "establish communication channels and data 
collection amongst inter-regional (MSAR-PRC-Hong Kong) and 
regional countries and territories in order to suppress 
organized crime, terrorism and corruption arising from 
illegal migration and human trafficking."  MIGRAMACAU does 
not serve as a single point of contact for all matters 
related to trafficking, but throughout 2006-08, the project 
-- jointly funded by the European Union -- will host eight 
training courses and three conferences related to trafficking 
and migration, including a five-day course held in November 
2006 that was dedicated to "Asylum and Human Trafficking" 
issues. 
 
(H) (U) Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were 
involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the 
process?  What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
-- (SBU) The government does not have a national plan of 
action to address trafficking in persons. 
 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
(A) (U) Does the jurisdiction have a law specifically 
prohibiting trafficking in persons--both for sexual and 
non-sexual purposes (e.g. forced labor)?  If so, please 
specifically cite the name of the law and its date of 
enactment.  Does the law(s) cover both internal and external 
(transnational) forms of trafficking? If not, under what 
other laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are 
there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of force, fraud or coercion?   Are 
these other laws being used in trafficking cases?  Are these 
laws, taken together, adequate to cover the full scope of 
trafficking in persons?  Please provide a full inventory of 
trafficking laws, including non-criminal statutes that allow 
for civil penalties against alleged trafficking crimes, 
(e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau authorities have not yet recognized, nor taken 
steps to draft legislation to address, certain important gaps 
in the territory,s laws related to trafficking; the Macau 
government, however, has recognized deficiencies in its laws 
relating to the welfare of women and children, and it now is 
reviewing applicable laws and covenants with an aim toward 
revising them in a coherent way.  Macau also does not have a 
separate law on trafficking in persons, but has the ability 
to prosecute such offenses under a variety of other laws. 
Article 7 of the Law on Organized Crime covers the rare 
occasion when a person is trafficked out of Macau, but does 
not apply to victims exploited in Macau.  The penalty for 
trafficking in persons under this law is two to eight years 
imprisonment.  This increases by one-third, within minimum 
and maximum limits, if the victim is less than 18 years of 
age.  If the victim is under 14 years of age, the penalty is 
five to fifteen years imprisonment. 
 
-- (SBU) A senior police official in Macau's Immigration 
Department told us that  the Commissioner of the Public 
Security Police was studying Macau's TIP-related laws.  At 
least one government official told us that, following the 
legal review, "we assure you that there will be follow-up to 
international standards." 
 
(B) (U) What are the penalties for trafficking people for 
sexual exploitation? 
 
-- (SBU) Since most trafficking cases involve prostitution, 
by far the most common, and easiest, method of prosecuting 
such cases is under Macau's "procurement" laws.  Although 
prostitution is legal, the exploitation of prostitution is 
illegal and is punishable under various autonomous statutes. 
For example, "procurement," defined as "instigating, favoring 
or facilitating the practice of prostitution by another 
person or exploiting their state of abandonment or necessity 
for the purposes of profit or as a way of life," is 
punishable by one to five years imprisonment under Article 
163 of the Criminal Code of Macau.  Additionally, aggravated 
procurement, defined as "the use of violence, serious 
threats, or deception, or exploiting the mental incapacity of 
a victim," is a separate crime punishable by two to eight 
years imprisonment under Article 164 of the Criminal Code of 
Macau. 
 
(C) (U) Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are 
the prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for 
labor exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor and 
involuntary servitude?  Do the government's laws provide for 
criminal punishment -- i.e. jail time -- for labor recruiters 
in labor source countries who engage in recruitment of 
laborers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers that 
result in workers being exploited in the destination 
jurisdiction?  For employers or labor agents in labor 
destination countries who confiscate workers' passports or 
travel documents, switch contracts without the worker's 
consent as a means to keep the worker in a state of service, 
or withhold payment of salaries as means of keeping the 
worker in a state of service?  If law(s) prescribe criminal 
punishments for these offenses, what are the actual 
punishments imposed on persons convicted of these offenses? 
 
-- (SBU) Crimes against personal freedom, most notably 
slavery, are prosecuted under Article 153 of the Criminal 
Code of Macau.  This law makes illegal the sale, transfer or 
purchase of a person made with the intention to reduce that 
person to the status or condition of slave.  Notably, this 
law has also been interpreted to include economic and sexual 
exploitation, which is punishable by 10 to 20 years 
imprisonment.  Prosecutions under this law are rare. 
 
(D) (U) What are the prescribed penalties for rape or 
forcible sexual assault?  How do they compare to the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for crimes of trafficking 
for commercial sexual exploitation? 
 
-- (SBU) Some trafficking cases can be prosecuted under 
Macau's kidnapping and rape laws.  Kidnapping with the intent 
to commit a crime against sexual liberty or 
self-determination is punishable by three to ten years 
imprisonment under Article 154(1)(b) of the Criminal Code of 
Macau.  Cases where the kidnapper rapes a victim are treated 
as two different crimes, though the sentences can in some 
cases be served concurrently.  The penalty for rape is three 
to twelve years imprisonment.  The Criminal Code forbids the 
death penalty and life imprisonment.  The maximum term of 
imprisonment is thirty years in total. 
 
(E) (U) Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? 
Are these laws enforced?  If prostitution is legal and 
regulated, what is the legal minimum age for this activity? 
Note that in many countries with federalist systems, 
prostitution laws may be covered by state, local, and 
provincial authorities. 
 
-- (SBU) There were no changes to the laws relating to 
prostitution in Macau during the reporting period. 
Prostitution is legal in Macau, though a number of activities 
associated with prostitution, including "pimping," are 
illegal.  Advertisements for sexual services can be found in 
regional newspapers and magazines, and are posted on ferry 
terminal walls.  There is no reliable data on the number of 
prostitutes working in Macau, but most come from mainland 
China, Russia, Eastern Europe, Thailand, and Vietnam.  Most 
prostitutes are from rural areas and are typically seventeen 
to thirty years of age.  They are usually poorly educated, 
though not illiterate.  They tend to be very mobile, usually 
coming for a month at a time and then moving to other 
countries, usually at the expiration of their tourist visas. 
Most work in hotels and casinos, though our contacts in the 
Thai Consulate in Hong Kong told us prostitution in the 
casinos is normally limited to PRC nationals, because Chinese 
organized crime rings allegedly control most Macau casinos. 
 
(F) (U) Has the government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences, including details 
on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Does 
the government in a labor source jurisdiction criminally 
prosecute labor recruiters who recruit laborers using 
knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers or impose on 
recruited laborers inappropriately high or illegal fees or 
commissions that create a debt bondage condition for the 
laborer?  Does the government in a labor destination 
jurisdiction criminally prosecute employers or labor agents 
who confiscate workers' passports/travel documents, switch 
contracts or terms of employment without the worker's 
consent, use physical or sexual abuse or the threat of such 
abuse to keep workers in a state of service, or withhold 
payment of salaries as a means to keep workers in a state of 
service?  Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced: If 
not, why not?  Please indicate whether the government can 
provide this information, and if not, why not? (Note: 
complete answers to this section are essential. End Note) 
 
-- (SBU) There were no reports of authorities using laws that 
criminalize activities related to trafficking to prosecute 
traffickers and their accomplices, despite press, NGO, and 
foreign government reports of organized crime and human 
trafficking in Macau.  One police official told us that 
prostitution is not a criminal offense in the MSAR, and that 
"we are trying our best to use existing laws to punish and 
prosecute cases of 'control.'"  He added that a lack of 
evidence often complicates the investigation and prosecution 
of trafficking cases. 
 
-- (SBU) Moreover, we noted reports in mid-February 2007 that 
the CCWA visited the Macau Public Prosecutions Office (PPO) 
to better understand cases involving women throughout the 
SAR, and to learn how the PPO would follow-up on such cases. 
 
(G) (U) Is there any information or reports of who is behind 
the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers freelance 
operators, small crime groups, and/or large international 
organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting for traffickers 
or crime groups to traffic individuals?  Are government 
officials involved?  Are there any reports of where profits 
from trafficking in persons are being channeled?  (e.g. armed 
groups, terrorist organizations, judges, banks, etc.) 
 
-- (SBU) Macau law enforcement officials, social welfare 
workers and others told us the overwhelming majority of 
foreign prostitutes come to Macau as willing participants in 
the commercial sex trade, and typically know in advance 
specifically what they will be doing and how much they can 
expect to earn.  Immigration Department officials told us 
that its Intelligence Department had only uncovered a 
"limited amount" of organized crime involvement in 
prostitution cases; rather, "street-side prostitutes are 
often on their own, and only hotels and nightclubs usually 
have an organized crime element."  Prior to the introduction 
of the Individual Visitor Scheme (IVS) in 2003, which allowed 
tourists from certain mainland cities and provinces to enter 
Macau on an individual basis, most prostitutes came to Macau 
with the help of a "pimp" or a criminal syndicate.  The 
introduction of the IVS made it possible for most prostitutes 
to enter Macau on their own, though some still seek the help 
of pimps, either because they are unaware that they can 
obtain visas on their own or because they need logistical and 
financial help with travel and housing.  While the IVS has 
weakened the role of pimps in Macau's sex industry, law 
enforcement officials believe that Chinese, Russian and Thai 
criminal syndicates are still, at times, involved in bringing 
prostitutes into Macau.  These officials have claimed, 
however, that women are rarely coerced into coming, or forced 
into prostitution once they arrive. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau allows visa-free access for nationals of many 
countries to facilitate tourism.  For citizens of 
non-visa-free countries, including Russia, visas can be 
obtained on arrival.  Immigration officers do not admit 
people they believe are entering for illegal employment, but 
they do not routinely refuse entry by targeting certain 
groups of travelers from specific countries.  Macau officials 
have made efforts to work with other governments, 
particularly the PRC, to develop a list of those known to be 
practicing prostitution, making it more difficult for those 
persons to get passports and exit permits from their home 
governments and visas for Macau. 
 
(H) (U) Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking?  (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.)  Does the government 
use active investigative techniques in trafficking in persons 
investigations?  To the extent possible under domestic law, 
are techniques such as electronic surveillance, undercover 
operations, and mitigated punishment or immunity for 
cooperating suspects used by the government?  Does the 
criminal procedure code or other laws prohibit the police 
from engaging in covert operations? 
 
-- (SBU) One social worker told us in late-January that 
"lately, it seems there have been a lot of anti-prostitution 
raids," and that the Judiciary Police were "more competent" 
and "more proactive" about combating illegal activities 
related to prostitution in the MSAR.  Post is not aware of 
the extent to which the authorities in Macau employ technical 
or other advanced tactics for investigating traffickers, 
although one government official described an elaborate 
system for technical surveillance used by the police 
throughout the MSAR. 
 
(I) (U) Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in how to recognize, investigate, 
and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
-- (SBU) A corporate security official told us the 
MSARG/police were in desperate need of training. 
Furthermore, a senior Macau police official expressed his 
hope that Macau can work with the USG to "expand our exchange 
and training efforts" related to trafficking.   (Note: Please 
also see the section below on MIGRAMACAU described in 
Protection (G).  End note.) 
 
(J) (U) Does the government cooperate with other governments 
in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? 
If possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations on trafficking? 
 
-- (SBU) Several police and Immigration Department officials 
have described the "good relations" between Macau, Guangdong, 
and Hong Kong authorities in dealing with trafficking cases, 
as well as the MSAR authorities' success in working with 
INTERPOL.  Post, however, is not aware of the number of 
cooperative investigations during the reporting period. 
 
-- (SBU) We have received reports from officials in Macau, an 
NGO representative, and the press that Mongolia's Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs -- based on reports of up to 300 Mongolian 
sex-workers working in, or possibly trafficked to, Macau -- 
was seeking to establish a consulate in the MSAR.  Post is 
not aware of the status of agreements related to this. 
 
(K) (U) Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post provide 
the number of traffickers extradited?  Does the government 
extradite its own nationals charged with such offenses?   If 
not, is the government prohibited by law form extraditing its 
own nationals?  If so, is the government doing to modify its 
laws to permit the extradition of its own nationals? 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of any cases during the reporting 
period whereby Macau extradited an alleged trafficker. 
However, Macau is committed to pursuing international 
cooperation in law enforcement and has been expanding its 
network of bilateral agreements on legal cooperation in 
criminal matters with other jurisdictions.  Domestic 
legislation for the implementation of these agreements is in 
place. 
 
(L) (U) Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
-- (SBU) There is no evidence or accusation of government 
involvement in trafficking at any level.  There were no 
government officials charged with or prosecuted for 
involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related corruption. 
 
(M) (U) If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such 
participation?  Have any government officials been prosecuted 
for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption?  Have any been convicted?  What sentence(s) was 
imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if available. 
 
-- (SBU) There is no evidence or allegation that Government 
officials facilitate, condone, or are otherwise complicit in 
trafficking activities.  Anti-bribery and anti-corruption 
laws are also strictly and effectively enforced. 
 
(N) (U) If the jurisdiction has an identified child sex 
tourism problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country or jurisdiction of 
origin?  What are the countries of origin for sex tourists? 
Do the jurisdiction's child sexual abuse laws have 
extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
If so, how many of the jurisdiction's nationals have been 
prosecuted and/or convicted under the extraterritorial 
provision(s)? 
 
(O) (U) Has the government signed, ratified, and/or taken 
steps to implement the following international instruments? 
Please provide the date of signature/ratification if 
appropriate. 
 
-- (SBU) As previously reported, several international 
treaties designed to combat slavery and similar practices, as 
well as trafficking in persons, are applicable to Macau, 
including (unless otherwise noted): 
 
-- (U) ILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and 
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of 
Child Labor 
      -- (SBU) Adopted by the MSAR on June 17, 1999 
-- (U) ILO Convention 29 and 105 on Forced or Compulsory Labor 
      -- (SBU) Adopted by the MSAR on June 28, 1930 and June 
25, 1957 (respectively) 
-- (U) The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (CRC) on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution, and Child Pornography 
      -- (SBU) Consideration of reports submitted by states 
parties under Article 12(1) of the Protocol (July 14, 2005) 
-- (U) The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime 
      -- (SBU) The MSAR is not a signatory to the Protocol. 
 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
A) (U) Does the government assist victims, for examle, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
jurisdiction have victim care and victim health care 
facilities?  Does the jurisdiction have facilities dedicated 
to helping victims of trafficking?  If so, can post provide 
the number of victims placed in these care facilities? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau continued to lack any significant protections 
for victims of trafficking.  As reported in ref B, Macau's 
Social Welfare Institute offers interview, identification, 
and counseling services for possible victims of 
forced/coerced sexual servitude; however, one government 
official told us that witness protection can not be 
guaranteed in Macau, probably due to the presence of 
organized crime groups in the SAR. 
 
-- (SBU) Officials have claimed the problem is too small to 
warrant separate Government programs.  Although none focus 
specifically on trafficking victims, several NGOs and 
charitable organizations, including Catholic Social Services 
and the Association of Women in Macau, provide assistance to 
abused women, including trafficking victims, without regard 
to nationality or social status.  A representative from the 
international non-government organization International 
Social Services (ISS), which currently has an office in Hong 
Kong, told us that ISS is considering opening a Macau office 
as early as 2007.  The Macau government provides assistance 
to abused women, including trafficking victims.  The 
government also provides repatriation funds to those who wish 
to return to their home countries but cannot afford tickets, 
including those who claim to be victims of abuse or 
trafficking. 
 
(B) (U) Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of efforts on the part of the 
Macau Government to provide funding or other forms of support 
to NGOs for services to victims. 
 
(C) (U) Do the government's law enforcement and social 
services personnel have a formal system of identifying 
victims of trafficking among high-risk persons with whom they 
come in contact(e.g. foreign persons arrested for 
prostitution or immigration violations)? Is there a referral 
process in place, when appropriate, to transfer victims 
detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by law 
enforcement authorities to NGO's that provide short- or 
long-term care? 
 
-- (SBU) As described in last year's report, according to 
Macau's International Law Office, the Government's typical 
response to a trafficking complaint is: 1) police investigate 
and the woman is sent to a shelter; 2) a Government 
prosecutor investigates and, depending on what is found, a 
court case may be filed; 3) the victim is offered assistance 
to return to her home country at the expense of the Macau 
government.  Officials noted that this last step often makes 
the case more difficult to prosecute if the victim does not 
return for the trial, but the Macau government provides this 
assistance for the physical and emotional protection of the 
victim.  Officials also noted that, after repatriation, some 
prostitutes returned to Macau and engaged in prostitution 
again.  The official said that most prostitutes were 
"professionals" who knew the laws on trafficking and that the 
Government would buy them a ticket home if they claimed they 
were forced into prostitution.  Many such "victims" would 
return to Macau a few months later.  All trials are public, 
except when the victim is a minor or when the victim's life 
(or that of someone else involved) is in danger. 
 
(D) (U) Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims 
treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, or 
deported?  If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are victims 
fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, 
such as those governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
-- (SBU) There are government programs, as well as charitable 
organizations, that provide assistance and shelter to women 
and children who have been the victims of abuse, including 
trafficking.  A representative from one NGO told us that, in 
those cases where trafficking victims sought help from the 
police, the police did "a fairly good job" of dealing with 
the problem; however, the CTWA survey published in October 
suggests that many prostitutes fear interaction with police. 
We have not seen any reports of victims being fined, jailed 
or deported solely for being a victim of trafficking, 
although related crimes have, at times, been cause for 
detention and/or prosecution. 
 
(E) (U) Does the government encourage victims to assist in 
the  investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May 
victims file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to such 
legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employer, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the jurisdiction pending 
trial proceedings?  Is there a victim restitution program? 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of any cases whereby the 
government encouraged victims to assist in the investigation 
and prosecution of trafficking, but we are similarly unaware 
of cases where victims were impeded or denied access to legal 
redress. 
 
(F) (U) What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the government provide?  Does it provide shelter or 
housing benefits to victims or other resources to aid the 
victims in rebuilding their lives? Where are child victims 
placed (e.g. in shelters, foster-care, or juvenile justice 
detention centers)? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau continued to lack any significant protections 
for victims of trafficking in practice, nor do we know of any 
efforts on the part of the government to provide benefits to 
victims attempting to rebuild their lives. 
 
(G) (U) Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in recognizing trafficking and in 
the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including 
the special needs of trafficked children?  (Note:  Questions 
regarding MSAR missions abroad are not applicable, since the 
MSAR does not operate any.  End note.) 
 
-- (SBU) One government official said that "proof of the 
Macau government's concern about TIP is its active 
involvement in MIGRAMACAU."  In fact, he said, the MIGRAMACAU 
program included a week-long course in November 2006 on 
"Asylum and Human Trafficking," among seven other courses and 
three conferences spanning 2006-08. 
 
-- (SBU) Moreover, Macau law enforcement officials, despite 
some training on trafficking in persons, did not show any 
significant efforts to identify victims of trafficking among 
the foreign women in prostitution arrested for immigration 
violations or other violations. 
 
(H) (U) Does the government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its repatriated 
nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau has no shelter or counseling resources 
dedicated to trafficking victims, and local authorities made 
no discernable moves to address this deficiency. 
 
(I) (U) Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims?  What type of services do they 
provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities?  (Note:  If post reports that a government is 
incapable of assisting and protecting TIP victims, then post 
should explain thoroughly.  End note.)  Funding, personnel, 
and training constraints should be noted, if applicable. 
Conversely, the lack of political will to address the problem 
should be noted as well. 
 
-- (SBU) In addition to those mentioned in Protection (A), we 
were told in late-January that one NGO is planning to send a 
research team to Macau in early 2007 to gather data for a 
"destination point survey" (Note:  This report will not/not 
evaluate victims trafficked out of Macau SAR.  End note.) 
 
¶2. (U) Post point of contact is poloff Matthew Tyson, tel. 
(852)2841-2139, fax (852)2526-7382; unclass email: 
tysonmr@state.gov. 
 
¶3. (U) Hours required to write the report: 
FS4 - 12 
FS2 - 2 
FS1 - 2 
CUNNINGHAM