07KABUL1350
TIP PROPOSALS SUBMITTED BY AFGHANISTAN
Sat Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO2743
RR RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHPW RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #1350/01 1111118
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211118Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7638
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3985
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 001350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A, AND G/TIP 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
OSD FOR SHIVERS 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-82 POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PHUM AF
SUBJECT: TIP PROPOSALS SUBMITTED BY AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF: STATE 28150 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains an action request. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GAPS IN AFGHANISTAN'S CAPAPCITY TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (U) In both 2006 and 2007, the State Department's 
Global Office on Trafficking and Persons considered 
downgrading Afghanistan's TIP Tier Ranking from Tier 2 
to Tier 2 Watch List.  On both occasions, post took 
the position that the lack of progress in 
Afghanistan's fight against trafficking in persons was 
due to a lack of capacity on the part of the 
government, not its lack of willingness to address the 
issue.  This year, post has worked closely with two 
international organizations - International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) - to develop 
a comprehensive strategy that pinpoints and addresses 
Afghanistan's capacity needs to combat human 
trafficking.  Both proposals are two-year projects. 
Post strongly recommends that G/TIP provide full 
funding for both in order to ensure the greatest 
success in building capacity to fight human 
trafficking in Afghanistan.  Specifically, these two 
proposals complement ongoing activities to combat 
trafficking to address the following capacity needs: 
 
-- Build capacity within the Ministry of Justice to 
   draft anti-trafficking legislation, investigate, 
   and prosecute trafficking cases.  It will also build 
   the capacity of MOJ officials to document and 
   verify trafficking cases as well as analyze trends. 
 
-- Build capacity of the Ministry of Interior (Afghan 
   National Police) to investigate, document, and 
   arrest perpetrators of trafficking cases.  It will 
   also build the capacity of MOI officials to document 
   and verify trafficking cases as well as analyze 
   trends. 
 
-- Identify and build the capacity of NGOs throughout 
   several provinces to raise awareness of the 
   trafficking issue, operate hotlines to receive 
   reports of trafficking cases, and disseminate 
   reports to the Ministry of Interior for further 
   investigation. 
 
------------------ 
PROPOSAL ABSTRACTS 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Text of proposals: 
 
-- Applicant: International Organization for 
   Migration 
   Requested Funding: $650,265 
   Project Title: Combating TIP in Afghanistan, 
   "Prevention and Prosecution" 
   Project Duration: 2 years 
 
Abstract:  This 2-year project has three primary 
goals:  (1) to build the capacity of local NGOs to 
detect, investigate, document and report cases of 
trafficking in persons to appropriate government 
agencies; (2) to build the capacity of the Afghan law 
enforcement community to arrest and prosecute human 
traffickers; (3) to educate the Afghan public about 
the perils of human trafficking and solicit their 
assistance in reporting cases to the NGO and law 
enforcement communities. 
 
Proposed activities include: (1) the identification of 
focal-point NGOs in the provinces of Kabul, Nangarhar, 
Laghman, Kandahar, Heart, Mazar-e-Sharif, Kunduz, 
 
KABUL 00001350  002 OF 003 
 
 
Badakhshan, Khost, and Kunar that will attend Training 
of Trainers (TOT) workshops to establish a hotline for 
receiving information from the public on trafficking 
cases; (2) training of Ministry of Interior and police 
officials in those same provinces to detect, 
investigate, and document trafficking cases, and to 
make arrests where appropriate; (3) training of the 
staff at the Ministry of Interior's new office on 
counter-trafficking; (4) development of a manual for 
prosecutors and judges on how to investigate and 
prosecute trafficking cases; (5) conduct two study 
tours in which government and NGO employees who work 
on trafficking issues will travel to neighboring 
countries to learn best practices for countering 
trafficking in the region; (5) training for current 
students at the Police Academy; (6) creation of 
brochures, posters, radio spots, DC's and DVD's, and 
television broadcasts to educate people on the issue 
of trafficking and how to report cases to the 
appropriate NGOs and government agencies. 
 
Expected Results include: (1) an increase in number of 
cases reported to MOI from provincial NGOs; (2) 
increased number of prosecutions; (3) increased number 
of TIP arrests; (4) an increased number of TIP 
convictions, and (5) increased public involvement in 
reporting TIP cases. 
 
-- Applicant: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
   Requested Funding: $498,900 
   Project Title: Prevention of Human Trafficking in 
   Afghanistan 
   Project Duration: 2 years 
 
Abstract:  This project will take place over a 24-month 
period and proposes working with and mentoring government 
officials from several different ministries to create a 
legal framework by which justice officials can address and 
ultimately decrease the extent to which human beings are 
exploited by organized crimes operations.  It is expected 
that at the end of the project the Afghanistan will have 
basic legislation in place to ratify and implement the anti 
human trafficking protocol as part of the Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime. UNODC will prepare a 
report highlighting trends and recommendations on anti- 
trafficking strategies and on improvement of the protection 
and support systems for victims and witnesses of 
trafficking. The report will include an analysis of the 
human trafficking situation and involvement of organized 
crime groups. Strong attention will be placed on refugee 
camps that harbour thousands of undocumented individuals. 
The build up of professional national experts will be 
accomplished through training, networking, and the sharing 
of information. Regional cooperation will be established 
for the exchange of information on human trafficking with 
the six neighbouring countries of Afghanistan. 
The project proposes designing and implementing training 
programs for members of law enforcement agencies and the 
judiciary with the emphasis on prosecution of human 
trafficking cases. The training course would address such 
substantive topic areas as: recognized investigative 
techniques for law enforcement officers, exchange of 
intelligence information within police agencies, regional 
and international intelligence sharing, regional law 
enforcement conferences, methodology of criminal 
organization in relation to target groups, human 
trafficking routes, and protecting the rights of victims. 
It is also anticipated that a cadre of judges and 
prosecutors will be trained to review, investigate, and 
prosecute human trafficking cases. 
 
---------------------------------- 
A COMPLEMENT TO ONGOING ACTIVITIES 
---------------------------------- 
 
These two proposals will be implemented in 2008-2010 
and have been coordinated to complement ongoing 
 
KABUL 00001350  003 OF 003 
 
 
activities, implemented by IOM and UNICEF in 2006- 
2007, that include the following: 
 
-- Training for primary and secondary school 
   teachers to identify TIP cases. 
-- Establishment of 15 information centres outside 
   of Kabul that will be located inside secondary 
   schools. Trained teachers will be focal points in 
   the districts responsible for the spreading 
   information about human trafficking. 
-- Survey on trafficking trends in Afghanistan will 
   be finished in August 2007 and will analyze 
   patterns, data and trends observed over the last 
   3 years. 
-- Study tour for law enforcement officials to 
   Tajikistan (April 16-20, 2007). The participants 
   will be trained on the investigation and 
   prosecution of TIP cases. Another study tour to 
   Italy for 4 government officials. 
-- Printed materials for prevention of trafficking 
   in children will be developed and distributed 
   among targets. 
-- Development of a special manual for social 
   workers to treat children who have been victims 
   of human trafficking. 
-- Building of a shelter to house and provide 
   treatment to victims of trafficking. 
-- Creation of cross-border committee with activists 
   from Iran and Pakistan to address cross-border 
   links to trafficking in Afghanistan. 
-- Assistance to the Ministry of Justice for 
   drafting anti-trafficking legislation. 
 
Note: Ongoing efforts are nascent and are largely 
focused on the issue of child trafficking.  These 
proposals submitted by UNODC and IOM will expand 
efforts to address human trafficking as a whole, 
including adult men and women.  End note.