07KAMPALA341
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (February 10-26, 2007)
Wed Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO0211
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #0341/01 0591049
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281049Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8315
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0544
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0385
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3184
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KAMPALA 000341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL MOPS ASEC CASC EAID UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (February 10-26, 2007) 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: Post presents the fourteenth edition of Northern 
Uganda Notes to provide information on the situation on the ground 
and USG activities aimed at meeting Mission's objectives in northern 
Uganda.  These objectives include promoting regional stability 
through peace and security, good governance access to social 
services, economic growth, and humanitarian assistance.  Post 
appreciates feedback from consumers on the utility of this product 
and any gaps in information that need to be filled.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (U) The Juba peace process and direct discussions between the 
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) remain 
stalled.  The Cessation of Hostilities Agreement (CHA) is due to be 
reviewed on February 28.  The GOU says it will not renew hostilities 
against the LRA.  The LRA's second-in-command, Vincent Otti told AFP 
on February 24 that the LRA would not renew the agreement but also 
would not resume hostilities.  Otti complained that the UPDF was 
attacking "my boys east of the Nile River and that from now on, we 
will defend ourselves."  The UPDF, which is providing security in 
southern Sudan, maintains that the CHA designates areas for the LRA. 
 Any LRA outside those areas are "fair game," according to Felix 
Kulaigye, the UPDF spokesperson. 
 
¶3.  (U) Meanwhile, press reports indicate that Kony and Otti have 
left Garamba National Park and are at the border area of Central 
African Republic (CAR).  Otti denies that the LRA have entered CAR. 
LRA spokesman Obonyo Olweny stated "there is no military gain in 
moving to CAR at the moment." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) An analysis based on interviews with a close associate of 
Kony is receiving wide distribution within the Ugandan government 
and in diplomatic circles.  It states that Kony is not genuinely 
committed to a peaceful resolution to the conflict.  Despite 
frequent references to the role of the International Criminal Court 
(ICC) as an obstacle to a negotiated settlement, the source contends 
that the LRA was using the issue as a diversion to buy time while 
planning for future hostile actions.  The analysis recommends that 
the talks must provide real amnesty, integration, and viable 
economic alternatives for the rank-and-file LRA combatants or else 
they will return to life in the bush.  For the LRA leaders, there is 
no place to go because if they sign a deal, the LRA ceases to exist 
and they must be offered a situation, such as exile, that is better 
than a return to the bush war. The analysis also recognizes the 
potential value of third parties -- local elected leaders, civil 
society, traditional and religious leaders -- in working with the 
GoU to win over the LRA. It warns, however, that third parties must 
speak with one voice and that when they do not, they become 
disruptive and should be removed. 
 
¶5.  (U) USG Activities: Ambassador Browning discussed the current 
situation in northern Uganda and options regarding the peace process 
with International Crisis Group (ICG) Director John Prendergast and 
former mediator, Betty Bigombe, on February 9.  Prendergast and 
Bigombe shared the following impressions after a week in the north: 
(1) There was overwhelming support among IDPs for Kony and Otti to 
go into exile while the rank-and-file fighters take amnesty. (2) 
IDPs are losing hope that the LRA will agree to peace.  (3) The LRA 
has been trying to mobilize past collaborators and previously 
rescued members to rebuild its ranks. (4) The LRA negotiators do not 
represent northern interests. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) ICG fully understands the negative dynamics of the talks. 
However, ICG believes the value in keeping the talks going is the 
reduction in the level of the conflict.  Prendergast was looking for 
ways to move the process forward and potential points of leverage 
over the LRA.  ICG recommends direct engagement of Kony over a deal 
that provides him future security and a livelihood, perhaps 
third-country exile and a community-backed accountability mechanism. 
 ICG believes that squeezing the LRA's financial backers, especially 
starting the process of closely scrutinizing members of the 
diaspora's ties to Kony and Otti, is the logical next step.  In 
addition, Prendergast noted that an open and transparent planning 
process for a concerted military strike by Uganda, Congo, Southern 
Sudan, and MONUC could help alter the LRA's perceptions of its 
options. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
SECURITY UPDATE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
 
KAMPALA 00000341  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶7.  (U) Most security concerns in recent weeks have focused on 
Karamoja and the sub-counties of Pader, Lira, Amuria and Katawki 
districts that border the Karamoja region.  At Monday's meeting of 
the Joint Monitoring Committee, for example, the Kitgum district 
Chairperson reported four deaths and ten wounded this month as a 
result of cattle raids from Kotido.  The Chairs of Lira, Katakwi and 
Amuria voiced similar concerns, and all recommended greater efforts 
at inter-communal peace building aimed at "disarming the Karimojong 
mentally." 
 
¶8. (U) The situation in the LRA-affected areas has remained quiet. 
Kitgum's District Security Officer reported that for the last month 
there were no reports of LRA movement inside the district or any 
violent acts committed by the Karamojong.  Nevertheless, major 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are restricting travel between 
March 1-5, after the latest Cessation of Hostilities Agreement 
expires.  The District Disaster Management Committee and UPDF in 
Kitgum disagree on declaring additional areas open for resettlement. 
 The UPDF spokesman reportedly told the committee that "we are 
preparing for war." 
 
¶9.  (U) In contrast, Gulu Resident District Commissioner Walter 
Ochora assured IDPs that they do not need to go back to camps and 
that the UPDF will provide security whether or not a peace agreement 
is signed.  The Amuru District Chairperson reported the security 
situation as normal, and that people have started returning to their 
homesteads.  Humanitarian organizations estimate 400,000 IDPs are on 
the move to new sites throughout the Acholi Sub-region.  Few have 
returned all the way home (3,297).  The World Food Program's 
revalidation exercise confirmed 700,000 IDPs in Gulu and Amuru 
districts. 
 
¶10.  (U) The judiciary's program to eliminate backlogged court cases 
and decongest prisons in northern Uganda will begin another round of 
court sessions in five cities on March 5.  Principal Judge James 
Ogoola will join seven other judges to hear cases in Gulu, Kitgum, 
Soroti, Lira, and Kumi for a two-month period.  The judges will 
handle 534 cases.  The Prime Minister's Office is using 215 million 
shillings (USD equivalent) to fund the exercise from the 
Humanitarian Emergency Action Program for Northern Uganda. 
 
¶11.  (U) A similar exercise undertaken by the "Gulu Civil Court 
Sessions" was a joint project between the High Court of Uganda and 
Restore International, a U.S.-based NGO.  From October-November 
2006, six judges heard 104 of 140 cases in Gulu to start clearing 
out the backlogged cases.  Until recently the courts were unable to 
sit due to insecurity in the north, resulting in a build-up of 
hundreds of cases.  Restore International supported U.S. law 
students to prepare the case briefs for the judges.  World Bank 
funding will be used for reconstruction and furnishing of courts in 
the north. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Local government officials have requested that all 
humanitarian assistance organizations submit budgets for 
incorporation into the overall district plans to enhance 
coordination, effective reconstruction, and targeting of funds. 
District officials say that they cannot operate properly in the 
presence of a "parallel government."  In Gulu District, over 140 
NGOs have complied. 
 
¶13.  (U) Another aspect of the problem is poor coordination between 
the central government and local officials.  To ensure proper 
exchange of information and coordination by the Prime Minister's 
office, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has 
asked all major humanitarian donors to report on agencies, by what 
kind of assistance in which districts, and has asked the districts 
to report in detail down to sub-county level. 
 
¶14.  (U) A key challenge for humanitarian organizations is to 
sustain existing services, at the same time they rehabilitate where 
populations movements are occurring. 
 
¶15.  (U) USG Activities:  USAID's health team spent a week in Gulu 
coordinating the Northern Uganda Malaria, AIDS, and TB (NUMAT) 
project with partners.  The program will assist in the delivery of 
services to IDPs and returnees.  The team also visited other 
USG-funded projects that provide assistance to caregivers for 
orphans and vulnerable children, a day care center for young mothers 
returning from conflict areas, and youth HIV/AIDS prevention 
 
KAMPALA 00000341  003 OF 003 
 
 
programs. 
 
¶16.  (U) USAID's Democracy and Governance team leader visited Oyam 
District to monitor progress on the Strengthening Decentralization 
in Uganda Program from February 12-13.  The new district's leaders 
are not waiting for donors to help resettle the 140,000 (out of 
250,000) residents living in IDP camps.  The local government has 
cultivated cassava plans to distribute to returning families along 
with basic tools.  The district officials also plan to give vouchers 
to individuals who help rebuild area roads.  The vouchers could be 
used to obtain oxen and plows.  The district plans to invest heavily 
in infrastructure repair to help farmers get crops to markets. With 
their limited resources, districts will be able to meet but a 
limited number of returnees' needs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
FROM THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶17.  (U) Uganda Conflict Action Network (Uganda-CAN) is mobilizing a 
telephone-call campaign on March 1 to place pressure on Congress for 
the U.S. Government to take a more active role in the peace process. 
 Uganda-CAN also published an editorial in the Government-run New 
Vision newspaper on February 13.  UGANDA-CAN states that the 
"current intractability of the situation can also be blamed on the 
international community, which has retained a largely passive 
position.  The current impasse highlights the critical need for 
external confidence-building, inducements, sanctions and technical 
assistance to rejuvenate the peace process.   Among other actions, 
the international community could strengthen the Cessation of 
Hostilities Monitoring Team, inject accountability into the process, 
assist the mediator, sanction "spoilers" in the LRA external wing, 
and bolster security for the displaced.  Generic statements from the 
diplomatic community do not go far enough; only serious action will 
bring regional stability in not only Uganda, but also Sudan and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo." 
 
¶18.  (U) On February 14, a Government of South Sudan press release 
issued after a meeting between the President of South Sudan and 
Ugandan Interior Minister Rugunda stated that there was considerable 
support for the GOSS's continued mediation role from the 
international community.  The press release also said that this 
support "included specific support from the Government of the United 
States of America for the continuation of the Juba peace process." 
The statement praises Kenya and South Africa for showing solidarity 
with the Juba process. 
BROWNING