07KHARTOUM1934
WHITE NILE GOVERNOR DISCUSSES AGRICULTURE, ELECTIONS, AND
Thu Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1934 3401357
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061357Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9468UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001934 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/EPS, EB/IFD, AND EB/ESC 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR, AND ALSO PASS USAID 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN ECON EAID SU
SUBJECT: WHITE NILE GOVERNOR DISCUSSES AGRICULTURE, ELECTIONS, AND 
NORTH-SOUTH TENSION 
 
REF: A. Khartoum 1753 
¶B. Khartoum 1744 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In a December 4 meeting with emboffs, the Governor 
of White Nile State, Dr. Mohammed Nur Al-Tigani, highlighted the 
importance of agriculture for Sudan, expressed confidence that 
mid-term elections would be conducted in a free, fair, and timely 
manner, and dismissed the existence of North-South tensions in his 
state.  He also expressed hope for an improved bilateral 
relationship between the U.S. and Sudan.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Al-Tigani described agriculture as the foundation of Sudan's 
economy.  He noted that while sugar brings in the largest source of 
agricultural revenue, sesame, sorghum, cotton, wheat, sunflower, and 
hibiscus also have great potential in White Nile state.  He noted 
that the Sudanese economy was more balanced before petroleum was 
exported, and said that the Sudanese economy will continue to grow 
even after its oil reserves are depleted.  He said that leading 
officials in Khartoum also recognize that agriculture is the real 
source of sustainable development in Sudan, but that war and 
instability have shortened these officials' attention and turned 
their focus to oil. 
 
¶4. (U) Al-Tigani was optimistic that the Sudanese mid-term elections 
scheduled for 2009 will be conducted in a timely, free, and fair 
manner.  He was not concerned that the census preceding the 
elections may be pushed back, saying, "Even if they don't complete 
the current census, they can use what they have and just build on 
the previous census."  Al-Tigani said that he has balanced his 
loyalty to the National Congress Party with the need to respect all 
political parties in his state, saying, "We need to understand and 
recognize that the elections are a peaceful way to share power. Even 
if we do not win in the coming elections we'll remain active and 
positive as an opposition power until the following elections." 
Recalling an interview with CDA Fernandez on Al-Jazeera from 
November 7 (reftel A) Al-Tigani stated that the level of democracy 
in Sudan is not to be found anywhere in the Middle East and that the 
upcoming elections will prove this. 
 
¶5. (U) Al-Tigani stated that southerners and northerners live 
together in peace in White Nile State, and contended that even if 
the South secedes from the north in 2011, southerners will stay in 
his state and trade will continue to increase between the North and 
South.  Al-Tigani noted that he halted North-South river transport 
on November 1 (reftel B) due to the increased presence of the Sudan 
Peoples Liberation Army (SPLA), claiming that SPLA troops moved 
inside White Nile's borders in early November and that many citizens 
were worried about the general state of security and stability in 
south White Nile State.  Al-Tigani said the situation has now been 
resolved and dismissed claims that this temporary port closure was 
the north's way of "flexing its muscles" or showing that the north 
can control the economy of South Sudan. 
 
¶6. (U) Al-Tigani said he will focus his efforts in the next year on 
developing two new cement factories in the Jabalain area, 
modernizing the electrical grid in anticipation of the opening of 
Meroe dam, and building new and dependable roads along the Nile.  He 
said that his state will continue privatization initiatives, as the 
private sector has proven to be more effective than government at 
managing business.  Al-Tigani also expressed hope that U.S.-Sudanese 
bilateral relationship will improve, saying "I'm optimistic.  When 
sanctions are eventually lifted, we'll have more economic 
cooperation and this will drive our bilateral relationship.  I look 
forward to the day when U.S. businesses will be in White Nile 
state." 
 
¶7. (U) COMMENT: Al-Tigani appeared to be a moderate, optimistic, and 
generally benign figure.  Although he may have little influence over 
key decision makers in Khartoum, he is a northern governor, who, at 
the very least, knows the right thing to say to Western diplomats on 
elections, agriculture, and U.S-Sudanese relations.  His comments on 
the long-term importance of agriculture, especially for the northern 
economy, are prescient given that the majority of oil reserves are 
in the South. END COMMENT. 
 
FERNANDEZ