07KHARTOUM1796
PRESIDENT BASHIR ESCALATES WAR OF WORDS WITH SPLM
Sun Nov 18 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9318
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1796/01 3221703
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181703Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9208
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001796 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KSCA OTRA EAID CDC UN SU
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT BASHIR ESCALATES WAR OF WORDS WITH SPLM 
 
¶1.  (U) President Al Bashir delivered his most bellicose speech in 
recent memory yesterday, warning the South that the North is ready 
for war, and branding western countries as greedy tyrants.  He 
insisted the north would not compromise over oil-rich Abyei.  The 
President was speaking at an annual convention of veterans of the 
Popular Defense Forces (PDF), the religious-based irregular forces 
that the Government deployed against the South in the country's 
civil war. 
 
------------------------------- 
Bashir threatens South with war 
------------------------------- 
¶2.  (U) In his remarks at Wad Madani in Al-Jazeera state to mark the 
18th anniversary of the PDF, Bashir said that while he was not 
declaring war, he was calling on all "mujahideen" in Sudan to 
prepare for war.  "This is not for the sake of declaring war, but it 
is clear that we must be ready to respond to Allah's calls," he 
said.  He reaffirmed the readiness of the Sudanese Armed Forces 
(SAF) to wage war if it erupts in Northern Sudan (a reference to the 
Abyei area).  He called for training camps for mujahideen to 
reopen. 
 
¶3.  (U) Bashir continued, praising all the forces of the North that, 
he said, had achieved victory over the South in the civil war. 
"There was the PDF, The Mujahideen, Aldababeen (anti-tank brigades), 
and the people's police, all these supported the SAF and we 
succeeded in defeating the conspiracies and thwarting the attack 
against us which neighboring countries had backed and which reached 
the stage of striking us with American rockets, but our response was 
stronger than their rockets and their arms.  It was our victories in 
Nuba Mountains, in the Blue Nile, and our sound victory, which shook 
all the tyrants."  He added that those who think Sudan has been 
weakened by the conflict in Darfur have miscalculated. 
 
¶4. (U) Pan-Arab "Al-Jazeera" satellite television gave prominent 
coverage to the most alarming parts of the speech throughout 
November 18. In an interview with a local expert in Khartoum, the 
professor told an incredulous Al-Jazeera anchor that Al-Bashir's 
rhetoric about holy war was "the greater jihad" (the internal fight 
of every Muslim to overcome sin and selfishness in their lives) 
rather than "the lesser jihad" (actual holy war) and just part of 
the political game and maneuvering between the two partners. 
 
--------------------------------- 
U.S. included in Bashir's warning 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Referring to recent talk among some elements of the SPLM 
(including published interviews by firebrand SPLM Secretary General 
Pagan Amum) of its own readiness for war the President replied  "I 
say to those who want to provoke war, we want to see you in the 
battlefield, not in the hotels of European capitals, because whoever 
ignites war will have to face its consequences."  He added: "We are 
ready, and we are not afraid of America or any other (power), any 
tyrant is underneath my boot."  Apparently indicating the U.S., he 
gestured towards his shoes and reiterated, "all the tyrants are 
here, underneath this very boot of mine." 
 
------------------- 
No retreat on Abyei 
------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Bashir indicated that the NCP was in no mood to compromise 
on the issue of the Abyei area.  He vowed the Government would not 
recognize the Experts' Report on Abyei, and said: "The experts 
should soak their report in water and drink it," an Arabic 
expression meaning essentially that they can "take their report and 
shove it." 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Western interest in Sudan motivated by greed 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) Referring to the recent incident of possible trafficking in 
children in Chad, Bashir blasted western countries for practicing 
modern slavery.  He said foreigners meddling in Sudan's affairs, 
especially in the South and in Darfur, are doing so for their own 
selfish reasons.  "They are liars and hypocrites who are motivated 
by their greed for our resources," he said, "and that is why they 
are stealing our children and youth and selling them in the slave 
markets in Europe." 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment: Although he stated several times that he wants 
peace, Bashir's remarks are a significant escalation in the war of 
words between the NCP and the SPLM.  His use of religious rhetoric 
and calls for mujahadeen and PDF recruitment seem intended to 
ratchet up the pressure on the SPLM by showing that he is willing to 
tap into the most violent base of fighters during the North-South 
war, responsible for numerous atrocities.  Humanitarian Affairs 
Minister Ahmed Haroun, indicted by the ICC as a war criminal in 
 
KHARTOUM 00001796  002 OF 002 
 
 
Darfur, gained his nickname "the butcher of the Nuba" for having 
mobilized some of these forces in the South.  Bashir's rhetoric 
against the U.S. appears to be tied to anger and jealousy over GOSS 
President and GNU First Vice President Kiir's visit to the U.S. and 
his meeting last week with President Bush. 
 
FERNANDEZ