07KHARTOUM195
SUDAN COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR AMY WENDT AND FRUZSINA
Sun Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0195/01 0420431
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110431Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6079
INFO RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0177
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI 0035UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000195 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA APER PREF ET SU
SUBJECT:  SUDAN COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR AMY WENDT AND FRUZSINA 
CSASZAR 
 
REF:  STATE 13072 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy Khartoum welcomes and grants country clearance for 
Amy Wendt and Fruzsina Csaczar, for the purpose of conducting 
monitoring and evaluation of PRM-funded projects in Southern Sudan 
from February 17-24. 
 
¶2. (SBU) U.S. Citizens are reminded that Sudanese visas are now 
required for travel to all parts of Sudan.  The Government of Sudan 
has informed us that it no longer recognizes SPLM clearances (see 
paragraph 7 for details.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) CONTACT INFORMATION:  Control officer for the visit is Pol 
Officer Nathan Holt, who can be reached on cell phone number 
011-249-912-217-8518, and by Thuraya at 011-882-165-119-2048; e-mail 
in Juba is nholt@usaid.gov.  Embassy switchboard number is 
249-183-774-700 or 249-183-774-702.  If you need to contact the 
Embassy after hours, please call the local guard at Post One at 
249-183-774-701.  The Embassy is open from 08:00 to 16:30 Sunday 
through Thursday. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Khartoum airport assistance is not required.  In Juba, all 
visitors will be met at the airport by a USAID driver and vehicle. 
Travelers should confirm the driver is in fact employed by USAID by 
requesting to see his Embassy issued identification card.  Due to 
security and safety concerns, all ground transportation will be 
provided by the USG.  Travelers to Juba are not permitted to use 
taxis or other forms of public transportation.  Other ground 
transportation options, to include United Nations and NGO vehicles, 
must be approved by the RSO. 
 
¶5. (U) EXCHANGE RATE: Current exchange rate at post is 210 Sudanese 
Dinars to one USD. 
 
¶6. (U) PASSPORT/VISA: 
 
¶A. (U) U.S. Citizens are reminded that Sudanese visas are now 
required for travel to all parts of Sudan.  It is the traveler's 
responsibility to obtain a Sudanese visa prior to arrival in 
Khartoum.  Please note that the Government of Sudan does not/not 
issue airport visas and currently does not permit entry of a 
traveler whose passport bears an Israeli stamp. 
 
¶B. (SBU) IF TRAVELING FROM THE UNITED STATES AND/OR A U.S. MISSION 
ABROAD:  The Sudanese Government has a restrictive policy in regards 
to visa issuances to official American travelers.  Official 
Americans should not begin their travel to Sudan without having 
obtained a Sudanese visa or having received notice that a visa has 
been authorized for issuance in another city.  Recently the Sudanese 
Government has advised that official American travelers coming from 
Washington, DC no longer need post's assistance in preparing 
diplomatic notes for visa issuance; travelers may apply directly to 
the Sudanese Embassy in Washington.  For visa issuance from other 
Sudanese Embassies, official American travelers may have to contact 
the American Embassy in Khartoum for assistance. 
 
¶7. (U) MEDICAL CLEARANCE: 
 
¶A. (U) All employees, including WAEs and civil service employees who 
are in TDY status for more than 60 days (cumulatively) in a calendar 
year, are required to have an up-to-date medical clearance from the 
Department of State Office of Medical Services (M/MED) in order to 
receive full State Department medical benefits from an Embassy 
Medical Unit, to include Embassy Khartoum Medical Unit. 
 
¶B. (U) MEDICAL CLEARANCE FOR PSC AND NON-PSC:  As per State cable 
201464, all contract workers (PSC and non-PSC, to include 
institutional contractors and grantees) must have a medical 
clearance issued from M/MED before arrival at post.  A copy of this 
clearance is required by the Medical Unit on arrival at post before 
any Embassy Khartoum Medical Unit services can be provided. 
 
¶C. (U) IMMUNIZATIONS (DIRECT HIRE, WAE, TDYERS, PSC, AND NON-PSC): 
Please ensure that you complete all immunizations recommended by 
M/MED before arrival at post.  Yellow fever and polio (IPV) are 
required at least 10 days before departure.  Malaria prophylaxis is 
required for post and should commence 1 or 2 weeks before departure. 
 Please ensure enough prophylaxis is issued to cover your TDY period 
at post.  Upon arrival, travelers should visit the Medical Unit to 
register and receive further health information.  Travelers' 
diarrhea is a common problem in Sudan.  Only bottled water or 
distilled water should be used for drinking (this includes ice). 
Eat foods that are well cooked.  Avoid fruits without peels, raw 
vegetables, salads, and local dairy products, which might not be 
pasteurized.  At least 8-10 glasses of water or fluids are 
recommended to avoid dehydration.  A topical insect repellent and 
sunscreen SPF 15-30 are also recommended. 
 
¶8. (U) BRINGING IN COMPUTERS: 
 
¶A. (U) In accordance with 95 State 243815 and 95 State 244394, 
Department of State policy prohibits the connection of official, 
portable computers to OpenNet or ClassNet without the explicit 
approval of the Bureau or Post ISSO (12 FAM 625). 
 
¶B. (U) Personally owned computers, personal digital assistants, cell 
phones, digital cameras, and audio recorders may not be brought into 
the Embassy without approval from the RSO or ISSO.  Personally owned 
computers may not be connected to OpenNet or ClassNet under any 
circumstances and may not be used within USG Controlled Access Areas 
(CAA)(12 FAM 625).  Unclassified government-owned portable computers 
intended for use any place within overseas facilities, and 
particularly within the CAA, cannot be taken in and out of the CAA, 
unless specifically authorized by the RSO.  Classified portable 
computers must remain within the CAA at all times. 
 
¶C. (U) COTRs/CORs are responsible for their contract employees, and 
must ensure that all contracted employees receive required systems 
security training before accessing OpenNet or any other post or 
bureau-operated system. 
 
¶D. (U) Transport and use at post: 
 
1) As stated in reftels (paragraph 9.A above), official travelers on 
temporary duty, including non-state personnel, must coordinate the 
transport of official unclassified portable computers that will be 
used within USG controlled access facilities with the RSO and ISSO. 
A country clearance request cable containing a statement to this 
effect will meet the requirement. 
 
2) Unclassified portable computers intended for use within the CAA 
on a long-term basis (over 30 days), must be shipped via 
professional or non-pro diplomatic courier (classified pouch). 
 
3) An official traveler can personally transport a USG portable 
computer to post only under the following conditions: 
 
- The official traveler must have at least a secret level security 
clearance; 
 
- The official traveler will be on temporary duty at the Embassy for 
a period not to exceed 30 days; 
 
- The portable computer must have been transported under the 
continuous personal control of the official traveler; 
 
- Under no circumstances may the computer have been left unattended 
outside of the CAA or in a public area, nor should it be checked in 
as luggage on public transport; and 
 
- All wireless and audio features on the portable computer must be 
disabled or de-installed, to include infrared ports and sound card, 
before entering the CAA, regardless of mode of transport. 
 
¶9. (U) SECURITY: 
 
¶A. (U) Visitors to Juba will be provided with security guidelines 
upon arrival.  Adherence to and compliance with all mission security 
directives is mandatory; violating these directives may result in 
disciplinary action and/or revocation of country clearance. 
 
¶B. (U) The Department of State has a Travel Warning in effect for 
Sudan and strongly urges all travelers to review this document. 
Visitors should follow all prudent personal security measures such 
as, but not limited to, varying routes and times of travel, avoiding 
becoming involved in demonstrations, attending non-official events 
at large public venues, avoiding predictable patterns of activities, 
and being aware of surroundings for potential threats.  Anti-U.S. 
street demonstrations always remain a strong possibility; however 
they are usually well controlled by the host country government and 
generally peaceful.  The criminal environment does not specifically 
target Americans in Khartoum.  Crimes of opportunity are the most 
typical incidents that may affect any visitor in country. 
 
¶10. (U) TERRORISM:  Visitors are also reminded that Sudan is a 
critical threat terrorism environment and that the country is still 
listed as a state sponsor of terrorism.  The Department acknowledges 
that the Sudanese government has taken steps to address the presence 
of terrorist groups in country; however, Sudan still might harbor 
extremists and those who are supportive of known terrorist 
organizations.  Presently, we are not aware of any information 
concerning an immediate, specific, or credible terrorist threat 
against official U.S. interests in Sudan. 
 
¶11. (U) TRAVEL TO SOUTHERN SUDAN:  All travel to Southern Sudan is 
contingent upon an RSO security assessment of the specific area to 
 
be visited immediately prior to the proposed travel.  High 
unemployment, banditry, the presence of Ugandan rebels (LRA) and an 
ineffective police presence have contributed to a very tenuous 
security structure in much of Southern Sudan.  At this time, 
overland travel anywhere south of Juba is strictly prohibited 
without an armed United Nations escort.  All USG personnel in Juba 
are expected to stay at the U.S. Consulate General there.  Other 
accommodations will not be permitted except in the most 
extraordinary circumstances.  Landmines and unexploded ordinance 
remain a problem in some areas of Southern Sudan, thereby requiring 
further travel precautions and restrictions. 
 
¶12. (U) Action Request:  Each visitor, regardless of length  of 
stay, must bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the 
visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation will be 
charged for the actual costs attributed to their visit.  Direct 
charge costs include, but are not limited to: American and LES staff 
overtime, field travel by Embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long 
distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, office supplies, and 
all other costs directly attributable to the visit.  Also, for 
TDYers over sixty days, there may be a charge for ICASS support 
services if the cumulative charges exceed $2,500 for the year. 
 
¶13. (U) WEATHER: Sudan for most of the year is hot and dry, with 
summer (March - October) temperatures reaching 120 plus degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Winter (November - February) temperatures average 80-90 
degrees. 
 
¶14. (U) ATTIRE:  In public, it is recommended that men and women do 
not wear shorts or non-sleeved shirts or blouses, including 
participants in running/walking activities, and that women wear 
ankle-length skirts or dresses, or pants.  Lightweight, cotton 
clothing is recommended, including a hat and sunglasses. 
 
¶15. (U) Please contact your Post Control Officer if you have any 
questions.  Have a safe journey; we look forward to your visit. 
Regards. 
 
HUME