07MANAGUA471
NICARAGUA: POLL GIVES ORTEGA FAVORABLE RATINGS,
Thu Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0471/01 0531950
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221950Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9183
INFO RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0961
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ FEB WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KDEM ECON AID NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: POLL GIVES ORTEGA FAVORABLE RATINGS, 
OPTIMISM UNUSUALLY HIGH 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  A CID-Gallup poll released on February 21 
shows President Daniel Ortega enjoying a honeymoon, with high 
favorability ratings and optimism toward his presidency -- 
not only from his traditional base of support, but also among 
the general public.  The poll also concludes that half the 
public holds a positive view of First Lady Rosario Murillo, 
whom a majority considers to be the most influential person 
in the Ortega government.  While the poll indicates a 
majority believe the country is on the right path and is 
confident that Ortega will leave the country in better shape 
than his predecessor Enrique Bolanos, the findings also 
suggest that the high expectations for the Ortega presidency 
will be difficult to manage given the challenges the country 
is facing.  Further, Nicaraguans customarily give their 
presidents favorable ratings at the start of their terms, but 
their popularity tends to wane within the first year if their 
performance is not up to expectations.  End Summary 
 
 
A Honeymoon Sweet 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU) According to a CID-Gallup study conducted February 
6-11, President Daniel Ortega of the FSLN party has marked 
his first month in office with a 61 percent approval rating, 
a level nearly on par with popular former President Violeta 
Chamorro who beat Ortega as the opposition candidate in the 
1990 elections.  The poll reflects an overall optimism and 
euphoria toward the new Nicaraguan government(GON) and 57 
percent of the population surveyed believe the future of the 
country under Ortega's leadership will improve.  With 
expectations at an all-time high, not only among his 
traditional base but also among the general public, the 
challenge for Ortega will be maintaining the level of 
optimism and delivering on the promises he has made, 
particularly in the area of employment. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Noting that a sense of "euphoria" among the public 
was to be expected following a successful election, 
CID-Gallup pollster Fred Denton nevertheless termed the level 
of overwhelming optimism "unusual" considering the actual 
situation of the country.  Denton told DCM that, while not 
apparent in the survey data, he felt that much of this excess 
optimism was attributable to a "relief factor" by those who 
had feared the worst from the outset from an Ortega 
Government.  The analysis of the survey results cautioned 
that Ortega's honeymoon bliss echoed that of President 
Bolanos, who also enjoyed a period of high popularity early 
in his presidency, but left office with mission 
unaccomplished marks.  The CID-Gallup sample was based on 
1,239 adults (aged 16 and older) questioned in house-to-house 
interviews, and has a margin of error of 2.8. 
 
Great Expectations: Jobs, Education, Health 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The main problem facing Nicaraguans is 
unemployment, asserted a majority of those polled, also one 
of the main shortcomings of the Bolanos administration and 
what ultimately led to his loss in popularity.   When asked 
if given the chance to ask President Ortega for one thing 
personally and for their families, at least 53 percent of 
respondents cited work, better jobs with better pay, as tops 
on their wish list, along with a home, plot of land, or a 
loan to buy a house.  Better quality of education, more 
schools, better healthcare and medicines also ranked among 
the high expectations.  More people expect that Ortega will 
fulfill his campaign promises than not.  While 52 percent 
agree strongly or moderately that he will follow through on 
his campaign promises, only 15 percent have no faith at all 
in his ability to deliver. 
 
Uncertainties Remain 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Although a significant 45 percent of the population 
consulted believe that Ortega "has changed" and will follow a 
democratic path, a solid 43 percent are uncertain about the 
type of government he will create, while 12 percent of the 
sample consider him a communist who will "repeat the 
mistakes" of his past.  Nevertheless,  amid the doubts, an 
overwhelming 64 percent are convinced that his government, 
whatever shape it takes, will be an improvement over the one 
 
President Bolanos left behind. 
This assessment was, noted Denton, shared not only by 
traditional Sandinistas, but also by other political groups. 
 
Centralizing Power and Broadening Nicaraguan Alliances 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The survey also revealed a sense of ambivalence 
among the Nicaraguan public about democracy, coupled with a 
disturbingly high comfort level with Ortega's move to 
centralize power.  Only five percent of those polled named 
democracy and political stability as being among their top 
priorities under an Ortega rule, in contrast to the 46 
percent who valued jobs as most important.  One of the more 
striking findings is that 33 percent strongly approved of 
Ortega's move to centralize power of the executive-- to 
include the direct control over the military and police, 
joined by 27 percent who somewhat approve.  In contrast, just 
17 percent recorded strong disapproval of the centralization 
of executive power.  President Ortega's move to establish 
alliances with Venezuela, Cuba, Bolivia, and Iran was backed 
by 59 percent of the sample.  (Denton acknowledged, however, 
that CID-Gallup should have broken Iran out separately from 
the ALBA group to get a better sense of Nicaraguan feeling 
toward such a distant and "foreign" relationship.)  An 
overwhelming 84 percent held a favorable view of the ALBA 
agreement. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) When asked about relations with the United States, 
33 percent predicted that relations would improve but an 
equal number believed they would not change.  There was 
variation based on party affiliation.  More respondents who 
identified with the FSLN predicted better relations (47 
percent), while the PLC and ALN were less optimistic, at 28 
percent and 17 percent, respectively.  Only eight percent of 
FSLN-affiliated respondents opined that relations with the 
United States would worsen under an Ortega government, while 
29 percent of those identifying with the PLC and 24 percent 
of those identifying with the ALN held that relations would 
worsen. 
 
First Lady of Influence 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (SBU) First Lady Rosario Murillo, who also serves as the 
government's Director of Communications and Citizenry, was 
considered the most influential person in Nicaragua by a 
majority of respondents.  Named the most influential person 
by 47 percent of those polled, her influence on Ortega's 
decisionmaking was believed to be even higher.  While half 
saw her influence over her husband as very good or somewhat 
good, a third regarded it as more or less good, and under a 
quarter viewed it as either bad or very bad.   After Murillo, 
the second most influential person named was Bayardo Arce, a 
former Sandinista militant now serving as President Ortega's 
advisor, followed by Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, and 
Cardinal Obando y Bravo. 
 
Montealegre Viewed Leader of Opposition, but Confidence in 
ALN as Party Less Promising 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  When asked who was the most influential leader of 
the opposition, forty-four percent of the sample named 
Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) leader/former presidential 
candidate Eduardo Montealegre.   Ex-president Arnoldo Aleman, 
who is under house arrest for corruption and money laundering 
and ranking leader of the Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC), 
was next in line -- named by 24 percent of the respondents. 
Although the ALN as a party was seen as strong in terms of 
consolidation of power by 64 percent of the population, it 
has lost ground in terms of its overall popularity, losing 
nine points in five months, while the PLC lost eight points 
over the same period.  The study also revealed that at the 
time of the survey, the situation of the FSLN was more 
favorable than that of the other parties, and with its recent 
six-point increase, was in its strongest position since 2001. 
 A total of 37 percent of the population now identifies with 
this political party, the poll concluded.  (Which corresponds 
closely to the 38 percent of votes which Ortega and the FSLN 
garnered in the November 2006 elections.) 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Denton told us he was quite sure that the 
 
"euphoric bubble" would start to deflate in the months ahead, 
and he expects that CID-Gallup's next survey in August will 
provide a more accurate "reality check" and baseline of 
public perceptions regarding the new Ortega administration. 
 
 
 
 
 
BRENNAN