07MANAGUA467
NICARAGUA: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF
Wed Feb 21 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0467/01 0522243
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 212243Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9177
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR EAID EIND NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF 
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0405 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. The Ambassador met with new Minister of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Amanda Lorio Arana to 
discuss potential collaboration on environmental programs. 
The Ambassador described the breadth and depth of U.S. 
environmental projects and programs in Nicaragua, including a 
CAFTA-DR Environmental Cooperation Agreement, a new $3.6 
million Global Development Alliance with the Rainforest 
Alliance, and a new natural resource management activity with 
the U.S. Forest Service to improve the effectiveness of 
protected areas and preserve biodiversity.  Lorio told the 
Ambassador that she planned to instill a new focus at the 
Minister of Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA) on 
watersheds and water resources.  She emphasized that another 
part of her job will be to change attitudes toward littering 
and cleanliness.  In the medium- to long-term, Lorio believes 
that MARENA will have to develop the capability to evaluate 
the environmental impact of the new petroleum refinery 
proposed by the Venezuelans.  Finally, she said that she saw 
another one of her responsibilities as preparing the 
population for climate change.  Lorio agreed that there is 
extraordinary potential for ecotourism in Nicaragua, and the 
USAID Director affirmed that studies had shown that Nicaragua 
offered even more biodiversity than Costa Rica.  Commenting 
on illegal logging activity, Lorio observed that corruption 
is rampant, and that illegal exporters of protected tree 
species come in all shapes and sizes.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On February 7, the Ambassador met with new Minister of 
the Environment and Natural Resources Amanda Lorio Arana to 
discuss potential collaboration on environmental programs. 
Accompanying him was the USAID Director and Econoff.  MARENA 
Director General Maria Antonieta Rivas Leclair also 
participated. 
 
USAID Activities 
---------------- 

¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador opened by explaining the breadth and 
depth of U.S. environmental projects and programs in 
Nicaragua.  He noted that much of the U.S. effort is related 
to fulfilling trade capacity building obligations under 
CAFTA-DR.  The following week, for example, the U.S. would 
participate in a regional conference in Guatemala for CAFTA 
countries to discuss priorities for the region.  (Note: 
Nicaragua was the only country which did not send a delegate 
to that conference.  Travel authorizations have been 
complicated by a Ministry of Finance order centralizing 
funding authority under the Presidency, in the Office of the 
Coordinator for Public Communication and Citizenship headed 
by First Lady Rosario Murillo.) 
 
¶4. (U) The Ambassador and USAID Director told Lorio that in 
the fall of 2006, USAID completed a work plan with the 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA) to 
support activities under the CAFTA-DR Environmental 
Cooperation Agreement.  USAID will invest $2 million to 
strengthen the country's ability to implement and enforce 
environmental laws, better protect and manage biodiversity 
and conservation, and encourage private sector involvement. 
 
¶5. (U) The Ambassador informed Lorio that USAID had recently 
initiated a new $3.6 million Global Development Alliance with 
the Rainforest Alliance to bring together private sector 
partners to strengthen the competitiveness and sustainability 
of agriculture, tourism, and forestry of small and 
medium-sized enterprises and community based activities. 
 
¶6. (U) In addition, the Ambassador and the USAID Director 
informed Lorio that USAID will begin new natural resource 
management activity with the U.S. Forest Service to improve 
the effectiveness of protected areas and preserve 
biodiversity.  Activities focus on watershed and associated 
protected areas.  USAID will fund $2.2 million while the 
private sector will contribute about $750,000. 
 
MARENA's Focus 
-------------- 

¶7. (SBU) Lorio told the Ambassador that she plans to instill 
a new focus at MARENA on watersheds and water resources.  She 
said decisions have to be made about which sources of water 
should be used for drinking and which should be used for 
industrial purposes.  In some cases, she said, wastewater and 
other effluents had thoroughly polluted lagoons, lakes, and 
rivers; in other cases, watersheds need to be replenished. 
In Nicaragua, she observed, reforestation has a large role to 
play in watershed management, as does understanding 
geothermal dynamics.  The Ambassador suggested that earning 
carbon credits under the Kyoto Protocol could provide a 
useful stimulus for reforestation in Nicaragua. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Lorio stressed that another part of her job will be 
to change attitudes toward littering and cleanliness. 
Driving through Managua, one can see people living in and 
around trash scattered along the streets and around the homes 
of practically all Managuans.  Lorio speculated that she 
would be requesting donor support for the establishment of 
collection and recycling systems. 
 
¶9. (SBU) In the medium- to long-term, Lorio believes that 
MARENA will have to develop the capability to evaluate the 
environmental impact of a new petroleum refinery, in 
reference to Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez' recent offer. 
Lorio noted that the experience of Honduras might be 
instructive in this regard.  (Note: Exxon-Mobil owns and 
operates the one refinery in Nicaragua at this time.) 
 
¶10. (SBU) Lorio retrieved a map of oil spills or leaks 
located around the country.  She pointed to five major and 
ten minor spills under management by the Directorate of 
Environmental Control.  (Note: We understand that most of 
these sites are gasoline stations with leaking tanks, and 
that the situation is not serious.)  Lorio added that while 
MARENA had set up a hotline to report environmental crimes, 
the ministry needs to train ministry officials and lawyers 
how to apply environmental law. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Finally, Lorio said that she sees another one of 
her responsibilities as preparing the population for climate 
change. 
 
Ecotourism 
---------- 

¶12. (U) The Ambassador commented that he served in Nicaragua 
twelve years ago and had always thought that the country was 
beautiful, but he now sees the extraordinary potential for 
ecotourism.  Lorio agreed, standing up to show designated 
protected areas and volcanoes on a topographical map.  She 
added that while most people believe that Costa Rica is home 
to more biodiversity, it is only because it is better 
documented.  USAID Director agreed, affirming that studies 
had shown that Nicaragua offered even more diversity than 
Costa Rica, especially along what is known as the biological 
corridor. 
 
Forestry 
-------- 

¶13. (SBU) The Ambassador asked about issues surrounding 
forest management and the enforcement of logging laws, given 
that things had deteriorated so that the Bolanos government 
had to issue a ban on the export of raw timber (reftel). 
Lorio supported Bolanos' desire to do something; the 
government could not simply sit idly by while the forests 
died a slow death.  The police, attorney general, and others 
need to better enforce the law.  Corruption in the industry, 
she stated, has to be confronted.  Illegal exporters of 
protected tree species come in all shapes and sizes.  USAID 
Director pointed out that what Nicaragua needs is a system to 
certify that logging corresponds to approved management 
plans. 
 
Turtles and Lagoons 
------------------- 

¶14. (U) Lorio lent two films to the Ambassador: "Turtles Also 
Cry" and "Broken Mirrors."  She encouraged him to show them 
to Embassy staff.  The first documents the plight of 
endangered species of turtles in Nicaragua.  On the Atlantic 
coast, turtle meat is butchered and commonly sold in the 
marketplace.  In addition, Nicaraguans harvest thousands of 
turtle eggs for food every year.  Lorio explained that 
Nicaragua has four of the seven endangered species of turtles 
designated by the Convention on Illegal Trade of Endangered 
Species (CITES).  The second film described the plight of 
Nicaraguan lagoons, originally created as the result of water 
runoff into volcanic craters.  Years of neglect and improper 
drainage of waste water had destroyed one very popular lagoon 
near Managua.  The films, funded by Danish development agency 
DANIDA, were locally produced and filmed. 
 
Potential for Collaboration 
--------------------------- 

¶15. (U) The Ambassador told Lorio that the U.S. Mission is 
very open to suggestions for potential projects.  USAID 
Director said that USAID would try to provide U.S. experience 
when it came to watershed management and reforestation.  He 
added that USAID welcomes the opportunity to discuss country 
and regional projects. 
 
Biography: Amanda Lorio Arana 
----------------------------- 

¶16. (SBU) Amanda Lorio Arana is a sociologist who worked for 
the Agricultural Development and Reform Ministry during the 
1980s.  She has since been certified by the Upledger 
Institute (United States) and the International Therapy 
Examination of Healthcare Practitioners.  Before being named 
minister, she practiced reflexology at a medical office in 
Managua.  The office specialized in the treatment of 
migraines, nervous and hormonal dysfunctions, depression, 
arthritic knees, lumbago, scoliosis, stress, post-operative 
recovery, and trauma.  She has reportedly treated the first 
lady and Director of Public Communication and Citizenship 
Rosario Murillo, and it was through this connection that she 
was selected as minister. 
BRENNAN