07MANAGUA646
NICARAGUA - VENEZUELA AGRICULTURAL COOPERATION
Fri Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0646/01 0682336
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 092336Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9421
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1012
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EEB/TPP/ABT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID NU VE
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA - VENEZUELA AGRICULTURAL COOPERATION 
AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0641 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0642 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 0643 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 0644 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  As part of a series of Bolivarian 
Alternative agreements between Nicaraguan and Venezuela 
signed on January 11, 2007, Nicaraguan and Venezuelan 
Ministers of Foreign Relations also signed an Agricultural 
Cooperation Agreement.  The agreement is general in nature, 
outlining the desire of both countries to conduct cooperative 
projects and programs, including scientific and practical 
studies and exchanges, in the areas of agricultural and rural 
development.  A joint working group will oversee joint 
activities. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) An Agricultural Cooperation Agreement was one of a 
series of thirteen commitments with Venezuela negotiated by 
the Ortega government before it came to power on January 10, 
¶2007.  Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Relations Samuel Santos 
and Venezuelan Minister of Foreign Relations Nicolas Maduro 
Moros signed the agreement on January 11, 2007.  The 
substance of the agreement, along with the other commitments 
made that day, was kept from the public for weeks.  This 
cable reports on the substance of that agreement. 
 
Preambular Language 
------------------- 

¶3. (SBU) Preambular language in the agreement speaks to 
furthering friendship between Nicaraguan and Venezuelan 
peoples and "excellent ties" in the area of agriculture.  The 
countries agree to establish a permanent dialogue and share 
experiences in the area of agriculture.  Believing that it is 
in their interest to promote sustainable endogenous 
agriculture and overcome social inequity, the countries 
reaffirm their interest in constituting a cooperative 
agricultural alliance, which includes collaboration on 
research, extension services, agricultural projects, training 
programs, exchange of cooperative staff, agricultural 
producers, technicians, and experts.  Both countries note a 
special interest in improving agricultural productivity. 
 
Article 1: Cooperation 
---------------------- 

¶4. (SBU) Nicaragua and Venezuela pledge in this agreement to 
promote and intensify cooperation in agriculture through the 
formulation and implementation of projects and programs in 
the areas of agriculture and rural development, taking into 
account established social and economic development 
priorities in their respective strategic plans, policies, and 
legislation. 
 
Article 2: Activities 
--------------------- 

¶5. (SBU) Cooperation may include the following envisioned 
activities: 
 
-- education and training of agricultural producers, 
cooperatives, technicians, and scientists; 
-- promotion of exchanges between agricultural producers, 
cooperatives, technicians, scientists, and experts who 
provide consulting services and studies, and prepare and 
execute specific projects and programs in matters relating to 
the agricultural sector and rural development; 
-- seminars, meetings, courses, and conferences in both 
countries to train technicians, agricultural cooperatives, 
among others on the part of both countries; 
-- exchange of scientific and technological information; 
-- joint and coordinated undertaking of research projects and 
programs and or development technologies, in particular those 
academies, institutes, and other research centers that are 
linked to the agricultural sector; 
-- elaboration of integrated rural development projects for 
the creation and strengthening the pillars of agricultural 
development; 
-- other activities upon which the parties may agree. 
 
Article 3: Executing Authorities 
-------------------------------- 

¶6. (SBU) Executing authorities are the Nicaraguan Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry and the Venezuelan Ministry of 
Agriculture and Land. 
 
Articles 4-5: Working Groups 
---------------------------- 

¶7. (SBU) With the objective of creating an adequate mechanism 
 
for oversight and follow-up, a Working Group will be composed 
of representatives from both ministries that will have the 
following functions: 
 
-- to establish priorities and evaluate possible specific 
cooperative projects for agricultural cooperation under this 
agreement; 
-- to study and recommend programs and projects within the 
framework of this agreement; 
-- to analyze and coordinate the completion of programs of 
cooperation and technical assistance. 
-- to monitor and fulfill the terms of this agreement. 
 
The working group will meet alternatively in Venezuela and 
Nicaragua on agreed upon dates.  Either party may submit 
specific projects to the other for consideration. 
 
Article 6: Programs 
------------------- 

¶8. (SBU) Parties will jointly elaborate programs of 
cooperation that will include a description of objectives, 
implementation periods, work plans, estimated costs, 
financial resources, technical people, and other condition 
that may be established. 
 
Article 7: Use of Knowledge 
--------------------------- 

¶9. (SBU) Parties will take necessary measures to ensure that 
knowledge acquired will contribute to the economic and social 
development of their country. 
 
Article 8: Costs 
---------------- 

¶10. (SBU) Financial arrangements for cooperative activities 
under this agreement will be established by mutual consent on 
a case by case basis.  Expenses for working group meetings 
will be covered by the host of the meeting.  Each party will 
pay for the costs of sending its own officials. 
 
Article 9: Confidentiality 
-------------------------- 

¶11. (SBU) Each party promises to maintain the confidentiality 
and secrecy of documents, information, and other data 
received or provided by the other party during the 
implementation of this agreement or conforming agreements. 
This article will continue to be effective though the 
agreement may terminate. 
 
Articles 10-12:  Disputes, Amendments, and Duration 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 

¶12. (SBU) Disputes will be resolved amicably through 
diplomatic negotiation.  The agreement may be amended by the 
common will of the parties.  The agreement enters into force 
for a period of five years after the last notification by the 
parties of the fulfillment of internal constitutional and 
legal requirements.  The agreement is automatically renewable 
for equal five-year periods, unless one of the parties 
notifies the other of its intention to not renew it at least 
six months before the end of a five year period. 
Notwithstanding, either party may withdraw from the agreement 
after having notified the other by written diplomatic note of 
its intention.  Withdrawal will not affect ongoing programs 
and projects, unless the parties say otherwise. 
TRIVELLI