07MUSCAT545
RARE OMANI CANDOR: AMBASSADOR HEARS LOCAL VIEWS OF
Wed May 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Muscat
VZCZCXRO9956
RR RUEHDE RUEHDIR
DE RUEHMS #0545 1501250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301250Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY MUSCAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8318
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MUSCAT 000545 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, R 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR PREL KPAO KISL IR IS IZ MU
SUBJECT: RARE OMANI CANDOR: AMBASSADOR HEARS LOCAL VIEWS OF 
U.S. MIDEAST POLICIES 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) From May 16-22, the Ambassador traveled overland 
from Muscat to Salalah and on to the Yemeni border - a trip 
of more than 1,300 kilometers - meeting with tribal sheikhs 
and other local officials along the way.  The trip provided a 
unique opportunity to reach out to Omanis at the grassroots 
level and engage audiences that normally do not have the 
chance to speak with an official American.  On the last day 
of the trip, Salalah's representative to the Majlis al-Shura 
(the directly elected lower house of Oman's bicameral 
advisory body), Sa'id bin Sa'd al-Shahri, organized a lunch 
for the Ambassador with approximately 30 of Salalah's 
community leaders.  The event was held on a hillside outside 
the city in traditional Omani fashion, with the invitees on 
mats, eating by hand from communal bowls and then gathering 
in a large circle for conversation. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Unlike similar events over the course of the trip in 
which the Omani hosts mostly limited their conversation to 
local topics, the Salalah participants quickly turned to a 
discussion of U.S. foreign policy in the region.  A reporter 
from one of Oman's four private newspapers, "Al-Watan," told 
the Ambassador that the current U.S. domestic debate over 
Iraq strategy - particularly disagreements between the 
legislative and executive branches - make it difficult for 
Omanis to understand U.S. priorities.  He pointed to U.S 
House of Representative Speaker Pelosi's recent trip to Syria 
as a high-profile example of this incongruity, asking "How 
can we be expected to agree with America (on your approach to 
Iraq) when your own government cannot come to agreement?" 
Several other participants seemed distressed by what they 
perceive to be America's "neo-colonial" role in the region. 
One leader noted that many Omanis were hopeful for a new 
relationship with the Western world after the U.S. displaced 
Great Britain as the region's primary foreign interlocutor. 
To date, however, most feel that the relationship has been 
marked by disappointment and lost opportunity, he said. 
 
¶3. (SBU) A businessman commented that while he and his 
colleagues appreciate the important contributions the U.S. 
has made to regional economic growth over the years - and 
hope to take advantage of new opportunities under the 
U.S.-Oman Free Trade Agreement - the war in Iraq has caused 
many Omanis to see "missiles and bombs" as America's main 
export to the region.  Although no one referred to Iran 
directly, the Omanis indicated their discomfort with what 
they perceive as a hard-line U.S. stance toward Tehran and 
the possibility that this approach could lead to greater 
regional instability.  In general, while still expressing 
their fundamental goodwill toward the U.S. and continuing 
desire to engage with the Embassy, the Omanis made it clear 
that they believe the current U.S. stance on the region's 
primary flash points - Iran, Iraq, and the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict - has significantly damaged 
America's image and credibility in Oman. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment: The discussion in Salalah provided a rare 
glimpse into how Omanis view U.S. policy at the popular 
level.  The Ambassador offered general explanations of our 
policies in Iraq, Israel, the Palestinian territories and 
elsewhere, but also used the lunch as an opportunity to 
listen.  His Omani hosts seemed satisfied simply to be heard. 
 The lunch was notable in that Omanis rarely engage 
foreigners, especially foreign officials, so directly on 
sensitive topics.  The freedom of the conversation in a 
traditional setting indicates the substantial public 
diplomacy dividends that can be gained from meeting local 
audiences on their turf.  The Ambassador and Mission officers 
plan to continue creating these kinds of opportunities as 
part of an overall strategy to reach out to Omani society. 
End comment. 
GRAPPO