07PHNOMPENH354
2007 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA PART III
Mon Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO4650
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0354/01 0640208
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050208Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8127
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0669
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC 0034UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 PHNOM PENH 000354 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP, EAP/MLS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID/ANE 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF ELAB SMIG KCRM KWMN KFRD ASEC CB
SUBJECT: 2007 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA PART III 
 
REFTEL: STATE 202745 
 
Government-to-Government TIP Cooperation 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3J.  Does the government cooperate with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases?  If possible, 
can post provide the number of cooperative international 
investigations on trafficking? 
 
The government continues to cooperate with U.S. law enforcement 
officials on trafficking issues and other criminal cases, and also 
cooperates with other countries.  The United States and a number of 
other countries have laws to prosecute their nationals who travel 
abroad to sexually exploit children.  The Cambodian government has 
cooperated with the U.S. in a significant number of PROTECT ACT 
cases, and has handled numerous cases involving other foreign 
nationals.  The first three successful prosecutions worldwide under 
the PROTECT ACT were achieved with the cooperation of RGC 
authorities.  Thirteen foreign nationals were arrested for 
debauchery between March 2006 and January 2007. 
 
The governments of Cambodia and Thailand signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding on Bilateral Cooperation for Eliminating Trafficking 
in Children and Women and Assisting Victims of Trafficking on May 
31, 2003.  The MOU requires the two governments to cooperate with 
each other to investigate and uncover domestic and cross-border 
trafficking of children and women, to conduct repatriation through 
diplomatic channels, and to promote bilateral cooperation in the 
judicial procedures against trafficking.  During 2006, with support 
from NGO IJM, the Cambodian trafficking police cooperated with Thai 
immigration police to arrest two suspected traffickers and rescue 
nine victims trafficked for sex in Thailand. 
 
In October 2005, Cambodia and Vietnam signed a similar MOU on 
trafficking.  During the Vietnamese PM's March 2006 visit to 
Cambodia, Vietnamese and Cambodian officials discussed cross-border 
trafficking cases concerning Cambodian child beggars in Vietnam. 
 
The Cambodian Police and Ministry of Justice cooperate with the 
Malaysian police on cross-border TIP cases, but the process is still 
in its infancy.  According to LEASEC, the Cambodian government has 
made the Malaysian government aware of TIP cases involving Cambodian 
nationals in Malaysia since early 2002.  Cambodia is now negotiating 
a similar MOU with Malaysia similar to the MOU in place with 
Vietnam. 
 
Extradition 
----------- 
 
3K.  Does the government extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post provide the number 
of traffickers extradited?  Does the government extradite its own 
nationals charged with such offenses?  If not, is the government 
prohibited by law from extraditing its own nationals?  If so, what 
is the government doing to modify its laws to permit extradition of 
its own nationals? 
 
The governments of Cambodia and Thailand reached agreement 
on an extradition treaty in Bangkok in May 1998.  The 
Cambodian National Assembly ratified the treaty in September 1999 
and its Thai counterpart in December 2000; 
representatives of the two countries signed the implementing 
protocol in March 2001 in Phnom Penh, and the treaty came into force 
in April 2001.  The bilateral treaty 
with Thailand provides a basis for future cooperation to address 
trafficking issues.  In March 2005, a Cambodian woman arrested in 
Thailand was sentenced to 85 years by a Thai court for trafficking 
eight underage Cambodian girls to Thailand for sexual exploitation. 
The sentence was reduced to 50 years after the woman pleaded guilty. 
 The case was hailed as a breakthrough in bilateral cooperation 
between Thailand and Cambodia that led to successful prosecution of 
a Cambodian trafficker.  The Cambodian government continues to 
cooperate with foreign governments to expel persons charged with 
pedophilia for acts committed in Cambodia so that they can be 
prosecuted in their countries of citizenship. 
 
Despite the lack of a bilateral extradition treaty, Cambodia has 
cooperated to render into U.S. custody numerous American accused of 
being child sex offenders.  During the reporting period, Cambodia 
deported two American nationals who committed crimes against 
Cambodian children to the U.S. to face trial under the PROTECT Act. 
 
 
Government Involvement in Trafficking 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000354  002 OF 007 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
3L.  Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level?  If so, 
please explain in detail. 
 
The Cambodian government as an institution does not tolerate human 
trafficking.  Because corruption is pervasive in Cambodia, it is 
widely believed that some individual Cambodian officials - including 
police and judicial officials - are involved in various aspects of 
human trafficking, but firm evidence leading to the prosecution of 
RGC officials is so far uncommon. 
 
Prosecution of Government Officials for Trafficking 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3M.  If government officials are involved in trafficking, what steps 
has the government taken to end such participation? Have any 
government officials been prosecuted for involvement in trafficking 
or trafficking-related corruption?  Have any been convicted?  What 
actual sentence was imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if 
available. 
 
Senior government officials have often stated that official 
corruption that aids or abets trafficking or other crimes 
will not be tolerated.  During the year, the RGC prosecuted several 
police officials for trafficking-related corruption charges. 
Colonel Touch Ngim, former Deputy Director of the Anti-Human 
trafficking and Juvenile Protection Department, and two other 
officials under his supervision were disciplined for taking money 
from karaoke owners in raided parlors in Kompong Speu province.  In 
August 2006, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Touch Ngim to 
five years and two other police officers to seven years in prison. 
Touch Ngim is serving his sentence; however, the two other officers 
remain on the job. 
 
Meng Say, Chief of the Phnom Penh Anti-Trafficking Unit, was 
suspended in January 2006 for extorting money from Korean nationals. 
 Meng Say arrested the Korean nationals who came to Cambodia to 
marry Cambodian women in October  2005, accusing them of human 
trafficking.  He then ordered the men to pay him USD 30,000 in 
return for their release from custody.  The men were released after 
paying more than USD 10,000; after which they filed a complaint with 
the Ministry of Interior and to the Prime Minister's office. 
Following the issuance of an arrest warrant by the Phnom Penh 
Municipal Court, Meng Say disappeared.  In late August 2006, police 
arrested Meng Say and he is now in pretrial detention. 
 
Low-ranking government officials have also been apprehended for 
involvement in trafficking.  According to the MOI, between March 
2006 and January 2007, police arrested two military officers and one 
member of the military police for running brothels and trafficking. 
The court sentenced one of them to a five-year suspended sentence 
and ordered a fine of five million riels (~USD 1,250). 
 
Child Sex Tourism Issues 
------------------------ 
 
3N.  If the country has an identified child sex tourism problem (as 
source or destination), how many foreign pedophiles have the 
government prosecuted or deported/extradited to their country of 
origin?  Do the country's child sexual abuse laws have 
extraterritorial coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)?  If so, how 
many of the country's nationals have been prosecuted and/or 
convicted under the extraterritorial provision(s)? 
 
Cambodia is identified as a destination point for pedophiles. 
During the period covered in this report, MOI reported the arrests 
of 14 foreign nationals (five Americans, three Germans, one Belgian, 
one British citizen, one Swiss, one Korean, one Japanese, and one 
Canadian) for sexually abusing Cambodian children.  Of the five 
Americans arrested, the Cambodian government deported two to the 
United States, one under the PROTECT Act framework and one under 
state charges; one committed suicide in prison; another one is in 
prison while the fifth is in prison awaiting deportation.  In 2006, 
the Cambodian court convicted a total of four foreign nationals, 
with prison sentences ranging from 10 to 18 years and civil 
compensation of USD 500 to USD 5,000. 
 
The draft Cambodian anti-trafficking law under consideration has 
extraterritorial coverage, allowing for the prosecution of Cambodian 
citizens committing similar crimes in another country, and the 
prosecution of a foreigner committing a crime involving Cambodian 
victims in another country. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000354  003 OF 007 
 
 
In June 2006, the Appeals Court in Phnom Penh, relying on forensic 
evidence, upheld the conviction of an Australian pedophile despite 
the withdrawal of witness complaints.  The case drew media attention 
because the defendant's defense lawyer had accused the Cambodian 
Women's Crisis Center of offering money to the victims to testify 
against the Australian.  Most observers believe that the victims 
withdrew their testimony under duress. 
 
International Instruments 
------------------------- 
 
3O.  Has the government signed, ratified, and/or taken steps to 
implement the following international instruments?  Please provide 
the date of signature/ratification if appropriate. 
 
--ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of worst forms of child labor: 
The Cambodian government has ratified the new ILO Convention 182 on 
the Worst Forms of Child Labor on October 25, 2005. 
 
--ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor: 
The government ratified the Forced Labor Convention (ILO 29) on 
February 24, 1969 and the Abolition of Forced Labor Convention (ILO 
105) on August 23, 1999.  It should be noted Cambodia is the second 
nation in Asia after Indonesia to ratify all seven fundamental 
conventions of the ILO. 
 
--Convention on the Rights of the Child:  The Cambodian government 
ratified this convention on October 15, 1992. 
According to the CNCC, relevant ministries have formulated 
internal policies and programs for the implementation of the 
convention. 
 
--The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution, and 
child pornography:  The Cambodian government ratified this 
convention on May 30, 2002. 
 
--The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime: Cambodia ratified 
this protocol on January 18, 2006. 
 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
4A.  Does the government assist victims, for example, by providing 
temporary to permanent residency status, relief from deportation, 
shelter and access to legal, medical and psychological services?  If 
so, please explain.  Does the country have victim care and victim 
health care facilities? 
Does the country have facilities dedicated to helping victims of 
trafficking?  If so, can post provide the number of victims placed 
in these care facilities? 
 
The government's record in assisting victims of trafficking 
is reasonably good, in view of its limited resources and 
lack of institutional capacity.  Victim assistance is 
usually conducted by an NGO or international organization, or 
combination of the two.  MOSAVY operates temporary shelters for 
victims of trafficking, rape and domestic violence in Phnom Penh, 
but the facility only provides temporary shelter and basic 
assistance until victims can be placed with an NGO-operated shelter 
and reintegration program.  MOSAVY works closely with AFESIP, IOM, 
UNICEF, World Vision and a variety of NGO-managed shelters 
throughout the provinces to assist initial reintegration of victims 
and follow-up investigations.  Cambodian citizens are technically 
provided free health care through Cambodia's national hospitals and 
clinics, but this does not happen in practice.  Services provided at 
these facilities are inadequate in normal circumstances, and 
non-existent for victims of trafficking, rape and domestic violence 
who require specialized care. 
 
When TIP victims are repatriated to Cambodia from Thailand, 
an IOM-run Transit Center in Poipet staffed with MOSAVY and 
IOM staff conduct preliminary assessments and assist in tracing 
family members and reintegrating victims into their home 
communities, or placing victims at appropriate NGO shelters to serve 
their needs.  In 2006, NGOs and MOSAVY identified 252 victims of 
trafficking from Thailand and placed them at the Transit Center. 
 
For children who cannot be reintegrated into their 
communities, the USG supports IOM and other NGOs activities provide 
long-term care and reintegration assistance such as vocational 
training, job placement, and income generation. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000354  004 OF 007 
 
 
 
Most of the NGOs shelters assist victims of all forms of violence, 
including rape, domestic violence and trafficking.  World Hope 
International manages a short-term assessment center for victims of 
trafficking, but also accepts rape victims when there is space 
available. In 2006, the shelter assisted 64 victims of trafficking. 
 
IOM also has cooperated in training Cambodian government officials 
from MOSAVY and MOI to repatriate Vietnamese victims.  Three victims 
were repatriated under this process in 2006, bringing the total 
number of repatriations to Vietnam to 60 since the initiation of 
this project in June 1999. 
 
Government-Funded Support to NGOs for Victims 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4B.  Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? Please 
explain. 
 
Because of inadequate resources, the Cambodian government 
relies heavily on bilateral donors and multilateral institutions for 
approximately 50 percent of its total annual budget, and has few 
resources to devote to trafficking victims.  The government relies 
on foreign and domestic NGOs to provide services to victims of 
trafficking, a situation that will likely persist for some time. 
The Cambodian Ministry of Social Affairs funds Seva Kapia Komar 
(SKK), which has primary responsibility for placement of TIP victims 
with NGOs for additional care and support.  On occasion, the RGC 
also provides in-kind contributions to partnerships with NGOs, such 
as land, office space and staff support. 
 
Screening/Referral Process for Victims 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4C.  Do the government's law enforcement and social services 
personnel have a formal system of identifying victims of trafficking 
among high-risk persons with whom they come in contact (e.g., 
foreign persons arrested for prostitution or immigration 
violations)?  Is there a referral process in place, when 
appropriate, to transfer victims detained, arrested or placed in 
protective custody by law enforcement authorities to NGO's that 
provide short- or long-term care? 
 
After a raid, law enforcement authorities conduct an initial 
screening for victims of trafficking before referring them to the 
provincial and municipal Departments of Social Affairs, where they 
will again be interviewed for victim determination.  The municipal 
and provincial Department of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth 
(DOSAVY) would in turn refer the victims to short- or long-term NGO 
shelters for further care depending on their needs. 
 
In Phnom Penh, the government-funded SKK receives TIP victims and 
refers them to appropriate NGOs.  The police often referred victims 
directly to NGOs, but SKK's role has been recently reinforced as the 
primary clearinghouse for victims.  Since 2005, World Hope 
International has operated a short-term assessment center in Phnom 
Penh for referral of TIP victims to longer-term care facilities to 
augment the services provided by SKK. 
 
Through an IOM project on repatriation and reintegration of 
victims, DOSAVY officials and IOM staff screen and 
refer victims repatriated from Thailand to appropriate 
NGOs.  There is no such system for victims returning 
from Vietnam.  For victims of trafficking outside of Phnom 
Penh, local DOSAVY offices screen and place victims with 
NGOs. 
 
Rights of Victims 
----------------- 
 
4D.  Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims also 
treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, or deported? 
If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are victims fined?  Are 
victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as those 
governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
The rights of victims are respected in practice, and victims are not 
treated as criminals.  Victims are not detained, jailed, fined, or 
deported.  Cambodia was widely condemned in 2002 for mistreatment of 
victims, but that is no longer the case. 
 
Victim Participation in Legal Action 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000354  005 OF 007 
 
 
4E.  Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims file 
civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to such legal 
redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court case against 
the former employer, is the victim permitted to obtain other 
employment or to leave the country pending trial proceedings?  Is 
there a victim restitution program? 
 
The anti-TIP police and prosecutors have become more 
effective at gaining witness testimony, but credible fears of 
retaliation from traffickers still pose major impediments to witness 
testimony.  Victims may file civil suits and seek legal action 
against traffickers, and a number of NGOs in the legal, human 
rights, and social services areas, including the Cambodian Defenders 
Project (CDP), encourage victims to do so; the NGOs provide or refer 
victims to legal services.  However, Cambodia's corrupt legal system 
has been a serious impediment to the success of cases brought by 
individuals. 
 
Government Protection for Victims/Witnesses 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4F.  What kind of protection is the government able to provide for 
victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services does the 
government provide? Does it provide shelter or any other benefits to 
victims or other resources to aid the victims in rebuilding their 
lives? Where are child victims placed (e.g. in shelters, foster-care 
type systems or juvenile justice detention centers)? 
 
The government has no practical ability to protect witnesses at this 
time.  NGO shelters represent the safest place for witnesses during 
the trial phase of a case against a trafficker.  The government has 
been planning to expand facilities at the MOI to temporarily hold 
victims and witnesses but has not taken concrete action to do so. 
Police have no practical ability to protect NGOs, victims, or 
witnesses in high-profile cases.  NGOs fill the void by providing 
shelter and support to victims through vocational training and 
start-up capital to start businesses.  A number of shelters and 
foster home programs are available for child victims of trafficking. 
 
 
Despite some NGO-run shelters, such protection may not be adequate. 
For example, in one trafficking case in Sihanoukville, according to 
reports by several NGOs, after a suspected pedophile and his 
girlfriend who was a suspected trafficker were released from prison 
on bail, the girlfriend threatened the families of the victims and 
demanded the victims be returned to her. 
 
Government Training to RGC Officials for Victims 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
4G.  Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in recognizing trafficking and in the provision 
of assistance to trafficked victims, including the special needs of 
trafficked children?  Does the government provide training on 
protections and assistance to its embassies and consulates in 
foreign countries that are destination or transit countries?  Does 
it urge those embassies and consulates to develop ongoing 
relationships with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
 
The LEASEC project has a training component sensitizing police 
officials to the special needs surrounding the trafficking and 
sexual exploitation of children, including developing procedures and 
training police in investigating cases of sexual exploitation and 
trafficking in children, and court procedures. 
 
In terms of social services, UNICEF and IOM continued to provide 
technical assistance to build the capacity of government officials 
in victim assistance.  For example, an IOM-funded project helps the 
provincial Svay Rieng Department of Social Affairs provide services 
to vulnerable families so that their children are not trafficked to 
Vietnam to participate in child-begging. 
 
Embassies and consulates in foreign countries do not receive 
training or sensitization related to trafficking and victims 
assistance.  Cambodian NGOs working with Cambodian trafficking 
victims in Malaysia voice frustration over the RGC officials' 
indifference toward trafficked victims, as well as their lack of 
cooperation.  However, there are some Cambodian officials who are 
willing to cooperate with the NGOs and take a more proactive 
approach to helping Cambodian victims outside the country. 
 
Government Assistance to Repatriated Nationals 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000354  006 OF 007 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4H.  Does the government provide assistance, such as medical aid, 
shelter, or financial help, to its repatriated nationals who are 
victims of trafficking? 
 
In this area, the government relies heavily on international 
organizations, foreign and domestic NGOs, and other countries to 
provide medical aid and shelter to its repatriated nationals who are 
the victims of trafficking.  MOSAVY is mandated by the Cambodian 
government to provide care and protection to the most vulnerable 
population in the country, especially women and children, but in 
practice lacks the resources to do so without international or NGO 
assistance. 
 
Former King Sihanouk's email offer to personally assist overseas 
trafficked Cambodians may have generated more attention by Cambodian 
Embassies and consulates. 
 
International Organization and NGOs 
----------------------------------- 
 
4I.  Which international organization or NGOs, if any, work with 
trafficking victims?  What type of services do they provide?  What 
sort of cooperation do they receive from local authorities? 
 
Approximately 70 NGOs work on trafficking issues, and of those, 
roughly 40 NGOs provide some form of service to trafficking victims. 
 The services include shelter (which usually includes food, sleeping 
accommodations, basic health care, counseling, literacy, and 
sometimes vocational training), legal assistance, drop-in centers, 
and re-integration assistance.  Cambodian government cooperation 
with these NGOs is good. 
 
ILO/IPEC conducted an income generation project as a strategy 
against trafficking for labor migration in the provinces of Prey 
Veng, Kampong Cham and Svay Rieng.  The project ended in September 
¶2006.  World Education has identified similar pilot projects to 
focus on improving the socio-economic opportunities for girls to 
prevent their being trafficked. 
 
PACT-Cambodia began a three-year program in September 2004 for 
women's empowerment through micro-enterprise development.  Supported 
by the State Department's Women's Issues Fund, this program focused 
on rural literacy and math skills among populations identified in a 
2004 study as being most at risk for trafficking.  The second year 
of the program established village-led savings and investment 
programs for women. 
 
Heroes 
------- 
 
The NGO Action Pour Les Enfants (APLE) is focused on eradicating 
street-based sexual exploitation and arresting traveling child sex 
offenders in Cambodia.  As a result of APLE's work in 2006, 
Cambodian authorities arrested 21 child sex offenders and 
pedophiles.  The organization operates branches in Phnom Penh and 
Sihanoukville on a limited budget and is in the process of opening a 
new branch in Siem Riep.  APLE has built capacity with local police 
and judicial officials, acted as a watchdog on those same officials, 
facilitated greater involvement of foreign police officials, as well 
as provided legal representation to victims who would otherwise not 
be able to afford a lawyer. 
 
Best Practices 
-------------- 
 
The Childsafe program, managed by Friends International and jointly 
implemented by Friends and another NGO, M'Lop Tapang, has built a 
network of people who protect children in the cities of 
Sihanoukville, Phnom Penh, and Siem Riep.  In the beach resort of 
Sihanoukville, Childsafe relies on 36 moto-taxi drivers as well as 
25 employees of guesthouses.  These facilitators are trained in 
child protection skills; the training is funded by the British 
Embassy and sponsored by the Cambodian Ministry of Tourism.  Once 
trained, these facilitators are able to protect and support children 
at risk of trafficking and sexual abuse. 
 
Staff Time 
---------- 
 
Political Officers Margaret McKean and Gaurav Bansal drafted this 
submission and estimated that the drafting of this report required 
40 hours of staff time; separately a local FSN political assistant 
spent 30 hours helping draft this report.  Embassy POC for this 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000354  007 OF 007 
 
 
cable is Section Chief Margaret McKean (T. 855-023-728-125). 
 
Abbreviations used in this report: 
 
ADHOC: Association de Defense des Droit de l'Homme (Human 
Rights Defense Association) 
AFESIP: Agir pour les Femmes en Situation Precaire 
APLE: Action Pour Les Enfants 
ARCPPT: Asia Regional Cooperation to Prevent People 
Trafficking 
CDP: Cambodian Defender's Project 
CNCC: Cambodian National Council for Children 
CNCW: Cambodian National Council for Women 
COMMIT: Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against 
Trafficking 
CWCC: Cambodian Women's Crisis Center 
CWDA: Cambodian Women Development Agency 
DOSAVY:  Department of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation 
IJM: International Justice Mission 
ILEA: International Law Enforcement Academy 
ILO-IPEC: International Labor Organization-International 
Program on the Elimination of Child Labor 
IOM: International Organization for Migration 
LEASEC: Ministry of Interior Law Enforcement Against Sexual 
Exploitation of Children Project 
LSCW: Legal Support for Children and Women 
MOI: Ministry of Interior 
MOJ: Ministry of Justice 
MOSAVY: Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation 
MOLVT: Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training 
MOT: Ministry of Tourism 
MOWA: Ministry of Women's Affairs 
RGC: Royal Government of Cambodia 
RSJP: Royal School of Judges and Prosecutors 
SKK: Seva Kapiar Komar (Service for Protection of Children) 
UNOHCHR: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights 
UNDP: United Nations Development Program 
UNIAP: United Nations Inter-Agency Project Against 
Trafficking of Women and Children in the Mekong Sub-Region 
UNICEF: United Nations Children's Fund 
UNTAC: United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia 
USAID: United States Agency for International Development 
WMC: Women's Media Center 
 
 
CAMPBELL