07QUITO2434
ECUADOR: AMBASSADOR INAUGURATES NAS-FUNDED PIER
Wed Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #2434/01 3042054
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 312054Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7987
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 7022
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 2730
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ OCT LIMA 2054
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 2978
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 002434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SNAR EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR: AMBASSADOR INAUGURATES NAS-FUNDED PIER 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Ambassador Jewell participated in the 
inauguration of an approximately $3.4 million Narcotics 
Affairs Section (NAS) funded 435 meter pier for the 
Ecuadorian Navy in the northern city of San Lorenzo, 
Esmeraldas province, 10 miles south of the Colombian border, 
on October 23, 2007.  The pier will provide direct access to 
the rivers, estuaries and ocean at this strategically 
important location.  In the inauguration ceremony, the 
Ambassador was accompanied by Ecuador's Minister of Defense, 
Dr. Wellington Sandoval, admirals and other dignitaries, who 
praised the USG and GOE's commitment to counter narcotics. 
The presence of high level GOE and local officials at this 
event demonstrates the GOE's commitment to counter narcotics 
and the Ecuadorian public's concern about rising illicit drug 
activity, especially in the Northern border region.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The 435 meter NAS-funded pier, built for the 
Ecuadorian Navy at the 11th Marine Battalion of San Lorenzo 
(BIMLOR), will greatly enhance Ecuador's ability to fight 
narcotraffickers' use of the coastal waterways between 
Colombia and Ecuador.  The pier strengthens the ability of 
the Ecuadorian Navy and Coast Guard to patrol and control 
these waterways, as it provides 24 hour access to the 
waterways and refueling and maintenance capabilities that did 
not previously exist.  The project fits into the Mission's 
strategy to mobilize GOE military and police forces along the 
northern border.  Sharing a border with Colombia, the rivers, 
estuaries and ocean access of Esmeraldas province are of 
strategic importance for maritime traffickers.  Maritime 
counternarcotics cooperation with the GOE has improved under 
the Correa administration and is forcing traffickers to begin 
to shift transport strategies. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The inauguration ceremony was attended by Ecuador's 
Minister of Defense, Dr. Wellington Sandoval, and other 
military and civilian dignitaries.  Speaking on behalf of the 
Ecuadorian Navy during the ceremony, Commander Dario Ortega 
praised the construction of the pier, saying that it would 
"strengthen operations against narco-trafficking, trafficking 
of fuels and contraband, and improve the livelihood of the 
people in the region."  During the toast at the lunch 
following, Minister of Defense Sandoval expressed 
appreciation for the USG's contributions to counternarcotics 
in Ecuador and for bilateral cooperation. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ambassador Jewell emphasized in her remarks at the 
ceremony that the bilateral relationship has produced 
important results, that the increase in seizures and arrests 
has been accompanied by an increase in trafficking, and that 
we therefore must continue our cooperative fight against the 
illicit drug market.  The Ambassador further stressed the 
USG's commitment to the northern border through contributions 
in security as well as economic development programs and 
assistance to local governments. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Narcotics Affairs Section at the Embassy funded 
the pier project, which includes the pier deck and hammerhead 
that provide 483 lineal meters during high and low tides, and 
slips and fueling capabilities for eight 26-foot armed 
Ecuadorian Navy riverine patrol craft and one 82-foot patrol 
boat.  The project also consisted of an access road, fueling 
facilities, on-shore fueling dispensing unit, pier lights, 
and a boat-lift structure for patrol boat maintenance. 
Project costs totaled $3.4 million and took four years from 
beginning design to finish.  The project contract was awarded 
to the Ecuadorian company Construtec.  In addition to the 
pier, the Embassy provided three Proline river patrol boats 
($370,000) to the BIMLOR and has budgeted $2 million to 
strengthen Coast Guard control of Ecuadorian waterways. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In addition to Minister of Defense Sandoval, the 
inauguration ceremony was attended by Under Secretary of 
Defense General Jorge Pena, Ecuadorian Navy Commander Vice 
Admiral Homero Arellano, Ecuadorian Navy Chief of Staff Vice 
Admiral Luis Yepes, Commander of Northern Navy Operations 
Command of Esmeraldas (COOPNO) Captain Eduardo Vega, 
Commander of the 11th Marine Battalion of San Lorenzo 
(BIMLOR) Captain Dario Ortega, Esmeraldas Province Governor 
Ricardo Villacis, and San Lorenzo Mayor Gustavo Samaniego. 
 
¶7. (U) Press coverage of the visit was broad; all but one 
national TV network broadcast the story, and the print media 
carried follow-up stories.  Coverage was cautiously positive, 
communicating the message that the pier was a USG 
contribution to an Ecuadorian-controlled facility. 
 
¶8. (SBU) COMMENT:  While the Correa administration is highly 
sensitive to sovereignty issues, the attendance of both 
national and local government officials, as well as the 
comments by Defense Minister Sandoval and Ecuadorian Navy 
leadership, demonstrate the GOE's continued commitment to 
counter-narcotics and bilateral cooperation, as well as 
Ecuadorian concern about illicit activity along the northern 
border.  END COMMENT. 
 
JEWELL