07RABAT1265
MAGAZINES SEIZED AND EDITORS CONVOKED FOR DISRESPECTING THE
Tue Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO3565
RR RUEHDE
DE RUEHRB #1265/01 2191439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071439Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7111
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 4488
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 9350
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2129
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 0497
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0673
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 3303
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3352
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4708
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 3530
RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI 0103UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RABAT 001265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/PPD PAGNEW, NEA/MAG, NEA/PI, DRL, NEA/PA 
LONDON FOR MOC 
DUBAI FOR PELLETIER 
 
E.0.12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL KDEM EAID PHUM KMPI MO
SUBJECT: MAGAZINES SEIZED AND EDITORS CONVOKED FOR DISRESPECTING THE 
KING AND ISLAM 
 
¶1. (U) This message is sensitive but unclassified; please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2. (U) Summary: Moroccan authorities seized, on orders of PM Jettou, 
the most recent editions of TelQuel and Nichane, weekly current 
affairs magazines on August 4 for violating laws that forbid 
criticism of the monarchy and cause offense to public morality and 
Islam. The seized issues published an editorial critical of the 
King's Throne ay speech in which he stated that the upcoming 
prliamentary elections would strengthen Moroccan deocracy, and an 
article on sex in Islamic culture.  Ahmed Benchemsi a former IV, who 
directs both mgazines and a college, has been questioned several 
times by police and prosecutors, but is not yet ormally charged. 
Their printer was also interrogted. Observers speculate that the 
seizure of the Nichane and TelQuel issues may reflect the 
governent's intent to erode press freedom prior to the ucoming 
parliamentary elections.  We are deeply cncerned given the key 
role of the press role inthe democracy and reform process in 
Morocco.  EndSummary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
TELQUEL/NICHANE PUSH THE ENVELOPE, AGAIN 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. On Augut 4, 2007, Moroccan authorities seized the proofs f 
French-language current affairs magazine TelQue (circulation 
25,000) before it went to print an pulled copies of Nichane 
(circulation 10,000), ts Arabic-language sister publication, from 
newstands.  The GOM accuses the publications of violatng laws that 
forbid criticism of the monarchy andIslam by printing articles 
disrespectful of the King and offensive to public morality. Ahmed 
Benchemsi, who directs both magazines and is a longtime critic of 
the King, was questioned by police for four hours in Casablanca on 
August 4 and remained in police custody until the early morning 
hours of August 5.  He has since been called back twice although 
formal charges are not yet filed.  He has been instructed to remain 
available for further questioning.  Authorities lso summoned 
Redouane Ramdani, Editor-in-Chief o Nichane for questioning. 
TelQuel and Nichane boh have a history of attracting government 
ire. For example, in January 2007, Nichane was shut down for two 
months after it published jokes the government and courts deemed 
offensive to Islam, prompting the eventual resignation of its then 
editor Driss Ksikes, who received a suspended sentence of three 
years. 
 
------------------------------- 
ELECTIONS DON'T EQUAL DEMOCRACY 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. The confiscated issues of Nichane and TelQuel included several 
articles critical of the King, including an editorial on the King's 
Throne Day speech by Ahmed Benchemsi entitled "What are you saying 
Master?"  In the editorial, Benchemsi claimed that the September 7 
parliamentary elections are "meaningless in a country where the King 
wields near absolute power." His statement directly contradicts the 
King's assessment in his Throne Day speech that the election would 
strengthen Moroccan democracy. Benchemsi also called into question 
the King's assertion that suffrage is "not to decide on the form of 
government because there is already a consensus that matter."  In 
addition, he opined that the King should not have jurisdiction over 
all three branches of power. 
 
----------------------------- 
A CHANGE IN TONE AND LANGUAGE 
----------------------------- 
¶5. Nichane also published an article entitled "Vote, God Bless You!" 
signed by its Editor-in-Chief Redouane Ramdani.  The article asserts 
that the King's discourse regarding the 2007 parliamentary elections 
has changed over time and now seeks to maintain the status quo. 
According to the article, in October 2006, the King called upon all 
parties "to respect the voters, to be clear and transparent in their 
speeches, and to select the best candidates to represent their 
constituencies."  However, in the Throne Day speech, the article 
states, the King expressed satisfaction with the political parties 
and no longer urged them to protect the interest of the people. 
Instead, Ramdani quotes the King as saying "he [the King] will 
confront those who doubt the usefulness of elections and attempt to 
 
RABAT 00001265  002 OF 003 
 
 
undermine their credibility." This is now put into action. 
 
------------------------------- 
WHERE ARE WE AFTER EIGHT YEARS? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The seized edition of Nichane also included an article by 
Benchemsi entitled "Where are you taking us, Brother? with the 
subtitle: "I speak and you obey." The article offers a critical 
assessment of the reign of Mohammed VI, stating "Moroccans had great 
expectations after Mohammed VI took power, but are disappointed 
eight years later."  Benchemsi claims that the only important 
achievement of the King was the Moudawana law governing the rights 
of women. 
 
----------------------------- 
WHAT'S SEX GOT TO DO WITH IT? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. Nichane also published an article on sex in the Arab world 
entitled "Sex in Islamic Culture," which included photographs of 
orientalist paintings of nude women. The article discuss the taboo 
subjects of the sex lives of married couples, homosexuality, and the 
Prophet's statements about sexual relations saying, "he [the 
Prophet] talked openly about the most intimate sexual relationships 
between men an women." Although the subject matter of the article is 
controversial in this conservative Muslim country, knowledgeable 
observers point out that Nichane and TelQuel have written on this 
topic in the past without government intervention.  Most 
commentators, we have spoken to, believe this article alone would 
not have prompted the authorities to seize the edition, leading some 
to assert that criticism of the King is the only steadfast taboo. In 
response to the move against the printer, the press union (SNPM) has 
called for a work stoppage today. 
 
----------------------- 
ARE SEIZURES JUSTIFIED? 
----------------------- 
 
¶8. In a communique issued on August 4, Prime Minister Driss Jettou 
stated that the magazines were seized because they published 
articles that violate laws that make it illegal to publish articles 
that are disrespectful of the monarchy, discredit Islam or are 
offensive to public morality.  In response to the confiscation of 
the publications, Youness M'Jahed, President of the Moroccan Union 
of Journalists (SNPM), denounced the seizures as censorship and 
asserted that the articles do not harm the monarchy or offend Islam. 
 In addition, independent Arabic-language daily Al Massae published 
a front-page editorial on August 6 that denounced the seizure as 
undemocratic and accused the authorities as unduly restricting press 
freedom. 
 
-------------------------- 
PRESS FREEDOM UNDER THREAT 
-------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Observers speculate that the seizure of the Nichane and 
TelQuel issues when considered in light of government-led legal 
action in recent months against publications and journalists may 
reflect a GOM strategy to erode press freedom prior to the September 
parliamentary elections.  The seizure follows a long list of GOM 
acts of censorship and restrictions on press freedoms that have 
already been reported.  For example, as of August 6, the weekly 
French-language daily Le Journal Hebdo suspended publishing until it 
receives authorization from authorities in Rabat.  On July 17, 
Abderrahmim Ariri, the director of Al Watan, was arrested for 
publishing a military document on Morocco's terrorist alert level 
and is currently awaiting trial.  The Al Watan case drew strong 
international condemnation from watchdog organizations like 
Reporters Without Borders (RSF) and the Committee to Protect 
Journalists (CPJ).  In addition, CPJ issued a report in May that 
listed Morocco as one of ten worst backsliders on media freedom. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
RABAT 00001265  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Benchemsi is a well-known and respected journalist, who 
has a reputation for pushing the boundaries of press freedom against 
Morocco's relatively open press.  The current crackdown on press 
freedom in the lead-up to the September parliamentary elections is 
matter of concern.  Despite widespread local and international 
condemnation, the government of Morocco continues to take steps that 
hinder the exercise of press freedom. We are deeply concerned about 
this development and are considering how to engage the GOM, 
particularly in light of R and other senior visits and pending MCC 
signing.