07RIGA92
Latvian parliament approves border treaty on first reading;
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Riga
VZCZCXRO6477
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHRA #0092 0331436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021436Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY RIGA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3745
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RIGA 000092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PBTS RS LG
SUBJECT: Latvian parliament approves border treaty on first reading; 
second on February 8 
 
Ref: Riga 53 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Latvia's Saeima (parliament) voted 65 - 26 on 
February 1 to authorize the government to sign the border treaty 
with Russia that has been pending since 1997.  This was only the 
first reading and the bill will have to pass again on February 8 
before it is final.  However, the nearly ten hours of debate, 
including all the leaders of the country, provide an opportunity for 
a full airing of views on an issue that has been neuralgic for the 
Latvian body politic.  The second reading will allow for amendments 
and it is not expected that there will be as many votes in favor, 
but it should still pass.  Whether Russia will agree to sign remains 
an open question, although the Latvians feel they are hearing 
encouraging noises from Moscow.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Latvia's parliament February 1 debated legislation to 
authorize the government to sign the Latvia - Russia border treaty. 
While parliamentary authorization is not required, the government 
sought it to assuage Moscow that the flap over the May 2005 
unilateral declaration would not be repeated (reftel).  Although the 
debate lasted for ten hours (with plenty of breaks), most of the 
suspense ended with a 63 - 26 vote at the top of the debate to 
consider the bill under urgent procedures. This means only two 
readings in parliament are needed , vice the normal three, and 
reduces the opportunities for amendments. 
 
¶3. (U) President Vike-Freiberga opened the debate, the first time 
Saeima watchers can remember a president addressing the chamber on a 
specific piece of legislation.  PM Kalvitis, FM Pabriks and other 
members of the cabinet also spoke, with Kalvitis sitting through the 
entire debate. 
 
¶4. (U) The debate was colorful at time, but largely covered the same 
ground over and over again.  The ultra-nationalists accused the 
government of accepting the Soviet occupation of Latvia while the 
names Molotov-Ribbentrop, Hitler, Stalin and Brezhnev were 
frequently invoked.  One member, perhaps the most right wing in 
parliament, charged that those supporting signing the treaty would 
be guilty of giving away Latvia's territory, which carries penalties 
of three - five years in prison.  Main opposition party New Era said 
it supported the treaty but argued that constitutionally the 
government needed a referendum before it could formally acquiesce in 
the separation of the Abrene region from Latvia's territory.  The 
government and its supporters claimed that signing the treaty would 
bring a range of benefits - everything from lifting the Russian ban 
on the importation of Latvian sprats, to reducing the lines of 
trucks at the Latvian/Russian border, even keeping Latvians from 
seeking work in Ireland (and attracting back those who have already 
left)!  More seriously, supporters stressed that it was important to 
fulfill Latvia's commitment on joining the EU and NATO that it had 
no unresolved territorial claims and was ready to sign the treaty. 
 
¶5. (U) One moment of drama came when the government nearly lost a 
vote to extend the session past the normal end time of five pm. 
Once that was overcome, debate extended another two and a half hours 
before the final vote of 65 - 26 was taken.  The bill will now 
return for a second reading on February 8, when amendments can be 
offered, but debate will be much shorter. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment:  This was a big win for PM Kalvitis, but he is far 
from finished.  Several members voting for the bill today, 
especially from ethic Russian based parties, explicitly stated they 
were doing so to be able to offer amendments on the second reading. 
Some of these are likely to be poison pills for the government, but 
government reps were cautiously optimistic that they could defeat 
the worst ones.  One ethnic Russian MP told pol/econ chief that his 
party would have to support the bill on second reading no matter 
what, but they also needed to try for some amendments to remove 
references to the continuity of the Latvian state - a non-starter 
for the vast majority in parliament.  The nationalists, meanwhile, 
can be expected to offer amendments explicitly citing the Soviet 
occupation, which would be anathema to Russia.  The government will 
need to try to hold the center.  If it wins the second vote, then 
the issue is whether Russia will agree to sign.  Representatives of 
the MFA and PM's office at the February 1 session said they were 
hearing positive noises from Moscow, but cautioned of the 
possibility of a last minute change in position. 
 
ANTWEILER