07SHANGHAI344
JOURNALISTS ON SOCIAL CHALLENGES AND PROSPECTS FOR POLITICAL
Tue Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO5340
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0344/01 1560827
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050827Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0155
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1168
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0719
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0699
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0721
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0829
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0591
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 6322UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHANGHAI 000344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, EAP/PD, EAP/P 
STATE PASS USTR FOR STRATFORD, WINTER, MCCARTIN, ALTBACH 
USDOC FOR ITA/MAC - DAS KASOFF, MELCHER, MCQUEEN 
TREASURY FOR AMB. HOLMER, WRIGHT, T. SMITH 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - CUSHMAN, WINSHIP, HAARSAGER, DOHNER 
DOL FOR ILAB - LI ZHAO 
HHS FOR STEIGER AND HICKEY 
NSC FOR WILDER AND TONG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR SOCI ECON ELAB CH
SUBJECT: JOURNALISTS ON SOCIAL CHALLENGES AND PROSPECTS FOR POLITICAL 
REFORMS 
 
(U) Sensitive but unclassified - please protect accordingly. 
Not for dissemination outside USG channels. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  A May 18 Consulate-sponsored roundtable 
between visiting Western and Asian journalists participating in 
the East-West Center-organized Jefferson Fellowship Program, 
Chinese journalists, and Shanghai-based U.S. journalists sparked 
lively debate on China's rich-poor gap, the one-child policy, 
the generation gap, democracy, and press freedom.  While one 
Chinese journalist took the party line and said that two-party 
democracy was not needed in China, other journalists argued for 
faster political reforms.  Chinese journalists agreed that 
Chinese leaders needed to address the growing rich-poor gap, 
which one journalist referred to as "a time bomb." 
Shanghai-based U.S. journalists noted the difficulties they 
faced in meeting with anyone connected with the government and 
in covering political and social issues.  End Summary. 
 
Rich-Poor Gap Time Bomb 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Chinese journalists participating in the 
roundtable discussion agreed that the growing rich-poor gap was 
one of China's biggest challenges.  One journalist who worked 
for a government-owned newspaper in Shanghai said that although 
the gap was widening, the poorest sector of society was better 
off now then it was 20 years ago.  He added that the Hu Jintao 
government was making great efforts to improve the situation of 
the poor.  For example, the central government had abolished 
taxes for farmers and was trying to improve healthcare for rural 
peasants.  He noted that there was a growing problem of 
"left-behind" children who remained in the countryside while 
their parents traveled to the city to find work.  He estimated 
that there were 20 million such "left-behind" children in China. 
 He said that the government was trying to alleviate this 
situation by building daycare centers in big cities to allow 
parents to bring their children with them and that there were 
also new policies in some big cities (such as Shanghai) that 
required local public schools to accept migrant children.  He 
noted, however, that despite government efforts at integration, 
migrant workers and the rural poor were still the underclass of 
Chinese society. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Another Shanghai journalist described the Chinese 
healthcare system as having effectively "crashed" with the 
advent of economic reforms.  The government was trying to 
rebuild the rural healthcare system, he said, but this was 
occurring at a very slow pace.  In the city, residents had 
healthcare, but there were limits built into even that system. 
According to him, the rich-poor gap was a "time bomb" because 
the countryside was not benefiting as much from China's economic 
development as the urban areas and many in the countryside were 
being forgotten and left-behind.  In Shanghai, there were three 
to four million migrant workers.  If Shanghai's construction 
boom stopped, one million of those workers would be out of work, 
which could lead to chaos. 
 
One-Child Policy Burden 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The young Chinese journalists in the group 
acknowledged that the one-child policy had placed a great burden 
on the younger generation.  One said that she was her parents 
"one bet."  She was the only person her parents could turn to if 
they got sick.  In the past, children could share the burden of 
taking care of their parents, but now the parents only had one 
child to take care of them.  One journalist said that she had to 
save money not only to provide her child with an education, but 
also to hire people to take care of her parents when they became 
older. 
 
 
SHANGHAI 00000344  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Generation Gap 
-------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) According to one young Chinese journalist present, 
there was a generation gap between younger (20-somethings) and 
older (40-somethings) adults in China.  She said there did not 
appear to be any basic foundation on which people of different 
generations could talk.  Young people complained on Internet 
websites and in chatrooms about the generation of people born in 
the 1960's.  They called this generation the "lost generation" 
and complained that it had made many mistakes that young people 
now had to live with.  They said that Chinese websites were 
filled with complaints and anxieties about the future.  The 
journalist added that such postings were constantly being 
deleted by the censors, but that they always came back again and 
again. 
 
Democracy Now or Later 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Chinese journalists heatedly debated the need for 
democracy in China.  A young journalist from Beijing, herself a 
Jefferson Fellow, said that she personally believed that there 
would be no political structural changes in China in the next 
ten years.  The situation in China was very different from the 
United States, she said, and a two-party political system was 
not suitable for China.  Citing the Tang and Han dynasties, she 
said China traditionally had a one-party system and what was 
needed was for the Party to be more transparent and democratic. 
A young journalist from Shanghai warned that there were costs to 
establishing democracy in China.  In a country with so many poor 
people, it was unclear who in China would be willing to pay the 
costs needed to establish a democracy. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Another young journalist from Shanghai disagreed 
vehemently and said that one could not say that Chinese people 
did not like democracy or that democracy was against Chinese 
tradition.  She defined democracy to mean "a system in which 
people could participate in the decision-making process."  She 
added that democracy was not a unique Western concept and said 
it was important for China to implement reforms immediately, 
albeit gradually.  According to her, China's current one-party 
system was not working.  In her view, there were no saints or 
philosopher kings in the world; everyone was human and 
governments needed checks and balances.  She said there was 
already a great deal of tension among peasants in China and, 
unless something was done to address their needs, there would be 
violence. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) A 40-something Shanghai journalist shared a similar 
view.  He said while democracy was not efficient, it was at 
least fair.  He said there was no need to organize a revolution, 
but reforms needed to be implemented gradually to address some 
of China's social problems.  Another 40-something Shanghai 
journalist said that he was very optimistic that there would be 
democratic reforms in China in the future.  He said the Chinese 
government was pushing many democratic measures and he felt that 
President Hu Jintao wanted democracy.  He added that there had 
already been progress in this area, noting that when he had 
attended a Consulate discussion with the Jefferson Fellows in 
2005, journalists were not willing to debate such topics.  The 
lively and open debate at this session was a testament to the 
increased openness in China. 
 
Press Freedom Limited 
--------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Shanghai-based U.S. journalists briefed participants 
on the media environment in Shanghai.  One said that while it 
was relatively easy for Western journalists to meet with 
business people and Chinese counterparts in the press in 
 
SHANGHAI 00000344  003 OF 003 
 
 
Shanghai, it was very difficult to meet with anyone connected 
with the government, including in state-owned enterprises.  In 
these cases, journalists could not go directly to the government 
offices or companies for interviews, but had to instead go 
through the Foreign Affairs Office (FAO), which often resulted 
in requests for interviews being declined.  She added that a 
journalist must be very inventive in Shanghai to get access to 
information.  Another U.S. journalist agreed and said that it 
was much easier to cover economic issues in Shanghai than 
political or social issues.  He said that he had heard of cases 
in which emails were intercepted or sources were told not to 
talk to journalists.  The U.S. journalists also made mention of 
the relatively new regulations that allowed foreign journalists 
to travel freely in China to cover Olympics-related news. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) This discussion among journalists was interesting not 
only for its candor, but for the differences in views expressed 
on China's future between 20-somethings and 40-somethings.  The 
younger journalists admitted that their only-child generation 
tended to be self-centered and to think first about the impact 
of any change on their own lives.  Their 40-year-old 
counterparts, in contrast, were from a more idealistic 
generation that still held out hope for the traditional Chinese, 
step-by-step approach to gradual change.  Similarly on the 
rich-poor gap, the two groups' views split along generational 
lines with the younger group foreseeing imminent unrest and the 
older group confident that the government was taking appropriate 
measures to avert a crisis.  In all, the discussion provided the 
visiting Jefferson Fellows with insights into the lives of 
average Chinese of two very different generations and proved an 
useful forum for eliciting a variety of opinions on China's 
current social challenges and prospects for political reforms 
JARRETT