07SHANGHAI357
DRL OFFICER CHANG EAST CHINA VISIT
Fri Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO9352
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0357/01 1590717
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080717Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5926
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1182
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0730
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0710
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0732
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0840
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0602
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 6346UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHANGHAI 000357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, DRL/PRU 
LABOR FOR ILAB - ZHAO LI 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN, MELCHER AND DAS KASOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ELAB KJUS CH
SUBJECT: DRL OFFICER CHANG EAST CHINA VISIT 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  During his May 21-24 visit to Shanghai and 
Hefei, Anhui Province, DRL Program Officer met with DRL grantee 
organizations International Bridges for Justice (IBJ) and SE 
Consortium for International Development/Global Suppliers 
Institute (SECID/GSI), as well as academics and students at 
Fudan University Journalism School and the Shanghai Municipal 
People's Congress (SMPC) Legislative Affairs Office.  While IBJ 
appeared to be thriving in Anhui and having some impact on legal 
aid in the area, SECID/GSI had just begun its training programs 
and had not yet assessed the effect of the program on labor 
practices of local suppliers.  Fudan University Journalism 
School and SMPC were generally pleased with their cooperation 
with the U.S.-China Educational Trust (USCET) but wanted more 
depth of content in their activities.  SMPC provided a briefing 
on its efforts to increase transparency through public hearings 
and said it was were eager for more exchanges with U.S. 
counterparts. End Summary. 
 
IBJ Legal Aid Project 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Chang and Consulate FSN Rule of Law Coordinator (ROLC) 
visited IBJ offices in Hefei, Anhui province on May 21 and met 
with four local lawyers trained by IBJ.  IBJ provides training 
and mentoring to a core team of private and governmental legal 
aid lawyers in Anhui Province, who then pass on this training to 
colleagues.  The lawyers at the meeting praised IBJ's project 
and said that the training they received had helped them to 
improve their criminal defense skills.  They added that this 
training was having an impact in Anhui as more and more legal 
aid lawyers received training. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Cheng and ROLC also visited the Hefei Municipal Legal 
Aid Center and received a briefing from the Center's Director 
and Hefei Bar Association Criminal Defense Chairman Liu Tao. 
Liu said that the Legal Aid Center's cooperation with IBJ had 
been very helpful and the center had opened an office at the 
local detention center to provide free legal advice to people 
detained at the center.  He added that his office not only 
provided legal aid for people in Hefei, but also provided legal 
services to migrant workers from Hefei who were working outside 
the city.  For example, he assisted a migrant who stood trial in 
Hangzhou.  Liu added that the center has had to limit the number 
of migrant worker cases it could accept since such cases were 
very costly.  He said the center's biggest challenge was finding 
financial support for its operations. 
 
SECID/GSI: Waiting For an Assessment 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On May 22, State DRL Program Officer Samuel Chang, 
Consulate's Poloff and FSN Political Assistant visited 
South-East Consortium for International Development's (SECID) 
Global Supplier Institute (GSI) China Project office in 
Shanghai.  GSI Senior Project Manager Stella Wang briefed 
participants on the project.  She said the purpose of the 
project was to provide training to companies operating in China, 
particularly those supplying products to multinational companies 
(MNCs), on how to improve their business and labor practices. 
GSI contracted Suzhou-based educational investment consulting 
company BOLD to provide the training.  GSI had contracts with 
three companies in Changzhou, Suzhou, and Wuxi. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Before the training began, GSI had performed on-site 
assessments to determine the companies' training needs.  Both 
sides then worked together to design "tailor-made" training. 
For example, GSI ran three programs at a Changzhou-based garden 
tool company including visual management, quality control and 
production standardization to improve workplace safety.  For the 
Suzhou digital technology company, the program focused on how to 
improve workplace ergonomics and reduce overtime.  After the 
training program was decided, GSI agreed to deliver a package of 
services to the companies, including three on-site assessments, 
a six-day customize training program, and, at least six progress 
reviews.  The training cycle lasted six months.  Wang said that 
all three projects were still in the initial stages and there 
were no assessments yet on the projects effectiveness. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) GSI team assigned to a company consisted of a trainer 
and at least two interns.  The interns were recruited from local 
graduate schools and all had an undergraduate background in 
 
SHANGHAI 00000357  002 OF 003 
 
 
engineering.  The interns worked with the trainers to collect 
data and monitor how well the companies implemented concepts or 
practices they learned from the training.  The intern program 
lasted 12 weeks and interns spent two days a week on the 
project, providing project updates every two weeks.  Wang was 
very proud of the internship program and said it provided many 
interns with hands-on management experience.  She hoped that 
these interns would take the skills they learned during the 
internship and apply them at their future jobs as factory 
managers. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) According to Wang, GSI had developed a productive 
relationship with local governments and the American Chamber of 
Commerce (AmCham) in Shanghai.  Wang said Suzhou Industry Park 
Administrative Committee encouraged companies to attend GSI 
training because it believed the training would increase 
productivity.  AmCham's Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
and Government Relations Manager Oliver Ye Yang added that 
Amcham companies were interested in the project since it could 
help suppliers meet labor standards.  He noted, however, that 
Amcham companies were still waiting to see the results of the 
assessments before signing on.  Yang was also concerned that the 
project appeared to be limited in scope.  Currently, the project 
focused on high-tech or equipment manufacturing companies.  Yang 
said it was unlikely that the more labor-intensive industries 
such as the textile sector would be interested in such a program 
as there was intense pressure on these types of companies to 
skirt labor laws to produce cheap goods at low prices. Although 
the training would increase productivity, most companies in the 
textile sector were focused on cost issues.  He noted that local 
governments were more interested in auditing or inspections, GDP 
growth and tax revenue.  As long as companies passed 
governmental audits, labor violations could be tolerated.  Wang 
and BOLD Training Director CK Tan admitted that GSI's approach 
to addressing labor violations was indirect but maintained that 
it would ultimately improve workplace conditions. 
 
Shanghai Municipal People's Congress 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) SMPC Legislative Affairs Commission provided a 
briefing on its cooperation with USCET and its efforts to 
increase public participation.  SMPC Legislative Affairs 
Commission Vice Secretary General Zheng Hui generally praised 
USCET and Ambassador Julia Bloch.  He said that in cooperation 
with USCET, Fudan University Professor Sun Zhe and Peking 
University Professor Cai Dingjian, SMPC held an international 
conference last year on Mine Safety Legislation at Fudan 
University.  Conference participants included representatives 
from 16 provincial people's congresses, the National People's 
Congress, the State Council and U.S. mine safety experts.  Zheng 
said the conference was successful and useful.  The SMPC even 
broadcasted a mock trial of a case using U.S. mine safety 
legislation on its website, which received lots of good 
comments.  Representatives appreciated the conference and the 
Chongqing People's Congress held a similar conference on 
Consumer Rights Protection this April.  SMPC was currently 
discussing with USCET the possibility of holding an 
international conference on energy saving and environmental 
protection in 2008.  Zheng said that the purpose of the 
exchanges was not to transplant American experiences or systems 
into China.  U.S. and Chinese cultures were quite different and 
two countries' democratic processes were also different. 
However, it was important to broaden legislators' knowledge 
about the experiences and practices of other countries.  Despite 
the positive aspects of cooperation with USCET, Zheng noted that 
USCET's programs were somewhat "ABC-ish" in nature and needed to 
be deeper in content rather than reintroducing basics. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Noting Shanghai's Open Government Information Act, 
Zheng said open information was a crucial basis of the rule of 
law and transparent government.  Governments should be open, 
otherwise they would become "tyrant" governments.  He added that 
Premier Wen Jiabao also stressed the importance of open 
government information.  The SMPC held public hearings on draft 
legislation five times this year.  These drafts dealt with the 
protection of historical buildings, greening the city, labor 
contracts, and school safety.   SMPC held four additional 
hearings, which he called "supervisory" hearings, to solicit 
views from the community on the work of local government 
agencies.  Zheng said that the latest supervisory hearing was 
 
SHANGHAI 00000357  003 OF 003 
 
 
about employment promotion?.  According to Zheng, citizens had 
to register and be selected by the SMPC to attend these 
hearings.  The government often took out ads in local newspapers 
or posted information on the hearings on its websites.  Local 
citizens could then register for the hearings and SMPC would 
hold a lottery to select participants.  Zheng noted that only 
10-15 citizens were allowed to attend each hearing. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) According to Zheng, Shanghai was able to implement a 
large number of experimental projects for three reasons.  First, 
China's new administrative punishment law provided the legal 
basis for public hearings.  Secondly, many people in the 
Legislative Affairs Commission were legal experts and professors 
and they brought many advanced ideas to the commission.  Third, 
Shanghai's Municipal Government had the courage and willingness 
to make changes and carry out experimental projects.  Both Zheng 
and SMPC Foreign Affairs Office Director Xiang Yang expressed 
their strong interest in having more cooperation and exchanges. 
Xiang hoped that there would be more cooperation between U.S. 
legislative bodies and the SMPC.  SMPC was particularly 
interested in having exchanges on how to strengthen 
Congressional bodies' control of governmental budgets.  Xiang 
added that SMPC employees already had basic knowledge of U.S. 
laws and regulations and what was really needed was more 
detailed and technical information about U.S. legal practices. 
 
Fudan University Journalism School 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Fudan University Journalism School Dean Yu Zhenwei 
and Program Assistant Li Na were effusive about the school's 
relationship with USCET.  Two journalism students who 
participated in the USCET programs also attended the meeting. 
According to Li, Fudan had two programs with USCET, Journalist 
In Residence (JIR) and Financial Media Institute (FMI).  Under 
the JIR program, USCET paid for a high-level U.S. journalist to 
lecture at Chinese universities, including Fudan University. 
Former JIR Journalists included David Broder and William 
Raspberry.  Li and the journalism students were pleased with the 
JIR program and the access it provided students with to meet 
high-level U.S. journalists.  They had no preferences on the 
type of journalist they wanted to participate in the program and 
could not provide any concrete recommendations for what type of 
information they needed about journalism in the United States. 
All they wanted was a well-known journalist that could attract a 
large crowd.  The FMI program focused on financial reporting. 
One student said that the FMI taught him more about 
professionalism and helped him to appreciate the differences 
between American and Chinese journalism but was limited in its 
impact because it lasted only ten days. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Another journalism student noted that the most 
surprising thing he learned from the programs was that there was 
also censorship or at least self-censorship in the United States 
because many journalists chose not to write about certain issues 
during the Iraq war.  She also said she learned that journalists 
should think creatively and write about issues in which they 
were personally interested.  She noted that it was difficult for 
students in China to think creatively because they were used to 
just accepting information from superiors, such as the 
government and their parents.  Dean Yu, Li and the students all 
played down the role of the Internet on the media and said that 
they did not believe much of the information on the Internet. 
They agreed that Chinese journalists should be better paid to 
avoid the common practice of taking hongbao, or cash-filled 
envelopes, for favorable press coverage. 
 
¶13.  (U) DRL/P Chang cleared this message. 
JARRETT