07STATE132715
GUIDANCE FOR SEPTEMBER 20 UNSC OPEN DEBATE ON THE
Thu Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0026
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2715 2631649
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201635Z SEP 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 132715 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPAL IS LE
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR SEPTEMBER 20 UNSC OPEN DEBATE ON THE 
MIDDLE EAST 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) USUN is instructed to draw from the following 
points in its statement at the September 20 UNSC open 
debate on the Middle East. 
 
-- Mr. President, a two state solution to the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains a key priority of 
President Bush.  The ongoing bilateral dialogue between 
Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas is key to 
achieving meaningful progress on a successful path to 
Palestinian statehood.  We were pleased to see as a 
product of this dialogue the recent decision  by the two 
sides to create negotiating teams that will memorialize 
their understandings so that the creation of a Palestinian 
state can move forward. 
 
-- To demonstrate U.S. commitment to this process, and to 
build on progress being made through these bilateral 
talks, Secretary Rice is visiting Jerusalem and Ramallah 
September 19-20 for meetings with Israeli and Palestinian 
leaders. 
 
-- The United States will continue to work with the 
parties and the international community with the goal of 
realizing President Bush's vision of two states, Israel 
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. 
 
-- We look forward to the Quartet meeting, planned for 
September 23 here in New York, as well as the subsequent 
dinner the Quartet will have with members of the Arab 
League, following up on a previous meeting in Sharm 
al-Sheikh earlier this year. 
 
-- We also look forward to the international meeting 
planned for later this year, announced by President Bush 
on July 16. The purpose of these events is to lend 
international and regional diplomatic support to the 
parties' own efforts to resolve their differences. 
 
-- At the same time, there is an urgent need for financial 
support for the Palestinians.  We look forward to a 
constructive and productive Ad Hoc Liaison Committee 
meeting on September 24, and urge all countries to provide 
the maximum contribution they can to support the 
Palestinians. 
 
-- We welcome initial steps by the parties to meet 
previous commitments and to effect changes on the ground, 
and encourage continued steps to build confidence and 
create a positive atmosphere, including by responsible 
regional states. 
 
-- As Secretary Rice has said, "we will not abandon the 
 
1.5 million Palestinians in Gaza and indeed will make 
every effort to deal with their humanitarian needs." We 
remain troubled by the violent takeover in Gaza by Hamas, 
a terrorist organization, which has stifled freedom of 
speech and the press since taking control of Gaza.  We 
continue to call for an end to rocket fire against 
Israel.  Secretary Rice has also said, we "view Gaza and 
the West Bank as constituent entities of a future 
Palestinian state.  The legitimate government of Gaza is 
ultimately that of the Palestinian Authority." 
 
-- We call on Hamas to curb illegal smuggling of weapons into 
Gaza, to curtail the activities of terrorist groups within Gaza 
 
such as Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and to end its own terrorist 
activities. 
 
LEBANON/SYRIA 
 
--  The U.S. condemns in the strongest possible terms 
yesterday's assassination of yet another Lebanese 
Parliamentarian, Antoine Ghanem.  We call for an immediate 
end to the use of intimidation tactics and violence as 
tools to subvert the democratic process in Lebanon. 
 
--  As Secretary Rice said yesterday, the "attack is yet 
another incident in an ongoing campaign of targeted 
assassinations of Lebanese leaders who have worked to 
promote a sovereign and democratic Lebanon free from 
Syrian influence." 
 
-- Lebanese elections, which are scheduled to begin within 
days, must be allowed to occur without threats and foreign 
interference, and must be free, fair, and held on-time and 
according to the Lebanese Constitution. 
 
--  We urge Lebanese parliamentarians to fulfill their 
constitutional duty to vote for a new president. This is 
what the Lebanese people deserve. 
 
-- The Lebanese Armed Forces demonstrated courage and 
resolve in their fight against Fatah al-Islam fighters. 
 
--  We urge all member states to continue generous 
assistance to Lebanon as it secures its territory against 
terrorist groups like this one and addresses the needs of 
those affected by the fighting. 
 
--  The U.S. expedited over 40 plane loads of military 
assistance to Lebanon during the operation and will 
continue to provide significant military support.   On 
September 10, we pledged an additional $10 million to 
UNWRA to assist displaced Palestinian refugees from Nahr 
Al-Bared and host families, both Lebanese and 
Palestinian.  In addition, to assist the Lebanese 
communities surrounding Nahr Al-Bared, we will immediately 
provide $100,000 for urgent needs and will review ongoing 
assistance in northern Lebanon to provide additional 
long-term resources.  This is in addition to our pledge of 
$3.5 million made to UNRWA's Flash Appeal immediately 
following the start of the 
operation. 
 
--  We remain deeply concerned by on-going illegal weapons 
shipments across the Lebanon/Syria border and urge all 
parties to assist the Lebanese government to secure its 
borders. 
 
--  We continue to call on Syria and Iran to cease their 
destabilizing tactics in Lebanon.  The Lebanese must 
select their next president without foreign interference 
and Iran and Syria must stop their ongoing weapons shipments 
to terrorists and armed groups within Lebanon. 
RICE