07WELLINGTON304
NEW ZEALAND: PROPOSAL TO HOST SCIENCE FELLOW
Sun Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0304/01 1051918
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151918Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4143UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/ANP DRICCI AMD OES/STC SHART 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSCA TSPL SENV AMGT OTRA APER NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND: PROPOSAL TO HOST SCIENCE FELLOW 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 30914 
     ¶B. WELLINGTON 108 
     ¶C. WELLINGTON 36 
     ¶D. 06 WELLINGTON 670 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: As part of the 2007 Embassy Science Fellow 
Program, Embassy Wellington proposes to host for three months 
a USG scientist with research interests in biofuels and 
associated renewable energy technologies.  Familiarity with 
hydrogen, geothermal and marine (wave and tidal) technologies 
would also be highly desirable. Having a fellow able to 
increase contacts with the GNZ in these areas as well as 
promote public understanding of the importance of US-NZ 
scientific cooperation would help our post meet some of its 
key Mission Strategic Plan goals.  It would also help us make 
further progress under the 2002 U.S.-New Zealand bilateral 
climate change partnership.  The GNZ would enthusiastically 
welcome such a fellow as well.  Biofuels and bioenergy are 
identified as strategic priorities in the 2006 Energy Roadmap 
published by the New Zealand Ministry for Research, Science 
and Technology.  These objectives are consistent with USG 
interests as well.  End Summary. 
 
Proposal: Host a USG Biofuels Scientist 
--------------------------------------- 
¶2. Embassy Wellington seeks a USG scientist with research 
expertise and interest in biofuels as a renewable energy 
technology.  The Embassy envisions a three-month program 
based out of the Embassy some time between July and 
mid-December 2007.  The focus of the fellow's work would be 
to build relationships with key GNZ ministries and Crowne 
Research Institutes engaged in energy and climate change 
science in order to identify opportunities for greater 
governmental and private scientific cooperation.  Potential 
GNZ partners include the Ministry of Research, Science and 
Technology; Ministry for the Environment; Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry; Ministry of Economic Development; 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority, Ministry of 
Transport, AgResearch, Scion (forestry), and GNS Science 
(physical sciences). 
 
¶3. In addition to the relevant science expertise, the ideal 
candidate would be comfortable interacting with persons 
outside of the research science community, including meeting 
with government ministers and a broad range of public 
officials, academics, and journalists.  US-NZ cooperation in 
science, especially in areas touching on environmental and 
climate change issues, has been a strong and enduring element 
in bilateral cooperation and offers significant opportunity 
to build public support in New Zealand for that cooperation. 
Public presentations and media interviews would be a core 
component of the program.  The candidate should also 
anticipate some limited travel within New Zealand. 
 
¶4. (SBU) While a security clearance is not necessary for the 
candidate, a top secret security clearance would greatly 
facilitate the successful candidate's ease of movement and 
integration into the Chancery office space.  While a medical 
clearance is not necessary, the Embassy recommends that the 
successful candidate review insurance coverage to ensure the 
ability to access and pay for any necessary medical care, 
including coverage for any potential medical evacuation.  The 
Embassy will provide housing, office support, in-country 
travel arrangements (as applicable), and other logistical 
support information. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Embassy point of contact is Environment, Science, 
Health and Technology Officer Tod Duran.  Contact details are 
as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6043 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-451-2538 
E-mail:  DuranTE@state.gov 
 
Background: Bilateral Science Cooperation 
----------- ----------------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) The U.S. and New Zealand have had a science and 
technology cooperative agreement since 1974 (renewed in 
1991), but bilateral scientific efforts began well before 
that, including since 1957 extensive cooperation in 
Antarctica.  Whereas other aspects of the bilateral 
relationship have waxed and waned over the years, bilateral 
scientific cooperation has remained strong and constant, and 
forty percent of Kiwi scientists have ties to American 
research.  Regrettably, the New Zealand public remains 
largely unaware of this.  As part of Mission New Zealand's 
ongoing efforts to improve US-NZ ties, we have made 
publicizing bilateral scientific efforts a key goal in our 
Mission Strategic Plan. 
¶7. (SBU) In October 2002, the U.S. and New Zealand initiated 
a Bilateral Climate Change Partnership to enhance and 
accelerate practical cooperation on climate change issues. 
The initial round of 26 projects was launched in 2003 and has 
grown to three dozen projects in nine priority areas: 
climate change science, technology development, greenhouse 
gas accounting in forestry and agriculture, engagement with 
business, emissions registries, cooperation with developing 
countries, climate change research in Antarctica, public 
education initiatives, and product & process standards (Ref 
C).  Climate change is an issue that attracts a lot of 
attention with the New Zealand public, whose negative opinion 
of U.S. policies on the issue is typically linked to our 
decision not to join the Kyoto Agreement. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In January 2007, coincident with a commemoration of 
the 50th anniversary of U.S. - New Zealand cooperation in 
Antarctica, OES A/S McMurray visited New Zealand to promote 
and better understand the relevance of the cooperative 
scientific effort, both for the underlying science itself as 
well as for the overall bilateral relationship.  Energy and 
climate change were principal features of the visit (Ref B). 
GNZ officials told A/S McMurray that formulating an effective 
New Zealand climate change policy is especially challenging 
because the country's agriculturally-based economy is both 
sensitive to the effects of climate change and the major 
contributor to New Zealand's emissions.  In a welcome 
paradox, this same agricultural base provides a platform that 
New Zealand can leverage to participate in U.S. efforts to 
develop biofuel technologies. 
 
Biofuels as a Cooperation Opportunity 
------------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) In July 2006, the GNZ put forward an economy-wide 
climate change strategy to coordinate the sometimes 
competitive policy interests of the energy, transport and 
land management sectors.  Energy Minister David Parker, who 
is also the country's Minister responsible for Climate Change 
Issues, provided U.S. officials with one example of how it is 
difficult in practice for GNZ to find the balance between 
these competing priorities.  Citing interest by  ExxonMobil 
and Chevron in exploring hydrocarbon development off New 
Zealand's southern coast, Parker admitted that this 
exploration would be at odds with the Government's stated 
preference for renewable resources.  But, he added, New 
Zealand has to consider all options because it will face 
increasing energy supply and security challenges as the 
country's North Island natural gas reserves wane (Ref B).  In 
December 2006, the Ministry for Research, Science and 
Technology published its Energy Roadmap for Science, which 
identifies biofuels and bioenergy as a strategic priority for 
a balanced approach to address climate change while 
maintaining economic and energy security.  In March 2007, 
Helen Andersen, Chief Executive of the Ministry of Research, 
Science and Technology told DCM David Keegan and ESTH Officer 
Tod Duran that GNZ would strongly support a U.S. science 
fellow.  She particularly endorsed our proposal for a 
scientist with a background in biofuel technology. 
 
Precedent: Prior Speaker Demonstrates Value 
---------- -------------------------------- 
¶10. (SBU) In October 2006, visiting U.S. scientist Dr. 
Timothy Coutts, a Research Fellow at the National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory (NREL) in Colorado, gave a talk on solar 
energy at the Embassy just prior to his return to the U.S. 
after a two-month fellowship at Canterbury University in 
Christchurch. Coutts gave a fascinating overview of renewable 
energy issues with a focus on thin-film solar cell 
technology, its applications and related issues. The audience 
of 47 included representatives from energy-related government 
departments (the Ministry for the Environment and the Energy 
Efficiency & Conservation Authority), the trade and economics 
sectors (Ministry of Economic Development, Meridian Energy, 
Todd Energy, NZ Exchange Ltd.), and the general public with 
an interest in renewable energy issues.  The enthusiasm 
demonstrated by the audience provides a strong indicator that 
the proposed science fellow would add real value to the 
Mission's efforts to sustain the global environment while 
promoting economic growth. 
McCormick