08BEIJING1284
The United States-China Economic and Security Review
Mon Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4924
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1284/01 0980907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 070907Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6295
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001284 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PARM CH
SUBJECT: The United States-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission Discusses Military Issues with Chinese Academics 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) A "responsible government" would never "initiate, sponsor 
or support" cyber attacks on other countries, a scholar from the 
Chinese Academy of Military Sciences told United States-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission members on April 1. 
However, the scholar described cyber warfare as an extension of an 
old tactic: the destruction of command and control communications 
that bombs achieved in the past.  PRC military modernization, which 
became a priority in the 1990s in response to "global trends and a 
rising Taiwan independence movement," is constrained by competing 
demands for PRC government expenditures and neighboring countries' 
perceptions.  China wants to maintain stability and avoid conflict 
in order to ensure domestic economic growth.  Beijing lacks the 
military power or capacity to demarcate spheres of influence in the 
Pacific, the scholar said.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Members of the United States-China Economic and Security 
Review (USCC) Commission discussed a range of military issues with 
Chinese scholars from the Chinese Academy of Military Sciences 
(CAMS) on April 1. 
 
China's Military Modernization 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) CAMS Senior Colonel Bao Bin said the modernization of the 
People's Liberation Army did not become a PRC priority until the 
1990s.  It was then, he explained, that China reevaluated the 
importance of its armed forces in response to what he described as 
"global trends and a rising Taiwan independence movement."  China 
has since been trying to modernize its "backwards" facilities and 
equipment to make up for years of neglect.  In response to a 
question from USCC Chairman Larry Wortzel, Bao described two limits 
to PLA modernization and growth: competing demands for PRC 
Government expenditures and the perceptions of neighboring 
countries.  Developing military systems that would frighten China's 
neighbors would be "unwise," Bao stated. 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to Bao, the relationship between Chinese civilian 
and military leaders has not changed as a result of military 
modernization.  The "system and structure" is not yet reformed, he 
added.  Prior PRC leaders had an understanding of military doctrine, 
but China's current leaders do not.  The current PLA leadership also 
lacks actual war experience.  The lack of military experience by 
political leaders is perhaps a concern in the United States, but is 
not in China.  "An army lead by politicians is not a problem for 
us," he said. 
 
¶5. (SBU) When asked if China favored creating spheres of military 
influence in the Pacific, Bao said that although the PLA is rapidly 
modernizing, China lacks the power or capacity to demarcate spheres 
of influence.  A strong U.S. military presence in the Pacific does 
not mean a clash between the United States and China is inevitable. 
Conflict is preventable through dialogue and cooperation.  Even if 
the PLA continues to strengthen, Chinese tradition frowns on 
pointless demonstrations of power, Bao said. 
 
Chinese Views on Space and Cyber Warfare 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Chairman Wortzel stressed the need for increased 
theoretical and strategic academic analysis on space warfare, noting 
the devastating affect that anti-satellite warfare would have on the 
civilian sector, such as commerce and banking.  Bao agreed that the 
increased integration of civil and military technology complicates 
warfare.  Bao said that when the subject of modern warfare is 
discussed, space-based systems naturally comes up.  The purpose of 
military-related technology in space is to make targets more precise 
in order to reduce casualties.  Research and development should 
shift from ground to space systems, he said, noting that preventing 
attacks from space is fundamental. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Bao said he accepted the official U.S. explanation of why 
it recently destroyed an errant spy satellite.  Rather, he said, he 
was interested in the method the United States used to shoot down 
the satellite. 
 
¶8. (SBU) When asked Chinese views on cyber warfare, Bao said China 
has never used the term "cyber warfare," adding that a "responsible 
government" would never "initiate, sponsor or support" a cyber 
attack on another country.  That said, Bao continued, cyber warfare 
should be seen simply as an extension of an old tactic: the 
destruction of command and control communications.  Cyber attacks 
today accomplish what bombs achieved in the past, he added.  USCC 
commissioners stressed that cyber warfare is a new phenomenon and 
the interconnectedness of civilian and military applications 
 
BEIJING 00001284  002 OF 002 
 
 
complicates its use. 
 
Understanding Chinese Intentions 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Bao invited the USCC commissioners to share the U.S. 
perspective on China's "peaceful rise."  The U.S. delegation said 
that while it may take many years to build up military capabilities, 
intentions can change very quickly.  The United States wants to 
understand China's intentions.  The USCC delegation pointed out that 
because China does not carry-out a public debate about its defense 
expenditures and strategic priorities, it is difficult for other 
countries to discern PRC intentions.  Bao responded by saying that 
China wants to maintain stability and avoid conflict in order to 
ensure domestic economic growth.  Routine, bilateral consultations 
and dialogue can help mitigate misinterpretation of intentions that 
could lead to conflict, he said. 
 
¶10. (U) The delegation cleared this cable.