08BUENOSAIRES1589
Argentina and Brazil Consider New Trade Barriers
Fri Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #1589/01 3261805
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211805Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2517
RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 001589 
 
USDOC for 4321/ITA/MAC/OLAC/PEACHER 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON AR BR
SUBJECT: Argentina and Brazil Consider New Trade Barriers 
 
Reftels:  A. Buenos Aires 1415 
          ¶B. Buenos Aires 1443 
          ¶C. Buenos Aires 1537 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Argentine and Brazilian officials discussed in Argentina 
November 17 a new Brazilian plan to subsidize consumer auto 
financing that will include autos imported from Argentina.  They 
also reviewed recently imposed Argentine non-tariff barriers and 
Argentina and Brazil's common interest in having the Mercosur trade 
bloc raise its external tariff rates on a short list of products. 
GoA trade officials argue that Argentine non-tariff barriers are not 
substantially protectionist and are limited in scope.  U.S. and 
European importers confirm they are thus far limited in impact.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Bilat Issues - Cars, Licenses, and the big MAC 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. (SBU) Argentina and Brazil held a bilateral meeting on trade 
issues on November 17 in Buenos Aires, led by GoA Secretary of 
Industry and Trade Fernando Fraguio (Ministry of Economy) and Welber 
Barral, Brazilian Secretary of Foreign Trade (Ministry of 
Development, Industry and Commerce).  Adrian Makuc, National 
Director of Trade Policy in the Ministry of Economy, attended the 
meeting and reported to Econoff that discussion focused on their 
bilateral automotive sector accord (Ref B) and on a new GoB plan to 
subsidize domestic consumer credit for new car purchases.  According 
to Argentine Ministry of Economy official Mabel Ganzana, GoB 
participants assured their GoA counterparts that the availability of 
credit subsidies would not depend on where the car was manufactured. 
(Over one-third of total Argentine automotive sector production is 
exported to Brazil, Ref B.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) On Argentina's recent imposition of non-automatic license 
and reference price non-tariff barriers (NTBs) on imports (ref A), 
Makuc noted that "Brazilians are used to Argentine licenses," since 
the GoA had applied similar NTBs on household appliances from Brazil 
four years ago, and on several other products since.  Makuc 
confirmed that GoA concern over increased imports centered on 
Chinese products, not Brazilian.  Contrary to press reports that the 
proposed Competitive Adaptation Mechanism (MAC, a quasi-safeguard 
mechanism, Ref C) was discussed at length, Ernesto de la Guardia, 
Counselor in the Argentine MFA's MERCOSUR office and a participant 
in the meeting, reported that it wasn't discussed at all.  He said 
the GoA simply passed Brazil Argentina's proposed MAC implementing 
regulations, which the GoB accepted to "study."  The GoB has yet to 
finish drafting its own MAC implementing regulations. 
 
------------------------------------ 
MERCOSUR - Raise the External Tariff 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Makuc and de la Guardia confirmed that both delegations 
made requests to increase a number of MERCOSUR Common External 
Tariff (CET) line item tariffs, which will be presented for 
consideration by the entire trade bloc at the upcoming mid-December 
MERCOSUR Council meeting in Brazil.  The GoA requested CET increases 
for 173 tariff lines of various synthetic and natural yarns (tariffs 
of 14/16/18% would be raised to 19%); suitcases or bags made of 
plastic, fabric, or both (three line-items with tariffs going from 
20% to 35%); and 22 tariff line-items of wooden furniture (from 18% 
tariffs to 20%).  Makuc explained that the reason for the desired 
addition of yarns was simply to include earlier stages of the 
value-added chain for textile products which MERCOSUR allowed Brazil 
and Argentina in September 2007 to raise tariffs on, a decision that 
Argentina only implemented in October 2008.  GoB requests were for 
increased CET rates on dairy products and peaches (according to 
Makuc, eleven tariff line-items of dairy and three of peaches). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Announced and Anticipated Measures Limited in Scope 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Makuc and de la Guardia both stressed the limited number of 
trade goods potentially affected by proposed CET tariff increases, 
and that most proposed increases were small.  Makuc also doubted 
that the new GoA non-automatic license and reference price 
non-tariff barriers (ref A) will have a significant effect on 
imports.  American company representatives on the American Chamber 
of Commerce in Argentina's Trade Committee told Emboffs October 22 
that they had not to date experienced any delays or other problems 
arising from those new measures.  Eighteen EU Economic Counselors, 
in a meeting with EconCouns on November 13, said their firms had not 
experienced any undue delays.  EU Political & Economic Affairs 
Counselor Carlos Gimeno Verdejo went further, stating that the 
measures appear "largely cosmetic and aimed (by the GoA) at 
placating domestic interests who feel threatened by the (Brazilian) 
Real's devaluation and by China's export strength." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Industry and Trade Secretary Fraguio has argued that GoA 
policy is "not protectionist" (Ref C), but has made clear the GoA's 
intent to safeguard domestic employment.  With the largest union in 
the country calling for triple-severance pay for fired workers to 
discourage downsizing, Fraguio's statements as well as recent public 
comments by President Fernandez de Kirchner calling on the private 
sector not to lay off workers are understandable.  That new 
Argentine non-tariff barriers and proposed CET increases are limited 
in scope and, according to multinational importers, marginal in 
effect suggests that the GoA's trade policy response to the global 
financial crisis appears more protectionist than it actually is. 
 
WAYNE