08DAKAR1351
Senegal: National Assembly elects new Speaker
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO5966
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1351 3251701
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201701Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1476
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 001351 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM SG
SUBJECT: Senegal: National Assembly elects new Speaker 
 
REF: Dakar 1325 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary and Introduction: On November 16, Senegal's 
National Assembly elected a new Speaker, Mamadou Seck, the former 
Chair of the Assembly's Finance Committee.  His election ends the 
long saga between President Abdoulaye Wade and the former Chair of 
the Assembly, Macky Sall, who was ousted after he refused to resign 
upon Wade's request.  Meanwhile, Sall has created his own political 
party.  End summary. 
 
Who is the new Speaker of the Assembly? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)   Mamadou Seck was until 1996 a member of the Directorate 
of the Party of Independence and Labor (PIT) a former communist 
party.  He left PIT when President Wade, while in the opposition, 
asked him to join his party and run for office as mayor of the small 
town of MBao, in the suburbs of Dakar.  He graduated in banking and 
economics in France.  After Wade's election, he became Minister of 
Transportation and Equipment in 2001 and subsequently Minister of 
Infrastructure, from 2002 to 2006.  Seck also served briefly in 2001 
as Minister of Economy and Finance but resigned from this position 
following allegations that he had embezzled funds in the 80s when he 
was Managing Director of SOMICOA, a shipping company.  A court 
ruling subsequently dismissed all charges. 
 
An opportunistic choice 
----------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) As Chair of the Assembly's Finance Committee, Seck was the 
person who initiated the attempt to have a hearing on how the 
President's son, Karim, was spending public money on infrastructure 
projects in the run up to March 2008 Organization of the Islamic 
Conference (OIC) Summit as head of the presidential OIC preparation 
agency known as ANOCI.  This attempt infuriated Wade and led 
directly to the downfall of Sall.  However, in Seck's case, a senior 
National Assembly member told Embassy that Seck apologized to the 
President and was forgiven.  His nomination serves several purposes. 
 Ostensibly, Wade hopes to show his magnanimity by underlining that 
he is not after those who demanded accountability from his son. 
Seck is also the most capable political leader in the Dakar region. 
Apparently, Wade is focusing his attention on the suburbs of the 
capital because he is concerned that it may become a source of 
unreast after severe flooding this summer left thousands of people, 
who were already living in precarious conditions, homeless.  Seck 
will seek to recapture this area where Wade's popularity is 
weakening.  His election will also satisfy the Tijdanes, the largest 
brotherhood in Senegal, as he is closely related to their Caliph. 
So far all leaders that have headed political institutions were 
Mourides, Wade's own brotherhood. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶4.  (SBU) Seck was elected by a large majority, 133 for and 3 
against.  Even members of the opposition voted for him as he is 
recognized as being competent with strong leadership qualities. 
However, the Constitutional changes that led to his election have 
reduced the President of the National Assembly from an independent 
head of a co-equal branch of government to a subordinate of the 
president.  It just takes a resolution signed by thirty eight 
members (out of one hundred fifty) to initiate a process to remove 
the National Assembly president from office.  This tool will allow 
the Wade to deter any attempt by a National Assembly president to 
act independently of the will of the president further eroding the 
country's system of separation of powers. 
Bernicat