08DOHA862
QATARI MEDIA WARM TO SUDAN SPECIAL ENVOY
Tue Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
VZCZCXRO7116
RR RUEHDE RUEHDIR
DE RUEHDO #0862/01 3510642
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160642Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8528
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0046UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DOHA 000862 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAO SU QA
SUBJECT: QATARI MEDIA WARM TO SUDAN SPECIAL ENVOY 
 
---------- 
KEY POINTS 
---------- 
 
-- Al Jazeera Arabic and English aired two interviews with Special 
Envoy for Sudan Richard Williamson on November 25 in prime time. 
 
--  Qatari local newspapers provided accurate, prominent coverage of 
Williamson's press roundtable.  An op-ed on November 29 highlighted 
the Government of Sudan's lack of credibility. 
 
-------- 
COMMENTS 
-------- 
 
-- (SBU) Qatar News Agency head Sheikh Jabor bin Yusuf Al Thani, who 
is close to the Prime Minister, told Ambassador that he found the 
Special Envoy's media engagements positive and helpful. 
 
-- (SBU) At a time when the USG is trying to help steer Qatar's 
efforts on Darfur in the right direction, media engagements like 
this one -- demonstrating that we are supportive, but also clearly 
communicating our goals and views -- are vital to our diplomatic 
efforts. 
 
¶1. (U) Responding to requests from post, Al Jazeera English and Al 
Jazeera Arabic (two separate channels) arranged back-to-back 
interviews for Special Envoy Williamson on November 25.  The first, 
a 15-minute live-to-tape interview, aired on Al Jazeera English 
during news bulletins in the prime 1300 - 1500 GMT time slot. 
(NOTE:  A prominent background image of Sudanese President Omar 
al-Bashir scowling provided an appropriate visual for the Special 
Envoy's points on the Government of Sudan's lack of credibility. 
END NOTE) 
 
¶2. (U) Williamson then appeared live on Al Jazeera's main afternoon 
news bulletin as the "Mid-Day Guest," a format in which a guest is 
interviewed by two news presenters on the news of the day.  The 
seven-minute segment provided an opportunity for the Special Envoy 
to demonstrate USG support for Qatar's efforts on Darfur; emphasize 
the central role of the African Union mediator; and call for 
implementation of commitments by the GOS and rebel groups.  The 
interview aired at 1330 GMT. 
 
¶3. (U) All seven Qatari newspapers also provided prominent coverage 
of Williamson's remarks at a press roundtable held at the 
Ambassador's residence.  Most headlines focused on U.S. support for 
Qatar's initiative, and the articles accurately reflected 
Williamson's comments.  Two newspapers also included in their 
headlines the Special Envoy's assessment that the Security Council 
would not take action to stop a process within the International 
Criminal Court related to President Bashir. 
 
¶4. (U) An op-ed published in Arabic-language daily "Al Raya" 
addressed the lack of confidence suffered by the GOS as a result of 
corruption and tensions within the regime.  The article ended with 
the question, "Are those in charge of the country up to this mission 
so that they can uproot those who hinder the implementation process 
and were also a reason that the lack of confidence took root?" 
 
¶5.  TEXT of Opening Statement by Richard C. Williamson - Press 
Roundtable - November 24, 2008 
 
It's a great pleasure for me to be in Doha; I thank all of you for 
taking the time to come out and let me visit with you, especially 
our friend from Sudan.  The U.S. goal in Sudan has been and remains 
relieving the great humanitarian suffering that continues.  In our 
efforts to make progress in relieving that humanitarian suffering, 
we welcome the Qatar initiative and Qatar's role as a diplomatic 
leader in this region. 
 
Mr. Bassol, the former Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso, is the 
joint mediator for the African Union and the United Nations, which 
the United States strongly supports; he has a unique role to play as 
a mediator between the parties.  In my discussions today with the 
Prime Minister and the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, I had 
the opportunity to discuss the need for close coordination between 
Qatari officials and the Qatari initiative with Mr. Bassol and his 
efforts. 
 
Unfortunately, past pledges by the Government of Sudan have not been 
lived up to.  There's a history of declarations followed by delay, 
diversion, denial, and non-performance.  Therefore, it's 
particularly challenging to bring the parties together because 
there's such a lack of trust, which is why the United States 
continues to demand there be concrete, verifiable progress on the 
ground.  This is a goal shared by the leadership in Qatar.  We join 
with them in working to get those concrete, verifiable steps on the 
ground to bring in humanitarian assistance. 
It's time to translate promises and declarations into action, and 
the United States looks forward to working closely with Qatar as 
they accept a leadership position in trying to bring international 
 
DOHA 00000862  002 OF 002 
 
 
pressure and cooperation for progress.  Thank you and I'll be happy 
to take any of your questions. 
 
¶6. (U) Khartoum minimize considered. 
LEBARON