08GUANGZHOU513
Guangdong's Glass Ceiling -- Few Cracks Showing
Fri Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO6268
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0513/01 2350613
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220613Z AUG 08
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7528
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000513 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SOCI CH
SUBJECT: Guangdong's Glass Ceiling -- Few Cracks Showing 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Promoting women cadres may be a priority for 
provincial officials, but Guangdong continues to fall short. 
Despite an increase in the number of women officials here, some 
academics believe that the environment is not favorable for their 
promotion; few women are actually given the chance to play important 
policymaking roles.  Discrimination, traditional attitudes and 
women's lack of enthusiasm about entering government and politics 
continue to be obstacles to breaking Guangdong's glass ceiling. End 
summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Guangdong Makes an Effort, Achieves Some Results 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Guangdong Communist Party Committee has strengthened 
training programs for women cadres, according to scholars at the 
provincial party school.  In 1991, the school launched a special 
three-month training program for women cadres.  So far, there have 
been 32 training sessions with 1,600 participants.  According to 
Professor Song Anchun, the curriculum is similar to that for male 
cadres, but includes special subjects such as gender equality, 
leadership, and women's psychology.  He noted that most of the 
program participants are women cadres at the section-chief level 
from throughout Guangdong province and indicated that they have few 
candidates at the more senior division-chief level. 
 
¶3. (U) In addition to the party school program, the Guangdong 
People's Congress passed the "Method of Implementing the Law on 
Protection of Women's Interest and Rights in Guangdong" in May 2007, 
stipulating that the government at all levels embrace gender 
equality and ensure that women enjoy the same rights as men.  The 
2006-2010 "Plan for Guangdong Cadre Education and Training" also 
attaches importance to the training and nurturing of women cadres. 
 
¶4. (U) Guangdong is making progress in this area.  In 2005, women 
made up 40.5 percent of the total cadre population -- a 4 percent 
point increase from 2000.  Nationally, only 38.9 percent of cadres 
were women in 2005.  In 2005 in neighboring Fujian, just 37.3 
percent of cadres were women. 
 
------------------ 
But Only for Show? 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) While these developments look good on paper, the reality is 
less rosy, according to some scholars.  Lu Ying, a law professor and 
Director of the Women and Gender Equality Research Center at Sun 
Yat-sen University, told us that Guangdong fails to provide a 
favorable environment for women to advance professionally.  She has 
noticed that most women officials here are deputies and that even 
the most capable women officials do not play an active role in 
public administration and policymaking.  She cited Li Li, Vice 
Director of the Standing Committee of the Guangzhou People's 
Congress as a prime example.  Lu commented that Li Li, who clearly 
deserved a higher position, was a model woman official who possessed 
strong legal knowledge and had contributed to promoting government 
transparency in Guangzhou, but her work was often underappreciated. 
Lu concluded that the promotion of women to the deputy level is 
often just for show -- a superficial demonstration of China's 
attentiveness to gender equality. 
 
---------------------------- 
What's Wrong with Guangdong? 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Professor Qu Ning of the Women's Cadre Training School and 
Women's Vocational School, pointed out that Guangdong's most recent 
survey on women's social in 2000 (the survey is conducted every ten 
years) concluded that overall attitudes about women's role in 
society were actually growing more traditional.  Qu dismissed 
explanations that the booming economy had enabled more women to feel 
like they could stay home if their husbands were rich enough, noting 
that this had not been the case in Beijing or western countries, 
where women still took policymaking positions.  However, Qu 
commented that many women in Guangdong were more interested in a 
good husband than a good job because they believed a rich and 
powerful husband could be a conduit to a good job.  Qu contended 
that a lack of transparency in China's political system fueled this 
belief. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Recently, Qu asked a class of 100 female students how many 
of them wanted to become government officials.  Only four raised 
their hands.  According to Qu, the reluctance of the other 96 was 
largely due to the belief that politics is dirty and like a 
battlefield not suitable for women.  In her work, she emphasizes 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000513  002 OF 002 
 
 
that more women need to be involved n policymaking.  She believes 
she is making some progress, having trained a number of women who 
never thought about participating in government but who had gone on 
to become government officials.  Qu said she tries to persuade her 
students that taking a government job represents a civic 
responsibility and can be very satisfying.  Convincing her female 
students this is the case, she told us, is not easy. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Problems Amplified in Rural Areas 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Pointing out that women officials in lower levels of 
government in rural areas are especially rare, Qu offered two 
explanations: more discrimination in rural areas and the tendency of 
women to leave rural areas and seek work in coastal cities.   To 
address these challenges, the Guangdong Party School developed a 
correspondence education program to reach women cadres at the county 
level and provided them the opportunity to take part in distance 
learning on the Internet.  Still, Professor Song of the Guangdong 
Party School admitted that women's education in rural areas is still 
lagging due primarily to discrimination. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Promoting Women's Issues or Themselves? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) According to Professor Lu of Sun Yat-sen University, the 
China Women's Federation has made efforts to promote gender equality 
legislation, but women leaders in the organization are unwilling to 
push for radical changes due to pressure from senior leaders and the 
desire to advance their own careers.  She cited her own personal 
experience as evidence.  In the 1970s, she worked for the Guangdong 
Communist Party Committee and China Women's Federation and had the 
chance to be promoted to Party Secretary of Huiying County. 
However, she chose to leave politics because she felt that women 
officials had to spend too much time pleasing senior leaders rather 
than helping other women.  Lu believes that working as a researcher 
and lawyer is a more effective way to reach women. 
 
GOLDBERG