08ISTANBUL468
ISTANBUL BRANCH OF NATIONALIST ACTION PARTY LOOKS TO THE WEST
Thu Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO0360
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHIT #0468/01 2410858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 280858Z AUG 08
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8430
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUFOADA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000468 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL BRANCH OF NATIONALIST ACTION PARTY LOOKS TO THE WEST 
 
REF: A. ISTANBUL 395 
     ¶B. 07 ANKARA 2041 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Ihsan Barutcu, Istanbul chair of the 
National Action Party (MHP), along with his deputy -- Nazme 
Celenk, and Mithat Melen, MHP MP from Istanbul, all welcomed 
greater cooperation with the United States in recent 
conversations with us.  All three MHP officials stated Turkey 
must look west, especially for economic development. Barutcu 
appreciated U.S. help in combating the terrorist PKK, which 
he described as the greatest problem facing Turkey. Melen, a 
self described MHP "maverick," criticized the ruling Justice 
and Development Party (AKP) for an ambiguous response to U.S. 
requests for support prior to the 2003 invasion of Iraq; he 
fears AKP is repeating this error today with regard to Iran. 
End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Turkey's Western Orientation 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ihsan Barutcu, MHP's Istanbul chairman, welcomed 
greater cooperation with the United States, pointing out 
Turkey's foreign policy interests often coincide with U.S. 
policy. Barutcu supports economic sanctions against Iran and 
continued pressure on Iran to stop its nuclear weapons 
program.  Barutcu is also concerned Syria is a "Middle East 
problem" that could spill into Turkey. MHP Istanbul deputy 
chairman Nazme Celenk stressed the Turkish Republic has 
always looked West since its formation in 1923.  Eastern 
counties such as Russia and China, along with Middle Eastern 
countries, should not be the focus of Turkish foreign policy, 
he argued.   In a separate meeting, Mithat Melen, MHP deputy 
for Istanbul's second district, also argued Turkey's future 
lies with the West.  Melen, professor of economics at Middle 
Eastern Technical University and a regular columnist on 
economic issues, told us Turkey's future can never be with 
the Middle East, since the path to economic prosperity 
clearly lies with interacting with the West. 
 
¶3. (SBU) While Barutcu and Celenk valued Turkey's economic 
engagement with the EU, both argued Turkey should not move 
toward the EU because "the EU does not want Turkey as a full 
member". Celenk suggested instead Turkey should become a 
special partner with the EU, a status that  would provide 
economic benefits while preserving Turkey's sovereignty. 
Given hostile comments from some EU leaders, Turkey should 
partner instead with the United States, according to Celenk. 
Melen was vague on the issue of EU membership, but supports 
EU-mandated free market reforms.  He praised AKP's earlier 
successes with economic reforms, but claimed the party's 
focus has turned to social issues, like the headscarf ban. 
EU nations are also guilty of ignoring the positive economic 
benefits of greater cooperation with Turkey by concentrating 
on social problems in Turkey, such as the reopening of Halki 
Seminary and the Armenian issue, he argued. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
PKK, Iraq, Iran, and Relations with the U.S. 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Separatist terror activity is the greatest threat 
facing Turkey today, a threat MHP takes more seriously than 
any other party, according to Barutcu. It was MHP's strong 
stance against terrorism, particularly against the 
PKK, that allowed MHP to cross the 10 percent threshold for 
representation in Parliament in the 2007 elections, he 
claimed.  Barutcu pointed to the ceremony for the victims of 
the July 27 Istanbul bombings (reftel A) as  underscoring the 
tragic results of terrorism. Accepting  our condolences for 
the victims of the attack, Barutcu said he looked forward to 
greater cooperation between Turkey and the U.S. in combating 
terrorism. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Melen pointed to Turkey's failure to support U.S. 
operations in Iraq as a significant cause of the poor 
relations between the two countries.  In 2003, AKP's 
inexperience led it to promise Turkey's support, yet it 
failed to deliver on the March 1 vote, he explained.  An MHP 
administration would have been clear where it stood, avoiding 
a diplomatic disaster by letting the Americans know 
beforehand that Turkey would not serve as a base for 
 
ISTANBUL 00000468  002 OF 002 
 
 
operations against Iraq.  Melen sees a similar problem 
occurring with a hypothetical attack on Iran; AKP should be 
clear to the United States that Turkish territory is off 
limits in any attack on Iran. 
 
--------------- 
Domestic Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Barutcu said he was disappointed by the 
Constitutional Court's June 5 annulment of constitutional 
amendments aimed at lifting the headscarf ban at universities 
- legislation MHP joined AKP in supporting.  The amendments 
represented a good compromise that best reflected all sectors 
of Turkish society, Barutcu explained. While the court's 
ruling means tensions over the headscarf ban will continue to 
simmer, Barutcu said everyone must respect the verdict. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Barutcu supported the investigation against the 
alleged Ergenekon coup plotters, adding there are groups that 
would thwart democracy in Turkey for political gain.  The 
government should take strong actions against those who 
instigate a military coup, according to Barutcu. Only the 
public should decide their country's leaders, and the 
democratic process is the only way to change government, he 
argued. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Barutcu said MHP strength comes from supporting the 
traditional roots of Turkey, noting that in the past 
the party's core consistency came from central Anatolia; now 
the party is strong in Ankara, Istanbul, and Izmir 
as well. The MHP's true constituencies are middle class, 
hard-working Turks with traditional values, Barutcu claimed. 
 
¶9. (SBU) According to Melen, corruption is the main 
distinction between his party and AKP.  Melen had great hopes 
for AKP when it entered government in 2002, but he now sees 
them as corrupt as past governments. In contrast, Melen 
claims  MHP is lead by an honest leader --  Devlet Bahceli -- 
who is driven by national pride, not personal gain. Melen 
sees greater transparency for all business transactions as a 
necessary measure to combat this significant obstacle to 
Turkey's development. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  Melen envied the ability of Americans to debate 
sensitive issues; "in the United States you can talk about 
anything".  This is not the case in Turkey, even within 
academia, according to Melen.  While he did not openly 
advocate eliminating one barrier to free speech in Turkey -- 
Penal Code Article 301 criminalizing insulting Turkishness -- 
he was frustrated by the law's censoring effect on debating 
sensitive issues in Turkey. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment:  Warm support for closer relations with 
the U.S. from senior Istanbul-based MHP representatives was 
unexpected, reflecting a more positive view of the US than 
traditional MHP rhetoric would imply.  MHP campaigned on a 
strong anti-American platform in the 2007 national elections 
(reftel B) and some party members have even accused the US of 
supporting PKK terrorism.  Being based in Istanbul may 
require these MHPrs to moderate their rhetoric; all three 
stated their party was not "anti-American" and the media was 
to blame for creating this false impression. Melen admitted 
his statements in Parliament often draw criticisms from 
within the party, but noted Bahceli placed him on top of the 
district candidate ticket in 2002 and 2007, a sign  Bahceli 
is open to descent. MHP's traditional rhetoric is not likely 
to shift radically, especially with local elections 
approaching, but it was refreshing to hear a more 
constructive line from Istanbul representatives. 
OUDKIRK