08KHARTOUM86
OPPOSITION LEADERS IN NORTHERN STATE DISCUSS NEW GOVERNOR,
Tue Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0086/01 0220930
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 220930Z JAN 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9748UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/SE WILLIAMSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR, AND ALSO PASS USAID 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN ECON EAID SU
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION LEADERS IN NORTHERN STATE DISCUSS NEW GOVERNOR, 
DAMS, AND ELECTIONS 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  In separate meetings with econoff on January 17 
and 21, leaders of the Kush Movement for Democracy and the Dal Dams 
Committee criticized Northern State's newly appointed governor. 
Contacts complained that the new governor is an outsider unfamiliar 
with northern issues, that he was appointed for his experience in 
security and intelligence, and that his first actions (dismissing 
state officials and focusing on security in the north) do not 
instill confidence.  These northern opposition leaders also 
discussed the status of dam construction in Kajbar, Dal, and Meroe, 
and preparations for 2009 mid-term elections in Northern State.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
NEW GOVERNOR FOR NORTHERN STATE 
------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) On January 21, 2008 the pro-government Arabic daily "Akhir 
Lahza" reported that Adil Al-Awat Salman replaced Mirghani Salih as 
governor of Northern State.  Abdullah Hotalib Edriss, leader of the 
Dal Dam Committee and Deputy Secretary of the Kush Movement for 
Democracy, verified this in a January 21 meeting with EconOff. 
Edriss stated that Salman is a former National Islamic Front 
hardliner, connected to the security apparatus, and, as an outsider 
to Northern State, is ignorant of northern history, politics, and 
culture.  Edriss stated that the new governor replaces Salih, a 
native Nubian. According to Edriss, Salih had a clash with the head 
of the Dams Administration, Osama Abdullah, and was subsequently 
fired. (Note:  The Dams Administration is widely recognized as a 
powerful bureau reporting directly to the Presidency.  It has its 
own security force and manages many of the largest and most 
expensive infrastructure projects in Sudan.  Its leader, Osama 
Abdullah, is married to the sister of President Bashir's wife and is 
reputed to be close to Bashir.  End Note.)  Edriss speculated that, 
"Osama can do whatever he likes and he was probably behind this 
decision." 
 
¶3.  (SBU) According to Edriss, upon entering his new position, 
Salman stated that his top priority is to bring security to Northern 
State.  Commenting on these inaugural remarks, Edriss stated "The 
north is one of the few areas in Sudan that is stable and secure, so 
what does he mean by this?" Edriss and pro-government media also 
reported that, in his first action as Governor, Salman dismissed 
most of the Northern State's ministers and the governor's staff. 
According to the pro-government newspaper "Akhir Lahza," Salih made 
this decision without consulting NCP leaders, and, after making the 
announcement, abruptly traveled to Khartoum with Dams Administration 
leader Osama Abdalla. 
 
DAM CONSTRUCTION 
---------------- 
¶4.  (SBU)  In a January 17 meeting with econoff, Abdullah Abuzaid, 
the head of Security for the Kush Movement for Democracy, reported 
that construction on the Kajbar dam has temporarily stopped.  (Note: 
In June 2007, Sudanese security fired on protestors demonstrating 
against the construction of a dam that, when completed, will flood 
hundreds of villages and displace thousands of people near Kajbar. 
The security forces killed four people and detained journalists 
covering the event for approximately one week.  End Note.)  Edriss 
confirmed that construction has been suspended, and credited the 
protests, their media coverage, and his group's use of the internet 
(especially its posting of video footage of the protests) for the 
delay.  Edriss stated that the surveying and planning equipment at 
the Kajbar dam site has been moved to the northern dam in Dal.  He 
said that sources in the Dams administration told him that "the 
internet really made leaders in the Dams administration afraid. 
This is the first time that we have seen something like this from 
Sudan on the internet and we have to be very careful." 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Edriss stated that although construction has not 
progressed on the Kajbar and Dal dams, their future development 
negatively impacts the region's economy.  He stated that businessmen 
are not willing to invest in a region that may soon be entirely 
flooded.  He said that the Dal Dams Committee and the Kajbar 
Committee are starting to work together to push their activism 
forward.  Edriss also labeled President Omar Al-Bashir's January 17 
inauguration of an international airport, a highway, and a bridge in 
Meroe as "just a media event" and stated that "the 172 kilometers of 
roads that they built are unnecessary roads that will not be used." 
 
 
2009 MID-TERM ELECTIONS 
----------------------- 
¶6.  (SBU) Edriss stated that the Kush Movement for Democracy is 
attempting to unify northern politicl arties and build alliances 
with national opposition parties such as the Umma party and the 
Democratic Unionist party.  He stated that "We must all be against 
the NCP.  We want to remove this party and will form alliances with 
anyone who is against the NCP."  Edriss said that the Kush Movement 
for Democracy will look to the leadership of the Umma party of Sadiq 
Al-Mahdi, the Democratic Unionist Party, and possibly the SPLM.  He 
also stated that there are many northern groups (such as the Nubian 
 
conference, the Nubian Collection Communist Party, the Nubian 
resistance movement, and the Karios Nubian party) that need to 
unite.  According to Edriss, the Karios Nubian party of Muhammad 
Jalaal has been receptive to this initial push for unity by the Kush 
Movement for Democracy.  Edriss expressed hope that the Karios party 
will soon unite into a single party with the 40,000 members of the 
Kush Movement for Democracy. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Edriss noted that he supports the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement "even though it is an agreement between the SPLM and the 
NCP," because "it presents the opportunity for Sudan to become a 
liberal and democratic state."  Abdullah Abuzaid was less 
enthusiastic about the CPA, saying "We in the north are the only 
people that have not received a peace agreement and the rewards of a 
wealth sharing agreement." 
 
¶8.  (SBU) COMMENT: Northern opposition movements such as the Kush 
Movement for Democracy appear disorganized and undeveloped compared 
to national opposition parties.  Moreover, given that President 
Bashir is from Shendi in Nile River State in the North, and has 
actively promoted development projects in the North, it is difficult 
for northern opposition parties to gain support.  Nonetheless, some 
northern opposition leaders such as Edriss appear to be politically 
savvy, and their use of the internet as a tool for activism has been 
effective in bringing their cause, and the brutality of the Sudanese 
security apparatus, to international attention.  As the 2009 
elections approach, we expect national opposition parties to 
intensify their courtship of these small, yet important northern 
opposition parties. 
 
FERNANDEZ