08KHARTOUM1210
SE WILLIAMSON MEETING WITH DARFURI CIVIL SOCIETY LEADERS
Mon Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7646
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1210/01 2240915
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 110915Z AUG 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1565
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001210 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, A/S FRAZER, SE WILLIAMSON 
NSC FOR BPITTMAN AND CHUDSON 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: SE WILLIAMSON MEETING WITH DARFURI CIVIL SOCIETY LEADERS 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 1108 
B) KHARTOUM 1167 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On August 10, Special Envoy Williamson held two 
separate meetings with Darfuri civil society leaders to discuss the 
peace process in Darfur, humanitarian concerns and insecurity in the 
region. The leaders painted a dire picture of the situation on the 
ground, underscored by rampant violence and a severe food shortage 
that could result in famine. In the search for a political solution, 
they argued that rebel leaders do not adequately represent the 
citizens of Darfur.  They told  Special Envoy Williamson that a 
broader spectrum of Darfuris must be involved in the peace process. 
The leaders asserted that civil society groups in particular are 
intellectually and morally better equipped than the rebels to 
promote peace and reconciliation. They also emphasized the need for 
indigenous methods of reconciliation, in accordance with Darfuri 
customs and traditions. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On August 10, Special Envoy Williamson held two separate 
meetings with a diverse group of Darfuri civil society leaders, 
including: Ahmed Abd Rahaman Rejal, the Maqdoom (viceroy) of South 
Darfur; Idriss Yusuf Ahmed, Secretary of the Darfur Shura Council; 
Suliman Ishag, SPLM Head of South Darfur and Secretary General of Al 
Tajuma Al Ahli, a largely Fur civil society group; Dr. Waleed 
Madibbo (from the Baggara Rizeigat Arab tribe), President of 
Governance Bureau, a consultancy; Dr. Musa Adam Abdul-Jalil, 
Associate Professor of Sociology and Anthropology at the University 
of Khartoum; former General Siddig Mohamed Ismail, Secretary General 
of Sons of Darfur Forum for Dialogue & Peaceful Coexistence; and 
Aisha Abubakr Subaira Adam, Coordinator of Peace and Development at 
the Community Development Association. Though the participants came 
from different segments of Darfuri society, they shared many similar 
views in regard to the situation on the ground, the rebel 
leadership, the role of civil society, and the path to peace and 
reconciliation. 
 
DIRE SITUATION ON THE GROUND 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (SBU) The civil society leaders painted a dire picture of the 
situation on the ground, one characterized by increasingly rampant 
insecurity. Dr. Madibbo noted that "areas considered relatively 
secure (such as parts of South Darfur) are in fact not secure at 
all," adding gangs of bandits operate there with impunity. Of 
greater concern, according to the leaders, is the severe food 
shortage resulting from the decrease in food aid and absence of 
local production as farmers are afraid to cultivate their fields. 
Prices of food have skyrocketed, and the civil society leaders 
stated there was imminent danger of increased hunger, especially for 
groups of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) who are cut off from 
humanitarian aid. Waleed Madibbo also expressed concern about the 
deepening ethnic divide in Darfur between the Zaghawa and the 
region's other tribes stoked by the regime (Reftel A). Special Envoy 
Williamson replied that the U.S. maintains its strong political and 
financial commitment to achieving peace in Darfur, and will continue 
to advocate full deployment of deployment as the best option to 
increase security and facilitate humanitarian efforts. 
 
DIM VIEW OF REBEL LEADERS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU) Responding to Special Envoy Williamson's question on how 
they view Darfur's rebel leaders, the civil society leaders shared 
the view that the rebel leaders are "sons of Darfur" but not 
adequately representing citizens of Darfur.  They characterized the 
rebel leaders as out of touch with the pain and suffering felt by 
ordinary people.  "Abdul Wahid has fought for our cause," noted the 
Maqdoom, "but he does not speak for people on the ground." And no 
matter how powerful rebel leaders are, said Dr. Madibbo, they 
"cannot force their views on grassroots communities." Furthermore, 
the civil society leaders do not view rebel groups as competent to 
produce a peaceful solution to the conflict. "People who are armed 
are never going to be a part of the peace process," said Idriss 
Yusuf Ahmed, and Dr. Abdul-Jalil wryly predicted that "at some point 
there will be another peace agreement signed between the parties to 
manipulate violence" in Darfur. 
 
ROLE OF CIVIL SOCIETY 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (SBU) In contrast to their views of the rebel groups, the civil 
society leaders said their grassroots efforts  articulate the needs 
and wants of the citizens of Darfur.  They pointed to the recent Dar 
Es Salaam Declaration (Reftel B), which offers recommendations on 
power sharing, wealth sharing, land issues, and restitution by an 
 
KHARTOUM 00001210  002 OF 003 
 
 
impressive group of local leaders and intellectuals representing all 
of Darfur's peoples. They urged a greater role for civil society in 
future negotiations, noting its capacity for voicing the concerns of 
ordinary citizens. For example, Aisha Abubakr Subaira spoke of how 
civil society efforts have focused on the desire of Darfuri women to 
be considered in any prospective peace agreement.  The latter must 
consider compensation for women who have lost properties and/or have 
been the victims of rape and other abuse.  Subaira said that it was 
unlikely without such neither the rebels or government would be 
willing to acknowledge and address such gender-based issues. Civil 
society can also "fill the gaps" on what is needed in peace 
agreements, said Dr. Madibbo, citing perceived vagueness relating to 
compensation in the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA). 
 
¶6. (SBU) The leaders claimed that despite the potential of their 
civil society groups to promote peace and reconciliation, such 
activities were still stifled by security forces through 
restrictions on freedom of speech,  assembly and other intimidation. 
 "Right now, there is no civil society as such, but there are agents 
for civic action," said Dr. Abdul-Jalil. These restrictions have 
driven civil society organizers to hold conferences abroad, such as 
the Dar Es Salaam Conference and similar events held in Heidelberg, 
Germany and the United Kingdom. But as the Maqdoom pointed out, "If 
there's anything to be done [in Darfur], we need to be free. Free to 
meet, to move around, and to consult our people." The leaders urged 
the  international community to support efforts to build civil 
society by providing resources and the auspices under which they 
could meet and organize.  They noted, if Darfur is to stabilize 
soon, we need to acquire some of the essential tools for nation 
building." They strongly urged that some international assistance 
for Darfur needs to be development and not just humanitarian aid, 
starting in some relatively stable communities like El-Daein. 
 
INDIGENOUS SOLUTIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (SBU) The civil society leaders strongly believe that although 
the trouble in Darfur originated with outside influences ("the 
international community underestimates the NCP's capacity for 
manipulation"), the solutions for such problems must come from 
within. Dr. Abdul-Jalil noted that there is evidence that local 
communities have come to recognize this, citing pacts made in 
several communities between nomadic former militias and local 
cultivators with regard to grazing rights. The Maqdoom recalled how 
disputes had been handled during the country's Condominium period. 
(Note: "Condominium" refers to British-Egyptian colonial rule in 
Sudan dominated by Britain with Egypt reduced to a largely symbolic 
role. Begun in the late 19th century, the "condominium" lasted until 
Sudanese independence in 1956)  He said that disagreements were 
handled outside of state courts by tribal elders, and suggested 
current intertribal conflict and grievances could be settled in a 
similar fashion, perhaps in a gathering of tribal leaders under the 
auspices of the UN or AU. In contrast to indigenous efforts, 
government-orchestrated reconciliations were, in the view of the 
leaders,  basically ineffective. 
 
DISTRUST OF THE NCP 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (SBU) Throughout their discussion with Special Envoy Williamson, 
the civil society leaders expressed a deep distrust of the National 
Congress Party (NCP). The elderly but feisty Maqdoom noted that the 
NCP's disarmament of the Fur tribe in the 1990s sowed the seeds for 
the current conflict, while Idriss Yusuf Ahmed maintained that 
everyone in Darfur, even the Arabs, realize that "it is the 
government's policy to keep Darfur unsettled."  They did not view 
the NCP regime as a reliable signatory, citing its lack of 
implementation of the DPA and its wavering on CPA commitments. Due 
to this lack of trust between Darfurians and the regime, Suliman 
Ishag suggested that the Darfur file be transferred to the SPLM, 
which  he noted already has relations with the rebel factions in 
Darfur. He argued  this would also give a chance for the SPLM to 
re-attempt to unify the movements, or at least their armed forces. 
(Note: Ishag is the SPLM Chairman of South Darfur. End Note.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT: If they can be properly mobilized, civil society 
groups may be able to provide a forum for the voices of Darfur's 
citizens and allow them to play a role in peace negotiations and 
reconciliation efforts.  This is a  role, according to the civil 
society leaders, that rebel groups and their leaders are unsuited to 
play. A solution to Darfur that focuses solely on warlords and 
rebels, and not on Darfur's people (especially alienated IDPs), will 
probably fail. 
 
¶10. (U) SE Williamson cleared this cable prior to transmission. 
 
KHARTOUM 00001210  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
FERNANDEZ