08MEXICO2160
SCENESETTER FOR DHS SECRETARY MICHAEL CHERTOFF,
Tue Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO7283
RR RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #2160/01 1971240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151240Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2564
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
RHMFIUU/CDR USNORTHCOM
RHMFIUU/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC162101
2008-07-15 12:40:00
08MEXICO2160
Embassy Mexico
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VZCZCXRO7283
RR RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #2160/01 1971240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151240Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2564
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
RHMFIUU/CDR USNORTHCOM
RHMFIUU/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM SNAR KCRM MX
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MEXICO 002160 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM SNAR KCRM MX
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR DHS SECRETARY MICHAEL CHERTOFF, 
JULY 17-19  
¶1. (SBU) Welcome to Mexico City.  Mexico remains key to USG 
success in combating the trafficking of drugs, persons, arms 
and precursors, terrorism, and other transnational threats. 
With the recent signing of Merida Initiative funding, we are 
poised to significantly expand counter drug cooperation and 
support President Calderon's robust efforts to take down 
Mexico's drug cartels and improve public security. 
 
----------------------------- 
Strengthening Law Enforcement 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  President Calderon remains firm in his commitment 
to aggressively target violence and criminality and continues 
to sharpen the capabilities of his law enforcement team.  In 
the past year and a half he has: launched aggressive 
anti-drug operations in ten states; raised pay for the 
military; replaced numerous high-ranking federal police 
officers in an anti-corruption campaign; launched a billion 
dollar project to create real-time interconnectivity between 
all police and prosecutors, as well as a unified national 
crime database; and, stewarded congressional legislation to 
unify federal police forces and reform the judicial system. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Calderon continues to greatly strengthen law 
enforcement cooperation with the USG.  The GOM has ramped up 
extraditions to the U.S. - 83 in 2007 and 38 so far this 
year.  The ongoing security campaign has reduced the broad 
geographic range and legal impunity that the cartels have 
traditionally enjoyed in Mexico, although progress is tenuous 
and uneven.  Addressing personal security challenges 
continues to rank as the number one priority in public 
opinion polls and there is general support among the Mexican 
public and body politic for expanding bilateral cooperation. 
The Merida Initiative is only the highest profile element of 
an emerging pattern of cooperation across the board, which is 
likely to take on momentum in coming years. 
 
¶4. (SBU) It should be noted that Mexico's military plays a 
fundamental role in the fight against organized crime, and in 
particular narco-trafficking.  Both SEDENA and SEMAR, at the 
direction of the President, have devoted significant 
resources and manpower towards drug, firearms and bulk cash 
interdictions and eradication. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Stakes Rising for Security Officials 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) The human price Mexico is paying remains high, with 
almost 2000 drug related killings so far in 2008, including 
194 police and military officials.  A new disturbing trend in 
recent months has been the slaying of several senior police 
officials. 
 
--------------------- 
Combating Corruption 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Turning the page on Mexico's endemic corruption 
problem is an essential component of President Calderon's 
efforts to combat organized crime.  The Public Administration 
Secretariat (SFP), created by the Fox administration is at 
the center of efforts, coordinating a network of IGs in GOM 
offices.  In 2007, SFP reported that the number of 
investigations conducted and public officials dismissed 
nearly doubled over the prior year.  The Public Security 
Secretariat (SSP) has undertaken an ambitious program 
designed to eventually vet all 400,000 of Mexico's federal, 
state, and local law enforcement officials.  Mexico's 
recently approved judicial reforms should make Mexico's 
judicial processes more transparent and accessible. 
Meanwhile, Mexico's military seeks to deepen its cooperative 
relationship with the U.S., including through the acquisition 
of U.S. equipment, in large measure out of a desire to reduce 
the potential for corruption.  Mexico has far to go to put 
its legacy of corruption behind it but it is striking out in 
the right direction.  Deepening U.S. cooperation through the 
Merida Initiative will advance significantly the GOM's 
anti-corruption efforts. 
 
-------------- 
Justice Reform 
 
MEXICO 00002160  002 OF 004 
 
 
-------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU)  In June, President Calderon signed into law major 
judicial reform legislation to facilitate transition to an 
oral trial system, give law enforcement officials broader 
search and seizure authority, allow consensual monitoring of 
telephone calls, and give police more responsibility for 
conducting investigations.  Effective implementation of the 
legislation will make the Mexican system work more 
transparently, expeditiously, and fairly.  A share of Merida 
Initiative support is tagged to assist Mexico with putting 
this improved system into place. 
 
------------------- 
Political Landscape 
------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The president faces a hardening political 
environment here, in the advent of legislative and key 
gubernatorial elections next year.   The window of 
opportunity to effectively cooperate with a divided congress 
on major reform initiatives, such as energy reform, is 
rapidly closing.  While security issues are paramount, 
prosperity is also a key priority in the minds of most 
Mexicans.  If his programs and policies prove unsuccessful in 
generating the kind of growth necessary to create sufficient 
jobs and reduce poverty, Calderon could quickly find himself 
vulnerable to a reinvigorated political opposition. 
 
---------------------- 
U.S.- Mexico Relations 
---------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU)  The Calderon government has demonstrated pragmatism 
in its posture toward the United States and bilateral 
cooperation, particularly in law enforcement, has never been 
stronger.  However, the failure of immigration reform in the 
United States was a political setback for the president.  The 
result is that he enjoys less political space in which to 
openly cooperate with the U.S. on issues of mutual bilateral 
importance. 
 
---------- 
Key Issues 
---------- 
 
¶10. (SBU)  Key Issues During Your Visit Include: 
 
-- Border Security:  In FY 2007 there were a total of 1,073 
incidents of violence that occurred at/or between the ports 
of entry against CBP law enforcement personnel, resulting in 
a 28% increase from FY06 to FY07.  The southwest border 
accounted for 99% of violent assaults against CBP law 
enforcement personnel for FY07. 
 
The protocols addressing border violence that we entered into 
with the GOM in 2006 are now in place throughout the entire 
U.S.-Mexico border.  Through these protocols, joint Border 
Security and Public Safety working groups meet locally on a 
monthly basis to discuss incidents of and mechanisms to 
address cross-border violence. 
 
Since the protocols were instituted, the most prevalent 
challenge has been the lack of GOM response to calls for 
assistance and/or support.  In response to the issue, SSP and 
CISEN have worked closely to draft a plan of incorporation of 
Mexico's Federal Police to become and equal partner in the 
protocols. 
 
The GOM is quick to posture on incidents of violence against 
undocumented aliens.  The occasional cases in which Border 
Patrol agents (often acting in self-defense) injure or kill 
undocumented aliens inevitably provoke a sharp reaction here. 
 Your visit can reinforce our message that we are concerned 
by the violence that is an unfortunate bi-product of illegal 
migration and that we need to work together to ensure safe, 
orderly and legal border crossings, while stemming the flow 
of illegal migrants.  (Note: Mexico has similar problems with 
violence along it's own southern border and the internal 
treatment of illegal migrants.) 
 
 
-- The Border Fence:  The GOM strongly opposes the 
 
MEXICO 00002160  003 OF 004 
 
 
construction of walls and other border infrastructure.  In 
this regard, minor incidents on the border, associated with 
infrastructure development, can quickly become public 
disputes.  It should be anticipated that the GOM will state 
its disapproval of DHS' efforts with SBI and the ongoing 
fence construction. 
 
 
-- Less than Lethal Munitions:  The GOM strongly opposes the 
deployment of less-than-lethal munitions (Pepperball 
Launchers, FN303, etc.) into Mexican territory.  The GOM 
considers the use of these tools an affront to basic human 
rights and takes the opportunity to criticize DHS' use of 
them.  It should be anticipated that the GOM will state their 
opposition to this tactic. 
 
 
-- Navarro-Montes:  The GOM has continuously supported the 
USG investigation into the death of Agent Luis Aguilar.  The 
GOM may use this case as an example of their support of DHS' 
efforts to curb border violence.  It should also be expected 
that the GOM will reiterate that Navarro-Montes was held for 
several months awaiting an extradition request.  This fact 
has been heavily reported in the media as well. 
 
 
-- Drugs:  Mexico is a central partner in USG efforts to 
combat drug trafficking and other trans-border threats.  The 
2000-mile border, with its high-volume ports of entry, and 
Mexico's maritime waters and airports, are vulnerable to 
criminal penetration.  As much as 80 percent of all the 
cocaine consumed in the United States transits Mexico. 
Mexico is a major source of heroin, methamphetamines, and 
marijuana, and the primary placement point for criminal 
proceeds from the U.S. into the international financial 
system.  While taking aggressive measures to tackle the 
problem at home, President Calderon has also publicly urged 
the United States to boost our own efforts to drive down 
demand for narcotics and improve controls on arms, cash, and 
precursor chemicals smuggled into Mexico. 
 
 
-- Arms Trafficking:  The smuggling of weapons into Mexico 
from the U.S. represents a major concern for Mexican 
authorities.  Approximately 95 percent of the illegal arms, 
including automatic weapons, smuggled into Mexico come from 
the U.S.  The GOM would like to see the U.S. take stricter 
measures to better enforce existing U.S. legislation on arms 
exports, which the GOM believes is fundamental to winning the 
war against organized crime and drug trafficking. 
 
ATF conducts all firearms traces of seized weapons in Mexico 
and also assist SEDENA in cases of ATF jurisdiction.  E-Trace 
has been deployed to all nine U.S. Consulate Offices in 
Mexico.  It is a means of electronically submitting a trace 
request via computer to ATF's National Tracing Center and 
providing the requestor with a response within ten days.  An 
urgent trace can be submitted and received within 24 hours. 
E-Trace is available to both U.S. and Mexican law enforcement 
at these Consulate Offices.  ATF is currently waiting for SSP 
to sign an E-Trace MOU to deploy E-Trace to the SSP at all 32 
Mexican States. 
 
DHS continues to work on a number of important initiatives 
with Mexico involving arms trafficking. ICE recently 
initiated &Operation Armas Cruzadas8 to combat the 
smuggling of weapons from the United States into Mexico.  As 
part of this initiative, DHS and GOM agencies will partner in 
unprecedented bilateral interdiction, investigation, an 
intelligence-sharing activities to identify, disrupt, and 
dismantle cross-border criminal networks that smuggle weapons 
from the United States into Mexico. 
 
Moreover, DOD through the Defense Attache has established a 
close working relationship with SEDENA relative to firearms 
seizures.  Through "Operation Chuck Wagon" they assist SEDENA 
in identifying high caliber and military type weapons (i.e. 
LAW rockets, RPG's and grenades). 
 
 
-- Southern Border:  Mexico's southern border remains 
extremely vulnerable to illegal immigration, trafficking in 
persons, and the smuggling of all manner of contraband, 
 
MEXICO 00002160  004 OF 004 
 
 
including drugs/precursors.  It is an issue of great concern 
to the GOM, which attributes its lack of success in dealing 
with the problem to the difficult local terrain; the lack of 
enforcement infrastructure; the historically informal nature 
of the border, particularly among local residents; and the 
inadequate border security efforts of its southern neighbors, 
Guatemala and Belize.  Nevertheless, progress in securing 
Mexico's southern border is of vital importance in achieving 
our own security objectives.  Last year Calderon announced 
plans for a Safe Southern Border Program, designed to 
strengthen Mexico's law enforcement efforts in the south, 
improve treatment of illegal immigrants, and create a guest 
worker program for Central Americans.  In your meetings, you 
may wish to inquire about the status of Mexican efforts to 
develop a comprehensive strategy to secure the southern 
frontier. 
 
 
-- Maritime Migration.:  The GOM is concerned about the 
increase in Cuban migration through Mexico to the United 
States.  Many GOM officials fear that if the migration 
increases -- or there is a mass migration from Cuba -- the 
United States will shut down its borders and look to Mexico 
to solve what it considers a U.S. problem. 
 
 
-- Maritime Operations:  The USCG and SEMAR are working 
exceptionally well together tacking maritime issues: 
smuggling, port security, search and rescue, and 
infrastructure protection.  SEMAR would like complete 
interoperability with the USCG across all mission areas. 
 
 
-- Disaster relief:  SEDENA and SEMAR are very involved in 
disaster relief and consider themselves experts.  The 
assisted the United States during Hurricane Katrina. 
Visit Mexico City's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/mexicocity and the North American 
Partnership Blog at http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
PARNELL