08MOSCOW2343
Russian TV paints Georgia-US plot in South Ossetia
Mon Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO7878
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #2343/01 2241311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111311Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9414
INFO RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI PRIORITY 3874
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 002343 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS PINR PINS PNAT PREL GG RS
 
SUBJECT: Russian TV paints Georgia-US plot in South Ossetia 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Russian broadcast coverage of the events in South 
Ossetia has placed the onus of the conflict on Georgia.  We have 
noticed signs that some broadcast and electronic media outlets are 
distorting coverage to suggest that the conflict is part of a 
U.S./NATO plot against Russia.  Broadcast coverage was devoted 
particularly to civilian casualties, allegedly inflicted by Georgian 
troops, and reports of Russian military activity within Georgian 
territory received little to no play.  Reports of U.S., NATO, and 
other "unfriendly" (ex. Ukrainian, Baltic) involvement on the ground 
and support for Georgia are cited regularly.  Statements by U.S. 
officials are covered but often accompanied by commentary making it 
clear Georgia is acting on behalf of U.S. interests.  More 
alarmingly, false stories originating on the Internet have started 
to gain speed, claiming direct U.S. military involvement in the 
conflict.  Overall, the Russian media has bent the truth at the same 
time it accuses the West of an anti-Russian bias.  End summary. 
 
Good vs. Evil 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Russian television has turned the conflict in South 
Ossetia into a classic good (Russia) versus evil (Georgia/U.S.) 
narrative.  Rossiya, the state television channel, focused its 
coverage on the successful efforts of Russian and South Ossetian 
troops to beat back Georgian "aggression" and the civilian 
casualties inflicted by Georgian troops.  Action shots of Russian 
tanks and North Ossetian "volunteers" rolling towards Tskhinvali are 
interspersed with pictures of wounded South Ossetian civilians, 
local residents hiding in their basements, and damaged and destroyed 
buildings.  All civilian casualties are attributed to Georgian 
troops and little or no mention is made of Russian military action 
in Gori or other areas outside South Ossetia.  Russian officials 
accusing Georgia  of "genocide" against South Ossetia are thrown 
into news broadcasts and heavy emphasis was placed on the 
humanitarian crisis "created" by Tbilisi.  These genocide 
accusations were accompanied by calls for South Ossetia to be 
severed from Georgia, as seen on the August 11th afternoon news 
broadcast on NTV, a domestic Russian TV channel. 
 
Washington Pulling the Strings 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) While Georgian president Mikhail Saakashvili is 
personified as being most responsible for the "crimes" committed in 
South Ossetia, both Rossiya and Channel One (another 
state-affiliated broadcaster) portrayed the U.S. as ultimately in 
control of the situation.  Rossiya made a point of showing 
Saakashvili announce martial law in English, with the newscaster 
saying that Saakashvili was "awaiting" a statement from POTUS. 
Reports of up to four U.S. arms shipments per day to Georgia by the 
Russian website www.newsru.com have sprouted on the Internet.  These 
reports later surfaced in the 1 PM news broadcast on NTV, a Russian 
domestic channel.  In addition, online media announced over the 
August 9-10 weekend that U.S. soldiers were captured or killed in 
South Ossetia; these reports have since disappeared by the afternoon 
of August 11, but Interfax quoted a South Ossetian hospital 
administrator as saying there were "foreigners" in his facility. 
Likewise, www.lenta.ru carried a report dated August 11 asserting 
that mercenaries from Ukraine and the Baltic states were fighting in 
South Ossetia on the Georgian side.  While these stories have not 
gained much traction yet, their existence suggests that pro-Russian 
forces could be floating a trial balloon to see how the public 
responds to an anti-U.S., anti-foreigner campaign. 
 
The Deck is Stacked Against Us! 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Russian media and officials have also been preoccupied 
with the "biased" Western broadcast reporting of the conflict.  On 
August 10, Channel One and Rossiya both devoted large amounts of 
airtime to criticizing Western television coverage as being 
pro-Georgian and of turning a blind eye to the plight of South 
Ossetians who have suffered from Georgian aggression.  In a Rossiya 
report on a BBC report of the Russian bombing of Gori, the 
commentator said the BBC's coverage "... suggests that should Russia 
get the upper hand over Georgia, other former Soviet republics may 
come under threat."  Channel One noted on the night of August 10 
that "His (Saakashvili's) statements and footage of what is 
described as Russia's bombing of Gori is what Western coverage is 
limited to.  The goal is that no one in the West should have any 
doubts about who attacked whom in this conflict."  If this 
commentary was not clear enough, the Russian news service Interfax 
quoted Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Karasin as saying "We would 
like Western television to broadcast not only pictures of Russian 
tanks... but also show the suffering of the Ossetian people, dead 
elderly people and children, villages razed to the ground and 
Tskhinvali lying almost in ruins. This would be objective reporting. 
 
MOSCOW 00002343  002 OF 002 
 
 
The rest are politically-motivated versions." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Russian print media, which reaches a smaller, but arguably 
more elite and influential audience, has published a wider range of 
coverage and opinions, some critical of Russian's actions.  Like 
broadcast, the print press also highlighted the media's role 
covering the conflict: Business-oriented Vedemosti noted that, 
"Russian authorities allowed their Georgian opponents to win a 
blitzkrieg in the media ... Saakashvili gives several interviews on 
Western TV every day, depicting Russia as the aggressor. ...As soon 
as the attack on Tskhinvali began, Russian authorities should have 
sent foreign journalists to the conflict zone, under protection of 
the Russian military, and give the floor to OSCE representatives who 
would confirm the scale of destruction, and victims among civilians 
and peacekeepers.  Instead, Russian TV told about Saakashvili's ties 
to the U.S." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment: The message Russian television is sending its 
audience seems to be threefold: 1) We're fighting the good fight; 2) 
It's a Washington-Tbilisi conspiracy against Russia; and 3) We are 
not going to get a fair shake in the Western media.  The goal seems 
to be to convince the Russian domestic audience that Russia is not 
only engaged in a noble struggle but that it had no choice because 
of Washington's and Saakashvili's machinations.  The focus on the 
"unfair" reporting by Western media could be an attempt to inoculate 
the Russian public from future international condemnation of Russian 
activity in the region.  Thus far, intentional plants or 
misrepresentation in the Russian media seems mostly confined to the 
Internet and wire services. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment continued: The other interesting feature of 
Russian television reporting is its emphasis on the inhumane 
conditions allegedly created by Georgia.  Accompanied by comments by 
South Ossetian and Abkhazian leaders that Georgia had forfeited its 
right to rule over South Ossetia, Russian media may be trying to lay 
the groundwork for the Russian government to make a comparison 
between Kosovo and South Ossetia with the argument that like Kosovo, 
South Ossetia should be severed from its current ruler out of 
humanitarian considerations.  End comment.