08OTTAWA646
CANADA'S RESPONSE TO CYCLONE NARGIS
Fri May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO0130
PP RUEHDT RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHPB RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0646/01 1302016
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 092016Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7836
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1275
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0414UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000646 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS (COPE) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL BM CA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S RESPONSE TO CYCLONE NARGIS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 48651 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 621 
 
Sensitive but unclassified 
 
¶1. (sbu) Canada is committed to providing emergency aid to 
Burma, but remains stymied by the Burmese regime's actions 
blocking humanitarian relief, Foreign Affairs and 
International Trade's Director of Humanitarian Affairs and 
Disasters Response Group Leslie Hope told Econcouns on May 9. 
 Joined by Lt. Commander Mike McKay, seconded from the 
Canadian Expeditionary Force Command (CEFCOM) to help 
coordinate Canada's Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) 
efforts, Hope stated that Canada shared the U.S. views and 
experiences laid out in ref a.  She said the initial obstacle 
is simply being allowed into Burma.  Once that is overcome, 
attention would turn toward building capacity infrastructure 
and getting access to the areas devastated by the cyclone. 
Hope added that some Canadian diplomats stationed in Thailand 
-- but also accredited to Burma -- might soon be receiving 
entry visas. 
 
¶2. (sbu) Hope stated that Canada "is pressing for (the 
delivery of) humanitarian assistance through the UN." She 
said this effort includes public statements by Ministers (see 
ref b and paragraph 5), demarches encouraging countries with 
ties to Burma to lobby the regime, and convoking the Burmese 
charge d'affaires in Ottawa.  Hope stated that the Burmese 
CDA had been "noncommittal" to Canadian entreaties, only 
promising to fax them to Rangoon. 
 
¶3. (sbu) Canada's C$2 million pledge for Burma relief 
announced on May 5 (ref b) would undoubtedly increase if and 
when the Burmese regime allowed international aid to flow 
into the country, Hope stated.  She also noted that Minister 
for International Cooperation Bev Oda's May 8 announcement of 
C$500,000 for the International Federation of the Red Cross 
and Red Crescent (IFRC) is part of the initial C$2 million 
pledge, and is not an additional allocation.  Hope said 
Canada's estimate of the total international assistance 
pledged to date was $41 million.  She also stated that Canada 
would be closely watching the (expected) May 9 appeal by the 
World Food Programme (WFP) for $100 million in pledges, much 
of which would go for building logistical and 
telecommunications infrastructure needed for delivering 
assistance. 
 
¶4. (sbu) Lt Commander McKay stated that a four-person 
Canadian DART is now in Bangkok, awaiting permission to enter 
Burma.  Charged with assessing the political environment as 
well as humanitarian needs, the DART would -- under normal 
circumstances -- lead the way for a seven-member 
reconnaissance team, McKay said.  Based on the two teams' 
recommendations, the military would then decide if the entire 
DART apparatus (some 240 diplomatic, military, and aid 
personnel) should deploy and whether other Canadian forces 
should become involved.  McKay expressed doubt that any 
Canadian DART team would be allowed to enter Burma, but 
acknowledged the need to make "public statement" by sending a 
team to the region. 
 
¶5. (u) In addition to the May 5 statement on providing 
humanitarian assistance to Burma (ref b), Canada released 
another statement the evening of May 8. 
 
Begin text: 
 
The Honourable Maxime Bernier, Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
and the Honourable Beverley J. Oda, Minister of International 
Cooperation, today offered the service of Canada's Disaster 
Assistance Response Team (DART) following Tropical Cyclone 
Nargis, and urged the Government of Burma to grant immediate 
QNargis, and urged the Government of Burma to grant immediate 
access to humanitarian actors: 
 
"As the number of dead and missing continues to grow, the 
international community has responded rapidly to offer 
much-needed humanitarian assistance to communities in Burma 
affected by this disaster," the ministers said.  "Although we 
are heartened by the news that some United Nations officials 
and relief flights are gaining access, we urge the Government 
of Burma to move quickly to grant immediate full and 
unhindered humanitarian access, including the necessary visas 
and customs clearance, so that desperately needed assistance 
may reach the people of Burma." 
 
"Earlier today," said Minister Bernier, "I spoke with UN 
 
OTTAWA 00000646  002 OF 002 
 
 
Secretary General Ban Ki Moon and reconfirmed Canada's 
support and willingness to help.  We have already pledged up 
to $2 million in humanitarian relief.  We are now offering 
the services of our Disaster Assistance Response Team to help 
with relief efforts.  A Canadian advance team has left for 
the region to assess how Canada can best deliver its support." 
 
The ministers added, "Given the widespread and devastating 
effects of Tropical Cyclone Nargis, Canada calls upon the 
Burmese government to focus on meeting the immediate needs of 
its people rather than pushing forward with the upcoming 
referendum on the Constitution. 
 
"The window of opportunity to save lives and alleviate 
suffering is rapidly closing.  We cannot afford to wait any 
longer." 
 
End text. 
 
¶6. (u) On May 9, Canada's House of Commons unanimously 
adopted a motion regarding Burma. 
 
Begin text: 
 
"That the House: 
 
(a) denounce the Burmese military regime's deplorable 
response to the crisis following Cyclone Nargis: 
 
(b) condemn the unprecedented seizure of international aid 
shipments by the military regime; 
 
(c) urge the Burmese regime to allow full and unrestricted 
access to international aid agencies and nongovernmental 
organizations: 
 
and (d) reaffirms its support for the Burmese people during 
this tragic period in their history. 
 
End text. 
 
Visit Canada,s Economy and Environment Forum at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/can ada 
 
WILKINS