08OTTAWA1059
THE ROLE OF THE PROVINCIAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONS
Fri Aug 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO6814
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1059/01 2212055
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 082055Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8306
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 OTTAWA 001059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV CA
SUBJECT: THE ROLE OF THE PROVINCIAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONS 
 
REF:  OTTAWA 1032 (Federal HR Commission) 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  Canadian provincial human rights commissions and 
tribunals administer provincial human rights law, with varying 
provisions, procedures, and jurisdictions. While the public has 
traditionally viewed these commissions and tribunals as defenders of 
human rights, they are coming under increasing criticism, especially 
for their work related to hate speech and minority rights.  Mission 
Canada on July 28 held a DVC with reporting officers from Embassy 
and constituent posts on the role and perceptions of the federal and 
provincial human rights commissions and tribunals.  Reftel discussed 
the federal Canadian Human Rights Commission; this message includes 
information from Mission Canada poloffs on the commissions and 
tribunals in their respective consular districts.  End summary. 
 
Procedures and Jurisdictions Differ 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Provincial human rights commissions and/or tribunals 
administer provincial human rights laws, with varying provisions, 
procedures, and jurisdictions.  For example, both British Columbia 
and Ontario practice direct-claims models in which complaints 
proceed directly to tribunal, while commissions in all other 
provinces and the territories provide some form of prior screening 
and refer only a limited number of cases to formal adjudication. 
Every province administers some type of dispute resolution 
mechanism, and most also run human rights education and 
discrimination prevention programs. 
 
Atlantic Canada 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The human rights commissions in the four Atlantic provinces 
focus on complaints dealing with employment situations, physical 
disabilities, gender issues, mental disabilities, and age.  As 
populations in Atlantic Canada are largely homogenous, with between 
95 and 99 pct of Atlantic Canadians tracing their roots to the 
British Isles and Europe, few cases of racial discrimination feature 
in the case-load.  The public in Atlantic Canada generally views the 
commissions as important to upholding human rights.  However, public 
opinion towards the role of the commissions in minority rights 
cases, especially regarding ethnic and religious rights, is growing 
increasingly negative, causing a backlash against those groups that 
bring such cases to the commissions.  In one controversial case, the 
Nova Scotia Human Rights Commission in 2007 ruled that a town 
council's decision not to fly the gay pride flag over city hall, and 
its policies regarding homosexual rights in general, were contrary 
to Nova Scotia's Human Rights Act. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to Nova Scotia Human Rights Commission Director 
and CEO Krista Daley (please protect), disability rights complaints 
are the most common, half of which are employment-related cases 
involving mental illness.  Daley noted that, since the expansion of 
the Commission's mandate to apply to aboriginal issues, the 
Commission has also seen an increasing number of cases involving 
aboriginals.  She noted that this mandate change was especially 
important for aboriginal women, who can now bring sexual harassment 
cases before the Commission.  Daley told the Halifax Consul General 
that she was frustrated by the "patchwork" of human rights 
commissions in each jurisdiction in Canada, all with different 
mandates and operations structures.  She noted that an individual 
living in one province may have the right to bring a case before 
his/her commission, but this person may not have the same right in a 
different province.  For example, British Columbia and Nova Scotia 
commissions have jurisdiction over media, but other provincial 
Qcommissions have jurisdiction over media, but other provincial 
commissions do not.  Daley also remarked that human rights 
commissions across Canada are under siege in the media due to 
misinformation and confusion about their respective mandates, 
stemming largely from the Maclean's case, which involves allegations 
that Maclean's magazine violated human rights by publishing 
allegedly "anti-Islamic" articles and book excerpts written by 
author Mark Steyn (reftel).  She stated that the provincial 
government is considering withdrawing the Nova Scotia Human Rights 
Commission's mandate over media cases, and noted that she supported 
the move. 
 
Quebec 
---------- 
 
¶5.  (U) The Quebec Human Rights Commission (Commission des droits de 
la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) upholds and promotes the 
Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms of Quebec.  According to Quebec 
Human Rights Commission Public Liaison Officer Daniella Robichaud, 
the majority of complaints the Commission receives are related to 
employment or housing.  The Commission resolves the bulk of 
inquiries through mediation.  The Commission's responsibilities 
include: receiving inquires and complaints; conducting 
investigations; educating the public about human rights; analyzing 
laws, bills and regulations and, when they are contrary to the 
Charter, making recommendations to the government; and conducting 
 
OTTAWA 00001059  002 OF 004 
 
 
and encouraging research and publication on human rights and 
freedoms.  The Commission also provides support for businesses and 
organizations implementing affirmative action programs, a 
requirement for companies with over $100,000 in contracts with the 
provincial government.  The Quebec Human Rights Commission has the 
power to initiate investigations, including of the government 
itself, without representing a specific complainant.  In addition, 
the Commission's legal department is required to review all 
legislation passed by Quebec's National Assembly to ensure 
provincial laws and regulations comply with the Charter of Human 
Rights and Freedoms of Quebec.  Uniquely, the Commission also has a 
mandate to promote and uphold the rights of children under the Youth 
Protection Act and the Youth Criminal Justice Act. 
 
¶6. (U) In Quebec, the debate over "reasonable accommodation" since 
2006 and the subsequent Bouchard-Taylor Commission's hearings have 
largely subsumed dialogue over human rights and heightened ethnic 
and religious sensitivities, resulting in a focus on preserving 
"Quebecois values."  The Commission has contributed to Quebec's 
focus on human rights and freedoms by instituting one of the most 
active outreach efforts, maintaining an education department that 
seeks to engage the community to prevent future human rights 
violations.  Currently, the Commission is working with the municipal 
police to reduce mistreatment of homeless youths in Montreal.  It 
has also worked with an NGO to publish a booklet for youths on the 
rights of those detained or arrested by the police.  This fall, the 
Commission will establish a telephone hotline dedicated to receiving 
complaints of human rights abuses related to reasonable 
accommodation. 
 
¶7. (U) In early 2008, the Quebec Human Rights Commission ruled on a 
case dealing with the application of U.S. International Traffic in 
Arms Regulations (ITAR).  The Commission ruled that Bell Helicopters 
was guilty of practicing discriminatory hiring practices.  Bell 
argued that its rejection of an internship application from a 
Haitian-Canadian dual citizen was in compliance with ITAR 
restrictions against hiring citizens of certain countries to work on 
U.S. military contracts.  Following the Commission's finding (but 
before the case reached the tribunal stage) Bell settled with the 
complainant.  Until a tribunal judge rules decisively on the issues 
involved in the case, companies remain at risk of human rights 
commissions and tribunals accepting and hearing complaints related 
to ITAR compliance. 
 
Ontario 
---------- 
 
 
¶8. (U) The Ontario Human Rights Commission received approximately 
42,000 complaints in April 2006 through March 2007, of which 2,337 
led to formal complaints.  More than 56 pct of these complaints 
focused on disability-related discrimination, and over 36 pct were 
related to race.  The Ontario Human Rights Code requires that 
complaints be filed within one year of an incident of alleged 
discrimination.  As of June 2008, the Ontario Human Rights 
Commission no longer processes discrimination complaints, which 
instead proceed directly to the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario. 
The change is designed to expedite the process and eliminate a case 
backlog of between 2 and 4 years.  The Ontario Commission has ruled 
that it does not have jurisdiction over media-related cases.  In the 
Maclean's case, while it denounced the magazine for "Islamophobic 
portrayals of Muslims" and "promoting destructive, xenophobic 
opinions," it dismissed the case, ruling it had no jurisdiction over 
print media.  According to the Commission, while Section 13 of the 
Qprint media.  According to the Commission, while Section 13 of the 
Ontario Human Rights Code makes it illegal to display or publish 
certain kinds of offensive material, its limitations are too narrow 
to apply to most cases. 
 
Manitoba 
------------ 
 
¶9. (U) The Manitoba Human Rights Commission screens complaints, 
provides mediation, and refers cases that cannot be otherwise 
resolved to independent adjudication in public hearings.  Complaints 
must be filed within six months of an incident of alleged 
discrimination.  Cases that proceed to adjudication must have a 
significant "public interest" component and the Commission presents 
the case at the hearing on behalf of both the Commission and the 
complainant.  As with the majority of the commissions, the greatest 
proportion (80 pct) of complaints relate to employment and 
disability.  Some 90 pct of Manitoba employers fall under the 
Commission's jurisdiction.  The Commission also handles complaints 
related to aboriginal issues, gender, policing and alleged racial 
profiling, particularly of aboriginals.  In 2006, the Commission 
received 342 inquiries or pre-complaints, of which 297 became formal 
complaints and seven went to adjudication. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Representatives of the Manitoba Human Rights Commission 
characterize their organization as a proactive, medium-sized agency 
that has largely escaped the negative criticism leveled at human 
rights commissions in Western Canada. The Commission attributes this 
 
OTTAWA 00001059  003 OF 004 
 
 
to an active focus on public education, awareness, and community 
outreach --  particularly to youth and employers -- as well as to 
efforts to partner with academic and community groups to explore, 
for example, "the next generation" of human rights issues, including 
the environment.  The Commission draws a clear distinction between 
itself and its Western counterparts with respect to hate speech. 
Manitoba Human Rights Commission Executive Director Dianne Scarth 
argued that the Commission would not, for example, have accepted the 
Maclean's case, due to the narrower scope of the province's human 
rights code, as well as to a non-confrontational "different climate" 
of public discourse.  She noted that the Manitoba Commission was 
concerned by the negative publicity generated by the Maclean's case 
and, although it ultimately decided not to comment, had considered 
issuing a formal public statement regarding its effect on human 
rights commissions across the country.  In general, the Manitoba 
Commission appears enthusiastic about expanding its mandate and its 
interpretation of human rights in the province, although it 
acknowledges that public opinion is divided over how broad that 
mandate should be. 
 
¶11. (U) The federal Canadian Human Rights Commission also maintains 
an independent presence in Manitoba in the form of its Aboriginal 
Initiative, which has been based in Winnipeg since 2007.  The office 
is responsible for research and knowledge-building on human rights 
issues within federal jurisdiction that affect aboriginal peoples 
across Canada.  Following the passage of legislation in June 2008 
extending the Canadian Human Rights Act to aboriginal peoples 
on-reserve, the Aboriginal Initiative is leading the federal 
Commission through a three-year transition period to deal with the 
expansion of its mandate, develop culturally appropriate dispute 
resolution models and redress mechanisms, and raise community 
awareness through education and outreach. 
 
Alberta and Saskatchewan 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Over 95 pct of complaints brought to both the Alberta Human 
Rights Commission and the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission are 
employment-related, with approximately one third focusing on mental 
and physical disabilities and a very small percent dealing with hate 
speech.  The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission receives 
approximately 300 to 400 cases each year, of which approximately 20 
pct relate to discrimination based on ancestry (including 
nationality and race), and another 20 pct relate to gender.  The 
neighboring Alberta Human Rights Commission (which covers a 
population of about 3 million people, triple that of Saskatchewan), 
receives between 600 and 800 cases per year, of which approximately 
34 pct deal with physical disability, 25 pct with gender, and 13 pct 
with mental disability.  In both provinces, parties resolve the 
majority of cases through settlement.  The Alberta Human Rights 
Commission resolves approximately 97 pct of inquiries through its 
reconciliation process, and the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 
referred only eight pct of cases to tribunal between 2006 and 2007. 
 
 
¶13. (U) While a relatively small number of cases in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan involve hate speech, these cases have generated the 
most controversy and press coverage, with an increasingly vocal 
group of critics in Western Canada suggesting the commissions have 
strayed into censorship at the expense of free speech.  In one 
controversial hate speech case, the Alberta Human Rights Commission 
ruled that Stephen Boissoin, who identified himself as a pastor and 
Qruled that Stephen Boissoin, who identified himself as a pastor and 
executive director of the Concerned Christian Coalition, violated 
Alberta's Human Rights, Citizenship and Multiculturalism Act by 
publishing statements in a local newspaper "likely to expose 
homosexuals" to "hatred and contempt due to their sexual 
preference."  Boissoin had written a letter published in the Red 
Deer Advocate that, he argued, was based on his church's teaching 
against homosexual behavior.  In May 2007, the Commission ordered 
that Boissoin "cease publishing, in newspapers, by email, on the 
radio, in public speeches, or on the Internet, in the future, 
disparaging remarks about gays and homosexuals," publish a written 
apology, and pay $5,000 in damages. 
 
¶14. (U) On August 6, 2008, following a year-long investigation, the 
Alberta Human Rights Commission rejected a complaint by the Edmonton 
Council of Muslim Communities against former Western Standard 
publisher Ezra Levant over his republication of the Danish Muhammad 
cartoons.  The Commission ruled it would not refer the complaint for 
panel hearing, stating that while the cartoons were "stereotypical, 
negative and offensive," they were "related to relevant and timely 
news" and were "not simply gratuitously included."  In February 
2008, a Calgary Muslim leader withdrew a similar complaint against 
Levant.  The complaints generated considerable public debated about 
the commission's mandate over hate speech.  Since the filing of the 
complaints, Ezra Levant has become an outspoken and well-known 
critic of the commissions, arguing they are limiting free speech and 
restricting freedom of expression. 
 
British Columbia 
--------------------- 
 
OTTAWA 00001059  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶15.  (U)   The British Columbia Human Rights Tribunal receives 
approximately 11,000 complaints each year, with about 50 to 75 going 
to hearing, and parties either dropping or resolving through 
mediation the remainder.  Approximately 70 pct of complaints are 
employment-related.  British Columbia re-organized its commission 
system in 2005, turning its Human Rights Commission into a tribunal 
and stripping the institution of much of its power.  Previously, the 
commission could represent parties, conduct investigations, and run 
educational programs.  The tribunal possesses none of these powers. 
Cases now proceed almost directly to the complaint stage, and go 
through a streamlined process.  After receiving a complaint, the 
Tribunal offers the parties the option of attending a 
tribunal-assisted settlement meeting prior to the respondent filing 
a response.  A settlement meeting may also take place at any later 
stage.  In addition, respondents have the right to ask for 
dismissal, which allows a tribunal judge to review written evidence 
ahead of a hearing to determine validity.  In the 2006-2007 
reporting year, the Tribunal handled 1,016 complaints, 222 of which 
it threw out at initial screening.  Of the complaints it received, 
61 pct were employment-related.  The most common grounds for 
discrimination were physical disability, gender (including 
pregnancy), and mental disability. The Tribunal settled (either 
through mediation or hearing) 44 pct of complaints, did not accept 
21 pct for review, and dismissed 19 pct.  Parties withdrew or 
abandoned 9 pct and 7 pct respectively. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The British Columbia Human Rights Tribunal heard testimony 
in the Maclean's case in early June 2008 and is currently 
deliberating, with a decision not likely for several months, 
possibly as late as December 2008.  The Tribunal received written 
submissions in the case up to the beginning of July.  The Maclean's 
case is only the second complaint to be brought under the 
discriminatory publications provisions of the British Columbia Human 
Rights Code.  Officials informally commented to Poloff that the case 
proceeded to the hearing stage largely because neither party would 
agree to mediation, and because Maclean's refused to file an 
application for dismissal of the case, implying that both sides were 
looking to gain publicity for their causes. 
 
BREESE