08PHNOMPENH463
CAMBODIA TIER 2 ANNOUNCEMENT: GOVERNMENT PLEDGES
Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO2957
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0463/01 1581040
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061040Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000463 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/MLS, G/TIP, AND DRL 
USAID FOR ASIA BUREAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KWMN CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA TIER 2 ANNOUNCEMENT: GOVERNMENT PLEDGES 
TO DO MORE 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  During a June 5 meeting with Charge 
d'Affaires, Cambodian Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) and 
Minister of Interior Sar Kheng expressed pleasure that the 
U.S. had recognized Cambodia's hard work to combat 
trafficking in persons (TIP) by placing Cambodia on Tier 2 
for 2008, and pledged that the government will do more. 
Following the meeting, the Charge and the DPM held a joint 
press conference with 45 media representatives -- more media 
reps than the Mission has counted at other Embassy affiliated 
press conferences.  Sar Kheng reiterated his message in 
comments to the press, stating that Cambodia aspires to be a 
Tier 1 country fully compliant with the Trafficking Victims 
Protection Act (TVPA).  During the press conference, 
questions were taken regarding recent reports by prostitutes' 
rights groups that a recently intensified effort to shut down 
brothels has led to the abuse of prostitutes while in 
security force detention, and to a lack of access to HIV/AIDS 
prevention and treatment.  On TIP and HIV/AIDS, the Charge 
responded that this is not an "either-or" proposition -- we 
need to think of strategies that will work to target both U.S 
priorities.  End summary. 
 
Cambodia Pleased With Tier Rating, Seeks To Do More 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Charge officially delivered the news of 
Cambodia's Tier 2 ranking to DPM Sar Kheng on June 5.  The 
DPM said it was with "extreme happiness" that he received the 
news of being upgraded from Tier 2 Watch List, and that he 
was pleased that the U.S. Government had recognized 
Cambodia's hard work to combat TIP.  He said that Cambodia's 
success cannot be disconnected from the cooperation and 
assistance of the U.S. through which Cambodia has gained 
experience and ideas that will be the basis for the country's 
future work.  Sar Kheng, who had clearly read the report 
carefully, remarked that he is not yet satisfied with 
Cambodia's anti-TIP efforts and agreed with the TIP Report's 
recommendations.  During a joint press conference following 
the meeting, Sar Kheng was honest in recognizing remaining 
challenges and told the press that Cambodia will strive over 
time to reach a Tier 1 rating.  (Note:  DPM and Minister of 
Interior Sar Kheng has largely led Cambodia's anti-TIP 
efforts from the highest levels of the government, and 
currently serves as the head of the government's High Level 
Working Group overseeing the Cambodian anti-TIP National Task 
Force (NTF).  End note.) 
 
Anti-TIP Inter-Agency Cooperation Is Key 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) During the meeting, Sar Kheng noted what he 
believes are some of the most significant achievements over 
the past year including greater government inter-agency 
cooperation in combating TIP, and improved cooperation with 
NGOs, international actors, and others that work on this 
issue.  He mentioned he has also seen cooperation between the 
government and restaurant, hotel, and entertainment 
establishment owners. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The DPM reflected on internal meetings held over 
the past year with MOI, Ministry of Women's Affairs (MOWA), 
and other NTF officials that put into place the steps to 
accomplish the significant activities mentioned in the TIP 
Report this year.  He specifically mentioned meetings 
regarding the structuring of the National Task Force and the 
High Level Working Group as an oversight mechanism.  He said 
the government remains committed to holding meetings about 
the next steps for the country, including implementation of 
the new anti-TIP law.  The Charge commented on the RGC's 
recognition and ownership of its TIP problem, its willingness 
to address the issue, and its continued determination to act 
on behalf of its most vulnerable citizens. 
 
Questions on TIP, HIV/AIDS; Reports of Prostitutes Abused 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶5.  (U) DPM Sar Kheng took questions regarding recent reports 
by prostitutes' rights groups that the RGC's anti-TIP efforts 
have led to brothel closures where HIV/AIDS and reproductive 
health workers previously had access to provide prevention 
information and condoms.  Reports have indicated that 
prostitutes fear they will be targeted by police if they 
actively seek such health services.  In addition, the DPM 
took a question about related reports that brothel raid 
activity has resulted in detained prostitutes being raped or 
otherwise abused by police and security guards while in 
detention.  The DPM said the RGC would investigate these 
allegations, with both MOI and the Ministry of Women's 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000463  002 OF 002 
 
 
Affairs playing a role, along with the NTF. 
 
¶6.  (U) Some of the rights groups are critical of the 
country's new anti-TIP law as the "instigator" of the 
targeting of prostitutes.  Sar Kheng said that the RGC stands 
by its own law -- a law that is not meant to be an attack on 
prostitutes but to stop pimps and others benefiting from 
exploitation.  He insisted that the government's efforts are 
not stopping here and that the NTF and the ministries 
involved will continue to be leaders in the efforts to stop 
TIP and to look at all of the issues involved. 
 
¶7.  (U) According to PAO, the joint press conference drew 
more than 45 media representatives, a larger showing than any 
other U.S. Mission-affiliated press conference he's seen at 
post.  Press coverage overall was non-sensational and 
accurately portrayed accomplishments and remaining 
challenges.  Some of the media reports also highlighted 
issues raised by the groups working with prostitutes. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) One local English press article on the TIP Report 
announcement quoted two anti-TIP NGO representatives who 
welcomed the tier rating news, one stating that it serves as 
evidence that anti-trafficking efforts are working.  After a 
year of hard work by the RGC to better address its TIP 
problems, it is noteworthy that the government is not resting 
on its laurels.  While we understand that Sar Kheng was 
elated by news of Cambodia's upgrade, he was quite focused 
during both our private meeting and the press conference on 
the need for continued attention to this still-immense 
problem.  Backed by senior members of the NTF, he presented 
the picture of a serious, all-of-government commitment. 
Even as the government faces a backlash from groups critical 
of its policies the RGC has remained open to information and 
suggestions to help it improve. 
MUSSOMELI