08PORTOFSPAIN88
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO: GOVERNMENT TAKES CASTRO'S
Thu Feb 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Port Of Spain
VZCZCXRO3826
RR RUEHGR
DE RUEHSP #0088/01 0521433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211433Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY PORT OF SPAIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8995
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3750
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0049UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PORT OF SPAIN 000088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR,WHA/CCA AND INR/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CU TD
SUBJECT: TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO: GOVERNMENT TAKES CASTRO'S 
RESIGNATION IN STRIDE, NO MAJOR CHANGES IN RELATIONS 
FORESEEN 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Foreign Ministry noted in an official 
February 19 statement that the resignation of Fidel Castro 
would not affect the cordial relations between TT and Cuba. 
The communique noted Cuban assistance to Trinidad and 
"saluted" Castro, but was measured in tone.  Speaking on 
February 20, PM Manning was a bit more effusive, noting that 
Castro "has been a friend to many in the Caribbean, including 
myself."  Press commentary was mixed.  For their parts, 
various trade unions praised Castro as a strong leader and an 
inspiration.  A noted academic observed to us that while the 
GOTT viewed some human rights and regional issues concerning 
Cuba with concern, it would never speak out against a 
long-time friend.  Cuban doctors are working in TT, and two 
"super-farms" projects with Cuban participation are on the 
horizon.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) The TT Ministry of Foreign Affairs released the 
following communique on February 19 concerning Fidel Castro's 
resignation: 
 
Begin text:  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has noted the 
announcement of Dr. Fidel Castro Ruz that due to health 
reasons, he will not accept another five-year term as 
President and Commander of the Armed Forces.  Dr. Castro was 
elected as a Member of Parliament at the recent elections. 
 
Since December 1972, Trinidad and Tobago and Cuba have had 
diplomatic relations covering cooperation in a wide range of 
areas supportive of economic and social development. 
 
Further, over the years, Cuba has provided valuable 
assistance to Trinidad and Tobago in many ways, through the 
provision of scholarships, manpower support in the medical 
services area (mainly doctors and nurses) and technical 
assistance in the field of agriculture, particularly in 
respect of the establishment of two large-scale commercial 
farms to be located at Tucker Valley in Chaguaramas. 
 
The Ministry wishes to recognize and salute the forty-nine 
years of Dr. Castro's leadership to the people of the 
Republic of Cuba.  The change in Cuban leadership will in no 
way affect the cordiality or commitment of this Government's 
relationship with Cuba, and the strengthening of relations at 
the bilateral level.  End Text. 
 
¶3. (U) The office of TT Prime Minister Patrick Manning said 
February 19 that Manning was aware of Castro's resignation, 
but had no official position to offer.  A day later, however, 
Manning told the press (at a joint news conference with 
visiting Barbados PM David Thompson) that, "President Castro 
has been a friend to many in the Caribbean, including myself. 
 There's hardly a country in the Caribbean who is not in a 
position to say they have gone to the Government of Cuba for 
assistance of one kind or the next and it did not come." 
Manning then recalled his heart valve replacement surgery in 
Cuba in 1998 and his 2005 pacemaker implant there.  Manning 
concluded that he intended to send Castro a letter thanking 
the Cuban for his services to the Caribbean. 
 
¶4. (U) Meanwhile, several Trinbagonian trade union leaders 
lauded Castro.  David Abdullah, president of the Federation 
of Independent Trade Unions and NGOs, called Castro "a 
remarkable human being and an outstanding leader who has 
provided inspiration to millions the world over in their 
struggle for social justice, equity, dignity and peace." 
Lyle Townsend, general secretary of the Communication Workers 
Union, hailed the Cuban as "an inspiration to all progressive 
trade union leaders in the country, and the best Caribbean 
leader we have seen for 100 years."  Curtis John, president 
of the Aviation Communication and Allied Workers Union, said 
Castro was a "very strong leader" who "had an open door 
policy for trade unions." 
 
¶5.  (U) For its part, press commentary was mixed, with the 
perceived good and bad of Cuba being remarked upon. "The 
Guardian" slightly skewed its editorial comment to the 
positive side (and also focused on commercial opportunities 
if Cuba goes capitalist) while "Newsday" took a slightly 
negative slant (noting alleged accomplishments on the island, 
but concluding that Castro's rule "prevented Cuba from 
becoming a modern nation"). 
 
¶6. (SBU) An academic at the University of the West Indies 
told us February 20 that the GOTT had maintained a 
 
PORT OF SP 00000088  002 OF 002 
 
 
traditionally friendly posture toward Cuba.  He added that a 
number of Cuban doctors contracted by the GOTT provide health 
services in remote rural areas, where they are much 
appreciated, and that Cuba provided free scholarships for 
medical students from the region.  In addition, as the MFA 
statement acknowledged, Cuba is participating in the 
establishment of two large-scale commercial farms to be 
located in Chaguaramas.  The GOTT hopes the farms, once up 
and producing, will help curtail rapid local food price 
inflation.  The academic noted that the GOTT had occasionally 
shown some concern over specific Cuban human rights issues, 
but would never act in a condemnatory manner toward Castro or 
Cuba. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment:  Trinidad and Tobago's relationship with 
Cuba is not dissimilar to that of many states in the region. 
While not seeing the Castro regime as a model, many Trinis 
also see little reason to condemn a Caribbean brother and 
have some sympathy for its "struggles" and travails.  Manning 
most recently visited Cuba in September of 2007, where he met 
with Raul Castro, opened a trade facilitation office and 
spoke about eventually opening an Embassy there (TT's High 
Commissioner to Jamaica is accredited to Cuba and Cuba opened 
an Embassy in TT in 1996 -- conveniently co-located with a 
private auto parts store).  The GOTT also is supportive of 
Cuban inclusion in regional bodies and Port of Spain serves 
as the home of the Association of Caribbean States (ACS) that 
includes Cuba.  That said, the GOTT also knows which side of 
the divide it lives in and, for instance, the Cuban 
Ambassador here has not been invited to any of the Summit of 
the Americas planning meetings we have attended. 
 
 
 
AUSTIN