08SHANGHAI573
EAST CHINA VIEWS ON TRADE FACILITATION VERSUS TIGHTER
Tue Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO3092
RR RUEHCN RUEHVC
DE RUEHGH #0573/01 3580636
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230636Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7470
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 0201
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0046
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 8084UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SHANGHAI 000573 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR FOR CHINA OFFICE - TSTRATFORD, AWINTER, TWINELAND, DKATZ; 
IPR OFFICE - RBAE; AND OCG - TPOSNER 
NSC FOR LOI, SHRIER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ELTN EWWT ASEC PREL KIPR CH
SUBJECT: EAST CHINA VIEWS ON TRADE FACILITATION VERSUS TIGHTER 
SECURITY 
 
SHANGHAI 00000573  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  During a December 4-7 visit to Shanghai, U.S. 
Senate Finance Committee Trade Analyst Hun Quach met with 
Shanghai Customs and Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau 
(CIQ) officials, as well as held discussions with U.S. business 
representatives on a wide-range of customs-related issues. 
Shanghai Customs emphasized it attaches great importance to 
trade facilitation and welcomes working with the United States 
on such programs as the Container Security Initiative.  However, 
it "resolutely" opposes the hundred percent screening mandated 
by The Security and Accountability For Every Port Act of 2006 
(aka, the SAFE Port Act).  CIQ officials said that better 
cooperation between countries is essential for better food and 
product safety.  Although U.S. business representatives 
favorably viewed Shanghai Customs, they said inconsistency of 
enforcement and non-transparency of customs rules remain major 
problems for many U.S. businesses throughout China.  They also 
oppose the hundred percent screening requirements required by 
the U.S. legislation, saying that it will likely be viewed as 
U.S. trade protectionism by the Chinese if implemented.  End 
Summary. 
 
Shanghai Customs Balancing Security and Trade Facilitation 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) As part of a visit to Shanghai's Yangshan Deepwater 
Port, Quach met with Yangshan Customs Director Xu Zupei, 
Shanghai Customs Divisions of Legal Affairs Director Wu Huading, 
and Shanghai Customs Foreign Affairs Director Ding Ye.  Xu 
outlined the work of Yangshan Customs, noting that the average 
clearance time for both imports and exports is 24 to 72 hours. 
Clearance on goods originating in the Yangshan Special Economic 
Zone is between 2.5 and 4 hours.  Shanghai Customs uses a system 
of risk management in which both companies and commodities are 
classified according to a number of risk factors.  Companies are 
divided into three categories according to their "credibility". 
Those that are deemed to have the highest degree of credibility 
are given faster clearance.  These companies must operate under 
certain standards and sign agreements that they will uphold all 
Shanghai Customs regulations.  For companies with bad records, 
the highest degree of scrutiny is given.  The same system 
applies to goods as well, which are divided into five 
categories.  The most "risky" shipments all require manual 
inspection.  Xu emphasized that CIQ plays the leading role in 
food and product safety, while Customs focuses on smuggling, IP 
infringement, and other such issues.  Certain products, both for 
exports and imports, require CIQ certification.  Customs 
releases the goods only after CIQ gives the green light. 
 
Customs Pleased with Shanghai CSI Program 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On the U.S. Container Security Initiative (CSI), Xu 
said Shanghai Customs is very pleased with the program.  Since 
the CSI program officially began in Shanghai in April 2005, 
Shanghai Customs has investigated 240 cases involving 550 
containers.  Shanghai Customs welcomes further work on the CSI 
program. 
 
Shanghai Customs Active on IP 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Wu said Shanghai Customs is very active on IPR 
protection, noting that in 2007 Shanghai Customs was top in the 
nation for seizures of infringing goods (by value).  Counterfeit 
consumer products are the main type of infringement detected by 
Shanghai Customs.  Of the products that are investigated or 
seized, 90 percent of the cases are ex-officio.  In response to 
a question on ways the United States could help Shanghai 
Customs, Wu responded that more training for Customs' staff 
would be very helpful. 
 
Shanghai Customs "Resolutely" Opposes 100 Percent Scanning 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶5.  In response to a question regarding Shanghai Customs' view 
on the hundred percent screening requirement mandated by the 
U.S. SAFE Port Act, Xu said it is impossible to comply and that 
Shanghai Customs "resolutely" opposes this requirement.  First, 
full implementation would require a huge Chinese investment in 
 
SHANGHAI 00000573  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
equipment and human resources to maintain the program.  The 
inspection would also significantly slow processing time and 
negatively impact trade facilitation.  Such delays and costs 
would ultimately be passed on to the consumers.  The requirement 
would also be viewed by the Chinese as a "significant trade 
barrier," and could ultimately hurt trade between China and the 
United States.  (Note:  Xu read from a prepared script when 
making his point on the hundred percent screening requirement. 
When asked by Congenoff about the origin of his script, he said 
his points reflected a consensus among Chinese Customs 
Districts.  Shanghai Customs FAO Director Ding later confirmed 
Xu's text came from General Administration of Customs 
headquarters in Beijing.  End note.) 
 
Shanghai CIQ Welcomes Further Cooperation with the U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In a separate meeting, Shanghai CIQ Division Director 
for Supervision on Food Safety Chen Jianliang, explained CIQ's 
role in food and product safety and its relationship with 
Shanghai Customs.  Imports and exports must first be declared to 
Customs; if the product falls into a certain category, 
stipulated by regulation, that requires quality inspection, it 
is then referred to CIQ.  Shanghai CIQ's main responsibility is 
to inspect products based on safety, health and environmental 
regulations.  It uses a sampling methodology based on the risk 
of each product.  Shanghai CIQ has agreements in place with 
other CIQ units in East China to share testing services on 
products in which they specialize.  According to Chen, non-CIQ 
"third parties" are also contracted by CIQ, but they only 
provide land and equipment for inspection.  Shanghai CIQ uses 
its own licensed inspection staff to do the work.  Certain 
standards are set for each product, but these standards can 
change from time to time.  After CIQ issues a certificate of 
approval, it notifies Customs for clearance purposes. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) For quality and safety of exported goods, Chen said 
that Shanghai CIQ uses the importing country's standards for 
clearance.  For example, if a product is being exported to the 
United States and requires inspection by the United States, 
Shanghai CIQ bases its inspection on U.S. safety standards.  On 
the question of transparency, Chen said that Shanghai CIQ 
publishes all its standards through a variety of sources, such 
as the internet.  However, Chen acknowledged that different 
ports in China may have different procedures, which could cause 
variation in the interpretation of regulations by different CIQ 
units.  However, CIQs do not report to municipal authorities; 
they report to the General Administration of Quality 
Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (AQSIQ) in Beijing, so 
technically all CIQs should have the same requirements.  Chen 
concluded by saying more collaboration between governments on 
food and safety issues is important.  It is also important to 
ensure manufactures are educated on product safety requirements. 
 
AmCham:  China Customs Lacks Transparency and Consistency 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) In a meeting with a group of AmCham Shanghai business 
representatives, AmCham President Brenda Foster noted that 
AmCham Shanghai started an initiative two years ago with 
Shanghai Customs to help improve communication between the two 
sides.  Foster reported that Shanghai Customs has been extremely 
responsive, and each year AmCham undertakes two or three 
programs where it can "make a difference" with Shanghai Customs. 
 Business Development Director from Scandic Sourcing Warren Bock 
praised Shanghai Customs saying it is very direct and has set 
the stage for a smooth flow of imports and exports.  Foster said 
that while AmCham member companies are generally pleased with 
Shanghai Customs, member companies dealing with many customs 
units throughout China are often frustrated by the general lack 
of transparency and consistency.  Foster also said that a China 
Customs pre-clearance system for U.S. companies with a good 
reputation would be very helpful.  However, these companies face 
a catch 22 - they would like a pre-clearance system, but are 
wary of providing information that may be compromised and given 
to their Chinese competitors.  Companies have "no confidence" 
that their information will be kept confidential. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Tyco Electronics Global Supply Chain Vice President 
 
SHANGHAI 00000573  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
Kevin Harris said one of the U.S. business community's biggest 
headaches is getting an official translation of changes in 
Customs rules and procedures.  Often an official translation can 
take up to two years, which puts foreign companies at a 
disadvantage when trying to navigate Customs clearances.  As a 
result, companies are left to do their informal translations and 
then check with Customs if they are in the ballpark.  Harris 
also noted that Customs likes to "make examples" out of foreign 
companies, cracking down on them while going soft on domestic 
firms.  According to Scandic Sourcing's Bock, Customs regulatory 
changes often take a long time to "trickle down" to the local 
level, and then there is often uneven enforcement.  To get a 
favorable ruling on a customs issue, building "guanxi," or 
connections, with Customs officials is the most important thing. 
 Foster also confirmed that, in general, China Customs is very 
good at promulgating rules but bad at enforcement.  In addition, 
most customs rules are "made in a vacuum," and people can only 
comment on the rules after they are made.  "Flexibility comes 
later through interpretation," said Foster. 
 
U.S. Companies' Views on U.S. Import Security Measures 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) All the AmCham representatives at the meeting with 
Quach voiced concern over the hundred percent scanning 
requirement in the U.S. SAFE Port act.  Foster said it would add 
tremendous costs to the bottom line for many U.S. companies in 
China and would add significantly to the customs processing 
time.  Bock also noted that the policy would be perceived by the 
Chinese as a trade barrier and could precipitate some form of 
retaliation.  On the U.S. Importer Security Filing and 
Additional Carrier Requirements (also known as the "10 Plus 2" 
requirements), which require additional data from U.S. importers 
and carriers, AmCham representatives were more positive.  Werner 
Global Logistics General Manager for China Juan Bautista said 
that his company is advising shippers, and they are "in the 
process of understanding" the requirements.  Matson Navigation 
Asia Director Christa Stauffer said that there are concerns 
among some shippers on how to handle the data once they receive 
it.  She also advised that it is important to have strict 
enforcement of the rule to get the full attention of shippers. 
Harris said that his company will have no problem in compliance, 
but foreign companies will have more of a struggle. 
 
U.S. Logistics Reps on the Competitiveness of U.S. Ports 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) In a separate meeting, two representatives from 
Intermarine and a representative of BNSF Railway echoed AmCham 
representatives' sentiments on beefed up security requirements. 
BNSF Railway International Services Chief Representative and 
Director Michelle Liu said she worried that the additional U.S. 
security requirements will hurt the competitiveness of U.S. 
ports.  She noted that many shippers are already using Canadian 
and Mexican ports as a result of bottlenecks encountered at West 
Coast ports.   However, if compliance with new U.S. regulations 
actually speeds up the clearance process, it could help the 
competitiveness of ports.  On disparate treatment at Chinese 
ports, Intermarine Asia Managing Director Richard Seeg said the 
speed of clearance and valuation depends almost entirely on the 
relationship a company has developed with the port.  As a 
result, companies tend to "shop" for the most favorable port and 
stick with those with which they have a good relationship.  He 
added that this adds a great deal of unnecessary shipping around 
China.  For example, a company will spend a great deal of money 
to send a shipment from northern to southern China just to get 
"more favorable customs treatment." 
 
Ernst & Young:  Customs Inconsistencies Hurts U.S. Business 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Ernst Young Partner Robert Smith, who in Shanghai 
specializes on customs and indirect tax issues, said he does a 
substantial amount of training on customs issues, and there is a 
significant misunderstanding by China Customs officials about 
WTO valuation rules.  He concurred that inconsistent 
implementation of rules and valuation procedures is the top 
customs-related problem faced by importers and exporters. 
According to Smith, this problem is especially acute in second 
 
SHANGHAI 00000573  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
and third tier Chinese cities.  He added that there are also 
insufficient resources devoted to valuation throughout China. 
Citing Shanghai Customs as an example, he said there are only 20 
people who work on valuation, yet Shanghai Customs handles 25 
percent of China's total trade volume.  Significant differences 
in interpretation of customs rules largely occur because customs 
rules are often ambiguous and vague.  And, more senior customs 
officials are unwilling to take responsibility for issuing 
clarifications.  In addition, a ruling by one customs unit has 
no binding effect on other customs units, or even the same 
customs unit at a later period.  He cited one example of a case 
that took over one and a half years and 50 meetings to get a 
ruling.  Even then, an administrative interpretation had to be 
issued to understand the ruling. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) This report has been cleared by Senate Finance 
Committee Trade Analyst Hun Quach. 
CAMP