08STATE114981
UNSC CONSULTATION ON LEBANON: UNSCR 1559
Tue Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0026
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4981 3022247
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 282238Z OCT 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0000
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 0000
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 114981 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC LE IS
SUBJECT: UNSC CONSULTATION ON LEBANON: UNSCR 1559 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message.  Please see Paragraph 3. 
 
¶2. (U) Mission may draw on the talking points at paragraph 3 
for the October 30 Security Council consultation on the 
eighth semi-annual report of the Secretary General on the 
implementation of UNSC resolution 1559 (2004). 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin Talking Points: 
 
-- We welcome the Secretary General's most recent report on 
UNSCR 1559. 
 
-- We concur with the report's conclusion that the Lebanese 
government must continue extending its control throughout the 
country until it is the sole political and military 
authority.  In this regard, we join the Secretary General in 
expressing our strong support for the National Dialogue 
process initiated by President Sleiman. 
 
-- The election of President Sleiman was a major step forward 
for Lebanon.  Under his leadership, the country has a great 
opportunity to move beyond the factionalism and violence that 
has characterized its recent history.  At the same time, 
however, Lebanon faces great challenges and there is a 
continued, pressing need for full implementation of all 
provisions of UNSC resolution 1559.  Today I would like to 
make four points. 
 
-- First, the violence that erupted in Lebanon in May clearly 
demonstrates the fact that there has been virtually no 
progress over the past four years in implementing a core 
component of resolution 1559 - the disbanding and disarming 
of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, the most significant 
of which is Hizballah. 
 
-- As the Secretary General notes in his report: "The issue 
of Hizballah's weapons continues to be central to the 
political debate in Lebanon and to the Security Council's 
resolutions on Lebanon.  Hizballah's maintenance of separate 
military assets and infrastructure is a fundamental challenge 
to the government's attempts to 
consolidate the sovereignty and authority of the Lebanese 
state..." 
 
-- This point cannot be overemphasized, because any other 
progress Lebanon may make could unravel overnight if armed 
groups are able to continue to operate with impunity.  The 
impact of these groups is profound enough that elections in 
Lebanon can not be described as "free and fair"; this will 
hold true as long as voters are intimidated by the threat of 
violence from armed groups like Hizballah - groups that have 
demonstrated a willingness to turn their arms against 
Lebanese civilians. 
 
-- The international threat is also clear.  As the report 
points out, "Hizballah's (para-military) structures, parallel 
and distinct from those of the state, remain a threat to 
regional peace and security."  Additionally, the report notes 
Hizballah continues to make verbal threats against Israel. 
 
-- The United States joins the Secretary General in urging 
all parties with influence on Hizballah, particularly Syria 
and Iran, to support the group's transformation into a 
peaceful political party, not an armed militia, consistent 
with the requirements of Resolution 1559 and the Taif 
agreement. 
 
-- Second, we are concerned that the Lebanese-Syrian border 
remains porous.  The Secretary General's report repeats the 
conclusions of the recent report of the Lebanese-Syrian 
Border Assessment Team:  the rate of progress for the 
Lebanese government's implementation of LIBAT recommendations 
has been insufficient.  Improving this situation is a key 
task for the Lebanese government and we call on them to 
assess the need for international assistance. 
 
-- The government of Syria also has clear responsibilities to 
ensure that illegal weapons do not cross its border into 
Lebanon in violation of UNSC Resolution 1701.  Syria has the 
capacity and the know-how to interdict weapons flows and stop 
foreign fighters from entering Lebanon and must take steps to 
ensure cease the flow of weapons to Hizballah and other armed 
groups. 
 
-- Third, the United States joins the Secretary General and 
the rest of the international community in applauding the 
recent agreement between Syria and Lebanon to establish full 
diplomatic relations.  We look forward to 
implementation of the agreement before the end of this year. 
 
-- That said, the texture of this new Lebanese-Syrian 
political relationship - and the extent to which it 
represents full Syrian respect for Lebanese sovereignty - 
will only be revealed once we see how Syria's relations 
with armed groups in Lebanon evolve, including whether Syria 
fully abides by the arms embargo established by UNSC 
Resolution 1701. 
 
-- Finally, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's renewed 
efforts to bring about a diplomatic resolution to the 
Sheba'a Farms dispute, which should be addressed in 
conjunction with the issue of disarmament and all 
unimplemented portions of resolutions 1559 and 1701. 
 
-- We also support UNIFIL's efforts to bring about a solution 
to the continued presence of Israeli troops and civilians 
north of the "blue line" in the village of Ghajar. 
RICE