08STATE133293
GUIDANCE: VOTING INSTRUCTION ON DFI RESOLUTION,
Sun Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1813
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #3293/01 3562132
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 212124Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 4306
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 3380UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 STATE 133293 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
USUN FOR GERMAIN AND KUJAWINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: VOTING INSTRUCTION ON DFI RESOLUTION, 
TEXT FOR REMARKS 
 
1.(SBU)This is an action request.  USUN is to vote in favor of 
adoption of a UNSC resolution to extend arrangements and 
immunities associated with the Development Fund for Iraq 
(DFI), Iraq's oil and gas exports, and revenues, so long 
as text does not change substantively from that in para 
¶2.  If text varies substantively, USUN is to request 
further instructions.  Suggested talking points for use by 
USUN following adoption are contained in para 3. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Resolution text: 
 
The Security Council: 
 
PP1. Welcoming the efforts of the democratically elected, 
constitutionally based, national unity Government of Iraq 
in fulfilling its detailed political, economic, and 
security programme and national reconciliation agenda, and 
encouraging in that regard the holding of inclusive and 
peaceful provincial elections, 
 
PP2. Recalling all of its previous relevant resolutions on 
Iraq, 
 
PP3. Reaffirming the independence, sovereignty, unity, and 
territorial integrity of Iraq and reaffirming further the 
importance of the principle of non-interference in the 
internal affairs of Iraq, 
 
PP4. Noting the progress that is taking place in Iraq, 
particularly in achieving security and stability, and in 
strengthening the armed forces and other Iraqi security 
forces, and noting likewise Iraq's progress in the 
political and economic fields, 
 
PP5. Welcoming the continuing work of the Government of 
Iraq towards a federal, democratic, pluralistic and 
unified Iraq, in which there is full respect for human 
rights, 
 
PP6. Noting the Government of Iraq's progress in pursuing 
an atmosphere in which sectarianism is totally rejected, 
underscoring the importance of inclusive political 
dialogue and national reconciliation, 
 
PP7. Recognizing that international support for security 
and stability is essential to the well-being of the people 
of Iraq as well as the ability of all concerned, including 
the United Nations, to carry out their work for the 
benefit of the people of Iraq, and expressing appreciation 
for Member State contributions in this regard under 
resolution 1483 (2003), resolution 1511 (2003), resolution 
1546 (2004), resolution 1637 (2005), resolution 1723 
(2006), and resolution 1790 (2007), 
 
PP8. Recognizing also that Iraq is still in need of 
regional and international support so that it can continue 
to make progress, so that its people can flourish and 
prosper in peace, 
 
PP9. Welcoming continuing progress under the International 
Compact with Iraq, an initiative of the Iraqi Government 
that has created a new partnership with the international 
community and is building a strong framework for Iraq's 
continued political, economic and security transformation 
and integration into the regional and global economy, as 
confirmed in the Stockholm Declaration on 29 May 2008, and 
welcoming also the important role that the United Nations 
is playing by jointly chairing the Compact with the 
Government of Iraq, 
 
PP10. Recalling the establishment of the United Nations 
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and affirming that 
the United Nations should continue to play a leading role 
in supporting the efforts of the Iraqi Government to 
strengthen institutions for representative government, 
promote political dialogue and national reconciliation, 
engage neighboring countries, assist vulnerable groups, 
including refugees and internally displaced persons, and 
promote the protection of human rights and judicial and 
legal reform in accordance with resolution 1770 (2007) and 
resolution 1830 (2008), 
 
PP11. Calling upon the international community, 
particularly countries in the region and Iraq's neighbors, 
 
STATE 00133293  002 OF 004 
 
 
to support the Iraqi people in their pursuit of peace, 
stability, security, democracy and prosperity, welcoming 
the Expanded Neighbors' Conferences held in Sharm 
El-Sheikh, Istanbul and Kuwait and their role in 
supporting the efforts of the Government of Iraq to 
achieve security and stability in Iraq, and the positive 
results thereof on regional and international peace and 
security, welcoming also the fact that the Expanded 
Neighbors' Conference, held in Kuwait on 22 April 2008 
approved the terms of reference of the support mechanism, 
and noting that the successful implementation of this 
resolution will contribute to regional stability, 
 
PP12. Noting the letter from the Prime Minister of Iraq to 
the President of the Security Council, dated 7 December 
2008, which is annexed to this resolution, welcoming the 
Prime Minister's affirmation of Iraq's commitment to 
living in peace with its neighbors in a manner that 
contributes to the security and stability of the region, 
and recognizing the expiration of the mandate of the 
multinational force at the end of 31 December 2008, 
 
PP13. Recognizing the positive developments in Iraq and 
that the situation now existing in Iraq is significantly 
different from that which existed at the time of the 
adoption of resolution 661 (1990), and further recognizing 
the importance of Iraq achieving international standing 
equal to that which it held prior to the adoption of 
resolution 661 (1990), 
 
PP14. Recognizing that the letter from the Prime Minister 
of Iraq also reaffirms the commitment by the Government to 
resolve the debts and settle the claims inherited from the 
previous regime, and to continue to address those debts 
and claims until they are resolved or settled, and 
requests the continued assistance of the international 
community, as the Government of Iraq works to complete 
this process, 
 
PP15. Recognizing the significant role of the Development 
Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory and 
Monitoring Board, and the provisions of paragraph 22 of 
resolution 1483 (2003) in helping the Government of Iraq 
to ensure that Iraq's resources are being used 
transparently and accountably for the benefit of the Iraqi 
people, and recognizing also the need for Iraq during 2009 
to transition to successor arrangements for the 
Development Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory 
and Monitoring Board, to include the Committee of 
Financial Experts, 
 
PP16. Reaffirming that acts of terrorism must not be 
allowed to disrupt Iraq's political and economic 
transition, and further reaffirming the obligations of 
Member States under resolution 1618 (2005) of 4 August 
2005 and other relevant resolutions and international 
conventions with respect, inter alia, to terrorist 
activities in and from Iraq or against its citizens, 
 
PP17. Recognizing that the Government of Iraq will 
continue to have the leading role in coordinating 
international assistance to Iraq and reaffirming the 
importance of international assistance and development of 
the Iraqi economy and the importance of coordinated donor 
assistance, 
 
PP18. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the 
United Nations, 
 
OP1.    Decides to extend until 31 December 2009 the 
arrangements established in paragraph 20 of resolution 
1483 (2003) for the depositing into the Development Fund 
for Iraq of proceeds from export sales of petroleum, 
petroleum products and natural gas and the arrangements 
referred to in paragraph 12 of resolution 1483 (2003) and 
paragraph 24 of resolution 1546 (2004) for the monitoring 
of the Development Fund for Iraq by the International 
Advisory and Monitoring Board and further decides that, 
subject to the exception provided for in paragraph 27 of 
resolution 1546 (2004), the provisions of paragraph 22 of 
resolution 1483 (2003) shall continue to apply  until that 
date, including with respect to funds and financial assets 
and economic resources described in paragraph 23 of that 
resolution; 
 
OP2.    Decides further that the provisions in the 
above paragraph for the deposit of proceeds into the 
Development Fund for Iraq and for the role of the 
International Advisory and Monitoring Board and the 
 
STATE 00133293  003 OF 004 
 
 
provisions of paragraph 22 of resolution 1483 (2003) shall 
be reviewed at the request of the Government of Iraq or no 
later than 15 June 2009; 
 
OP3.    Requests the Secretary-General to report to 
the Council on a quarterly basis, with the first briefing 
no later than 31 March 2009 and with a written report on a 
semiannual basis, on the activities of the Development 
Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory and 
Monitoring Board, including on progress made in 
strengthening financial and administrative oversight of 
the Development Fund for Iraq and on progress made in 
transitioning to successor arrangements for the 
Development Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory 
and Monitoring Board, to include the Committee of 
Financial Experts; 
 
OP4.    Encourages the International Monetary Fund and 
the World Bank, as members of the International Advisory 
and Monitoring Board, to brief the Council in January 
2009; 
 
OP5.    Decides to review resolutions pertaining 
specifically to Iraq, beginning with the adoption of 
resolution 661 (1990), and in that regard requests the 
Secretary General to report after consultations with the 
Government of Iraq, on facts relevant to consideration by 
the Council of actions necessary for Iraq to achieve 
international standing equal to that which it held prior 
to the adoption of such resolutions, 
 
OP6.    Decides to remain actively seized of the 
matter. 
 
End text. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin suggested remarks: 
 
The United States welcomes the adoption of this critical 
resolution extending the arrangements related to the 
Development Fund for Iraq.  This action clearly 
demonstrates that the Security Council recognizes the 
tremendous progress that Iraq has achieved.  Furthermore, 
it secures the Iraqi Government's ability to use its 
resources to engage in vital activities that will 
safeguard the future of the Iraqi people. 
 
The extension of immunities for Iraq's funds will provide 
Iraq additional time to resolve the debts and settle the 
claims inherited from the previous regime.  The United 
States looks forward to Iraq taking the necessary steps to 
address those debts and claims. 
 
While it is imperative that Iraq receive the sustained 
support of the international community - we must also 
recognize that Iraq has become increasingly capable, 
democratic, and stable.  The Iraqi government and the 
Iraqi people can take great pride in the progress that has 
been made. 2008 has been a year of significant achievement 
for Iraq -- not only in the security sector, but also in 
the political and economic fields, in rule of law, 
reconstruction, and productive, positive engagement with 
neighbors and the international community. 
 
Iraq's responsible actions - at home and abroad - from the 
passage of key legislation and work toward national 
reconciliation. . . to the fruitful participation in the 
Neighbors' process and the International Compact with Iraq 
- tangibly demonstrate Iraq's progress and the need for 
rapid and complete reintegration into the community of 
nations. 
 
Adoption of Resolution [####] today sends an important 
signal that the Council is firmly committed to reviewing 
resolutions that pertain specifically to Iraq. 
 
Circumstances in Iraq have fundamentally changed since 
many of these resolutions were first considered.  Iraq 
today is significantly different than it was when 
Resolution 661 was adopted in 1990. 
 
Today, the Government of Iraq is committed to working with 
its neighbors and others as a trusted and credible 
international partner.  Therefore, a review regarding 
continuation of all outstanding Chapter VII resolutions 
specifically related to Iraq is justified; the time is 
ripe for a reconsideration of these outstanding 
resolutions based upon current facts. 
 
 
STATE 00133293  004 OF 004 
 
 
The United States looks forward to the Secretary General's 
report on relevant facts and the Council's swift 
consideration of actions to return Iraq to its rightful 
place in the community of nations.  We are committed to 
working with the Council and with the Government of Iraq 
to restore that international standing as soon as 
possible. 
 
End remarks. 
RICE