08TORONTO115
ABCP Market Restructuring Getting Closer
Thu Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO1045
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0115/01 1082110
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 172110Z APR 08
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2447
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0056
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TORONTO 000115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN (RIOS) AND EEB (SIROTIC) 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR MELLE, MENDENHALL, SULLIVAN 
TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (TRAN) 
COMMERCE FOR 4320/ITA/MAC/WH/ONIA (WORD) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EINV ETRD PGOV CA
SUBJECT: ABCP Market Restructuring Getting Closer 
 
REF:  (A) Toronto 87 (B) Toronto 81 (C) Toronto 66 
 
 (D) 07 Toronto 430 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified - Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The Pan Canadian Investors Committee has been 
working hard to persuade nearly 2,000 retail investors, who hold 
roughly 1% of the frozen C$33 billion third-party asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) market, to support a long-term restructuring 
plan.  On April 9, Vancouver-based Canaccord Capital offered to buy 
back at par C$138 million in short-term notes held by 97% of their 
clients.  Medium-sized investors, whose assets total about C$4 
billion, are reportedly hoping to either leverage a better deal for 
themselves or to buy more time by delaying the April 25 vote.  On 
April 15, a court agreed to extend the creditor protection that had 
previously been granted the 20 ABCP trusts which issued the C$33 
billion in ABCP.  Unless the courts push the date back further, ABCP 
investors must vote on the restructuring plan by April 25.  Whether 
the restructuring plan moves forward or not, we expect the non-bank 
ABCP liquidity crisis will prompt Canada to reform financial sector 
regulation.  Federal Finance Minister Jim Flaherty plans to meet 
with major banks during the week of April 21 to discuss 
recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Pan Canadian Investors Committee, led by Purdy Crawford, 
spent the first week of April in consultations across Canada with 
nearly 2,000 retail investors, who hold roughly 1% of the frozen 
C$33 billion third-party (non-bank sponsored) asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) market in order to gain their support for 
the committee's market restructuring plan.  ABCP investors must vote 
on the committee's restructuring plan by April 25, but the deadline 
may be pushed out further if Crawford feels he has insufficient 
buy-in from these retail investors, as well as from corporate 
investors (numbering about 200), whose support counts as much as 
bigger institutional investors like Caisse de depot et placement du 
Quebec (ref (A)). 
 
------------------------- 
Court Protection Extended 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) On April 15, Ontario Superior Court Judge Colin Campbell, who 
is presiding over the ABCP market restructuring, agreed to extend 
creditor protection for the 20 ABCP trusts-turned-corporations 
under the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act (CCAA) (ref (B)), 
from April 16 to May 31.  The extension will allow time for note 
holders to vote on the proposed restructuring of 20 trusts on April 
¶25.  Under federal creditor protection law, the restructuring plan 
must be approved by a majority of the note holders, as well as by 
voting note holders who own at least two-thirds of the value of the 
ABCP. 
 
----------------------- 
Retail Investor Bailout 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) In response to the threat of independent retail investors 
voting against the ABCP restructuring plan, ABCP retailers are 
piecing together bailout offers for their clients.  On April 9, 
Vancouver's Canaccord Capital offered to buy back at par C$138 
million in short-term notes held by 97% or 1,430 of their clients, 
who each hold C$1 million or less.  The Canaccord offer is dependent 
on the successful restructuring of the ABCP market, and combines 
market bids (roughly 60% of the value) from unnamed third-party 
sources assembled by the Royal Bank of Canada, with Canaccord 
funding top-ups (about 40% of the value) to achieve par value on the 
presently frozen investments.  Investors will also receive unpaid 
interest, and Canaccord will reimburse investors' share of the 
restructuring costs.  Canaccord's offer, which expires at the end of 
May 2008, is conditional on investors voting "yes" to the 
restructuring plan.  As a result of the bailout, Canaccord will take 
a C$58.2 million pre-tax writedown in Q4 2008.  Committee head Purdy 
Crawford told investors on an April 14 conference call that another 
bailout offer is likely to come as soon as this week from 
Vancouver-based Credential Financial for a further 335 individual 
investors. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Corporate Investors Left out of the Deal 
---------------------------------------- 
 
TORONTO 00000115  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Canaccord's bailout plan does not help 28 corporate note 
holders and 15 individual investors, with more than C$1 million 
worth of the paper, who are reportedly angry to have been left of 
out the deal.  While most corporate investors have more money at 
stake than retail investors, they have less leverage than the 2,000 
strong group of retail investors, who can control the restructuring 
vote.  As a result, financial institutions that sold them the notes 
have less incentive to bargain.  Including its corporate clients in 
the bailout plan reportedly would have doubled Canaccord's bill. 
 
¶6. (U) Companies like Toronto-based New Gold, Vancouver-based 
Redcorp Ventures, and Vancouver-based Universal Uranium reportedly 
have hundreds of millions of dollars locked up in ABCP.  It is 
estimated that about 200 companies hold as much as C$4 billion of 
frozen ABCP.  Some corporate note holders reportedly have asked the 
Ontario Superior Court to create a new class of investors to give 
them more leverage.  The court reportedly refused their request on 
April 15.  Other corporate investors are considering launching 
lawsuits against those who sold and structured the frozen notes. 
These note holders are only eligible for loans secured by their 
holdings. 
 
¶7. (U) On April 22, some companies holding frozen ABCP reportedly 
will ask the court to delay the April 25 vote.  The companies want 
more time to review the restructuring plan that proposes converting 
the short-term notes into new notes that will mature in 7 to 10 
years (ref (B) and (C)).  While note holders must surrender their 
right to file lawsuits if they vote in favor of the plan, Crawford 
told investors on April 14 that there is a possibility that cases 
alleging fraud could be allowed to proceed even if the restructuring 
wins court approval. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment:  While the 200 corporate investors cannot block 
retail investor support for a restructuring deal, they could tie up 
Canadian financial institutions in legal wrangling for years to 
come.  Whether the restructuring plan moves forward or not, we 
expect the non-bank ABCP liquidity crisis will prompt financial 
sector regulatory reform.  End Comment. 
 
NAY