08TORONTO233
WHTI - Ontario's Proposed Enhanced Driver's License Spurs
Fri Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHON #0233 2001959
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181959Z JUL 08
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDCUNCLAS TORONTO 000233 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CPAS PBTS PGOV PINR PREL CA
SUBJECT: WHTI - Ontario's Proposed Enhanced Driver's License Spurs 
Some Local Privacy Concerns 
 
Ref: (A) 07 Toronto 81 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified - Please Protect Accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) On July 16, The University of Toronto and Ontario's 
Information and Privacy Commission held a public forum on Ontario's 
proposed enhanced driver's licenses (EDLs).  The forum, which drew 
approximately 70 people, featured guest speakers from the Canadian 
Border Services Agency (CBSA) and the Ontario Ministries of 
Transportation, Government Services, and Information and Privacy. 
The event was organized to provide the public with information about 
the voluntary EDL program, which Ontario hopes can be used as an 
alternative to a passport when traveling from Canada to the United 
States by land or water.  As could be expected, some of the same 
privacy concerns were voiced that have been voiced elsewhere 
regarding these and other identity documents. 
 
¶2. (U) Ontario's EDL plan has been in development since early 2007 
(ref A) and was initially intended to improve the security of 
Ontario's driver's licenses.  Ontario has since focused on also 
using EDLs to meet the land and water documentary requirements of 
the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative (WHTI).  The EDL bill is 
currently assigned to committee, and is expected to be heard for a 
second reading by the Ontario legislature in the fall.  Proponents 
of the bill argue the EDLs will be beneficial in providing greater 
ease to cross-border travel, while reducing congestion.  If 
approved, Ontario's EDL will not be available until at least 2010. 
 
¶3. (U) The EDL plan, as originally conceived, would require the 
Canadian federal government to provide Ontario with citizenship 
information of bearers of EDLs.  Speaking at the July 16 event, 
however, Dr. Ann Cavoukian, Ontario's Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, said that the Canadian federal government has refused 
to provide this information, and instead asked Ontario to create its 
own database.  Cavoukian said that the creation of this additional 
database was unnecessary, and could be a security risk.  The EDLs 
will also use Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags located 
inside the cards that will be readable by antennas from a distance 
of 10 meters.  Cavoukian stated that the RFID tags would be secure, 
and that concerns that they could be read by unauthorized persons 
were misplaced. 
 
¶4.  (U) A representative from the Council of Canadians, which is a 
frequent critic of closer U.S.-Canadian ties, was predictably 
opposed to the EDL program.  He argued that use of the EDLs would 
infringe on Canadians' privacy, would not alleviate terrorism 
concerns, and would create additional privacy issues for Canadian 
citizens 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Privacy concerns about the information in the 
EDLs are unlikely to derail the initiative.  However, if Ontario is 
really unable to obtain Canadian federal government cooperation, 
Ontario's ability to work with Homeland Security to obtain approval 
for the EDLs to be used as border crossing cards could be delayed 
indefinitely.  END COMMENT. 
 
NAY