08TORONTO24
Toronto Police File First Human Trafficking Charges
Mon Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO3243
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0024/01 0282001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 282001Z JAN 08
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2320
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBM/AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST 0009
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0011
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV 0001
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0015
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TORONTO 000024 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PGOVSMIGKCRMKWMNPHUMCVISKFRDCA
SUBJECT: Toronto Police File First Human Trafficking Charges 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified. Please Protect Accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Toronto Police have filed multiple human 
trafficking and prostitution-related charges against six Toronto 
residents of Ukrainian and Russian descent.  The charges are the 
first time Toronto Police have laid charges under 2005 laws 
specifically criminalizing human-trafficking related offenses.  In 
statements after the arrests, Toronto authorities asserted that 
adequate structures are in place to protect human trafficking 
victims, but admit that the underground nature of the offenses makes 
apprehension and prosecution difficult.  While the current charges 
are based on the accusations of two women who escaped their captors 
and fled to a police station, Toronto authorities suspect that as 
many as 6-10 other victims may be held as part of the scheme.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
From Romania and Russia with Fake Israeli Passports 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) The case broke on the evening of January 10, when a 
Romanian woman walked into the 52 Division of the Toronto Police 
Service (less than 200 yards from the Consulate General) and 
informed police that she was being forcibly held and forced to 
perform prostitution services.  Shortly thereafter, Toronto police 
located a Russian national held at a downtown Toronto residence. 
Both women had been in Canada less than one year.  According to 
police reports, the women traveled to Canada using falsified Israeli 
passports after being recruited under the pretense of performing 
"modeling" services.  Once in Canada, their travel documents were 
confiscated, and they were forcibly confined except when being 
brought to clients (NOTE: Canada does not require visas for most 
visiting Israeli nationals.  END NOTE). 
 
¶3. (SBU) Acting on information provided by the two reported victims, 
Toronto Police arrested six Toronto residents, four men and two 
women between the ages of 35 and 52.  All are of Russian and/or 
Ukrainian descent.  Three are recent immigrants to Canada and could 
be deported if convicted of the prostitution and trafficking 
charges.  The Canadian refugee claim of one of the Russian nationals 
was previously denied but he later reentered the country after his 
Ukrainian wife (who has also been charged in the case) filed a 
successful immigration petition.  The names of the accused have been 
forwarded to Toronto's Consular section for entry in relevant 
lookout databases.  At this point, there is no apparent U.S. 
connection to the investigation. 
 
¶4. (SBU) At press conferences immediately following the arrests, 
Toronto Police Service officials speculated that as many as 10 
further victims could be under confinement in the Toronto area and 
issued a public plea for victims to come forward.  However, as of 
January 28, and after two court appearances by the accused, no 
further victims have been located.  The federal Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police (RCMP) has been assisting Toronto Police with the 
investigation.  The victims have been referred to Citizenship and 
Immigration Canada for immigration and residency benefits available 
to victims of human trafficking. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
First Use of Human Trafficking Statutes in Ontario 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) While prostitution-related arrests are not uncommon in 
Toronto -- a town with a flourishing adult entertainment industry -- 
the January arrests are only the second time charges have been laid 
under 2005 federal legislation specifically criminalizing 
human-trafficking related offences.  In December, 2007 charges of 
human trafficking were dropped against a Montreal couple for lack of 
evidence.  The six accused in the Toronto case are charged with 
"Engaging in Human Trafficking" and "Benefiting from the Proceeds of 
Human Trafficking" as well as various prostitution-related offences. 
 According to the Toronto Police lead investigator, none of the 
accused had previously come to the attention of law enforcement. 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT:  Given the failure of past human trafficking 
investigations, the Toronto charges are a significant test of 
Canada's new trafficking statutes. Toronto Police acknowledge the 
importance of this case and have actively solicited the public for 
assistance with the investigation and prosecution.  In conversations 
with Consulate staff, Toronto area human trafficking researchers 
were skeptical that the Toronto arrests were an indicator of 
improved enforcement and attention to human trafficking issues. 
Rather, our contacts say, Toronto Police received an extraordinarily 
lucky break when the first victim presented herself to police.  As 
no further victims have been located nearly two weeks after the 
initial arrests, this seems to be a logical conclusion.  END 
 
TORONTO 00000024  002 OF 002 
 
 
COMMENT. 
 
TUNIS