08TORONTO70
FEDERAL BY-ELECTION - PROMINENT LIBERALS PREPARE FOR MOVE
Wed Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO3201
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0070/01 0721929
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121929Z MAR 08
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2384
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TORONTO 000070 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR CA
SUBJECT: FEDERAL BY-ELECTION - PROMINENT LIBERALS PREPARE FOR MOVE 
TO OTTAWA 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Please Protect Accordingly 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  In the two Ontario by-elections slated for March 
17, the federal Liberals appear poised to send two well-known 
personalities to join the ranks of the Liberal caucus in Ottawa.  In 
suburban Toronto Willowdale, former Liberal leadership candidate 
Martha Hall Findlay looks to be a lock to maintain the long-time 
Liberal stronghold.  In Toronto Centre, former NDP Ontario Premier 
Bob Rae--now a Liberal and also a loser to Stephane Dion in the 2006 
leadership race--is likely to claim a seat for what some say are his 
thinly disguised ambitions to run the federal Liberals.  A Rae 
victory in Toronto Centre-a riding with significant NDP and Green 
followings-will give an articulate and well known critic of Canada's 
presence in Afghanistan a parliamentary base.  Harper's 
Conservatives, sensing that the Toronto races are largely a lost 
cause, have run a low-key campaign, folding the by-election into 
their larger program of attacks on Ontario Liberal Premier Dalton 
McGuinty and federal Liberal leader Dion.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------- 
All Quiet in Willowdale 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Overshadowed by maneuvering in Ottawa over a potential 
spring election, intense media coverage of the U.S. presidential 
primary season, and to a lesser extent Bob Rae in Toronto Centre, 
Martha Hall Findlay has run a quiet campaign focused on maintaining 
the "Liberal tradition" in Willowdale, home riding of former federal 
Liberal minister Jim Peterson.  Conservative candidate Maureen 
Harquail, cousin of current federal Finance Minister Jim Flaherty, 
is unlikely to make significant inroads.  Both the NDP and Greens 
are almost certain to be nonfactors on March 17.  Issues have been 
largely local, focusing mostly on improving federal support for 
transit in the Greater Toronto Area, health-care access, and 
recognition of foreign educational qualifications.  A prominent Tory 
here lamented to us the "lost opportunity" in this riding, saying he 
thought the Conservatives might have had a chance, if they had 
picked a stronger candidate and run a stronger campaign. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Harper, Dion and Layton Proxies Fight In Toronto 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In Toronto Central, the presence of Bob Rae, widely 
believed to hold leadership ambitions within the federal Liberal 
Party, has focused the race on big-picture federal issues, such as 
Afghanistan, crime, and what is perceived as a general failure by 
the Liberals to effectively oppose the Conservative Harper 
government.  The riding has been held by the Liberals since 1993, 
but both the NDP and Greens believe a strong showing is possible in 
this left-leaning riding. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Rae, who still fights memories of his chaotic NDP 
Premiership here in the early 1990s, has pointed to his record in 
building social and low-income housing while Premier as evidence of 
his ties to the riding and that his Premiership was not "a total 
disaster."  In a March 11 debate, Rae paid cursory attention to 
local issues, and quickly pivoted to a larger critique of the Harper 
government.  In campaign literature and public appearances, Rae 
paints Harper (he rarely mentions the Conservative candidate in the 
riding, Don Meredith) as an acolyte of George Bush and the 
Republican Party. Surprisingly thin-skinned in a campaign where he 
has a significant advantage, Rae brandished Conservative and NDP 
literature with unflattering pictures of Stephane Dion, accusing his 
opponents of "dirty tricks," and berating his Green Party opponent 
for suggesting that Canadian Forces (CF) are in Iraq under the 
auspices of the NATO Training Mission and/or DOD/CF exchanges. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Rae faces pressure on the left from the NDP and Greens.  At 
the March 11 debate, NDP candidate El-Farouk Khaki earned cheers for 
describing Canada's Afghanistan presence as "war-mongering," and for 
railing against the Security and Prosperity Partnership.  Green 
Candidate Chris Tindal, who was relatively successful in the riding 
in the 2006 federal elections, continued to pitch his candidacy as 
an "historic" chance to elect the first Green to the Commons. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Don Meredith, a Toronto preacher, businessman, and 
civic-activist, is widely acknowledged as the Conservatives' 
"sacrificial lamb" in the riding.  An already difficult situation 
was made more so as he joined the campaign late, after the federal 
Conservatives ditched their previous candidate for alleged 
disloyalty to Harper.  His debate appearances have been-charitably 
put-"unsteady and inarticulate."  Seemingly unsure of his brief, 
each of his attempts to defend the Harper record of balanced budgets 
and his warning that people could see "blood in the streets" of 
Toronto if a soft-on-crime Liberal government were elected, were met 
with loud boos and cries of "fascist" from the debate audience. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  The lack of publicly available riding-specific 
opinion polling and the lack of media coverage in the mainstream 
Toronto outlets normally would make definitive predictions on the 
 
TORONTO 00000070  002 OF 002 
 
 
by-elections difficult.  All of our contacts, including high-level 
Conservatives, however, agree that the Liberals will win both 
ridings handily.  The NDP and Greens may surprise in Toronto Centre 
as voters, believing by-elections will not affect the near-term 
balance of power in the House of Commons, may choose to indulge 
their leftist leanings.  With Rae's strong message on Afghanistan, 
position as Foreign Affairs Critic, and relatively distinguished 
background, he will undoubtedly have an impact on the Liberal caucus 
in Ottawa once he joins Parliament.  END COMMENT. 
 
NAY