08TRIPOLI372
PD PROGRAMS FALL VICTIM TO BILATERAL TENSIONS
Thu May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO8284
PP RUEHTRO
DE RUEHTRO #0372/01 1290848
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080848Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3410
INFO RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0666
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 0497
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0617
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1085
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0791
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 3914UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TRIPOLI 000372 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR: NEA/MAG, NEA/PPD, ECA D. IVES, K. WILSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SCUL LY PREL OIIP OEXC CVIS PGOV
SUBJECT: PD PROGRAMS FALL VICTIM TO BILATERAL TENSIONS 
 
REF: TRIPOLI 289 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Since January, Post has experienced increasing 
difficulties in obtaining visas for incoming Public Affairs 
Section visitors, both for educational and cultural programs. 
The Government of Libya (GOL) has canceled some programs 
outright, and has simply not approved visas for others. These 
recent difficulties appear to be the result of an intentional 
decision by elements within the GOL, rather than the routine 
difficulties of navigating the Libyan bureaucracy.  End summary. 
 
RECENT HISTORY OF CANCELED PROGRAMS 
 
¶2. (U) Prior to January, Post experienced several months of 
relatively successful Public Affairs Section (PAS) programming, 
particularly educational programs. We brought in our first 
English Language Fellow, conducted successful English Language 
Specialist workshops, and gained routine access for the first 
time to students and faculty at Libyan public universities. 
However, since January several programs have been canceled by 
the GOL. While the Embassy has successfully secured visas for 
other visitors during the same time period, PAS visitors have 
been singled out for denial. Failure to issue visas to PAS 
visitors is not a reciprocity issue, as Post has expedited and 
issued more visas more quickly in response to Libyan official 
requests than the GOL has done for Embassy official requests 
(see reftel). 
 
¶3. (U) In early January, DAS Tom Farrell, accompanied by other 
ECA staff and 4 representatives of American universities and 
higher education, planned to come to Libya to meet with 
representatives of Libyan universities and government officials. 
Despite prior agreement to the visit and assurances that visas 
would be approved, the visas were not approved. The General 
People's Committee for Foreign Liaison and International 
Cooperation (GPCFLIC, or MFA-equivalent) blamed the snafu on 
their internal bureaucracy. 
 
¶4. (U) In mid-January, the GOL canceled the planned performance 
of a musician following a U.S. court decision awarding 
compensation to families of victims of the UTA bombing. The 
GPCFLIC told the CDA that it was not the right time for such 
performances, stating that it would be "confusing" for the GOL 
to facilitate concerts by a U.S. musician in the wake of the 
court decision, and suggesting that the U.S. postpone it. 
Shortly thereafter, the musician's visa, which had previously 
been approved, was canceled. 
 
¶5. (U) In early February, the GOL abruptly canceled an event 
that the GPC for Higher Education (GPCHE) had requested of the 
Embassy - an information session for recipients of Libyan 
scholarships for post-graduate study in the United States. 
Expecting to brief several hundred students, CAO and visiting 
Regional Education Advising Coordinator were notified of the 
event's cancellation minutes before it was scheduled to begin. 
Despite Embassy efforts to provide information to scholarship 
recipients, PAS still frequently receives complaints about the 
Libyan students' lack of preparation for applying to and 
studying at U.S. universities. 
 
¶6. (U) In mid-April, the GOL canceled the performance of a 
second musical group. PAS had taken precautionary steps to 
confirm that the musical performance would be permitted, and 
obtained approval from various government bodies. Our local 
partners had also obtained approval to host performances. In 
early April, our local partners contacted us to let us know they 
received instructions to cancel the scheduled performances, and 
were told that given the state of the bilateral relationship, 
such programs were not a priority for the Libyan government. In 
subsequent conversations, Libyan officials told the P/E Chief 
that public programming was not appropriate because the 
bilateral relationship was "not fully normalized". 
 
¶7. (SBU) In April, Post expected an American Fulbright grantee 
to come to Libya to work with professors at Garyounis 
University. Despite written approval of the Program and numerous 
assurances, the visa has not been issued. The Head of the 
Protocol Office told a Post employee that he wished that Public 
Affairs programs would simply go away. (Comment: We believe that 
the Protocol Office has instructions not to issue visas to 
Embassy visitors who will engage the public, and that excuses 
blaming lack of visa issuance on bureaucratic snafus is merely a 
dodge. End comment.) 
 
¶8. (U) In late April, Post expected the publishers of MEPI's My 
Arabic Library program to come to Libya to meet with the GPC for 
 
TRIPOLI 00000372  002 OF 003 
 
 
Basic Education to discuss implementation of the program, which 
Libyan authorities have approved. The visas were not approved, 
much to the disappointment of officials at the GPC for Basic 
Education, who, in addition to the My Arabic Library program, 
are eager to meet with American publishers to discuss using 
American textbooks in public schools. 
 
¶9. (U) During the first week of May, Post planned to host Dr. 
Steve Morrison of SAIS. The Green Book Society, the National 
Center for Disease Control, and Al Fatah University Medical 
School had all agreed to host Dr. Morrison for events. His visa 
was not approved. 
 
CONFLICTING MESSAGES 
 
¶10. (U) It is clear that our Libyan education and cultural 
partners want Americans to come to Libya to implement joint 
programming. They are greatly disappointed when Americans do not 
receive their visas, and complain of conflicting points of view 
they hear behind the scenes. The GPC for Basic Education is 
tasked with finding the best textbooks possible, and has been 
advised by some government parties to use American textbooks. 
Without being able to host American publishers, however, they 
cannot find a way to practically implement that plan. Libyan 
universities are tasked by the highest levels to send their 
students to the U.S. for study. University administrators, 
however, are blocked from bringing American professors and 
representatives to Libya to establish the relationships 
necessary to achieve that objective. 
 
¶11. (SBU) At a recent meeting at Al Fatah University Medical 
School, the dean complained about the inability of Libyan 
academic administrators to achieve the unrealistic and 
frequently contradictory goals of Libyan politicians. He 
described how "politicians" have told him that he has to send 
2,000 students to the U.S., Canada, and Great Britain for 
medical school next year. When he explains that Libyan students 
will not be accepted into medical schools in those countries, he 
is viewed as a nay-sayer. When he introduces plans to improve 
the quality of Libya's medical education (such as bringing 
American medical school representatives here to discuss 
curriculum development and establishing joint programs, meeting 
American accreditation standards, and sending Libyan students to 
U.S. schools for undergraduate degrees followed by medical 
school), "the politicians" criticize him for his suggestions 
that will take too long to implement. (Note: A key part of a 
proposed Regional Nuclear Medicine Center project being 
implemented with USG assistance involves sending Libyans to U.S. 
medical schools for advanced training. End note.) 
 
¶12. (SBU) The new Educational Attachi to the Libyan Embassy in 
Washington recently expressed to us his nervousness that the 
goals he is tasked with achieving are unattainable. While Libyan 
officials have repeatedly stressed that they want Libyan 
students to return to U.S. universities by the thousands, the 
Libyan bureaucracy, and to a large extent, Libyans themselves, 
remain intransigent in terms of their willingness to meet the 
requirements necessary to matriculate in U.S. schools. 
 
MORE DIFFICULTIES AHEAD 
 
¶13. (U) While for the past two years American universities have 
given Libyan students substantial benefit of the doubt in 
accepting them, there are already rumblings from those 
universities about Libyan students. Universities have recently 
remarked about the high level of complaining from Libyan 
students and the intense bureaucratic support they and their 
families require. They also note that while some Libyan students 
have done exceptionally well academically, others are performing 
terribly. A number of GOL scholarship students reportedly have 
paid more than 1000 Libyan Dinars each to poorly-qualified local 
"educational agencies" for assistance in completing university 
admissions forms (typically Colorado State and Oklahoma State) 
and visa applications.  The universities have found that many 
such admissions forms contain inaccurate information and essays 
they suspect the students themselves did not write. Universities 
are now reviewing applications from Libyans with more intense 
scrutiny to try to better screen them. 
 
¶14. (U) In addition to more intense scrutiny by American 
universities, Libyan students hoping to study in the U.S. may 
also begin to experience more intense scrutiny during their visa 
interviews. Post's Consular Officer recently learned that at 
Oklahoma State University, 50% of Libyan students have applied 
for public benefits. It is not clear yet whether that indicates 
 
TRIPOLI 00000372  003 OF 003 
 
 
that GOL scholarship funds are insufficient, and/or that Libyan 
students budget such funds poorly. Another possibility is that 
Libyan students are seeking to inappropriately exploit public 
benefits, even if they have sufficient funds from other sources. 
(Note: Egyptian Embassy officials recently told P/E Chief that 
Libyan university students in Egypt, who number in the 
thousands, routinely abuse public benefits reserved for Egyptian 
students.) 
 
¶15. (SBU) Comment:  As the bilateral relationship has grown more 
tense during the past several months as a result of outstanding 
compensation issues and human rights issues, GOL officials who 
oppose reengagement with the U.S. have gained ground in putting 
a halt to PAS programs in Libya. While Libyan government 
officials still desire reengagement with the American academic 
community, their lack of understanding of the academic 
environment coupled with the recent trend of refusing American 
visitors prevents Libyan academic officials from achieving those 
goals. Post will continue to push in particular for educational 
programs and visitors.  End comment. 
STEVENS