08USUNNEWYORK573
SETTLEMENTS UNSCR: LIBYA TABLES DRAFT RESOLUTION
Sat Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO5538
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0573/01 1800040
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 280040Z JUN 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4518
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000573 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPAL KWBG UNSC SY LE IS PA
SUBJECT: SETTLEMENTS UNSCR: LIBYA TABLES DRAFT RESOLUTION 
DURING MONTHLY MIDDLE EAST DEBATE 
 
REF: USUN 531 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  The UN Security Council held its monthly 
Middle East meeting on June 27.  Lisa Buttenheim, Director of 
the Asia and Pacific Division of the UN Department of 
Political Affairs, briefed the Council in a public session, 
and Council members subsequently discussed regional events in 
closed consultations.  Buttenheim noted positive but fragile 
developments in the Middle East, and pointed to the recent 
ceasefire between Hamas and Israel as one example.  In closed 
consultations, Libya put forward a draft resolution 
condemning Israeli settlement expansion on behalf of the Arab 
Group.  Most delegates expressed an interest in trying to 
reach consensus on the draft resolution, while the U.S., 
Croatia, and the UK expressed reservations about the 
proposal, pointing to issues of substance and timing. 
Delegates expressed support for the Israeli-Hamas ceasefire 
in Gaza and the ongoing Annapolis process.  Most welcomed the 
Israeli-Syrian dialogue and indicated the need to ensure a 
national unity government was formed in Lebanon, as per the 
Doha agreement.  End Summary. 
 
Buttenheim: Positive but Fragile Developments 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Lisa Buttenheim, Director of the Asia and Pacific 
Division of the UN Department of Political Affairs, briefed 
the Council during a public session on June 27.  (Note: A 
transcript of her remarks was e-mailed to IO/UNP.  End Note.) 
 Buttenheim said that there was a need to turn fragile, but 
real, opportunities into genuine progress.  She praised the 
Egyptian-brokered ceasefire between Israel and Hamas that 
went into effect on June 19.  However, she noted breaches of 
the ceasefire in the form of rocket and mortar attacks from 
Gaza, IDF fire into Gaza, and Israel,s closing of border 
crossings in Gaza.  She reiterated the UN,s condemnation of 
all deliberate or indiscriminate attacks on civilians and any 
disproportionate or excessive use of force.  Buttenheim said 
the SYG urges Israel to heed the call of the Quartet to 
freeze all settlement activity.  She also spoke about 
positive steps taken by Palestinian security forces to disarm 
and arrest militants, Israel,s facilitation of the reopening 
of Palestinian police stations, and the economic situation in 
the Palestinian Authority.  She called on countries to step 
up their commitments to provide economic assistance.  She 
also welcomed indirect talks between Israel and Syria under 
Turkish mediation.  On Lebanon, Buttenheim noted slow 
progress on the formation of a national unity government but 
hoped an agreement would soon be reached despite violence in 
recent days. 
 
Most Delegations Welcome Libyan Draft 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Libya formally introduced a draft resolution, 
prepared by the Arab Group, that condemns Israeli settlement 
activity.  (Note: The text of the resolution was included in 
reftel. End Note.)  Libya said that, in light of past 
statements made by the Council and the Quartet, the draft 
resolution should not raise difficulties for the &vast 
majority of members.8  Libya recognized that it might be 
sensitive for &one member state,8 but noted that recent 
statements made by Secretary Rice on the issue of settlements 
have been encouraging.  Most member states thanked Libya for 
its draft resolution, reaffirmed the importance of Council 
involvement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and 
expressed a willingness to engage constructively to reach 
consensus on a final draft that would suit all member states. 
 China said that Israel,s expansion of settlements was 
disquieting and a contravention of international law and 
hoped the Council could reach consensus on a resolution. 
France remarked that settlements are the major obstacle to 
peace but that the issue must be viewed in the context of the 
entire peace process.  Russia said that Israel must freeze 
settlement activity while other parties must also carry out 
their agreements under the Roadmap. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The U.S., UK, and Croatia explictly expressed 
concerns about a resolution that only addresses Israeli 
settlements without addressing Palestinian obligations under 
the Roadmap.  The UK said that a resolution focusing on only 
one aspect of the peace process is not/not the best way to 
move the process forward.  Croatia likewise opposed focusing 
on only one party,s obligations and expressed hesitation 
about the timing of the initiative, given that bilateral 
talks are ongoing.  Amb Khalilzad stressed that the best way 
to address adherence by both sides to their Roadmap 
obligations is through the ongoing bilateral negotiations and 
that Council action could make it harder to reach compromise. 
 He also emphasized the need to address the obligations of 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000573  002 OF 002 
 
 
both parties rather than singling out Israeli settlement 
activity.  But he said that the U.S. remains open-minded 
about engaging on a Council product as long as it is helpful 
on both substance and timing.  After all delegations had 
spoken, Libya said that the Arab Group had taken a firm 
position in excluding contentious issues and had decided to 
address settlements alone because it is an issue on which all 
member states could reach consensus.  Libya noted that the 
Roadmap and other agreements have not put an end to 
settlement expansion, which is in clear violation of 
international law. 
 
Mood Generally Positive about &Fragile8 Ceasefire 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  All Council members supported the 
Egyptian-brokered ceasefire between Israel and Hamas and 
urged both parties to abide by their obligations.  But most 
delegations noted that the calm is fragile, underlining the 
need for the international community to remain fully engaged. 
 The U.S., France, South Africa, Vietnam, Italy, and Croatia 
specifically condemned recent rocket and mortar attacks from 
Gaza, but almost all delegations expressed general concern 
about recent breaches of the tenuous ceasefire by the 
Israelis, Palestinians, or both.  Most members called on 
Israel to end the closure of Gaza.  Several delegations also 
expressed concern about a recent IDF raid into Nablus that 
was not coordinated with Palestinian security services. 
France said that it would never compromise on the security of 
Israel but that there must be a two-state solution that 
includes an economically viable Palestinian state and 
Jerusalem as the capital of two states.  Russia and Indonesia 
said that establishing unity was vital for the Palestinian 
people.  Amb Khalilzad restated the long-term U.S. goal for a 
two-state solution.  He recognized recent progress and noted 
that talks were difficult but that their private nature 
should not be mistaken for a lack of progress.  At the same 
time, he also recognized the challenges of harmful activities 
that threaten the ceasefire.  He condemned all attacks 
against civilians and called on Israel to freeze all 
settlement activity, consistent with the Roadmap. 
 
Support for Regional Diplomacy 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Most member states welcomed negotiations between 
Israel and Syria under Turkish mediation.  Russia stressed a 
policy of involvement rather than isolation with regard to 
Syria.  The UK was encouraged by talks between Israel and 
Syria but called on Syria to do more about stopping support 
for Palestinian rejectionist movements and work on improving 
relations with Lebanon.  On Lebanon, most delegations 
expressed concern about the recent outbreak of violence in 
Tripoli, the Bekaa Valley, and elsewhere and worried that it 
could threaten the implementation of the Doha agreement. 
Italy said that the Lebanese must rapidly and fully implement 
the Doha Agreement and called for the Sheba,a Farms to be 
put under UN jurisdiction pending Syrian-Lebanese border 
demarcation.  China, France, and others said they were 
dedicated to seeing Doha fully implemented and hoped that a 
government of national unity would quickly emerge.  Amb 
Khalilzad called for full implementation of the Doha 
agreement and urged all parties to compromise in support of 
Siniora,s efforts to establish a national unity government. 
He said the U.S. was deeply concerned about recent act of 
violence and reiterated the need to implement UNSCR 1701 in 
full. 
Khalilzad