09ABUDHABI34
HUMANITARIAN AID THE FOCUS OF PUBLIC EFFORTS ON GAZA
Sun Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abu Dhabi
VZCZCXRO4124
PP RUEHDE RUEHDIR
DE RUEHAD #0034/01 0111308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111308Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1983
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0220
RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 0872
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 1516
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0617
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0265UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABU DHABI 000034 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PREF EAID KWBG UN IS AE
SUBJECT:  HUMANITARIAN AID THE FOCUS OF PUBLIC EFFORTS ON GAZA 
 
REF: A) ABU DHABI 20, B) ABU DHABI 17, C) 08 ABU DHABI 1467 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Message includes input from Consulate 
General Dubai. 
 
¶1.  (U) As local news outlets warn of escalation of Israeli military 
activity in Gaza, UAE citizens and residents are expressing 
solidarity, taking to the streets in calm, controlled (and 
relatively small) demonstrations while pledging donations in cash 
and in kind. 
 
Marching in solidarity 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Local press reports suggest that a total of 10,000 persons 
marched in four separate locations on the afternoon of Friday, 
January 9 (Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, and Ras al Khaimah).  Police 
presence was extensive and marches were peaceful, with ample 
displays of Palestinian flags and scarves and expressions of 
solidarity with those suffering in Gaza.  From what we observed in 
Abu Dhabi, the marches let off steam rather than increasing 
pressure.  The Ministry of Interior authorized, and prepared 
extensively for, this series of demonstrations.   (Note:  Permission 
to demonstrate is not common in the UAE, but authorized selectively 
under controlled circumstances.  End note.)   The police presence in 
Abu Dhabi included buses of riot police, water cannons and 
concertina wire.  The three events elsewhere were similarly closely 
monitored and involved the participation of public officials; 
marches in Sharjah and Ras al Khaimah lasted for approximately three 
hours.  The Red Crescent provided leaflets to demonstrators with 
instructions for making donations to Gaza. 
 
¶3.  (U) Likely representative of general demonstrator sentiment, one 
Palestinian who grew up in the UAE was quoted in the National 
(semi-official English daily) as saying "We feel hopeless but this 
is all we can do to support Palestinians emotionally."  The events 
were not openly political and more focused on the social and 
emotional costs of the conflict. 
 
Reaching into the pocketbook 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) A national campaign secured pledges of 315 million dirham 
(approximately $ 86m) in an eight-hour media telethon on January 9. 
Pledges were taken over 80 telephone lines and through text 
messaging.  Large pledges included widow of the late Sheikh Zayed, 
Sheikha Fatima (5m AED), Deputy Prime Minister and head of the Red 
Crescent Hamdan bin Zayed (10m), Federal National Council Speaker 
(and wealthy banker) Abdul Aziz al-Ghureir (15m), and Abu Dhabi 
Ruler's representative in the Western Region Mohammed bin Butti al 
Hamed (4m AED).  The campaign is anticipated to continue and may 
receive some boost from Islamic scholars declaring that "you can 
donate anything to this campaign and deduct it from your zakat" 
(zakat being the annual charity donation anticipated of devout 
Muslims).  Friday mosque sermons on the topic likely contributed to 
the largesse of contributors. 
 
¶5.  (U) Parallel donation efforts are also generating funds. 
Collection boxes at shopping centers are bringing in both goods and 
cash (one Mall in Abu Dhabi reportedly netted 6 million AED on 
Friday).  Separate Red Crescent donation tents around town add to 
the collection effort, as do personnel inviting donations to 
collection boxes extended to guests at the Friday evening screening 
of a new film "Journey to Mecca" (judging by the contents of the 
clear acrylic boxes, donations appeared to be quite generous). 
 
¶6.  (U) Red Crescent Chairman Ali al Kaabi tells of a little girl 
who donated her piggy bank, upon which an organizer of the event 
seized on the opportunity to magnify that donation and auctioned off 
the bank for 21,000 AED.  Another said "I have no cash, but can I 
donate my jacket?"  The media also reports that at least fifty 
trucks carrying 300 tons of goods purchased in Egypt had made their 
way  to the al Arish area (near Rafah's border with Gaza), on the 
order of Sheikh Hamdan bin Zayed. 
 
Princely construction assistance 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) Aside from cash and emergency humanitarian goods, senior 
sheikhs are extending pledges to help rebuild Gaza.  President 
Khalifa pledged to rebuild 600 houses.  Dubai Ruler (and UAE PM and 
VP) Mohammed bin Rashid matched that pledge with a 600-house 
commitment of how own.  Minister of Interior Sheikh Saif bin Zayed 
is reported to have pledged to build 100 homes, while Presidential 
Affairs Minister Mansour bin Zayed pledged to build an extension to 
the all-important al Shifaa Hospital in Gaza. 
 
ABU DHABI 00000034  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶8.  (U) Sheikh Hamdan added his commitment to mobilize the UAE Red 
Crescent to assist in the rebuilding of three UNRWA schools in Gaza 
which have been destroyed.  And the newly-installed ruler of the 
small emirate of Um al Quwain, Sheikh Saud bin Rashid al Mualla, has 
offered to rebuild mosques destroyed in Gaza. 
 
Sharing blood, and sweat 
------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (U) The Ministry of Health, in collaboration with the Red 
Crescent Authority, is seeking to bolster its provision of health 
services to Palestine with blood drives in the UAE.  Over 140 donors 
reportedly donated blood in Sharjah, an effort likely to expand to 
other areas of the UAE.  The Dubai Cares charity drive (primarily 
focused on education in the Middle East), has also joined forces 
with other medical providers to offer specialized medical services 
not otherwise available in Gaza. 
 
¶10.  (U) Dubai Ruler Mohammed bin Rashid participated in (and won) 
an endurance race in Bahrain -- navigating his horse for the almost 
five-hour event on January 10.  He dedicated the victory to the 
Palestinian people and, according to one news account, to "the souls 
of children and innocent civilians."  He issued a statement that 
"The UAE will always support and stand by the Palestinian people 
materially, morally and politically, and will remain committed to 
its fundamental and invariable position until they achieve their 
security and freedom, regain their national rights and establish 
their own independent state on the soil of their homeland."  He also 
called on Gazans to continue in patience and steadfastness. 
 
Seeking broader international coordination 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  (U) Sheikh Hamdan bin Zayed, in his capacity as Chair of the 
UAE Red Crescent Authority and Chairman of the UAE Foreign Aid 
Coordination Committee, has called for an emergency meeting by 
donating countries and international relief and humanitarian 
organizations to discuss the humanitarian situation in Gaza.  With 
the primary goals of highlighting urgent priorities, the meeting is 
scheduled in Abu Dhabi January 12 to be chaired by Minister of State 
for Foreign Affairs Dr. Anwar Gargash.  (Resident diplomats may be 
the primary attendees at this meeting, which is to include briefings 
by UN representatives.) 
OLSON