09ANKARA1063
SMOKE LIKE A TURK NO MORE
Fri Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6015
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1063/01 2051817
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241817Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0322
INFO RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4030
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6059UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001063 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON TU
SUBJECT: SMOKE LIKE A TURK NO MORE 
 
 1.(SBU) Summary. On July 19, Turkey banned smoking in all 
enclosed public spaces, including bars, cafes, and 
restaurants.  This second installment of a smoking ban that 
began in May 2008 came into effect amid public and business 
complaints.  Turkey has one of the highest cigarette 
consumption rates in the world, and health officials and 
non-smokers are delighted with the new law.  The ban was 
opposed by smokers, many business owners, and some in the 
secularist camp who see the smoking ban not as a health 
measure but as a GOT attempt to impose conservative religious 
values and as a first step towards an alcohol ban.  To the 
surprise of many, however, compliance appeared to be quite 
high during the law's first week.  End Summary. 
 
Law No. 4207 
----------- 
¶2. (U) Parts of Law no. 4207 entered into force on May 5, 
2008, banning smoking in taxis, malls and offices. The second 
and more comprehensive part came into effect on July 19. It 
provides: 
----Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed spaces, including 
those at restaurants, cafes, coffee houses, bars and all 
entertainment centers, in public transportation vehicles 
(including taxis), in both open and enclosed spaces at 
education, arts, and sporting event areas.  Special enclosed 
spaces can be assigned within these facilities for smoking, 
but cannot exceed 50 percent of the total space.  This means 
that nargile (water pipe) cafes with no outdoor seating will 
have to shut down. These cafes are popular in tourist areas. 
----Smoking is not banned in prisons, nursing homes, mental 
hospitals or on the decks of ferries.  However, there must be 
an area assigned specially for smoking that children will not 
be able to enter. 
----Smoking is allowed in open gardens as long as the proper 
equipment is installed to ensure that nonsmokers are not 
bothered b the cigarette smoke. 
----Smoking is prohibited under umbrellas erected in gardens. 
 Smoking is only allowed if all four sides of an area are 
open and the sky is visible. 
----Hotels will be able to have rooms available that smoking 
is allowed, but children will not be able to stay in those 
rooms. 
----Cigarettes may not be sold at heath, education, 
entertainment or sports facilities. 
----Provincial smoking-control councils are being established 
by the Health Ministry. 
Penalties for Smoking 
--------------------- 
¶3. (U) Smokers violating the law will be fined 69 Turkish 
Liras.  Bars and restaurants that violate the law will be 
fined 500 liras.  For subsequent violations of the law the 
fines will increase up to 5,600 liras. The Ministry of Health 
has trained a 5,000 person task force to patrol establishment 
and dole out fines to anyone caught lighting up.  Ministry 
inspection teams will fine violators of the new law, and the 
GOT expects fines to provide a significant monetary infusion 
into the Treasury.  The MOH will also establish complaint 
hotlines in every city, and citizens will be able to inform 
authorities about people not abiding by the law. 
Health Officials Are Happy 
------------------------- 
¶4. (U) The smoking ban is being praised by health officials 
and non-smokers.  Health advocates are hoping that the 
legislation will be taken seriously, saying that it will 
protect against secondhand smoke and help Turks quit smoking. 
 According to the World Health Organization Turkey has one of 
the highest consumption of cigarettes in the world, with 
about half of men and 20 percent of women smoking.    A 2003 
WHO survey of 16,000 Turkish teenagers revealed that 11 
percent were regular smokers, and about 30 percent had tried 
their first cigarette before the age of 10.  GOT health care 
officials estimate that about 100,000 Turks die annually from 
tobacco related illnesses, costing billions every year in 
health care expenses. 
Smokers, Businesses and Secularists are Not 
------------------------------------------ 
¶5. (SBU) For the country that inspired the phrase &to smoke 
like a Turk8 imposing a comprehensive public smoking ban was 
a quite controversial move.  To the surprise of many, 
compliance with the smoking ban appears to be quite high, at 
least during the law's first week in force.  Historically, 
alcohol and cigarettes have gone hand in hand in Turkey, and 
many Turks say the law will push people into parks and 
streets if they cannot smoke and drink in a pub or caf, or 
chain smoke through dinner in a restaurant. 
¶6. (SBU) The ban was opposed by many business owners, 
smokers, and some in the secularist camp who see the smoking 
ban not as a health measure but as a GOT attempt to impose 
conservative religious values and as a first step towards an 
alcohol ban.  Many business owners, especially owners of 
restaurants and bars, say they expect a sharp decline in 
 
ANKARA 00001063  002 OF 002 
 
 
business.  However, business owners in tourist areas are 
generally happier with the ban, because they believe 
non-smoking tourists will feel more comfortable in previously 
smokey restaurants, cafes, and bars and make up for any loss 
of Turkish customers. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
JEFFREY