09ANKARA445
TURKEY: 2008 END USE MONITORING REPORT
Tue Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0016
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0445/01 0831637
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241637Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9168UNCLAS ANKARA 000445 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR AFIN TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: 2008 END USE MONITORING REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 27091 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The International Narcotics Control and 
Law Enforcement (INCLE) program in Turkey wound down after 
2000 because of the GOT's refusal to accept Leahy Amendment 
language contained in the Year 2000 Letter of Agreement.  We 
are in the process of negotiating a new Letter of Agreement 
with the Government of Turkey, although we have not received 
a formal MFA response.  Virtually all of the equipment 
donated with INL funds in the past has reached the end of its 
useful life.  Most of the equipment was donated before or 
during FY 2000 and has become obsolete.  INL funds at post 
total $9,921.  Equipment has been assigned to numerous 
locations throughout the country, and with post's limited 
budget, physical inspection of any but a very small portion 
is a practical impossibility.  Thus, post relies upon 
periodic meetings with supervisory personnel in recipient 
agencies to monitor use.  End Summary. 
 
INL Program Staff at Post and Counterpart Agencies 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (SBU) EUM Program Coordinator at post is Courtney Turner. 
She can be reached by IVG at 8-295-7065, or 90-312-457-7065. 
Her email address is TurnerCL@state.gov.  Local employee 
Aysem Sargin provides end use monitoring assistance and 
support to the INCLE program at post.  She can be reached by 
IVG at 8-295-7069, or 90-312-457-7069.  Her email address is 
SarginA@state.gov.  DEA officials at post work closely with 
the INCLE staff, and we design our programs to avoid 
duplication of effort and to ensure that our work and plans 
are complementary.  Our principal contact in DEA is Deputy 
Regional Director Tom Senecal.  He can be reached by IVG at 
8-295-7229, or 90-312-457-7229.  His email address is 
Thomas.J.Senecal@usdoj.gov. 
 
Inventory System, On-Site Inspections, and 
Secondary Methods of Monitoring Resource Status 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Due to the age and obsolescence of items donated in 
the past, limited funding, and the absence of a Letter of 
Agreement, post program representatives are limited in their 
ability to do on-site inspections.  We were able to visit 
Bolvadin and Afyon on June 3, AMATEM Headquarters in Istanbul 
on August 27, Turkish National Police (TNP) Headquarters in 
Edirne on August 28, and TADOC training facility in Ankara on 
multiple occasions.  The majority of our information on other 
sites was gathered through discussions with Erol Keskinkilic, 
Technical Support Branch Director at TNP Ankara. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Five Turkish agencies have responsibility for 
Turkey's anti-narcotics programs: the Turkish Grain Board 
(TMO), TNP, Jandarma, Customs, and the AMATEM drug addiction 
treatment facility.  Generally, the equipment provided since 
1986 can be assigned to the following categories: training, 
communication, surveillance, and poppy processing. 
 
Status of Inventories and Program Impact 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Starting in 1992 and continuing through 2001, the 
INCLE program provided the TMO with equipment and training 
valued at over USD 900,000.  Most of this equipment is still 
being used.  No new items were delivered in 2008.  As 
previously reported, the donations to TMO have been 
remarkably useful.  The INL-funded equipment has had a 
concrete, long-lasting, and positive impact on TMO's 
operations.  For example, poppy production remains under 
stringent control by the TMO, while productivity increased 
through the use of donated seed processing equipment.  The 
morphine content of poppies significantly increased thanks to 
the INL-funded pilot production facility.  TMO's products 
have become more marketable and profitable, and the 
INL-funded equipment is in working condition and is repaired 
locally. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Starting in 1986 and continuing through 2004, the 
INCLE program provided TNP with equipment and training valued 
at over USD 1.2 million.  No new items were delivered in 
¶2008.  TNP's Erol Keskinkilic reported that the vast majority 
of the items donated under the INCLE program are outdated and 
no longer used.  He told us that TNP Ankara still uses some 
of the donated surveillance headphones, siren systems, and 
hand-held radios in its operations. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The TNP keeps an exhaustive inventory of all the 
INL-funded equipment.  Keskinkilic noted that all the 
equipment provided since 1986 was useful, but that some items 
quickly became obsolete with advances in technology.  He 
remarked that the INL-funded surveillance headphones, 
videoscopes, and cameras continue to be useful in narcotic 
operations throughout the country.  In some cases, TNP has 
been able to use older equipment with new technologies, as in 
the case of using an INL-funded SLR camera lens on a new 
digital camera lens body. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) As requested in reftel, the following sets forth 
the status of resources provided to Turkish agencies that 
remain in use.  According to TNP, all other equipment 
provided by the USG has outlived its useful life and is no 
longer in use. 
 
a) Vehicles: INCLE provided 20 vehicles to the Turkish Grain 
Board (TMO) in 1992 and 1993.  TMO officials told us in a 
recent meeting that several of the vehicles were still in use 
in their monitoring operations in poppy fields in Afyon, 
Turkey.  They noted that the vehicles are aging and in need 
of continuous maintenance.  Ideally, they would like to 
replace the vehicles. 
 
b) Camera lenses:  TNP continues to use INCLE camera lenses 
in the following locations throughout Turkey:  Adana, Ankara, 
Diyarbakir, Malatya, Mugla, and TNP headquarters. 
 
c) Communications equipment: Although technology changes have 
caused some of the equipment to become unusable, TNP 
continues occasional use of radio sets in the following 
locations:  Antalya, Baliksehir, Bursa, Diyarbakir, 
Gaziantep, Istanbul, Izmir, Kars, Kocaeli, Konya, TNP 
headquarters, Mersin, Mugla, Sanliurfa, Van, and Yalova. 
Transmitted packets are used in Ankara, Baliksehir, 
Diyarbakir, Istanbul, Izmir, Konya, TNP Headquarters, Mersin, 
and Van. 
 
Istanbul still uses two radio chargers. 
 
Microphones are used in Diyarbakir, Istanbul, TNP 
headquarters, and Mugla 
 
d) Surveillance equipment: TNP uses surveillance headphones 
in the following locations:  Adana, Ankara, Diyarbakir, 
Duzce, Edirne, Gaziantep, Istanbul, Izmir, Kahramanmaras, 
Kayseri, Kirikkale, Kirsehir, Konya, TNP headquarters, 
Mersin, Mugla, Osmaniye, Sakarya, Usak, Van, and Yalova 
 
e. Miscellaneous equipment: TNP uses GPS tracking system 
equipment at the following locations:  Diyarbakir, Istanbul, 
and TNP headquarters.  Videoscopes are used in Istanbul and 
at TNP headquarters. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) All agencies expressed appreciation for the items 
INCLE provided.  They remarked that advances in technology 
pushed them to switch or upgrade equipment, ultimately 
rendering obsolete many of the previously-supplied INCLE 
equipment items. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Based on our meetings and discussions in 2008 with 
supervisory personnel from the various recipient agencies, it 
appears that all INL resources are being properly maintained. 
  Overall, the INL-funded equipment and training provided to 
Turkey has been useful, but advances in technology have 
rendered many of them no longer useful.  With a rejuvenated 
INCLE program, post plans to use INCLE resources for training 
and other non-physical goods. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
Jeffrey