09BAGHDAD2889
BAGHDAD BOMBINGS: USG ASSISTANCE COORDINATION
Wed Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2889/01 3011636
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 281636Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5259
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002889 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ASEC PGOV PTER IZ
SUBJECT: BAGHDAD BOMBINGS: USG ASSISTANCE COORDINATION 
WORKING GROUP - OCTOBER 28 UPDATE 
 
REF: A. A) BAGHDAD 2877 
     ¶B. B) BAGHDAD 2883 C) BAGHDAD 2884 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Post's USG Assistance Coordination Working 
Group has identified areas of immediate need following the 
October 25 bombings in response to GOI requests. We are 
providing vehicles, office equipment, and generators to the 
affected government offices, and continuing to support 
forensic and explosive analyses. Although still in recovery 
and assessment mode, the GOI has taken steps to find 
temporary work space for some government staff, assess and 
renovate damaged offices, and re-link electricity grids. 
Ministry of Justice (MOJ) officials informed us that the 
Council of Ministers has provided $8 million to assist in 
renovating the MOJ building. Several international 
organizations are providing some medical supplies to 
hospitals. Donor countries say they have no assistance plans 
but remain on standby to help if the GOI asks. End Summary. 
 
USG coordination efforts 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Post's USG Assistance Coordination Working Group 
has identified areas of immediate need following the October 
25 bombings in response to GOI requests. The Higher Judicial 
Council (HJC) and the MOJ have asked us to provide a 
structural safety assessment of the building they share. Iraq 
Transition Assistance Office (ITAO) has identified funds 
available for this activity and believes it can work with the 
Army Corps of Engineers to quickly carry out this assessment. 
ITAO also recently completed an infrastructure security 
assessment of the Ministry of Electricity and may be able to 
fund security improvements for other essential service 
ministries, including the Ministry of Municipalities and 
Public Works (MMPW). USAID has identified computers, other IT 
equipment and two vehicles for the MMPW and has identified 
four generators in country to support the recovery effort. 
INL has signed a loan agreement to quickly deliver 12 
vehicles, cubicles, office furniture, and twenty laptops to 
the HJC, which would then be converted to grant items. 
Vehicle delivery is pending the Ministry of Interior's 
approval of registration. INL has begun coordinating limited 
occupancy of the HJC's INL-funded $12 million Judicial 
Development Institute (JDI) campus (which has not officially 
opened yet) as interim office space.  Agreement from the Army 
Corps of Engineers is required before that can occur. We are 
also seeking resources to provide additional equipment and 
furnishings. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Baghdad PRT is working with MND-Baghdad to deploy 
cadaver dogs to assist the Iraqi Civil Defense Directorate 
(ICDD) in recovering bodies and has already delivered crates 
of water to the ICDD emergency crews.  Per reftel C, 
explosive and forensic expert analysts are continuing to 
collect evidence and liaise with the GOI to provide technical 
support as requested. Post's Constitutional and Legislative 
Affairs Office had already planned to provide $1.3 million in 
equipment and computers to the Shura Council (which falls 
under the MOJ) which could be expedited if necessary.  At the 
GOI's request, we are not publicizing our assistance efforts. 
 
GOI Taking Steps 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The GOI and various ministries are also taking 
initiatives to address immediate and long term capacity 
needs, but recovery and damage assessments are still ongoing. 
MOJ is seeking to temporarily relocate, possibly using the 
Old National Council Building. MOJ Deputy Minister informed 
us that the Council of Ministers has provided $8 million to 
Qus that the Council of Ministers has provided $8 million to 
assist in renovating the MOJ building. The building recently 
constructed for the MMPW was heavily damaged but remains 
structurally sound. Ministry staff have been called to return 
to work for cleanup, but ongoing recovery of bodies has 
hampered this effort. MMPW has already contacted the Turkish 
construction company that formerly worked on the new building 
to begin the renovation process, estimated to take 2-3 
months. In the meantime, employees are using their former 
facilities on the Mansour compound. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Baghdad Governor and Provincial Council (PC) 
chairman have not requested assistance but we have heard 
unofficially they may seek office equipment once they are 
able to return to their building and assess their needs, in 
approximately 3-4 weeks. We have identified Quick Response 
Funds (QRF) that can be utilized for this effort. Engineers 
hired by the local government are evaluating the Baghdad 
Governorate and Provincial Council Building. The Director 
General for Electricity has also begun evaluating 
reconnecting the building to the grid. The Governor has moved 
 
back into his office and one floor remains functional. The 
Governorate's engineering office is off site and will be 
hiring contractors to assist with the work. The PC chairman 
and other council members are also continuing their work at 
various local council halls throughout Baghdad. With the last 
tranche of the investment budget released yesterday by the 
Ministry of Finance, no major delays are expected in the 
implementation of projects for provincial offices. Assistance 
can also be provided through USAID's Local Governance Project 
III if necessary. 
 
International Organizations Providing Some Assistance 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Several international organizations have responded to 
calls for immediate medical supplies.  International Medical 
Corps (IMC), a USAID implementing partner, provided large 
quantities of gauze, bandages, syringes, and antiseptic 
materials in response to a request directly from Medical City 
Hospital.  International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) 
sent two war-wounded kits to Baghdad Teaching Hospital, which 
received the largest majority of injured and dead. Each kit 
includes one ton of medical and surgical supplies to treat up 
to 50 trauma cases. MND-Baghdad provided approximately 420 
boxes of gauze and 100 boxes of other bandages to the 
Director General of Health of Karkh district. They also 
delivered medical supplies to Yarmouk General Hospital on 
October 26.  In addition, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
is processing procurement of additional anesthetics for the 
Ministry of Health (MOH) at MOH's request. 
 
¶7.  (U) Other donor countries we have contacted say they have 
no plans for any assistance. European Community reps told us 
they may consider assistance if asked by the GOI but so far 
have not received any requests. 
HILL