09BAKU990
Azerbaijan (Sort of) Celebrates Muharram, Ashoura
Thu Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baku
VZCZCXRO4957
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHKB #0990/01 3580851
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240851Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAKU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2205
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI 0015
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 1545
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 3743UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAKU 000990 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CARC, DRL/OIRF 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV KISL SCUL SOCI AJ IR
SUBJECT:   Azerbaijan (Sort of) Celebrates Muharram, Ashoura 
 
BAKU 00000990  001.3 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) On December 18, Muslims worldwide started celebrations for 
the holy month of Muharram.  In Azerbaijan, the date was marked by a 
simple statement, without fanfare, from the Caucasus Muslim Board. 
For Shi'a Muslims, including those in Azerbaijan and neighboring 
Iran, Muharram has a special meaning, separate from the broader 
context and practices among Sunni Muslims, as it is associated with 
sorrow and mourning for the killed grandsons of Prophet Muhammad. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The culmination of Muharram for Shi'a Muslims is the day of 
Ashoura which is the tenth day after the start of the month. In 2009 
it will fall on December 27.  Shi'a Muslims commemorate on Ashoura 
the tragic killing of Huseyn, the grandson of Prophet Muhammad, 
which took place in the end of seventh century near the city of 
Kerbela (modern Iraq) in the course of fight for the political power 
in the Caliphate.  This event is believed to set the schism in the 
Muslim world which divided the community into Sunni and Shi'a 
Muslims. 
 
The Iranian Influence 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) During the Safavid dynasty, the Iranian rulers converted 
most of the peoples under their rule, including Azerbaijanis, from 
the Sunni to the Shi'a sect of Islam, in juxtaposition to the Sunni 
Ottoman Turks.  Muharram became an opportunity to demonstrate love 
toward the Prophet's family (Ahle Beit) and a chance to strengthen 
Shi'ism, the new faction of Islam, and to encourage others to join 
it. Also in this era, Muharram was instrumental in uniting Iranian 
ethnic groups to counter the threat of the Ottoman Empire, which 
eventually gave rise to the formation of the first Iranian empire 
after Islam. 
 
The Tradition of Ashoura in Azerbaijan 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Above all, during Muharram Shi'a Muslims in Azerbaijan and 
other countries, particularly in Iran, refrain from any joyful 
celebrations, weddings and engagements.  On Ashoura, religious 
people in Azerbaijan would go to local mosques for participation in 
mourning ceremonies and chant marsiya (sorrowful elegies).  In some 
conservative parts of the country people fast and may spent a night 
in mosques. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In the past, practicing Shi'a Muslims would flagellate 
themselves on Ashoura with special chains made for this purpose. 
Self-flagellation was often accompanied with crowds walking through 
quarters of towns and villages chanting "Huseyn vay" as an 
expression of grief.  Despite commonplace practice in the Soviet 
time forbidding such religious ceremonies, the tradition survived in 
the most conservative parts of Azerbaijan as the south of the 
country and several villages located on the Absheron peninsula as 
Buzovna, Nardaran, Mashtaga, etc.  The religious practice revived 
especially in the end of 1980s and the beginning of 1990s, but such 
demonstrations remain larger and much more common in Iran than 
Azerbaijan. 
 
As It Is Actually Practiced Today 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Though Azerbaijan is traditionally a majority Shi'a 
country, the majority of Azerbaijanis appears to be secular.  The 
absence of religious practice is likely a lingering effect from the 
Soviet era, yet it seems to be a preferred course for the Ilham 
Aliyev administration.  Typically, Azerbaijanis are not familiar 
with the traditions of Muharram and Ashoura.  In that sense, the 
holiday season passes somewhat without notice, and differs greatly 
from widespread, popular practices in Iran. 
 
¶7. (SBU) While religious practices are not forbidden in Azerbaijan - 
and the GOAJ continues to boast of an overall spirit of religious 
tolerance - the environment for religious observance has tightened, 
with the government requiring religious organizations, among other 
things, to register with authorities.  Similarly, there have been 
complaints of mosque closings, at times tied to property disputes 
and sometimes because of other issues, and efforts to some extent to 
restrict the distribution of religious materials.  Some government 
leaders in Azerbaijan have also expressed dismay in the past at what 
is perceived as the heightened religious agenda of the Turkish 
Government, and complained about woman in headscarves as portrayed 
by Turkish television. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Nonetheless, it is common for Shi'a Muslims in Azerbaijan - 
 
BAKU 00000990  002.3 OF 002 
 
 
those practicing and otherwise - to postpone weddings and 
engagements if the date overlaps with Muharram.  Occasionally, 
weddings and engagements may take place only in those regions with 
predominant Sunni population.  But Muharram is known as a month of 
mourning throughout Azerbaijan and the scheduling of weddings and 
other joyful celebrations significantly decreases at this time of 
the year. 
 
¶9. (SBU) On Ashoura, many mosques in Azerbaijan, as well as families 
may provide free meals/sherbet (sweet flavorful drinks) and this 
procession is known as ehsan. It is particularly widespread in the 
south of the country in districts of Astara, Lenkaran and Lerik.  To 
date, Ashoura remains a personal and family holiday for believers in 
Azerbaijan, and has not yet taken on the quasi-political or 
"protest" undertones that have often marked Ashoura observances in 
Iran. 
 
A Call to Give Blood 
-------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) In recent years, Sheykh ul-Islam Haji Allahshukur 
Pashazade, Director of the Caucasus Muslims Board (CMB), has called 
upon Azerbaijanis to donate blood on Ashoura in lieu of taking part 
in mourning processions and engaging in self-flagellation.  There 
has been no official statement by the Sheykh ul-Islam for this 
year's Ashoura.  However, last year he said, "... the Azerbaijani 
Government has created conditions to commemorate this day (Ashoura). 
 Shedding blood, chain beating (flagellation), chest cutting are not 
appropriate on Ashoura.  Blood shedding is not considered in Islam 
as a positive thing."  On December 15, the Council of Ghazis (top 
ranking clergy) of the CMB issued a fatwa for this year's Ashoura 
stating, "On Ashoura flagellation and infliction of bodily injuries 
is unacceptable; order must be observed at all sanctuaries.  Blood 
donation which has been organized for several years by the Board, 
and should be set as a sample for Taziya (passion play)." 
 
¶11. (SBU) The CMB has announced that blood donation will be 
organized this year at central mosques of Taza Pir, Ajdarbey, Haji 
Soltanali and Icharishahar. The Ministry of Health in collaboration 
with the CMB will set mobile labs at those mosques and people 
wishing to donate blood may come there for this purpose. It has also 
been announced that Sheykh ul-Islam Allahshukur Pashazade will join 
the action this year as well.