09BAGHDAD3174
EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE COORDINATION TEAM CONVENES IN
Wed Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #3174/01 3431717
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 091717Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5672
INFO RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003174 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ASEC PGOV PTER IZ
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE COORDINATION TEAM CONVENES IN 
RESPONSE TO DECEMBER 8 ATTACKS 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 2877 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On December 9, Coordinator for Assistance 
Transition Patricia Haslach convened Post's interagency 
Emergency Assistance Coordination Team (EACT) in response to 
the December 8 bombings in Baghdad.  The blasts damaged the 
Karkh courthouse, Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
(MOLSA), the new Ministry of Finance (MOF) site, and 
surrounding buildings.  ATF and Multinational Baghdad forces 
have sent explosive ordnance disposal assets to the bomb 
sites and are conducting lab analyses. EACT, which was 
established in response to the October 25 bombings, is 
tracking GOI recovery efforts and requests for USG 
assistance. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Coordinator for Assistance Transition Patricia 
Haslach convened Post's interagency Emergency Assistance 
Coordination Team (EACT) in response to the December 8 
bombings in Baghdad, which damaged several GOI offices and 
surrounding areas.  EACT, which was established in response 
to the October 25 bombings, has clear organizational and 
funding processes in place that could quickly activate USG 
assistance if needed. ATF and Multinational Baghdad forces 
have already sent explosive ordnance assets to the bomb 
sites. Most GOI entities remain in a recovery and assessment 
phase, and have not requested further assistance so far. 
 
------------------------- 
Immediate USG assistance 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) At the Ministry of Interior's request, Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) agents 
visited the bomb sites on December 9 at the Karkh Courthouse 
and the new Ministry of Finance site.  ATF's samples and 
evidence are undergoing lab analyses. Multinational 
Division-Baghdad also provided explosive ordnance disposal 
assets and security forces to support the Iraqi police and 
military forces. Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaisance 
assets are on station providing intelligence with attack 
weapons teams providing overwatch. U.S. forces are willing to 
support further support if requested by the GOI. 
 
----------------------------- 
Hospitals, Medicines on Track 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Ministry of Health (MOH) officially reported 63 
deaths and 479 injured as of December 8 based on hospital 
reports,  while the press has reported much higher figures of 
127 and 504, respectively. We expect these figures to 
increase as recovery efforts continue. MOH reported that the 
deceased and injured were taken to five hospitals throughout 
Baghdad, including the Ministry of Defense hospital, which 
itself sustained minor damages. The Deputy Minister of Health 
told us that the MOH procedures worked smoothly and it did 
not require USG assistance. The International Committee of 
the Red Cross (ICRC) head of delegation told us it has 
received no requests for medicine or supplies. Several 
hospitals still have the War Wounded Kits ICRC provided 
following the October bombs. 
 
------------------------ 
Karkh Courthouse Damages 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Higher Judicial Council (HJC) has fielded 
engineer and security staff to the Karkh Courthouse where it 
had set up temporary work space following damage to its 
offices in the October bombing. Staff are securing the area 
and assessing damages. HJC officials told us 160 recent law 
school graduates had been invited to Karkh Courthouse for 
interviews on the day of the bombing; many were injured and 
unaccounted for. Ten HJC officials are believed dead. HJC has 
requested that INL postpone its security training planned for 
Qrequested that INL postpone its security training planned for 
this week in order to conduct recovery activity.  INL is 
continuing to work with HJC to equip additional 
administration space due to damage from the October attacks 
through QRF funds. INL will meet with HJC engineers on 
December 10 to obtain damage assessments and complete site 
surveys. INL is separately meeting with both the Judicial 
Development Institute's Director and Director General for 
Finance and Planning on its assessment of building damages 
and injured staff. 
 
--------------------------- 
Ministry of Finance Damages 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) MOF staff are continuing work at its old 
 
headquarters in Adnon Palace, but the new building for the 
MOF sustained serious damage and will impact some ministerial 
functions, including year-end closeout processes.  MOF 
officials told us distribution of funds to various ministries 
will also be challenging once the Council of Representatives 
passes the budget. Minister of Finance Jabr and his budget 
director were in Erbil at the time of the attack and returned 
to Baghdad on December 9. Jabr reported that the Deputy 
Budget Director, Deputy DG of Accounting, and Deputy of 
Public Finance were all seriously injured. Jabr will convene 
a meeting with his DGs on December 10 to assess recovery 
efforts and will respond with any assistance requests. The 
World Bank representative told us it is helping the MOF 
re-establish internect connection, at the MOF's request. It 
is also providing some computers and printers to the MOF's 
Accounting and Budget Office. 
 
------------------------------------- 
USACE Structural Assessments Continue 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In response to GOI requests following the August 
and October bombings, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
continues its structural assessments and preliminary 
recommendations to the MOF, Ministry of Justice, and Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs (MFA). MFA is proceeding with blast 
protection measures, including a reinforced composite wall 
that could potentially impede blast dissipation efforts. 
USACE is urging the MFA to complete a building assessment and 
await USACE's full set of recommendations before taking 
further measures. Post is also in contact with NEA/I on 
ascertaining funds for mylar protection at key ministries. 
HILL