09BAGHDAD563
PARLIAMENT CONFIRMS JUDGE DARA NOOR-ELDEEN AS NEW
Thu Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0563/01 0640622
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050622Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1987
INFO RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000563 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
JUSTICE PASS TO JOHN EULER, PHIL LYNCH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KJUS SNAR IQ
SUBJECT: PARLIAMENT CONFIRMS JUDGE DARA NOOR-ELDEEN AS NEW 
MINISTER OF JUSTICE 
 
¶1. (SBU)  SUMMARY:  On February 19, the Iraqi Parliament 
voted by an overwhelming majority to confirm the appointment 
of Judge Dara Noor-Eldeen Baha,-Eldeen as the new Minister 
of Justice.  Subsequent to the vote, Judge Dara Baha,-Eldeen 
took the oath of office and was sworn in as the Minister of 
Justice.  Minister Dara Baha,-Eldeen replaces Dr. Safa 
al-Safi, who served as the Acting Minister of Justice since 
April 2007 and will continue serving in his normal capacity 
as Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs.  Minister 
Dara Baha,-Eldeen expressed his desire to work closely with 
the United States.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  After a long delay since his initial nomination, 
the Council of Representatives (CoR) on February 19 confirmed 
the nomination of Judge Dara Noor-Eldeen as the new Minister 
of Justice. Judge Dara took the oath of office and was sworn 
in as the Minister of Justice the following day.  Dara 
replaces Acting Minister of Justice Dr. Safa al-Safi, who had 
been Acting Minister since April 2007. 
 
--------------- 
Biography 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Judge Dara Baha,-Eldeen, an Iraqi Kurd, was born 
in 1947.  He graduated from the Baghdad University College of 
Law in 1970 and following graduation served in the Kirkuk 
courts.  He graduated from the Judicial Institute in 1982, 
and continued serving as a judge in several courts in Baghdad 
until 2001, when he became the Deputy Head of the Court of 
Appeals.   While serving in this capacity, he was 
incarcerated for a period of time at Abu Ghraib prison after 
entering a judicial decision adverse to a member of Saddam 
Hussein,s family.  The Minister served as a member of the 
former Governing Council, as a member of the former Interim 
National Council, and as a member of the former National 
Assembly.   He understands and speaks English to a limited 
degree, but he predominately speaks in Arabic and Kurdish. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Priorities and Desire to Cooperate 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Rule of Law (RoL) officials met with Minister Dara 
on February 21.  He informed us that he would assume official 
duties as Minister of Justice on February 22.  The Minister 
repeatedly emphasized his desire to work closely and 
cooperatively with the Embassy and Coalition Forces, and he 
emphasized that a lot of time had passed with insufficient 
progress within the Ministry of Justice.  He was extremely 
polite and engaging throughout.  Though the meeting was 
focused on personal introductions, courtesies, and 
administrative matters, the Minister provided the following 
general overview of his priorities, and indicated that was 
eager to begin work on them: 
 
-- Prisons and detention, including training, management, 
staffing, and detainee transfers and releases. 
-- The need for a secure computerized database to fully 
automate the Iraq Correctional System (ICS). 
-- The need for a secure computerized database as it relates 
to recording and reclaiming rightful ownership of real 
property. 
-- Coordinating anti-corruption training and programs with 
the U.S. Embassy. 
-- Developing and implementing management and personnel 
training programs within the Ministry of Justice. 
-- The need to better enforce judicial rulings and court 
orders. (The Minister stated:  "What good is a court order if 
it is not followed?") 
-- The importance of working closely with the Shura Council, 
which serves a limited administrative court function 
mediating disputes between ministries and reviews all draft 
Qmediating disputes between ministries and reviews all draft 
executive legislation. (The Minister stated that he will seek 
U.S. assistance in supporting an extended term of office for 
the current head of the council, Dr. Ghazi Ibraheem 
Al-Janabi.) 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The Minister asked for regular weekly meetings 
with RoL officers and noted that he would add additional 
engagements whenever necessary.  He also readily approved 
continued Embassy engagements with Deputy Minister of Justice 
Posho Ibrahim to conduct business.  While he noted that his 
first few days are already filled with ministry formalities 
and courtesy calls, he expressed a desire to meet soon with 
other senior U.S. Embassy and coalition forces officials. 
 
-------------- 
Comment 
 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Relations with Dr. Safa were characterized by a 
high degree of tension and mistrust.  The confirmation of 
Judge Dara as the permanent minister should lead to 
substantially improved relations with the Ministry of 
Justice.  Our initial interactions with the Minister were 
positive and support this assessment.  His judicial 
reputation is very good.  He was a former student of Chief 
Justice Medhat,s, and the Chief Justice has called him a 
"good and honest man."  U.S. Circuit Judge Gilbert S. 
Merritt, who has over 24 years on the federal bench and spent 
7 weeks in postwar Iraq interviewing Judge Dara and 28 other 
Iraqi Supreme Court Justices, said, "Dara is an independent 
soul, a courageous man of great integrity." 
BUTENIS