09BAGHDAD3286
TRADE MINISTRY CONSIDERING MARKET-ORIENTED APPROACH WITH
Mon Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1632
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3286 3550952
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210952Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5817
INFO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003286 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
USDA FOR GSM JOHN BREWER 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID ECON ETRD KCOR PREF WFP IZ
REF:  BAGHDAD 3055 
SUBJECT:  TRADE MINISTRY CONSIDERING MARKET-ORIENTED APPROACH WITH 
PDS IMPLICATIONS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and Comment:  Two reform proposals originating from 
within the Iraqi Ministry of Trade (MOT) would liberalize state 
control over food production and processing.  The first deals with 
Iraq's corrupt and inefficient food rationing program, the Public 
Distribution System (PDS).  The proposal would privatize flour 
milling and could positively impact $700 million in existing U.S. 
wheat sales.  The second is a possible sharing of MOT grain handling 
facilities for private imports of animal feeds and other 
commodities.  It is too early to gauge the GOI's commitment to 
implementing either proposal, but that these steps are being 
considered at all is encouraging.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
Wheat Flour & Rice Reforms 
 
¶2. (SBU) High-level officials at the Ministry of Trade (MoT) and its 
purchasing arm, the Iraqi Grain Board (IGB), are discussing 
significant changes to the Public Distribution System (PDS). These 
changes, if instituted, could be positive steps toward market 
orientation.  Under discussion is a plan that would reduce the PDS 
allotment of wheat flour and rice given to each Iraqi.  This 
component of consumer demand would, in the future, be met by the 
private sector.  We are seeking copies of both plans from the MOT 
contact who briefed us on the details of the plans. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Virtually all Iraqi private sector flour mills are under 
exclusive contract with the MoT to mill flour for the PDS. Most 
mills are outdated and operate at only 25-50% of their rated 
capacity.  Under this plan, flour mills could choose to be released 
from PDS milling contracts thereby becoming genuinely private sector 
entities or renegotiate/bid competitively for new PDS contracts. 
The plan as envisioned would act as a catalyst to allow the 
re-emergence of a private sector milling industry. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The MoT is exploring similar options for the other major 
PDS commodities including rice, sugar, and vegetable oil, as first 
steps toward possible disengagement from supplying state-rationed 
food to Iraqis.  This type of reform could also provide a boost to 
retail food shops that currently compete against free food 
commodities distributed through PDS agents throughout the country. 
Private Use of MoT Grain Handling Facilities 
 
¶5. (SBU) MoT has also indicated that they will consider facilitating 
the import and distribution of feed grain commodities (corn, 
sorghum, soybeans, and protein meals) to the private sector through 
the use of their existing infrastructure.  Most feed is currently 
imported by truck from Syria or Turkey whereas transportation by 
ocean-going vessels would be much more efficient if the private 
sector had access to port facilities in Umm Qasr.  The initiative is 
significant because the lack of availability and high price of 
animal feed continues to hinder Iraq's agricultural economy and 
results in reduced agricultural employment and higher meat and 
poultry prices.  Significant demand exists for imported corn, 
soybeans, and other feed components.  However, the Ministry of 
Agriculture maintains a thicket of procedural import barriers and 
seasonal import bans that make Iraqi feed prices the region's 
highest.  We do not believe that the Ministry of Agriculture is 
aware of the MoT plans yet. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: The wheat plan would significantly reduce the 
"crowding out" effect of the PDS, and could re-establish a private 
milling sector, while concurrently reducing one of the main avenues 
for corruption in the PDS structure.  If handled correctly, it could 
Qfor corruption in the PDS structure.  If handled correctly, it could 
also greatly improve the range and quality of flour available to the 
Iraqi baking industry.  Newly privatized domestic millers could 
recapture the market niche now filled by state-supported imports of 
flour from Turkey. We estimate that one-third of the PDS flour is 
now illicitly resold into the private market.  The plan would reduce 
this "leakage," eliminating a huge and expensive inefficiency 
inherent in the current PDS design. Regarding the use of MoT 
handling facilities for private feed imports, Iraq's livestock 
sector would reap huge benefits from bulk feed grain imports, 
through much lower feed cost.  Increasing the feed supply has been 
an ongoing objective for a range of U.S. policy and development 
initiatives.  This may create an opportunity for USDA-sponsored 
initiatives in the areas of private/public sector procurement 
strategies and milling science.  End Comment.