09BEIRUT833
LEBANON FOLLOW UP TO THE CAIRO SPEECH: CONSULTATIVE PROCESS
Thu Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO4839
RR RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDH RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHLB #0833/01 2041602
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231602Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5402
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BEIRUT 000833 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/P FOR GBEHRMAN 
NEA/ELA, NEA/FO 
ALSO FOR IO A/S BRIMMER 
P FOR DRUSSELL, RRANGASWAMY 
USUN FOR WOLFF/SCHEDLBAUER/GERMAIN 
NSC FOR MCDERMOTT, SHAPIRO 
DOD FOR FLOURNOY/KAHL/DALTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON OEXC OSCI PREL SCUL SENV SOCI TNGD TSPL
LE 
REFS: A) STATE 71325 
B) BEIRUT 627 
C) BEIRUT 621 
 
SUBJECT: LEBANON FOLLOW UP TO THE CAIRO SPEECH: CONSULTATIVE PROCESS 
FOR MUSLIM ENGAGEMENT 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) U.S. Embassy Beirut contacted Lebanese stakeholders - 
including youth, civil society partners, and political interlocutors 
- to solicit feedback about specific recommendations and suggestions 
to achieve priorities outlined by President Obama during his June 4 
speech in Cairo, (ref A).  Comments about the speech were generally 
positive, and the Lebanese are anxious to see action follow the 
words. The feedback received suggested that many Lebanese are eager 
for more intercultural exchange but would also like to see the West 
have a more robust appreciation for Arab culture.  There is a belief 
among the Lebanese that radicalism is driven by poverty and 
hopelessness and that support for programs focused on economic and 
business development in the region, coupled with education programs, 
can combat extremism.  Many Lebanese youth are interested in 
increased economic opportunities and were especially intrigued by 
the President's focus on "green alternatives," but currently lack 
the resources to initiate projects.  To illustrate how current 
programs can also support the Cairo Initiatives, we detail several 
of the existing USAID, Public Diplomacy, MEPI, and Office of Defense 
Cooperation programs that Embassy Beirut actively promotes and 
supports.  There are two significant challenges to achieving success 
with the Cairo Initiatives in Lebanon: (a) the need for additional 
funding and human resources and (b) a Lebanese sensitivity to the 
"Muslim engagement" term in this confessionally-diverse country with 
a significant Christian population.  End summary. 
 
POST OUTREACH 
------------- 
 
¶2. (U) In response to ref A, Post solicited feedback from civil 
society interlocutors, journalists, educators, and political 
contacts in response to initiatives outlined in President Obama's 
June 4 Cairo speech.  (Note: Initial reactions to the speech are 
included in refs B and C.  End note.)  As part of Embassy Beirut's 
ongoing efforts to engage Lebanese audiences on the speech, to date 
we have conducted the following activities: 
 
-- Roundtable:  The Ambassador held a roundtable discussion at her 
residence with eight influential, multi-confessional Lebanese 
opinion-makers representing a diverse range of political, civil 
society and NGO leaders.  These individuals provided feedback on the 
President's speech (ref B) and insightful thoughts on future 
directions programming should take to support the articulated 
initiatives. 
 
-- Reaching out to youth: the Public Affairs Section (PAS) promoted 
the speech using several IIP multimedia resources including live 
webcast and SMS services, as well as English and Arabic websites, 
both before and after the President's speech.  The Public Affairs 
and Political sections used Embassy Beirut's Facebook networking 
site extensively to spread the President's message and provoke 
discussion among Lebanese youth. 
 
-- MEPI alumni:  POL contacted MEPI alumni (a significant number of 
whom are women) by e-mail and Facebook to gauge their impressions of 
the speech and elicit suggestions for programs which we will 
consider in the context of 
on-going projects or possible future programming. 
 
¶3. (U) The Embassy Country Team has reviewed current and future 
programming for areas of synergy to support the President's outlined 
initiatives.  We will continue to expand this list as we meet with 
stakeholders, community members and other social advocates who 
desire positive change within Lebanon. 
 
AREA FOR ENGAGEMENT: 
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Numerous contacts expressed the idea that the West should 
make more of an effort to understand Arabs, instead of always 
explaining western positions and ideas.  One moderate journalist 
said that he was "very encouraged" by the speech.  He liked that it 
 
BEIRUT 00000833  002 OF 005 
 
 
promoted "intercultural dialogue through encouraging many Americans 
to study abroad in Arab countries" because he believed that it would 
help the United States make better policy decisions if it understood 
the "Arab mentality." 
A project coordinator for a local youth-oriented NGO liked the 
President's idea that "education and innovation will be the currency 
in the 21st century" and suggested that if the U.S. is serious about 
helping the Middle East develop, it needs to invest in social 
issues, health, education, and technology, as well as women's 
rights. 
 
¶5. (U) Current programs that U.S. Embassy Beirut actively promotes 
and supports related to human development include: 
 
-- USAID: Economic Support Fund assistance strengthens basic and 
higher education in Lebanon by providing assistance to 283 public 
schools.  The program improves learning environments through 
infrastructure repairs, providing equipment such as science 
laboratory materials, classroom equipment and computer laboratories, 
as well as extracurricular activities to enhance the students' 
skills and learning experience. USAID is also focused on decreasing 
student drop-out rates (particularly girls).  Over the past three 
years, USAID has also supported two American educational high school 
institutions, the American Community School and the International 
College. Furthermore, USAID supports three American accredited 
universities, which provide students with the opportunity to receive 
an American-style education in Lebanon.  Under the newly-adopted 
five-year USAID strategy for Lebanon, a competitive scholarship 
program for economically disadvantaged students will facilitate 
raising the overall quality of education. 
 
-- Public Affairs: Mission officers actively participate in a 
variety of outreach programs, including at the four American Corners 
which are used as programming bases.  In all programs, the Public 
Diplomacy Section (PD) strives to have the variety of Lebanese 
religious confessions and regions represented.  Core U.S. values, 
including the importance of education, diversity, gender equality, 
and peaceful resolution of differences, are emphasized in youth 
programs as well as individual interactions with university 
students.  Key PD-managed programs include the J. William Fulbright 
program and the Near East/South Asia undergraduate scholarship 
programs.  Other programs, such as the Access English 
Microscholarship and Youth Exchange and Study (YES) programs, both 
of which are specifically for disadvantaged high school-aged youth, 
further the goals of developing a sense of self-worth in the 
students and allowing them to obtain language and social skills to 
mitigate strife.  These goals are also reached through an active 
sports diplomacy program which brings youth together with coaches 
trained to teach teamwork as well as resolve cultural conflict 
situations.  The popular International Visitors Leadership Program 
(IVLP) meets the needs of Lebanese professionals at several stages 
during their careers.  These programs provide skill-based training 
while reinforcing U.S. values. 
 
The PAO meets regularly with university presidents individually and 
in groups to discuss how their institutions of higher learning 
leverage their individual areas of expertise to form consortia to 
benefit Lebanon more widely, e.g. forming "centers of excellence." 
Realizing the need for women throughout Lebanon to learn English, 
the Section designed "Teaching Women English" (TWE).  This program, 
funded with 2007 supplemental funding, has proven to be a great 
success.  With additional funding, TWE could extend its reach and 
have a significant impact in underserved communities. 
 
-- MEPI: The Women Political Leaders program enabled approximately 
10 Lebanese women from different political factions to participate 
in an election observation program in the U.S. in anticipation of 
the June 7 Lebanese parliamentary elections.  Meanwhile, the Student 
Leaders Program sends university students to the U.S. for leadership 
training.  For the first time, the FY2009 program will include 
several Palestinian participants who reside in some of Lebanon's 
Palestinian refugee camps. 
 
AREA FOR ENGAGEMENT: 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
BEIRUT 00000833  003 OF 005 
 
 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) MEPI alumni expressed concern that the lack of economic 
opportunity in the region contributes to radical political activity. 
 One MEPI alumnus commented that poverty is the "fuel" of Islamic 
radicalism and believes that the U.S. can address this aspect of 
radicalism by encouraging economic growth in the Muslim world. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Current USG programs in Lebanon geared towards economic 
empowerment include: 
 
-- USAID: Microfinance:  Through a mixture of loans and grants, 
current and future USAID programs provide technical assistance for 
business plans and remove barriers by increasing women's access to 
finance. 
 
USAID will continue expanding these programs to support economic 
growth in Lebanon by increasing incomes and jobs primarily in the 
agribusiness tourism sectors located in peri-urban and rural areas. 
Increased income and employment opportunities for youth in these 
expanding sectors can be significantly enhanced through 
complementary technical training, including career counseling and 
guidance, and on-the-job training and placement programs in assisted 
enterprises.  Job creation through other sectors such as solid waste 
treatment plants and forestry activities under environmental 
programming are targeted in the newly-adopted USAID strategy. 
 
-- MEPI: MEPI funds several projects to develop small businesses. 
For example, MEPI funded the Women's Cooperative Association of 
Rashaya-Wadi El-Taym, giving it a bus to allow an impoverished 
women's cooperative to sell its produce in different geographical 
areas and increase its income.  Also, the Rene Moawad Foundation 
(RMF) project builds the capacity of small-scale breeders living in 
the Akkar region to improve the quantity and quality of dairy 
production, which will lead to rising incomes. 
 
-- USAID Office of Transition Initiatives (OTI):  USAID/OTI funds 
numerous projects to support vocational training for youth from 
marginalized and impoverished areas.  In a recent program for youth 
in the Akkar area, one of the country's least developed regions, OTI 
funded a youth-led program through a local NGO to provide four 
months of hands-on training in filming and directing, theater makeup 
and hairdressing for 50 youth from five marginalized villages.  The 
participants will apply what they learn by producing short-films 
about issues facing youth in the region.  The training will increase 
work opportunities for youth to work such as hairdressing and 
makeup, services commonly used for weddings and social events. 
 
In Northern Beqaa, training has been provided through a grant to 
teach sewing and related marketing skills through a local NGO.  The 
products made during the practical portion of the training are sold 
through exhibitions and youth are equipped with skills needed to 
start their own home enterprises. 
 
OTI continues to expand programming to provide economic 
opportunities for those at-risk throughout the country. 
 
 
AREA FOR ENGAGEMENT: 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Several MEPI alumni respondents were excited by the 
President's "green" message, noting that he stressed the importance 
of empowering Arabs to seek "green alternatives" for industry and 
agriculture to revive the economy.  One MEPI alumnus working for an 
environmentally-focused NGO welcomed the comments and hoped that the 
U.S. launch of a fund to support technological development will 
trigger a greener focus among Arab leaders. 
 
¶9. (U) Current and planned programs include: 
 
-- USAID: Forests covered 35% of Lebanon in 1965; they now cover 
only 13% of the country due to forest fires and lack of proper urban 
planning.  Loss of forest cover contributes to increasing carbon 
 
BEIRUT 00000833  004 OF 005 
 
 
emissions, floods, soil erosion, and landslides.  USAID will work 
with government, communities, and civil society to identify methods 
to protect and regenerate forests based on their watershed, 
income-generation, and carbon sequestration values, along with 
cultural values.  Development of tree nurseries will be designed to 
also increase income for local communities, particularly unemployed 
youth.  Further incentives for forest conservation include the 
sustainable harvesting and sale of high value forest products such 
as pine nuts.  Where possible, activities will be associated with 
sites for eco-tourism, will work to physically link forest patches 
to remaining natural forests, and will engage and train youth in 
conservation. 
 
USAID also funds programs which address solid waste pollution of the 
Litani River by constructing low-tech waste water treatment plants. 
USAID will continue to directly fund and leverage resources to 
build, rehabilitate or expand facilities meant to store, distribute 
and treat water for domestic and industrial usages under the new 
five year strategy.  Programs include developing citizens' awareness 
of management of water resources; promoting user participation and 
decentralization in water resource management, and enhancing 
coordination mechanisms for managing water resources such as 
aquifers or river basins. 
 
-- MEPI: MEPI funds the Benefaction-Spikes Association project to 
repair the water supply network in Nabha village of Baalbeck, Bekaa, 
as well as the Association for Forests, Development and Conservation 
(AFDC) project to start a campaign in Lebanon inspired by the 
"Smokey Bear campaign", which is considered as the longest running 
public service campaign in the USA. 
-- USAID/OTI:  OTI provided a grant to a local NGO to work with a 
core group of 35 youth who were trained in advocacy and political 
activism on environmental issues.  Those youth then went out and 
engaged 500 people in small-scale environmental campaigns in Beirut, 
Aley, and the south of Lebanon.   As a result, the youth were able 
to initiate renovation of a public park in a southern village, raise 
awareness of the dangers of plastic bag use in collaboration with 
local business and use street performances to deliver messages about 
preserving the environment. OTI continues to seek out opportunities 
to work with NGOs in the communities on "green" projects. 
-- ODC: The Office of Defense Cooperation is successfully using 
CENTCOM Humanitarian Assistance funds, construct fire stations in 
remote areas, renovate schools, and increase the capacity of Badaro 
Central Hospital by constructing an emergency and X-ray room and 
renovating the operating room. 
 
¶10. (U) Despite Post's efforts, our current programs could and 
should be expanded.  Lebanon lacks even a rudimentary recycling 
program, and, in fact, rock quarrying has devastated the 
environment.  To further the President's agenda to promote 
alternative energy sources, especially in a region so dependent on a 
fossil-fuel economy, Post suggests monitoring the development of the 
American University Beirut (AUB) Institute for Energy and Natural 
Resources.  This institute was recently created with five million 
dollars in seed money from an AUB trustee.  As UAB further develops 
the institute's potential, it may become an excellent funding 
vehicle for promoting "Green" Cairo Initiatives. 
 
AREA FOR ENGAGEMENT: 
INTERFAITH DIALOGUE 
------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Post observed that a number of Facebook and 
e-mail responses from MEPI alumni offered opinions on the Quranic 
references in the speech.  Their comments reveal a deep divide 
between Muslims and Christians in their perceptions, suggesting that 
creating true interfaith partnership is important but extremely 
challenging.  For example, a number of Lebanese Muslims expressed 
their belief that the President was finally acknowledging them, and 
it was clear that many Muslims feel marginalized by the West. 
However, one Lebanese Christian warned us to "keep an eagle eye on 
the expansion of Muslims in the world" saying that it's not 
"innocent" and noting that there are mosques in Rome but not 
churches in Saudi Arabia. 
 
 
BEIRUT 00000833  005 OF 005 
 
 
¶12. (SBU) Members of the MEPI-funded Lebanese Shadow Government 
commented that the political issues that have built up the mistrust 
between the U.S. and the Muslim world are not solely related to 
Muslims.  Rather, they appear in communities where Islam is perhaps 
the dominant faith and/or identity but is not exclusive. 
Consequently, they believe that Obama's speech ignored other 
communities -- not only religious ones, but also cultural and 
political.  Post often seeks participants for IVLP programs on 
interfaith dialogue, but few Lebanese have participated over the 
years. 
 
¶13.  USAID/OTI: Funding has been provided for numerous activities 
which promote peace-building, conflict resolution activities with a 
focus on youth.  A recent project supported the rehabilitation of a 
large public stairway linking two rival communities (the Alawite 
area of Jabal Mohsen and the predominately Sunni area of Bab el 
Tabbeneh).   Both of these marginalized neighborhoods in Northern 
Tripoli harbored deep rooted hostilities and mistrust due to 
recurrent fighting over the years.  With the grant from OTI through 
a local NGO, the stairway was rehabilitated to encourage greater 
interaction between both communities along with the creation of a 
playground and small library for children in an area adjacent to the 
stairway.  Students of both communities painted murals along the 
renovated stairway and participated in workshops to further 
strengthen communication and facilitate reconciliation.  The 
stairway was opened in mid-July 2009 and citizens from both 
communities are now interacting and finding ways to further improve 
their neighborhoods jointly. 
 
USAID is expanding funding through OTI to work with nascent Civil 
Society and NGO organizations.  We are actively expanding outreach 
dialogue and seeking ideas for additional programming in this area. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) In Lebanon, current USG programs address several of the 
target areas outlined in President Obama's June 4 Cairo speech. 
However, challenges to "Muslim engagement" in Lebanon include the 
need for additional program funding and human resources.  In 
addition, several of our interlocutors, particularly youth, found 
the Cairo Initiatives necessary, but argued for implementation in 
all Arab areas, including in Lebanon's Christian communities. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Embassy Beirut will continue to pursue assistance 
programming targeted at focus areas in the Cairo speech with vigor. 
Such programs significantly improve the image and credibility of the 
United States by creating new opportunities for the Lebanese, who 
are often disappointed by their weak state institutions.  We will 
also continue to provide S/P with periodic updates, as requested.