09BEIRUT1194
SCENESETTER FOR CODEL PRICE'S NOVEMBER 9-10 VISIT
Mon Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1194/01 3061309
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADD0952C MSI3055 641)
P 021309Z NOV 09 ZDF
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5987UNCLAS BEIRUT 001194 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY PARAS MISNUMBER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PREL PGOV KDEM EAID UNSC PTER MARR LE
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR CODEL PRICE'S NOVEMBER 9-10 VISIT 
TO LEBANON 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The U.S. Mission in Beirut welcomes your 
November 9-10 visit.  Your visit is the first by a U.S. 
Congressional delegation to Lebanon since the June 7 
parliamentary elections.  Your meetings with President Michel 
Sleiman, Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri, caretaker PM 
Fouad Siniora, Speaker of Parliament Nabih Berri, and members 
of parliament (MPs) will reinforce the message that the U.S. 
is committed to supporting Lebanon's state institutions and 
looks forward to working with the next government of Lebanon. 
 USAID and its implementing partners are supporting projects 
that strengthen state institutions, such as the judiciary, 
and improve transparency in municipal governments.  USAID is 
also preparing to launch a parliamentary research center 
program for the Lebanese parliament.  With regard to economic 
reform, you should encourage Lebanese parliamentarians to 
pass a transparent budget that meets the needs of the 
Lebanese people.  Recent security incidents in south Lebanon 
have raised questions regarding the full implementation of UN 
Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1701.  Your visit to 
Lebanon presents an opportunity not only to register U.S. 
concern but also to highlight the need for the state to exert 
control over all of Lebanon's territory.   End Summary. 
GOVERNMENT FORMATION PENDING 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Government formation efforts have been ongoing since 
the June 7 parliamentary elections.  Prime Minister-designate 
Saad Hariri continues to engage with the leaders of various 
parliamentary groups, especially opposition Christian leader 
Michel Aoun, to come to a consensus about the distribution of 
cabinet portfolios and the selection of ministers.  The 1989 
Taif Agreement created a delicately balanced confessional 
system which dictates the distribution of power-sharing 
between Christians and Muslims.  Within that framework, 
jockeying by the parliamentary blocs for representation in a 
national-unity cabinet has contributed to a protracted 
negotiation process that has also delayed the functioning of 
parliament. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Lebanon's 128-member parliament officially opened 
its regular session on October 20, as mandated by the 
Lebanese constitution. However, election of committees has 
been delayed and no legislative work will begin until after 
the cabinet is formed.  Lebanese public opinion generally 
supports the view that parliament committees should not be 
formed until after the cabinet formation is complete because 
the chairmanships and committee membership should reflect a 
cabinet consensus.  However, the public and the leaders 
consistently express a desire for the government to be formed 
soon. 
 
INSTITUTION-BUILDING, REFORM 
KEY U.S. OBJECTIVES 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Strengthening Lebanese state institutions has been 
and continues to be a major U.S. objective.  Progress towards 
reaching this objective has been achieved by USAID and its 
implementing partners.  One such example, a project to 
"Strengthen the Independence of the Judiciary and Citizen 
Access to Justice in Lebanon," aims to develop the capacity 
and infrastructure of the Judicial Training Institute (JTI), 
to enhance judicial independence, and to provide a space for 
training for judges.  This program is implemented by the 
National Center for State Courts (NCSC) and is expected to 
run through 2010.  A separate project, the Municipal 
Governance Assistance Program, works with 750 of Lebanon's 
900 municipalities to build their capacity and transparency. 
This program, which began in 2004 and is expected to run 
through 2011, is being implemented by the State University of 
New York/Center for Legislative Development (SUNY/CLD). 
 
¶5. (SBU) SUNY's Center for International Development is also 
preparing to launch a program with the Lebanese parliament to 
develop a parliamentary resource center.  Prior to 
implementing any activities, a memorandum of understanding 
with the parliament is required.  Speaker Berri is interested 
in having the program begin as soon as possible and has 
voiced support for its objectives. 
 
¶6. (SBU) On the economic front, one of the first agenda items 
of the new parliament will be to consider passage of the 
GOL's 2010 budget.  USAID is exploring with the finance 
ministry establishing a program to provide technical 
assistance to complement existing activities aimed at 
improving budget transparency.  Improved budget transparency 
would constrain existing patronage mechanisms, slow the 
growth of Lebanon's debt burden, and allow the central 
government to be more accountable to its citizens.  You 
should encourage parliamentarians to support reforms that 
encourage transparent budgeting to serve the interests of the 
 
Lebanese people in support of these efforts. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF UNSCR 1701 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Lebanese leaders express support for full 
implementation of UNSCR 1701, which calls for the cessation 
of hostilities between Israel and Lebanon and the disarming 
of all militias south of the Litani River.  However, the 
Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and the UN Interim Force in 
Lebanon (UNIFIL) have recently faced several challenges to 
their respective mandates.  A rocket launch from the southern 
town of Houla into northern Israel on October 27, preceded by 
other security incidents over the summer, has raised the 
specter that armed elements in the south are taking advantage 
of the government impasse to stir tension.  Statements issued 
from the office of caretaker PM Siniora condemned each of the 
incidents and reiterated Lebanon's continued commitment to 
UNSCR 1701.  Lebanese leaders have praised UNIFIL and its 
cooperation with the LAF.  We continue to highlight the 
urgent need to bring all arms in Lebanon under the sole 
authority of the state.  We have also highlighted our ongoing 
train and equip assistance program to strengthen the Lebanese 
Armed Forces.  We have underscored to the GOL that we believe 
the surest way for Lebanon to set the stage for eventual 
peace with its neighbors is to complete UNSCR 1701 
implementation and demarcate its borders. 
 
SISON