09BEIRUT1205
LEBANON: 2009-2010 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY
Fri Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1205/01 3101204
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061204Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6008UNCLAS BEIRUT 001205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INL/AAE JOHN LYLE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR NAS LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: 2009-2010 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY 
REPORT PART I 
 
REF: STATE 097309 
 
¶I. Summary 
---------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Lebanon is not a major illicit drug producing or 
drug-transit country.  The Lebanese government reported ongoing 
cannabis cultivation in 2009, and increased drug use particularly 
among the young, due to greater availability and reduced price of 
most drugs sold in Lebanon.  During 2009, Lebanon undertook 
eradication efforts in the Bekaa Valley and claimed to have 
destroyed nearly all cannabis and opium production.  This is 
significant since between 2005 and 2007, the Drug Enforcement Bureau 
(DEB) of the Internal Security Forces (ISF) of Lebanon undertook 
almost no crop destruction operations due to ongoing political 
crises and overstretched security commitments on the part of the 
Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF), which provide security for the police 
involved in crop destruction.  However, illicit crop cultivation 
remains an attractive option for some farmers due to a lack of 
economically viable alternate crops. There is practically no illicit 
drug refining in Lebanon.  The majority of drug refining labs are 
very small in scale and incapable of producing large amounts of 
illicit narcotics.  There is minimal production, trading or transit 
of precursor chemicals.  Drug trafficking across the Lebanese-Syrian 
border continued in 2009, in large part due to the absence of 
effective border controls along the two countries' long common 
border.  The UN peacekeeping force on the Lebanese-Israeli border, 
UNIFIL (the UN Interim Force in Lebanon), also reported continued 
drug smuggling across the Lebanese-Israeli border in 2009.  Lebanon 
is a transit country for cocaine and heroin, with Lebanese nationals 
operating in concert with drug traffickers from Colombia and South 
America.  The government of Lebanon continued its ongoing drug 
demand reduction efforts through public service messages and 
awareness campaigns.  Lebanon is a party to the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention. 
 
II. Status of Country 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) At least five types of drugs are available in Lebanon: 
hashish, heroin, cocaine, amphetamine, and other synthetics such as 
MDMA (Ecstasy).  The use of hashish and heroin continues to rise. 
Although eradication efforts have diminished the supply of marijuana 
and hashish, the drugs are still relatively easy to obtain and 
readily available to the growing number of young users. Over the 
last few years, only small quantities of cocaine and heroin arrived 
in Lebanon to meet local demand.  Through September 2009, Lebanese 
officials seized 6.6 kilograms of cocaine, compared to 61 kg in 2008 
and 3.5 kg in 2007.  However, there was a significant increase in 
the seizure of heroin, with over 68 kilograms seized though 
September 2009 compared to 14.5 kg in 2008 and 2.7 kg in 2007. 
Given the variance in seizures from year to year, it is too early to 
tell if the increase in heroin seizures constitutes a trend. 
According to local officials, heroin use is limited but increasing. 
They also reported an increase in heroin smuggling from Lebanon to 
Africa.  It is believed the heroin is smuggled into Lebanon from 
Afghanistan via Turkey and Syria and transported by individuals via 
commercial airlines to Africa.  The government also reported 
increased abuse of synthetic drugs.  Lebanon is not considered a 
major transit country for illicit drugs.  There is growing evidence 
that drug trafficking in Lebanon is in part controlled or 
facilitated by large scale criminal groups.  Lebanese citizens with 
links to these organizations are a major presence among 
international drug trafficking and money laundering organizations in 
South America, and are tied into the highest levels of Colombian 
traffickers moving cocaine throughout the world.  Cannabis and opium 
derivatives are trafficked to a modest extent in the region, but 
there is no evidence that the illicit narcotics that transit Lebanon 
reach the U.S. in significant amounts.  South American cocaine, 
primarily from Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia, is smuggled into Lebanon 
via air and sea routes from Europe, Jordan, and Syria, or directly 
to Lebanon.  Lebanese nationals living in South America, in concert 
with resident Lebanese traffickers, often finance these operations. 
Synthetic drugs are visible in the market, and Lebanese officials 
report that they are smuggled into Lebanon primarily from Eastern 
Europe for sale to high-income recreational users both within 
Lebanon and for transit to the Gulf States. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The stagnant economic situation in rural Lebanon makes 
illicit crop cultivation appealing to farmers in the Bekaa Valley of 
eastern Lebanon.  Lebanese officials hope that renewed eradication 
efforts during 2009 will help deter further cultivation.  There is 
no significant illicit drug refining in Lebanon.  However, small 
amounts of precursor chemicals, being shipped from Lebanon to Turkey 
via Syria, were thought to be diverted for illicit use in Lebanon. 
Lebanese officials reported an increase in misuse/overuse of 
prescribed medications.  The ISF is working with the Ministry of 
Health to tighten regulations on the sale of drugs without 
prescription to lessen the increased consumption and overuse of pain 
killers such as Tramadol and a codeine-based cough medicine referred 
to as "Simo."  Legislation passed in 1998 authorized seizure of 
 
 
 
assets if a drug trafficking nexus is established in court 
proceedings. 
 
III. Country Actions against Drugs in 2009 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Policy Initiatives.  The Ministry of Interior considers 
counter-narcotics a priority.  The government has continued a 
vigorous campaign to discourage drug use by expanding public 
awareness programs on high school and university campuses, through 
media campaigns and in advertisements. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Law Enforcement Efforts.  Between 2005 and 2007 there were 
almost no eradication efforts in Lebanon.  In both 2006 and 2007, 
the LAF was unable to provide the requisite security for the ISF 
because of its commitments in internal conflicts (the Israel/Lebanon 
war in 2006 and battle against Islamic militants in a northern 
Palestinian camp in summer 2007).  In early 2008 internal sectarian 
conflicts and political tensions precluded a decision approving 
eradication.  After political tensions eased, the ISF mounted a 
large policing operation in October 2008, supported by the LAF, in 
the cannabis growing region of the Bekaa. In a one-week period in 
October 2008, the ISF arrested over 350 drug dealers and traffickers 
and seized 83 tons of cannabis plants, 7.5 kilograms of processed 
hashish, and 1,700 kilograms of cannabis seeds.  These aggressive 
efforts continued into 2009, when the ISF claims to have eradicated 
51 acres of opium and 3,237 acres of cannabis.   The ISF continues 
to face the possibility of armed and violent resistance by local 
farmers when attempting to eradicate crops or when attempting to 
undertake drug enforcement operations.  Lebanese officials report 
increased trafficking of Captagon into the domestic market, with 1.3 
million tablets seized through September 2009.  The vast majority of 
Captagon seized in Lebanon is destined for the Gulf States, 
primarily Saudi Arabia.  In October 2008, DEA and Colombian 
authorities arrested three Lebanese nationals suspected of being 
part of a large-scale international drug trafficking and 
money-laundering ring that operates globally, from Colombia to the 
U.S., Canada, Europe and the Middle East. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Lebanese law enforcement officers cooperated with foreign 
officials bilaterally and through Interpol in 2009.  Several 
European and Arabian Gulf countries have drug enforcement liaison 
offices in Beirut with which local law enforcement authorities 
cooperate.  The ISF stated that from January to October 2009 they 
arrested a total of 2,059 people for drug use, dealing, 
distribution, and smuggling. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Corruption.  Corruption remains endemic in Lebanon in all 
levels of government, but the U.S. has no information that 
government corruption is systematically connected to drug production 
or trafficking or the protection of persons who deal in illicit 
drugs.  The government of Lebanon does not encourage or facilitate 
illicit production or distribution of controlled substances.  While 
low-level corruption in the counter narcotics forces is possible, 
there is no evidence of wide-scale corruption within the Judiciary 
Police or the ISF, who appear to be genuinely dedicated to combating 
drugs.  On October 8, 2008, parliament ratified the UN Convention 
against Corruption. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Agreements and Treaties.  Lebanon is a party to the 1988 UN 
Drug Convention, the 1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 
and the 1961 UN Single Convention, as amended by the 1972 Protocol. 
Lebanon is also a party to the UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime and its protocols against migrant smuggling and 
trafficking in persons. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Cultivation and Production.  Lebanon is no longer a 
significant drug producing country, though there had been an 
increase in cannabis cultivation for hashish production since 2005, 
when many farmers appeared to be resuming planting illicit crops 
because they believed the crops would not be destroyed.  In remote 
areas in the north of the country where few other viable economic 
options exist, illicit crop production remains an attractive option. 
 Lebanese police claim that they destroyed nearly all of the 
cannabis and opium cultivation in Lebanon during 2009. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Drug Flow/Transit.  Coordinated through Interpol, joint 
Syrian-Lebanese anti-trafficking operations have continued since the 
Syrian withdrawal from Lebanese territory in 2005.  The eastern 
border between Lebanon and Syria remains porous, and border policing 
efforts remain ineffective due to political constraints and lack of 
resources and manpower.  UNIFIL and press reports indicate increased 
drug smuggling incidents on the Blue Line (Lebanese/Israeli border) 
since the passage of resolution 1701 (2006) and particularly since 
¶2008.  The primary route for smuggling hashish from Lebanon during 
2009 was overland through Syria to Arab countries such as Saudi 
Arabia, Egypt, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, and via sea routes 
to Europe.  According to the ISF, large exports of hashish from 
Lebanon to Europe are more and more difficult for smugglers due to 
 
 
 
increased seashore patrols and airport control. 
 
¶11. (U) Domestic Programs/Demand Reduction.  The Lebanese government 
and NGOs are actively involved in programs and campaigns to address 
the problems of illicit drug use in Lebanon.  The current (but 
unimplemented) law on drugs dictates that a National Council on 
Drugs (NCD) be established to provide substance abuse treatment, 
prevention, and awareness, and to formulate a national action plan. 
The NCD has not yet been established.  Since 2002 the government has 
sponsored public awareness campaigns to discourage drug use. 
Textbooks approved for public schools contain a chapter on narcotics 
awareness.  The ISF undertakes demand reduction programs in the 
schools and community.  DEB officers personally speak to youth at 
high schools and universities on a regular basis. 
 
¶12. (U) There are several detoxification and rehabilitation 
programs, the most comprehensive of which is run by Oum al-Nour 
(ON), a Beirut-based NGO funded in part by the Ministries of Social 
Affairs and Public Health.  ON operates two drug treatment centers 
with a maximum capacity of 120 patients and offers a year-long 
residential program, in addition to its wide range of prevention 
programs, parents' and family guidance programs, outpatient 
follow-up programs, media campaigns, and training and conferences. 
 
¶13. (U) Several other organizations also provide prevention and 
treatment services.  A drug rehabilitation center in Zahleh is run 
by the Saint Charles Hospital and the Ministry of Health.  The 
center holds drug prevention conferences, assemblies and talks 
throughout the municipality every two weeks, and runs weekly 
anti-drug use campaigns in the schools.  Skoun, an outpatient 
facility, has broadened its drug treatment, prevention, awareness, 
and counseling to drug users and their families throughout Lebanon, 
including in Sidon, Tripoli and the southern suburbs of Beirut. 
Skoun is the first treatment center in the Middle East to prescribe 
buprenorphine maintenance for opiate addicts and continues to lobby 
with the Ministry of Health for buprenorphine's legalization.  With 
the aim of better implementing the 1998 law decriminalizing 
addiction and educating the criminal justice system on the benefits 
of treatment centers over imprisonment of drug addicts, Skoun has 
been working since August 2007 to ensure the legal rights of drug 
addicts through a series of roundtable discussions and workshops 
designed to sensitize judges, police investigators, heads of police, 
police recruits, and other public officials on the condition of drug 
addicts and the laws that govern them.  This project is sponsored by 
the European Union and administered by the office of the Minister of 
State for Administrative Reform.  Jeunesse Anti-Drogue (JAD) offers 
rehabilitation centers, educational programs, medical treatment, and 
outpatient counseling.  Jeunesse Contre la Drogue raises awareness 
of substance abuse and AIDS.  The Association Justice et Misericorde 
was established to assist incarcerated drug abusers. 
 
IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Policy Initiatives.  In meetings with Lebanese officials, 
U.S. officials continued to stress the U.S. commitment to support 
law enforcement sector development by strengthening the capacity of 
the ISF to enforce the rule of law in Lebanon, and to punish 
violators by increasing the capacity of the ISF to combat criminal 
activities in all forms, including drug trafficking, production and 
use.  The USG also stressed the importance of anticorruption 
efforts.  High-level ISF officials state drug trafficking is the 
second highest priority of the ISF, second only to anti-terrorism 
efforts. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Bilateral Cooperation.  Bilateral law enforcement 
cooperation has continued to increase during FY 2009.  The INL 
Office at the U.S. Embassy in Beirut has been the major force in 
furthering these cooperative efforts.  The INL Director manages the 
U.S. Lebanon Police Reform Program with a goal to strengthen the 
capacity of the ISF to enforce the rule of law in Lebanon through 
provision of police training and equipment.  The excellent working 
relations between the DEA Country Office in Nicosia, Cyprus, and the 
DEB were strengthened when 35 DEB officers participated in DEA's 
Basic Counter-Narcotics course in December 2008.  During 2009, INL 
funded donations of computers and investigative equipment to the 
DEB.  USAID continued its programs to empower Lebanese municipal 
governments and civil society to promote transparency, 
accountability and good governance.   The U.S. Coast Guard provided 
diesel engine maintenance training enabling maritime patrolling. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The Road Ahead.  The U.S. Embassy in Beirut and DEA 
Country Office in Nicosia will continue to enhance cooperation and 
coordination with the Lebanese government and the ISF.  Benefiting 
from increased USG funding in support of the security forces of 
Lebanon, the Embassy and DEA intend to increase in-country training 
and investigative cooperation and provide necessary equipment for 
the underfunded ISF counter-narcotics unit. To ensure that all 
Lebanese security agencies with a counter-narcotics role are capable 
E 
 
 
 
of carrying out their mandate, the Embassy and DEA will explore 
extending U.S. training in counter-narcotics strategies to Lebanese 
customs officers. 
 
SISON