09BRASILIA1129
BRAZIL: SCENE SETTER, USTR AMBASSADOR RON KIRK VISIT TO SAO
Fri Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO3289
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1129/01 2541031
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111031Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5049
INFO RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 4523
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 9910
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8171UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 BRASILIA 001129 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR FOR USTR KIRK, EVERETT EISSENSTAT, KATE 
KALUTKIEWICZ 
STATE FOR WHA AND EEB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD KIRP ECON EFIN EINV EAGR BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: SCENE SETTER, USTR AMBASSADOR RON KIRK VISIT TO SAO 
PAULO AND BRASILIA, SEPTEMBER 16 AND 17 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The relationship between the United States and 
Brazil is productive and broad-based, with growing economic and 
trade ties.  Excellent opportunities for increased bilateral trade 
cooperation exist, including issues raised in the recent CEO Forum. 
Brazil has also prioritized concluding the Doha round of World Trade 
Organization (WTO) negotiations.  The Government of Brazil (GOB) has 
played a constructive role in the G20. Fora including the Economic 
Partnership Dialogue between State and the Ministry of External 
Affairs (MRE) and the Commercial Dialogue between Commerce and the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade (MDIC) have provided opportunities 
for increased positive bilateral economic and commercial 
cooperation.  Recent events including the WTO cotton decision and 
orange juice case, issues surrounding the on-going FX-2 aircraft bid 
process, and Brazil's suspicion over U.S. access to military bases 
in Colombia, may color the atmospherics of your trip, particularly 
your interaction with the press.  Private sector interlocutors may 
raise the recently announced GOB-proposed legislation that would 
provide a significant government role in development of potentially 
vast new off-shore oil resources.  The visit provides an important 
opportunity to highlight the potential for increased bilateral 
cooperation, emphasizing that specific trade disputes need not 
define our overall positive relationship.  As Brazil's ambition and 
ability to engage on issues of global importance increases, the 
value of engaging Brazil and finding areas of mutual interest for 
cooperation increases.  END SUMMARY 
 
POLITICAL OVERVIEW 
 
¶2.  (SBU) With democracy re-established in 1988 after decades of 
military dictatorship, Brazil's democratic institutions are 
generally strong and stable.  President Luiz Inacio "Lula" da Silva 
remains a popular president -- one of the most popular in Brazil's 
history and indeed in the world today, with recent approval ratings 
still as high as 68 percent nearly seven years into his presidency. 
This sustained popularity is based on a combination of his personal 
connection with the country's lower classes, orthodox economic 
policies, and expanded social programs.  Ongoing public scandals 
involving the leadership of the Senate and various members of 
congress have further eroded the legislature's power vis-a-vis the 
executive and its ratings among the Brazilian public.  The court 
system remains cumbersome and unreliable, but has recently taken 
limited steps to curb impunity among public officials, which have 
been well received by a public accustomed to abuses by authorities. 
The Brazilian political elite and media are already focused on the 
October 2010 national elections for president, all 26 state 
governors, two-thirds of the senate, and all federal deputies.  Lula 
is constitutionally barred from seeking a third term and has 
designated Civil Household (Prime) Minister Dilma Rousseff as his 
party's candidate to succeed him.  At this point, Rousseff is a 
distant second in the polls to likely opposition candidate Sao Paulo 
Governor Jose Serra, but with a year to go, the race remains 
unpredictable. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The United States and Brazil share the basic goals of 
fostering hemispheric stability and integration, promoting democracy 
and human rights, and preventing transnational illicit activity. 
The attainment of a permanent seat on the UN Security Council has 
been a central goal of Brazil's foreign policy under President 
Lula's government.  Regionally, Lula has maintained Brazil's 
historic focus on stability, seeing good relations with all parties 
as the best way to achieve this goal.  As a result, Brazil maintains 
an active dialogue with Venezuela and Cuba, has worked to foster 
good relations with Bolivia and Ecuador, and has stood firmly on the 
principle of respect for sovereignty in the region. 
 
ECONOMIC OVERVIEW 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Brazil is the tenth largest economy in the world and 
received investment grade status from Standard and Poor's and Fitch 
in 2008.  Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew 5.1 percent in 
2008, and inflation was 5.8 percent.  The global economic crisis 
eroded previous predictions for annual GDP growth for 2009 from four 
per cent to essentially flat or slightly negative.  Despite this 
decline in immediate prospects, Brazil has thus far weathered the 
crisis better than most major economies and has recently shown signs 
of a recovery, led by strong domestic demand.  Conservative 
macroeconomic policies in the years prior to the crisis, and 
targeted responses during the crisis -- including credit injections 
in the financial system and tax cuts on automobiles and consumer 
durables -- played a role in lessening the impact of the global 
crisis on Brazil. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Brazil's relatively successful management of the crisis 
has encouraged GOB to engage proactively and constructively in the 
debate over how to handle the economic crisis including through the 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  002 OF 008 
 
 
G20 process.  Brazil has called for increased regulation of the 
global financial system, increased global access to trade finance, 
and an expanded voice and vote for large emerging countries like 
Brazil in the International Financial Institutions. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Brazil is a major producer and exporter.  Agriculture 
makes up 36 percent of exports, and the agribusiness sector accounts 
for 25 percent of Brazil's GDP.  Brazil is a leading exporter of 
soybeans, beef, sugar, coffee, and orange juice.  Brazil also 
distinguishes itself as a major exporter of civilian aircraft, 
steel, and petrochemicals.  The United States is Brazil's top 
trading partner overall, and China as of March of this year moved 
into first position as Brazil's primary export destination.  Prior 
to the current financial crisis, U.S.-Brazil trade experienced 
significant annual growth surpassing USD 50 billion in 2008 -- 
Brazil typically experiences a slight positive balance in the trade 
relationship. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Brazil is increasing, 
with inflows of USD 44 billion in 2008; USD 6.9 billion came from 
the United States.  Brazilian investment in the United States almost 
tripled between 2001 (USD 1.4 billion) and 2006 (USD 3.9 billion). 
President Lula has been actively selling Brazil as a solid 
investment destination during the financial crisis due to its sound 
macroeconomic policies and relatively strong economy.  Brazil is 
Latin America's biggest recipient of FDI, and in 2008 received 
roughly twice the volume of inflow than Mexico received. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Despite progress in recent years, income distribution in 
Brazil remains grossly unequal, with 10 percent of the population 
holding over 50 percent of the nation's wealth.  With a total 
population near 200 million, Brazil is also home to 50 percent of 
the people who live in extreme poverty in Latin America.  President 
Lula's social programs, combined with formal sector job growth and 
real increases in the minimum wage, have reduced income inequalities 
each year since 2004. 
 
OVERVIEW ON BRAZILIAN MEDIA AND PUBLIC ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE USA 
 
¶9.  (SBU) In terms of general public opinion, the election of Barack 
Obama as president seems to have influenced views of the United 
States in a positive way.  An Office of Research Opinion Analysis 
released in March 2009 found that seven-in-10 Brazilians believe the 
Obama presidency will be positive for Brazil and the world. 
Economically, Brazilians say their future lies with the United 
States and China.  Majorities held a favorable view of the United 
States (57 percent) and saw bilateral relations as being good (65 
percent).  However, Brazilians have often seen the United States as 
an impediment to Brazil's aspirations for regional leadership. 
Pluralities said last year that politically and economically, the 
United States was as much a competitor as it was an ally and 
partner.  As of January, half lack confidence in the United States' 
ability to deal responsibly with world problems. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Brazilian journalists, generally speaking, are 
professional, balanced, and strive for objectivity.  Many are 
evenhanded in their treatment of the United States, even if they do 
not personally agree with U.S. policies.  Some mainstream Brazilian 
opinion writers demonstrate biases against U.S. policies, though the 
trend has started to change with the election of President Obama.  A 
small segment of the Brazilian public accepts the notion that the 
United States has a campaign to subjugate Brazil economically, 
undermine it culturally, and occupy with troops at least part of its 
territory.  Such attitudes and beliefs have influenced Brazilian 
reporting and commentary on issues such as the reestablishment of 
the U.S. Navy's Fourth Fleet (which has been characterized as a 
threat to Brazil), supposed U.S. nefarious intentions toward the 
Amazon and the "Blue Amazon" (seas where new oil discoveries were 
found) and most recently, the announcement on U.S. access to 
Colombian military bases.  That said, the Brazilian media have 
reported favorably on U.S. efforts at the recent meeting of the 
General Assembly of the Organization of American States and the 
Summit of the Americas, and the Obama Administration overall, 
portending a change in perspective with regards to U.S. intentions 
in Brazil and the region at large. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Specifically on trade, the mainstream press has been 
critical of the United States, asserting USG does not have a trade 
policy and that the United States is not committed to advancing the 
Doha Round.  On the WTO cotton decision, Estado de Sao Paulo in 
separate articles characterized the USTR trip as focused on 
negotiating retaliation, and asserted cross-retaliation on IPR would 
be preferable to goods because withdrawing IP protection "would not 
hurt the Brazilian consumer" while goods retaliation potentially 
could.  While Brazil is not a member of the WTO Government 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  003 OF 008 
 
 
Procurement Agreement and maintains its own domestic preference 
program, in the past the press was critical of Buy America 
provisions in U.S. measures to address the global economic crisis as 
protectionist. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: BILATERAL TRADE COOPERATION 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The GOB, including the Ministry of External Relations 
(MRE), the Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade (MDIC), and 
the External Trade Chamber (CAMEX) Secretariat, has indicated 
interest in exploring ways to deepen bilateral trade cooperation 
with the United States.  While tariff negotiations could only occur 
in 4+1 format with Brazil's Mercosul partners, Embassy interlocutors 
agree there is scope for bilateral cooperation, with the potential 
to expand eventually to 4+1 cooperation if there is mutual interest. 
 In areas of joint interest, Brazil and the United States could 
potentially make common cause in approaches to third countries. 
Some in the Brazilian trade associations (Sao Paulo-based FIESP and 
its umbrella association CNI) have indicated interest in more 
strategic bilateral engagement.  Possible areas to explore include 
or that may be raised in your Sao Paulo private sector discussions: 
 
 
Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA):  There is a great 
deal of GOB interest, particularly in MDIC, in implementing the CEO 
Forum recommendation to pursue a TIFA with the United States.  CAMEX 
is reviewing existing USG TIFAs, with a view to identifying 
preferred elements (NOTE: Mission has received feedback that the 
Uruguay TIFA, with its trade facilitation annex, is of particular 
interest).  While GOB continues to resist Bilateral Investment 
Treaty negotiations, increasing Brazilian investment overseas is 
fueling interest in engaging in some way more concretely on 
investment issues. 
 
Joint Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and/or Sanitary and 
Phyto-Sanitary (SPS) cooperation: Opportunities exist for 
cooperation both on bilateral standards issues, and probably more 
attractively, in terms of getting positive movement, in jointly 
developing approaches to third countries such as China. 
Additionally, there is potentially scope for joint cooperation in 
less-developed countries, such as in Africa, in capacity-building to 
develop appropriate TBT/SPS rules and procedures. 
 
Joint Agricultural Cooperation: Both Brazil and the United States 
are significant agricultural exporters.  Opportunities exist to 
explore how the United States and Brazil can work together, to 
mutual benefit, to open third country markets.  Brazil has 
sensitivities regarding U.S. agricultural subsidies; however, there 
could be common cause regarding barriers in China and the EU for our 
exports, including soy and beef.  The United States can also 
consider re-approaching Brazil on its position on agricultural 
biotechnology, which is used domestically, but GOB does not actively 
engage internationally to support agricultural biotechnology in 
Africa and elsewhere. 
 
Services: While the services sector represents a potential growth 
area in Brazil, there is still an undeveloped lobbying effort within 
Brazil.  The sector has been relatively non-vocal in pressing for 
GOB multilateral liberalization engagement.  The USG could encourage 
further bilateral engagement to reinforce mutual interests beyond 
manufacturing and agriculture. 
 
Trade Facilitation: GOB and Brazilian industry have provided 
significant feedback that intensified cooperation on trade 
facilitation would be welcome.  USDOC and CAMEX have sponsored two 
week-long trips this year for GOB agencies to learn how customs 
clearance and inter-agency coordination works in the United States, 
and another is scheduled for November.  Other activities include 
seminars held by CBP in Brazil for Brazilian Customs and the Federal 
Police, and an upcoming Commercial Dialogue Trade Facilitation 
meeting to be held in Manaus, Brazil in November.  The CEO Forum has 
also prioritized trade facilitation. 
 
Anti-Dumping/Trade Enforcement: While GOB disagrees with U.S. 
anti-dumping methodology and recently initiated a first request on 
orange juice at the DSB, Brazil itself is now using the anti-dumping 
tool more intensively and is particularly concerned about Chinese 
practices.  Opportunities may exist for United States-Brazil 
bilateral dialogue and cooperation on the subject. 
 
Innovation: Brazilian government officials continue to state that 
innovation is one of their highest priorities and have indicated 
interest in cooperation on specific initiatives. Continuing our 
bilateral discussions on innovation also provides the USG with an 
excellent opportunity to highlight the importance of intellectual 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  004 OF 008 
 
 
property rights (IPR) as a pillar of innovation.  While some 
Ministries' officials acknowledge the importance of IPR to 
innovation, GOB writ large does not consistently draw a link between 
IPR and the development and commercialization of new technology and 
invention.  MRE consideration of cross-retaliation on IPR (in the 
WTO cotton dispute) could be perceived as a lack of commitment to 
the long-term value of IPR to attracting and promoting innovation as 
a key element of economic growth.  MRE and Casa Civil interlocutors 
will not eagerly seize on the theme of innovation's ties to IPR 
protection.  However, MDIC and CAMEX are well aware of IPR's 
importance to economic development and growth, and FIESP has 
indicated concerns regarding proposals to cross-retaliate on IPR in 
the cotton case. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: WTO COTTON DECISION 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Since the August 31 WTO cotton ruling, there has been a 
range of opinions across the public and private sectors regarding 
what form the Brazilian retaliation could take.  The Sao Paulo 
business federation, FIESP, will likely have a muted message, not 
wanting the issue to become a barrier to a good trade relationship 
with the United States.  However, others in the business community, 
including the author of the case who is now the President of the 
Brazilian Pork Exporters Association, have publicly indicated that 
Brazil has not taken advantage of the ruling and should make a 
stronger statement on how it plans to retaliate against the United 
States.  The retaliation strategy is under active discussion in the 
CAMEX interagency process, with widely divergent views on whether 
threatening to or actually moving to cross-retaliate on services or 
IPR is in the best interests of Brazil.  (NOTE: CAMEX (the External 
Trade Chamber) membership includes MDIC (chair), Casa Civil, MRE, 
Finance, Agriculture, Planning, and Agricultural Development 
Ministers.  CAMEX's mandate includes decisions on trade defense 
measures; trade facilitation; common external tariff changes 
decisions; export guarantees; international negotiations; and trade 
security.  END NOTE) We understand MDIC is against IPR 
cross-retaliation, while Ministries such as Agriculture are 
supportive.  While the Ministry of Health is not a CAMEX member 
itself, its views on opportunities to increase access to generic 
pharmaceutical production are known.  The next CAMEX meeting to 
discuss is scheduled for September 22. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: DOHA ROUND 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Brazil has been a significant voice in the WTO's Doha 
Round negotiations and concluding Doha remains a high priority for 
Brazil.  Brazil's willingness to break ranks with its Mercosul 
partner Argentina and agree to the December 2008 modalities texts 
was seen as a major step forward in Brazil's willingness to engage 
more concretely on the multilateral stage in support of its own 
economic national interest despite competing pressures from Mercosul 
and G77 relationships.  However, Brazil has been clear that while it 
is interested to hear what specific access USG seeks, it is 
reluctant to engage in bilateral negotiations on scheduling.  Amorim 
has been vocal in the press alleging that the USG considers progress 
to date to represent a "floor" on market access and a "ceiling" on 
subsidies.  GOB, reflecting FIESP/CNI industry positions, has been 
resistant to WTO sectorals, including electronics or chemicals. 
Amorim's public rhetoric is increasingly putting responsibility for 
progress on the Doha Round on the USG's shoulders. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: GSP 
 
¶15. Private sector representatives at your Sao Paulo AmCham event or 
business roundtable may raise this issue.  Industry keeps a close 
eye on developments in the US Congress on GSP renewal, and strongly 
advocates remaining in the GSP program. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: LABOR SKEPTICISM ON TRADE 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Brazil has a strong organized labor movement with close 
connections to the state and particularly to President Lula's 
Worker's Party (PT) government.  The major unions support the GOB, 
which continues to seek to protect Brazil's labor markets.  The 
Unified Workers Central (CUT) and the Union Force (Forca Sindical or 
FS) both represent many metal workers, who serve the highly 
protected automobile industry.  The General Union of Workers (UGT) 
was originally founded as an offshoot of FS and represents many 
service workers and those in the energy sector.  Consequently, labor 
representatives are generally free trade skeptics and critics.  The 
CUT is a strongly leftist, ideological organization, many of whose 
members still see the United State as an "imperialistic" power bent 
on economic domination of other regions, while FS is more moderate. 
Nonetheless, a recent July conference organized by FS featured a 
number of speakers who portrayed the United States and its free 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  005 OF 008 
 
 
trade policies as the origin point for the ongoing global financial 
crisis. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR LISTS ON GOODS PRODUCED BY 
FORCED LABOR AND/OR CHILD LABOR 
 
¶17.  (U) On September 10, 2009, the Department of Labor released: 
(1) a list of goods produced by forced labor or child labor in 
various countries, as mandated by the Trafficking Victims Protection 
Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) of 2005; (2) a list of goods produced by 
forced or indentured child labor, as mandated by E.O. 13126 of 1999; 
and (3) DOL's 2008 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor.  The 
first list for Brazil contains the following goods: bricks, cattle, 
ceramics, charcoal, cotton, footwear, manioc/cassava, pineapples, 
rice sisal, sugarcane, timber, and tobacco.  The second list 
contains one product for Brazil: charcoal.  The GOB will not respond 
officially to any reporting by third countries on "alleged human 
rights violations in Brazil;" it comments only on reports produced 
by multilateral organizations to which Brazil belongs, such as the 
UN or OAS.  In our demarche to the GOB we made the following points: 
the TVPRA List is to promote efforts to eliminate forced and child 
labor, not to serve as a legal basis for an import ban; and the E.O. 
List is an "initial determination," not a final list, and 
governments (and others) have 90 days to submit comments, if they 
wish. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: THE CEO FORUM 
 
¶18.  (SBU) In addition to TIFA, trade facilitation, GSP, and Doha 
priorities identified above, the July meeting of the CEO Forum 
identified priority recommendations on the Information Technology 
Agreement, standards to harmonize biofuels, and Haiti and Africa 
development cooperation.  Framing these priorities in terms of CEO 
Forum support will be key in focusing Rousseff's interest.  In 
addition to the suggestions above for possible TBT/SPS cooperation 
in Africa, MRE may raise Haiti textiles and access to U.S. Hope II, 
an issue of keen interest to some FIESP members.  USTR may wish to 
inquire where MRE's draft legislation on establishing a similar 
program in Brazil stands (all indications to date are that no draft 
yet exists). CNI/FIESP support CEO Forum recommendations for a 
bilateral tax treaty (BTT).  BTT negotiations are stalled and are 
unlikely to make progress in the current election cycle climate. 
Brazilian industry has commissioned a study evaluating the positive 
economic impact of a BTT with the United States, due in the near 
term.  With respect to investment, the USG and the Brazilian 
government have had productive consultations on Bilateral Investment 
Treaty (BIT) elements, although Brazil is still cautious about 
negotiating BITs given historical congressional opposition.  CNI 
remains cautious about the value of BITs, seeing them as a 
constraint on industrial policy, but acknowledges the question needs 
further consideration as Brazil's overseas FDI increases. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
¶19.  (SBU) After intensive lobbying from senior USG officials and 
pressure from other countries and domestic constituencies, President 
Lula announced a major shift in Brazil's position in the 
international climate change negotiations.  In early September he 
said that Brazil will agree to an emissions reductions number and 
Minister of External Relations Amorim has said the same.  This 
represents a significant advance over Brazil's previous position 
that only the developed countries should have emissions reductions 
targets and the developing ones needed to preserve room for growth. 
Brazil, however, insists that developed countries provide 
substantial technology transfer and financial assistance to 
developing countries so that they can take mitigation and adaptation 
measures. 
 
¶20.  (SBU) Brazil has opposed efforts to reduce or eliminate tariffs 
on "green" goods because the list of products in last year's 
initiative did not include biofuels. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: G7/8, G20, AND BRICS 
 
¶21.  (SBU) President Lula has said publicly that "the G7 alone is no 
longer in a position to make decisions that require truly globally 
coordinated responses" and noting that richer countries must 
recognize the growing clout of the BRICs. In Paris just before 
June's BRIC Summit in Yekaterinburg, FM Amorim said that the G-8 
group is no longer representative of global political and economic 
forces. "The G-8 is dead, I have no doubt. I don't know how the 
burial will be.  Sometimes that happens slowly."  GOB remains 
sensitive that the G8 plus G5 format not be simply "inviting them in 
for coffee" to discuss decisions made by the G8.  GOB prioritizes 
the G20 mechanism, while conceding consensus-building can be 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  006 OF 008 
 
 
cumbersome in this format.  As a top-10 GDP country, contacts across 
GOB believe Brazil should be at the table in economic 
decision-making and has a valuable contribution to make.  While the 
MRE coordinates G20 participation through its Economic Under 
Secretary, Sherpa Pedro Mendonca (who will attend the Amorim 
meeting), the G8/G5 process is tracked by its Political Under 
Secretary who covers North America/Europe, international 
organizations and environment, Vera Machado. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: PATENT PROTECTION -- PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
¶22.  (SBU) In July, the Brazilian National Institute of Industrial 
Property (INPI) rejected a patent application by California-based 
Gilead Sciences for its HIV drug Viread (scientific name: 
tenofovir).  The patent rejection (which INPI told Gilead was 
"purely technical" but accompanied by "lots of pressure" from the 
Ministry of Health) could be the final step in allowing generic 
production of tenofovir, since the Ministry of Health (MOH) has 
already declared tenofovir to be a drug of public interest (April 
2008) and established an inter-ministerial group to oversee the 
development of domestic production capacity (May 2009). 
 
¶23.  (SBU) Compulsory licensing has been a topic of much discussion 
since Brazil's 2007 decision to issue a compulsory license for 
Merck's HIV drug Stocrin (scientific name: efavirenz) and will 
continue to be so.  However, Brazil's current stance against patents 
for incremental innovation in pharmaceuticals could have equally 
damaging results.  Political pressure to reject patent applications 
for legitimately innovative drugs could be a new front in Brazil's 
push to cut health costs and bolster its generic drug industry, but 
will ultimately damage innovation and competitiveness.  The USG has 
opportunities to engage on these issues with MRE (through the 
Economic Partnership Dialogue, the Bilateral Consultative Mechanism, 
and the Joint Consultative Mechanism[JCM]), MDIC (through the 
Commercial Dialogue), the Ministry of Science and Technology (which 
will lead the delegation to the next JCM), and through direct 
dialogue with the Brazilian Congress.  Continuing to press 
innovation / competitiveness themes and raise their profile within 
the spectrum of stake-holder agencies will remain an important part 
of the strategy to affect progress on intellectual property 
protection in Brazil. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: ENERGY 
 
¶24.  (SBU) For Brazil, turning ethanol into a world commodity is a 
key aspect of increasing energy security.  Though Brazilian ethanol 
is produced from sugar cane, Brazil sees expansion of the global 
ethanol market, regardless of feed stock, as a key interest.  In 
March 2007, the United States and Brazil signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) on biofuels cooperation.  As a result, 
scientists and laboratories from the two countries are 
collaboratively researching next generation biofuels technologies. 
The United States and Brazil are also working together in various 
multilateral fora and the bilateral Commercial Dialogue to develop 
international biofuels standards and sustainability criteria.  By 
making it easier to treat biofuels as a tradable commodity, these 
standards should foster the emergence of a vibrant global biofuels 
market.  One irritant in the biofuels relationship is the 54 cents 
per gallon surcharge/tariff charged to imported biofuels.  The 
Brazilians view the tariff as a measure which supports the corn 
ethanol industry to the detriment of more efficient sugar ethanol 
and regularly question why there should be a trade barrier to a 
clean fuel when there is no such barrier for petroleum.  Another 
issue of concern is the proposed EPA rule making for a renewable 
fuel standard, which the Brazilians view as a non-tariff trade 
barrier.  The Brazilians contest the modeling that was done to 
assess the greenhouse gas effects of fuel lifecycles and fear that 
such assessments could be used to unfairly impede exports of 
sugar-cane based biofuels from Brazil and the third countries where 
we are working together to establish domestic ethanol capabilities. 
In a welcome and well-received outreach effort, the EPA sent a team 
to Brazil in August to share their modeling methodology and hear the 
suggestions and concerns of the Brazilians. 
 
¶25.  (SBU) The discovery in 2007 of potentially massive offshore 
("pre-salt") reserves of oil and gas estimated to contain between 
30-80 billion barrels of oil equivalent could put Brazil within the 
top ten oil countries in terms of reserves.  Though the discoveries 
have generated a great deal of excitement, industry observers 
caution that development will probably be slow in coming due to the 
expensive technological challenges involved with ultra-deepwater 
drilling, including a worldwide shortage of equipment such as 
drilling rigs. 
 
¶26.  (SBU) On August 31, the GOB unveiled its long-awaited proposal 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  007 OF 008 
 
 
for a new oil regime to administer its ultra deepwater pre-salt 
reserves.  The proposal, which has been submitted to Congress for 
consideration, is destined to be highly politicized in this 
pre-election year and will likely undergo significant changes.  The 
proposed legislation would replace the old concessions model and 
make state-owned Petrobras, with a required minimum of 30 percent 
participation, the operator on each block, responsible for choosing 
the contractors, technology, and personnel.  It also creates a new 
government entity known as Petrosal to represent the government to 
manage the service contracts, and establishes a Social Fund to 
direct anticipated new oil state revenues against poverty 
alleviation, education, and scientific and technological innovation. 
 Finally, the legislation provides for up to USD 50 billion to 
increase Petrobras' capacity to serve its designated role in the 
pre-salt exploration.  U.S. oil companies operating in Brazil are 
concerned about the new nationalistic model and warn that it could 
make their future operations in Brazil commercially non-viable. 
They are particularly concerned about the potential for Petrobras' 
designation as sole operator to relegate them to essentially a 
financing role, and they cite a high degree of uncertainty regarding 
the model's potential impact on their investments in Brazil. 
ExImBank has extended a USD 2 billion line of credit to support US 
equipment and services in development of these reserves. 
 
¶27.  (U) FIESP is engaged in energy policy issues.  FIESP will hold 
a conference in Sao Paulo October 5-6, their 10th annual 
International Energy Meeting, and on September 9 invited Secretary 
of State Clinton to be the keynote speaker.  The focus of the 
conference this year will be on the links between Energy and Climate 
Change. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: FIGHTER AIRCRAFT PURCHASE 
 
¶28.  (SBU) An important watershed in achieving a more robust defense 
relationship with Brazil will be the decision on a next generation 
fighter aircraft.  This is a $4 billion sale that would create an 
estimated 30,000 jobs in the United States and 5,000 in Brazil. 
Boeing's F-18 Super Hornet is a finalist along with the French 
Rafale and Swedish Gripen.  After hosting French President Sarkozy 
in Brasilia for Brazilian Independence Day celebrations, President 
Lula announced on September 7 that Brazil is entering advanced 
negotiations to purchase 36 French-made Rafale fighters.  The 
following day Brazil's Defense Ministry confirmed that the selection 
process was not closed and the U.S. contender is still under 
consideration.  With a lower cost and stronger offset program, 
Boeing is well-positioned to win on the merits of its bid, but faces 
a presumption in the Brazilian political community that doing 
business with the United States is negative for Brazil.  Boeing 
executives are working with FIESP to hold a Supplier's Conference 
September 15 and 16 to discuss industrial cooperation and seek 
Brazilian partner companies.  While Brazilian businesses would 
prefer to build a relationship with Boeing, they have not yet made 
this view known to the political leadership.  Despite significant 
USG efforts over the past two months to allay Brazilian concerns 
regarding technology transfer and USG trustworthiness as a partner, 
significant doubts remain, and further high-level USG support is 
needed to level the playing field. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: U.S. ACCESS TO MILITARY BASES IN COLOMBIA 
 
¶29.  (SBU) The announcement in August of a Defense Cooperation 
Agreement that sets conditions for continued U.S. military access to 
Colombian bases provoked a negative reaction from Venezuela that was 
picked up by the Brazilian press and government.  Mischaracterized 
as the establishment of new U.S. bases, the agreement led many 
Brazilian elites to worry that U.S. forces in Colombia might be used 
to launch operations in other countries or present a challenge to 
Brazilian interests.  While we and the Colombians have taken pains 
to apprise the GOB of the facts, and the GOB has toned down its 
public rhetoric following a summit of South American presidents on 
August 28, the GOB still believes that the presence of U.S. 
personnel, even with full Colombian assent, is a destabilizing 
factor in the region. 
 
COMMENT 
 
¶30.  (SBU) With growing economic clout and increasing interest in 
engaging in global economic issues, Brazil has seen its importance 
in the region and on the world stage expand significantly.  Brazil's 
successful management of the global financial crisis has fueled 
additional self-confidence, prompting Brazil to speak with more 
authority in international fora such as the G-20.  While the 
government is largely friendly and open to the United States, it 
does not and will not always see eye to eye with us.  The 
sensitivities inherent to the relationship are especially evident 
 
BRASILIA 00001129  008 OF 008 
 
 
today within the context of the recent series of highly visible 
events played out in the press, including concerns over U.S. 
military intentions in the region (centering on suspicions that the 
United States harbors interests in Brazil's pre-salt oil reserves 
and Amazon resources), the WTO cotton decision, and the defense 
aircraft acquisition bid.  Your visit provides a concrete 
opportunity for the United States to once again highlight the many 
positive economic and trade ties that unite the United States and 
Brazil, and re-direct the focus of our relationship toward expanding 
our strong bilateral cooperation. 
 
KUBISKE