09BRASILIA1254
BRAZIL: SCENESETTER FOR VISIT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Thu Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO7510
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1254/01 2951857
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221857Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5257
INFO RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 4671
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 0035
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8302UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 BRASILIA 001254 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSCA EAGR EAID SENV TBIO BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: SCENESETTER FOR VISIT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
ADVISER TO THE SECRETARY AND USAID - DR. FEDOROFF, OCTOBER 25-29 
 
REF:  A) BRASILIA 1105, B) BRASILIA 1120, C) BRASILIA 1175 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  The relationship between the United States and 
Brazil is productive and broad-based.  There exists a solid 
foundation of scientific and technological (S&T) ties, which offers 
excellent opportunities for increasing bilateral - and possible 
trilateral - cooperation.  The bilateral S&T relationship is most 
advanced in the area of agriculture research, though medical and 
other areas of research have been growing significantly.  Moreover, 
thousands of Brazilians scientists, engineers and technicians have 
studied in the United States.  The Fulbright Commission in Brazil 
puts a high priority on offering science and technology programs and 
many Brazilians in recent years have been selected for some of the 
most prestigious Fulbright programs in these areas. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Your visit is propitious as it comes before the 
ministerial-level Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) on Science and 
Technology, which will take place in Washington, November 19-20. 
The JCM will review the many aspects of the bilateral S&T 
relationship and will include a focus in the areas of food security, 
climate change science, and innovation.  Furthermore, the U.S. 
Government (USG) and the Government of Brazil (GOB) have shown 
interest in using their S&T skills to assist third countries, such 
as Haiti and Lusophone Africa.  This "trilateral cooperation" is 
likely to increase, especially in the areas of food security and 
health.  The GOB recently has expressed great interest in working 
with the USG to better support innovation in Brazil.  Your visit 
provides an important opportunity to highlight the potential for 
increased bilateral and trilateral S&T cooperation.  END SUMMARY 
 
POLITICAL OVERVIEW 
 
¶3.  (SBU) With democracy re-established in 1988 after decades of 
military dictatorship, Brazil's democratic institutions are 
generally strong and stable.  President Luiz Inacio "Lula" da Silva 
remains a popular president -- one of the most popular in Brazil's 
history and indeed in the world today, with recent approval ratings 
still as high as 68 percent nearly seven years into his presidency. 
This sustained popularity is based on a combination of his personal 
connection with the country's lower classes, disciplined economic 
policies, and expanded social programs.  Ongoing public scandals 
involving the leadership of the Senate and various members of 
congress have further eroded the legislature's power vis-a-vis the 
executive and its ratings among the Brazilian public.  The court 
system remains cumbersome and unreliable, but has recently taken 
limited steps to curb impunity among public officials, which have 
been well received by a public accustomed to abuses by authorities. 
The Brazilian political elite and media are already focused on the 
October 2010 national elections for president, all 26 state 
governors, two-thirds of the senate, and all federal deputies.  Lula 
is constitutionally barred from seeking a third term and has 
designated Civil Household (Prime) Minister Dilma Rousseff as his 
party's candidate to succeed him.  At this point, Rousseff is a 
distant second in the polls to likely opposition candidate Sao Paulo 
Governor Jose Serra, but with a year to go, the race remains 
unpredictable.  The evolving political situation will likely 
increasingly impinge on the ability to launch new bilateral 
initiatives.  Summer/Christmas/Carnival break, which extends from 
mid-December through mid-February, will slow progress on most 
issues.  Shortly afterward, as the campaign season enters full 
swing, there will be a significant exodus of senior officials as 
they leave to run for office and many ministries and agencies will 
prefer to wait for the new government to be installed in January 
2011 before starting significant new activities. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The United States and Brazil share the basic goals of 
fostering hemispheric stability and integration, promoting democracy 
and human rights, and preventing transnational illicit activity. 
The attainment of a permanent seat on the UN Security Council has 
been a central goal of Brazil's foreign policy under President 
Lula's government, and Brazil was just elected to a tenth two-year 
non-permanent UN Security Council seat, a record matched only by 
Japan.  Regionally, Lula has maintained Brazil's historic focus on 
stability, seeing good relations with all parties as the best way to 
achieve this goal.  As a result, Brazil maintains an active dialogue 
with Venezuela and Cuba, has worked to foster good relations with 
Bolivia and Ecuador, and has stood firmly on the principle of 
respect for sovereignty in the region. 
 
ECONOMIC OVERVIEW 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Brazil is the tenth largest economy in the world and 
received investment grade status from Standard and Poor's and Fitch 
in 2008, and from Moody's in 2009.  Annual Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) grew 5.1 percent in 2008, and inflation was 5.8 percent.  The 
global economic crisis eroded previous predictions for annual GDP 
growth for 2009 from four per cent to essentially flat or slightly 
negative.  Despite this decline in immediate prospects, Brazil has 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  002 OF 008 
 
 
thus far weathered the crisis better than most major economies and 
appears to be entering into a solid recovery position, led by strong 
domestic demand.  Conservative macroeconomic policies in the years 
prior to the crisis, and targeted responses during the crisis -- 
including credit injections in the financial system, a reduction in 
interest rates, and tax cuts on automobiles and consumer durables -- 
played a role in lessening the impact of the global crisis on 
Brazil.  Brazil is projected to return to a 4 to 5 percent GDP 
growth rate in 2010. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Brazil's relatively successful management of the crisis 
has encouraged the GOB to engage proactively and constructively in 
the debate over how to handle the economic crisis including through 
the G20 process.  Brazil has called for increased regulation of the 
global financial system, increased global access to trade finance, 
and an expanded voice and vote for large emerging countries like 
Brazil in the international financial institutions. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Brazil is a major producer and exporter.  Agriculture 
makes up 36 percent of exports, and the agribusiness sector accounts 
for 25 percent of Brazil's Gross Domestic Product (GDP).  Brazil is 
a leading exporter of soybeans, beef, sugar, coffee, and orange 
juice.  Brazil also distinguishes itself as a major exporter of 
civilian aircraft, steel, and petrochemicals.  The United States is 
Brazil's top trading partner overall, and China as of March of this 
year moved into first position as Brazil's primary export 
destination.  Prior to the current financial crisis, U.S.-Brazil 
trade experienced significant annual growth surpassing USD 50 
billion in 2008 -- Brazil typically experiences a slight positive 
balance in the trade relationship. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Brazil is increasing, 
with inflows of USD 44 billion in 2008; USD 6.9 billion came from 
the United States.  Brazilian investment in the United States almost 
tripled between 2001 (USD 1.4 billion) and 2006 (USD 3.9 billion). 
President Lula has been actively selling Brazil as a solid 
investment destination during the financial crisis due to its sound 
macroeconomic policies and relatively strong economy.  Brazil is 
Latin America's biggest recipient of FDI, and in 2008 received 
roughly twice the volume of inflow that Mexico received. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Despite progress in recent years, income distribution in 
Brazil remains grossly unequal, with 10 percent of the population 
holding over 50 percent of the nation's wealth.  With a total 
population near 200 million, Brazil is also home to 50 percent of 
the people who live in extreme povrty in Latin America.  President 
Lula's social pograms, combined with formal sector job growth and 
real increases in the minimum wage, have reduced income inequalities 
each year since 2004. 
 
OVERVIEW ON BRAZILIAN MEDIA AND PUBLIC ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE USA 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In terms of general public opinion, the election of 
Barack Obama as president seems to have influenced views of the 
United States in a positive way.  An Office of Research Opinion 
Analysis released in March 2009 found that seven-in-10 Brazilians 
believe the Obama presidency will be positive for Brazil and the 
world.  Economically, Brazilians say their future lies with the 
United States and China.  Majorities held a favorable view of the 
United States (57 percent) and saw bilateral relations as being good 
(65 percent).  Howevr, Brazilians have often seen the United States 
as an impediment to Brazil's aspirations for regional leadership. 
Pluralities said last year that politically and economically, the 
United States was as much a competitor as it was an ally and 
partner.  As of January, half lack confidence in the United States' 
ability to deal responsibly with world problems. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Brazilian journalists, generally speaking, are 
professional, balanced, and strive for objectivity.  Many are 
evenhanded in their treatment of the United States, even if they do 
not personally agree with U.S. policies.  Some mainstream Brazilian 
opinion writers demonstrate biases against U.S. policies, though the 
trend has started to change with the election of President Obama.  A 
small segment of the Brazilian public accepts the notion that the 
United States has a campaign to subjugate Brazil economically, 
undermine it culturally, and occupy with troops at least part of its 
territory.  Such attitudes and beliefs have influenced Brazilian 
reporting and commentary on issues such as the reestablishment of 
the U.S. Navy's Fourth Fleet (which has been characterized as a 
threat to Brazil), supposed U.S. nefarious intentions toward the 
Amazon and the "Blue Amazon" (seas where new oil discoveries were 
found) and most recently, the announcement on U.S. access to 
Colombian military bases.  That said, the Brazilian media have 
reported favorably on U.S. efforts at the recent meeting of the 
General Assembly of the Organization of American States and the 
Summit of the Americas, and the Obama Administration overall, 
portending a change in perspective with regards to U.S. intentions 
in Brazil and the region at large. 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  003 OF 008 
 
 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: JOINT COMMISSION MEETING ON SCIENCE &TECHNOLOGY 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The next Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) on Science and 
Technology will take place in Washington, November 19-20.  This will 
be the first JCM since 2006 and the first one during the Obama 
Administration.  The Brazilian delegation will be headed by the 
Minister of Science and Technology, Dr. Sergio Rezende (MIT Ph.D, 
Fulbright alumnus), who will be accompanied by the Ministry of 
External Relations' Under Secretary for Energy and High Technology, 
Ambassador Andre Amado.  Dr. John Holdren, Science Adviser to the 
President and Director of the Office of Science and Technology 
Policy, will head the U.S. delegation.  The JCM will review the wide 
gamut of the bilateral S&T relationship.  This meeting will include 
a focus on three key areas: food security; climate change science; 
and innovation. (SEE REFTEL A.) 
 
¶13.  (SBU) The JCM takes place in accordance with the 1984 Agreement 
on Science and Technology between the United States and Brazil (the 
"S&T Framework Agreement").  A wide variety of USG agencies have 
used this Framework Agreement as the basis for an on-going and 
robust cooperation with their Brazilian counterparts.  Some of the 
most active USG agencies in Brazil include the National Institutes 
of Health, the National Science Foundation, the Smithsonian 
Institution, the U.S. Geologic Survey, the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture's Agricultural Research Service (USDA/ARS), the U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers, the National Aeronautical and Space 
Administration (NASA), and the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology.  The activities undertaken by these agencies range the 
gamut from climate science, to medical research and everything in 
between. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Biotechnology and genetic resources are issues that have 
divided the Brazilian ministries, with the Agriculture Ministry 
vigorously supporting increased use of biotechnology and freer flow 
of genetic resources, and until recently, the Environment Ministry 
expressing skepticism and caution on the matter.  (SEE REFTEL B.) 
The growing use of agricultural biotechnology, including genetic 
engineering (GE), by Brazilian farmers and the arrival of a more 
pragmatic Environment Minister present an opportunity for the USG to 
encourage the GOB to work more closely with the USG on these key 
issues.  Brazil has come a long way in making use of biotechnology. 
Post estimates that for the upcoming 2009/2010 season GE seeds will 
account for 65 percent of soybean plantings, 20 percent of corn 
plantings, and 10 percent of cotton plantings.  Earlier in October 
2009, the Ministry of Science and Technology together with the 
National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) 
announced an initiative to promote biotechnology research with small 
grants of up to 50,000 Reais (about US$25,000). 
 
¶14.  (SBU) You will have opportunities during this visit to meet 
with the Minister of Agriculture, Reinhold Stephanes, and 
researchers from Brazil's Agricultural Research Service (EMBRAPA), 
an agency similar to the USDA/ARS.  In fact, EMBRAPA and USDA/ARS 
have a well-established cooperation and exchange program called 
LABEX.  EMBRAPA is a leader in agriculture biotechnology.  In 1986, 
EMBRAPA began its agricultural biotech research at the Center for 
Genetics and Biotechnology Research (CENARGEN), which you will have 
an opportunity to see.  Further, you will meet with the private 
sector engaged in agriculture biotechnology such as Monsanto and 
DOW, as well as agriculture multinationals, such as ADM and Cargill 
and Brazil's National Agriculture Confederation (CNA). 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: ASSISTANCE AND TRILATERAL COOPERATION 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Bilateral development assistance in Brazil is diminishing 
as Brazil's economy advances, notwithstanding areas of continued 
extreme poverty and sharp regional disparities.  Germany and the 
European Union lead assistance efforts, much of it dedicated to 
forest conservation and sustainable development, while the United 
Kingdom is devoting its assistance efforts almost entirely to 
climate change mitigation and carbon-free economic growth.  USAID 
has modest assistance programs in Brazil directed to health and 
youth employability in the poor Northeast and to sustainable 
development in the Amazon, channeled almost entirely through 
non-governmental organizations.  But while the GOB accepts limited 
development aid, it does not actively seek assistance, even during 
periods of evident disaster assistance needs such as the recent 
flooding in the Northeast and in the Amazon. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Brazil is evolving toward a new role as a provider of 
development cooperation, rather than a recipient.  Together with 
Brazil's Ministry of External Relations, USAID is developing an MOU 
that will establish triangular development assistance relationships 
with Haiti and with Portuguese-speaking African countries in the 
areas of food security and health.  The GOB is confident that it is 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  004 OF 008 
 
 
in an advantageous position to showcase its agricultural expertise 
and experience in HIV/AIDS treatment and actively seeks a 
partnership of equals with the USG and other developed countries to 
extend this success to developing countries.  The USG and GOB have 
already commenced a project in Sao Tome to address the problem of 
malaria there.  Further, the USG has repeatedly called on Brazilian 
medical specialists to assist its health assistance programs in 
Africa. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) Possible areas of trilateral cooperation extend beyond 
food security and health.  Since signing the Biofuels Cooperation 
Memorandum of Understanding in March 2007, the USG and the GOB have 
been working together to assist developing countries in the 
Caribbean, Central America, and now in Africa in making scientific 
based decisions about biofuel policies.  Moreover, the USG and GOB 
are conducting joint research on advanced and next generation 
biofuels.  We are also discussing possible joint cooperation on 
hydropower in Haiti.  Now, there is initial interest in how the USG 
and the GOB might utilize their impressive assets and skills in 
remote sensing and earth observation to benefit other tropical 
forest countries. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: INNOVATION 
 
¶18.  (SBU) Brazilian officials continue to point to innovation as 
one of their highest priorities and have indicated interest in 
cooperation in this area.  (SEE REFTEL C.)  Continuing bilateral 
discussions on innovation would provide the USG with an excellent 
opportunity to highlight the importance of intellectual property 
rights (IPR) as a pillar of innovation.  While innovation has 
occasionally served as a hook for positive discussion of IPR with 
the GOB, there is also some resistance (principally from the 
Ministry of External Relations) to linking conversations on 
innovation, economic development, and intellectual property 
protection.  This resistance seems to be motivated by the Ministry 
of External Relations' political desire for Brazil to take a leading 
role among developing nations and a policy belief (led by Ministry 
of Health) that pharmaceutical patents contradict the public 
interest by limiting access to medications.  While some Brazilian 
officials acknowledge the importance of IPR to innovation, the GOB 
writ large does not consistently draw a link between IPR and the 
development and commercialization of new technology and invention. 
Furthermore, the Ministry of External Relations' consideration of 
cross-retaliation on IPR (in the World Trade Organization cotton 
dispute) could be perceived as a lack of commitment to the long-term 
value of IPR to attracting and promoting innovation as a key element 
of economic growth.  The Ministry of External Relations and Casa 
Civil interlocutors will not eagerly seize on the theme of 
innovation's ties to IPR protection.  However, those officials and 
ministries dealing with industry and trade are well aware of IPR's 
importance to economic development and growth, and the powerful Sao 
Paulo Industry Federation (FIESP) as well as other Brazilian private 
sector representative have indicated concerns regarding proposals to 
cross-retaliate on IPR in the cotton case. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: FULBRIGHT AND HIGHER EDUCATION COOPERATION 
 
¶19. (SBU) The Fulbright Program offers grants for graduate and 
post-doctoral studies in all fields of knowledge.  The Fulbright 
Program in Brazil, begun in 1957, has awarded grants for 3,000 
Brazilians for educational programs in the United States. and for 
2,500 Americans for educational programs in Brazil.  Of the 
Brazilians who have gone to the United States, 286 participated in 
science or technology programs, and 83 Brazilians are currently 
studying in the United States in scientific or technical fields. 
Since its inception in 2007, four Brazilians have been selected for 
the International Fulbright Science and Technology Award for 
Outstanding Foreign Students, which provides winners the opportunity 
to pursue a Ph.D. at top U.S. universities.  This award is designed 
to be the most prestigious international scholarship in science and 
technology.  In addition, two Brazilian scholars were selected to 
take part in the 2010 Fulbright New Century Scholars Program, the 
theme of which is "The University as Innovation Driver and Knowledge 
Center."  Now in its sixth year, this program provides a platform 
for a group of outstanding scholars from around the world to focus 
on a single issue of concern to people, institutions and governments 
worldwide.  The selected scholars, one-third of whom are from the 
United States and the rest from other countries - spend a year 
conducting research, both individually and collaboratively, to 
advance understanding on the year's chosen topic.  It is very 
unusual to have two scholars from the same country participate in 
this program, which speaks to the quality of the Brazilian 
applicants. 
 
¶20.  (SBU) The Fulbright Commission in Brazil works in cooperation 
on many of its programs with CAPES, the Brazilian federal agency 
under the Ministry of Education that supports scholarships abroad 
for Brazilian students and scholars.  You will be meeting with the 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  005 OF 008 
 
 
President of CAPES during your visit.  This year Fulbright and CAPES 
will phase out the four-year PhD program as a result of the 
consolidation of graduate programs in Brazil.  They will launch in 
its place the Fulbright Doctoral Dissertation Research Award 
Program, which will provide a nine-month research grant for 
Brazilian doctoral students enrolled in Brazilian universities who 
wish to study or do research at U.S. institutions to complement 
their studies and research in Brazil. The priority areas for these 
grants will be science and technology fields.  In the first year, 40 
grants will be offered, and the goal is to increase the number to 50 
in the coming years.  A call for applications for this program will 
begin in November of 2009 and the first students will depart in the 
fall of 2010. 
 
¶21. (SBU) Since February of 2008, the Fulbright Commission in Brazil 
has coordinated the Brazil-U.S. Higher Education Council Bio-Fuels 
Network, which aims to create a framework to enhance information 
exchange and facilitate research collaboration and partnerships 
between scientists, universities and research institutions in Brazil 
and the U.S. in the area of biofuels.  The Network has established 
an active website that includes an international database to connect 
researchers from United States and Brazilian institutions that 
currently includes 140 Brazilian and U.S. researchers and 
professionals working in the area of biofuels.  The Network has 
organized a an annual short course on biofuels, the first of which 
was held at the University of Sao Paulo from July 27-August 7 of 
this year.  The course aimed at providing interdisciplinary 
education in bio-energy and biofuels technologies and to improve 
communication among institutions of higher education, science, and 
other public and private organizations in Brazil and the U.S. 
Participants included Brazilian and U.S. graduate students, as well 
as private sector professionals.  The Network plans to seek funding 
for joint proposals developed by Network members, to start webinars 
and a bi-monthly e-newsletter, and is currently planning the second 
annual biofuels short course. However, this project has funding for 
two years only from the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs 
(ECA).  ECA is currently evaluation the program to determine if it 
will continue funding, currently scheduled to terminate in December 
of 2009. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
¶22.  (SBU) After intensive lobbying from senior USG officials and 
pressure from other countries and domestic constituencies, President 
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva announced a major shift in Brazil's 
position in the international climate change negotiations.  He has 
announced a target of reducing the rate of deforestation of the 
Amazon Forest by 80% by 2020, which would amount to about 20% 
reduction in country-wide emissions.  This represents a significant 
advance over Brazil's previous position that only the developed 
countries should have emissions reductions targets and the 
developing ones needed to preserve room for growth.  Brazil, 
however, insists that developed countries provide substantial 
technology transfer and financial assistance to developing countries 
so that they can take mitigation and adaptation measures. 
 
¶23. (SBU) There is a long history of cooperation in the science of 
climate change and biodiversity.  NASA supported a massive project 
called the Large-scale Biosphere Atmosphere (LBA) Project in the 
Amazon, which continues with funding from other sources.  The 
Smithsonian Institution and the National Science Foundation operate 
programs on climate change in Brazil.  NASA provides the satellite 
imagery to help Brazil monitor the Amazon.  This is a potential area 
for greater cooperation as USG agencies place a greater emphasis on 
this area. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: THREATS TO PATENTS FOR PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
¶24.  (SBU) Patent protection for pharmaceuticals is a sensitive 
matter for the GOB.  In July, the Brazilian National Institute of 
Industrial Property (INPI) rejected a patent application by 
California-based Gilead Sciences for its HIV drug Viread (scientific 
name:  tenofovir).  The patent rejection (which INPI told Gilead was 
"purely technical" but accompanied by "lots of pressure" from the 
Ministry of Health) could be the final step in allowing generic 
production of tenofovir, since the Ministry of Health has already 
declared in April 2008 that tenofovir was a drug of public interest 
and in May 2009 established an inter-ministerial group to oversee 
the development of domestic production capacity. 
 
¶25.  (SBU) Compulsory licensing has been a topic of much discussion 
since Brazil's 2007 decision to issue a compulsory license for 
Merck's HIV drug Stocrin (scientific name: efavirenz) and will 
continue to be so.  However, the GOB's current stance against 
patents for incremental innovation in pharmaceuticals could have 
equally damaging results.  Political pressure to reject patent 
applications for legitimately innovative drugs could be a new front 
in Brazil's push to cut health costs and bolster its generic drug 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  006 OF 008 
 
 
industry, but will ultimately damage innovation and competitiveness. 
 The USG has opportunities to engage on these issues with the GOB 
through the Economic Partnership Dialogue, the Bilateral 
Consultative Mechanism, the Commercial Dialogue, and the JCM. 
Continuing to press innovation/competitiveness themes and raise 
their profile within the spectrum of stake-holder agencies will 
remain an important part of the strategy to affect progress on 
intellectual property protection in Brazil. 
 
¶26.  (SBU) These issues are of particular note because you may be 
meeting with one or more representatives of the Oswaldo Cruz 
Insitute (Fio Cruz) which in addition to being the country's premier 
medical research institution, is also the center of its generic 
pharmaceutical industry.  In addition to impressive medical research 
facilities, like Fio Cruz, Brazil has a large cadre of first class 
researchers.  In fact, the National Institutes of Health conduct 
more joint research with Brazilian researchers and institutions than 
in any other country in the Western Hemisphere. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: ENERGY 
 
¶27.  (SBU) For Brazil, turning ethanol into a world commodity is a 
key aspect of increasing energy security.  Though Brazilian ethanol 
is produced from sugar cane, Brazil sees expansion of the global 
ethanol market, regardless of feed stock, as a key interest.  The 
USG and the GOB are working together in various multilateral fora 
and the bilateral Commercial Dialogue to develop international 
biofuels standards and sustainability criteria.  By making it easier 
to treat biofuels as a tradable commodity, these standards should 
foster the emergence of a vibrant global biofuels market.  One 
irritant in the biofuels relationship is the 54 cents per gallon 
surcharge charged to imported biofuels.  The Brazilians view the 
tariff as a measure which supports the corn ethanol industry to the 
detriment of more efficient sugar ethanol and regularly question why 
there should be a trade barrier to a clean fuel when there is no 
such barrier for petroleum.  The Brazilian Sugar Growers' 
Association (UNICA) may raise their concern about the tariff in your 
Sao Paulo meeting with them.  Another issue of concern is the 
proposed U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) rule making for 
a federal renewable fuel standard, which the Brazilians view as a 
non-tariff trade barrier.  The Brazilians contest the modeling that 
was done to assess the greenhouse gas effects of fuel lifecycles and 
fear that such assessments could be used to unfairly impede exports 
of sugar cane based biofuels from Brazil and the third countries 
where we are working together to establish domestic ethanol 
capabilities.  In a welcome and well-received outreach effort, the 
EPA sent a team to Brazil in August to share their modeling 
methodology and hear the suggestions and concerns of the 
Brazilians. 
 
¶28.  (SBU) The discovery in 2007 of potentially massive offshore 
("pre-salt") reserves of oil and gas estimated to contain between 
30-80 billion barrels of oil equivalent could put Brazil within the 
top ten oil countries in terms of reserves.  Though the discoveries 
have generated a great deal of excitement, industry observers 
caution that development will probably be slow in coming due to the 
expensive technological challenges involved with ultra-deepwater 
drilling, including a worldwide shortage of equipment such as 
drilling rigs.  One particular challenge they face is how to handle 
the likely significant quantities of natural gas in the reserves at 
such depths and such great distances from land.  There has been some 
discussion of bilateral cooperation generally in this area and could 
perhaps be a means of heading off a potential gas flaring problem. 
 
¶29.  (SBU) On August 31, the GOB unveiled its long-awaited proposal 
for a new oil regime to administer its ultra deepwater pre-salt 
reserves.  The proposal, which has been submitted to Congress for 
consideration, is destined to be highly politicized in this 
pre-election year and will likely undergo significant changes.  The 
proposed legislation would replace the old concessions model and 
make state-owned Petrobras, with a required minimum of 30 percent 
participation, the operator on each block, responsible for choosing 
the contractors, technology, and personnel.  It also creates a new 
government entity known as Petrosal to represent the government to 
manage the service contracts, and establishes a Social Fund to 
direct anticipated new oil state revenues against poverty 
alleviation, education, and scientific and technological innovation. 
 Finally, the legislation provides for up to USD 50 billion to 
increase Petrobras' capacity to serve its designated role in the 
pre-salt exploration.  U.S. oil companies operating in Brazil are 
concerned about the new nationalistic model and warn that it could 
make their future operations in Brazil commercially non-viable. 
They are particularly concerned about the potential for Petrobras' 
designation as sole operator to relegate them to essentially a 
financing role, and they cite a high degree of uncertainty regarding 
the model's potential impact on their investments in Brazil. 
ExImBank has extended a USD 2 billion line of credit to support U.S. 
equipment and services in development of these reserves. 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  007 OF 008 
 
 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: U.S. DEFENSE DEPARTMENT S&T INTERESTS IN BRAZIL 
 
¶30.  (SBU) The United States was a direct contributor to the birth 
of the Brazilian Aerospace Industry.  In 1945, Brazilian Air Force 
Col Montenegro visited Wright Patterson AFB and MIT.  These visits 
resulted in Col Montenegro and MIT Professor Richard Smith 
establishing what is today known as the Aerospace Technical 
Institute (ITA), the Department of Aerospace Technology (DCTA) and 
the successful aircraft manufacturer EMBRAER, which today is a 
private company.  Very intense cooperation throughout the 1960s 
transitioned to a decline in military S&T cooperation during periods 
of human rights violations and military dictatorship in Brazil.  The 
Brazilian military and the U.S. military continue to work to 
increase collaborative efforts after a long lull in cooperation. 
The Brazilian military has emphasized that they have been faithful 
custodians of U.S. sensitive technologies, while at the same time 
expressing resentment over what they label as embargoes on 
technology transfer.  In response to the misuse of the term 
embargoes or implied restrictions technology transfer, DTSA had a 
briefing team clarify with the Ministry of Defense that most of the 
issues presented were commercial contractual issues with private 
companies and not USG trade control issues, and definitely not an 
embargo.  S&T dialogues are held at the General Officer Level on an 
annual basis, alternating between Brazil and the United States. 
These meetings are referred to as National Executive Agent Meetings. 
 The Brazilian Air Force Executive Agent, Brigadier General Venancio 
will be participating in the November JCM.  While at the same time 
desiring a return to the cooperation of the 1950's and 1960's and a 
man who has great respect for the United States, he is an officer 
who has made charges of U.S. "embargoes" of transferring 
technologies to Brazil. 
 
¶31.  (SBU) The Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) has 
collaborative efforts with military and civilian universities. 
Extensive interest in Brazil led to a proposal to open a regional 
office in Brazil, however, due to Brazilian political resistance, 
this regional office had to be established elsewhere, in Santiago, 
Chile, despite the most significant collaborative work occurring in 
Brazil.  The Brazilian Air Force is most proud of ongoing hypersonic 
collaborative research with the U.S. Air Force which is leading edge 
relative to global hypersonic research efforts.  If the Super Hornet 
is selected in the F-X2 competition the Brazilian Air Force will 
receive a Tri-sonic wind tunnel as a Boeing offset which will 
significantly improve their aerospace research and development 
capabilities. 
 
¶32.  (SBU) One of the most significant visits in the area of S&T was 
a visit by former DARPA Director Dr. Tether in September of 2008. 
Dr. Tether visited CENPES (Petrobras Research Center), COPPE 
(Federal University of Rio Research Center) and PUC (Catholic 
University Research Center).  In Brasilia he met with the S&T 
Minister and with the Brazilian Army.  In Sao Jose dos Campos, which 
contains the greatest concentration of Brazilian Aerospace research, 
he visited, INPE (National Aerospace Research Center) and CTA (Air 
Force R&D Center) followed by the  University of Sco Paulo.  The 
intent was to discover collaborative opportunities and hopefully 
generate interest in submitting White Papers to DARPA with 
collaborative project proposals.  Great interest was expressed 
during Dr. Tether's visit, but no DARPA collaborative projects with 
Brazil have yet emerged. 
 
¶33.  (SBU) The GOB has a high regard for the scientific know-how and 
technical prowess of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).  The 
USACE has a robust engagement plan with the Brazilian Army 
Engineers.  The USACE has worked closely with the GOB on potential 
cooperation on ports management, dredging and transmodal cargo 
operations as well as waterway navigation and management.  The GOB 
requested assistance from the USACE on the transposition of the Sao 
Francisco River, in the Northeast of Brazil, but due to internal 
Brazilian controversies surrounding the transposition, the USACE has 
refrained from cooperating on anything other than the waterway 
management of the river.  Areas covered were: revitalization of 
river banks, dredging, and navigation training works (structures 
such as chevrons, dikes, locks, etc.).  The USACE is currently 
working on the possibility of cooperating with the GOB on design and 
development of a hydroelectric project in Haiti.  In September 2009, 
USACE sent a team to assist the Brazilian Waterways Agency (ANA) 
with an assessment of the Navigability of the Teles Pires - Tapajos 
river.  USACE is currently looking at forming a formal cooperation 
agreement with ANA.  An important annual event between USACE and the 
Brazilian Army engineers is the annual Chief of Engineers visits, 
alternating host countries every year. 
 
SPECIFIC ISSUES: FIGHTER AIRCRAFT PURCHASE & TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER 
 
¶34.  (SBU) An important watershed in achieving a more robust defense 
relationship with Brazil will be the decision on a next generation 
 
BRASILIA 00001254  008 OF 008 
 
 
fighter aircraft.  This is a $4 billion sale that would create an 
estimated 30,000 jobs in the United States and 5,000 in Brazil. 
Boeing's F-18 Super Hornet is a finalist along with the French 
Rafale and Swedish Gripen.  After hosting French President Sarkozy 
in Brasilia for Brazilian Independence Day celebrations, President 
Lula announced on September 7 that Brazil is entering advanced 
negotiations to purchase 36 French-made Rafale fighters.  The 
following day Brazil's Defense Ministry confirmed that the selection 
process was not closed and the U.S. contender is still under 
consideration.  With a lower cost and stronger offset program, 
Boeing is well-positioned to win on the merits of its bid, but faces 
a presumption in the Brazilian political community that doing 
business with the United States is negative for Brazil.  While many 
Brazilian businesses would prefer to build a relationship with 
Boeing, they have not yet made this view known to the political 
leadership. 
 
¶35.  (SBU) Despite significant USG efforts over the past year to 
allay Brazilian concerns, the GOB expresses doubts about the USG's 
willingness to transfer technology.  The USG has, however, completed 
approval for all components of the Boeing offer. 
 
SECURITY SITUATION IN BRAZIL 
 
¶36.  (SBU) Political and labor strikes and demonstrations occur 
sporadically in urban areas and may cause temporary disruption to 
public transportation.  Naturally, protests anywhere in the world 
have the potential to become violent.  While it is unlikely that 
U.S. citizens would be targeted during such events, U.S. citizens 
traveling or residing in Brazil are advised to take common-sense 
precautions and avoid any large gatherings or any other event where 
crowds have congregated to demonstrate or protest. 
 
¶37.  (SBU) Crime throughout Brazil (especially Rio de Janeiro) has 
reached very high levels.  The Brazilian police and the Brazilian 
press report that the rate of crime continues to rise, especially in 
the major urban centers - though it is also spreading in rural 
areas.  Brazil's murder rate is more than four times higher than 
that of the United States.  Rates for other crimes are similarly 
high.  The majority of crimes are not solved. 
 
¶38.  (SBU) Street crime remains a problem for visitors and local 
residents alike, especially in the evenings and late at night. 
Foreign tourists are often targets of crime and Americans are not 
exempt.  This targeting occurs in all tourist areas but is 
especially problematic in Rio de Janeiro, Salvador and Recife. 
 
¶39.  (SBU) The incidence of crime against tourists is greater in 
areas surrounding beaches, hotels, discotheques, bars, nightclubs, 
and other similar establishments that cater to visitors.  This type 
of crime is especially prevalent during Carnaval (Brazilian Mardi 
Gras), but takes place throughout the year.  While the risk is 
greater at dusk and during the evening hours, street crime can occur 
both day and night, and even safer areas of cities are not immune. 
 
¶40.  (SBU) At airports, hotel lobbies, bus stations and other public 
places, incidents of pick pocketing, theft of hand carried luggage, 
and laptop computers are common.  Travelers should "dress down" when 
outside and avoid carrying valuables or wearing jewelry or expensive 
watches.  "Good Samaritan" scams are common.  If a tourist looks 
lost or seems to be having trouble communicating, a seemingly 
innocent bystander offering help may victimize them.  Care should be 
taken at and around banks and internationally connected automatic 
teller machines that take U.S. credit or debit cards. 
 
¶41.  (SBU) Travelers using personal ATMs or credit cards sometimes 
receive billing statements with non-authorized charges after 
returning from a visit to Brazil. The Embassy and Consulates have 
received numerous reports from both official Americans and tourists 
who have had their cards cloned or duplicated without their 
knowledge.  Those using such payment methods should carefully 
monitor their banking online for the duration of their visit. 
 
¶42.  (SBU) While the ability of Brazilian police to help recover 
stolen property is limited, it is nevertheless strongly advised to 
obtain a "boletim de ocorrencia" (police report) at a "delegacia" 
(police station) whenever any possessions are lost or stolen.  This 
will facilitate the traveler's exit from Brazil and insurance 
claims. 
 
KUBISKE