09CHENGDU141
SW CHINA: CHENGDU ENVIRONMENTALIST INDICTED FOR BLOOD DRIVE
Tue Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO4085
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0141/01 2160949
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040949Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3317
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3993UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000141 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV SENV
SUBJECT: SW CHINA: CHENGDU ENVIRONMENTALIST INDICTED FOR BLOOD DRIVE 
COMMEMORATING JUNE 4/TIANANMEN; TRIAL OF SECOND DISSIDENT BEGINS IN 
CHENGDU 
 
REF: A. A) 08 CHENGDU 98 
     ¶B. B) FBS20080527382725 
 
CHENGDU 00000141  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.    (SBU)  Chengdu environmentalist Tan Zuoren, who organized 
protests against a USD 5.5 billion petrochemical plant near 
Chengdu (ref A)  and published online politically sensitive 
lists of the numbers of children killed when their schools 
collapsed in the May 12, 2008 earthquake (ref B), was indicted 
July 17 in Chengdu.  Tan, who had been arrested in Chengdu on 
March 28,  was reportedly indicted not for his most high profile 
activities, but for incitement to subvert the state and the 
socialist system by slandering the government's handling of 
Tiananmen, and for running voluntary blood donation drives in 
memory of June 4th.  Tan's wife obtained a copy of the 
indictment.  Chengdu activist Ran Yunfei distributed the 
indictment and other information on the Tan's case  on his blogs 
and on his Twitter channel at twitter.com/ranyunfei . Ran Yunfei 
wrote in his blogs that "In this country full of disasters and 
troubles, in this country that terrorizes people, any one of use 
could be Tan Zuoren", adding that freedom is something that must 
be won; people cannot expect that they can simply wait and 
receive it later as a gift. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) The indictment is translated in the appendix below. 
Ran believes that  that Tan was indicted for June 4th activities 
by the local authorities rather than for his recent high profile 
activities in order to tie the hands of higher authorities who 
might not be willing to prosecute him for activities the local 
authorities find troublesome. Another Chinese blogger agreed, 
saying, "If they want to convict someone, any crime will do!" 
[yujia  zhi zui, hehuan wuci]  According to an August 1 Voice of 
America news report, Tan Zuoren's case will be tried on August 
12 at the Chengdu Intermediate Court.  Tan's lawyer, Hu 
Zhiqiang, told VOA that 55-year-old Tan Zuoren is in good 
spirits at the Chengdu Dujiangyan Detention Center. Tan is now 
working with his lawyer to prepare his defense. 
 
 
 
Chengdu Crackdowns:  Huang Qi, Parents of Schoolchildren Killed 
in Sichuan Earthquake 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Tan's indictment occurred just as the trial of 
another Chengdu dissident, Huang Qi, is about to begin.   Huang 
Qi was arrested on June 10, 2008 on "suspicion of possessing 
state secrets. "  Huang Qi and his website -- 64tianwang.com -- 
originally won public attention by investigating missing persons 
and helping free several women who had been trafficked.  He got 
into trouble last year apparently for remembrances of June 4th 
and for criticizing poor school construction standards that led 
to the death of many children in the May earthquake.  On many 
occasions after the Sichuan earthquake, parents of 
schoolchildren who gathered to protest inadequate school 
construction standards in Dujiangyan and elsewhere were 
arrested, and otherwise strongly cautioned against making public 
protests or meeting journalists.  Many parents protested the 
"bean curd construction" of schools that made the earthquake 
even more deadly in  the weeks following the quake.  Local 
officials throughout the quake zone reportedly intensified their 
crack down on protesting parents again around the one-year 
anniversary of the quake. 
 
 
 
Comment:   Rare Sample of A Chinese Political Indictment 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)   Indictment in sensitive Chinese political cases are 
often not available, so this is useful as an example of the 
genre, as well as for understanding how Tan Zuoren's case is 
being handled. 
 
 
 
¶5. (U)  Appendix:  Tan Zuoren Indictment:  Consulate General 
Chengdu Translation 
 
 
 
Sichuan Province Chengdu People's Procuratorate Indictment 
 
     Chengdu Procuratorate -- Indictment  [2009]183 
 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000141  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
The indicted, Tan Zuoren, male, born May 15, 1954, PRC ID card 
no. 5101021954051611X, Han nationality, vocational school 
education, resides at No. 29 Wangjiang Road, Taolin Village, 
Building 6, No. 6.  On March 28, 2009 he was placed under 
criminal detention according to the law.  On April 24, 2009 
because he was involved in the crime of inciting subversion of 
state power, he was, with the permission of the Chengdu 
Procuratorate, arrested according to law by Chengdu Public 
Security. 
 
 
 
An investigation carried out according to law has determined 
that: 
 
 
 
The indicted Tan Zuoren is dissatisfied with the methods and 
verdict of the Party Central Committee concerning the "June 
Fourth Incident" and for many years by various methods has been 
involved in "June Fourth" activities.  On May 27, 2007, Tan 
Zuoren concocted an article entitled "1989: A Witness to the 
Last Beauty: An Eyewitness' Tiananmen Square Diary" and using 
the Internet put it on the website "Torch of Liberty" and other 
websites outside of China mainland.  The main points of that 
article distorted the handling of the "June 4th Incident" by the 
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and libeled it. 
 
 
 
 
Shortly after that article was posted, the enemy element outside 
mainland China Wang Dan contacted him by email and on several 
occasions sent him propaganda materials about "June Fourth". 
 
 
 
On June 4, 2008, the indicted Tan Zuoren and others on Chengdu's 
Tianfu Square commemorated "June 4th" by making voluntary blood 
donations and at that time agreed to a telephone interview 
request by the enemy radio station outside China mainland "Voice 
of Hope".  Since November 2008, Wang Dan on many occasions sent 
him materials on commemorating the twentieth anniversary of 
"June 4th".  On February 10, 2009, the indicted Tan Zuoren sent 
Wang Dan an email entitled "My Suggestions for Commemorating the 
Twentieth Anniversary of June 4th", suggesting that during this 
year's "June 4th" period that a "June 4th Global Chinese Blood 
Drive" be held to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of June 
4th. 
 
 
 
After the "May 12th earthquake" of 2008, the indicted Tan Zuoren 
was interviewed many times by media from outside mainland China. 
On these occasions he said many things that severely harmed the 
image of our Party and government.  On March 27th, the indicted 
Tan Zuoren was brought to justice by Public Security. 
 
 
 
Evidence proving the facts above are as follows: notes on 
identification of the indicted, notes on the taking into custody 
of the indicted, appraisals by experts, testimony of witnesses, 
deposition of the indicted. 
 
 
 
The Procuratorate believes that the indicted Tan Zuoren, in 
order to achieve his goal of subverting state power and 
overthrowing the socialist system fabricated things out of whole 
cloth, distorted news, and spread speech that is injurious to 
state power and the socialist system in order to damage the 
image of state power and the socialist system in the eyes of the 
people.  This constitutes a crime under article 105 of the 
Criminal Code of the People's Republic of China.  The crime is 
clear, the evidence is certain and abundant.  Tan Zuoren should 
be prosecuted and convicted of the crime of inciting subversion 
of state power.  As stipulated by Article 141 "Code of Criminal 
Procedure of the People's Republic of China", Tan Zuoren is 
indicted and it is hereby requested that he be prosecuted 
according to law. 
 
 
 
Hereby submitted to the Chengdu Intermediate People's Court 
 
 
 
Prosecutor Chen Shiti 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000141  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Assistant Prosecutor Wang Yihong 
 
July 17, 2009 
 
Secretary Li Zhenzhen 
 
 
 
Notes: 
 
¶1. The indicted Tan Zuoren is now confined in the Wenjiang 
District House of Detention 
 
¶2. The list of evidence, photocopies of principal evidence are 
in one bound book. 
BROWN