09CHENGDU71
SICHUAN FACES RETURNING MIGRANT WORKER TIDE
Tue Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO0541
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0071/01 1180711
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280711Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3189
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3862UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000071 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ELAB SOCI CH
SUBJECT: SICHUAN FACES RETURNING MIGRANT WORKER TIDE 
 
REF: A) O8 CHENGDU 267 B) FBS20080627234985 
 
CHENGDU 00000071  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
1.(SBU)  This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2.   (SBU) Summary:  A low reliance on exports and spending on 
earthquake reconstruction has cushioned the impact of the global 
economic slowdown on Southwest China's Sichuan Province, 
academics and officials say.  Both groups worried about local 
unemployment and social instability should a tide of jobless 
from among the ten million Sichuanese peasants employed outside 
the province return from the coast to engulf Sichuan Province. 
Government officials are now confident that Sichuan is 
successfully assisting a group of returned laid off  Sichuan 
province peasant workers. Scholars have doubts both about 
official peasant worker unemployment figures and the 
effectiveness of the official response to rising peasant worker 
unemployment.   End summary. 
 
 
 
Sichuan Less Dependent, Quake Reconstruction Helps Too 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Wang Xiaogang of Sichuan's Economic Development 
Research Institute said that despite recent increases, exports 
still account for under 10 percent of Sichuan's GDP, potentially 
lessening the impact of the global financial crisis.  Other 
scholars said that funds for earthquake reconstruction and 
national stimulus money provided by the central government are 
also helping cushion the shock.  Still, Sichuan has not escaped 
unscathed.  Chen Jiaze of the Chengdu Academy of Social Sciences 
said that the city's GDP fell 12 percent and government revenue 
dropped by 20 percent compared with the same period of 2008.  An 
official at Chengdu's largest urban labor market said that 
overall number of job seekers is higher than normal although 
fewer jobs are available. 
 
 
 
Peasant Migrant Unemployment, Instability Became Top Concerns 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)   Sichuan academics have become most concerned not so 
much the economic downturn itself as  with the "returning tide" 
of migrant peasant workers on social stability.  Many Sichuan 
peasants work in the Yangtze and Pearl River Delta regions on 
the coast.  In late 2008, Guo Xiaoming of the Sichuan Academy of 
Social Sciences (SASS), a provincial government think tank, said 
(ref A) that Sichuan provincial officials did not expect a surge 
of returning unemployed peasants.  A mid-March conversation with 
Guo, however, reflected much greater official concern about the 
problem.  He said that about four million of Sichuan's ten 
million peasant workers employed outside the province had 
returned home for the Spring Festival in January.   Another half 
of  Sichuan's estimated 20 million peasant workers out of a 
total provincial population of 80 million work in Sichuan 
province itself, either in their home areas or in Sichuan's 
cities. 
 
 
 
 ¶5.  (SBU)  The Sichuan Daily, the official paper of the Sichuan 
Provincial CPC Committee, on April 18 quoted a late March 
provincial report stating that all but 760,000 peasant workers 
who had returned for Spring Festival had not left again to find 
work outside their home area within Sichuan Province or in 
another province.  Several scholars warn that official 
unemployment numbers are likely too low since it is very hard to 
determine whether migrants who went to the coast to find work 
actually found a job.  A Chengdu official  from rural Sichuan 
said that numbers of unemployed at a Chengdu labor market are 
significantly higher than last year, and earthquake construction 
is not providing enough jobs to make up for the difference. 
Staff at Heifer International, which has several poverty 
alleviation projects throughout rural Sichuan, remarked that 
many people who had been outside the province for several years 
without returning are now back. 
 
 
 
Migrant Peasant Worker Remittances Have Dropped 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
CHENGDU 00000071  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Remittances from peasant migrant workers provide 40 - 
45 percent of rural per capita income and up to 70 percent of 
cash income in rural Sichuan; the drop in peasant migrant worker 
employment has had a strong negative impact.  Some scholars 
estimate that peasant migrant worker remittances are off by a 
third this year.  While many returning peasants can go back to 
the land, several worry that some of the peasants who have 
worked in the city have already transferred the remaining years 
of their land contract to others.  Guo Xiaoming worries that the 
land leasing experiment in Chengdu's rural counties may backfire 
if peasants who have pooled their village collectively-owned 
lands for lease to an agricultural company suddenly lose their 
jobs but are unable to go back to the land. 
 
 
 
Worker Retraining, Employment Efforts Falling Short 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Sichuan Labor and Social Security Bureau (LSSB) 
officials discussed several provincial policies to help 
unemployed peasant migrants: 
 
-- Working with eastern provinces to reduce unemployed returnee 
numbers by providing Sichuan peasant workers with appropriate 
training.  LSSB officials attended a Guangdong job fair in March 
where representatives of 100 Sichuan training centers sought 
contracts with Guangdong employers to provide appropriately 
trained workers. 
 
-- Subsidizing training for Sichuan unemployed peasant and 
helping the unemployed in their job search.  Sichuan provincial 
and local governments have issued training vouchers to train 
300,000 workers since the beginning of 2009.  Some scholars 
argue that these courses, may which last for only a few weeks, 
are too short.  Furthermore, government subsidies, if available 
(Chengdu has already spent all its voucher funding) do not cover 
the entire tuition. 
 
-- Providing loans and other assistance to start a small 
business are also being considered.  Chen Jiaze said separately 
that government has very limited ability to get credit to small 
businesses that need it. 
 
 
 
Quake Reconstruction: No Silver Bullet for Peasant Unemployment 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Earthquake reconstruction is a major employer of 
peasant workers.  The Mianzhu area alone will need 300,000 
construction workers for rebuilding over the next two years. 
Many of these projects will be awarded through bids and paid for 
by the coastal provinces that are partnering with Sichuan 
counties (ref B) hardest hit by the earthquake.  Wang Xiaogang 
of the Sichuan Development Research Institute, however, suspects 
that much of the work will go to companies from the assistance 
donating provinces that will perhaps bring in their own workers 
for some of the construction work.  Moreover, some of the 
construction work demand skills that Sichuan's unemployed 
peasant workers do not have. 
 
 
 
Comment:  A V-Pattern of Confidence, to Worry, Back to Confidence 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Sichuan official confidence on the peasant worker 
unemployment issue followed a V-pattern of initial confidence in 
late 2008, followed by considerable worry in January 2009 that 
many unemployed peasant workers might congregate in Sichuan's 
cities and cause social instability.  By March, confidence had 
returned once most peasant workers who had returned home once 
again departed to work or seek work in the cities of Sichuan or 
other provinces. 
COWHIG