09CHENGDU163
UK CG'S VIEWS ON CHONGQING ECONOMY, MARKET ACCESS, CLIMATE
Mon Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO9546
RR RUEHAST RUEHDH RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHSL
RUEHTM RUEHTRO RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0163/01 2361142
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241142Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3357
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAEPA/EPA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4033UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000163 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/CM, OES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ETRD SENV TBIO PREL CH
SUBJECT: UK CG'S VIEWS ON CHONGQING ECONOMY, MARKET ACCESS, CLIMATE 
CHANGE POLICIES 
 
REF: A. A) CHENGDU 071 
     ¶B. B) CHENGDU 081 
 
CHENGDU 00000163  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The impact of the global financial crisis on 
domestically focused Chongqing has been relatively small, with 
China's stimulus package and auto-sector incentives boosting GDP 
by 12.1 percent in the first half of 2009, the UK's 
Chongqing-based Consul General told us.  Chongqing's Party 
Secretary has ambitions of turning his municipality into the 
most open inland economy in China, boosting its inland port 
through a new bonded zone, promoting a growing electronics 
industry, and advocating Chongqing as the financial center of 
southwest China.  UK firms have faced unequal access to public 
tenders in Chongqing, and localized interpretations of China's 
WTO commitments have impaired market access.  The UK has been 
active in raising local government and public awareness of 
climate change, and hopes to get low-carbon language inserted 
into Chongqing's next five-year plan.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
Impact of Global Financial Crisis on Chongqing Relatively Small, 
Delayed 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) The global financial crisis has had relatively little 
impact on Chongqing because its economy is "inward-looking" and 
focused on China's domestic market, UK CG Whittingham told 
visiting Chengdu CG on August 10.  There were impacts, however, 
as some workers laid off in coastal provinces such as Guangzhou 
returned to Chongqing (leading to a drop in remittances of 
salaries, and in higher local unemployment).  At first, 
Chongqing's key car industry was also impacted by a slowing 
domestic economy, but because of China's stimulus package 
(including tax reductions to spur car sales) it has recovered 
strongly.  (See septel on Ford's joint venture in Chongqing.) 
Overall, Chongqing's GDP growth was up 12.1 percent in the first 
half of 2009, beating the national average. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) More generally, Chongqing Municipal Party Secretary Bo 
Xilai has ambitions to turn Chongqing into the most open inland 
economy in China, Whittingham said.  Chongqing has an excellent 
river port, from which smaller container ships move goods to 
Shanghai, where they can be transferred to larger ships for 
transshipment abroad or to other coastal ports in China. 
Chongqing, although inland, also has a surprisingly strong 
shipbuilding industry.   Note:  China's central government 
approved the establishment of Chongqing's Cuntan Port Bonded 
Zone, the biggest bonded zone in inland China, in December 2008. 
  End Note. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Chongqing also has ambitions of creating a vibrant 
electronics industry, Whittingham noted.  Taiwan-based Foxconn's 
recent decision to invest in a Chongqing laptop factory 
(reportedly a USD 3 billion investment to supply Hewlett 
Packard) is a step in this direction, but Chongqing remains far 
behind Chengdu (where US firms Intel and Cisco, for example, 
have factories), he felt.    (Comment: The information 
technology industry's proportion of Chongqing's GDP increased 
from 2.9 percent in 2002, to 6.0 percent in 2007, per the 
Chongqing Foreign Trade and Economic Commission (COFTEC), 
suggesting that the municipality is having some success in 
building an electronics industry.   End Comment.) 
 
 
 
"Three Hoops" to Market Access in Chongqing 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) British firms have encountered three kinds of market 
access problems in Chongqing, Whittingham explained: 
 
 
 
A) Inadequate hard and soft infrastructure.  Chongqing is making 
progress in addressing this by, for example, constructing 
 
CHENGDU 00000163  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
international hospitals and schools, and by opening new air 
routes. 
 
 
 
B) Unequal access to local business opportunities.   Chongqing 
and other local governments in southwest China will often tell 
foreign companies about a tender one week before, while giving 
local firms two months notice.   This favoritism is because 
local governments prefer to award contracts to home-town firms, 
believing this is more likely to boost the local economy; 
corruption also gives local firms a leg up. 
 
 
 
C) Regulatory impediments.  Although the central government has 
made commitments to the WTO, local governments have the 
flexibility to interpret these rules in ways that can impair 
real market access.  One UK firm wanted to provide high-value 
architectural and safety design in Chongqing, for example, but 
is being compelled to do years of basic construction work before 
it will be allowed to do so.  Moreover, the firm is being 
compelled to link up with local design firms in the interim. 
On the other hand, local flexibility might also work to the 
favor of foreign firms: the UK Consulate is also trying to 
convince Chongqing, working through the Banking Regulatory 
Commission, to expand the scope of existing licenses held by UK 
financial firms. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Note: Bo Xilai has advocated a strategy to convert 
Chongqing into the financial and transportation center of 
southwest China, and the "Chicago" of China by 2020.  Consul 
General toured the river area at night where cranes are just 
starting to build what city leaders hope will become a future 
financial center in the image of Shanghai's Pudong district. 
End note. 
 
 
 
Climate Change is Core Strategic Goal for UK in Chongqing; Rural 
Development Also Emphasized 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Reflecting one of the UK's foreign policy priorities, 
the UK Consulate General in Chongqing has a team of three 
employees (one UK national and two local employees) working on 
climate change,  versus only one employee working full time on 
political/economic issues.  This three-person team has spent 
about 65 percent of its time on Chongqing and 20 percent of its 
time in Sichuan promoting awareness of the importance of climate 
change via websites, blogs and public events.  (The Consulate 
also covers Yunnan and Guizhou.)  The Consulate recently entered 
the second phase of its public diplomacy work on climate change 
by including messages to business audiences on the economic 
benefits of a low-carbon economy. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) The UK Consulate has been working with London-based 
Chatham House (aka the Royal Institute of International 
Affairs), UK firm ERM, and Chongqing's local Development and 
Reform Commission (CDRC) on a variety of climate change and 
rural development projects.  It has a "sustainable cities" MOU 
with Chongqing that fits well with the municipality's "Five 
Chongqings" sustainable development plans ("green," "healthy," 
"safe," "transport", and "livable" Chongqing).  It hopes to get 
low-carbon language inserted into Chongqing's next five-year 
plan.  The UK's Foreign Minister signed an agreement in 2008 
with the CDRC regarding 35 projects related to urban-rural 
cooperation and development.  One recently completed project was 
on local land reform; the UK Consulate General is seeking local 
support for a rural health care project, possibly in cooperation 
with the World Bank and the National Health Service of Wales. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) One promising area for public-private partnership in 
rural development is the push of UK banks into rural finance. 
UK banking giant HSBC has received a rural banking license in 
the city of Dazu.  Fellow UK banking giant Standard Chartered is 
 
CHENGDU 00000163  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
already doing rural finance elsewhere in China, and is also 
interested in a license to do so in Chongqing. 
BROWN