09CHENGDU95
SOUTHWEST CHINA:  WHAT'S GOING ON WITH AIR QUALITY DATA?
Tue Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO8009
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0095/01 1530603
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020603Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3243
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAEPA/EPA WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3916UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000095 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV CH ENRG PREL ECON
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA:  WHAT'S GOING ON WITH AIR QUALITY DATA? 
 
REF: 2008 CHENGDU 210 
 
CHENGDU 00000095  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Air quality in Southwest China's city of 
Chengdu, is probably worse than official statistics would 
suggest.  The city records significantly fewer poor air quality 
days than should normally occur based on a statistical analysis 
of the government's air quality data.  Even air quality that has 
a strong odor and limits visibility is sometimes recorded as 
being only "lightly polluted."  City residents in May reportedly 
called local media outlets to question the disparity between 
official air quality figures and air they saw outside. 
Defensive of their data, city environmental officials claim 
pollution is often localized and lasts for only short periods 
throughout the day.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Air quality in Sichuan's capital city of Chengdu is on 
track to record more relatively low pollution days in 2009 than 
at any time since 2001, based on government data available for 
the first five months.   Through May, Chengdu had 124 days with 
"very good" air quality, defined as days on which the air 
pollution index (API) is 100 or lower.  Air quality monitors 
currently measure only sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, and 
large particulates, neglecting other pollutants like ozone and 
fine particulates.  Chengdu may record 329 days of very good air 
by the end of the year, roughly 90 percent of time, if the 
pattern seen in our analysis of the data from previous years 
continues.  Past data from the city's Environmental Protection 
Bureau shows that air quality generally improves after the 
winter months.  Over the last five years, Chengdu's air quality 
statistics show that the number of very good quality air days 
increased 7 percent on average from June 1 through the end of 
the year. 
 
 
 
When "Choking" Air Equals Light Pollution 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Despite the apparent success and the potential for 
full-year improvements in air quality, the city's data appears 
to show the same potential for manipulation Post has seen in 
reviewing the last nine years of reported measurements.  Days on 
which air quality probably did not reach the very good threshold 
were nevertheless recorded as "very good."  We see an excessive 
number of days during the first five months of this year where 
pollution data falls outside the normal distribution one would 
expect to see.  Through the end of May 2009, Chengdu recorded 
about 60 more days with an API of 46-100, and roughly 25 fewer 
days of API 100-150 than would occur if the data had a normal 
distribution.  Note: Normal distribution, also called Gaussian 
distribution, has long been used as a basis for analyzing air 
quality.  In a normal distribution, a large number of 
independent data points will tend to follow a bell curve 
specific to the data set being analyzed.  Chengdu's air quality 
data has significant variations from this curve, particularly 
around the cutoff point between lightly polluted and very good 
air quality. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The annual burning of agricultural stalks around 
Chengdu during May in fact resulted in noticeably poor air 
quality for the city's residents.  The resulting pollution 
decreased visibility in the downtown area and gave the air a 
distinctive smell.  A local Chinese-language news service, 
Sichuan Online, reported that on 18 May some city residents were 
calling the newspaper to ask about the difference between the 
published figures and the perceived air quality.  The newspaper 
wrote that "pervasive smoke" on May 17 and 18 "choked people," 
but official figures show that the API for both days was 65, 
very good, and 104, lightly polluted, respectively.  A Sichuan 
Evening News reporter said that on 17 May visibility in 
Chengdu's northwestern district of Jinniu was less than 100 
meters, and drivers were forced to significantly reduce their 
speed while driving.  A picture included with the news article 
showed a thick shroud of pollution in what appears to be 
downtown Chengdu.  Congenoff also noted the smell of burning 
 
CHENGDU 00000095  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
agricultural stalks south of the city center.  The Chengdu city 
government officially prohibits the burning of agricultural 
stalks, and may assess a fine of USD 29 or less for farmers 
found violating the regulation.  Burning is common in spite of 
the ban. 
 
 
 
Why the Inconsistency? 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Chengdu environmental officials tell us that air 
quality is measured daily from noon to noon, meaning that each 
recorded day of data actually includes the afternoon and evening 
hours from the previous day.  Monitors placed at 38 sites around 
the city log pollution data and transmit it to the Chengdu 
Environmental Supervision Center (CESC).  The results for the 
24-hour period are then transmitted to Beijing and select 
officials across Chengdu.  Some of these officials receive text 
messages each afternoon on their cell phones with the day's air 
quality before it is publicly available. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) CESC officials claimed recently that the discrepancy 
between some residents' perceptions of pollution and the 
recorded air quality resulted from brief periods of peak 
pollution that were not sustained over a 24-hour reporting 
period.  They also explained that different parts of the city 
experience differing levels of pollution.  On a day when air 
quality around several parts of the city appeared very poor, 
however, no monitoring station recorded higher than lightly 
polluted air.  CESC said that monitoring stations around Chengdu 
registered API values ranging from 102-130 between noon on 17 
May and noon the following day.  The official average for the 
day was only 104, suggesting that the majority of stations 
around the city recorded at, or very close to, the bottom of the 
range.  Reviewing the CESC data, we estimate that no more than 
one or two monitoring station reached 130, and few stations 
could have recorded a value higher than 110. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment: We are unclear if the air quality monitors 
around the city record better than expected air quality because 
of the locations of the monitors or because CESC officials 
actually manipulate the data once they receive it.  The one air 
monitoring station that Congenoff was able to visit in February 
did not seem like its location would provide artificially good 
air quality readings.  Officials showed Congenoff the modem in 
the monitoring station that enabled the data transfer to CESC, 
but Congenoff has not had an opportunity to see where the data 
from all of the monitoring stations is aggregated.  We do not 
know if any of the air quality monitoring stations have been 
moved over the last several years. 
BOUGHNER