09DAKAR1256
Senegalese Foreign Minister Fired
Mon Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO1451
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1256/01 2780742
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050742Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3152
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 001256 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: Senegalese Foreign Minister Fired 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In a development that has come as a shock to many 
in the international community, Foreign Minister Cheikh Tidiane 
Gadio has been relieved of his post and replaced by Madicke Niang, 
the former Minister of Justice.  Niang has been replaced as Justice 
Minister by Minister of Education Moustapha Sourang in what has 
become one of President Abdoulaye Wade's most significant Cabinet 
reshuffles.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Long referred to as one of the "untouchables," Foreign 
Minister Gadio is the only Minister in Wade's government that had, 
up until yesterday, survived in his job since the PDS came to power 
in 2000.  Long considered by everybody in the international 
community as one of the country's most able ministers, Gadio's 
removal from the cabinet, without a follow-on assignment, has raised 
questions as to why he was fired.  In the Machiavellian world of 
Senegalese politics, it has long been known that many within the PDS 
and in the President's entourage had been jealous of Gadio's access 
to the President and his high international profile. 
 
So begins the rumor mill 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to sources close to the President, Gadio was the 
victim of his own success and that this firing was the result of an 
accumulation of these successes.  For example, Gadio was widely 
praised by American officials during the recent signing of an MCC 
compact with Senegal to the detriment of presidential son Karim, who 
was told in no uncertain terms that he was not welcome at the event 
due to his having derailed a previous compact the MCC was on the 
verge of signing with Senegal in 2007.  A member of the ruling PDS 
told Embassy that, although Karim is in charge of International 
cooperation, Gadio did everything he could to prevent him from 
playing a role in the finalization of the MCC compact and he had 
complained to his father about this lack of cooperation from the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  (Note. As to this latter matter, this 
was very much the preferred outcome of both this Embassy and MCA. 
End note.) 
 
A Master of self promotion 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Wade's entourage admits that Gadio was a good minister, but 
they hasten to add that he was also working for himself.  They 
indicate that he only appointed people loyal to him in Embassies. 
They said that only the Ambassadors were chosen by Wade and that 
Gadio always found a way to appoint his people to all other 
positions.  One of Karim's aides told Embassy that, despite the fact 
that foreign affairs are "a domain reserve" (i.e. under the sole 
responsibility of the Head of State), Gadio either came up with 
reasons not to send people chosen by the President or made life 
difficult for them in Embassies.  He added that there are several 
people the PDS wanted to be posted in Embassies, but that Gadio 
never acted on them during the past two years.  But what is 
unforgivable in his view was that Gadio has set up "Mouvements de 
Soutien" (groups of supporters) among Senegalese living abroad with 
the goal of having political support if he runs in future 
presidential elections.  What made these groups suspicious is that 
Gadio never informed Wade about their existence. 
 
Lack of solidarity 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Additionally, it is being said that Gadio contributed to a 
recently published book by respected investigative journalist Abdou 
Latif Coulibaly where he outlines in stark detail the catastrophic 
management and potential embezzlement of the formerly Karim Wade-run 
National Agency for the Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(ANOCI).  This would seem to corroborate strong rumors, recently 
confirmed by a highly placed source, that Gadio is the eminence 
grise behind an anti-Karim movement within the PDS. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The firing of Gadio seems to be part of a process of 
getting rid of all strong cabinet figures who may potentially 
compete with Karim for Wade's succession.  This latest move will put 
Karim in a position to further control the PDS's vast patronage 
network.  Wade seems to find it unacceptable that political figures 
who were anonymous before joining his cabinet now see themselves as 
his potential successors without his blessing.  If Wade's strategy 
to clear the way for his son is fully implemented, Karim will be 
left as the dominant figure in the cabinet.  For example, the new 
Foreign Minister is known as being part of Karim's entourage and 
acts as his sometime mentor.  The strategy may work within the PDS 
but it remains to be seen whether or not Karim has enough time and 
charisma to alter his negative image among the voters.  End 
Comment. 
 
 
DAKAR 00001256  002 OF 002 
 
 
SMITH