09DOHA133
DOHA DARFUR CONSULTATIONS: AGREEMENT OF GOODWILL SIGNED
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
David A Fabrycky  03/08/2009 01:26:46 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  PE

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        DOHA 00133
CXDOHA:
    ACTION: PAO
    INFO:   AMB P/E DCM

DISSEMINATION: PAO /10
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: AMB:JELEBARON
DRAFTED: PAO:JHOOD; SPG:KYAI
CLEARED: DCM:MRATNEY

VZCZCDOI446
PP RUEHC RUEHEE RUCNFUR
DE RUEHDO #0133/01 0501045
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191045Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8777
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DOHA 000133 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR AF/SPG AND NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SU QA
SUBJECT: DOHA DARFUR CONSULTATIONS: AGREEMENT OF GOODWILL SIGNED 
 
---------------- 
(SBU) KEY POINTS 
---------------- 
 
-- (SBU) On February 17, representatives of Sudan's Government of 
National Unity (GNU) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) 
signed an "Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence Building for the 
Settlement of the Problem in Darfur." 
 
-- (SBU) The agreement (text at para 11) calls for an exchange of 
prisoners; for guaranteeing the flow of humanitarian assistance; and 
for working toward a framework agreement within three months. 
 
-- (SBU) AU/UN Joint Mediator Djibril Bassole and Qatari Prime 
Minister/Foreign Minister Hamad bin Jassim Al Thani announced at a 
press conference that they would soon travel to Khartoum to work out 
a timeframe for next steps.  JEM leader Khalil Ibrahim announced 
that he would unilaterally release a number of prisoners as a 
goodwill gesture. 
 
--  (SBU) Both delegations agreed to maintain representatives in 
Doha to continue discussions.  Mediator Bassole intends to convene a 
Contact Group meeting in Brussels in early March. 
 
--  (SBU) Qatari Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Ahmed bin 
Abdullah al-Mahmoud and Bassole expected that an announcement by the 
International Criminal Court of an arrest warrant for Sudanese 
President Bashir could dampen the GNU's interest in pursuing an 
agreement, but reiterated Qatar's commitment to the peace process no 
matter the ICC's verdict. 
 
--  (SBU)  Qatar is committed to reconstruction in Darfur, but as a 
bottom-up process.  Al-Mahmoud and Bassole will look for ways to 
engage civil society organizations in the peace consultations, as 
well as post-agreement reconstruction. 
 
END KEY POINTS 
 
------------------------- 
A STATEMENT OF INTENTIONS 
------------------------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Sudanese Minister of Culture, Youth and Sports, Dr. Amin 
Hassan Omer, and JEM representative Jibril Ibrahim signed an 
"Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence Building for the Settlement of 
the Problem in Darfur" in Doha on February 17 at the Amiri Diwan. 
The signing was witnessed by representatives of the five permanent 
members of the UN Security Council (P5) and the Qatari Foreign 
Minister/Prime Minister. 
 
¶2.  (U) The agreement stipulates that both sides agree to refrain 
from harassing internally displaced people; guarantee the flow of 
aid; work toward a framework agreement that leads to a cessation of 
hostilities in under three months; and exchange prisoners based on a 
timeline to be developed by Mediator Bassole. 
 
¶3.  (U) At the signing ceremony press conference, Bassole and the 
Qatari Prime Minister announced that they would soon travel to 
Khartoum to help work out the timeline for prisoner exchanges and 
other next steps.  JEM's Khalil Ibrahim announced that he would 
unilaterally release a number of prisoners as a goodwill gesture. 
 
---------------------------------- 
BASSOLE AND AL-MAHMOUD: WHAT NEXT? 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) After the signing ceremony, Qatar's Minister of State for 
Foreign Affairs Abdullah al-Mahmoud met with P5 representatives, and 
thanked them for their support and advice during the consultations, 
which he said was vital to the success of "round one."  He 
encouraged the P5 to issue individual statements of support, as it 
would encourage those who remain outside the process to join in. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Al-Mahmoud and Bassole stressed the need for an inclusive 
process and that the parties have agreed to this in principle, even 
though it was not spelled out in the agreement itself.  The 
mediators explained that they preferred to leave it out of the text 
to prevent either party from believing it had a veto over if/ who 
participates in the peace process.   Al-Mahmoud and Bassole said 
they would now start an intensive engagement with other actors. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  JEM and GNU will leave some delegation members in Doha to 
continue consultations and prepare for the final talks on a draft 
framework agreement.  Bassole felt the confidence building measure 
agreement was good, but that the most difficult task was yet to 
come. The first issue is the need to create a good environment that 
"could bring in others who continue to resist." 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Bassole also underscored the importance of normalizing 
relations between Chad and Sudan, and engaging with Libya, Egypt, 
and Eritrea for their constructive involvement and support for the 
Qatari/AU/UN mediation efforts. He suggested working with these 
countries to get them to a stage where "they speak with one voice 
during the final talks."  Bassole said he planned to visit each 
country soon, but did not specify a timeline.  He also pledged to 
call a Contact Group meeting in Brussels by mid-March. 
 
------------------- 
POSSIBLE ICC IMPACT 
------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Asked what impact an ICC announcement might have on the 
process begun in Doha, both al-Mahmoud and Bassole emphasized that 
they intended to continue their mediation efforts, but feared that 
the rebels could refuse to join talks and the government may no 
longer see the benefit of talks if an arrest warrant were issued. 
Bassole surmised that JEM refused to sign a cessation of hostilities 
agreement because they are waiting for the announcement. Though an 
announcement of the ICC could create some uncertainty, said Bassole, 
it should not detract the mediators from their focus. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Al-Mahmoud opined that peace is more of a priority for 
Darfuris than justice. The Qataris are committed to move forward to 
conclude a comprehensive agreement, but al-Mahmoud said he wanted 
the ICC judges to think about the people of Darfur and the impact an 
announcement could have on their lives.  Ultimately, however, Qatar 
will respect the ICC's verdict. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
RECONSTRUCTION AND PEACE FROM THE GROUND UP 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  The Minister of State said that Qatar would like to 
engage in reconstruction in Darfur after a peace agreement is 
concluded, but believes that any successful project needs to  start 
from the grassroots, so a bottom-up approach is indispensable to the 
peace process. He and Bassole are discussing how to engage civil 
society, to inform them of what has been done so far and what the 
next steps are. 
 
-------------- 
AGREEMENT TEXT 
-------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Begin text of the "Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence 
Building for the Settlement of the Problem in Darfur:" 
 
In the name of God, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful 
 
AGREEMENT OF GOOD WILL AND CONFIDENCE BUILDING FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF 
THE PROBLEM IN DARFUR 
 
Under the kind auspices of the State of Qatar and the AU-UN Joint 
Chief Mediator for Darfur, a meeting was convened from 10th to 17th 
of February 2009 in Doha, capital of the State of Qatar between a 
delegation from the Government of National Unity of the Republic of 
Sudan (GNU) and a delegation from the Justice and Equality Movement 
Sudan (JEM) to pursue a negotiated peaceful settlement for the Sudan 
conflict in Darfur. 
 
The two Parties hereby: 
 
Firstly: Highly appreciate the role of the State of Qatar as the 
Host Country and agree upon Doha as the venue for the talks between 
them. 
 
Secondly: Appreciate the kind auspices of H.H. Sheikh Hamad bin 
Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar and the mediation by 
the esteemed Government of the State of Qatar and the AU-UN Joint 
Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibrill Bassole; 
 
Thirdly: Recognize the constructive support to the peace process 
provided by neighboring countries and the international community. 
 
Fourthly: Declare their intent to work towards ending the ongoing 
conflict between them, as follows: 
 
Give the peace process a strategic priority over other issues to 
settle the conflict in Darfur. 
 
Agree to adopt a comprehensive approach which addresses the 
root-causes of the problem and realizes a lasting peace in the 
country. 
 
Agree to take all necessary measures to create a conducive 
environment for reaching a lasting settlement of the conflict, 
including: 
 
Refrain from all kinds of harassment of IDPs. 
 
Guarantee the smooth and unobstructed flow of relief assistance to 
the needy people without any obstacles or constraints. 
 
Commit to exchange prisoners and release imprisoned, convicted, 
detained and arrested persons in relation to the conflict between 
them with a view to building confidence and accelerating the peace 
process.  The state of Qatar and the AU-UN Joint Chief Mediator will 
maintain contacts with both parties to work out a time-line for 
concluding the release of the above-mentioned. 
 
Work towards an early framework agreement that leads to cessation of 
hostilities and lay down the basis for detailed issues. 
Undertake to follow the framework agreement with serious talks to 
end the conflict in the shortest possible time, not to exceed three 
months. 
 
Pledge to remain engaged in the peace process and to maintain 
representatives in Doha to prepare a framework agreement to the 
final talks. 
 
Done in three languages, in Arabic, English and French, all texts 
are equally authentic. 
 
Signed in Doha on 17th February 2009 
 
For the Sudan Government of National Unity 
Dr. Amin Hassan Omer, Minister of State, Ministry of Culture, Youth 
and Sports 
 
For the Justice and Equality Movement 
Dr. Gebreil Ibrahim Mohamed, Head of the JEM delegation to the Doha 
talks 
 
Witnessed by: 
 
Ahmed bin Abdulla Al-Mahmoud 
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Member of the Cabinet, 
State of Qatar 
 
Djibrill Yipene Bassole 
AU-UN Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur 
 
END AGREEMENT TEXT 
 
LEBARON