09DOHA298
SUDAN AND CHAD CALL FOR FORCE TO IMPLEMENT PEACE
Tue May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
VZCZCXRO7363
PP RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHKUK RUEHMA
RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHDO #0298/01 1251218
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051218Z MAY 09 CTG HSD0018 ZDK ZEL
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9025
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0017
RUEHKA/AMEMBASSY DHAKA 0192
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0065
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 0198
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 0031UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DOHA 000298 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY PARA MARKINGS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM LY SU CD QA
SUBJECT: SUDAN AND CHAD CALL FOR FORCE TO IMPLEMENT PEACE 
AGREEMENTS 
 
REF: 2008 DAKAR 350 
 
DOHA 00000298  001.5 OF 003 
 
 
---------- 
KEY POINTS 
---------- 
 
-- The Sudanese Foreign Minister and the Minister of 
International Cooperation of Chad met in Doha April 29-May 3 
to discuss the normalization of relations between them. 
Senior officials from Qatar and Libya mediated the 
discussions. 
 
-- The parties signed an accord (full text para 5) agreeing 
to refrain from interfering in one another's internal 
affairs, from the threat or use of force, and to halt hostile 
media campaigns against the other. 
 
-- The parties requested that the contact group established 
by the Dakar Accord of 2008 (see reftel) hold an emergency 
meeting to formulate a plan to deploy border monitors between 
the two countries. They also asked that Qatar be added as a 
member of the contact group. 
 
-- The parties agreed to hold a summit between the presidents 
of Chad and Sudan in Tripoli at an unspecified date in the 
future. 
 
End Key Points. 
 
1.(SBU) Mousa Faki Mohamed, Minister of Foreign Relations of the 
Republic of Chad, and Al-Tijani Saleh Fidail, Minister of 
International Cooperation of the Republic of Sudan, met in 
Doha April 29-May 3 to discuss the normalization of relations 
between the two countries.  Qatari PM/FM Hamad bin Jassim Al 
Thani, Libyan FM Mousa Mohamed Kousa, and Qatari Minister of 
State Ahmed Al-Mahmoud participated in the meetings. 
 
2.(SBU) The meetings resulted in the issuance of the Doha Accord, 
in which they agreed to refrain from interfering in each 
other's internal affairs and from waging hostile media 
campaigns against the other.  They also agreed to abstain 
from the threat or use of force in their bilateral relations. 
 
3.(SBU) The parties noted that the lack of an enforcement 
mechanism had prevented the effective implementation of their 
previous agreements.  They called upon the contact group 
established under the Dakar Accord of 2008 (see reftel) to 
convene an emergency meeting to forge a plan for the 
immediate deployment of monitors and joint protection forces 
along their common border.  They also recognized the 
effectiveness of Qatar's efforts to bring about a 
comprehensive peace to the region and asked that it be added 
as a member of the contact group. 
 
4.(SBU) Finally, the parties agreed to hold in Libya a summit 
between the Presidents of their respective countries on a 
mutually agreed-upon future date. 
 
5.(SBU) Below is an unofficial Government of Qatar translation of 
the text of the Accord: 
 
Within the framework of the good offices of His Highness 
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar 
and his brother leader Muammar Al-Gadhafi, leader of the 
revolution in the great Socialist People's Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Chairman of the African Union with the aim of: 
 
-- The normalization of relations between the Republic of 
Chad and the Republic of Sudan, and the consolidation of the 
fraternal relations between them, 
 
-- The actual implementation of what has been agreed upon 
between the two countries in the previous agreements, 
particularly Tripoli Accord, signed on 8 February 2006, 
Khartoum Framework Agreement and its additional Protocols, 
signed on 28 August 2006, Riyadh Accord, signed on 3 May 
2007, and Dakar Agreement, signed on 13 March 2008, 
 
-- The creation of an atmosphere of confidence and 
appropriate conditions for the convening of Tripoli Summit in 
Libya between the Presidents of the two countries, 
 
    And with the participation of H. E. Sheikh Hamad bin 
Jassim bin Jabor Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Minister of 
 
DOHA 00000298  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar, and in the presence of 
¶H. E. Mr. Mousa Muhammad Kousa, the Secretary General of the 
People's General Committee for Foreign Communication and 
International Cooperation in the Great Socialist People's 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and H. E. Mr. Ahmed bin Abdulla 
Al-Mahmoud, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Member 
of the Cabinet of the State of Qatar, 
 
     Met in Doha, in the period 29th of April - 3rd of May 
2009, a delegation from the Republic of Chad, led by H. E. 
Mr. Moussa Faki Mohamed, Minister of Foreign Relations, with 
a delegation from the Republic of Sudan, led by H. E. Mr. 
Al-Tijani Saleh Fidail, Minister of International 
Cooperation, and they agreed on the following: 
 
-- (1)  The two parties undertake to expedite implementing 
what has been agreed upon in the above-mentioned agreements 
with a view to restoring the climate of confidence and 
good-neighborliness between the two countries. 
 
-- (2)  The two parties affirm their determination to abstain 
from interfering in the internal affairs of each other and 
that none of the parties shall render support to any armed 
force which is opposed to the other party and that they shall 
seek to fully implement the above-mentioned agreements 
concluded between them, and also those agreements the signing 
of which they witnessed and for which they acted as 
guarantors. 
 
-- (3)  Each of the parties pledges to refrain from the use 
of or threat of force against the other. 
 
-- (4)  The two parties pledge to reactivate their diplomatic 
relations in a manner that serves the interests of their 
brotherly peoples. 
 
-- (5)  The two parties request the Contact Group emanating 
from the Dakar Accord to meet in an emergency manner to adopt 
and implement a plan of action on the completion of the 
immediate deployment of border monitoring teams and their 
joint protection forces.  The two parties recommend that the 
State of Qatar be added to the Contact Group due to its 
effective efforts aimed at the realization of peace in the 
region, and also call for installing new monitoring posts by 
the two parties for conducting surveillance if that is deemed 
necessary.  They also advise the States sponsoring the 
present Agreement to exert their efforts for the prompt 
securing of financial and logistical support in order to 
facilitate the implementation of monitors' and protection 
forces' mission for a one renewable year if need arises. 
 
-- (6)  The two parties confirm their commitment to put an 
end to hostile media campaigns and to encourage positive 
media discourse conducive to the consolidation of the ties of 
brotherhood and reconciliation. 
 
-- (7)  The two parties and the Mediation shall agree on a 
date for convening the above-mentioned Summit in Tripoli. 
 
-- (8)  In case that any difference arises between the two 
parties concerning the interpretation of the provisions 
hereof, the two parties shall refer that difference to the 
Mediation on order to find a solution thereto. 
 
-- (9)  This agreement shall be effective as soon as it is 
signed by the two parties. 
 
     The two parties have expressed their appreciation of the 
efforts made by His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa 
Al-Thani and brother leader Muammar Al-Gadhafi and their role 
in the effoerts aimed at the normalization of relations 
between the two sisterly countries. 
 
     The two parties have also expressed their appreciation 
of the efforts exerted by the State of Qatar in hosting this 
meeting, which resulted in the issuance of this Agreement. 
 
     Done in Doha on the Eighth of Jummada Al-Awla 1430 AH, 
corresponding to the 3rd of May, 2009.  In Arabic and French 
languages, each text is equally authentic. 
 
/s/ 
 
Moussa Faki Mohamed 
 
DOHA 00000298  003.3 OF 003 
 
 
Minister of Foreign Relations of Republic of Chad 
 
Dr. Al-Tijani Saleh Fidail 
Minister of International Cooperation of the Republic of the 
Sudan 
 
Mousa Mohamed Kousa 
Secretary General of the People's General Committee on 
Foreign Communication and International Cooperation in the 
Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
 
Ahmed bin Abdulla Al-Mahmoud 
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Member of Cabinet 
of the State of Qatar 
Ratney