09DUBLIN110
BRIAN COWEN RALLIES THE TROOPS: THE 72ND FIANNA
Thu Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO1071
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0110/01 0641734
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051734Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9871
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0956UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000110 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EI EIND PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: BRIAN COWEN RALLIES THE TROOPS: THE 72ND FIANNA 
FAIL PARTY CONVENTION 
 
DUBLIN 00000110  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The governing political party in Ireland, Fianna 
Fail, held its annual party convention on February 27-28, 
¶2009.  The party's leaders acknowledged the country's 
difficult economic slump and heaped blame for the current 
problems on bankers.  Facing record low approval ratings, 
Prime Minister Brian Cowen's keynote speech was widely viewed 
as an important measure of his ability to lead the nation out 
of the crisis.  Cowen outlined plans to address Ireland's 
economic problems, announced major changes to banking 
regulations (including the merger of the Central Bank and the 
Financial Regulator to create a Central Banking Commission) 
and the hiring of an overseas banking regulator.  He said he 
would overhaul government operations, increase taxes, and 
reduce spending.  The general consensus was that Cowen's 
address was "good," but the result does not appear to have 
given him a bump in popularity.  As more bad economic news is 
expected soon from the government, many people in Ireland are 
beginning to wonder how much longer Cowen will be able to 
hold on to his job.  End summary. 
 
IT WAS THE WORST OF TIMES... 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On February 27-28, 2009, Fianna Fail, the dominant 
political party in the coalition government in Ireland, held 
its annual party convention in Dublin.  The key themes of the 
convention included how the current government would steer 
the country through the current economic recession, deal with 
problems in the banking sector (including scandals), and cope 
with an increasingly angry electorate. 
 
¶3.  (U) Deputy Prime Minister Mary Coughlan spoke about how 
the current economic situation impacted a wide cross-section 
of Irish life.  She said that Ireland's "own exuberance in 
recent years has left (its) public finances and banks more 
exposed to the whims of international money markets than may 
otherwise have been the case," and that perhaps both 
"government and individuals should have demonstrated more 
restraint."  Despite this, Coughlan rallied party members, 
saying that the government was "reinvigorated" and had 
strengthened its resolve to lead the country through the 
tough times ahead under Prime Minister Brian Cowen's 
leadership. 
 
¶4.  (U) Minister of Transportation Noel Dempsey made 
introductory remarks for the Taoiseach's address, harshly 
condemning bankers and money manipulators for committing 
"economic treason" on the homefront, using the Irish economy 
as their own "personal piggy bank," and endangering the 
"economic survival of the people."  Dempsey acknowledged that 
the anger of the Irish electorate was directed at Fianna Fail 
as the party made "Hobson's choices ... between bad and 
worse" to fix Ireland's public finances.  He raised the crowd 
to its feet with his rallying cry that Fianna Fail had 
steered the country through difficult times in the past and 
would do so again. 
 
THE PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Facing record low approval ratings (at just 21 
percent), Prime Minister Brian Cowen's speech was widely 
viewed as an important measure of his ability to lead the 
nation out of the ongoing financial crisis.  Cowen outlined 
plans to address Ireland's economic problems, pledging new 
banking standards and overhauling government operations so 
that the government could give taxpayers value for their 
money.  He highlighted action plans to increase taxes, 
mitigate budget shortfalls, and cope with the economic 
downturn in the short- and long-terms.  Cowen announced major 
changes to banking regulations, including the merger of the 
Central Bank and the Financial Regulator to create a Central 
Banking Commission based on the Canadian model.  He also 
announced that an overseas banking regulator would be brought 
in to maintain oversight of the banks.  He blamed the bankers 
for their behavior, saying that the government had to step in 
to fix the damage they had caused. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Although the general consensus seemed to be that 
Cowen's address was "good," some commentators noted that they 
were looking for more inspiration from his speech, something 
along the lines of a U.S.-style "State of the Union" address. 
 The news media criticized Cowen for speaking to Fianna Fail, 
rather than speaking to the nation from the floor of 
 
DUBLIN 00000110  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Parliament.  (Note: Cowen's address was televised nationwide. 
 End note.)  Typically, party conventions accord the party 
leader a boost in popularity, but this does not appear to 
have happened.  In the meantime, it was widely noted that the 
best speech of the evening was by Transportation Minister 
Dempsey when he introduced the Prime Minister. 
Traditionally, the person who gives the introduction to the 
Taoiseach's address is viewed as the up and coming party 
leader.  It would appear that the star of Deputy Prime 
Minister Coughlan - with an approval rating of only 23 
percent - may be on the wane.  As more bad news is expected 
soon from the government, including expected high 
unemployment rates around 11 percent, many people in Ireland 
are beginning to ask, "How long can Cowen hold on to his job?" 
FAUCHER