09DURBAN37
MINISTER OF TRANSPORT ADAMANT THAT TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE
Thu Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Durban
VZCZCXRO3265
RR RUEHBZ RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHDU #0037/01 0990654
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090654Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1426
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0004
RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0800UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DURBAN 000037 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/S, INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SF
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF TRANSPORT ADAMANT THAT TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROJECTS ARE ON SCHEDULE FOR 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP 
 
REF: A) JOHANNESBURG 17; B) DURBAN 21 
 
DURBAN 00000037  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Minister of Transport Jeffrey Radebe told an 
audience at the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry that 
South Africa is spending billions of Rands to develop efficient, 
safe, and reliable public transportation systems for the 2010 
FIFA World Cup. Major airport and road construction projects are 
on schedule.  Trains, buses, and minibus taxis will receive 
necessary funds for upgrades.  Durban plans to revamp its public 
transportation system and improve roads.  The government faces a 
difficult task in ensuring that the 2010 projects have a 
longer-term impact in the development of reliable, safe, and 
affordable transportation systems.  End Summary. 
 
Billions of Rands Invested to Improve Transport Infrastructure 
 
¶2. (U) Minister of Transport Jeffrey Radebe provided a briefing 
on 2010 FIFA World Cup preparations at an event hosted by the 
Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry (DCCI) and attended by 
Pol/Econ Assistant on March 27.  Radebe noted that the South 
African Government (SAG) has allocated more than R100 billion 
Rands ($10.9 billion) to improve South Africa's transportation 
infrastructure in preparation for the World Cup.  Radebe said 
R13.6 billion ($1.4 billion) was allocated for the improvement 
of public transportation, R25 billion ($2.7 billion) for 
airports, 70 billion Rands ($7.6 billion) for road construction 
and refurbishment, R7.7 billion ($835 million) for the minibus 
recapitalization program, and R18 billion ($1.9 billion) for 
railway improvements. Radebe was adamant that all host cities 
will be ready for the world cup in 2010.  `Don't believe 
everything [negative] you read in the media. South Africa is 
rolling with 2010,' said Radebe.  (Comment: Like Radebe, most of 
the officials involved in the transportation upgrade planning 
process are confident that public transportation systems will 
run smoothly during the World Cup despite alleged concerns from 
FIFA that South Africa will not be ready for the games.  End 
Comment.) 
 
Airports on Course for Take Off 
 
¶3. (U) Minister Radebe and Airport Companies of South Africa 
(ACSA) KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) Regional Director Bongani Maseko 
reported that work is progressing well at the site of the new La 
Mercy International Airport, north of Durban.  Both stated 
confidently that the airport will be completed by April 2010. 
The airport will cost R4.3 billion (approximately $470 million) 
to build, will cater for 7.5 million passengers a year, and is 
56 percent complete. The official airport name has not yet been 
decided as it must be approved by the Department of Arts and 
Culture.  Radebe also reported that refurbishments to the 
international airports in Johannesburg and Cape Town are `at an 
advanced stage' (Ref A). 
 
Durban Revamps its Public Transport System, Improves Roads 
 
¶4. (U) Durban's public transportation infrastructure is the 
biggest challenge facing the World Cub host city ahead of the 
World Cup, acknowledged eThekwini Municipality Head of Strategic 
Projects Julie May-Ellingson (Ref  B).  Durban's improvement 
plan includes the refurbishment of the N3 and Inkosi Albert 
Luthuli highways, and the establishment of the Warwick Junction 
Development, a public transportation hub with retail and 
economic centers.  The Warwick project is the most important 
Durban transportation project to be launched in 20 years.  In 
addition, a public multipurpose hub will be set up to improve 
Durban's public transport information system.   It will include 
an information call center that will be operational by June 
2009, said Ellingson. Touch-screen information kiosks will be 
placed in major shopping malls with information about public 
transportation. 
 
¶5. (U) Ellingson reported that Durban will establish a Central 
Public Transport Hub in the Central Business District, which 
will greatly improve public transport accessibility.  A Fan Park 
Transport Plan is currently being developed.  It will include 
restricted parking zones, bus parking facilities and safe, clean 
and easy-to-access pedestrian routes.  Durban will rely mostly 
on bus and rail services for 2010 but will also give some routes 
to minibus taxi operators.  Ellingson is confident that Durban 
will accomplish its transportation goals for the 2010 World Cup. 
 
Better Trains, Refurbished Stations 
 
¶6. (U) KZN District Manager Danny Hatting told the DCCI 
gathering that Metrorail is currently implementing an 
operational enhancement plan in preparation for the 2010 World 
 
DURBAN 00000037  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Cup.  This plan includes train station refurbishments, including 
R30 million Rands for Durban alone, training and deployment of 
additional staff, and 700 security personnel which will be 
deployed in the Durban railway sector. 
 
¶7. (U) Metrorail is improving its Passenger Communication 
Systems (PCS) in preparation for the 2010 World Cup.  The first 
phase of the PCS is currently being implemented in five train 
stations in Durban and the surrounding areas. The new PCS 
includes electronic billboards and on-board communication 
devices.  Twenty new trains with the new communication system 
and safety features are already in operation and seven more will 
be added by 2010, according to Hatting.  Durban expects to have 
one of the most efficient, safe, and reliable public rail system 
in the country that will serve its residents beyond the 2010 
World Cup. 
 
Comment 
 
¶8. (SBU) SAG World Cup-related transportation plans for the 
development of bus-rapid-transit-systems have already suffered 
due to many violent protests from minibus taxi operators, who 
object to the plans out of fears that their business interests 
will be adversely affected.  Despite government assurances of 
continued autonomy for the minibus industry, minibus operators 
are not convinced of these promises.  As a result, clouds 
continue to hang over South Africa's World Cup transportation 
plans.  Poor public transportation infrastructure is the one of 
the biggest challenges facing post-apartheid urban and 
peri-urban South Africa.  Over the years, there have been many 
violent protests linked to unreliable public transportation, 
including the burning of trains in Gauteng and numerous strikes 
by minibus taxi operators in KZN.  Industry analysts also note 
that the long-term viability of World Cup-related transport 
projects would depend on the SAG's ability to address safety and 
security shortfalls in existing and proposed public 
transportation systems.   Many South African citizens remain 
hopeful, however, that one of the most important and visible 
legacies of the 2010 World Cup will be the development of a 
reliable, safe, and affordable transportation system. 
DERDERIAN