09HARARE745
EXPERIENCE ENGAGING DIASPORA COMMUNITIES: HARARE
Fri Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO8817
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0745/01 2610900
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180900Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4915
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HARARE 000745 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S FOR B. WALCH 
S/GPI 
S/P 
DRL FOR N. WILETT 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR J. HARMON AND L. DOBBINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP BTIO EAID OEXC PGOV PHUM PREL SCUL SMIG
TSPL, ZI 
SUBJECT: EXPERIENCE ENGAGING DIASPORA COMMUNITIES: HARARE 
 
REF: STATE 86401 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable responds to questions presented in Ref. 
 
¶2.  A.  (U) To what extent are diasporans from your host 
country an identifiable community?  Are there existing 
diaspora networks, organizations or online communities 
available as platforms for outreach? 
 
i)  (U) Estimates by NGOs, diplomatic officials, and press 
accounts of the size of the Zimbabwean community residing 
outside of Zimbabwe range from 2.5 million to 3.85 million 
people.  These Zimbabweans consist of a mix of professionals 
and semi-skilled migrants who now predominantly reside in 
South Africa, the UK, Botswana, the U.S., and Australia. 
According to the International Organization on Migration 
(IOM), the largest diasporan community is in South Africa, 
where IOM estimates that as many as 3.1 million Zimbabweans 
reside, the majority of whom are illegal migrants.  Other 
countries with sizable Zimbabwean populations (estimates from 
IOM) are the UK (400,000), Botswana (200,000), the U.S. 
(100,000), Australia (22,000), Canada (20,000), New Zealand 
(7,000) and Namibia (2,000).  Migrants in these countries 
tend to belong to identifiable communities. 
 
ii)  (U) Most existing diaspora networks are located in South 
Africa with some connection to other countries.  These 
include Global Zimbabwe Forum, Zimbabwe Diaspora Development 
Chamber, Diaspora Nurses Association, Progressive Teachers of 
Zimbabwe in South Africa, Creative Writers Association 
Workshop, and Peace and Democracy Project.  They act as 
useful platforms for outreach.  The IOM utilized them when it 
organized a Zimbabwe Diaspora Engagement Workshop in May 
¶2009. 
 
¶B.  (U) What is the nature of the connection of the diaspora 
community to the host country? 
 
i)  (U) It is common for Zimbabweans in the diaspora to 
maintain close ties with their families in Zimbabwe and to 
support them economically.  Many low- and semi-skilled 
workers have left Zimbabwe because of the collapse of the 
agricultural, mining, and industrial sectors and remit 
portions of their meager wages.  Higher-skilled migrants, who 
have left Zimbabwe for either political or economic reasons, 
are generally earning higher wages and able to send back 
larger amounts. 
 
ii)  (SBU) Some highly educated migrants have maintained 
their memberships in Zimbabwean professional associations. 
For example, the Secretary General of the Zimbabwe Medical 
Aid Association (ZIMA) told us that many doctors in the 
diaspora keep their dues current with ZIMA even though they 
may have left Zimbabwe years ago. 
 
iii)  (SBU) Many diasporans are active in the political 
discourse on Zimbabwe despite still being denied the right to 
vote in elections.  The Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) 
political party has branches in South Africa, the UK, the 
U.S., Australia, and Canada.  These branches hold annual 
congresses and maintain close contact with the party in 
Zimbabwe through the MDC national chairperson. 
 
¶C.  (U) To what extent has your host country or government 
activated its diaspora communities for humanitarian relief? 
 
i)  (SBU) While there have been instances when the diasporan 
community contributed to humanitarian relief efforts, this 
has not been at the instigation or encouragement of 
government.  Last year, during a health crisis, medical 
equipment was donated to Harare Hospital.  These sorts of 
efforts are initiated by  members of the diaspora who often 
partner with international donor groups to provide ad hoc 
Qpartner with international donor groups to provide ad hoc 
assistance. 
 
¶D.  (U) To what extent is the diaspora community engaged in 
long-term investment in your host country? 
 
i)  (SBU) The diaspora community is not a significant 
participant in long-term investment in Zimbabwe.  While there 
are a handful of entepreneurs who have established 
successful businesses in Zimbabwe while living abroad -- the 
CEO of cellular operator Econet, Strive Masiyiwa, and mining 
executive Mutumwa Mawere for instance -- these are 
exceptions.  Many potential investors in the diaspora left 
 
HARARE 00000745  002 OF 003 
 
 
Zimbabwe due to differences with ZANU-PF and are reluctant to 
invest while ZANU-PF remains in power.  Additionally, there 
are concerns about political instability and onerous 
investment regulations. 
 
ii)  (SBU) The diaspora community has shown some interest in 
real estate.  Although investment in this sector has declined 
in the last three years, demand for houses by the diaspora is 
showing signs of increasing due to optimism following the 
establishment of the new ZANU-PF--MDC inclusive government in 
February. 
 
¶E.  (U) To what extent is the diaspora community working 
toward scientific, engineering, medical, and educational 
institution building? 
 
i)  (U) Many skilled professionals have left Zimbabwe.  These 
include large numbers of civil, mechanical, electrical and 
mining engineers.  Within the medical field, numerous doctors 
and nurses have left.  Numerous teachers have migrated to 
South Africa and other neighboring countries.  In 2008, for 
example, Botswana hired a large proportion of the science and 
math teachers from the city of Bulawayo.  Additionally, 
numerous Zimbabwean students are studying health, medicine, 
engineering, economics, finance, and science in the U.S., 
South Africa, and in other countries.  While they are not 
currently engaged in institution building in Zimbabwe, they 
constitute a potentially valuable resource should local 
conditions improve and prompt their return. 
 
¶F.  (U) To what extent is the diaspora community engaged in 
conflict resolution and peace building? 
 
i)  (U) The Zimbabwean diaspora has not assumed an active 
role in conflict resolution or peace building. 
 
¶G.  (U) To what extent is the diaspora community engaged in 
meeting the health, education and welfare needs of indigenous 
peoples? 
 
i)  (U) The participation of the diaspora community in 
meeting the health, education and welfare needs of indigenous 
peoples is predominantly focused on financial support to 
their families.  The diaspora community sends funds back home 
to support their families with school fees, medical care and 
related household expenses. 
 
ii)  (U) Additionally, some in the diaspora are engaged in 
fundraising activities to support the work of NGOs and social 
welfare organizations as well as faith-based organizations in 
their home communities in Zimbabwe.  Diasporans also 
volunteer their expertise when home in Zimbabwe on visits -- 
either formally or informally -- in order to assist such 
organizations and their communities. 
 
¶H.  (U) To what extent is the diaspora community engaged in 
democracy promotion, electoral reform and civil society 
development? 
 
i)  (U) The diaspora community is active in promoting 
democracy, electoral reform and civil society development. 
This is done through the creation of websites such as 
Zimbabwe Situation, ZimDaily, the Zimbabwe Times, and the 
newspaper The Zimbabwean (distributed in Zimbabwe) and the 
placement of op/eds in newspapers throughout the world. 
Additionally the diaspora maintains contact with government 
officials in numerous countries and lobbies for support for 
democratic elements within Zimbabwe.   In particular, the 
diaspora community is lobbying for provisions in a new 
constitution to give it the right to vote and the right to 
hold dual citizenship.  These are positions that the MDC has 
embraced and is championing. 
 
¶I.  (U) How would you characterize the level of concern and 
attention given to diaspora communities by your host 
Qattention given to diaspora communities by your host 
government? 
 
i)  (SBU) Prior to the formation of the current inclusive 
government, the ZANU-PF-led government paid little attention 
to the diaspora.  This was due to the belief that the 
diaspora population -- including skilled and semi-skilled 
migrants -- was supportive of the political opposition MDC 
party. 
 
ii)  (SBU) The MDC, which is now part of government, views 
 
HARARE 00000745  003 OF 003 
 
 
the diaspora as an important resource and base of support. 
Consequently, Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai has met with 
diaspora groups in the U.S., Europe and South Africa to 
address their concerns and encourage them to return to 
Zimbabwe. 
 
¶J.  (U) If Post has undertaken programs to reach out 
proactively to diaspora community members, please share the 
circumstances that prompted the outreach effort. 
 
i)  (U) Post has no formal programs to reach out to the 
diaspora community.  We meet from time to time with 
Zimbabweans residing outside the country who are visiting, 
and maintain contacts with some Zimbabweans in the diaspora, 
principally in South Africa. 
 
¶K.  (U) If Post has received unsolicited requests from the 
diaspora community please share the nature of these request. 
 
i)  (U) Post has received many inquiries on how to give back 
effectively from former program participants and students 
from Zimbabwe who studied in the U.S.; these requests are on 
how to gain employment in Zimbabwe, how to seek local 
internship and volunteer opportunities, and how to 
participate in fund-raising efforts with community-based 
organizations. 
 
¶L.  (U) To what extent has Post designed or participated in 
public diplomacy programs customized to diaspora community 
needs and interests? 
 
i)  (U) The Educational Advising Center based in the Public 
Affairs Section of the Embassy has been working actively with 
Zimbabwean stuQts who are studying in the U.S., or who have 
graduated and are working full-time, or are engaged in 
internships in the U.S.  We have launched a Facebook page for 
them and actively engage them as speakers when they are home 
on holidays.  We work to integrate them into our programming, 
especially for our pre-departure orientations and as speakers 
in our Food for Thought seminar series.  Through the 
Embassy's USAP program (www.usapglobal.org), which assists 
Zimbabwean students to study in the U.S.,  we support a 
website, listservs and annual conferences, to foster 
communication among Zimbabwean students living in the U.S. 
 
¶M.  (U) In planning future programs and anticipating requests 
for assistance for diaspora community actors, what types of 
knowledge management tools and information materials would be 
most helpful to action officers at Post? 
 
i)  (U) Post would greatly benefit from a tool which would 
allow us to create a database to track the skills, interests, 
and levels of involvement of Zimbabweans in their home 
communities.  This would allow us to capitalize on 
diasporans' ability to contribute to a Zimbabwean recovery. 
 
PETTERSON