09HELSINKI59
FINLAND: 2009 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING-IN-PERSONS REPORT
Wed Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO5518
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHHE #0059/01 0491235
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181235Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4807
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHTL/AMEMBASSY TALLINN 4215
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 4954
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0557
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0125
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0078
RUEHLN/AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 0200
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 HELSINKI 000059 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, EUR/NB, EUR/PGI 
STATE PASS AID 
 
PART 01 OF 02 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC ELAB FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: 2009 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING-IN-PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: (A)2008 STATE 132759 (B)STATE 005577` (C) Email dtd December 
15, 2008 Finland Action Guide (D) 2008 Helsinki 00563(E) 2008 
Helsinki 00574 
 
HELSINKI 00000059  001.2 OF 006 
 
 
¶1. (U)  Post's point-of-contact on TIP is Political & Labor Officer 
Lisa Conesa(ConesaLB@state.gov; Tel: 358-9-6162-5482; FAX: 
358-9-6162-5766).  Ms. Conesa is an FS-04, and spent 100 hours on 
preparing the TIP report.  Two  local LES employees in the Political 
Section and Consular Section spent 67 hours supporting the 
preparation of this report. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Embassy Comment:  Embassy Helsinki has continued to work 
collaboratively with our Finnish interlocutors in the area of 
trafficking-in-persons (TIP).  The GoF has been proactive in 
responding to Mission requests for information related to its TIP 
efforts, and has been receptive to the Department's TIP Action Plan 
contained in ref C. Post believes that Finland continues, in both 
talk and action, to represent a prime example of a Tier 1 country. 
End Comment. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin Text. 
 
Overview of Finland's Activities to Eliminate TIP 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
The following has been keyed according to ref A. 
 
The Country's Tip Situation: 
---------------------------- 
 
23A:  The Embassy's main sources for official 
trafficking-in-person's information are government officials from 
the Interior Ministry (MOI), Finnish Border Guards (FBG), National 
Bureau of Investigation (NBI) and National Immigration Service 
(NIS).  The Political Section meets with these officials and the new 
National Rappateur for Trafficking in Human Beings on a regular 
basis.  The RSO and Consular Sections alert and include the 
Political Section in meetings that may address crimes or migration 
with a trafficking component.  Officials remain unanimous in their 
assessment that the instances of trafficking continue to be very 
small, an assertion that is supported by academic researchers, NGO 
leaders and media reporting.  Nevertheless, the Government of 
Finland (GoF) takes the fight against TIP very seriously and has 
established effective interagency mechanisms to detect, prevent and 
deter it. 
 
23A - cont.  The GoF has adopted and implemented a revised national 
TIP action plan (2008), and has allocated personnel and resources at 
all levels of the GoF to deter and reduce the likelihood of 
trafficking into or through Finland.  In the Revised National Plan 
of Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings, the GoF has 
acknowQdged the need to conduct more detailed data collection and 
analysis so that it can better grasp the scope of the TIP issue.  To 
that end, the GoF added an independent National Rappateur for 
Trafficking in Human Beings who is required to report regularly to 
the Government, to monitor the trafficking phenomena in order to 
identify problems.  The Rappateur may also issue advice, 
recommendations, proposals for action and statements. 
 
23A - cont.  A Finnish NGO network (30 NGOs), led by Pro-tukipiste, 
began separately counting known victims appearing in the network for 
services in 2007, whether or not the victim agreed to go through 
police channels or had been referred by the police. 
 
23A - cont.  The Embassy PAS section provides daily press 
translations.  Post documents cases that appear in the press and are 
reported as human trafficking or a crime, which may turn out to be 
trafficking, such as alien smuggling.  Additionally, PAS watches for 
articles that may not make the daily press translation and alerts 
POL to them.  The POL Assistant (an FSN) also scans domestic press 
daily.  When a press item appears, post contacts local officials for 
more detailed background. 
 
23A - cont.  Data from Finnish sources is generally reliable.  NGOs 
disclose what is fact-based, what is estimated and what is an 
 
HELSINKI 00000059  002.2 OF 006 
 
 
opinion. 
 
23B:  Finland is a transit and destination country for trafficked 
men and women, with transit trafficking being more prevalent than 
trafficking to Finland as a destination.  Finland is not a source 
country.  Internal trafficking does not routinely occur. 
 
23B - cont.  People are trafficked for labor and prostitution. In 
the very small number of recent cases into Finland, perpetrators 
trafficked people into the southern more populous parts of the 
country.  Recent illegal transit (alien smuggling) cases that might 
have developed into trafficking, if not for early interdiction, were 
destined for France, Italy, Spain, Canada and the US. 
 
23B - cont.  According to officials, most victims trafficked through 
Finland are likely women destined for Western Europe's commercial 
sex industry, and come from Russia and Estonia; there is limited 
trafficking of women from Lithuania, Latvia, the Caucasus and Asia. 
Finland has no "red light" districts per se, and cities such as 
Helsinki, Turku, and Tampere support only a handful of nightclubs. 
NGOs count 300 "Thai Massage" parlors in Finland, 150 of those in 
Helsinki. NGOs estimate that half of them operate legitimate massage 
establishments.  Police investigate massage parlors and a case 
prosecuted in 2007 as extortion and usury involving 13 victims is 
currently under appeal; this year, an investigation of 38 massage 
parlors found one case of pandering in Turku.  Most prostitutes work 
out of their homes, rent apartments and, in certain circumstances, 
utilize hotel rooms.  While advertising for sex is illegal, many 
prostitutes use the Internet to attract clients and the internet was 
used in pandering and procurement cases.  According to the NBI, most 
prostitutes are Finnish students, full-time freelance sex workers, 
and individuals working in the sex industry on a part time basis. 
Most officials and NGOs estimate 500 to 600 prostitutes work in 
Finland, though Pro-tukipiste, the NGO which supports and promotes 
civil rights for sex workers in Finland, claims 8,000 calls from sex 
workers and 2,000 individual in-office contacts per year. 
 
23B - cont.  According to authorities, many non-Finnish prostitutes 
continue to commute to Finland to work as prostitutes for several 
weeks at a time, often from Russia, Estonia, Latvia. These 
individuals, or independent sex workers, largely come to Finland 
voluntarily for economic gain and NGOs refer to the phenomena as 
"moving prostitution".  Of the few women who are trafficked to 
Finland, most are aware that they will work as prostitutes upon 
arrival; they do not, for example, believe that they will be 
domestic servants or agricultural workers.  NGOs have suggested that 
in some cases, "pimps" use coercion to maintain the services of a 
sex worker, thereby changing the dynamics of the situation from one 
of cooperation to one of victimization.  Finnish NGOs disagree on 
whether prostitution is a valid profession or whether all 
prostitutes are, by the nature of the work, exploited. 
 
23B - cont.  Indian, Chinese and to a lesser degree, Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi men, have also been trafficked into Finland to work as 
illegal laborers.  Labor trafficking purportedly involves 
restaurants, sub-contractor situations, domestics, cleaning crews, 
and construction. Officials believe that most labor trafficking is 
small-scale and tied to ethnic businesses like restaurants.  Labor 
victims are predominantly East Asian or Indian, although cases 
involving Pakistanis and Bangladeshis have been noted 
 
23B - cont.  Based on available official information, refugees have 
not been victims of trafficking in Finland.  Finnish authorities 
again have seen no trafficked minors destined to Finland during this 
reporting period.  The trafficking of minors to third countries via 
Helsinki is a concern, but such trafficking is minimal.  Border 
Guards indicated that they pay special attention to unaccompanied 
minors.  They have been trained in identifying potentially 
trafficked minors, and patrol the transit lounges looking for them. 
 
 
23C:  Based on police information, perpetrators brought victims 
exploited for sex work to private apartments or private homes.  The 
one domestic trafficking incident during the reporting period 
involved securing the victim in the basement of a rural home with 
 
HELSINKI 00000059  003.2 OF 006 
 
 
duct tape.  Restaurant owners kept Chinese restaurant workers in the 
food storage area of the restaurant.  Accommodations for suspected 
labor trafficking victims are substandard. 
 
23D:  The common vulnerabilities in trafficking-related prosecutions 
appear to be previous contact between the trafficker and an 
unemployed victim.  With one exception, most of the trafficking-type 
cases have started with an employment offer that then did not 
conclude as promised.  The distinction between trafficking and 
smuggling, especially in labor cases, is often murky.  Due to early 
interdiction, prior to boarding aircraft bound for Finland notably 
from India, over 100 smuggling cases were thwarted during this 
reporting period.  Because of the early interdiction, the victims 
still perceive the smuggler as a hero.  The intent of the smugglers, 
because of the reportedly high payments up front and additional 
payments expected at the destination, remains unclear. 
 
23E: The traffickers appear to be friends of friends or extended 
family relationships who connect victims with a criminal 
organization or activity via a job offer, usually for a service job, 
or a promise of reunification.  Exploiters appear to be travel and 
document purveyors.  Officials believe that many represent organized 
rings.  According to the NBI, there are no identifiable Finnish 
organized crime networks that traffic sex or labor workers into or 
through Finland.  However, Russian and Estonian trafficking groups 
may facilitate the entry of Russian and Estonian prostitutes into 
Finland, but the perpetrators generally operate beyond Finland's 
borders.  Estonia extradited two traffickers to Finland during this 
reporting period.  Finnish officials would like to see greater 
support from Russian law enforcement personnel when Finnish law 
enforcement attempts to seek their assistance in potential TIP cases 
involving Russians.  [Note: The Revised National Action Plan states 
that human trafficking and its prevention must be taken into account 
in cooperation between Finland and Russia, with particular attention 
to gender and child-sensitive issues. End note.)  Approaches to 
victimization and transit appear organized and officials work to 
identify the initial perpetrators, often resident in another 
country. 
 
23E - cont.  Workers voluntarily enter Finland (legally or smuggled) 
for economic reasons, but after arrival, are forced to work long 
hours for minimal wages.  Some are forced to sleep on premises, as 
was apparent in the Chinese restaurant workers' case.  Passports may 
be taken and the threat of violence or turning the victim over to 
immigration authorities is used.  Finnish law enforcement 
authorities report that it is extremely difficult to investigate 
such cases due to the closed nature of immigrant communities, 
language barriers, and the unwillingness of victims and material 
witnesses to cooperate with the police.  The full scope of labor 
trafficking to Finland is unknown, but authorities believe there are 
likely small numbers of trafficked workers in major Finnish cities. 
 
23E - cont.  Exploiters use false documents and real documents under 
false pretense or attempt to move people from a neighboring country 
by ferry, bus, train or car where no documents would be expected. 
Smugglers sell complete packages including identity documents, 
travel, and a border FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) manual for use 
when officials ask questions.  Because of interdiction before 
departure or at the Finnish border, officials cannot say for certain 
that victims would not become trafficked to make final payments, 
which were reported to be large, although the end employment would 
be low-wage employment such as farm work. 
 
23E - cont.  NGOs believe that arranged or forced marriages may 
verge on trafficking for some immigrant groups coming from South 
Asia and Africa.  They have no provable cases so far but have 
received assistance calls that lead them to suspect trafficking in a 
few cases annually.  One NGO logged 21 suspect cases over a 9-year 
period ending in 2008.  NGOs believe foreign wives are vulnerable 
because they may not know their rights in Finland and may continue 
to live under their source-country's paradigm. 
 
23E - cont.  While the actual number of TIP victims inside Finland 
appears low, expanded travel options to Finland have expanded the 
possibilities of transit through Finland.  Finnish law enforcement 
 
HELSINKI 00000059  004.2 OF 006 
 
 
remains vigilant regarding the transit TIP dynamic, particularly 
trafficking from Asia.  Finnair, the national airline, has 26 
flights weekly to China and 12 flights weekly to India.  In the 
Indian smuggling cases reported by the media, officials and Finnair, 
the victims hoped to continue on to other destinations; Finnair 
proved instrumental in preventing transit.    When Finnair expanded 
its Asian air routes between Helsinki and Osaka, Tokyo, Nagoya, 
Mumbai, New Delhi, Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Hong Kong and 
Bangkok, attempts at transit trafficking increased.  Finnair 
enhanced passenger screening of transit passengers to reduce 
suspected TIP flows from Asia to and through Finland.  Finnair will 
be adding a route to Turkey and is actively pursuing transit 
monitoring arrangements at the overseas departure point.    Finnair 
statistics indicate a consistent refusal to board suspect 
passengers. 
 
 
Setting the Scene for the Government's Anti-Tip Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
24A:  The GoF acknowledges that trafficking-in persons is a criminal 
and social problem. 
 
24B:  The GoF revised anti-TIP national action plan ensures 
continuing cooperation and coordination throughout all levels of the 
GoF.  The GoF frequently voices its determination to stop TIP in 
Finland, and to support international programs aimed at eliminating 
situations overseas which create a conducive environment for the 
trafficking of persons to developed nations.  Finland has actively 
pursued these goals at the European Union and United Nations, and 
made trafficking a theme of its 2008 OSCE Chairmanship. 
 
24B - cont.  The elimination of trafficking and smuggling within and 
through Finland is a responsibility taken seriously and shared 
across the government.  The GOF works via a "Steering Committee" 
composed of representatives from the Ministries for Foreign Affairs, 
Social Affairs and Health, Justice, and Education, as well as the 
FBG, the NBI, and several NGOs.  This group coordinates the 
implementation of the National Plan of Action against Trafficking in 
Human Beings and related counter-trafficking/smuggling activities. 
The following agencies are involved in the GoF's TIP initiatives: 
 
--Minstry of Interior (Lead and Key): 
 
-- National Rappateur for Trafficking in Human Beings:  In this 
reporting period, the government appointed the Ombudsman for 
Minorities (Rappateur) to be the Rappateur.  The Rappateur, part of 
the Ministry of Interior but operating with independence, reports 
regularly to the government and monitors international commitments 
and the mechanism of the Council of Europe Convention on Action 
against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA). 
 
--Finnish Border Guards: principal responsibility of interdicting 
trafficked persons attempting to cross a Finnish border.  They also 
have shared responsibility for investigating trafficking/smuggling 
rings that attempt to circumvent Finnish immigration laws. Part of 
the Ministry of the Interior. 
 
--The National Bureau of Investigation: charged with pursuing 
organized crime pertaining to trafficking and smuggling, and has the 
lead of coordinating Finnish TIP law enforcement cooperation with 
third countries.  TIP investigations are centralized in the NBI's 
25-person Economic Crimes Unit.  The unit focuses on prostitution, 
child pornography, abandoned children, human organ theft and 
trafficking, and forced/illegal labor crimes.  Part of the Ministry 
of the Interior. 
 
--Finnish Police: the police are charged with enforcing all laws 
throughout Finland. The police represent a national police force, 
and identify possible TIP victims as they enforce laws related to 
prostitution, pandering and internal immigration violations. Part of 
the Ministry of the Interior. 
 
--Finnish Immigration Service: plays a key role in protecting the 
rights of individuals identified as victims of 
 
HELSINKI 00000059  005.2 OF 006 
 
 
trafficking/smuggling, either at a port of entry or upon 
identification by law enforcement authorities. Part of the Ministry 
of the Interior. 
 
--Finnish Customs: indirectly enforces immigration laws and is 
charged with detecting trafficking-smuggling when individuals are 
identified during routine Customs checks, and at locations where the 
Customs service provides immigration screening services on behalf of 
the Border Guards. Part of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
--Ministry of Employment and the Economy (key): charged with 
enforcing and investigating potential labor law violations, 
including instances of forced labor.  Also coordinates GoF emergency 
support services and assistance provided to non-resident TIP 
victims. 
 
--Ministry of Social Affairs & Health (key): manages the nation's 
health and social welfare programs.  Provides coordination of 
benefits and social services to individuals who have been identified 
as potential victims of trafficking-smuggling. 
 
--Ministry of Justice (key): coordinates development of relevant 
Finnish law pertaining to TIP.  Also coordinates extradition and 
legal requests from foreign jurisdictions regard TIP and 
extraterritorial jurisdiction of citizens overseas. 
 
--Ministry for Foreign Affairs(key):  implements international 
treaties against human trafficking and Finland's accession, taking 
into account current national legislation.  Also coordinates visa 
policy and GoF authorities participation in the Visa Information 
System (VIS) and Schengen.  The Passport and Visa Unit of the 
Ministry for Foreign Affairs (MFA) maintains an anti-human 
trafficking agenda.  The MFA may also be involved in victim return 
and protecting human rights in civilian crisis management. 
 
--Ministry of Education (key): involves itself in training and 
education and special services for children. 
 
--Ministry of Defense: ensures that civilian crisis management and 
peacekeeping missions are familiar with the human trafficking 
phenomenon and how it relates to the filed. 
 
--Ministry of Finance:  is involved in victim assistance, training, 
work and integration issues via social security. 
 
24C:  Finland is rated by Transparency International as one of the 
world's least corrupt nations, consistently placing among the top 
five.  Corruption is extremely rare, and has not been associated 
with TIP enforcement.  The GoF's law enforcement, immigration and 
Border Guards are well trained and funded, and capable of thoroughly 
investigating and prosecuting all cases of TIP.  The GoF and its 
multipronged TIP action plan (Revised National Plan of Action 
against Trafficking in Human Beings, August 2008) are also well 
funded, resourced and prepared to quickly respond to all TIP cases. 
NGOs argue that flow and use of resources could be more fluid and 
are actively working to improve public trust and ensure a positive 
outcome for victims. 
 
24D:  GoF's Revised National Plan of Action against Trafficking in 
Human Beings specifically directs the police to monitor trafficking, 
prostitution and related criminal activities with support from the 
Surveillance Unit for Illegal Foreign Labor and the Illegal 
Immigration intelligence subordinate to the National Bureau of 
Investigation. 
 
24D - cont.  Exchange of information among police, customs and the 
border guard occurs while maintaining respect for the victim's 
privacy, safety, and human rights.  NGOs are working to improve the 
exchange of information by building "street credibility" and "trust" 
with suspected victims. 
 
24D - cont.  The newly formed office of the National Rappateur for 
Trafficking in Human Beings must collect and analyze information 
related to trafficking. 
 
 
HELSINKI 00000059  006.2 OF 006 
 
 
BUTLER