09ISTANBUL98
TURKS DISTRUST BOTH FOREIGNERS AND SHARIA LAW
Mon Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIT #0098/01 0681013
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADX3C62DF MSI8811 540A)
P 091013Z MAR 09
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8830
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUFOADA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 8150UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000098 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY -- ADDING ADD'L ADDRESSEE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKS DISTRUST BOTH FOREIGNERS AND SHARIA LAW 
 
 ¶1.  (U) Summary: A poll released in February found that 
most Turks are distrustful of foreigners and fearful that 
the country will be divided by outside forces.  The poll 
commissioned by the mainstream Hurriyet newspaper and 
conducted by well regarded polling firm Konda Research also 
found many Turks worried Islamic law will become the law of 
the land. While nearly all respondents supported democracy 
at all times, less than half also said the military should 
be able to intervene if necessary.  The data shows a nation 
divided over the role of religion in society.  However, the 
scales are clearly tilted in favor of those with a more 
religious lifestyle.  Konda Chairman Erdem pointed to 
gender inequities as the basis of all of TurkeyQs societal 
ills -- providing results that show prevailing paternal 
attitudes towards women.  End Summary. 
 
Many Turks still fighting the War of Independence 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. (U) Results from a 2008 nationwide survey of 6,482 
respondents commissioned by Hurriyet newspaper showed Turks 
are generally distrustful of outside influences.  At a 
public unveiling of the poll results, Tarhan Erdem, 
Chairman of Konda, stated the survey found nearly eighty 
percent of Turks agreed with the proposition that "foreign 
governments were the source behind the Kurdish and 
southeastern problems".  Moreover, about 75 percent of the 
respondents opposed foreigners buying land in Turkey, and 
roughly the same number said they feared Turkey will be 
divided. Columnist Ahmet Insel, of the daily Radikal who 
spoke at the release of the poll results, said these 
results show there are many Turks who still feel the War of 
Independence is ongoing and Turkey needs to continue to be 
vigilant against these threats. 
 
¶3. (U) The survey showed Turks overwhelmingly favoring a 
democratic government at all times, yet 48 percent 
conversely believes the military needs to have the right to 
intervene. Erdem, who noted the poll found that the more 
modern, educated, and secular cluster of society was the 
most supportive of military intervention, commented that it 
was ironic that those who most strenuously claim to support 
western values are the most willing to turn their backs on 
democracy. 
 
Many are fearful of Sharia Law; Yet Turkish Society 
is Religious 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4. (U) The survey found nearly six out of ten respondents 
were fearful of Sharia law coming to Turkey, and about the 
same number agreeing "state and religious affairs should be 
separated". Turkish society, however, is quite religious, 
with twoQthirds identifying themselves as either pious or 
extremely devout.  Over 70 percent of women respondents 
said they cover their heads; of which 13 percent said they 
wear the "turban" a readily identifiable style of wearing 
the headscarf common in urban Turkey and viewed by many as 
a political statement. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a separate meeting Bekir Agirdir, Manager of 
Konda, told us that it is grossly over-simplified to divide 
Turkey into religious and secular groups. Deeper analysis 
of the data reveals a more complicated society. If you 
define society on a purely religious/secular axis, Agirdir 
cautioned, the religious sectors clearly outnumber the 
secular sectors.  Agirdir told us Turkey has become more 
polarized since the ruling Justice and Development Party 
(AKP) convincingly won the general election in 2007.  Prime 
Minister ErodganQs language has become more pious since his 
victory, sparking a counter-response from secular 
columnists and driving the debate into an uneven battle in 
favor of those seeking a more religious Turkey.  Turkish 
society is more balanced if you compare those who want the 
country to become more "modern" to those who oppose change, 
according to Agirdir. There are many religious Turks who 
are educated and want to modernize. These people will back 
economic and social reforms, adding their su 
pport to the more secular Turks, yet Agirdir believes the 
old debate over religion will impede progress; driving a 
deeper wedge into society. 
 
Reducing Gender Inequity Necessary to Solve Turkey's Ills 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶6. (U) Erdem argued Turkey's patriarchal society is 
damaging the nation's development since women are excluded 
from significant parts of the economy.  Reducing the 
inequity is key to ameliorating all of Turkey's other 
societal problem, according to Erdem.  The poll, however, 
showed that this is a large barrier for the nation to 
overcome. Nearly 70 percent of the respondents stated that 
a woman needs permission from her husband in order to work 
outside the house.  Nearly 60 percent of the respondents 
said women in their househol never are allowed to leave 
the house with sleeveess shirts.  Erdem pointed to these 
results to sow Turkish women are not even free in their 
privte lives. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment:  The Konda poll add to existing evidence 
that Turks harbor very hosile perceptions towards other 
counties.  A 19-coutry BBC World Service Poll released in 
February ound that Turks held some of the most negative 
atitudes within the survey toward many foreign counries. 
A majority of Turks held negative opinionsregarding most 
of the countries mentioned in the oll, including some that 
barely capture the attetion of the media such as: India, 
South Africa, apan, and Brazil.  This blanket distrust of 
manynations provides evidence that the "War of 
Indepndence" does continue for many Turks.  Moreover, the 
increasing polarization over religion in societ that 
Agirdir noted appears to be another conflit for Turks to 
face. The polling results indicat it is not a balanced 
fight. 
 
WIENER