09JAKARTA1619
INDONESIA: AVIATION - THE NEXT STEP
Tue Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1619 2720008
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290008Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3418
INFO RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 6599
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS JAKARTA 001619 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR E, EAP/MTS, EB/TRA, E/CBA 
SINGAPORE PASS TO FAA MARY WALSH, TSA THOMAS KEENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON ID
SUBJECT: INDONESIA: AVIATION - THE NEXT STEP 
 
¶1. (U) This message contains an Action request. Please see paragraph 
¶6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: Indonesia is a major civil aviation market, and 
will grow faster if U.S. technical assistance can help bring its 
aviation sector up to international standards.  A string of fatal 
air disasters has heightened awareness of Indonesia's outdated 
infrastructure and inadequate regulatory framework.  It is in our 
interest to help Indonesia regain its Federal Aviation Authority 
(FAA) Category-1 rating in order to create new commercial 
opportunities for U.S. companies and advance our bilateral 
relationship.  Comprehensive FAA and Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA) assessments are needed as soon as possible to 
determine how to provide the appropriate technical assistance.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The value of Indonesia's transportation sector is expected 
to grow to over $33 billion by 2011, and U.S. aviation companies are 
already doing big business here.  Boeing has $1 billion in current 
orders with two Indonesian carriers and will provide the Government 
of Indonesia with a new Presidential jet.  Bell has a commitment for 
$120 million in helicopter sales.  In addition to aircraft, real 
sales opportunities exist for U.S. air-traffic control systems and 
security equipment as well as military aviation equipment and 
services.  U.S. aviation companies enjoy a unique advantage in this 
market over EU competitor Airbus because of our key role in regional 
security. This market will continue to grow, and will grow faster if 
Indonesia's aviation safety and security improve to meet 
international standards. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The aviation sector witnessed explosive growth after 
deregulation in 1999; currently there are 48 air carriers, including 
15 passenger service airlines.  However, the regulatory authority 
and airport infrastructure have not kept pace. Over the last few 
years, high-profile aircraft accidents have undermined consumer 
confidence in Indonesian aviation safety.  Indonesia has been an FAA 
Category-2 country since 2007; its airlines still cannot make 
regularly-scheduled flights to the U.S.  An EU flight ban was 
imposed in June 2007.  In July 2009, the EU lifted the ban for four 
carriers after extensive effort on the part of Indonesian airlines, 
regulators and international stakeholders (including the FAA). 
 
¶5. (SBU) State-owned carrier Garuda has ordered two 777s for 
long-haul flights; it would like to commence service to the U.S. by 
2012 and will request FAA authority to do so.  Regaining Category-1 
FAA status will be a laborious and time intensive process involving 
multiple stakeholders and government agencies.  Failure would be a 
setback in our bilateral relationship; we need to engage with 
Indonesia now to make sure they succeed.  The private sector is 
doing its part -- Garuda has already retained independent safety 
advisors and Boeing has indicated an intention to do the same. 
Embassy is coordinating with both parties. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Action request: Post requests comprehensive FAA and TSA 
assessments as soon as possible to identify what needs to be done to 
raise Indonesia's aviation to international standards.  A TSA 
assessment team is tentatively scheduled to visit Jakarta's 
Soekarno-Hatta International airport in November.  While this visit 
is an important first step, Ngurah Rai International airport in Bali 
and other facilities merit prompt attention as well.  Following 
professional assessment, additional resources should be mobilized 
quickly.  It is important that we help Indonesia bring its aviation 
sector up to speed in time to ensure the success of their Category-1 
request.  Improving safety and security will boost the market here, 
leading to more opportunities for U.S. commercial sales while 
enhancing our bilateral relationship. 
 
HUME