09JERUSALEM91
GAZA UPDATE JANUARY 9, 2009, 1300 LOCAL
Fri Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO3174
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0091/01 0091202
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091202Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3773
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 000091 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE AND IPA, NSC FOR ABRAMS/PASCUAL/RAMCHAND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER MOPS IS
SUBJECT: GAZA UPDATE JANUARY 9, 2009, 1300 LOCAL 
 
REF:  JERUSALEM 75 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Following the passage of a UNSCR calling for a 
cease-fire, the IDF maintained its positions on January 9 and 
continued operations in northern Gaza and around Khan Yunis, 
generally on the outskirts of urban areas.  IAF and Israeli naval 
strikes targeted northern Gaza and some areas in central Gaza 
overnight.  A humanitarian pause began at 1200 local.  The 
suspension of movement inside Gaza UNRWA and ICRC continues.  Kerem 
Shalom is open, but only for deliveries organized by the private 
sector.  UN OCHA reported 776 dead and 3,100 wounded since 
hostilities broke out.  A total of ten Israeli soldiers have died in 
action to date.  The PA Cabinet expressed support for the Egyptian 
initiative to end hostilities.  Press reported that HAMAS rejected 
the UNSC-endorsed cease-fire.  End summary. 
 
Ground Operation Continues, 
Focus in Northern Gaza 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Gaza-based sources, local press, and NGOs report that the 
IDF continued operations January 8-9 in the northern Gaza Strip, 
around Gaza City, Bayt Lahiya, Bayt Hanun, and Jabaliya, as well as 
around Khan Yunis.  The IDF maintained positions from Nahal Oz to 
the coast, cutting northern Gaza off from the rest of the Strip; 
east of the defunct Rafah airport; and northeast of al-Burayj 
refugee camp. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) According to Gaza-based contacts and local press, the 
heaviest fighting January 8-9 took place in northern Gaza, where IDF 
troops engaged militants near Bayt Hanun, Bayt Lahiya, Jabaliya, and 
on the outskirts of Gaza City.  Clashes were also reported in Dayr 
al-Balah, and on the outskirts of the southern city of Khan Yunis. 
 
 -- Gaza-based contacts reported intense fighting in the eastern 
Gaza City neighborhoods of al-Tufah and al-Zaytun; 
 
 -- Israeli press reported that the Golani Infantry Brigade clashed 
with HAMAS militants in the northern Gaza Strip; 
 
 -- the Kfir Infantry Brigade came under attack in the area of the 
former Netzarim settlement January 7, where the IDF reported the 
first use of an anti-tank missile by HAMAS; 
 
 -- the Paratroopers Brigade was reported operating around the 
northern Gaza town of al-Atatra; 
 
 -- clashes reportedly took place in Abasan, al-Qarara, and Khan 
Yunis early on January 9, as the IDF continued to move around Khan 
Yunis. 
 
[Note:  Post is now reporting IDF unit-level activity as best we can 
for Leahy Act purposes.  End note.] 
 
Airstrikes and Naval Barrage Continue 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Gaza-based sources, local press, and the UN reported 
that the IAF and Israeli Navy struck at least 30 targets January 
8-9, hitting offices, police stations, and homes.  Most of the 
targets were in and around Gaza City, with other strikes in the 
central Gaza cities of Nusayrat and Shaykh al-Maghazi.  At least ten 
militants were killed.  The IAF also dropped leaflets over Rafah and 
Jabaliya, warning residents to leave the area in advance of military 
operations. 
 
Rocket Fire Causes Four Injuries 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Israeli media reported at least seven rockets fired into 
Israel from Gaza before 1300 local on January 9.  At least four of 
the rockets were Grad-type rockets, and struck fields near Beer 
Sheva.  Four injuries were reported after a mortar landed within the 
Eshkol Regional Council limits.  Reports said a total of 25 rockets 
were fired from Gaza on January 8. 
 
Casualties 
---------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) UN OCHA reported that that at least 758 Palestinians have 
been killed since hostilities began through January 9, including 257 
children, 56 women, and 12 paramedics.  Of the reported 3,100 
injured, 1,080 are children and 452 are women.  The ICRC reported 
that 683 bodies have been transported to hospitals it supports in 
Gaza, and, of the 3,070 wounded being treated in those hospitals, 
one-third are women and children.  Gaza-based health officials 
reported to press that 776 have died thus far.  The UN reported that 
the danger to medical staff and the difficulty of extracting the 
 
JERUSALEM 00000091  002 OF 002 
 
 
injured from collapsed buildings makes proper evacuation and 
estimation of casualties difficult. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Israeli media reported three soldiers killed in action on 
January 8, bringing the total Israeli military casualties to ten 
dead and 107 wounded since hostilities began. 
 
Humanitarian Situation 
---------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) A humanitarian pause began January 9 at noon, expected to 
last through 1500 local.  Kerem Shalom is opened, but because UNRWA 
and the ICRC have suspended their movements in Gaza, the crossing is 
expected to handle only private sector trucks. 
 
Political Developments 
---------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The PA Cabinet released a statement on 8 January calling 
for an end to hostilities.  The statement also offered support to 
President Mubarak's cease-fire initiative.  The PA also called on 
Israel to ensure the availability of food, water, and medical 
supplies to the residents of Gaza. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Israeli press reported that statements by HAMAS leaders 
in Syria and Lebanon indicated that the faction is unwilling to 
accept the UNSC call for a cease-fire. 
 
West Bank Reactions and Security 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Demonstrations are being held in towns throughout the 
West Bank and in East Jerusalem on January 9.  HAMAS called on West 
Bank residents to demonstrate after Friday prayers, declaring 
January 9 a "day of rage."  PASF officials declared a special state 
of alert and reported that they would work to keep demonstrations 
peaceful and prevent clashes with the IDF. 
 
 -- Thousands of Israeli police deployed around Jerusalem early on 
the morning of January 9 to ensure calm during Friday prayers at the 
al-Aqsa Mosque.  The GoI prevented males over the age of 50 from 
entering the Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount compound; 
 
 -- two Palestinians throwing Molotov cocktails near Hebron were 
injured by rubber bullets when the IDF fired on them; and 
 
 -- dozens of women and children suffered from teargas inhalation 
while protesting at the separation barrier near the town of Bil'in. 
 
WALLES