09KABUL642
Paktika Governor Continues Outreach to Districts
Wed Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #0642/01 0771157
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181157Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7828
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 000642 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV AF
 
SUBJECT: Paktika Governor Continues Outreach to Districts 
 
REF: Kabul 515 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU): Paktika's new governor, Abdul Qayum Katawazay, continues a 
strong push to establish his effectiveness and assure the tribes of 
Paktika that he will serve all the province's tribes equitably.  In 
recent meetings with the leaders of Orgun, Khair Kot, and 
neighboring districts, the governor and other provincial officials 
accompanying him responded to the people's concerns about lack of 
adequate health, education, and agricultural services.  Katawazay 
has confided to PRT his desire to move forward with broad 
reconciliation initiatives in concert with Paktika's tribal leaders 
and his need for Embassy assistance in this effort.  As anticipated 
before Katawazay's arrival, some Paktika figures have expressed 
unhappiness with the new leadership because of his tribe or his 
background; on the whole, however, Katawazay appears to be off to a 
good start, with visits to additional districts planned for the 
coming weeks. 
 
Orgun and Sarobi Leaders call for Health, 
Agriculture, and Education Assistance 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On March 10, PRT Paktika facilitated Governor Katawazay's 
travel by air to Orgun, the province's largest town, and accompanied 
him to an outdoor meeting of some 150 tribal and religious leaders 
from Orgun and neighboring Sarobi districts.  Orgun district 
administrator Azizullah opened the meeting and complained that 
Orgun, despite having good security conditions in relation to the 
rest of the province, does not receive enough development projects. 
He listed needs for more teachers; more clinics, doctors, and 
medical equipment; irrigation systems; animal clinics and 
veterinarians; paving of the road from Orgun through Ziruk district 
and north to Khost province; and programs for orphans, widows, and 
youth.  Shura members from Orgun and Sarobi districts, the director 
of the Orgun hospital, and the Orgun prosecutor (one of only two in 
Paktika) echoed these concerns, while a respected former mujaheddin 
commander from the Zadran tribe, Zakim Khan, called on the people 
and the tribes to take more responsibility for solving their 
problems.  (Comment: Despite these complaints of lack of projects, 
Orgun has in fact benefited from many PRT and maneuver unit projects 
and the PRT is very focused on development in the district.) 
 
¶3.  (U) Governor Katawazay responded directly to the concerns 
raised, dividing the major problems into security and economic 
development.  Katawazay said ANSF would carry out more patrols and 
ambushes to counter enemy activity, stressed the need for secular 
and religious schools to deter youth from joining enemy forces, and 
called on the people to deny refuge to the Taliban.  He also noted 
the PRT's support for projects in the area, such as the Orgun 
hospital and paving of the Sharana-Orgun road (a major project that 
has faced security-related delays).  In response to closing remarks 
by the maulawi (religious leader) of the Orgun mosque, Katawazay 
took the podium a second time to pledge, as he had previously in 
Yusuf Khel district (reftel), that CF and ANSF would coordinate on 
house searches, while detainees should not be released 
unconditionally but only upon review of their cases.  Provincial 
Council Chairman Nawab Waziri called for national unity to overcome 
the challenges facing Afghanistan.  He recalled the historical role 
of the tribes of Paktika in providing security and urged tribal and 
religious leaders to work together to solve their problems and 
participate in the development of the province. 
 
Khair Kot Region Echoes Concerns 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Many of the same themes emerged in the Governor's meeting in 
Khair Kot district, which attracted an estimated 800 participants 
from Khair Kot and neighboring Yaya Khel, Baki Khel, Shakhilabad, 
and Khushamond districts.  Leaders from these districts likewise 
raised low education levels, insufficient medical facilities, and 
agricultural problems as their greatest challenges, as well as lack 
of support from the central government.  They expressed great 
enthusiasm for the appointment of a member of the local Suleimankhel 
(Pashtun) tribe as governor, calling it an historic moment.  The 
local ANA battalion commander noted that the tribal leaders spoke 
well about supporting the government and contributing to security, 
yet improvised explosive devices (IEDs)continued to be placed on the 
road leading from Sharana to Khair Kot despite the tribes' 
responsibility to prevent such enemy activity. 
 
¶5.  (U) PC Chairman Waziri praised the proud history of the 
Suleimankhel and repeated his call for unity among the tribes.  He 
noted that a large portion of funds spent on National Solidarity 
Program projects in Paktika was wasted or mishandled and called on 
the people to be good stewards of all development projects, 
including those of the PRT and Coalition Forces. 
 
Governor Supports Obama's Reconciliation Message; 
Asks for Support 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6.  (U) Governor Katawazay reiterated in Khair Kot his messages on 
security and development, as well as house searches and detainees, 
noting that he had heard Taliban were pressuring tribal leaders to 
come to his office to demand release of detainees.  He urged the 
people to send their children to school as the new school year 
begins this month and assured them that school books in use are 
consistent with Islam.  He emphasized that he intends to serve all 
the tribes of Paktika fairly.  He also expressed support for 
President Obama's recent remarks regarding talking with reconcilable 
Taliban.  Privately, Katawazay told State PRT Officer that various 
tribal leaders had approached him regarding reconciliation with 
Taliban belonging to their tribes, and he asked for the Embassy's 
support in developing an initiative to move forward in coordination 
with the Afghan government. 
 
A Homecoming and Family Ties 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) On the return trip to Sharana, Governor Katawazay requested 
a stop in his hometown of Seygana Village, Khair Kot district, to 
visit his relatives still living there. Hundreds of villagers came 
out to see the convoy, and many talked to PRT.  While in the 
village, PRT learned from the local school director that the Seygana 
village girls' school has 500 students -- a rare success for girls' 
education in Paktika -- and two of the Governor's sisters teach 
there.  Governor Katawazay is related to other important local 
figures, including the district administrator and mayor of Khair 
Kot, and his brother is the NDS chief for Orgun district.  He has 
also brought a brother on as a tribal affairs advisor. 
 
A Few Sour Notes, but Outlook Positive 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Before Katawazay's official appointment, PRT heard of 
widespread concerns based on his affiliation with one of the 
province's tribes and his activities during the time of the Soviet 
occupation.  Since his arrival, one line director (Labor and Social 
Affairs) has requested to resign, although his resignation has not 
yet been accepted.  Another hinted to PRT that the governor 
appointed a difficult new deputy director (a tribal leader from 
Khair Kot district, also named Katawazay) to encourage him to resign 
as well.  The district administrator of one district recently 
complained about the governor's communist-era activities. 
(Katawazay graduated from the military college in Kabul in 1986 and 
is presumed to have worked for the security services during the 
Soviet occupation; this may be why his office has yet to provide a 
biography covering that period.)   While somewhat distanced by his 
professional career from the Paktika grassroots (he acknowledged to 
PRT upon his arrival, for example that he was not accustomed to 
wearing a turban), Katawazay is working hard to reach out to all the 
province's major tribes.  In addition to his own engagements, he has 
also put in place a new deputy governor, Jum Mohammad, from the 
eastern Zadran tribe.  Katawazay's approach appears to be working 
thus far.  PRT will continue to assist him in reaching out to the 
districts, with additional trips planned for the coming weeks. 
 
¶9.  (U) PRT Commander has reviewed this cable. 
 
WOOD