09KABUL705
Herat: Iran Support for Afghan Rail and Air Service
Mon Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO7033
RR RUEHDBU
DE RUEHBUL #0705 0821141
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231141Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7888
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE 0046UNCLAS KABUL 000705 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM, NEA/IR 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM AF IR
 
SUBJECT: Herat: Iran Support for Afghan Rail and Air Service 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Herat Governor Nuristani discounted recent press reports 
that suggested the railroad from Khaf City in Iran to Herat City in 
Afghanistan is 60-90 percent completed.  Iran pledged to assist 
Afghanistan in building the rail line for 60 km from the border 
towards Herat, and many of the culverts, bridges, and railbeds in 
this area have been constructed.  However, Afghanistan has not taken 
any steps to meet its pledge to build the final 50 km of railway 
leading into Herat.  Governor Nuristani is seeking funding from the 
Afghan central budget, but speculated that Iran might pay the Afghan 
share to complete the rail line.  Additionally, a new air service is 
set to begin March 24 between Herat and Mahhad, Iran. 
 
Iran's Share of Rail Line is Progressing 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Governor Nuristani and his Executive Office Implementation 
Director, Asiluddin Jami, told the State PRT Representative that 
work had progressed on the 180 km rail line between Herat, 
Afghanistan and Khaf City in Iran, but discounted the press reports 
suggesting the rail link is nearing completion.  The problem, he 
said, is the Afghan side of the funding requirements.  Iran is 
funding the segment being built in Iran to the Afghan border, and 
the first 60 km on the Afghan side of the border.  The Governor said 
that work is continuing on this Afghan segment, with many culverts, 
bridges, and railbeds constructed.  A key worry for the Iran side is 
security for personnel and the completed infrastructure.  The 
Iranian Consul had been in to see the Governor three times in the 
past month pressing on security issues. 
 
GIRoA Rail Activities are Non-existent 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The GIRoA is responsible for funding the final 50 km of 
rail line inside Afghanistan, which would bring the railroad to the 
western approaches of Herat city.  Work on this segment is virtually 
non-existent, the Governor said.  To date, the GIRoA has not 
budgeted any funds for the project nor purchased railroad right of 
way on the land.  The Governor said he dispatched officials from the 
provincial Public Works Department recently to Kabul to ensure that 
approximately two million dollars is earmarked for this project in 
the Afghan budget.  He speculated, though, that Iran might foot the 
bill for this segment as well. 
 
New Air Connections between Herat and Mahhad 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) In addition to the new rail line, travel agent Ariana may 
begin weekly direct lights from Kabul to Herat to Mahhad, Iran as 
early as Tuesday, March 24, the first Tuesday in the Afghan new 
year.  Return route would likely be Mashhad to Kabul to Herat, with 
the possibility of another stop in the north, perhaps Mazar-e 
Sharif.  Ariana Airlines reportedly will use a 727 Boeing aircraft, 
with a passenger capacity varying from 108 to 155.  Parastoo Travel 
Agency, an Iranian tourism agency, will issue tickets once 
passengers obtain a visa from the Iranian consulate.  The Afghan 
Border Police (ABP) based at Herat Airport will be responsible for 
security checks, but they have not received any special equipment or 
guidelines yet. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Completion of the rail line will significantly augment the 
commercial, political, and social ties between Iran, western 
Afghanistan, and Central Asia.  According to statements by senior 
leaders, long-term plans include tying together by rail Herat and 
Maimana in Faryab province and eventually across northern 
Afghanistan to connect with Tajikistan.  However, that is a much 
bigger investment traversing more difficult topography and some 
presently insecure areas.  The progression of the rail line is 
another manifestation of Iran's expansion of its historical ties to 
the region, but as demonstrated by the Iranian Consul's 
preoccupation with security on the first segment inside Afghanistan, 
Iran's activities in Afghanistan are also limited by instability and 
criminal activities. 
 
WOOD