09KABUL2438
GOVERNOR WAHIDI HOSTS TIMBER CONFERENCE IN KUNAR
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6945
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #2438/01 2320925
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200925Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0956
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002438 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS USAID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EAGR EAID AF ECON
SUBJECT: GOVERNOR WAHIDI HOSTS TIMBER CONFERENCE IN KUNAR 
 
 ¶1.   (SBU) SUMMARY: On July 28, Kunar Governor Wahidi 
convened a shura of timber merchants, land owners, and tribal 
elders with three key GIRoA ministers to promote his vision 
for the future of Kunar,s timber industry, including a halt 
to smuggling and the disposition of massive existing timber 
stockpiles.  No immediate solutions were outlined but the 
event demonstrated the Afghan government,s determination to 
address the issue and hinted at the possible release of the 
sequestered timber stockpiles following national elections on 
August 20.  The GIRoA ministers seized the opportunity to 
talk directly to tribal elders about development in the 
province, including power, education, health, and 
agriculture.  Some radio commentators and local leaders were 
skeptical, calling the event a campaign stop, but most 
expressed optimism that development would be accelerated 
early in the new administration. 
 
¶2.    (SBU) Comment: The timing of the meeting, coupled with 
the announced approval of a Kunar university and hospital the 
day following the conference, had a strong tinge of electoral 
politics to it, but the event did provide a needed 
opportunity to move the timber problem onto the national 
stage. End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) Governor Wahidi hosted a ministerial-level conference 
on timber in Kunar,s capital city, Asadabad, on July 28. 
Among the GIRoA attendees, were the ministers of Finance, 
Commerce, and Agriculture, along with the Deputy Minister for 
Administration and Finance at the Independent Directorate for 
Local Governance (IDLG), and the Directors General for the 
National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) and Customs. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Governor brought the senior delegation together 
with Kunar timber trade association representatives, 
landowners (of land where stockpiles are currently located), 
and tribal elders to discuss the ongoing timber 
sequestration.  Wahidi,s stated goal was to promote his 
vision for the future of a licit Kunar timber industry, 
including a halt to smuggling and the need for the 
disposition of massive existing timber stockpiles confiscated 
by the government in 2005.  Provincial officials and timber 
barons sought to convince GIRoA that the government,s 
current policy of inaction has a negative effect on economic 
growth and longer-term stability. Wahidi also argued that 
Asadabad is particularly affected by stagnant timber depots 
that litter the capital city, pose a dangerous fire hazard, 
and occupy land that could be used for additional 
infrastructure and commercial activities.  Timber traders 
warned that the stockpiles are decreasing in value as a 
result of exposure to the elements, and are therefore a 
wasted valuable commodity in a very poor province. 
 
¶5. (SBU) GIROA officials agreed with local leaders, in 
principle, that timber stockpiles should be sold, with timber 
&owners8 reaping the majority of revenue.  Minister of 
Finance Zakhilwal asked tribal elders to engage their 
constituencies over the next month to support the current ban 
on tree cutting and smuggling.  Zakhilwal agreed to work with 
the cabinet to consider a resolution after the completion of 
national elections.  Minister of Agriculture Rahimi reported 
that the cabinet approved a new draft timber law, inter alia, 
establishing a forestry service.  This draft is now before 
parliament. 
 
¶6. (SBU) During their public addresses, both Zakhilwal and 
Rahimi used the opportunity to note the government,s plans 
for further development in Kunar province, including a 
university, a 100 bed hospital, the provision of additional 
electricity, and assistance with agricultural production. 
While these issues were off-topic, Zakhilwal tied them in as 
other elements that will help Kunar,s longer-term stability. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Some radio commentators and local leaders expressed 
skepticism about the ministers, visit to Kunar, noting that 
the event resembled a campaign stop for President Karzai,s 
development team but produced no results.  In spite of the 
skepticism, most of Kunar,s businessmen and tribal elders 
were pleased to see top GIRoA officials in Kunar and 
optimistic that the government will make an effort to resolve 
the timber issue once elections are completed. 
 
¶8. (SBU) BACKGROUND: Timber has long been one of Kunar,s 
most treasured natural resources; however, forests were 
excessively depleted beginning with a country-wide population 
boom in the 1960s.  The wartime conditions that followed led 
to unregulated and widespread cutting, and no reforestation. 
A government ban on cutting and transport of the commodity, 
mostly over environmental concerns, has led to a 
sophisticated black market dominated by Kunari and Pakistani 
 
KABUL 00002438  002 OF 002 
 
 
&timber mafia.8  The international community remains 
concerned that the current situation is contributing to 
further environmental degradation, an atmosphere of 
lawlessness, and direct or indirect financial support of the 
insurgency.  Draft timber legislation, which the Minister of 
Agriculture hopes to see pass soon, provides a long-term 
framework for sustainable community management of 
Afghanistan,s timber resources, if sufficient law 
enforcement assets are allocated to it. 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT: Wahidi,s timber conference was a success 
in bringing the issue onto the national stage and raising 
social awareness.  The absence of the Minister of Interior 
was unfortunate; law enforcement and corruption issues 
surrounding timber smuggling remain key challenges.  While 
GIRoA officials were likely enticed to attend as part of 
their campaign efforts for President Karzai, the event sets 
the stage for future engagement.  Announcements by the 
national government of a Kunar university and hospital on the 
day following the timber event lacked substance and 
reinforced the suggestion that the shura was mainly about 
electoral politics.  Governor Wahidi will need to keep GIRoA 
focused on the timber issue through the elections.  Changes 
in provincial leadership as well as cabinet ministers could 
slow progress, and local leaders will also need to continue 
pushing the issue. Kunar politics remain interesting: 
Governor Wahidi invited a well known timber smuggler (and 
provincial strongman) to deliver a gift to the Minister of 
Commerce at the conclusion of the day,s activities. 
Perhaps, the gift-giving will play a small part in 
encouraging a GIRoA decision on the disposition of the timber 
stockpiles by late September, should the key minister remain 
in place.  END COMMENT. 
 
EIKENBERRY