09KABUL2009
HELMAND: GARMSIR SHURA SUPPORTS ISAF FORCES
Thu Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO4366
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #2009/01 2040739
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230739Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0323
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 7581
RUEHAH/AMEMBASSY ASHGABAT 5695UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002009 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM, INL/AP 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
NSC FOR WOOD 
OSD FOR WILKES 
CENTCOM FOR USFOR-A COS, CG CJTF-101 POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PHUM AF
 
SUBJECT: HELMAND: GARMSIR SHURA SUPPORTS ISAF FORCES 
 
REF: Kabul 1737, Kabul 1677 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On July 13, Governor Mangal visited Garmsir 
district for the first time since the Marine Expeditionary Brigade's 
(MEB) arrival on July 2, opening a major USAID project and holding a 
well-attended shura with local elders.  Atmospherics were very 
positive.  Approximately 350-400 elders attended the shura, and 
several of them spoke to the crowd encouraging reconciliation and 
urging the people to resist the Taliban and help identify Improvised 
Explosive Devices (IEDs).  National Directorate of Security (NDS) 
Chief General Naim drew on parallels from the life of Prophet 
Muhammad to illustrate the acceptability of working with non-Muslims 
toward common goals, and highlighted the sacrifices of ISAF forces 
fighting on behalf of Afghan civilians.  Governor Mangal gave 
well-received remarks noting reconstruction achievements and the 
contributions of ISAF forces to Garmsir's security.  Mangal traveled 
with several local media who filmed and recorded each segment of the 
trip.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On July 13, Governor Mangal flew to Garmsir district 
center accompanied by NDS Chief General Naim, State and USAID PRT 
officers, and local media.  The trip began with Mangal touching down 
at FOB Delhi for a brief from the Marines and from local ANP and ANA 
chiefs.  The briefing included maps of areas under MEB control and 
of insurgent contact.  The group then mounted MRAPs and drove to the 
site of USAID's "Drop 8" sluice gate rebuild project.  Mangal, 
accompanied by local notables and press, cut the ceremonial ribbon 
and announced the completion of the project.  While at the Drop 8 
site, piles of wheat chaff could be seen dotting the surrounding 
fields, indicating that these fields did not grow poppy last 
season. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) From FOB Delhi the group moved to the District Center 
building for the shura.  Around 350-400 elders were already in place 
seated in the inner courtyard when Mangal arrived.  Helmand NDS 
Chief General Naim gave the first set of remarks and spoke at length 
about reconciliation and other topics.  He drew on numerous 
parallels from the life of the prophet Muhammad to illustrate that, 
just as Muhammad had worked closely with non-believers, it is 
likewise good to embrace non-believers (ISAF, in this case) who are 
friendly and work with them towards common goals.  He emphasized 
that the Taliban practice of destroying clinics and bridges does not 
demonstrate Islam or jihad, and encouraged the elders to report IED 
locations to the NDS, noting that it is mainly Afghans who are 
killed by them.  He stressed that all ISAF operations in Helmand are 
approved by Governor Mangal.  Naim seemed to strike a chord with the 
audience when he said, "Foreigners are not like Afghans; while we 
have ten sons they only have one, but they will send their only sons 
to Afghanistan to fight the Taliban for your security."  His remarks 
appeared well-received as numerous elders sitting close to the 
podium (and thus more important) nodded at as he emphasized his 
points. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) An elderly local mullah, so frail he had to cling to the 
podium to remain upright, told Mangal that the people of Garmsir are 
happy with the security brought by the Marines and asked the 
governor to keep responding to security issues, such as the unsafe 
road north to Nawa and Lashkar Gah.  Three Garmsir tribal elders 
then spoke in sequence.  Haji Abdul Samad Khan urged people to use 
the shura as an opportunity to share their views with the governor 
about security and development.  Haji Adam Khan argued that 
reconciliation with Taliban commanders is the way to solve the 
conflict, and said GIRoA must deliver with security and development. 
 Haji Adam Khan concluded his speech by saying "don't tell me about 
tribe or language, tell me about honesty and truth."  A third elder 
gave a lengthy address urging people to shun foreign fighters and be 
willing to help the government implement security by not sheltering 
Taliban fighters. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Mawlawi Meherdi, a Lashkar Gah-based mullah closely allied 
with Mangal, told the assembled elders that the government would 
provide for them but that they must not help the Taliban.  He said 
IEDs are illegal and against Islam.  He asked rhetorically how the 
Taliban can continue to tax people if only the elected government 
has that right because it provides services in return.  Mawlawi 
concluded with a forceful statement condemning suicide bombings as 
haram (forbidden in Islam). 
 
¶6. (SBU) Governor Mangal then took to the podium and was roundly 
applauded.  Mangal praised the elders' attendance and offered his 
condolences for members of their families lost to mines and IEDs in 
Garmsir.  He then gave an overview of the operations in Babaji 
(British Area of Operations), Basharan, Nawa, Garmsir, and Khanashin 
 
KABUL 00002009  002 OF 002 
 
 
districts, noting the very low civilian casualty numbers and light 
damage to compounds.  Mangal said rebuilding schools, clinics and 
roads are the key goals once security is sufficiently established in 
Garmsir, and insisted the Marines would stay for the long term.  He 
noted the completion of Drop 8, as well as other improvements over 
the last year to the district center and local roads.  Mangal told 
the crowd he would send 100 tons of wheat to Garmsir (Note:  the PRT 
is working with Mangal's office and the MEB on the logistics for 
this), and thanked the PRT (State Department in particular) for 
providing the prayer rugs he distributed to local mosques ahead of 
the shura.  Mangal described his signature "Food Zone" project to 
discourage poppy production by providing wheat seed that was 
successful last year, and stated that he will extend the project to 
include 4,220 families in Garmsir for 2009. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Mangal spoke briefly about the upcoming election, 
encouraging the elders and mullahs to send their families and those 
in their villages to vote for their choice for president.  He asked 
that they vote for a good, honest candidate who would be best for 
Afghanistan's future. 
 
EIKENBERRY