09KABUL515
New Paktika Governor Makes First District Visit
Sat Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3160
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0515 0660732
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070732Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7635
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 000515 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
NSC FOR WOOD 
OSD FOR WILKES 
CG CJTF-101 POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM AF
 
SUBJECT: New Paktika Governor Makes First District Visit 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Governor Katawazy, in office since mid-February, used his 
first trip out to a neighboring district to build relations with the 
local tribe, solicit their continued support for the government and 
urge them to encourage reconciliation in their area.  The elders in 
turn took sharp aim at house searches by international forces and 
sought the governor's help in constraining such actions.  That the 
governor was given such an earful so close to his capital raises the 
question of what he might hear when he gets an opportunity to travel 
further afield to the many more insecure parts of his province. 
 
A First Foray 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Newly appointed Paktika Governor Katawazay made his first 
foray out into the districts to meet with local leaders on March 2. 
Accompanied by National Directorate of Security (NDS) Provincial 
Chief Mohammad Yaseen, Governor Katawazay - who reportedly faced 
strong opposition to his recent appointment - attended the 
Suleimankhel tribal shura in Yusuf Khel district to discuss the 
concerns of district tribal elders.  The shura took place in the 
Yusuf Khel District Center compound, and was attended by 
approximately 250 tribal leaders and residents from the surrounding 
area. 
 
Reconciliation Raised in Priority District 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Yusuf Khel district is located in northwestern Paktika, just 
south of the capital district of Sharana, and is the first district 
Governor Katawazay has visited since his arrival on February 14. 
This district is a priority area for the PRT, with rehabilitation 
and improvement of a dam and ancillary irrigation systems, road 
construction, and other projects planned or underway. 
 
¶4. (U) Governor Katawazay delivered a short speech emphasizing that 
his top priority for Paktika is security.  He encouraged the leaders 
of the Suleimankhel tribe to maintain their constructive support and 
improve stability throughout Paktika province.  The governor also 
commented that President Karzai is offering the Taliban the 
opportunity to reconcile with the GIRoA, and he encouraged the 
audience to support reconciliation at the village and district 
levels throughout the province. 
 
More Afghan/CF Coordination and Development 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The tribal leaders in turn offered their full support to help 
GIRoA.  At the same time, the elders requested that Governor 
Katawazay help reduce the number of non-coordinated compound 
searches, and recommended all searches be conducted with at least 
one tribal elder and/or a mullah from the village.  Taza Gul, one of 
the tribal leaders, said the people of Paktika will no longer 
tolerate the foreign fighters' "oppression" and that they are all 
ready to stand together with GIRoA to help facilitate the 
implementation of more development projects.  Ismatullah, the 
education director of Yusuf Khel District, urged the people to 
support educational projects and help the populace of Paktika become 
educated and serve their country and province. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) This trip was fairly standard for governor-tribal 
engagements these days, including the complaints about house 
searches.  The PRT will monitor how well the new governor manages 
such concerns and any resulting tensions.  That he received such an 
earful in such a relatively secure area so close to the provincial 
capital suggests the challenges he will face in this regard when he 
travels further afield out into decidedly insecure areas of Paktika. 
 
 
DELL