09KHARTOUM191
UNAMID DEPLOYMENT UPDATE, FEBRUARY 10
Tue Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9727
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0191/01 0411501
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101501Z FEB 09 ZDK CTG NUMEROUS SERVICES
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2957
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 000191 
 
DEPT FOR AF A A/S CARTER, AF/SPG, AF/C, IO 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: UNAMID DEPLOYMENT UPDATE, FEBRUARY 10 
 
REFS: A) KHARTOUM 142 
B) KHARTOUM 89 
C) 08 KHARTOUM 1810 
D) 08 KHARTOUM 1726 
 
KHARTOUM 00000191  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  As of February 5 the total number of UNAMID 
military personnel was 12,547, or just over 64 percent of the total 
authorized force strength.  DPKO is pressing UNAMID to facilitate 
the deployment of an Ethiopian attack helicopter company a soon as 
possible, but construction of adequate facilities may take three 
months per UNAMID (post estimates six months) once approval is 
received from the GOS.  The contingent-owned equipment shipping 
pipeline will remain active with units deploying continuously over 
the next six months.  The State Department-funded airlift of COE via 
PAE (subcontracted to Norse Air) is moving forward as planned.  On 
February 8, National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) lifted 
travel restrictions on UNAMID travel to Muhajaria and senior UNAMID 
staff visited Muhajaria and Labado on February 9.  Early indications 
are that the damage to Muhajaria was minimal, but worse in Labado 
and Graida. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Between February 5 and 8 Poloff spoke with the following 
UNAMID officials: Col. Noddy Stafford, Chief of Military Plans; 
Michael Fryer, Police Commissioner; Lt. Col. Andrew Moeti, Staff 
Officer for Operational Plans; Col. Hussein Al Hasan, Formed Police 
Unit (FPU) Coordination Officer; and Mostasem Atoum, FPU 
Coordinator. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Stafford reported that as of February 5, the total number 
of UNAMID military personnel was 12,547, or just over 64 percent of 
the total authorized force strength.  UNAMID is focusing on 
importing equipment to enhance the capacity of forces already on the 
ground.  Stafford noted that the goal of 80 percent personnel 
deployment by March 31 has been removed from most UN deployment-plan 
documents coming from DPKO. 
 
Anticipated Military Arrivals 
----------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Troop increases are anticipated over the next four to six 
weeks as the South African, Senegalese and Egyptian battalions will 
each increase from 650 troops to 800 troops.  The South African 
Battalion will augment their troops already in Kutum, Melit and 
Malha.  (Note: The camp in Malha was expected to close this spring, 
but UNAMID Force Commander General Martin Luthur Agwai  is reviewing 
decision as Mahla is the only camp in the northeastern area of North 
Darfur. End Note.)  The Senegalese will deploy to Tine and Um Barru 
but cannot move until expansion can be completed at both camps. 
UNAMID is making arrangements in El Geneina to house the incoming 
troops until camp expansion is completed in 30-60 days.  The 
Egyptian Battalion 1 agreed to deploy the last 150 members of their 
contingent to Um Kadada by the end of February. 
 
The Shipping Pipeline 
--------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) The State Department-funded airlift of COE via PAE 
(subcontracted to Sudanese company Norse Air) is moving forward as 
planned.  The contract started successfully on February 3 using 
L-100 aircraft.  Two sorties a day are taking vehicles and bulk 
items of up to two containers per load from El Obeid to El Geneina 
and from Nyala to El Geneina.  The contractor reported that there 
have been no problems and expects the short-term contract to 
continue as planned.   El Obeid and Nyala are still back-logged with 
equipment awaiting GoS escort while the GoS is presently preoccupied 
with rebel fighting in Sector South.  Three L-100 sorties each day 
are dedicated to move the remaining Nigerian Level II hospital 
equipment from El Obeid to El Geneina using the old gravel airfield. 
 Delivery will be complete this week.  The Egyptian Battalion 1 
should receive its final equipment in Um Kadada by mid-February. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Egyptian Battalion 2 Contingent-Owned Equipment (COE) is 
off-shore in a damaged ship but should arrive soon.  (Note:  UNAMID 
is paying demurrage of 20,000 USD per day until the problems are 
resolved.  End Note.)  COE for the Rwandan, Nigerian, Senegalese, 
and South African battalions is not yet in country but due to arrive 
equally parsed over the next few months.  Load lists for the 
Ethiopian Battalion 2 and the Senegalese Battalion 2 have been 
submitted to DPKO and Ethiopian Battalion 2 is organizing 
pre-deployment visits for the end of January and beginning of 
February.  However, load lists for the Senegalese Battalion 2, 
Burkina Faso 1, Thailand Battalion 1, and Tanzania Battalion 1 are 
still pending. 
 
¶7. (SBU) UNAMID's Priority of Movement has changed and is now: 1) 
Ethiopian Infantry APCs; 2) Ethiopian COE; 3) Nigerian FPU tents; 4) 
Egypt Battalion 2. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00000191  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Muhajaria 
--------- 
¶8. (SBU) Stafford stated that UNAMID has been unable to assess the 
area after the recent GoS/JEM fighting as officials had been 
repeatedly denied aviation clearances by the NISS.  On February 8, 
NISS lifted the restriction and Force Commander General Agwai and 
senior staff visited Muhajaria and Labado on February 9.  Initial 
assessments that UN Humanitarian Coordinator Ameerah Haq provided to 
CDA Fernandez February 9 indicate that the damage to Muhajaria may 
be minimal, but that there may have been more damage to the towns of 
Labado and Graida (septel).  UNAMID troops in Labado reported 
internally displaced persons (IDP) movement away from the Muhajariya 
area during the time of the fighting and the FPU at Zam Zam IDP camp 
in El Fasher reported receiving approximately 1,500 new IDPs.  The 
FPU Coordination Officer reported that more IDPs continue to arrive 
daily. 
 
Ethiopian Attack Helicopter Company 
----------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) Stafford and Moeti said DPKO is aggressively pressuring 
UNAMID to facilitate the deployment of an Ethiopian attack 
helicopter company as soon as possible.  UNAMID has determined that 
a GoS-owned area next to the existing airfield in Nyala is the best 
location for the company.  The issue will be raised at the next 
tri-partite (UN, AU, GOS) meeting in Khartoum on February 23. 
Meanwhile, UNAMID is coordinating with the Sudanese Civil Aviation 
Authority (SCAA) on the project pending final approval.  An initial 
assessment of the required facilities includes the need for 
approximately 300 square meters of construction including: 
 
- One open hardstand per helicopter (total five) 
- One helicopter hangar for all-weather maintenance 
- Flight office 
- Engineering office 
- Engine maintenance facility (with areas for transmission, 
hydraulics, avionics, instruments, and a 'clean room') 
- Weapons maintenance facility to include areas for gun, rocket, and 
missile maintenance, spare parts, and petroleum, oil, and lubricants 
(POL) 
- Explosives storage facilities surrounded by an earth wall and with 
appropriate safety distances away from other facilities 
 
¶10. (SBU) UNAMID expects the construction to take three months once 
the GoS grants permission and construction materials arrive in 
Darfur. Stafford voiced concern that the GoS may impose obstacles to 
the construction and deployment, as "the GoS doesn't want us to have 
the freedom" that a 24-hour capable quick-reaction force would 
provide. Of course, UNAMID could have begun to prepare such 
facilities for an eventual deployment long ago. 
 
FPUs to Hold Integrated Training Classes 
---------------------------------------- 
¶11. (SBU) Al Hussein announced a March 3 start date for an 
Integrated Training Program for all FPUs in the mission.  Each unit 
will train in El Fasher for one week of hands-on operational 
readiness planning that will stress roles and regulations.  The 
training will also include fire arms proficiency, first aid, and 
driving skills.  The Nigerian FPUs will start the training as they 
are the latest to arrive.  Training will be completed by platoon so 
as not to disrupt patrolling and will be conducted principally by 
three officers from the FPU Coordination Office. 
 
FPU Schedule and Movement 
------------------------- 
¶12. (SBU) UNAMID Police Commissioner Michael Fryer announced that 
the Jordanian FPUs 1 and 2 scheduled to deploy in February have been 
postponed to April and May respectively.  (Note: No reason was 
provided, but if the experience with the Egyptian FPU is any guide, 
it is likely due to the impending ICC indictment of President 
Bashir.  Contributing countries appear to want to delay deployments 
to see what the effect of the indictment will be on the situation in 
Darfur. End note.)  Al Hassan noted deployment and COE movement is 
flowing well with the exception of the Bangladeshi FPU 4 deployment 
to Greida.  The tentative site acceptance date was April but site 
expansion is taking longer than anticipated so the move has been 
indefinitely deferred.  The deployment of the Egyptian FPU has been 
controversial as many IDPs are disturbed at the prospect of Arab 
police in their camp.  To alleviate those fears, Fryer will direct 
the FPU to augment local police in El Fasher to provide added 
protection against vehicle theft. 
 
Assessment of FPU Capabilities 
------------------------------ 
¶13. (SBU) Fryer called the Indonesian FPU the "superstar" of the FPU 
community as they quickly integrated into the camp and have been 
recognized by IDPs for their abilities.  Al Hussein noted they are 
 
KHARTOUM 00000191  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the best-equipped of all the FPUs and their vehicles are in 
excellent condition.  Al Hussein also noted that although they are 
doing extremely well, he said at least 2-3 more FPUs are needed in 
El Fasher. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Fryer also had warm praise for the Nepalese FPU as they, 
too, were eagerly accepted into the IDP camps.  Bangladesh was noted 
as not being up to UN standards in fire arms proficiency and 
operational planning, but Fryer said the unit is improving.  Both 
Fryer and Al Hussein said the Nigerian FPUs are doing well.  On 
February 6, the Nigeria FPU 2 moved from Nyala to Zalingi and is 
setting up operations.  However, the unit deployed without 
bullet-proof vests so UNAMID is working with other units to try to 
procure vests "on loan" until Nigeria can send the vests with the 
next military rotation scheduled at the end of March. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Given the amount of time it has historically taken to gain 
approvals for projects, sign contracts, and complete construction, 
we urge some caution when gauging the three-month figure for 
UNAMID's readiness to accept the Ethiopian attack helicopter 
company.  In our experience, this is likely to take at least six 
months and UNAMID may have to come up with an interim location for 
the helicopters if DPKO demands that they deploy any sooner.  An 
interim solution will be difficult as the GOS is highly unlikely to 
sacrifice any of its own space (used for punitive air attacks 
against rebel held areas) at the Nyala airfield and will rely on 
UNAMID to construct new space.  It is hard to believe that UNAMID is 
not ready to receive the Ethiopian helicopters after complaining for 
a year about not having any military helicopters assets, but that is 
reflective of UNAMID management in general - only making 
arrangements once forced to do so by circumstances.  Skewering 
UNAMID over this is not helpful and will not speed up helicopter 
deployment, but is worth keeping in mind when gauging UNAMID's 
overall capacity and credibility. 
 
FERNANDEZ