09KHARTOUM589
SUDANESE GOVERNMENT BREAKS FROM HOSTILE STANCE TOWARDS NGOS
Mon May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5281
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0589/01 1240719
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 040719Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3689
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOA
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0044
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0123
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0308UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 000589 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A A/S CARTER, AF/C 
NSC FOR MGAVIN AND CHUDSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
BRUSSELS FOR PBROWN 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
UN ROME FOR HSPANOS 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: SUDANESE GOVERNMENT BREAKS FROM HOSTILE STANCE TOWARDS NGOS 
IN APRIL 30 MEETING 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 577 
B) KHARTOUM 555 
C) KHARTOUM 554 
 
KHARTOUM 00000589  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On April 30, Sudanese Presidential Advisor Dr. Ghazi 
Salahudin convened a rare meeting between international and national 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and senior Government of 
National Unity (GNU) officials to raise mutual concerns and identify 
ways to strengthen coordination between the government and NGOs. 
During the meeting, government officials took a conciliatory tone 
towards the NGOs, noting the government's appreciation of the 
organizations' work.  Dr. Salahudin also made several references to 
the government's discussions and negotiations with U.S. Special 
Envoy J. Scott Gration.  Dr. Salahudin expressed the government's 
willingness to comply with the framework negotiated between the 
National Congress Party and the Special Envoy in early April, as 
well as ensure its implementation at all levels of the government. 
The Presidential Advisor indicated that he had personally held 
discussions with all relevant high-level government officials to 
explain the framework and invited NGOs to share any potential issues 
with him.  Notably, Dr. Salahudin also announced that three of the 
expelled NGOs would be replaced and stated that he did not 
understand why the 2007 Joint Communique could not be applicable to 
all of Sudan.  (Embassy Khartoum suggests that latter of these 
proposals would be worth pursuing during the Special Envoy's next 
visit to Sudan, and as an item for further UN follow-up.)  While the 
meeting represented a significant step in establishing a positive 
relationship between the Sudanese Office of the President and NGOs, 
it is unclear whether this meeting will translate into immediate 
tangible improvements in the day-to-day operations of NGOs working 
in northern Sudan.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------- 
A New Approach 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The April 30 meeting between the government and NGOs was 
hosted by Sudanese Presidential Advisor Dr. Ghazi Salahudin, 
Minister of Humanitarian Affairs Dr. Haroun Lual Ruun (SPLM), and 
the Director of GNU Humanitarian Aid Commission's (HAC) NGO Section 
Ahmed Adam.  (Note:  Visibly absent from the meeting was GNU HAC 
Commissioner-General Hassabo Mohammed Abdel Rahman, who is 
reportedly out of the country and has not been present at several 
recent high-level meetings concerning the implementation of the 
Special Envoy's framework.  Post notes that the notorious Hassabo's 
absence from the meeting potentially represents a positive step in 
improving coordination between NGOs and the government and fostering 
a more positive tone towards NGOs in the media.  End Note.)  Unlike 
previous meetings with Hassabo, NGOs reported that the media was not 
present, which created a more favorable and open atmosphere for 
discussion. 
 
------------------------------ 
Statement by Minister Dr. Ruun 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (U) Throughout the meeting, the three government officials 
stressed the importance of mutual cooperation between the government 
and NGOs and took a more conciliatory tone towards NGOs, noting the 
government's appreciation of the organizations' work.  While 
indirectly alluding to the government's previous stance -- "some 
NGOs were involved in certain things that created this situation" -- 
Dr. Ruun noted that many NGOs are willingly cooperating with the 
government and conducting life-saving work, and stated that the 
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs (MOHA) had undertaken significant 
measures to help facilitate the work of NGOs.  During his statement, 
Dr. Ruun clarified that only a small group of NGOs were involved in 
behavior deemed unacceptable by the government and that NGOs should 
not fear a broadening of this generalization to include all NGOs. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Dr. Ruun noted that the Presidential Advisor's presence at 
 
KHARTOUM 00000589  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
the meeting confirmed the government's commitment to the Sudanese 
people not only at the MOHA-level, but also at the highest levels of 
the government.  (Note:  While the government's true commitment to 
implement the Special Envoy's framework and to facilitate 
humanitarian operations in Sudan remains unclear, Dr. Salahudin's 
presence marks the first high-level meeting with NGOs in at least 
two years.  This meeting is a very positive sign of the government's 
willingness to follow through on the Special Envoy's framework.  End 
Note.)  Dr. Ruun expressed the government's readiness to "join 
hands" with any international or national NGO wishing to work in 
Sudan without a hidden agenda. 
 
¶5.  (U) Regarding the current situation in Darfur, Dr. Ruun stated 
that "things are moving" and noted that he had observed progress 
during his recent trip to Darfur.  (Note:  Dr. Ruun has conducted 
three visits to Darfur since the early March NGO expulsions, 
particularly to explain and enforce the April 16 ministerial decree 
in the Darfur states.  End Note.)  Dr. Ruun closed his statement by 
re-iterating his thanks to NGOs for their contributions, as well as 
re-emphasized the government's commitment to facilitate the work of 
NGOs. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Statement by Presidential Advisor Dr. Salahudin 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Dr. Salahudin began by stating that the meeting provided 
an essential forum for the government to listen to NGOs and explore 
ways that the two groups could work together.  Although noting that 
he had relatively little prior knowledge of NGO operations, Dr. 
Salahudin stated that he had recently witnessed some NGO program 
implementation and was appreciative of NGOs' work.  Salahudin noted 
that prior to the expulsions, he was not aware that NGOs actually 
distributed the aid that the organizations brought into the country. 
 
 
¶7.  (U) Dr. Salahudin made several references to the government's 
discussions and negotiations with the Special Envoy, as well as 
implementation of the Special Envoy's framework.  Dr. Salahudin 
noted that the government and the Special Envoy had made an 
agreement which "reinforces some existing commitments but also new 
ways forward," indicating that the Special Envoy had already raised 
many of the NGOs' concerns in meetings with the government.  Since 
the negotiations in early April, Dr. Salahudin reported that he has 
been in contact with the two MOHA ministers to monitor progress on 
the agreement and explain procedural changes to other ministries. 
Dr. Salahudin indicated that he had personally held discussions with 
all relevant high-level officials to clarify the framework and 
ensure its full implementation.  Dr. Salahudin further noted that 
GNU Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs Ahmed Haroun is 
personally overseeing progress on implementation of the framework, 
particularly in the three Darfur states. 
 
¶8.  (U) Dr. Salahudin expressed optimism regarding the possibility 
for peace in Darfur, noting that the Special Envoy had made some 
progress in brokering a peace deal in Doha and expressing hope that 
the Government of Chad and armed opposition groups could reach a 
ceasefire agreement in the coming days.  However, the Presidential 
Advisor indicated that peace is currently a "possibility, not a 
probability."  Dr. Salahudin noted that once the peace process 
stabilizes Darfur, "handouts to IDPs could be stopped and real 
recovery/development work could begin."  While noting problems with 
forced returns, Dr. Salahudin indicated that the government's goal 
is to end IDP's dependency on aid and encourage IDP returns. 
 
¶9.  (U) Dr. Salahudin highlighted that improving the operating 
environment requires a two-way commitment on the part of both the 
government and NGOs.  Dr. Salahudin urged NGOs to explain the 
humanitarian situation without creating harm, noting that 
"activists" opposed to the government could exploit NGO reports that 
inadvertently portray the situation negatively.  However, Dr. 
Salahudin also noted that some high-level officials in the 
government and "unruly elements of the media" had negatively 
depicted NGOs, creating impediments to NGO operations.  Dr. 
Salahudin reiterated that both groups need to improve communications 
 
KHARTOUM 00000589  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
and cooperation to improve the operating environment. 
 
¶10.  (U) Prior to inviting the NGOs to ask questions, Dr. Salahudin 
re-asserted the government's commitment to previous agreements and 
highlighted the government's more active approach to ensuring 
implementation of these commitments.  While noting that the 
government's ultimate objective is the return of all IDPs, Dr. 
Salahudin stated that even in such a case, NGOs could continue 
working on reconstruction in Sudan. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) NGOs, including Medecines Sans Frontieres (MSF) and 
members of the NGO forum, welcomed the opportunity for the meeting 
as well as the issuance of the April 16 decree and reiterated the 
organizations' commitment to conduct operations based on 
humanitarian principles for as long as needs exist in Sudan.  In 
response to concerns regarding the Sudanization of aid, Dr. 
Salahudin reaffirmed that while the government is fully committed to 
nationalizing aid, this process is not meant to negate or undermine 
the work of international NGOs.  He stated that both the government 
and NGOs need to reconcile the other side's demands to work toward 
an appropriate solution.  In response to questions regarding the 
recent abduction of two Aide Medicale Internationale staff, Dr. 
Salahudin noted that the incidents were as embarrassing and painful 
to the government as to the NGOs.  Dr. Salahudin elaborated that "it 
is not good for us as a government to feel helpless and 
ineffectual."  The Presidential Advisor noted that the abductors 
should be tried and punished and indicated that the government would 
look into a role in protecting humanitarian workers.  (Note: The two 
international NGO staff who were abducted have since been released 
and have returned to their respective countries - septel. End 
note.) 
 
¶12.  (SBU) While acknowledging the importance of the MOHA visits to 
Darfur to clarify the April 16 decree, NGOs noted that state 
officials are not fully implementing the decree.  NGOs emphasized 
that communicating the decree at all levels of the government is 
necessary to ensure its full implementation.  Dr. Salahudin agreed, 
noting that the decree will take time to fully implement in the 
Darfur states due to significant distances and difficulties in 
communication.  In addition, Dr. Salahudin noted serious concerns 
with difficult junior-level officers who use "self importance" and 
unilateral decisions to obstruct facilitation of the government's 
commitments.  Prior to concluding the meeting, Dr. Salahudin stated 
that three of the expelled NGOs would be replaced and questioned why 
the Joint Communique could not be applicable to all of Sudan, as 
discussed during the Special Envoy's negotiations. 
 
¶13.  (U) In his closing remarks, Dr. Salahudin thanked the NGOs for 
their candor, stating that it was "good to hear such comments 
without glossing over the issues."  Dr. Salahudin invited NGOs to 
discuss issues, even those regarding NGO staff intimidation, 
directly with him in the future. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The April 30 meeting constitutes a significant departure 
from previous poisonous interaction between the government and NGOs, 
both in rhetoric and in tone.  In a change from the previous two 
years, government officials openly expressed appreciation for the 
role of NGOs in providing assistance and expressed willingness to 
cooperate with the organizations to improve the operating 
environment in Darfur.  While the meeting was a welcome development, 
it still remains unclear whether this "charm offensive" will lead to 
actual, palpable improvements in humanitarian operations on the 
ground. There have been some positive signs, such as the ministerial 
decree and Dr. Salahudin's meeting with the NGOs, but real 
improvements in the operating environment will only be observed over 
time.  There is a ministerial level meeting of the reconstituted 
Higher Level Committee in Khartoum May 7, which Special Envoy 
Gration and UN U/S John Holmes will attend, at which donors and NGOs 
will be able to discuss adherence to the 2007 Joint Communique, an 
agreement the GOS spent much of the past two years undermining, in 
greater detail. 
 
KHARTOUM 00000589  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
FERNANDEZ