09MOSCOW1138
30,000 DEMONSTRATORS DESCEND ON MOSCOW FOR MAY DAY
Mon May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO5656
RR RUEHDBU RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHSK RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #1138/01 1241405
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041405Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3135
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 001138 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM PINR KDEM ECON RS
SUBJECT: 30,000 DEMONSTRATORS DESCEND ON MOSCOW FOR MAY DAY 
 
¶1. (SBU) This message is sensitive but unclassified; please 
protect accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  On May Day, some 33 opposition groups, 
trade unions, and pro-government groups, numbering an 
estimated 30,000 individuals, took to the streets of Moscow. 
Protests were generally labor-related and focused on the 
economic crisis.  Approximately 5,000 Communist Party (KPRF) 
members marched through Moscow.  Similar protests occurred 
across Russia.  As in recent years, these May Day protests 
were planned well in advance and were highly controlled, 
leaving little room for true dissent.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On May 1, a number of demonstrations took place in 
Moscow, generally to protest against the economic crisis. 
Aside from United Russia, KPRF members held the largest event 
with an estimated 5,000 Communists marching through the 
streets of Moscow from the Statue of Lenin at Oktyabryskaya 
Square on the Southern side of the Garden Ring to the statue 
of Marx at Teatralnaya Square.  The pro-government United 
Russia, Just Russia, and Yabloko parties, and opposition 
groups like Solidarity, as well as trade unions, held 
separate protests.  Media reported on at least 33 rallies 
involving more than 30,000 people across Moscow.  Many Moscow 
city streets were closed as 6,600 policemen provided 
security. 
 
The Communist March and Rally 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) KPRF members and sympathizers marched through the 
streets of Moscow to celebrate the May Day holiday.  Marchers 
carried traditional banners calling on workers of the world 
to unite, as well as ones denouncing the current government 
as being opposed to the interests of the Russian people.  The 
event culminated in a rally at Moscow's Teatralnaya Square, 
where speakers, including KPRF leader Gennadiy Zyuganov, 
praised Russia's history, harshly criticized Russia's present 
leadership, while declaring many aspects of Russia life 
(including its tax system) to be the envy of the world. 
Other speakers read poetry about the glories of socialism. 
Marching behind the KPRF were members of the National 
Bolsheviks, the Left Front, and Autonomous Stalinists. 
According to police officials at the scene, the march went 
off without incident.  However, some new sources reported 
that some Left Front demonstrators were detained. 
 
Many Participants Remember the Good Old Days 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Many participants were pensioners who said they were 
marching to publicly denounce the present Russian government, 
the West, capitalism, and the financial crisis, among other 
things.  One pensioner said that she wanted to show the world 
that socialism is the wave of the future, as demonstrated by 
capitalism's failure during the financial crisis.  She said 
the capitalist West had been robbing and colonizing the rest 
of the world for over 50 years, as well as actively seeking 
to destroy first the Soviet Union and now Russia, and now was 
suffering the consequences.  Socialism, she said, would bring 
about a more equitable, just world, once implemented.  The 
current government, she said, should be forced to resign, as 
it was not adequately caring for the Russian people. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Other older participants lamented many changes that 
occurred in Russia since the end of communism, including the 
increase in crime, the rise in prices for many goods, and the 
perceived increase in corruption in Russia.  As the march 
proceeded across a bridge near Christ the Savior Cathedral, 
one older woman interrupted her description of life in Moscow 
during World War II to talk about how much she used to enjoy 
visiting the public swimming pool that was located where the 
cathedral currently stands.  She has never been inside the 
cathedral, and does not plan to go, she told us. 
 
¶7. (SBU) A small portion of the older demonstrators openly 
expressed their admiration for Josef Stalin.  One man 
carrying a portrait of Stalin said that all large industries 
should be nationalized, although small enterprises such as 
barbershops and bakeries could be left in private hands.  One 
woman wearing a baseball cap with "FBI" emblazoned across it 
carried a sign calling for Stalin's canonization.  When asked 
how it would be possible to canonize the former Soviet 
leader, she walked away. 
 
Little Youth Participation 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) While some children attended the event along with 
 
MOSCOW 00001138  002 OF 002 
 
 
their parents, few young adults were seen in the crowd.  None 
of the youth expressed anti-Western views, and some of them 
expressed interest in participating in the Summer Work and 
Travel program. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Members of the communist youth group "Red Hedgehog" 
marched carrying banners of revolutionary heroes such as Anka 
Pulemechiza, a character in Russian literature and movies, as 
well as calling for higher pay for doctors.  They said they 
joined the KPRF because socialism is far more just than 
capitalism.  Even though they work in private companies and 
wear blue jeans, sneakers, and other Western-style clothing, 
they said they hope to build a socialist future in Russia. 
(Note:  Red Hedgehog claims approximately 30 members.  Their 
website is located at http://ezovnik.narod.ru/ez/bc/.) 
 
Socialists of the World, Unite! 
------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Socialists from countries such as Greece and Turkey 
also joined the rally.  One man claiming to be the leader of 
a large Greek socialist youth group said that he came to 
Moscow specifically to watch the May Day event, but was very 
disappointed by the low turnout.  Some socialists from Turkey 
also attended the event because they "had some vacation time" 
and wanted to travel to Moscow. 
 
Pro-government Rallies 
---------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) United Russia staged a rally near Moscow city hall 
in which Moscow Mayor Luzhkov took part.  He called for 
nationalizing large enterprises and cutting the number of 
migrant workers (representatives of whom were reported to 
have participated in large part in Communist party-organized 
demonstrations).  In general, though, United Russia rallies, 
with approximately 25,000 people, kept it bland, calling for 
Russia to "move forward," for families to have more children, 
and for greater support for small and medium-sized 
businesses. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) In general, the day was marked peacefully.  With 
temperatures in the mid to high 40s on a sunny day, most 
people were enjoying the holiday by avoiding political 
activities. 
BEYRLE