09MOSCOW833
SCO CONFERENCE ON AFGHANISTAN
Thu Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO7303
PP RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHPW RUEHSK RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #0833/01 0920838
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 020838Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2670
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MOSCOW 000833 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER SNAR UN AF RS ZK
SUBJECT: SCO CONFERENCE ON AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Shanghai Cooperation Organization's 
(SCO) Special Conference on Afghanistan convened in Moscow 
March 27 to discuss the impact of terrorism and narcotics 
trafficking in Afghanistan on the country's neighbors, and 
intensifying international efforts to address these 
challenges.  The event brought together SCO member states, 
plus Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Iran, Turkey, the G-8 
countries, and representatives of the UN, EU, NATO, and other 
international organizations, all of whom pledged various 
forms of support, both real and rhetorical, to Afghanistan. 
Participation by a U.S. delegation headed by SCA DAS Moon 
marked the first formal U.S. engagement with the SCO, 
undertaken to demonstrate U.S. support for international 
efforts to assist Afghanistan.  The Russian organizers left 
no room in the formal proceedings for open discussion, and 
each delegation gave prepared remarks that did not stray far 
from the agenda.  The event resulted in a statement by SCO 
members to support Afghanistan, a plan of action by the SCO 
and Afghanistan to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and 
organized crime, and a general declaration agreed by all 
attendees that acknowledged the key role of ISAF, among 
others, to assist Afghanistan.  Final agreement was 
complicated by European objections to specifically recognize 
the SCO as a forum for dialogue on Afghanistan, and Iran's 
insistence on being singled out for its sacrifice in 
combating Afghan drug trafficking.  The conference appeared 
to meet the Russian desire to convene an international event 
on Afghanistan, and was deemed a success simply for being 
held.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The SCO Special Conference on Afghanistan, held in 
Moscow on March 27, provided a forum for representatives of 
SCO member states, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and observers such 
as India, Iran, Turkey, the G-8, and international 
organizations to present their views on stabilizing 
Afghanistan and addressing the threats of terrorism and 
narcotics trafficking to the country's neighbors.  This was 
the first such event held by the SCO, and was attended by 
member states Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and 
Tajikistan, with Uzbekistan declining to attend.  Heads of 
delegations gave statements that rarely strayed from the 
agenda, highlighted their contributions to Afghanistan, and 
avoided delving into controversial topics.  SCO members and 
Afghanistan agreed upon a joint statement and a separate plan 
of action to combat terrorism and narcotics.  All attendees 
agreed upon a final declaration that welcomed the SCO 
initiative, the efforts of the UN, NATO, and others to 
address the threats of terrorism and drug trafficking, and 
expressed the conviction of all to assist Afghanistan. 
(Note: All three documents are available in English on the 
Russian MFA website, http://www.mid.ru/brp 4.nsf/main eng.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) The conference proceedings consisted of prepared 
remarks given by representatives of the 32 delegations 
present, including: 
 
-- Russia: FM Sergey Lavrov opened the conference in his role 
as Chairman, highlighting the need to take a comprehensive 
approach to Afghan stabilization that includes tackling 
extremists and drug trafficking.  This requires strengthening 
coordination between ISAF and Afghan security forces in order 
to increase the latter's effectiveness.  He called it "only 
natural" that the SCO, which incorporates nearly all of 
Afghanistan's neighbors, not remain aloof from collective 
security efforts.  Through joint work with Kabul, and not the 
creation of "sanitary cordons," did the SCO and the 
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) suggest 
creating a security belt in the region.  Russia supports 
Afghan national reconciliation so long as individuals 
renounce violence and "rupture ties" with Al-Qaeda.  Lavrov 
cited the CSTO's counter-narcotics program Operation Channel, 
which Afghanistan joined and to which NATO and EU countries 
are observers. 
 
-- UN: SYG Ban Ki-moon painted a bleak picture of Afghans 
living in despair and farmers turning to opium to feed their 
families.  Afghan terrorism and criminality transcended 
borders and went to where law enforcement was weakest.  Ban 
saw positive signs that the international community was 
responding to drug trafficking through establishment of the 
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Center 
(CARICC) in Almaty, a joint Afghanistan-Pakistan-Iran counter 
drug operation, and the U.S. plan to send more troops to 
Afghanistan, which would mean additional security for the 
August Presidential election and more training for the Afghan 
army and police. 
 
-- Afghanistan: FM Rangin Spanta said the SCO could play a 
key role in projects of mutual benefit to Afghanistan and 
 
MOSCOW 00000833  002 OF 005 
 
 
Central Asia, such as building roads, which would allow 
Afghanistan to serve as a route for increased regional trade. 
 He called upon countries to reject the "zero sum game" in 
the region and avoid using Afghanistan as a "tool for 
conflicting policies."  Stability in Afghanistan depended 
upon the long term commitment of Afghanistan's partners and 
the international community. 
 
-- Kazakhstan: DFM Nurtai Abykaev expressed concern that the 
global financial crisis would prevent donor countries from 
meeting their obligations to Afghanistan.  Kazakhstan 
intended to double its financial commitment to Afghan 
reconstruction and development.  He called for strengthening 
cooperation between the SCO and CSTO to combat narcotics 
trafficking, and for expanding the CSTO's Operation Channel. 
Kazakhstan would continue providing support to facilities in 
Dushanbe and Bishkek for training Afghan and Central Asian 
border guards and other officials.  He welcomed ISAF's 
contribution to combating drug trafficking and called upon 
other international organizations to be involved in Afghan 
development. 
 
-- China: DFM Song Tao said Afghanistan was at a 
"crossroads," an expression used in numerous presentations 
during the conference.  He stressed the need for the SCO and 
international community to: 1) Support the leading role of 
the UN in coordinating the reconstruction process; 2) Assist 
the Afghan government in holding general elections, the 
success of which would be a basis for stability; 3) Respect 
the leading role of the Afghan government in managing the 
nation's affairs, and step-up training for the Afghan 
military and police so they can play a larger role in 
maintaining security; 4) Give greater attention to 
development, agriculture, education, healthcare and 
infrastructure and increase the efficiency of the assistance 
given; and 5) Improve regional cooperation mechanisms, 
including the SCO.  Tao said the SCO should tighten border 
controls, involve Afghanistan in regional law enforcement 
efforts, and strengthen real cooperation among member-states. 
 Chinese assistance to Afghanistan included $180 million in 
economic aid, the cancellation of debts, technical training 
for Afghans working in various fields, and assistance to the 
Afghan army.  China would convert to grants $75 million in 
concessional loans already given to Kabul this year. 
 
-- Kyrgyzstan: FM Kadyrbek Sarbaev cited the need to create a 
security belt around Afghanistan to halt the flow of 
narcotics.  Kyrgyzstan had already seized 14 tons of 
narcotics coming from Afghanistan, including 200 kilos in the 
last two months.  Bishkek supported new counter-narcotics 
efforts under the aegis of the UN, and believed Afghanistan 
needed to be invited more often to participate in regional 
processes.  The Kyrgyz President proposed Bishkek as a site 
to establish an analytical center to discuss Afghanistan and 
find solutions for the country's stabilization and 
development. 
 
-- Tajikistan: FM Hamrokhon Zarifi pledged support for the 
Afghan people, who are not the source but the victim of 
terrorism and narcotics trafficking.  Tajikistan welcomes the 
presence of Afghan entrepreneurs, seeks expanded trade, and 
wants to cooperate on hydroelectric and irrigation projects. 
He noted the particular importance of tightening border 
controls with Afghanistan to Tajikistan, the SCO member with 
the largest common border.  Zarifi called for the creation of 
a SCO center in Dushanbe to combat drug trafficking, and the 
creation of a formal counter-terrorism structure within the 
SCO. 
 
-- Pakistan: FM Makhdoom Qureshi said that Pakistan had 
keenly observed the SCO expand into a platform to promote 
stability and economic cooperation in Central Asia, and cited 
Russia and China for their productive roles in this endeavor. 
 Pakistan looks forward to full SCO membership, and until 
that time, wants to expand cooperation on energy development 
and investment promotion with SCO members.  Pakistan also 
wants to take part in regional counter-narcotics coordination 
and expand cooperation of customs agencies.  He cited the 
tremendous sacrifices Pakistan has made as Afghanistan's 
neighbor, including hosting the world's largest refugee 
population.  Pakistan's security is indivisible from 
Afghanistan's, and Islamabad has reached a "new level of 
trust" with Kabul, agreeing to cooperate closely on 
counter-terrorism and narcotics efforts.  Qureshi enumerated 
several steps the SCO could take to assist Afghan stability: 
1) Accept norms of international conduct and respect 
territorial integrity; 2) Facilitate Afghan-led national 
reconciliation; 3) Conduct the battle for hearts and minds in 
a manner that respects local culture and traditions; 4) 
 
MOSCOW 00000833  003 OF 005 
 
 
Support a massive reconstruction plan that includes enhancing 
the capacity of local security forces; and 5) Support 
infrastructure and energy development to allow Afghanistan to 
become a bridge for regional trade and development. 
 
-- Turkey: FM Ali Babacan said that while the ultimate 
solutions to Afghanistan's problems must come from the Afghan 
people, Turkey was ready to play a role in helping win Afghan 
hearts and minds by assisting the country's development. 
Turkey was living up to its assistance pledges, providing 
$200 million in aid for 550 development projects focusing on 
healthcare, education and agriculture, and establishing its 
own provisional reconstruction team.  Turkey provided $100 
million to train the Afghan army, funds for the police, and 
trained 100 Afghan government officials in Turkey.  He 
highlighted Ankara's trilateral initiative that brought 
together government, military, and intelligence officials 
from Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Turkey to address regional 
issues. 
 
-- India: Special Envoy Satinder Lambah focused on helping 
Afghanistan become a regional hub for trade and transport 
through infrastructure development.  India has already 
pledged $1.2 billion in various forms of assistance to 
Afghanistan.  More must be done to help rural Afghans find 
alternative crops to opium and raise public awareness of the 
link between narcotics and extremists. 
 
-- Iran: DFM Mohammad Ahundzadeh said that any action aimed 
at strengthening stability in Afghanistan should be 
considered support for peace and stability in the region.  He 
named several capitals, but did not mention Washington, 
saying that any decision made by them to stop drug 
trafficking and promote stability should be supported.  The 
nexus of drugs and terrorism was detrimental to achieving 
security in the region.  No country could accomplish this 
alone, although Iran has achieved some success, typically 
seizing three tons of opium daily and 1,000 tons annually. 
Success in battling heavy narcotics had moved the trade 
toward light narcotics.  Terrorism does not differentiate 
between rich or poor, guilty or not guilty; it is indifferent 
to national borders.  The international community must tackle 
the root causes of terrorism, with the UN maintaining the 
primary role through UNSCRs 1373 and 1390.  After September 
11th, Iran began extensive cooperation with its neighbors to 
prevent terrorism and drug trafficking.  Human trafficking, 
trade in contraband, and poverty in the region contributed to 
the difficulty in eradicating terrorism and drug trafficking. 
 Afghanistan, which has faced 20 years of hostility, suffers 
most from these blights.  There exists huge trade and human 
potential in the region that must be harnessed.  Security can 
only be achieved if accompanied by economic development. 
Iran, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, and Pakistan are particularly 
interested in cooperating to develop trade and the region's 
economic potential. 
 
-- CSTO: Secretary General Nikolay Bordyuzha cited the large 
number of international agencies active in Afghanistan and 
the need to prevent unnecessary duplication of efforts.  He 
cited Russia and the U.S. for training customs and 
counter-narcotics officials in Afghanistan.  Kyrgyz and Tajik 
drug enforcement agencies need technical assistance to 
strengthen their potential.  Countries throughout the region 
need assistance to improve legislation to better fight 
narcotics trafficking. 
 
-- EU: Czech DFM Tomas Pojar cited EU donations to 
Afghanistan totaling $8 billion from 2001-2010.  EU 
assistance is focused towards: 1) Training the Afghan army; 
2) Promoting good governance and the rule of law, including 
expanding EUPOL to 400 people; 3) Providing assistance and 
possibly election monitors for the Afghan election; and 4) 
Enhancing regional cooperation to stabilize Afghanistan. 
 
-- UK: Special Representative for Afghanistan Sherard 
Cowper-Coles said he was genuinely optimistic about the 
future of Afghanistan when a gathering could be held that 
brought together Russia, Iran, and others to reach a common 
approach toward stabilizing the country.  We all know what 
needs to be done, and we all know that there are military and 
non-military solutions.  The UK is spending $4.7 billion 
annually in Afghanistan, while the U.S. is spending 
considerably more.  Positive steps include the upcoming Hague 
conference, the U.S. Afghanistan-Pakistan policy review, and 
enhanced Afghan-Pakistan cooperation.  He called upon all to 
contribute in cash and in kind to support the Afghan 
election, the credibility of which would help create a sense 
of common purpose among the Afghan people.  He cited the toll 
of instability on people in the region, where three or four 
 
MOSCOW 00000833  004 OF 005 
 
 
Afghan police officers are killed every day, 4,600 Pakistanis 
have died in terrorist attacks since 2001, and 3,000 Iranian 
border guards have died attempting to interdict narcotics. 
He closed by warning that if we don't hang together, then 
surely we will hang separately. 
 
-- U.S.: DAS Moon told the conference that the U.S. would 
announce the results of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Strategic 
Review later that day, and thanked U.S. allies, friends, and 
especially Afghanistan and Pakistan, for their contributions 
to this process.  He highlighted the U.S. funding commitment 
for the Afghan elections and urged others to donate.  The 
U.S. continues its support for the Afghan army and police, 
but understands that the solution is not entirely military, 
therefore, the international community must support building 
good governance and expand the delivery of development 
assistance.  He urged support for two critical OSCE border 
security projects planned for northern Afghanistan, and 
ensuring that the UNSCR 1267 regime remained viable.  The 
intentional community needs to assist the Afghans to better 
integrate counter-narcotics goals into security plans.  The 
contribution of UNODC deserves special praise, including its 
initiative to advance counter-narcotics cooperation between 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran.  The focus of the 
international community, as friends and partners of the 
Afghans, should be on building their capabilities to manage 
and sustain the efforts already underway. 
 
Russia Appreciates U.S. Participation 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Russian DFM for Asia Aleksey Borodavkin closed the 
conference by highlighting the SCO's important role in 
combating terrorism, extremism, and drug trafficking.  He 
expressed hope that the conference participants would 
continue the dialogue at the March 31 Hague conference in a 
manner that would be "free from ideological overtones."  In a 
separate conversation with DAS Moon, Borodavkin expressed 
appreciation for U.S. participation in the conference, 
calling it a good first step in starting cooperation between 
the SCO and U.S.  Reaffirming the importance of cooperation 
on Afghanistan to the Russia-U.S. relationship, he hoped that 
the SCO conference's apparent success would help fine tune 
the U.S. policy review on Afghanistan. 
 
EU, Iran and China Differ on Declaration 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) While the conference participants adopted a fairly 
innocuous joint declaration, two issues prolonged the 
declaration negotiation: several European countries' 
objection to characterizing the SCO as "an appropriate forum" 
for a wide dialogue on Afghanistan-related issues, and Iran's 
insistence on language that would single out its "efforts and 
sacrifice" in combating drug trafficking from Afghanistan. 
In the first instance, EU members, particularly Germany and 
the UK, expressed discomfort with agreeing to a qualitative 
judgment of the SCO's capabilities when they were not members 
of the organization.  Their views met with firm opposition 
from China, which resisted all alternatives.  The final 
declaration compromised by noting that the SCO was "one of 
the appropriate fora" to discuss Afghanistan. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In the second instance, the Iranian delegation 
demanded that either Iran be singled out for praise, specific 
reference to joint efforts by Afghanistan and Pakistan be 
deleted, or the declaration not be approved.  The Iranians 
stood firm in the face of urgent appeals for reasonableness 
from the Russian chair, Afghanistan, and China.  Only Russian 
behind-the-scenes intervention succeeded in reaching a 
compromise by removing the entire paragraph on the importance 
of joint actions between states to combat drug trafficking. 
India, as an SCO observer country, served as a mediator in 
the negotiating session, while Russia demonstrated 
impartiality and flexibility as the chair. 
 
By What Measure Success? 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) SCO members, Russian officials, and the Russian 
press, declared the Moscow conference a success that would 
enhance the role of the SCO in stabilizing Afghanistan. 
Leading Russian daily Kommersant went so far as to declare 
the success of the March 31 Afghanistan conference in The 
Hague dependent upon the outcome of the Moscow conference. 
Despite such self congratulations, a MFA official who was a 
principal organizer of the meeting lamented that success was 
measured by agreement upon three general statements and no 
concrete results.  By typical Russian metrics, simply holding 
 
MOSCOW 00000833  005 OF 005 
 
 
an international conference of this magnitude is considered a 
diplomatic victory. 
 
¶8. (U) DAS Moon has cleared this cable. 
BEYRLE