09PHNOMPENH682
Khmer Rouge Tribunal:  The Trial of S-21
Tue Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO9974
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0682 2510213
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080213Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1174
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000682 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, DRL, S/WCI 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KJUS PREL EAID CB
SUBJECT:  Khmer Rouge Tribunal:  The Trial of S-21 
Interrogation Center Head Kaing Guek Eav, Week 19 
 
REF: PHNOM PENH 646 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Embassy staff routinely observes the proceedings 
of the trial against the notorious Khmer Rouge (KR) torture center 
head, widely known as Duch, at the Extraordinary Chambers in the 
Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) (Reftel).  This report summarizes the 19th 
week of activities inside the court at the Khmer Rouge Tribunal. 
More technical accounts of the proceedings can be found at: 
www.csdcambodia.org; www.kidcambodia.org and at 
http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~warcrime/.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Duch Humanized, Civil Parties Protest, and Additional Investigations 
Allowed 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Character witness testimony was overshadowed on week 19 by 
a September 2 decision from the pre-trial chamber which effectively 
paves the way for the ECCC to proceed with additional criminal 
investigations against former leaders of the Khmer Rouge.  The 
investigation of further suspects has been a contentious issue in 
and out of the court, with the national and international 
co-prosecutors at odds on how to best fulfill the mandate of the 
ECCC.  The week's proceedings highlighted additional controversies 
within the court, as civil parties boycotted and their lawyers were 
barred from questioning character witnesses.  When the civil party 
lawyers raised repeated objections, the tribunal disconnected their 
microphones and prohibited them from intervening during the 
remainder of character witness testimonies.  Translation from French 
was problematic for witnesses, who generally painted a rosy picture 
of Duch as a fellow student, teacher, and colleague during the 
period before and after the Khmer Rouge. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Herewith are observation notes for the week beginning 
August 31, 2009: 
 
Tuesday, September 1, 2009:  The audience was only approximately 
half-full and mainly consisted of Cambodian males.  Towards the end 
of the afternoon, only a handful of observers remained. 
 
Duch Humanized 
-------------- 
 
The tribunal heard the final testimony of two psychologists who 
presented a summary of their assessment of Duch.  The international 
defense council focused on the experts' suggestion that Duch could 
be rehabilitated, and recalled their statements that "a person is 
not born an executioner, but that one becomes an executioner."  The 
experts then stated that Duch could be made "human" again and could 
be integrated into society.  Four character witnesses who knew Duch 
when he was a student and teacher testified for the remainder of the 
day.  The four universally stated that Duch was a good, humble, hard 
working and gentle person.  One of the witnesses asked and received 
permission to visit with Duch after the day's proceedings. 
 
Civil Party Discontent 
---------------------- 
 
There were several interruptions throughout the day, with judges 
consulting three to four times on different issues.  Civil parties 
continued their boycott of the proceedings, an act which stemmed 
from last week's decision by the tribunal to not allow civil parties 
to question remaining witnesses regarding the character of the 
accused (Reftel).  Of the civil legal teams, only three were 
present.  Lawyers for the civil parties repeatedly asked the court 
to explain to new witnesses why the civil parties were not allowed 
to ask questions, and why the civil parties were not in the 
courtroom.  After the third or fourth such request, the tribunal 
became upset and stated that the civil party lawyers would no longer 
be heard during the proceedings and summarily disconnected the civil 
party lawyers' microphones. 
 
The translation of the defense council's questions, originally in 
French, appeared to be problematic.  On multiple occasions the 
witnesses did not answer the questions asked, but answered on a 
separate subject altogether. 
 
RODLEY