09PRETORIA2210
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER OCTOBER 26-OCTOBER 30
Fri Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO4660
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2210/01 3031258
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301258Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0052
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7285
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1364
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9645UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 002210 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV ASEC SF POL PAS ECON
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER OCTOBER 26-OCTOBER 30 
 
PRETORIA 00002210  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
Pakistani Syndicate Illegally Enter RSA Using Fraudulent Documents 
 
¶2. (U)  "Rapport" South African Afrikaans weekly reported on 25 
October that Pakistani crime syndicates are operating in South 
Africa.  The ease with which illegal immigrants can enter the 
country and the cooperation of corrupt public servants and police 
officers reportedly make South Africa particularly attractive for 
the syndicates.  Many Pakistanis do not qualify for a South African 
visa. They allegedly pay agents in Pakistan between $4,000 and 
$6,000 (30,000 rand and 45,000 rand) for safe passage. This amount 
includes a bribe, false documents and accommodation in a "safe 
house."  The report further stated that Pakistani criminal gangs are 
also lured to South Africa by the growing market in illegal drugs. 
[Description of Source: Johannesburg Rapport in Afrikaans -- 
Privately-owned national Sunday newspaper critical of government 
policies] 
 
Challenges to Mpumalanga Name Changes 
 
¶3. (U)  More than 600 businesses in Mpumalanga are seeking legal 
advice on how to challenge what they claim is "a flawed name change 
process."  The South African Government earlier this month announced 
plans to rename cities and towns in Mpumalanga, including changing 
Nelspruit to Mbombela.  The Lowveld Chamber of Business and Tourism 
argue that the consultation process conducted by Minister of Arts 
and Culture Lulu Xingwana was unfair as businesses were not fully 
consulted and the deadline for public comments or objections 
relating to the proposed name change was not widely publicized.  An 
additional objection from business is that Nelspruit is not a 
politically offensive name in South African history.  The Democratic 
Alliance (DA) in Mpumalanga also has questioned the name change as 
the party's provincial leader said while the DA is not opposed to 
the changing of offensive or derogatory names, the motive behind the 
changes in Mpumalanga "must be questioned."  (News24, October 27, 
2009) 
Service Delivery Protests in Diepsloot "Motivated by Anti-ANC 
Campaign" 
¶4. (U)  The African National Congress (ANC) in Diepsloot, north of 
Johannesburg, says service delivery protests on October 24-25 were 
spurred by anti-ANC activists.  Residents barricaded roads and 
looted small businesses and demanded the local councilor step down. 
(Note:  The South African Communist Party SACP leaders in the area 
came out in support of the protests.  End Note.)  The ANC 
chairperson in Diepsloot, Rogers Makhubele, says the protest action 
was organized by criminals and those opposed to the ruling party. 
(SABCNEWS, October 27, 2009) 
Tshwane Mayor Keeps Her Job in Reshuffled Cabinet 
¶5. (U)  Tshwane Mayor Gwen Ramokgopa reshuffled her mayoral 
committee, which might help save her own political future. 
Ramokgopa announced her new council on October 26 as seven members 
of the Mayoral Executive Committee were recalled under pressure from 
the ANC's Tshwane branches.  Ramokgopa said the moves would help 
strengthen service delivery in the city, which is dealing with 
Qstrengthen service delivery in the city, which is dealing with 
several problems including poor debt collection and financial 
management. The mayor said,  "These changes that we are making, it 
is improving our capacity to move faster and to ensure that we deal 
with complex challenges we acknowledge still remain."  Ramokgopa 
added that her administration remained committed to good governance 
and would build on the successes of the past.  (Eyewitness, October 
26, 2009) 
Inkatha Freedom Party Keeps Mangosuthu Buthelezi as Leader 
¶6. (U)  The national council of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) has 
taken a resolution that party president Mangosuthu Buthelezi will 
continue as leader.  Political analyst Zakhele Ndlovu has warned 
that this is likely to cause more harm than good for the divided 
party because younger members want a greater say in the party's 
future.  Ndlovu's comments come after the national council of the 
IFP decided that Buthelezi was the only unifying member in the party 
and that neither IFP National Chairperson Zanele Magwaza-Msibi nor 
IFP General Secretary Musa Zondi should avail themselves for 
nominations to take over from Buthelezi when he retires.  Ndlovu 
said the resolution was a clear indication that the party has failed 
to produce new leaders or deal with the succession issue.  (Soweto, 
October 26, 2009) 
 
------------------ 
International News 
 
PRETORIA 00002210  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
------------------ 
 
Zimbabwe Leaders Robert Mugabe, Morgan Tsvangirai Hold Direct Talks 
26 Oct 
 
¶7. (U)  On 26 October French news agency AFP reported that 
Zimbabwe's leaders met in their first direct talks since Prime 
Minister Morgan Tsvangirai suspended his party's participation in 
meetings with government partner President Robert Mugabe. "This is a 
regular Monday meeting and they will discuss the issues of the GPA 
(Global Political Agreement)," which underpins the unity government, 
Mugabe's spokesman George Charamba said, confirming the meeting was 
under way.  "However (Deputy Prime Minister Arthur) Mutambara is 
going to leave the two to discuss further," Charamba told AFP. 
(Note:  There also were press reports this week that South African 
allies of former President Thabo Mbeki, Frank Chikane and Manjaku 
Gumbi, were in Harare for talks on the progress of the GPA.  End 
Note.)  [Description of Source: Paris AFP (World Service) in English 
-- world news service of the independent French news agency Agence 
France Presse] 
 
MDC's Tsvangirai, Other Ministers Boycott Zimbabwe Cabinet Meeting 
Led by Mugabe 
 
¶8. (U)  Zimbabwe's Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai and ministers 
drawn from his MDC (Movement for Democratic Change) party Tuesday 
boycotted a cabinet meeting led by President Robert Mugabe for the 
second time in as many weeks, reported AFP 27 October. "We did not 
attend a cabinet meeting again today (and will not) until the 
outstanding issues have been addressed," Nelson Chamisa, spokesman 
for the MDC, who is also a cabinet minister, told AFP.  The second 
boycott by Tsvangirai came after his talks with Mugabe on 26 October 
failed to break a deadlock after the MDC withdrew from participation 
in the unity government on October 16, sparking a crisis in the 
eight month partnership.  "It is not possible to continue with this 
inclusive government without addressing outstanding issues, "Chamisa 
later told a press conference. [Description of Source: Paris AFP 
(World Service) in English -- world news service of the independent 
French news agency Agence France Presse] 
 
South Africa, DRC Bilateral Talks Move Forward Under Zuma 
 
¶9. (U)  Zuma co-chaired the SA-DRC Binational Commission Summit with 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) President Joseph Kabila on 
October 30 in Pretoria.  Zuma was supported by a full team of 
ministers, underscoring the importance of the relationship to the 
South African Government.  Nearly every minister in the Zuma Cabinet 
played a role in the visit, especially International Relations and 
Corporation Minister Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, Minister of Home 
Affairs Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister of Defense and Military 
Veterans Lindiwe Sisulu, and Minister of Trade and Industry Rob 
Davies.   The Commission focused on South Africa's continued support 
for the Post Conflict Reconstruction and Development program in the 
DRC.  (DIRCO Briefing, October 27) 
 
South Africa, Nigeria Mark Anniversary of Bilateral Talks 
 
¶10. (U)  Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe on October 29 hosted a 
series of activities in South Africa with his Nigerian counterpart, 
Goodluck Jonathan, as part of the 10-year anniversary celebrations 
of the South Africa-Nigeria Binational Commission.  During the South 
African meetings, Motlanthe and Jonathan promised to promote trade 
and investment on the African continent as well to push for stronger 
cooperation in building institutions in South Africa and Nigeria. 
Motlanthe is expected to visit Nigeria next month to reciprocate the 
QMotlanthe is expected to visit Nigeria next month to reciprocate the 
exchange.  (DIRCO Briefing, October 22)