09PRETORIA2314
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER NOVEMBER 9-NOVEMBER 13
Fri Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO7432
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2314/01 3171445
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131445Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0194
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7329
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1410
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9689UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 002314 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV ASEC SF POL PAS ECON
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER NOVEMBER 9-NOVEMBER 13 
 
REF:  PRETORIA 02251, PRETORIA 02254, PRETORIA 02263, PRETORIA 
02266, PRETORIA 02267 
 
PRETORIA 00002314  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers i6Q*Q}th Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
 
Weekly Says President Zuma Faces Real Challenge Over Feuding Police 
Chiefs 
 
¶2. (U)  Sunday Times reports that the political fallout between 
police minister Nathi Mthethwa and his deputy, Fikile Mbalula, has 
exposed a "dangerous zone" which President Jacob Zuma created when 
he picked the members of his cabinet after the elections.  Mbalula - 
by virtue of his position as ANC head of campaigns and power base - 
felt that he was senior to Mthethwa, while it was inevitable that 
Mthethwa would assume seniority over Mbalula by his appointment to a 
full cabinet position.  The report further states that the danger of 
this conflict is that it has the potential to seriously weaken the 
war on crime and is "surely" going to pose a serious test of Zuma's 
leadership.  Both Mthethwa and Mbalula are known to be fierce Zuma 
loyalists and were instrumental in weakening former President Thabo 
Mbeki's grip.  Mbalula has discounted this report, but speculation 
continues that there is a rift between the two ministers. 
[Website of privately owned Sunday newspaper; URL: 
http://www.thetimes.co.za/] 
 
ANC Warns Youth Leader Malema Against Push for Nationalization of 
Mines 
 
¶3. (U)  Sunday Times rep/q"g&vtreportedly told Malema to follow proper party 
processes and said that ANC policy could only be changed at the 
party's national general council or its policy conference.  South 
African Communist Party leader Jeremy Cronincautioned against te 
nationalizatio of mines, saying that the move could deplete the 
national budget, but reiterated that state ownership of mines - 
favored by communists - was "not necessarily" a progressive 
socialist measure.  The report further notes that Cronin asserted 
that there was a need for a comprehensive discussion of how mining 
assets could be used to drive development, ensuring it is 
"nationalization with compensation, not with expropriation". 
[Website of privately owned Sunday newspaper; URL: 
http://www.thetimes.co.za/] 
 
State to Drop Willing Buyer, Willing Seller Concept, Speed Up Land 
Reform 
 
¶4. (U)  Business Report reports that the government indicated 
yesterday that the "willing-buyer, willing-seller" concept for land 
redistribution would be "ditched" in favor of a system of average 
hectare price offers and expropriation due to the delay in the 
process.  During a 10 November briefing, Rural Development and Land 
Reform Minister Gugile Nkwinti said that the deadline for 
transferring agricultural land to the previously disadvantaged - set 
for 20Qj8 
discussions with farmers' unions were fruitful in establishing 
average prices of farmland per hectare, which would assist in 
speeding up land reform in the future. The report highlighted that 
only about 5 percent of land had been transferred, with 87 percent 
of land still in the hands of the minority; however, the minister 
reiterated his commitment to avoid a repeat of the experience of 
Zimbabwe - where the land issue had led to significant 
"polarisation". [Website of business and financial publication, 
privately owned by Independent Newspaper Company; URL: 
http://www.businessreport.co.za/] 
 
ANC Youth League Leader Malema Receives Police Protection 
 
¶5. (U)  Beeld reports that Police Minister Nathi Mthethwa approved 
police protection for ANC Youth League President Julius Malema at a 
cost of 300,000 [roughly $ 43,000] rand per month despite Malema not 
being a government official.  Zweli Mnisi, spokesman for the Police 
Minister, said Malema informed the ministry that he "believes his 
life is in danger."Mnisi went on to explain that "any South African 
 
PRETORIA 00002314  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
who believes that his life was in danger can request for VIP 
protection."  When asked to comment Malema told Beeld that "No, no, 
no, I don't discuss security issues."  The Democratic Alliance's 
spokesperson for security, Dianne Kohler Barnard, said it is 
"ridiculous" that Malema is receiving police protection while he is 
"not a MP or even of a provincial legislature. He is not even a 
member of the executive authority." [Description of Source: Pretoria 
Beeld in Afrikaans -- Privately-owned national daily newspaper, 
targeting liberal-minded Afrikaners] 
 
COSATU Unhappy with African National Congress (ANC) Decision 
 
¶6. (U)  Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) spokesperson 
Patrick Craven said on November 11 the labor federation felt the 
African National Congress (ANC) National Executive Committee (NEC) 
took the "wrong decision" to endorse Trevor Manuel as the 
chairperson of the National Planning Commission (NPC).  COSATU has 
vowed to continue opposing the ANC's decision to endorse Manuel as 
chair of the new commission and COSATU General Secretary Zwelinzima 
Vavi said promised to raise their concerns during the alliance 
summit beginning on November 13.  (Sowetan, November 12, 2009) 
 
Inkatha Freedom Party Youth Leader Suspended 
 
¶7. (U)  Inkatha Freedom Party Youth Brigade (IFPYB) Chairperson Muzi 
Simelane has been suspended after he was accused of allegedly 
instigating the youth brigade to support Zanele Magwaza-Msibi for 
presidency when Mangosuthu Buthelezi retires.  IFP Provincial 
Secretary Bonginkosi Buthelezi told local newspapers that Simelane 
has been suspended with immediate effect after he was found guilty 
by the party's disciplinary committee.  Simelane said he will be 
suspended for three years and his membership was withdrawn.  The IFP 
Youth Brigade is divided between supporters of party secretary Musa 
Zondi and Magwaza-Msibi. (Sowetan, November 11, 2009) 
 
 
Development Bank of Southern Africa Uses State Funds to Fund Hotels 
 
¶8. (U)  The Development Bank of Southern Africa is dishing out 
millions of dollars in loans to private companies in which its 
directors own shares.  The Bank's annual reports show that it gave 
loans to hotel groups and Broad Based Black Economic Empowerment 
investment funds.  The state-owned bank is meant to provide loans to 
municipalities for service delivery, so giving loans to six-star 
hotels under the guise of tourism has raised questions among 
opposition parliamentarians and the media.  (Sowetan, November 12, 
2009) 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
 
Zuma Named African President of the Year 
 
¶9. (U)  President Jacob Zuma has been named the "2009 African 
President of the Year" and received the award on November 10.  The 
award was founded by the African Consciousness Media and the Kenneth 
Kaunda Foundation in recognition of African leaders.  (Eyewitness 
News, November 11) 
 
 
COSATU Shows Solidarity with Zimbabwe Trade Union 
 
¶10. (U)  COSATU on November 10 called on the Zimbabwean Government 
to release Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Union (ZCTU) President 
Lovemore Matombo.  The ZCTU leader and two of his colleagues were 
arrested in Victoria Falls on November 8.  (Eyewitness News, 
November 10) 
 
Ebrahim Ebrahim Learns More About the International Criminal Court 
 
¶11. (U)  Department of International Relations and Cooperation 
(DIRCO) Deputy Minister Ebrahim Ebrahim received International 
Criminal Court (ICC) Chief Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo on November 
QCriminal Court (ICC) Chief Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo on November 
10 in Cape Town.  The meeting between Ebrahim and Moreno-Ocampo 
covered a number of issues including the work of the ICC and current 
investigations, particularly ones in Africa.  The meeting also 
touched on the upcoming Review Conference of the Rome Statute in 
¶2010.  Moreno-Ocampo expressed his hope that "Africa will play a key 
role during this process."  Ebrahim confirmed that preparations for 
Africa's participation at this Review are already underway and 
re-iterated the South Africa's commitment to honor its international 
obligations including the Rome Statutes of the ICC.  (DIRCO 
Briefing, November 10) 
 
IFP Leader Plans to Discuss Tibet 
 
¶12. (U)  The Chinese Government is attempting to persuade IFP leader 
 
PRETORIA 00002314  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Mangosuthu Buthelezi not to attend a summit of world leaders in Rome 
to discuss China's rule of Tibet.  China's Consul General, Liu 
Yantao, allegedly wrote a letter to Buthelezi asking him not to take 
part in the summit scheduled to take place in late November. 
Buthelezi, who is a friend of the Dalai Lama, has refused to turn 
down the invitation.  There also are rumors that the Chinese 
Government has attempted to persuade the South African government to 
block Buthelezi from attending the conference.  (SAPA, November 12) 
 
 
DIRCO Minister Visits Sri Lanka . . . 
 
¶13. (U)  DIRCO Minister Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, supported by senior 
government officials, undertook an official visit to Sri Lanka 
November 11-12.  The visit was undertaken within the context of 
deepening South-South cooperation and strengthening bilateral 
relations between South Africa and Sri Lanka.  In addition, the 
visit afforded Nkoana-Mashabane an opportunity for greater 
understanding of the political, social and economic dynamics in Sri 
Lanka following the end of the civil war there in May 2009.  During 
the visit, discussions focused on bilateral relations, dates for a 
South Africa-Sri Lanka Partnership Forum in 2010, regional issues, 
and multilateral cooperation.  (DIRCO Briefing, November 9) 
 
. . . Then Off to India 
 
¶14. (U) Nkoana-Mashabane intends to visit India following her visit 
to Sri Lanka.  Nkoana-Mashabane is expected to participate in the 
Regional Heads of Mission Conference scheduled for November 13-14 
during her time in India.  The visit is aimed at strengthening 
bilateral relations between South Africa and India and to signal 
South Africa's commitment to the continuation of the strategic 
partnership with India within the context of South-South 
cooperation.  During the visit, discussions between Nkoana-Mashabane 
and her Indian counterpart will focus in part on preparations for 
the State Visit of President Zuma to India in 2010.  (DIRCO 
Briefing, November 11)