09PRETORIA298
PRETORIA INPUTS TO THE 2009 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Tue Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO4029
RR RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHSA #0298/01 0481044
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171044Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7377
INFO RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 1243
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0519
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0933
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE 3798
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 6031
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0944
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 6561
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0683
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8902
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 PRETORIA 000298 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/S, AF/RSA; G/TIP FOR STEPHANIE KRONENBURG; 
G-ACBLANK, INL, DRL, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SA KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD
ASEC, PREF, ELAB 
SUBJECT: PRETORIA INPUTS TO THE 2009 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
(TIP) REPORT -- PART 1 OF 2 
 
REF: A. STATE 05577 
     ¶B. 08 STATE 132759 
     ¶C. 08 PRETORIA 2249 
     ¶D. 08 PRETORIA 2454 
     ¶E. 08 PRETORIA 1926 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Post hereby submits responses to the Department's action 
request (Refs A,B) for the ninth annual Trafficking in 
Persons (TIP) Report, covering the period from March 2008 
through mid-February 2009.  Following an overview of South 
Africa's counter-trafficking efforts, and of its unique 
capacity challenges as a 14-year-old emerging democracy, 
responses in paragraphs 7-13 correspond to the Department's 
paragraphs 23-29 of specific questions.  Paragraphs 14-17 
below then list sources, Post contributors, time spent, and 
TIP contact.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Overview: Steady Progress Against TIP 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Per Post's reporting through the year (Refs C, D, E), the 
South African government (SAG) is committed to combating the 
scourge of human trafficking.  The key hurdle remains 
comprehensive anti-TIP legislation, which is now drafted and 
due for passage in late 2009 after mid-year parliamentary 
elections.  A tough, focused law is necessary to grant 
mandates and resources to law enforcement, the judiciary, and 
social services to punish perpetrators and protect victims. 
 
¶3.  In the meantime, however, the National Prosecuting 
Authority (NPA)'s Sexual Offences and Community Affairs 
(SOCA) unit is mobilizing affected SAG agencies, civil 
society groups, and the public through task teams, training, 
and awareness campaigns.  Extensive workshops by NPA/SOCA, 
the International Organization for Migration (IOM), NGOs, and 
academic experts educated over 3,000 attendees in 2008, 
across a spectrum of SAG officials, NGO workers, and the 
media, to ready these stakeholders for the law's passage. 
Police are noticeably shifting paradigms, from punishing 
victims to protecting them, and prosecutors have taken at 
least 16 traffickers to trial during the reporting period. 
Social workers continue their longstanding assistance to 
victims, coordinated by the SAG's Victims' Empowerment 
directorate. 
 
¶4.  Public awareness campaigns continue to expand, including 
during the annual Human Trafficking Awareness Week, the '16 
Days of Activism' to end the abuse of women and children, and 
new targeted anti-TIP efforts in advance of South Africa's 
hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup.  Like the other annual 
campaigns, the 2010 initiatives aim to alert the traveling 
public about trafficking and especially to safeguard children 
who will flock to fan parks.  Efforts include awareness talks 
to educate vulnerable communities (potential victims), 
distribution of in-hotel leaflets and stadium signage to 
inform fans (prospective clients), and marshaling of NGO 
volunteers to provide on-site assistance booths.  The tourism 
sector, anxious to showcase South Africa as a wholesome 
destination, is fully on board, even convening a private 
industry forum next month seeking ways to confront sex 
Qindustry forum next month seeking ways to confront sex 
tourism. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Context: Great Need, But Fledgling Capacity 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Classed as a 'middle income' economy, South Africa is 
often mistaken for a uniformly first-world, developed nation, 
without a full appreciation of the magnitude of its 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  002 OF 008 
 
 
challenges and constraints in combating crime and social 
ills.  Income distribution is highly skewed, with a very 
small segment of concentrated affluence amid a wider 
population of which more than half live below the poverty 
line.  Its very status as a world-class tourism destination, 
with extensive transport links serving as a regional hub, 
combine with its wide income disparities to create especially 
fertile ground for TIP. 
 
¶6.  As a 14-year-old democracy, the SAG is still in its 
infancy, struggling to extend governance and protections to 
the majority of its citizens who were woefully neglected 
under apartheid.  Legislative frameworks on rights and 
justice are in the process of fundamental overhaul, yet the 
shortfall in implementation capacity is estimated on the 
order of several hundred thousand mid-level workers.  The SAG 
particularly lacks the skilled workers it needs to implement 
programs.  Members of Parliament have no professionally 
trained staff; SAG departments are massively overstretched; 
police are expanding but still strained; and social workers 
are in desperately short supply.  A very dynamic civil 
society sector helps to bridge some of the gaps, creating a 
vibrant and vocal but often patchy advocacy community.  It is 
in this context of transitional democracy -- wholly committed 
but nascent and still largely underdeveloped -- that South 
Africa's efforts should be judged. 
 
------------- 
TIP Situation 
------------- 
 
¶7. (Responses to paragraph 23 of Ref B.) 
 
-- A.  Sources of information on TIP are dispersed, since 
many groups address the issue.  With a range of SAG agencies, 
IOs, NGOs, faith based organizations (FBOs), and community 
groups (CBOs) confronting different aspects of the problem, 
there is no central repository of qualitative information and 
no source of statistical data.  While a wide array of 
anti-TIP efforts are underway in South Africa, the majority 
of those are not publicized in published documents, and 
information must be gathered primarily through in-person 
meetings.  The 20 counterparts interviewed by post for this 
year's TIP Report are listed in paragraph 14 below.  Post 
believes these sources are reliable, in the sense of being 
truthful, but their information is likely to be incomplete, 
given the underground nature of TIP and the many diverse 
groups fighting it.  Documentation of TIP will improve after 
this year with the pending passage of TIP legislation, 
generating formal requirements for parliamentary reporting 
and statutes for compiling crime statistics. 
 
-- B.  South Africa is a country of origin, transit, and 
destination for women, children, and men trafficked 
internally (domestically) and internationally across its 
borders.  (The country has no ungoverned territory or civil 
war.)  Domestically, victims are largely trafficked from poor 
rural areas to urban centers like Johannesburg, Cape Town, 
Durban, and Bloemfontein.  For a detailed list of primary 
locations and a map of main domestic trafficking routes, see 
Qlocations and a map of main domestic trafficking routes, see 
pages 32-33 of the IOM's October 2008 report, "No Experience 
Necessary: The Internal Trafficking of Persons in South 
Africa" of research funded by USAID (Ref C; http://iom.org.za 
under "publications"). 
 
Among international victims, countries of origin can be 
partly inferred from the 262 victims directly assisted by IOM 
from January 2004 to January 2009.  These were a mix of 
persons from Asia and neighboring countries of Southern 
Africa -- most of them Thai (147), as well as Congolese (35), 
Indian (12), Chinese (11), Mozambican (10), and Zimbabwean 
(9).  According to the NPA, Chinese traffickers make 
Johannesburg a regional hub for collecting victims from 
Lesotho, Mozambique, and Swaziland, for exploitation locally 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  003 OF 008 
 
 
and in other cities.  South African women are trafficked 
abroad mainly to Europe and the Far East (albeit in 
relatively small numbers compared to the internal trade), for 
commercial sexual exploitation at clubs in the U.K. or 
Ireland, or domestic work then followed by sexual 
exploitation.  Nigerian syndicates have reportedly begun 
moving trafficked women to the U.S. as well, targeting 
African migrant clients there.  Inside South Africa, Thai 
women are exploited in large numbers in humble brothels, 
while Russian and Ukranian women are trafficked for sex work 
in exclusive private men's clubs. 
 
The IOM study catalogued five main purposes of internal TIP: 
commercial sexual exploitation (both male and female), 
domestic servitude (girls), agricultural labor (boys), street 
work (vending, begging, and crime), and "muti" (organ removal 
for traditional medicine).  Both internally and 
internationally, commercial sexual exploitation is the 
primary purpose, to which the sources and destinations 
described above refer.  According to the South African 
Department of Labor (SADOL), ethnic Chinese (from PRC or ROC) 
laborers are trafficked to sweatshop factories in Chinese 
urban enclaves in South Africa.  These operations are highly 
organized and mobile to evade labor inspectors, even moving 
in and out of neighboring Lesotho and Swaziland to avoid 
arrest.  While SADOL acknowledges that Mozambican or 
Zimbabwean men and children are exploited by labor brokers in 
South Africa for farm work, SADOL characterizes this as a 
localized abuse of migrants already seeking work in the area, 
rather than TIP per se as was reported last year.  The South 
African Police Service (SAPS)' TIP officer also described 
exploitative farm labor in border areas as smuggling more 
than TIP. 
 
There are no available estimates of the numbers of TIP 
victims in South Africa, but numbers are believed to be high. 
 Patterns of TIP destinations and purposes in 2008 were 
consistent with those reported in prior years.  New venues 
for the sex trade are said to be proliferating near football 
stadiums in advance of the 2010 FIFA World Cup -- accompanied 
by expanded efforts by traffickers to groom new groups of 
victims for commercial sexual exploitation. 
 
-- C.  Victims faced conditions of confinement, intimidation, 
and abuse.  For example, in the domestic servitude TIP trade, 
the IOM study recounts that girls in the Western Cape are 
bused to big cities, then corralled into small holding rooms 
of 20-30 girls, and paraded before prospective employers 
until "purchased."  Once brought to work in a private home, 
many were subject to abuse (including sexual) by employers, 
and too frightened or ashamed to escape.  Those who fled 
could easily fall prey to sexual traffickers.  On farms, 
trafficked laborers were often paid little or nothing to work 
long hours and live in substandard conditions.  Across all 
categories of TIP, traffickers controlled victims through 
intimidation and threats, use of force, confiscation of 
Qintimidation and threats, use of force, confiscation of 
identity documents to discourage escape, demands to pay job 
"debts," and even forced use of drugs and alcohol. 
 
-- D.  South Africans most at risk of becoming trafficking 
victims are mainly poor blacks, from rural areas suffering 
high rates of unemployment and from where wage earners have 
traditionally migrated to cities in search of work.  With 
half the population below the poverty line, and roughly a 
fourth unemployed, many who are desperate for work will 
travel long distances to where the economy is more robust. 
Economic disparities among racial groups and between rural 
vs. urban communities create trafficking opportunities. 
 
The AIDS epidemic in South Africa has also increased 
mobility, and hence vulnerability, not just of young men but 
of women and children heads of household.  NGOs such as 
Khulisa estimate that children make up 60 percent of TIP 
victims in South Africa, although kept on farms and in 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  004 OF 008 
 
 
private homes these are harder for law enforcement to locate 
and rescue compared to the more easily identifiable foreign 
women in brothels.  A growing population of orphans are 
vulnerable to predatory traffickers for exploitation in 
crime, labor, or the growing demand for younger virgins in a 
sex trade more fearful of HIV/AIDS.  In a culture with some 
of the world's highest rates of rape and gender violence, 
victims fleeing forced marriages or abuse at home may fall 
prey to TIP. 
 
-- E.  Organized criminal groups including Nigerian, Chinese, 
Thai, Ukranian, and Russian syndicates and local gangs 
facilitate trafficking into, through and within South Africa 
for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation.  Some of 
these syndicates may even have spawned offshoot operations in 
neighboring countries.  International mafias initially 
recruit victims of their own nationalities, but there is also 
secondary "swapping" of victims.  The IOM study documents 
very organized regional networks trading in teens and young 
women for domestic servitude, particularly in the Western 
Cape.  Smaller, more amateur groups typically operate in 
other labor-related TIP such as farm work or street begging. 
Trafficking victims are mostly lured by promises of lucrative 
(and legal) jobs enabling them to better their own lives and 
send money home to their families.  Whereas typical victims 
used to be runaways who fell prey to city pimps, nowadays 
syndicates proactively send recruiters to rural towns. 
Recruiters for the sex trade are just as likely to be women 
as men, and often trusted family members, acquaintances, or 
neighbors.  Posing as employment agencies, traffickers for 
domestic labor used job ads in local newspapers to lure 
victims. 
 
-------------------- 
SAG Anti-TIP Efforts 
-------------------- 
 
¶8.  (Responses to paragraph 24 of Ref B.) 
 
-- A.  The SAG acknowledges the TIP problem and has drafted 
comprehensive legislation to combat it.  In the meantime, it 
is using existing and interim legislation to arrest and 
punish perpetrators, commissioning training of officials to 
recognize and address TIP situations, and expanding shelters 
and services to attend to victims. 
 
-- B.  NPA/SOCA has the lead in coordinating SAG 
countertrafficking efforts, both within government and with 
external partners from civil society.  NPA/SOCA chairs a 
Trafficking in Persons Inter-sectoral Task Team whose members 
include the Departments of Justice and Constitutional 
Development (DoJ), Home Affairs (DHA), Labor (SADOL), Social 
Development (DSD), as well as the Organized Crime Unit and 
Ports of Entry Division of the South African Police Service 
(SAPS), the IOM, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC), and local NGO Molo Songololo.  As only a two-person 
team, however, the NPA/SOCA's capacity for outreach and 
coordination is limited.  Our sources described South 
Africa's anti-TIP activity as mainly independent, 
operating-level 'silos' of action among many public and 
Qoperating-level 'silos' of action among many public and 
private actors. 
 
The Task Team's primary focus in 2008 was laying groundwork 
to implement the pending law -- promoting interagency 
dialogue and joint planning; formulating standards, 
protocols, and interagency operating procedures for the TIP 
law's implementation; and undertaking extensive trainings of 
TIP concepts, identification, and agency roles.  With EU 
funding, NPA/SOCA has also in recent weeks awarded contracts 
for a set of five anti-TIP initiatives due to run through the 
end of 2010.  These are: curriculum development (continuing 
work by IOM); research into TIP trends and support to victims 
(to be managed by the Human Sciences Research Council, and 
parceled to experts in criminology, psycho-sociology, and 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  005 OF 008 
 
 
law); legislation and regulations (ongoing with the South 
African Law Reform Commission (SALRC)); awareness raising 
(given to the International Organization of Labor's 
International Training Center); and technology connectivity 
with neighboring countries to promote more effective 
monitoring, law enforcement, and victim protection. 
 
-- C.  The key hurdle to SAG's anti-TIP efforts hurdle 
remains comprehensive anti-TIP legislation, which is in the 
late stages of the drafting process.  The SALRC released a 
first draft was released in mid-2008, which underwent 
consultations and revisions.  A second draft was submitted on 
November 25 to the Minister of Justice (MoJ) and the 
Parliamentary committee.  MoJ Enver Surty has declared 
passage of this TIP legislation as a personal priority for 
2009, despite the year's disruptions to legislative schedules 
due to national elections in the second quarter.  A tough, 
focused law is necessary to grant resources and authorities 
to law enforcement, the judiciary, and social services for 
prosecution, protection, and prevention. 
 
Other important limitations include capacity of SAPS, NPA, 
and Social Development to pursue all cases and attend to all 
victims, given insufficient police and prosecutors, and 
chronic shortfalls in the ranks of social workers.  The 
problem is less one of funding, and more one of these 
services struggling to build sufficient staff with adequate 
skills for their dramatically expanded responsibilities in 
the post-1994 aftermath of apartheid. 
 
Awareness of TIP-related law, ability to apply it in 
identifying cases, and confident knowledge in appropriate 
measures to take are also still lacking, hampering the 
responses of police and immigration officers, since only a 
minority have yet been exposed to counter-TIP training. 
Police officers may receive bribes from crime syndicates, or 
fail to pursue them out of fear of reprisals, or they may 
prefer to deport victims as a shortcut compared to opening a 
TIP investigation, particularly given language barriers. 
There is no evidence of large-scale corruption or official 
collaboration with traffickers, but the large sums of money 
generated by the trade is believed to fund localized 
corruption. 
 
-- D.  The SAG does not yet have a systematic mechanism for 
monitoring and reporting the anti-trafficking efforts of its 
own agencies and external partners.  Work has been suspended 
on the "Trafficking in Information Management System" (TIMS) 
mentioned in last year's report, replaced by plans to 
incorporate TIP tracking into a larger data base of justice 
and crime prevention called "e-justice."  The latter will 
track investigations, prosecutions, and victims, across SAPS, 
NPA, DHA, SADOL, and DSD.  E-justice is expected to be two to 
three years in development. 
 
----------------------------- 
Investigation and Prosecution 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (Responses to paragraph 25 of Ref B.) 
 
-- A.  South Africa's Prevention and Combating of Trafficking 
Q-- A.  South Africa's Prevention and Combating of Trafficking 
in Persons Bill is drafted and awaiting a vote date on the 
2009 Parliamentary calendar.  The Bill is comprehensive and 
specifically targeted to TIP, for both sexual exploitation 
and labor, in both domestic and cross-border cases.  (Note: 
full text of the bill, aka "Project 131," is at 
http://salawreform.justice.gov.za/reports.htm , the PDF report 
next to Project 131 -- Annexure D, pages 188-269.) 
 
Pending the TIP Bill's passage, prosecutors continue to rely 
on elements of common law (e.g. rape, assault, kidnapping, 
and extortion) and acts against racketeering, sexual abuse, 
forced labor and child labor, and pornography.  This body of 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  006 OF 008 
 
 
legislation includes the Prevention of Organized Crime Act 
121 of 1998 (POCA); the Sexual Offenses Act 23 of 1957, as 
amended in December 2007; the Basic Conditions of Employment 
Act 75 of 1997; the Children's Act 38 of 2005, as amended in 
November 2007; the Immigration Act 13 of 2002; the Films and 
Publications Act 65 of 1996; the Corruption Act 94 of 1992; 
the Extradition Act 67 of 1962; and the International 
Cooperation in Criminal Matters Act 75 of 1996.  (Note: these 
are unchanged since last year's report, hence they are not 
reproduced here.  End Note.) 
 
Given the strong ties of TIP to criminal networks, the 
Prevention of Organized Crime Act 121 of 1998 (POCA) is the 
law most used to date to punish traffickers, usually those 
related to the sex trade.  SAPS noted that POCA also has the 
most extensive list of charges, hence highest probability 
that some will "stick" and yield convictions.  The Sexual 
Offences Act (SOA) also now criminalizes trafficking for 
sexual exploitation and does not allow victims to be 
prosecuted for related offenses like immigration laws or 
prostitution.  (Note: full text of the latter provisions is 
at http://www.info.gov.za/gazette/bills/2003/b50 b-03.pdf, 
pages 40-41, sections 70-71(1)-71(2).) 
 
The Children's Act of 2005 prohibits "the recruitment, sale, 
supply, transportation, transportation, harboring or receipt 
of children, within or across the borders of the Republic." 
The law also prohibits the commercial sexual exploitation of 
children, sexual intercourse with children under 16, or 
permitting a female under 16 to stay in a brothel for the 
purpose of prostitution.  The Children's Amendment Act of 
2007, signed into law in March 2008, creates an advanced 
regulatory framework for prevention and prosecution of child 
labor, explicitly outlaws child trafficking.  Section 141 of 
the Act defines and criminalizes the worst forms of child 
labor, including TIP, in accordance with ILO Convention 182. 
This Act further includes a requirement for planning at a 
national and provincial level along with an effective roll 
out of services.  Although the provisions of the Children's 
Amendment Act cannot officially take effect until the 
completion of regulations governing its implementation, 
children's legal advocates say the SAG is already taking 
action as if the Act were fully in force, and they strongly 
believe those implementing regulations will be put in place 
in 2009. 
 
-- B.  The maximum penalty for violations of the Sexual 
Offences or Children's Acts is 20 years in prison.  In the 
past, application of common law has obtained sentences nearly 
that long, as in the case of trafficker Amien Andrews, 
sentenced in 1996 and still serving 17 years for charges 
including kidnapping, indecent assault, and rape. 
 
-- C.  Labor related TIP offenses are punishable under a 
variety of existing laws.  The Basic Conditions of Employment 
Act removes cases of forced and child labor from the Labor 
Court and assigns them to the Criminal Court, where 
QCourt and assigns them to the Criminal Court, where 
sentencing is based on precedent and case law.  Post is not 
aware of any case prosecuted to a close to set a precedent. 
 
-- D.  Penalties for rape and sexual assault are difficult to 
estimate.  The Sexual Offences Act makes mention of penalties 
from three to seven years, depending on offenses and their 
severity, leaving the sentence to the discretion of the 
court.  Penalties for these crimes against children are 
markedly more severe, up to a maximum life imprisonment, with 
even first time offenders receiving on the order of 15 or 
more years. 
 
-- E.  The SAG opened at least five new prosecutions of 
trafficking cases during the reporting period, including two 
with charges under the newly expanded SOA.  In May, a 
Mozambican woman Aldina dos Santos was charged with child 
trafficking and forced labor for subjecting three girls to 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  007 OF 008 
 
 
sexual exploitation (under the SOA) and domestic servitude 
(under labor law).  Also in May, a female club owner and her 
adult daughter were arrested for luring eight South African 
women into forced prostitution.  In June, a Sierra Leone 
national was arrested for selling girls aged eight to 12 into 
prostitution.  In November, five Nigerian men were arrested 
for trafficking Nigerians through South Africa.  They were 
charged with TIP offenses under the SOA as well as for 
drug-related crimes.  In late January, six Nigerians and one 
Tanzanian were arrested, and 17 South African victims 
rescued, in North West province.  Charges in the latter case 
include drug trafficking and prostitution, with TIP charges 
to be determined. 
 
Aside from these cases highlighted in the press and confirmed 
by NPA, no complete figures on SAPS investigations or NPA 
prosecutions were available.  Of the five cases listed here, 
all concerned commercial sexual exploitation (and one forced 
labor as well); in four of the five cases the traffickers 
were non-nationals, although in three of the five cases their 
victims were local; and the cases were split between children 
and adult victims.  All five cases were ongoing at year-end. 
No convictions were reached or sentences handed down during 
the reporting period. 
 
While there were no prosecutions in the reporting period 
specifically targeting fraudulent labor recruitment, the 
alleged traffickers charged above may have made deceptive 
offers or imposed debt bondage on their victims as part of 
their TIP activity.  As mentioned earlier, SADOL labor 
inspectors did pursue unscrupulous labor brokers in the rural 
agricultural sectors, and they have pledged to reform or ban 
labor brokering after the 2009 national election.  On the 
destination end of trafficking, the above five cases apply to 
"employers" who tricked, intimidated, and abused victims. 
Past examples of convictions of both recruiters and employers 
of TIP victims include recruiter Amien Andrews, sentenced to 
17 years in 1996, and still in jail; and brothel boss 
Elizabeth Maswanganye, who lured women and exploited them, 
sentenced to 5 years in 2006, and still in jail. 
 
-- F.  On behalf of NPA/SOCA, the IOM and other experts from 
the academic and NGO communities are providing extensive 
specialized counter-trafficking training to officials from an 
array of government agencies, from law enforcement to 
immigration officers to social workers, plus representatives 
of NGOs, advocacy organizations, and the media.  Training 
material encompasses the definition of trafficking, as 
distinct from smuggling; identification criteria; legal 
frameworks; and roles of various government departments and 
community actors.  The table below summarizes the more than 
1,000 SAG attendees of EU-funded IOM anti-TIP workshops in 
just the latter half of last year: 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
IOM Counter-Trafficking Training Attendees 
July - December 2008 
QJuly - December 2008 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
- Dept. of Home Affairs / Border Officers: 339 
- Department of Social Development: 155 
- South African Police Service (SAPS): 139 
- Department of Health: 135 
- Department of Labor: 100 
- National Prosecuting Authority: 71 
- Dept. of Home Affairs / Law Enforcement: 44 
- Other law enforcement agencies: 33 
- Media professionals: 32 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Total: 1,048 persons trained against TIP 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
IOM/SAG workshops will continue through 2009, emphasizing 
coordinated responses across government agencies, NGOs, and 
the public.  After an intensive five-day IOM course, 68 
 
PRETORIA 00000298  008 OF 008 
 
 
representatives of NGOs and church charities were certified 
as TIP trainers by conducting onward two-day courses in their 
provinces.  A total of 30 awareness-raising workshops across 
all nine provinces drew 573 community participants.  IOM's 
curriculum is being reviewed for SAG accreditation and 
institutionalized roll-out across the SAG within the next 
year. 
 
Susan Kreston, children's rights advocate and guest lecturer 
at the University of the Free State, estimates she gave 
anti-TIP training to 1,535 workshop attendees during the 
year, encompassing police, prosecutors, social workers, 
medical and mental health professionals, NGO officers, and 
others.  Of that audience, over 500 were participants in NPA 
training workshops on the SOA, within which Ms. Kreston 
taught the TIP module.  Over 200 others were prosecutors, in 
training at regional Justice Colleges.  An estimated 265 were 
attendees of the May annual meeting of the South African 
Professional Society on the Abuse of Children (SAPSAC), where 
TIP was one segment in 2008 but will be the primary theme of 
the upcoming 2009 conference.  A mixed community audience of 
about 225 attended Ms. Kreston's sessions in Durban in March, 
covering a range of topics from TIP basics and the SOA, to 
forensic interviewing, to preparing children to testify in 
court.  The Durban series was underwritten by the NPA, a 
local NGO, and the U.S. Consulate.  In January 2009, Ms. 
Kreston will contribute to anti-TIP presentations run by Save 
the Children-UK. 
 
The USG is also contributing directly to the training effort. 
 State/INL's Women's Justice and Empowerment Initiative 
(WJEI) team, currently training police and prosecutors on 
gender-based violence and the amended Sexual Offences Act, is 
contractually committed to expanding the program to address 
TIP, and to include seminars for judges.  WJEI's law 
enforcement advisor is currently exploring training 
opportunities with the SAPS addressing TIP, in preparation 
for imminent passage of the TIP law.  In this endeavor, WJEI 
is looking to leverage the expertise of a DHS/ICE officer who 
has personally delivered anti-TIP training to over 2,500 
members of the police force in his previous role with IOM. 
 
(Text of paragraph 9 continues in the "Part 2" cable.) 
LA LIME