09PRETORIA271
PRETORIA INPUTS TO THE 2009 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Thu Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO0630
RR RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHSA #0271/01 0431449
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121449Z FEB 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7339
INFO RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 1235
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0511
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0925
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE 3788
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 6022
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0936
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 6548
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0668
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8889
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 PRETORIA 000271 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/S, AF/RSA; G/TIP FOR STEPHANIE KRONENBURG; 
G-ACBLANK, INL, DRL, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SA KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD
ASEC, PREF, ELAB 
SUBJECT: PRETORIA INPUTS TO THE 2009 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
(TIP) REPORT -- PART 2 OF 2 
 
REF: A. STATE 05577 
     ¶B. 08 STATE 132759 
     ¶C. 08 PRETORIA 2249 
     ¶D. 08 PRETORIA 2454 
     ¶E. 08 PRETORIA 1926 
 
(Text continues from Paragraph 9 of the "Part 1" cable.) 
 
 
-- G.  There has been little, if any, cross-border law 
enforcement cooperation on TIP between the SAG and 
neighboring countries, although DSD and IOM do assist in 
victims' repatriation.  As noted above, initiation of 
regional joint efforts against TIP is a goal of the NPA's 
Inter-Sectoral Task Team, and EU funding is being applied to 
enable cross-border data sharing for TIP monitoring.  The 
SAPS noted a particular focus on cooperation with authorities 
of Mozambique, the land border experiencing the highest 
traffic in contraband goods as well as TIP. 
 
-- H.  Neither Post nor the SAPS trafficking desk is aware of 
any extraditions by South Africa to other countries to face 
TIP charges, nor of any requests by other nations for such 
extraditions. 
 
-- I.  Post has no evidence of official SAG involvement in 
TIP or institutional tolerance of TIP.  Some individuals in 
immigration or other law enforcement areas may have corrupt 
dealings with traffickers but Post has no such evidence. 
 
-- J.  No SAG officials are known to have been prosecuted for 
involvement in TIP.  A multinational anti-TIP team at 
Johannesburg International Airport expressed frustration that 
corruption did occur among DHA immigration officials 
apparently bribed by traffickers to overlook TIP.  Given long 
delays in investigations and low likelihood of successful 
prosecution, punishment was limited to dismissal of suspected 
employees.  Further, strong trade unions blocked the 
permanent barring of such employees from future airport work, 
raising the prospect of recycling of offenders. 
 
-- K.  Prostitution is illegal in South Africa.  The 
activities of prostitutes, brothel operators, clients, pimps, 
and enforcers are all criminal.  Police enforcement can be 
lax, given South Africa's exceptionally high rates of violent 
crime and overstretched policing resources.  Victims' rights 
NGOs told us that while police generally take proper care of 
victims, delivering them to shelters or alerting SAG social 
workers, they then usually failed to investigate 
perpetrators. 
 
Despite headline-grabbing efforts by the advocacy group Sex 
Workers' Education and Advocacy Task Force (SWEAT) in favor 
of decriminalization of prostitution in 2010, we find SAG and 
advocacy groups opposed to that idea, on the evidence of 
increased criminality in countries which have experimented 
with legalization.  While enforcement will likely be uneven 
outside VIP zones, as police scramble to provide security for 
the games, Post does not expect formal decriminalization. 
 
-- L.  The South African Defense Forces provides troops to 
peacekeeping units deployed abroad, primarily on the African 
continent.  While our interviewees were aware of crimes 
committed by these troops, none were TIP-related. 
 
-- M.  South Africa does have a problem of child sex tourism, 
Q-- M.  South Africa does have a problem of child sex tourism, 
particularly in its most popular destination of Cape Town. 
While post has no hard data on offenders, anecdotally we 
understand that client perpetrators are largely from Europe 
(e.g. UK, Germany, Holland) and even the U.S., with 
exploitative activities occuring primarily in rented holiday 
apartments.  The amended SOA expressly provides for the 
exercise of South Africa's laws outside its territories 
(extraterritoriality).  No one to date has been prosecuted 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  002 OF 008 
 
 
under these extraterritorial provisions. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Victim Protection and Assistance 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (Responses to paragraph 26 of Ref B.) 
 
-- A.  Recent legislation provides specific protections to 
TIP victims.  The amended SOA stipulates that TIP victims are 
not to be charged with crimes -- such as immigration 
violations or prostitution -- which are the direct result of 
their having been trafficked.  Following extensive awareness 
and sensitivity training conducted by the UNODC, IOM, and 
others, police action toward TIP victims is said to be not 
always perfect, but markedly more in line with this policy. 
Both the SOA and the amended Children's Act of 2007, expected 
to be implemented by mid-2009, commit the SAG to victims' 
assistance in terms of places of safety, medical aid, and 
legal support.  In practice, the SAG does abide by these 
commitments, although provision of these services can be 
uneven, and lacking most in rural areas.  The Children's Act 
will give extra legal protection to vulnerable children, 
especially those living and working on the street, children 
with disabilities, and children affected by the HIV pandemic. 
 This Act further includes a requirement for planning at 
national and provincial levels and uniform roll-out of 
services. 
 
South Africa was a strong participant in the "Towards the 
Elimination of Child Labor" (TECL) project funded by the U.S. 
Department of Labor and implemented by the IOL.  Under TECL's 
auspices, the SAG drafted a Child Labor Plan of Action 
comprising hundreds of measures to combat and prevent child 
labor, including in its worst forms like trafficking.  SADOL, 
still the lead agency, says many of the measures have been 
incorporated into the current plans of SAG agencies, and 
implementation will begin in 2009. 
 
-- B.  South Africa has a wide array of care shelters for 
victims of domestic abuse, gender-based violence, rape, and 
sexual assault.  Although there are no specialized facilities 
specifically targeted to TIP victims, trafficked persons can 
access any of those other shelters.  Due to the extremely 
high prevalence of those crimes (e.g. a rape rate higher than 
any other country not at war), assistance and care services 
are well established, albeit at insufficient capacity. 
Facilities are mainly run by NGOs, faith-based organizations 
(FBOs) and community charities, in coordination with the 
Department of Social Development (DSD).  As the only body 
formally authorized by judicial authorities to refer crime 
victims to private shelters, the DSD must always be involved 
in each case, even though it contracts with private entities 
to furnish shelter and care.  The DSD's Victim Empowerment 
Directorate is currently undertaking a five-year review of 
its 2004 'shelter strategy,' with a view to updating 
accreditation procedures, promoting more uniform standards of 
care, and boosting direct funding to its network of service 
Qcare, and boosting direct funding to its network of service 
providers. 
 
Foreign victims have equal access to these shelters, with 
South Africans.  Shelters segregate women from men, for whom 
few facilities exist since men comprise a small fraction of 
victims.  Children under 16 years of age, who are thought to 
make up over half of TIP victims, are cared for in dedicated 
and specialized facilities, with stringent requirements on 
accompaniment and monitoring by social workers. 
 
In a 2007 State/DRL-funded project to prompt awareness and 
collaboration among care providers to TIP victims in the 
inner city of Johannesburg, local NGO Khulisa found that many 
shelters had assisted TIP victims without identifying them as 
such, i.e. addressing and healing abuse without recognizing 
signs of trafficking.  In more developed provinces like 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  003 OF 008 
 
 
Gauteng and Western Cape, Khulisa found (after probing) that 
about two thirds of organizations surveyed did in fact deal 
with victims of human trafficking; this figure was 57 percent 
in Mpumalanga province bordering Mozambique and 40 percent in 
Limpopo bordering Zimbabwe. 
 
In addition to DSD's networks of affiliated private shelters, 
the SAG has established a network of Thuthuzela Care Centers 
(TCCs), described in greater detail in paragraph 13 below. 
Further, UNODC funding of $18 million has been committed to 
the DSD's Victim Empowerment Unit to build a national network 
of victim drop-in centers. 
 
Because TIP victims are assisted through the same channels as 
victims of other types of violence and abuse, and in many 
cases not necessarily identified as TIP victims per se, the 
SAG does not have figures for amounts spent specifically 
assisting TIP victims.  In the case of TCCs, which are 
collaborative efforts across multiple SAG departments, each 
of the partners bears the costs for the services it 
contributes -- Department of Health for medical care, 
Department of Justice for legal aid, and DSD for counseling. 
 
-- C.  As noted, the SAG does provide TIP victims with legal, 
medical, and counseling services.  All TCCs, for instance, 
are staffed by doctors, forensic nurses, social workers, and 
satellite NGOs providing psycho-social help.  Subcontracted 
services, such as for overnight shelter, are funded by DSD, 
albeit at tiny levels of subsidy.  (The Saartjie Baartman 
Centre said it receives funding equivalent to $100 a month 
for every child in its care, and $300 a month per adult 
woman.)  According to DSD, victims' assistance funding is 
allocated in a cascade fashion, parceled from national 
government to departments and then to provinces, where the 
funding is spent by a combination of provincial and local 
authorities.  Foreign victims often do not avail themselves 
of counseling or legal aid, instead preferring only critical 
medical services followed by repatriation at the earliest 
opportunity. 
 
-- D.  As noted, the SOA provides TIP victims with relief 
from criminal prosecution or deportation.  Foreign victims 
are allowed to remain in the country temporarily to receive 
assistance and to assist law enforcement investigations. 
 
-- E.  The SAG does not provide long-term shelter or housing 
to TIP victims; its programs are meant to be emergency 
response and transitional towards reintegration to normal 
life.  An exception is the case of foreign victims who may 
agree to remain in South Africa in witness protection 
programs while awaiting the trial of their traffickers. 
Three Thai women are currently in this status, but it is 
uncommon, since most victims want to return to their home 
countries as quickly as possible, and the trial wait can 
extend for several years. 
 
-- F.  DSD, SAPS, and private shelters collaborate in 
attending to victims when TIP situations come to light.  A 
social worker may be approached by an escaped victim, or 
Qsocial worker may be approached by an escaped victim, or 
called by a church shelter; or police may rescue a victim in 
the course of a raid; or an alert call may come through the 
IOM TIP hotline.  In any of these cases, DSD and SAPS notify 
each other to enable rapid care as well as effective 
gathering of evidence and testimony.  DSD is the only agency 
then authorized to refer victims to registered private 
shelters, and to monitor their care, prepare them for court, 
and accompany them through trial and/or repatriation stages. 
DSD aims to have social workers on call, nationwide, 24x7, to 
respond to new cases, but if a social worker cannot be 
contacted the SAPS are also authorized to place victims in 
temporary overnight shelter care rather than housing them in 
police custody.  These protocols, under development by the 
Task Team over the last year, are due to be finalized in the 
first quarter of 2009. 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  004 OF 008 
 
 
 
-- G.  Until passage of the TIP law, TIP victims continue to 
be categorized with other victims of rape, domestic abuse, 
and gender based violence.  As a result, there are no 
available statistics of TIP victims assisted during the 
reporting period, as these numbers are subsumed within much 
larger headings.  Even after the law is passed, lack of 
recognition of trafficking victims, even among social 
workers, will contribute to the absence of statistics or even 
estimates of numbers of victims assisted. 
 
-- H.  NPA-contracted IOM training to police, immigration and 
border officials, and social workers includes instruction in 
the identification of TIP victims among sex workers, 
laborers, travelers, and victims of abuse.  The Thai 
Embassy's TIP officer described how SAPS alerts the Embassy 
and IOM in advance of raiding a brothel holding suspected 
Thai victims.  With Embassy translation, IOM then conducts 
screening interviews with those persons found, in order to 
distinguish trafficking victims from voluntary prostitutes. 
 
-- I.  Historically, TIP victims were often charged with 
offenses like prostitution or immigration violations, and 
foreign victims were generally quickly deported without 
medical attention, legal assistance, or counseling care.  The 
SOA has since provided protections from prosecution of 
victims for crimes committed under TIP coercion.  Police are 
also being trained to protect rather than punish victims.  In 
March, however, press reported that police intended to deport 
27 Chinese women along with their seven alleged traffickers. 
 
-- J.  Victims may seek legal action against traffickers, but 
despite SAG encouragement to TIP victims to do so the vast 
majority prefer to return home without pressing charges, 
according to the SAPS and NPA.  No statistic is available on 
the exact number of victims willing to testify, but the 
figure above of six TIP cases opened this year is an 
indicator that the number is small.  Four Thai TIP victims 
remain under witness protection during the ongoing trial of 
their traffickers.  Post received a phone inquiry from the 
SAPS about digital videoconferencing (DVC) capabilities from 
Thailand, and TIP officer passed this query on to the Thai 
Embassy.  Testimony via DVC from South Africa's Embassy in 
Bangkok would be a much better option, to enable Thai victims 
to return home quickly and testify remotely. 
 
For those victims who remain in South Africa, those who are 
citizens or otherwise entitled to work may naturally seek new 
employment while a court case is pending.  Some shelters do 
offer basic trade skills training, and IOM provides small 
seed capital for repatriated adult victims to launch new 
legal livelihoods in their home countries.  In the case of 
child victims, IOM undertakes the tracing of the victim's 
family through its office in the country of origin, a process 
that normally lasts a few months, while the child remains 
under DSD supervised shelter. 
Q 
-- K.  As noted earlier, the SAG has conducted extensive 
interagency training on TIP, including procedures for victim 
identification and assistance.  IOM told TIP officer that DHA 
had requested supplemental training targeted to its consular 
officers going abroad, but Post is not aware of any cases in 
the reporting period of such assistance by South African 
diplomatic missions.  Typically repatriation of South African 
victims is mediated by the IOM in both countries, or in a 
December 2008 by contacts between SAPS and UK police who had 
rescued a South African victim in Wales. 
 
-- L.  Post is not aware of any requests for SAG assistance 
by repatriated South African victims, nor of any mechanism 
for its provision, other than through the mediation of IOM. 
 
-- M.  IOM is the main international organization assisting 
TIP victims in South Africa -- advising the SAG on policy, 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  005 OF 008 
 
 
serving as a member of the NPA/SOCA's Inter-Sectoral Task 
Team on TIP, running a national TIP phone hotline, conducting 
screening interviews to identify TIP victims, directly 
facilitating the provision of shelter, and arranging returns 
of foreign nationals.  These areas of victim assistance are 
alongside the IOM's extensive training of SAG officials, 
research on TIP, and production of informational materials 
and participation in awareness-raising campaigns.  IOM 
confirmed TIP officer's impression that the working 
relationship with NPA/SOCA, DSD, and other SAG officials was 
close and very productive. 
 
---------- 
Prevention 
---------- 
 
¶11.  (Responses to paragraph 27 of Ref B.) 
 
-- A.  The SAG, IOM, and NGOs continue to expand 
awareness-raising activities.  More than 85,000 
countertrafficking posters and brochures in six languages 
were distributed in local towns during IOM's training 
workshops, publicizing the IOM's toll-free helpline.  A TV ad 
aired in September drew 576 referral calls, five times the 
usual volume.  The above-referenced IOM survey on domestic 
TIP drew press attention, raised public awareness of the 
issue, and provided authorities with useful information on 
TIP flows, patterns, and modus operandi. 
 
Annual campaigns targeting the general public generated 
anti-TIP media blitzes.  The third annual Human Trafficking 
Awareness Week (a 'best practice' of the 2007 TIP Report), 
held in October, alerted the public to the TIP threat and 
promoted the IOM's TIP helpline.  Coordinated by the NPA, 
IOM, and a popular radio station Metro FM, the week featured 
a film festival, rock concert, and a blitz of radio spots. 
This augmented the annual '16 Days of Activism' campaign to 
end the abuse of women and children.  Justice Minister Surty 
has proposed making TIP a central issue in the next '16 Days' 
cycle, with the busy transport route between Maputo and 
Koomatiport a candidate for an anti-TIP roadshow. 
 
As noted above, 30 IOM-spawned awareness-raising workshops 
across all nine provinces drew 573 community participants, 
directly spreading the word.  For 2009, IOM is now launching 
a series of 'indaba' style traditional village counsels with 
tribal leaders, specifically targeting potential TIP victims 
in rural communities.  Although IOM has the lead role in 
coordinating the SAG's EU-funded anti-TIP training and 
curriculum development, myriad private initiatives are also 
ongoing.  A Catholic nuns' group has drafted a school 
curriculum.  In inner city areas of Johannesburg, local NGO 
Khulisa has educated communities to detect trafficking, and 
it is creating "referral map" posters for citizens to contact 
authorities.  Khulisa has a child-friendly kit for elementary 
school teachers to use with their students.  The Alliance of 
Christians Against Trafficking (ACT) conducts scenario-based 
"Traffic Proof" seminars in churches, schools, and community 
halls to sensitize audiences to signs of TIP, ending with 
Qhalls to sensitize audiences to signs of TIP, ending with 
mnemonic games to help the public memorize the TIP helpline 
number 0800-555-9999. 
 
Looking ahead to South Africa's hosting of the 2010 FIFA 
World Cup of football, the SAG's Inter-sectoral Task Team 
focused its latest meeting in December on an assessment of 
2010 preparedness gaps conducted by local children's NGO Molo 
Songololo and funded by regional countertrafficking NGO the 
Southern Africa Network Against Trafficking and Abuse of 
Children (SANTAC).  Since that meeting, previously overlooked 
anti-TIP prevention and child protection measures have been 
added to planning agendas across SAG departments.  The DSD's 
Victim Empowerment directorate, for example, has been tasked 
with formulating a child protection strategy.  Cape Town 
Tourism, a SAG-funded destination marketing organization 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  006 OF 008 
 
 
which also sits on a World Trade Organization (WTO) board for 
the protection of children in tourism, has proposed that Cape 
Town act as pilot site for the roll-out of the Code (detailed 
in paragraph 12 below). 
 
Civil society organizations are important collaborators in 
the 2010 anti-TIP efforts.  ACT, in partnership with Youth 
With A Mission (YWAM) and Ultimate Goal, who have 
historically been involved in World Cup events globally, are 
already active in enlisting a projected 3,500 volunteers from 
abroad with defined skills in physical education, medical 
assistance, and child protection.  These YWAM staff will help 
generate recreation opportunities for unaccompanied kids 
flocking to fan parks when public schools are suspended 
during the games.  They will also distribute anti-TIP 
pamphlets in game areas and man lost-children booths and TIP 
information stands.  YWAM's volunteer force, together with 
the industry support delivered by FTTSA (below) and Cape Town 
Tourism, and with the local knowledge of child protection 
NGOs like Molo Songololo, should provide a powerful deterrent 
to potential clients and victims. 
 
-- B.  The SAG does monitor physical flows of persons at 
ports of entry, screening for behavior patterns indicative of 
TIP.  The multinational South African Immigration Liason 
(SAIL) Team at Johannesburg Airport, for example, observes 
and interviews passengers leaving the country, alert to signs 
of TIP, such as adults traveling with children evidently not 
their own.  Other suspicious signs include one-way tickets, 
same-day ticket purchase, unaccompanied minors, ignorance of 
final destination, or travel rationales which do not appear 
to be bona fide.  TIP detection is mainly a matter of pattern 
identification over time -- e.g. a suspect traveling 
repeatedly in varied company for no clear reason in a short 
period of time.  Before boarding, flight data is mined for 
known suspects by comparing it against data bases of persons 
of concern.  Because sufficient evidence takes a long time to 
collect, and prosecution of offenders is a slim prospect as 
they may switch modes of operation, the SAIL team's primary 
strategy is one of disruption of detected activity, by 
screening and offloading of suspects and their potential 
victims. 
 
-- C.  See paragraph 8B above for details of the NPA/SOCA-led 
Inter-sectoral Task Team on TIP. 
 
-- D.  Last year, Post reported that the SAG had a national 
anti-TIP plan, albeit unimplemented.  In more recent 
discussions, NPA/SOCA said a new plan was to be drafted in 
the context of the EU-funded broad-based TIP initiatives 
running to the end of 2010.  The NPA noted that South African 
Development Community (SADC) members including South Africa 
had recently committing all of its members to have such plans 
by 2015. 
 
-- E.  Prostitution is illegal in South Africa, and so is the 
purchasing of commercial sex services.  As mentioned, 
enforcement can be lax, given the competing priorities 
Qenforcement can be lax, given the competing priorities 
generated by South Africa's exceptionally high rates of 
violent crime and overstretched policing resources.  The 
SAG's greatest deterrence effort is its continuing arrests 
and prosecutions of violators. 
 
-- F.  Cape Town Tourism plans to convoke in late March 2009 
a small, focused, and closed-door workshop (which Post may 
attend as observers) among representatives of the tourism 
industry, government, and civil society, to find ways to 
combat sex tourism.  Further efforts to deter sex tourism are 
described in paragraph 12 below.  These initiatives will 
impact the activities of foreign tourists in South Africa, 
and also South Africans who might travel abroad in future. 
 
-- G.  The South African military has prosecuted its own 
troops involved in sex crimes such as rape while deployed on 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  007 OF 008 
 
 
peacekeeping missions abroad.  All troops involved in such 
missions receive behavior and conduct training to avert 
problems of sexual abuse. 
 
------------ 
"TIP Heroes" 
------------ 
 
¶12.  (Response to paragraph 28 of Ref B.) 
 
Post applauds the initiative of Ms. Jennifer Seif, Executive 
Director of Fair Trade in Tourism South Africa (FTTSA), in 
introducing "the Code" against child sex tourism to South 
Africa's vital tourism sector.  By its full name, The Code of 
Conduct for the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Exploitation in Travel and Tourism (http://www.thecode.org) 
is a worldwide campaign committing signatories to six 
concrete anti-TIP actions related to institutional policy, 
training, contracting, awareness-raising among clients and 
counterparts, and reporting.  The Code was launched by the 
Swedish NGO ECPAT, on whose steering committee FTTSA now 
holds one of the NGO seats, with UNICEF funding and WTO 
support.  For its part, FTTSA 
(http://www.fairtourismsa.org.za) is a local nonprofit 
encouraging tourism that is sustainable and respectful 
vis-a-vis environmental resources and culture, and that is 
ethical and equitable to local communities.  By FTTSA's 
action, South Africa will join Kenya in leading the Africa 
continent towards adoption of the Code. 
 
By its proactive and preventative nature, this initiative is 
particularly welcome in advance of South Africa's hosting of 
the 2010 FIFA World Cup.  In advocating for the Code, FTTSA 
is marshaling resources and commitments from a broad spectrum 
of anti-TIP stakeholders -- from the government sector, 
through coordination with the SAG's Department of 
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Department of Home 
Affairs, and National Prosecuting Authority; from private 
businesses, ranging from major multinational hotels and auto 
rental chains, to small community cooperatives, who have 
agreed to sign on; and most importantly the traveling public, 
who will be encouraged to be vigilant against the sex trade 
in children.  Through its interest in the Code, the tourism 
sector has recognized the importance of 2010 in showcasing 
South Africa to the world as a safe, lawful, and ethical 
destination.  We urge the SAG to go beyond mere endorsement 
of this initiative, and to supply tangible resources and 
funding, and perhaps even regulatory incentives to encourage 
the widest possible adoption of the Code in 2009. 
 
-------------- 
Best Practices 
-------------- 
 
¶13.  (Responses to paragraph 29 of Ref B.) 
 
The SAG has established an internationally lauded network of 
Thuthuzela Care Centers (TCCs), essentially crisis centers to 
assist victims of rape and sexual violence.  The TCC model is 
an integrated "one-stop shop" addressing victims' medical, 
legal, and social needs, and coordinating the services of SAG 
Departments of Health, Justice, and Social Development.  TCCs 
are not shelters -- they are not designed for victims to stay 
overnight, although they can refer victims to NGOs that do 
Qovernight, although they can refer victims to NGOs that do 
offer shelter.  Under the leadership of NPA/SOCA, 17 TCCs 
have been established to date.  Another 35 are due for 
completion by 2011 -- 23 of them funded by an $11.7 million 
contract awarded by USAID under the Women's Justice and 
Empowerment Initiative, and the other 12 by UNICEF.  The 
ultimate goal is a total of 80 TCCs nationwide.  USAID 
estimates that the TCCs already serve approximately 20 
percent of all victims of rape and sexual offences. 
 
------------------------ 
 
PRETORIA 00000271  008 OF 008 
 
 
Sources and Contributors 
------------------------ 
 
¶14.  Information above is derived from post meetings with 
government officials, law enforcement and the judiciary, 
lawmakers, academics, IOs and NGOs, diplomatic counterparts, 
trainers and researchers, and members of civil society: 
 
- Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) 
- Department of Labor (SADOL) 
- Department of Social Development (DSD), Victim Empowerment 
directorate ('VEP') 
- (Dept. of Justice) National Prosecuting Authority / Sexual 
Offences and Community Affairs unit (NPA/SOCA) 
- Thuthuzela Care Centers - implementing contractor 'RTI' 
- (Department of Home Affairs) South Africa Immigration 
Liason (SAIL) Team and border control officers, Johannesburg 
International Airport 
- South African Police Service (SAPS) / TIP desk 
- South African Law Reform Commission (SALRC) 
- Fair Trade in Tourism South Africa (FTTSA) 
- Cape Town Tourism 
- International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
- United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 
- Royal Thai Embassy, Pretoria 
- Susan Kreston, University of Free State / U.S. Fulbright 
- Dr. Carol Allais, University of South Africa (UNISA) 
- Khulisa (human rights NGO), Johannesburg 
- Molo Songolo (children's NGO), Cape Town 
- Alliance of Christians Against Trafficking (ACT), Cape Town 
- Saartjie Baartman Centre (victims' shelter), Cape Town 
- Anex / CDW (victims' support NGO), Cape Town 
 
¶15.  Post's interagency TIP working group coordinates 
anti-TIP reporting and programs among the Political section, 
DHS/ICE, DoJ/INL/Women's Justice and Empowerment Initiative 
(WJEI), Economic / Labor office, and USAID. 
 
¶16.  The estimated total time spent by Post to compile this 
information is 136 hours.  This includes 93 hours by the TIP 
officer, and 43 by the rest of post's interagency working 
group.  Of this, an estimated 60 hours were devoted to 
interviews with interlocutors, 33 arranging and holding group 
meetings, and 43 writing the reporting cable. 
 
¶17.  Post point of contact on TIP is Cassandra Carraway, 
telephone 27-(0)12-431-4374 and fax 27-(0)12-431-4612. 
 
 
LA LIME