09PRETORIA1614
CAUTIOUS HOPES FOR ZUMA AMONG SOME SOUTH AFRICAN
Fri Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO7463
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHSA #1614/01 2191322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071322Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9270
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7042
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1144
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9412
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 001614 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KIRF SA KJUS KDEM SF
SUBJECT: CAUTIOUS HOPES FOR ZUMA AMONG SOME SOUTH AFRICAN 
NGOS 
 
PRETORIA 00001614  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU)  South African civil society groups are cautiously 
optimistic about President Jacob Zuma, believing his promises 
of openness and meaningful dialogue will improve their 
working environment.  Under former President Thabo Mbeki, 
many groups felt isolated from leadership and shut out from 
meaningful work.  With the country grappling with tough 
issues like xenophobic attacks, poverty, inadequate health 
care, and crime, NGO sources felt the need was urgent to 
engage the state and strengthen its advocacy.  Poloff met 
with a small sample of civil society organizations to 
understand how their roles may evolve under the new 
administration.  These organizations were chosen to reflect 
some of the most pressing issues in South Africa and the role 
civil society would undertake to improve current conditions. 
End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
A  A Look at Select NGOS in South Africa 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  AfriForum Youth, the pro-Afrikaner civil rights 
group, respected Zuma personally but was cautiously waiting 
for him to act on his campaign promises.  Secretary General 
Ebert Grobler said, "Zuma can have the best or worst 
administration ... It is too early to judge." Funded by 
members rather than the SAG, AfriForum Youth was unconcerned 
about financial support from the Zuma administration. 
AfriForum has over 1,000 members with membership costs 
ranging from $5 to $11.  The group was lobbying for a shift 
in affirmative action policy.  AfriForum felt the policy's 
current focus solely on race (people of color), was unfair to 
other ethnic groups from lower socioeconmic backgrounds. 
AfriForum is advocating for a new policy based on 
socioeconomic status alone. Grobler was hopeful that under 
Zuma's leadership the SAG would soon undertake such changes. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Human Rights Watch is an independent organization 
focused on defending and protecting human rights.  Some of 
their direct action is specifically geared toward 
investigation of human rights abuse and presenting these 
reports to government and policy makers.  The group indicated 
that fundraising can be problematic at times, but is 
extremely grateful for the help from American-based 
foundations.  The operating budget of Human Rights Watch 
specifically geared to Africa is $5,532,631, 75 percent of 
which comes from individual donors.  Senior Researcher Tiseke 
Kasambala reiterates a common theme heard from other 
groups... that Zuma is more open in terms of policy 
implementation and is very aware of past human rights issues 
and those that are currently surfacing.  She indicated that 
Zuma is more flexible and open to meeting with Human Rights 
Watch than Mbeki was.  Kasambala indicated that she could 
call government on the phone as a representative from Human 
Rights Watch and "be sure to get an answer."  She also said 
that if she did not get an answer immediately, government 
would call back, which shows the leverage of the 
organization.  The group is very hopeful of their mission in 
South Africa.  Kasambala said, "There are so many issues for 
our organization to deal with and funding is another barrier 
to our progress, but we are heavily depending on our partners 
to help us continue our mission." 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition is comprised of three 
Q4. (SBU)  Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition is comprised of three 
hundred civic groups that are currently organized under five 
committees: Information, Advocacy, Youth, Human Rights and 
Peace Building in Zimbabwe.  The total operating budget of 
the organization is $190,840.  Eleanor Sisulu, director of 
the organization and daughter-in-law to legendary ANC leader 
Walter Sisulu, indicated that her organization was able to 
raise awareness and make the government conscious of issues 
surrounding Zimbabwe.  However, she noted, "The organization 
is still trying to assess the direction of the government 
under Zuma."  She admits that on foreign policy engagement, 
it will not be easy because this sector of government is 
still stuck in old Mbeki policies.  Sisulu expects her 
organization to continue thriving under the current political 
conditions.  She has indicated that most civil society 
organizations need to be more articulate in their engagement 
and need fresh approaches to lobbying the state. 
 
PRETORIA 00001614  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The South African Liaison Office (SALO) is an 
international liaison, dialogue and research organization 
most active on building consensus around South African and 
international response to the situations in Zimbabwe and 
Swaziland.  Its roots lie with student and other activists 
who saw a need for steering government to support democracy 
in Zimbabwe by creating linkages between former Zimbabwean 
opposition party Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) leaders 
and their counterparts in the ANC and South African 
Government (SAG).  Lucian Segami, a member of the ANC's 
International Relations committee and manager of SALO, said 
civil society had access to the SAG through people like him, 
who were also active members of the ANC.  He believes that 
civil society's influence on government policy is likely to 
increase under Zuma for several reasons.  Segami thinks the 
new SAG is more sensitive to public opinion than Mbeki was 
and more interested in internal democracy within the ANC.  He 
said, "Definitely government will listen to civil society." 
According to Segami, the ANC is currently implementing a 
mechanism for branch level input on policy issues.  He added 
that the ANC itself, as well as its alliance partners, the 
South African Communist Party and Congress of South African 
Trade Unions, which both sympathize with the MDC, will have a 
much more influential role under Zuma.  Segami believes the 
SAG will be receptive to MDC input on South Africa's role and 
policies towards Zimbabwe. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Institute for Democracy in South Africa (IDASA) -- 
which has often been accused of being too pro-American -- is 
driven by several programs that include Community and Citizen 
Empowerment, Economic Governance, Governance and Aids and 
Initiative for Leadership and Democracy in Africa.   IDASA's 
operating budget is $9,659,421 and about 90 percent of this 
budget comes from international donors (including the United 
States).  Yvette Geyer, acting director of IDASA, is very 
hopeful regarding the leadership of President Zuma.  She 
indicated that her organization rarely disagrees with 
policies implemented by government.  Instead, she claimed 
that their role is to effectively communicate to the public 
the governments, rationale on specific issues.  To do this, 
Geyer said, they work with the South African Government by 
publishing press statements and holding meetings in local 
municipalities.  Through this, she said, "We have been able 
to influence government on foreign policy, as well as 
facilitate a political discussion with leaders from the ANC." 
 Geyer noted that IDASA is one of the few civil society 
groups granted access to the government. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  South Africa Cares for Life is a NGO that supports 
women, children and families affected by unplanned 
pregnancies, abortion, dire poverty, HIV and AIDs.  Their 
current operating budget is $273,463.  South Africa Cares for 
Life indicated that it is too early to truly understand the 
direction the Zuma administration will take.  However, the 
organization did say that Zuma made a visit, out of courtesy, 
to one of its facilities before his election.  (Note:  South 
Africa Cares for Life officials say when Zuma visited the 
facility, he held "as many babies as he could" because he was 
so intrigued by the group's work.  End Note.)   Managing 
Qso intrigued by the group's work.  End Note.)   Managing 
Director Rieke Van Der Berg indicated that she is inspired by 
SA Cares for Life's mission.  She credits this optimism to 
her organization's spiritual background and calling to render 
this form of service to the South African community.  Van Der 
Berg said, "As far as government support is concerned, most 
of our work does not rely on government intervention but 
rests heavily with committed individuals willing to make a 
difference." 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Treatment Action Campaign (TAC), which was one of 
the most marginalized groups under the Mbeki administration, 
is a consortium of community health advocates.  The driving 
force behind their direct action is rooted in awareness 
campaigns and in researching health related issues.  The 
operating budget for TAC is $5,087,527.  Over 80% of funding 
comes from 14 international donors.  TAC indicated that the 
new government at least acknowledges health disparities 
whereas under the Mbeki administration, there was a sense of 
denial in government due to the fact that there was a 
self-serving and closed-minded health minister in office, 
said Mokhunda.  TAC challenged many policies under the Mbeki 
administration.  Mbeki refused to meet with TAC.  However, 
Zuma is showing signs of greater flexibility and a desire to 
 
PRETORIA 00001614  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
be accessible.  Zuma has accepted the fact that HIV can be 
minimized through treatment, and the ANC has made a 
commitment to fighting HIV.  Neo Mokhunda, representative 
from TAC, is very hopeful about the future of TAC,s mission. 
 This hopefulness is credited to the national commitment from 
government, its acknowledgment of serious health issues and 
its desire to remove health deficiencies with the 
availability of funding.  TAC will continue to monitor 
government implementation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Zuma is closely approaching the 100 day mark in 
office.  He is making it a personal mission to visit 
different communities and thank them for their support during 
the election.  From a civil society perspective, Zuma must do 
more than thank them with his words, but also with his 
tangible actions that bring results.  According to Civil 
Society, these results include being more action-driven 
around civil rights, human rights, health care and improving 
the quality of life for the citizens of South Africa.  Most 
groups feel that it is too early to label Zuma as an ideal 
leader, but they are remaining optimistic in their mission to 
build a better South Africa regardless of difficult issues, 
limited funding and support from government.  Only time will 
tell how Zuma treats civil society over the long term -- 
particularly when groups criticize him -- but his creating 
space for dialogue is an important first step to regaining 
the trust lost under Mbeki. 
LA LIME