09RABAT188
EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM 2009
Thu Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0188/01 0641217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051217Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9766
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 0644
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 4526UNCLAS RABAT 000188 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/STC - E KANE AND NEA/MAG 
AMMAN FOR ESTH HUB ? M BHALLA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TSPL ECON AMGT APER MO
SUBJECT: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM 2009 
MOROCCO 
 
REF: A.  STATE 010843 
¶B.  RABAT 0106 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: Embassy Rabat proposes to host an 
Embassy Science Fellow (ESF) in 2009.  Proposal 
follows Ref A template.  End Summary. 
 
-- General Information: 
-- Topic: Evaluation of Morocco?s research and 
development institutions and structure. 
-- Relevant Institutions: The Embassy Science Fellow 
(ESF) would collaborate closely with the Ministry of 
National Education, Higher Education, Training, and 
Scientific Research; the National Center for 
Scientific and Techological Research (CNRST); and 
various Moroccan academic institutions. 
-- Preferred Time Frame and Length: Dates can be 
flexible to accommodate ESF schedule, but Post 
suggests 2-3 months duration (medical clearance 
would be necessary for more than 2 months).  Post 
suggests starting in late September 2009, after the 
Muslim month of Ramadan (after approximately 20 
September). 
-- Additional skills: Background in managing 
scientific research and/or commercialization of 
research; evaluation of research proposals; 
conversational in French. 
-- Security clearance is not required for this 
Fellowship. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Post Proposal: 
¶A.  Post proposes that an ESF from a USG agency with 
expertise in evaluation of scientific research 
proposals and institutions conduct an evaluation of 
Morocco?s scientific and technological (S&T) 
research and development (R&D) institutions, funding 
and infrastructure with a goal of producing a 
strategic ?road map? to guide the Government of 
Morocco (GOM) in its restructuring of the R&D sector 
to make it more relevant to promoting economic 
growth and development.  This activity would 
strongly support Mission goals for economic growth 
and development and would facilitate enhanced U.S.- 
Morocco S&T collaboration under the 2006 U.S.- 
Morocco Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement 
(S&T Agreement).  The proposed ESF program directly 
responds to GOM requests for technical assistance 
(Ref B), provides an important and valuable service 
demonstrating USG commitment to the S&T Agreement, 
and advances USG priorities of promoting science 
diplomacy with Muslim countries. 
 
¶B.  Morocco?s Ministry of National Education, Higher 
Education, Training and Scientific Research 
(Ministry of Education) has identified an urgent 
national need to modernize the organization, 
direction, and relevance of Morocco?s research and 
development efforts.  The Ministry of Education is 
the Government of Morocco?s lead agency for 
activities under the S&T Agreement, and has 
repeatedly contacted Post with requests for USG 
assistance and guidance in evaluating and 
prioritizing national R&D efforts, as well as 
advancing U.S.-Moroccan R&D collaboration under the 
Agreement.  Post has coordinated this proposal with 
the Ministry of Education, and the Ministry has 
assured us of its support for a Science Fellow to 
engage in this work, and its willingness to 
facilitate his/her inquiries and interactions with 
relevant individuals and institutions in Morocco. 
 
¶C.  Post proposes that the ESF use his/her tenure in 
Morocco to prepare a report evaluating the current 
state of Morocco?s R&D institutions and efforts, and 
making recommendations in the form of a ?road map? 
for restructuring, reorienting, or reinforcing 
specific fields and institutions.  This report would 
provide a framework for orienting U.S. cooperation 
in S&T areas, as well as serve as a point of 
reference and advice for the Government of Morocco 
as it conducts its restructuring of the R&D sector. 
The ideal ESF would have experience in assessing the 
relative merits and utility of research programs and 
proposals in various scientific and technological 
fields, particularly regarding institutions and 
programs that develop commercially marketable 
technologies.  In addition to the inherent value of 
 
this evaluation to guide USG interactions and GOM 
reforms, Post anticipates that this ESF proposal 
will also be an important deliverable under the S&T 
Agreement, and significantly boost and consolidate 
USG-GOM efforts to promote bilateral cooperation and 
science diplomacy. 
 
¶3.  (U) Embassy Rabat is prepared to provide 
housing, office support, and in-country travel 
arrangements if required (for example, official 
travel to scientific and academic institutions). 
The housing will be living space in a USG-owned 
residence.  Post does not anticipate the ESF would 
require a security clearance to conduct this work. 
 
¶4.  (U) Rabat is not an unaccompanied post and has 
zero percent danger pay.  RSO clears on the 
assignment of a potential ESF. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Post point of contact for the ESF proposal 
is EconOff Jai Nair (Email: NairJL@state.gov; Tel: 
+212-537-66-8136; Fax: +212-537-76-3984).  Backup 
point of contact is EconOff Johanna Merejo (Email: 
MerejoJR@state.gov; Tel: +212-537-66-8131; Fax: 
+212-537-76-3984). 
 
JACKSON