09RABAT952

Fri Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO8046
RR RUEHDE
DE RUEHRB #0952/01 3381542
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041542Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0882
INFO RUEAUSA/DEPT OF EDUCATION WASHINGTON DC
RUEHMEP/THE MEPI COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0102
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 0439
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 3845
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 1093
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0019
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0232
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3699
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 5198
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0705
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 1648
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0461
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0012
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0313UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 RABAT 000952 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV ECON KMPI XF XT CA
SUBJ: CIVIL SOCIETY AND G8-BMENA GOVERNMENTS MEET AT 
SIXTH FORUM FOR THE FUTURE 
 
RABAT 00000952  001.2 OF 011 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The Sixth Forum for the Future, 
co-chaired by Morocco and Italy, was held in 
Marrakesh November 2-3 and was attended by 
representatives of the G8 and Broader Middle East 
North Africa (BMENA) countries, international 
organizations (IOs), and civil society groups.  The 
Forum focused on themes of Economic Reform, 
Political Reform, and Human Development and Human 
Security, as outlined in three preparatory workshops 
held in Beirut (September 25-26), Rabat (October 5- 
6), and Doha (October 12-13), but other issues also 
arose, such as continued concern about the 
Palestinian issue and a complaint from civil society 
organizations that civil society leaders were 
marginalized in this year's Forum, despite frequent 
assurances by BMENA governments that they would not 
be.  Secretary Clinton led the U.S. delegation and 
delivered a well-received speech following up on 
President Obama's Cairo speech with specific 
deliverables.  However, there was an apparent 
disconnect between many of the civil society 
organizations and the BMENA governments, which seem 
to have envisioned civil society groups as an 
instrument for promoting government policies.  End 
summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
The Senior Officials' Meeting 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Forum began on November 2 with a Senior 
Officials' meeting opened by Moroccan Foreign 
Minister Fassi Fihri, who complimented the work of 
the three preparatory workshops.  In his remarks, he 
laid out several themes that would recur throughout 
the Forum: 
 
A) The Forum for the Future is unique because of its 
cooperation between governments and civil society 
organizations on the basis of joint responsibility. 
(Note: The issue of civil society responsibility was 
raised by several BMENA governments during Forum, 
but by and large not by G8 officials or civil 
society leaders.  End note.) 
 
B) Dialogue marked by mutual respect and tolerance, 
as the Forum epitomizes, is the ideal framework for 
working out reform efforts in the region. 
 
C) The "trauma" of the global financial crisis meant 
this Forum would be different from previous ones, 
and it showed the need for cooperation to advance 
the reforms needed to achieve peace, stability, and 
prosperity. 
 
D) There were "deep concerns" regarding the Israeli/ 
Palestinian conflict and actions against the holy 
monuments of Jerusalem.  Almost every BMENA 
government representative, and many civil society 
representatives, reiterated this point. 
 
E) Democracy is not a "one-size-fits-all" model, but 
an evolving process that will be different in each 
country, based on each country's history and 
specificities.  (Note:  As with the theme of civil 
society responsibility, this was a frequent talking 
point of BMENA government officials throughout the 
Forum, but not of civil society representatives or, 
with the exception of Russia, of the G8 governments. 
End note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Following Fassi Fihri's remarks, Italy's 
Director General for the Mediterranean and Middle 
East Luigi Marras said the Forum process heretofore 
had not been as "tangible and concrete" as some of 
 
RABAT 00000952  002.2 OF 011 
 
 
us would have liked.  However, he declared that in 
the last year Forum cooperation had produced 
demonstrable results, and he specifically commended 
the civil society delegations and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) for the positive changes that 
took place.  He said better understanding between 
governments and civil society had emerged in the 
last year as a result of the preparatory workshops. 
Marras stated that in the BMENA countries human 
resources, in particular women and youth, are 
abundant, but also present challenges.  Creating 
policies that properly harness these resources is 
difficult but necessary because if the region fails 
to meet these needs the results will be skepticism, 
cynicism, and extremism.  Echoing Fassi Fihri, 
Marras said the Forum is a unique tool to work 
toward coordinating policies regionally and 
internationally. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Senior Officials' Meeting concluded 
with a brief discussion of the declaration of the 
2009 Forum for the Future that had been deliberated 
at the Rome sub-ministerial meeting on October 23. 
The chairs declined to open up the substance of the 
declaration to amendments or modification, but 
agreed to modify the Arabic translation on some 
points.  The chairs indicated that the declaration 
would be presented in the Ministerial and would 
provide the groundwork for the Forum going forward 
into next year. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: Both Italy and Morocco worked 
extensively in the lead-up to the Forum to achieve a 
consensus document that incorporated the principles 
of the "Partnership Between G8-BMENA Governments and 
Civil Society" document.  At the last moment, a 
number of countries in the region blocked efforts to 
reach a consensus declaration.  In the end, a 
Chairmen's Statement of the Sixth Forum for the 
Future was presented at the ministerial. End 
comment. 
 
--------------------- 
Forum Opening Session 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Opening the Forum on November 3, Fassi Fihri 
said the Forum continues to be a necessary dialogue 
between the G8 and BMENA countries that complements 
other dialogue frameworks.  He lauded the active 
participation of civil society in this year's 
process. 
 
¶7. (U) In the context of describing Morocco's own 
traditions of pluralism, Fassi Fihri saluted the 
American vision expressed in President Obama's Cairo 
speech, calling it a "harbinger to a new era" of 
relations based on justice, tolerance, human 
dignity, and working together to build bridges.  He 
said interfaith and intercultural dialogue will 
strengthen the framework of relations between BMENA 
countries and the West; such dynamics can revitalize 
the Israeli/Palestinian peace process based on the 
Arab Peace Initiative and lead to an independent 
Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.  He 
repeated his previous condemnation of Israel's 
involvement in recent events at the Al Aqsa Mosque 
in Jerusalem, which he believes could fuel "demons 
of extremism and violence" in the region. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Fassi Fihri said that in Morocco, NGOs and 
civil society actors are part of a comprehensive 
partnership with the government to develop the rule 
of law and human rights in keeping with the tolerant 
values of Islam, leading to an open society 
 
RABAT 00000952  003.2 OF 011 
 
 
cushioned against extremism.  He discussed women's 
rights but, as with his discussion of democracy on 
November 2, in the frame of national and cultural 
specificities and the appropriate pace of 
development.  He stressed the importance of good 
local governance as a cornerstone of broader 
national democracy that preserves national unity and 
territorial integrity, adding "weak entities stand 
no chance." 
 
¶9. (U) Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini 
described the Democracy Assistance Dialogue (DAD) as 
a successful initiative of the Forum and called for 
further concrete dimensions to the Forum.  He 
praised the three preparatory workshops for 
generating proposals on developing the private 
sector, education, youth empowerment, improving the 
environment, human security, political 
participation, economic and social reforms, and 
women's empowerment. 
 
¶10. (U) Frattini cited two significant proposals 
that emerged from the three workshops, and that 
should be addressed in next year's Forum: the 
creation of a Gender Institute to be hosted by a 
BMENA country and a consultative human security 
initiative to "manage diversity." 
 
¶11. (U) Frattini stressed the role of youth as a 
resource and as one of the prime determinants of the 
future.  He called for bridging the "education gap" 
in the BMENA region, and laid out the proposal for a 
G8-BMENA Education Network to boost best practices 
and exchanges between the G8 and BMENA countries. 
He also stated that G8 countries should be able to 
launch a visa facilitation policy for students.  He 
concluded his remarks by saying the partnership the 
Forum represents should "put human beings at the 
very core of policies that unite rather than divide 
us." 
 
--------------------------- 
Secretary Clinton's Remarks 
--------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Secretary Clinton lauded the 
government/civil society partnership, saying it 
should not be a rare sight and those present should 
look for ways to work together for the peoples they 
represent.  She praised Morocco's reforms in women's 
rights, saying women could help lead the way in 
democratic institution building, economic growth, 
and the enlargement of civil society. 
 
¶13. (U) The Secretary reaffirmed the U.S. commitment 
to broad engagement with Muslim communities around 
the world and outlined steps the United States is 
taking to follow up on the new beginning President 
Obama laid out in Cairo. She said that "true 
progress comes from within a society and cannot be 
imposed from the outside, and we know that change 
does not happen overnight."   The Secretary made 
clear that the United States is focused on 
partnerships that promote civil society, 
entrepreneurship and economic development, 
educational opportunity, scientific and 
technological cooperation, women's empowerment, and 
interfaith cooperation.  The Secretary stated:  "Our 
work is based on empowering individuals rather than 
promoting ideologies; listening and embracing 
others' ideas rather than simply imposing our own; 
and pursuing partnerships that are sustainable and 
broad-based."  She also reiterated the USG 
commitment to peace between Palestinians and 
Israelis and affirmed that she and the President 
 
RABAT 00000952  004.2 OF 011 
 
 
believe peace is attainable. 
 
¶14. (SBU) United Arab Emirates Foreign Minister 
Abdullah bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, who co-hosted last 
year's Forum, thanked Secretary Clinton for her 
remarks, for her personal involvement in issues 
dealing with women, youth, and employment, and 
personally thanked her for appointing a 
representative for Muslim communities.  He also 
stated that the participants should engage on 
President Obama's openness policies, which he called 
the best option to deal with pessimism in the 
region. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Three Major Themes, One Marathon Session 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) Following the opening session, discussions 
were organized into the three themes of the 
preparatory workshops and included civil society and 
governmental interventions. 
 
A) Political Reform, with a focus on democracy and 
local governance. 
 
B) Economic Reform, with a focus on the impact of 
the financial crises on the BMENA region 
 
C) Social Reform, with a focus on human development/ 
human security and social issues. 
 
---------------- 
Political Reform 
---------------- 
 
¶16. (U) Mounir Ben Salah, representing the NGO 
Moroccan Organization for Human Rights (known by its 
French acronym of OMDH), presented the outcomes of 
the Rabat preparatory workshop, highlighting the 
importance of broadening the role of civil society 
in local governance and democracy, such as through 
direct election of local representatives.  A broader 
role, based on pluralism, tolerance, and rule of law 
can encourage these values to spread beyond the 
local level to the regional and national levels. 
(Note: OMDH and Italian NGO No Peace without Justice 
served as civil society co-chairs of this year's 
Forum. End Note.) 
 
¶17. (SBU) The head of the French delegation, former 
Foreign Minister (1978-1981) and current Senator 
Jean Francois-Poncet, spoke next, describing local 
governance as "the basic unit of infrastructure at 
the local level of democracy" and calling for 
decentralized cooperation among local government, 
civil society, and national government.  He also 
stressed the necessity of involving women in 
democratic processes.  He said local governance is a 
problematic issue for the Palestinians, and he 
called the Israeli/Palestinian conflict a "stumbling 
block" in the Middle East. 
 
¶18. (SBU) The Russian representative followed, 
saying that without an independent Palestinian state 
and the return of the "occupied lands" and 
resolution of the Palestinian and other regional 
conflicts, democratic reforms in the region will be 
incomplete and lopsided.  He called for a WMD-free 
zone in the region, and he discussed the already 
robust educational exchanges between Russia and the 
BMENA region.  (Note:  Uniquely among G8 countries, 
the Russian representative echoed almost word for 
word the language of BMENA governments regarding 
democracy, saying it must take into account the 
 
RABAT 00000952  005.6 OF 011 
 
 
specific history of the countries, and NGOs and 
civil society should approach partnership with 
governments in a "non-confrontational" manner, aware 
of their role and their responsibilities.  End 
note.) 
 
¶19. (SBU) Next, the Hungarian representative 
stressed Hungary's positive post-Communist 
experiences with democracy and civil society.  He 
recalled the role of local governance and activism 
in the expansion of civil society and democracy in 
Hungary and other central and eastern European 
countries, adding that Hungary's participation in 
foreign affairs was premised on Hungary sharing its 
positive results of democracy building. 
 
¶20. (SBU) Qatar's State Minister for Foreign Affairs 
Ahmad ben Abdallah Al Mahmood began with praise for 
his country's progress in political reforms and 
civil society/government cooperation, especially on 
issues of health and education.  He stated that 
Qatar appreciates President Obama's efforts toward a 
sustainable and comprehensive two-state solution in 
Palestine/Israel.  He ended by formally announcing 
that Qatar will co-host the seventh Forum with 
Canada. 
 
¶21. (SBU) Palestinian Authority (PA) Foreign 
Minister Riyad al-Maliki said reform should have 
political, economic, and social objectives, and that 
political reform is most likely to bear fruit if it 
results from a commitment to reform from within a 
society, as opposed to external pressure.  He added 
that a deep-seated conviction for reform requires 
strong governance.  He stressed that Israel's 
policies curtail PA reform efforts, but nonetheless 
felt that the PA has taken great strides in 
political, economic, and administrative reforms.  He 
said the PA is pursuing a reform and development 
plan with the private sector and NGOs - and is proud 
to do so under difficult circumstances.  He declared 
a Palestinian state "inevitable" and called on 
"international authorities" to bring about 
Palestinian independence. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Jordan's Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Nasser Judeh, said reform should be "home-grown" and 
requires the broad-based participation of 
government, the private sector, and civil society 
organizations.  He said Jordan had made great 
strides in reform, singling out the importance of 
women's and youth issues. He said reform could be 
broadened if a Palestinian state came into being 
with Jerusalem as its capital in accordance with 
international resolutions, stating that governments 
need to "close ranks" regionally and internationally 
around this issue in order to broaden reform.  He 
praised the commitment to the peace process of 
President Obama, Secretary Clinton, and Special 
Envoy Mitchell, and quoted President Obama's remarks 
at the United Nations General Assembly that the 
"occupation must be ended." He added that all 
present needed to support the PA government led by 
President Mahmoud Abbas against "Arab opposition," 
presumably referring to Hamas and its supporters. 
 
¶23. (SBU) Lebanese Foreign Minister Fawzi Salloukh 
referred to Lebanon's tradition of pluralism and 
recent advances in democracy, stating that 
international observers agreed on the transparency 
and fairness of Lebanon's recent elections.  He said 
BMENA nations must codify democratic practices to 
bring about the rule of law, an independent 
judiciary, and equal rights for all, to include 
decision-making positions for women in the private 
 
RABAT 00000952  006.2 OF 011 
 
 
sector, government, and NGOs.  He also said the 
development of democracy in the region could not be 
separated from the political climate, referring to 
the Arab-Israeli conflict.  He said the world cannot 
continue to treat Israel separately from the 
international system of justice, and he called for a 
resolution to the Palestinian refugee problem by 
helping refugees find their way back to their 
"motherland," noting that Palestinian refugees 
present a problem not just for Palestine/ Israel, 
but for states with large refugee populations such 
as Lebanon.  Finally, he made positive note of the 
conclusions of the recent United Nations Development 
Program [UNDP] Arab Human Development Report. 
 
¶24. (U) Algeria's remarks were largely confined to 
reiterating prior themes of local governance, the 
necessity for home-grown democracy, and women's 
empowerment.  The Mauritanian delegate made similar 
points later in the meeting and added that democracy 
should be seen not as an end, but as a means to 
devise social and political policies.  The 
Mauritanian representative said the role of civil 
society needs to have a legal framework "to ensure 
complementarity, not confrontation."  FM Fassi Fihri 
spoke from the chair to agree with the Mauritanian 
representative. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
A Dissenting Note from an Egyptian Activist 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶25. (SBU) Noted Egyptian political activist Saad 
Eddin Ibrahim made several key points during a civil 
society intervention: 
 
A) Civil society groups place high hopes in 
Secretary Clinton's statements. 
 
B) Civil society organizations consider democracy as 
the primary concern. It is a facet of development, 
stability, and peace.  In apparent reference to many 
of the remarks of BMENA governments (and Russia), he 
was emphatic that democracy should not be played 
down. 
 
C) Democracy cannot be imported or exported, but can 
be supported.  The community of democracies should 
support democracy.  He said that "first world" 
democracies should support democracy in the region, 
and should not support unfair and unjust regimes for 
the sake of stability, which "leads to a blind 
alley." 
 
D) Given the chance, the people of the Middle East 
do not shy away from practicing democracy, citing 
numerous elections in the region in the last few 
years.  He said civil society activists believe 
elections are decisive not only for individual 
countries, but for the region.  He called for Forum 
partner nations to put the upcoming Iraqi and 
Egyptian elections on their agendas, and to ensure 
that the elections are transparent and fair. 
 
E) There are three forces facing democracy:  unfair 
and unjust governments, extremists, and civil 
society.  He called on governments to support civil 
society as the force that stands between the 
unfair/unjust governments and the extremists. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Wrapping up the Political Session 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶26. (SBU) The Switzerland representative made brief 
 
RABAT 00000952  007.2 OF 011 
 
 
remarks about the country's experience with 
decentralized local government in the form of 
cantons, and gave examples of involvement with 
capacity building in the region but added that 
violent conflict hinders UN Millennium Development 
Goals.  The Swiss also offered to support the Gender 
Institute. 
 
¶27. (U) Spain's Secretary of State Angel Losada said 
the financial crisis should not change the agenda 
for the Forum, which he linked to the UN Millennium 
Development Goals. 
 
¶28. (SBU) UAE State Minister Reem Ibrahim Al Hashimi 
announced support for the creation of the regional 
BMENA Gender Institute, and said the UAE will pay 
for 50% of the Institute.  (Note: While the UAE did 
not offer to host the Institute during this 
intervention, UAE officials separately told the U.S. 
delegation the UAE would be willing to host the 
Gender Institute.  End note.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
- 
NGOs Assess Economic and Social Reform/Human 
Security 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
- 
 
¶29. (SBU) Houda Chalak of the Lebanese NGO Civic 
Action Coalition reiterated the need for cooperation 
between civil society and the BMENA governments, the 
need for support from the most industrialized 
governments during the financial crisis, and the 
important role women and youth play in the movement 
toward a democratic society.  She said human 
development and human security require economic 
development, rule of law, and sound educational 
policies.  She stated that to deal with the economic 
crisis, regional initiatives supporting small and 
medium enterprises were needed, and that in turn 
these enterprises needed a climate of freedom to 
bring about entrepreneurship, which she linked to 
democratic participation and guarantees for the 
rights of the people. 
 
¶30. (U) Chalak outlined the two concrete proposals 
from the Beirut preparatory workshop:  establishing 
a network for entrepreneurs to serve as a regional 
forum for sharing expertise in specialized projects 
and best practices; and developing, in cooperation 
with existing institutes, a training center and 
state of the art institute dedicated to small and 
medium enterprises. 
 
¶31. (SBU) Bakhtiar Amin, an ethnic Kurd who began 
his remarks in Kurdish, represented Iraqi civil 
society.  He stated that the politicization of 
religion was a threat to economic development.  He 
stressed the need to avoid violence, to develop 
multi-lateral programs to develop human security, 
and to make the most of cultural diversity, going 
beyond tolerance toward active participation of 
different groups in national and regional cultures 
and citing as a goal the development of a regional 
diversity center.  He said democratic reform would 
not be complete without a solution to the Kurdish 
issue. 
 
¶32. (SBU) Ali Bin Somaik Al Murri of the Qatari NGO 
National Committee for Human Rights praised the 
Forum, saying a new starting point was needed with 
more achievements and accomplishments.  He stressed 
that democratic reform was the duty of all present 
at the Forum.  Al Murri said that against the 
 
RABAT 00000952  008.2 OF 011 
 
 
backdrop of the financial crisis, the region needed 
to adopt approaches centered on human security in 
order to develop the BMENA region's great potential 
and resources. 
 
¶33. (SBU) Mohsen Marzouk, a Tunisian national who 
heads the Qatar-based NGO Arab Democracy Foundation, 
said a feasibility study on human security was 
necessary. He said the Forum is a starting point, 
but it needs to develop a short list of priorities 
and approaches that use civil society as an actual 
partner.  It also needs to determine why civil 
society is not currently a full participant in the 
Forum. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Governments, IOs Concerned about Economic Crisis 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶34. (SBU) Canadian Foreign Minister Lawrence Cannon 
cited statistics from the IMF to make the case that 
the BMENA region has weathered the world financial 
crisis better than other regions and continues to 
have good prospects for growth.  He described 
Canada's continued willingness to support both civil 
society and governments in the region, including by 
urging large banks to help the poorest countries. 
He said the crisis shows that G8 and BMENA have no 
choice but to work together in a forum such as 
Forum, and stated that Canada was looking forward to 
co-chairing the Forum next year. 
 
¶35. (SBU) The Yemeni government representative drew 
a distinction between local governance - of which he 
approved - and separatist movements, which he said 
violate the territorial integrity of countries. 
 
¶36. (SBU) Bahraini Foreign Minister Khalid bin Ahmed 
Al Khalifa said sustainable economic growth in a 
secure framework is essential and warned that the 
effects of the world financial crisis will linger 
and affect employment, access to capital, energy 
costs, and corporate governance.  He said the region 
requires a flexible, well-trained work force and a 
stable regulatory framework to protect economies 
from future shocks.  To this end, he explicitly 
called for education reform and free trade in the 
BMENA region in order to create jobs and harmonize 
regulations.  He said civil society can assist 
governments by encouraging popular support for these 
initiatives. 
 
¶37. (SBU) The representative of Japan (co-host of 
the 2008 Forum) highlighted the country's 
contributions to the IMF and other international 
organizations to alleviate the effects of the global 
economic crisis. The Japanese delegate spoke about 
the need for the region to work to combat climate 
change, a theme some other speakers briefly touched 
upon.  Japan was also the only government to stress 
BMENA and G8 cooperation to combat piracy off the 
coast of Africa and Yemen. 
 
¶38. (SBU) The Netherlands delegate reacted 
positively to the proposal for the Gender Institute, 
pledged support, and said that the Netherlands would 
donate USD 1 million to the Foundation for the 
Future.  The delegate from Denmark praised civil 
society and NGO involvement, speaking as well about 
climate change with reference to the December 2009 
meeting in Copenhagen and the issue of water 
resources in the BMENA region. 
 
¶39. (SBU) The delegate from the Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) said participants need to have 
 
RABAT 00000952  009.2 OF 011 
 
 
creative and flexible ideas about reform.  Without 
naming names, he said some countries have double 
standards when it comes to reforms, and others are 
genuinely helpful.  He then spoke at length about 
the Palestinian cause.  Finally, he spoke in favor 
of increased opening of markets between the BMENA 
countries and the G8, and of the need for continued 
scientific research, development, and education.  He 
was followed by a speaker from the Arab Monetary 
Fund, who spoke in general about the effect of the 
global economic crisis on the BMENA region, noting a 
50 percent loss in petroleum revenues and placing 
responsibility for the origins of the crisis on 
western countries.  He said the savings of the oil- 
rich nations of the BMENA are alleviating the impact 
of the crisis, and these BMENA governments should 
pursue a monetary policy of injecting liquidity into 
and consolidating regional banks.  He found the 
current efforts not sufficient, and called for 
greater coordination on these issues through the 
Forum to recover economic growth. 
 
¶40. (SBU) The Egyptian delegate described shrinking 
growth rates in Egypt.  He called for national 
control mechanisms (e.g., job creation programs) for 
the economy to support the social safety net, 
although he added there should not be any 
overregulation or exaggeration.  He called for the 
liberalization of trade and the speeding up of 
reform of financial institutions, especially early 
warning systems.  Like the Bahraini delegate, he 
spoke of civil society as a sector with which 
governments could partner to reach out and promote 
reform.  He called for the G8 to correct financial 
and monetary systems, taking into account emerging 
and developing countries and putting aside the 
principle of reciprocity in trade.  He spoke of 
increased cooperation with the G8 in health care and 
poverty alleviation, saying these steps would make 
developing countries part of the solution, and not 
just a part of the problem. 
 
---------------------------------- 
NGOs Unhappy with Pace of Dialogue 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶41. (SBU) The representative of the Arab Network of 
Democracy was the next speaker.  He said that six 
years after the founding of the Forum, a true 
partnership mechanism had yet to be developed 
between BMENA governments and civil society.  Thus, 
civil society organizations cannot be held 
responsible for problems of process.  Echoing 
Egyptian political activist Saad Eddin Ibrahim, he 
said democracy was not at the center of the Forum 
process and that there have been some steps backward 
with respect to democracy's place within the Forum 
process.  He called for a dialogue without 
restrictions on civil society organizations, not one 
among "deaf and dumb."  He said governments should 
not fear civil society organizations, which are not 
trying to revolutionize but to contribute to the 
rule of law along with governments. 
 
¶42. (SBU) A representative of the Al-Kawakibi 
Democracy Transition Center (Arabic acronym KADEM) 
spoke next, saying the Forum Partnership Document 
was important, but that it was too often ignored by 
BMENA governments.  He also said they had attached 
too many restrictions to it.  He implored the G8 
governments to keep promoting the document.  This 
prompted a reply from the Bahraini delegation, who 
insisted that government/civil society dialogue had 
made achievements and that there was no "dialogue of 
the deaf and dumb."  FM Fassi Fihri also disagreed 
 
RABAT 00000952  010.2 OF 011 
 
 
passionately with the civil society speakers, and 
claimed all BMENA governments were in direct 
dialogue with civil society.  He said that if civil 
society groups feel that in some countries or areas 
there are delays in the dialogue, he wanted to 
reassure them that dialogue exists to develop 
society and strengthen democracy. 
 
¶43. (SBU) The next speaker represented the 
Mauritanian NGO "Intellectual Club for Democracy." 
Noting differences in elections in the region - and 
differing levels of transparency in those elections 
- he called on the G8 and other organizations to 
build civil society capacity.  Following this, a 
speaker from the Bahrain Transparency Society hailed 
Secretary Clinton's speech and declared that a lack 
of transparency helped explain the collapse of the 
world economy in 2008.  He called on government 
ministries, legislative assemblies, civil society, 
and the private sector to come together and act to 
enhance transparency. 
 
------------------- 
Final Interventions 
------------------- 
 
¶44. (SBU) Government representatives made a few more 
remarks, mostly reiterating themes mentioned above. 
The Sudanese delegate said the country was 
considering reforms in various areas and preparing 
for elections in 2010 under delicate circumstances. 
The delegate said no peace would be possible if the 
people of Darfur were not living stable lives. 
Tunisia held itself up as a model of development and 
social and educational reform; the Tunisian delegate 
also briefly touched on legal protections and NGO 
involvement with the disabled.  The UK delegate 
supported the Danish comments on climate change and 
acknowledged BMENA requests for more equitable 
outcomes.  He also stressed global health and infant 
mortality reduction, supported the creation of the 
Gender Institute given that there are still 
restrictive laws towards women in the BMENA region, 
and detailed the hundreds of millions of pounds the 
UK spends on civil society development in the region 
(including trade unions).  The UK delegate gave 
support to U.S. efforts on the Palestinian/Israeli 
conflict, saying that this was "last best chance" 
for peace in this generation. 
 
¶45. (SBU) The delegate from Afghanistan stressed the 
country's advances despite its difficult 
circumstances, saying it had just completed a 
challenging electoral process and would now focus on 
forming an inclusive government, fighting corruption 
at all levels, and extending the hand of peace and 
reconciliation, all with the support of the 
international community and keeping in mind 
realistic goals. 
 
¶46. (SBU) The Yemeni NGO "Human Rights Information 
and Training Center" (HRITC) representative said he 
was surprised to hear other delegates positively 
discussing civil society participation in the Forum, 
because this year civil society had only a minor 
role.  Unlike this year, civil society could in the 
past reach decision-making levels within the Forum, 
he said.  He reiterated the need for equal and 
constructive dialogue, unlike this year's passive 
dialogue.  He said more than rhetoric is needed, 
because building the future is a shared 
responsibility between governments and civil 
society. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
RABAT 00000952  011.2 OF 011 
 
 
Confusion and Anger as Session Draws to a Close 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶47. (SBU) Going off agenda, Moroccan FM Fassi Fihri 
started to give closing remarks.  He said that no 
single model can be exported from north to south, 
and he reiterated themes of exchange and dialogue. 
He made reference to the "unhelpful" situation in 
Palestine, implying this as big a hindrance to 
regional reform as the global economic crisis. 
 
¶48. (SBU) Fassi Fihri ended his remarks by saying he 
was duty-bound to listen to the civil society 
representatives' opinions and take them as partners. 
Much to the surprise of the delegates and the 
remaining speakers, including the two civil society 
co-chairs for the Forum and Canada as the next G8 
president, he proceeded to thank the participants 
and close the ministerial.  After some confusion, 
the error was pointed out to Fassi Fihri and he 
opened the floor to the remaining speakers, but by 
that time many delegations had left. 
 
¶49. (SBU) The head of No Peace Without Justice, 
former Italian and EU Senator Marco Pannella, was 
clearly perturbed and limited his brief remarks to 
expressions of thanks to the Italian government and 
the Government of Morocco, and he suggested that 
perhaps he would be given more time to speak at next 
year's Forum.  The speaker from the Moroccan 
Organization for Human Rights (OMDH) also was 
agitated and spoke in an angry tone.  She said she 
would have liked to discuss the civil society 
meeting in Casablanca, as actual and effective 
partnership is supposed to be crystal clear.  She 
was particularly upset that the "Partnership Between 
G8-BMENA Governments and Civil Society" document was 
not formally submitted at the Forum.  The final 
substantive remarks came from the Canadian delegate, 
who said the priorities outlined in the Forum 
Chairmen's Statement would help Canada determine the 
themes for next year's Forum.  He ended by stating 
that Canada calls for a lasting and just peace in 
the Middle East. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶50. (SBU) There was a significant disconnect between 
many of the civil society organizations and BMENA 
governments at this year's Forum.  Talk of civil 
society responsibility and accountability seemed to 
be a call for civil society groups to censor 
themselves and avoid confrontation with governments. 
Talk of "home-grown" models of democracy suggested 
that BMENA governments were restricting the meaning 
of "democracy" in a self-serving fashion.  Civil 
society organizations were upset with this tone, and 
many openly complained of what they perceived to be 
a diminished role for civil society in this year's 
Forum.  They cited as lack of tangible progress in 
advancing the civil society/government partnership 
the failure of the Chairs to formally approve the 
Partnership Document.  While the BMENA governments 
praised dialogue with civil society, they clearly 
envisioned an instrumental use for civil society 
groups to serve as intermediaries to promote 
government policies.  End comment. 
 
 
JACKSON