09RPODUBAI433
IRAN PRESS: AHMADINEJAD WEBSITE GOES 'BEHIND THE SCENES' IN
Tue Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO8423
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHDIR #0433/01 2861209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 131209Z OCT 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0569
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DIA FT BELVOIR
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 0041
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0440
RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0570UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RPO DUBAI 000433 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IR PGOV PREL PARM
SUBJECT: IRAN PRESS: AHMADINEJAD WEBSITE GOES 'BEHIND THE SCENES' IN 
GENEVA TALKS 
 
DUBAI 00000433  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (U) "Sanyehnews" (sanyehnews.com) is an Iranian website 
closely affiliated the views of President Ahmadinejad.  On 
Monday, October 12 it posted a story titled, "What Wasn't Said 
and Published About the Geneva Talks," that puts forward a 
version of the October first Geneva negotiations that is worth 
noting for its indication as to how the Ahmadinejad 
administration is portraying events in Geneva for its core 
supporters. 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) (rough translation of article as follows:) 
 
 
 
Iran presented its proposal to the P5+1 countries  at a time 
when the press atmosphere was severely against Iran's nuclear 
program, citing a final deadline of the end of September for 
Iran to carry out discussions with the West.  But behind this 
propaganda, other events were taking place. 
 
 
 
According to Saniyeh News, former NATO Secretary General and 
current EU Foreign Minister Javier Solana contacted IRIG Supreme 
National Security Council Secretary Dr. Said Jalili, citing the 
western media atmosphere to convince Iran to carry out 
discussions in September concerning "the nuclear file."  Jalili 
did not succumb to Solana's pressure, responding firstly that 
his schedule for the month of September was full and he didn't 
have any free time, and secondly that the subject for 
discussions could not be Iran's nuclear file.  Finally Solana 
accepted that the discussions would take place in October with 
the subject being Iran's proposed package. 
 
 
 
[in Geneva on October 1] In the first round of discussions every 
time that the 5+1 delegation, contrary to prior agreement, spoke 
about Iran's nuclear file, Jalili put his pen down and looked at 
them to show his displeasure at this departure from the thrust 
of the talks.  Jalili's wise stance met with a reaction by the 
six countries, especially the UK representative who protesting 
sharply, characterized the talks as returning to a starting 
point of zero.  Responding to these protests, Jalili pointed out 
that the UK representative was the third person to represent the 
UK with whom Jalili has talked [i.e. during Jalili's tenure] and 
cited him as a newcomer in these negotiations and ignorant of 
the past progression of these talks.  Jalili said that Iran is 
not seeking to return to zero, and that Iran has pursued a 
course over the last six years and has made achievements that it 
is not willing to turn from or negotiate over.  Jalili showed 
the P5+1 delegations several English-language newspapers that 
had news stories featuring the statement of 239 Iranian Majlis 
representatives warning the P5+1 and supporting Iran's nuclear 
program.  Without mentioning Obama's name, he quoted to the P5+1 
members' Obama's prior comments that "one must speak to the 
representatives of the people," and cited himself as the 
representative of the Iranian nation, a nation that sees nuclear 
energy as its undeniable right. 
 
 
 
After these statements, the other side requested a break.  Dr. 
Jalili agreed and went to relax and sit down in a green area 
outside the meeting site.   After a while a Swiss Deputy Foreign 
Minister (Switzerland being the host country for the meetings) 
came hurriedly looking for Jalili and excitedly told Jalili that 
"Nicholas Burns [sic] the US Deputy Secretary of State has 
invited you for bilateral talks."  Mindless of his [i.e. the 
Swiss diplomat's] excitement, Jalili said there is no need for 
this, and the US representative can speak his words in front of 
all when talks resume.  After continued insistence the Swiss 
official met with a stern response by Jalili, who invited him to 
perform [only] his role as the host of the gathering. After him, 
Javier Solana came and spoke of the urgency of taking advantage 
of this historic opportunity and even took Jalili's hand to 
encourage him to go for discussions [i.e. with Burns].  But he 
met with a decisive negative answer from Jalili who implied that 
he wished to renounce such a historic opportunity, in that the 
other meeting participants were not strangers and it was better 
that the US representative speak in front of all. 
 
 
DUBAI 00000433  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
 
Jalili stood firm, and next Nicholas [sic] Burns came and asked 
to talk, but met with the same answer.  Burns insisted that he 
had something else to say.  Jalili asked Burns to speak at that 
very location and next started walking towards the place where 
lunch was going to be held, with Burns following him.  This 
process was taking place with the representatives of the five 
countries (Russia, China, France, Germany, UK) along with Solana 
staring from the building's balcony at the discussion between 
Burns and Jalili, a discussion in which Jalili characterized 
Iran's nuclear file as verified, solved and sealed. 
 
 
 
After the end of this discussion, Solana came towards Jalili and 
asked about the results.  Jalili saying that he'd not yet prayed 
nor had lunch, and left the area.  While eating, Solana 
announced to Jalili that the 5+1 was prepared to continue 
discussions after lunch.  Jalili said that he had to reflect and 
went outside for a walk, taking 15 minutes to do so.  Solana 
came looking for him saying, "with your walking you are 
concentrating your thoughts but are also deranging ours!" 
 
 
 
Finally the next session of discussions started and was carried 
out quickly, with both sides agreeing to cite the process of 
discussions as positive and to prepare conditions for expert 
discussions so that experts can prepare proposals for the future 
of the seven-sided discussions. 
EYREAE