09SANTIAGO480
COUNTRY REVIEW FOR LIBERTAD ACT -- CHILE
Wed May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Santiago
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSG #0480/01 1402020
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 202020Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4958UNCLAS SANTIAGO 000480 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: ETRD ETCC PREL CU CI
SUBJECT: COUNTRY REVIEW FOR LIBERTAD ACT -- CHILE 
 
REF:  A. STATE 48487 B. SANTIAGO 44 C. SANTIAGO 45 
¶D. SANTIAGO 157 E. SANTIAGO 228 
 
¶1.  (U) Post provides the following information in response to Ref A 
request.  Responses are keyed to the specific questions identified 
in Ref A.  Refs B-E are Post's reporting covering the preceding 
six-month period. 
 
Promotion of Democracy and Human Rights 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Cuba played a prominent role in Chilean foreign policy and 
public debate over the last six months, sparked by President 
Bachelet's February visit to Cuba and the UN Universal Periodic 
Review.  The Chilean government views President Bachelet's Cuba trip 
as promoting Cuba's opening to the world and promoting the gradual 
advancement of democracy and human rights.  Some Chilean officials 
who were critical of the president's trip made public statements 
calling for quicker progress toward safeguarding human rights on the 
island. 
 
High Level Diplomatic Visits 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) President Bachelet visited Cuba from February 11 to 13, 
¶2009.  This was the first official travel to Cuba by a Chilean 
President since Salvador Allende visited in 1973.  Her delegation 
included politicians, business leaders, and cultural 
representatives.  During the trip, President Bachelet participated 
in an economic seminar with members of the Chilean and Cuban 
business sectors, and attended the opening ceremony for the Havana 
Book Festival (Ref B).  She also had private meetings with both Raul 
and Fidel Castro. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) During the visit, Chile signed eight accords with Cuba -- 
cooperation agreements on science and technology, neurological 
restoration, genetic engineering and biotechnology, international 
cooperation programs, forestry, cinema, sports, and national 
monuments.  Economic stimulation through increased trade and 
investment was also a prevalent theme (see paragraphs 9-11). 
 
¶5.  (SBU) President Bachelet characterized the trip as a success, 
citing the importance of Latin American integration.  However, 
Christian Democrats and Alianza members saw the visit, and 
particularly Fidel Castro's subsequent hostile public remarks, as an 
embarrassing policy setback for Chile (Ref D).  Bachelet faced 
criticism for her decision not to meet with Cuban dissidents, while 
state officials explained that such meetings would be inappropriate 
on an official visit (Ref B).  The President noted she raised all 
the important issues (i.e., human rights). 
 
Statements and Government Actions 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Parliamentarian Patricio Walker of the Christian 
Democratic Party spearheaded the movement to pass an official 
Congressional statement on Cuban governmental policy.  The 
statement, which passed on January 7, 2009, called on Cuba to free 
its political prisoners and to hold open elections. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Ambassador Carlos Portales, Chile's permanent 
representative to the United Nations, spoke at the UN's Universal 
Periodic Review of Cuba in February 2009.  In a speech that was 
well-received by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, 
Portales encouraged Cuba to promote judicial independence and 
protect political dissidents.  He also urged the Cuban government to 
loosen restrictions on freedom of expression and movement (Ref E). 
 
¶8.  (SBU) After his meeting with President Bachelet's, Fidel Castro 
wrote an article condemning Chile's seizure of Bolivia's access to 
the sea.  This began a war of words.  Senators from Chilean 
right-wing political party UDI called Fidel Castro a brutal 
dictator, and compared him to Hitler and Stalin.  Juan Carlos 
Latorre, President of the centrist Christian Democrats, publicly 
denounced Cuba's human rights record.  The Bachelet administration 
stated its displeasure with Castro's statements, noting they 
reflected the views of a former leader. 
 
Bilateral Trade Agreements           -------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) In March 2008, Chile signed a trade agreement with Cuba. 
The Chilean government reported $80 million in bilateral trade in 
2008, with Cuban exports making up a paltry $5 million of that 
figure.  Cuban rum accounts for nearly all the exports to Chile.  In 
a speaking engagement during her visit to Cuba, Bachelet noted that 
the island has much more to offer than rum, and encouraged the 
diversification of exports. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) One of the accords signed while President Bachelet was in 
Cuba included a promise by both countries to promote long-term 
export strategies.  This agreement was signed by ProChile, which is 
Chile's Department of Export Promotion, and Cuba's Center for 
External Trade Promotion.  The goal is to increase economic 
integration through trade missions, professional collaboration, and 
information exchange. 
 
Nature of Economic Investments 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Chileans invest $40 million annually in Cuban industries 
such as tourism, construction, food, air transport, energy, and 
printing, according to the Chilean government.  However, the 
President sees increased investment as an important step for both 
countries.  Bachelet called on Chilean and Cuban entrepreneurs to 
seek out new investment possibilities -- in areas like the mining 
and food industries -- as a way to combat the recession. 
 
Exchange Programs                     ----------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) There are currently more than 400 university students 
from Chile studying in Cuba.  This number is up from previous years. 
 The Cuban government offers a limited number of scholarships to 
Chilean medical students studying in Cuba. 
SIMONS