09SANJOSE156
Costa Rica Optimistic About New U.S. Administration
Fri Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0156 0651828
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061828Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0565
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SAN JOSE 000156 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC and H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CS PINR PGOV PREL
SUBJECT:  Costa Rica Optimistic About New U.S. Administration 
 
REF: SAN JOSE 0098 
¶1.   (U) SUMMARY:  On January 20, the Legislative Assembly of Costa 
Rica voted unanimously to pass a resolution congratulating the U.S. 
Congress and the American people on the inauguration of President 
Barack Obama.  The resolution and the comments in support thereof 
lauded the election as a reaffirmation of democratic values and as a 
fulfillment of Martin Luther King Jr.'s "dream."  Of note, 
Legislator Alberto Salom (PAC), one of the Assembly's most 
vociferous critics of the policies of the United States, spoke in 
favor of the resolution (although he also used that platform to 
criticize the use of the military in U.S. foreign policy).    We 
report this resolution and debate for the record, as another 
indication of the high hopes in Costa Rica and the region for the 
new U.S. Administration.  END SUMMARY. 
¶2.   (U) On January 20, 2009, the Legislative Assembly of Costa 
Rica, meeting in plenary session, considered a resolution 
congratulating the U.S. Congress and the American people on the 
inauguration of President Barack Obama.  In introducing the 
resolution, Assembly President, Francisco Pacheco (PLN), noted 
"Today is an historic day for the United States of America and for 
the world," in which the American people have given an "example to 
the world" that "all human beings are equal."  Pacheco referred to 
the election of President Obama as a fulfillment of the "dream" 
described by Martin Luther King Jr. 
¶3.  (U) The resolution (see full text below), proposed by Legislator 
Yalile Esna (PLN, President Arias' party), expressed hope that "the 
Creator (would) give (President Obama) wisdom to direct the destiny 
of the (United States) on the path of prosperity ... and global 
leadership to contribute to brotherhood and peace."   In her 
comments, Esna (the only Afro-Caribbean member of the National 
Assembly) emphasized that the inauguration of the nation's first 
African-American president was a "vindication," for the United 
States and the world, of the principle that people should be 
measured by their "human qualities," not by their race, gender, 
religion or creed. 
¶4.  (U) In a rare act of bipartisanship, the resolution was also 
supported by Alberto Salom (PAC), a consistent and outspoken 
opponent of U.S. policies, including CAFTA, and one of the 
Assembly's wiliest tacticians.  Salom noted that, with the election 
of the first African-American U.S. president, "we are at a unique 
juncture" characterized by extraordinary challenges and 
opportunities.  He expressed hope that President Obama's presidency 
would generate new opportunities for international dialogue, and 
specifically that it would lead to a "revision" of what he termed "a 
tradition of military intervention" and encourage a "real and 
durable world peace." 
¶5.  (U) The resolution was passed unanimously.   On January 30, the 
acting Chairman of the National Assembly's International Relations 
Committee, Fernando Sanchez (PLN), wrote the Ambassador to ensure 
the USG received an official copy of the resolution. 
¶6.  (U) TEXT OF RESOLUTION (INFORMAL TRANSLATION): 
(Resolved that) the Costa Rican parliament should send its courteous 
and excited (congratulations) to the United States Congress, on the 
inauguration of President Barack Obama, and express its hope that 
the Creator would give him wisdom (and that he would) direct the 
destiny of that country down the path of prosperity, and 
development, exercising global leadership to contribute to 
brotherhood and peace.  In the same way, (the parliament) also 
congratulates the American people for this historic election, which 
makes that nation even greater. 
 ¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  Although our GOCR interlocutors have tempered 
their very high expectations since Inauguration Day, increasingly 
cognizant that the financial crisis is inevitably monopolizing the 
administration's attention, and that relations with Mexico, Brazil 
and Colombia are top of the USG's WHA agenda, they hope for more 
positive, "respectful" overall USG engagement around the world, and 
deeper engagement in (including more resources for) Central America. 
  Visiting WHA/CEN Deputy Director heard echoes of this optimism on 
February 11 (Reftel), as did the Ambassador and DCM in meetings with 
FM Bruno Stagno on February 19 and in a private dinner with 
President Arias himself on March 4.   During the latter event, Arias 
stressed the importance of paying attention to the region at this 
time, highlighting in particular Costa Rica's role as a "model" 
which shared USG values on environmental protection, social justice, 
market economies and democratic development in Latin America.  We 
will continue to explore creative ways to tap this optimism in order 
to advance important USG objectives in Costa Rica and Central 
America. 
 
CIANCHETTE