09STATE43054
U.S. MESSAGES ON MIDDLE EAST PEACE
Tue Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1391
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDH RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
RUEHSR RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #3054/01 1182326
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 282307Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 8114
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 9719
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 4829
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 8745
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI PRIORITY 7011
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5844
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 7956UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 043054 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KWBG AL EU RU IS
SUBJECT: U.S. MESSAGES ON MIDDLE EAST PEACE 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The U.S. remains committed to comprehensive peace in 
the Middle East, including the two-state solution, and to an 
end to the Arab-Israeli conflict as soon as possible.  To 
this end, Special Envoy for Middle East Peace George Mitchell 
recently completed a 9-day trip to the Middle East and Europe 
to advance our efforts.  Below are points that Posts can use 
in discussions with host governments on the U.S. approach to 
Middle East peace.  End summary. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) From April 13 to April 22, Special Envoy for Middle 
East Peace George Mitchell visited 11 Arab states, Israel, 
the West Bank, and Europe to advance the U.S. commitment to 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including the 
two-state solution.  S/E Mitchell visited Rabat, Algiers, 
Tunis, Jerusalem, Ramallah, Cairo, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh, Muscat, 
Doha, Kuwait City, and Bahrain.  He briefed the EU Political 
and Security Committee in Brussels on April 22. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The focus of the trip was to create the context for 
negotiations toward an early resolution of the Arab-Israeli 
conflict.  The trip concentrated on three goals: 1) Begin a 
substantive dialogue with the new Israeli government, 2) Hold 
discussions with Israeli, Palestinian, and Arab leaders to 
encourage them to promptly take concrete steps to improve the 
environment for negotiations, and 3) Ensure full regional 
participation in our approach, in part by energizing the Arab 
Peace Initiative.  Since his appointment in late January, 
Special Envoy Mitchell has met with 13 Arab and Muslim heads 
of state, in addition to his consistent engagement with 
Israel and European allies. 
 
-------------- 
Talking Points 
-------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Post can draw on the following points when engaging 
with host governments on Middle East peace: 
 
--Comprehensive peace, including the two-state solution, is 
our objective, and we will pursue it vigorously in the coming 
months.  The President is personally committed to these goals 
and continues to exert direct leadership on this issue. 
 
--As the President stated during his recent visit to Ankara, 
the parties have also committed to these goals in the Roadmap 
and at Annapolis. 
 
--We are not interested in a lengthy, drawn-out process but 
in results.  Our focus is not on the structure of 
negotiations but on ensuring that they yield these results as 
soon as possible. 
 
--Our immediate objective is to work with our Israeli and 
Arab partners, and our allies throughout the international 
community, to create the conditions for a peaceful resolution 
of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the establishment of an 
independent and viable Palestinian state and to reverse the 
pervasive skepticism and lack of trust in the region.  This 
effort is also designed to prevent a new outbreak of violence 
that could significantly set-back our efforts and further 
destabilize the region. 
 
--During his recent visit to Israel, Special Envoy met with 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for over two hours 
and discussed all of the relevant issues.  The new Israeli 
government is undergoing a policy review, and the Prime 
Minister is likely to visit Washington in mid- to late May to 
discuss next steps with the President, the Secretary, and 
Special Envoy Mitchell.  Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas 
will visit Washington shortly thereafter. 
 
--These visits follow King Abdullah of Jordan's recent 
 
STATE 00043054  002 OF 002 
 
 
meeting with the President in Washington.  They had a very 
productive discussion on many issues connected to Middle East 
peace, including settlements, Jerusalem, rocket fire from 
Gaza, and strengthening the Palestinian Authority and its 
institutions.  We welcome King Abdullah's remarks following 
his meeting with the President in which he stated that 
America alone cannot achieve peace and so a group of 
countries, including Jordan, will do all it can to support 
the President. 
 
--It is critical that Arab states consider actions that they 
can take, in the context of significant Israeli steps, to 
progress toward normalization with Israel. 
 
--The U.S. approach to Middle East peace is linked to our 
efforts on Iran.  Iran exploits regional conflicts--in the 
West Bank and Gaza, in Lebanon, and elsewhere--to extend its 
influence.  Resolution of these conflicts will be a 
significant part of dealing with Iran, and the two-state 
solution is in the national interests of the United States, 
of Israel, and of our Arab allies.  To this end, the Arab 
Peace Initiative will be integrated into our approach for 
comprehensive peace. 
 
--While we move to create the conditions for meaningful 
negotiations, we must maintain support for those Palestinians 
who are committed to pursuing peace.  It is imperative that 
President Abbas, Prime Minister Fayyad, and the Palestinian 
Authority are able to demonstrate that negotiations--rather 
than terrorism and armed resistance--are the means toward an 
independent and viable Palestinian state.  Like any 
politician, President Abbas must be able to deliver benefits 
for his people, and it is in the interests of the U.S., 
Israel, and the international community to support him in 
this effort. 
 
--Arab governments bear a special responsibility in this 
regard.  Contrary to some assertions, the PA is improving the 
lives of ordinary people throughout the West Bank and Gaza 
with non-partisan, transparent programs.  The World Bank and 
the IMF have endorsed the PA's budgetary and financial 
controls and account for its responsible use of budgetary 
assistance from donors, which totaled USD 1.7 billion in 2008 
alone. 
 
--While many Arab states believe that Palestinian 
reconciliation is critical prior to Palestinian elections, 
reconciliation on the terms on which Hamas insists would 
fatally undermine President Abbas and the PA and alienate 
Israel.  It will be impossible to conclude a peace agreement 
if one party enters the door just as another leaves the room. 
 
--The Quartet principles--renunciation of violence, 
recognition of Israel, and respect for previous agreements 
and understandings--are the essential building blocks of a 
Palestinian state, and Hamas' continued rejection of these 
principles only delays the realization of Palestinians' 
legitimate aspirations to control their own destiny. 
 
¶5. (U) For additional information, please contact Payton 
Knopf in NEA/IPA. 
 
¶6. (U) Tripoli minimize considered. 
CLINTON