09STATE114489
AFGHANISTAN: TALKING POINTS FOR SYG BAN'S
Fri Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0011
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4489 3100018
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 060013Z NOV 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0000UNCLAS STATE 114489 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC AF
SUBJECT: AFGHANISTAN: TALKING POINTS FOR SYG BAN'S 
NOVEMBER 6 BRIEFING TO THE UNSC 
 
1.(U) This is an action request. USUN should draw from the 
points in para 2 during SYG Ban's briefing to the Security 
Council on November 6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Points: 
-- I thank the Secretary-General for this briefing. 
 
-- The United States condemns last week's attack on UN 
personnel in Afghanistan.  The United States condemns in the 
strongest terms the Taliban who claimed responsibility for 
the attack and continue to attempt to destabilize the 
country.  The United States is committed to combatting all 
forms of terrorism and would like to emphasize that these 
type of attacks on UN personnel cannot continue. 
 
--As you know, the United States has consistently supported 
strengthening security for UN personnel ) particularly those 
deployed in the field ) and will continue to do so. 
 
-- The United States remains firmly committed to the United 
Nations and its vital work in Afghanistan.  We were pleased 
to hear the Secretary-General affirm that despite the recent 
attack on UN staff, the United Nations remains committed to 
its mission in Afghanistan. 
 
-- The recently-concluded Afghan presidential election 
process confirms the importance of this mission. 
 
-- These elections were held in challenging circumstances but 
ultimately concluded in accordance with the Afghan 
constitution and electoral laws.  We congratulate President 
Karzai on his victory.  We also congratulate all the 
candidates who stood in Afghanistan's second Presidential 
election since 2001, in particular Dr. Abdullah. 
 
-- Being elected is only the first part of the process. 
Candidate Karzai noted the importance of providing security, 
creating jobs and generating economic growth,  tackling 
corruption, and delivering effective and accountable 
governance to the Afghan people.  As President Obama has 
said, the Afghan people and the international community now 
look to see those words translated into deeds. 
 
-- We will work with the rest of the international community 
to partner with, and support, the new Afghan government to 
help achieve these goals. 
 
-- We believe the UN should and will continue to play a 
central role in providing critical support to the Afghan 
government and people as they rebuild their country.  We will 
endeavor to work creatively with the UN to help it face the 
security challenges in Afghanistan so as to ensure that the 
UN's mission is successful-- and we will encourage others to 
do the same. 
END POINTS 
 
¶3. (SBU) BACKGROUND: At his first press conference after the 
Independent Election Commission (IEC) declared him the 
election victor, President Karzai thanked Dr. Abdullah and 
the other candidates, stating that &the new Afghan 
government will be one of national unity ( the door is open 
to everyone.8  His comments on corruption focused on civil 
service and legal reforms, not on the removal of high-level 
officials.  He said he will have a strong partnership with 
the international community, especially the U.S., but will 
need to clarify our relationship with regards to assistance. 
How President Karzai handles Ministerial appointments will be 
the first key test of his Administration: we are encouraging 
him to ensure that key appointments are merit-based, while 
accepting that he will need to find room for some of his 
political supporters, ideally in ceremonial roles or more 
minor appointments. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Dr. Abdullah stated on November 4 that he did not 
consider the IEC's decision to declare Karzai President as 
legal, but he has accepted that the elections process is 
over. We understand that Inauguration Day will be November 19 
and are encouraging senior level participation. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Taliban asserted the canceling of the 
presidential runoff election demonstrates its successful 
disruption of the process, media report.  Embassy Kabul notes 
the claim will resonate among the Afghan populace as a 
credible explanation for canceling the runoff. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In London, Ban stressed that good governance had to 
be a &top priority8 for Karzai, and urged him to form a 
unity government with experienced ministers and officials. 
&I have specifically asked President Karzai to work together 
with all his political leaders who used to be presidential 
candidates including Dr. Abdullah Abdullah,8 he said. 
END BACKGROUND 
CLINTON