09STATE54410
U.S. STATEMENT AT UNSC BRIEFING ON SUDAN
Wed May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4410 1472314
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 272301Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 054410 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL SU UNSC
SUBJECT: U.S. STATEMENT AT UNSC BRIEFING ON SUDAN 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message. USUN is authorized to draw 
from points in para 2 below following the UNSC Briefing by 
U/SYG John Holmes on the Humanitarian Situation in Sudan. 
 
¶2. (U) I thank Under-Secretary General Holmes for his 
insightful briefing on the current humanitarian situation in 
Sudan. 
 
The United States wishes to express its profound appreciation 
to UN agencies and officials for assisting with humanitarian 
efforts throughout Sudan and working tirelessly to avert a 
humanitarian catastrophe following the Government of Sudan,s 
callous decision to expel 13 international nongovernmental 
organizations and to close three national relief agencies. 
These efforts seem to have prevented an immediate 
humanitarian crisis, though we are not yet out of the woods. 
 
Significant gaps in health, nutrition, water, sanitation and 
hygiene, and food still exist for long-term needs.  According 
to an April UN Food and Agriculture Organization report, more 
than 32,000 households in Darfur are not expected to receive 
the previously planned food and livelihood support due to the 
NGO expulsions. 
 
The United States welcomes the Government of Sudan,s recent 
statement that three new non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) will be permitted to register in Sudan to fill key 
humanitarian assistance gaps.  Having said that, we are 
disturbed by reports that the Government of Sudan is 
interfering with the operations of international NGOs.  We 
are also concerned by reports that the Government of Sudan 
has not fully implemented its commitments to issue one-year, 
multiple re-entry visas for humanitarian workers. 
 
It is critical that the Government of Sudan fully and quickly 
implement its commitments to meet the humanitarian needs of 
its citizens, including by living up to its stated 
commitments to improve access for humanitarian NGOs.  The 
rainy season in Sudan will be upon us in only two to five 
weeks, and the humanitarian agencies will require increased 
access and government cooperation to pre-position food 
assistance and emergency relief commodities.  We also urge 
the Government of Sudan to restore critical NGO activity to 
the Three Areas as soon as possible. 
 
The increasing levels of insecurity in Darfur are profoundly 
alarming, particularly two kidnapping episodes since March 4 
and almost daily car jacking incidents and compound 
invasions.  It is the responsibility of the Government of 
Sudan to restore order for the protection of its citizens and 
the safety of aid operations. 
 
Along this vein, we press the governments of Sudan and Chad 
to maintain diplomatic ties despite recent tensions and to 
cease hostile activity towards one another, including support 
for each other,s rebel groups.  The relationship between 
Sudan and Chad is essential to achieving a stable security 
environment in both countries. 
 
The United States is also deeply concerned about the loss of 
life due to recent clashes in North Darfur and about the 
safety of civilians and peacekeepers located in the affected 
area.  We condemn the recent attacks by the Justice and 
Equality Movement (JEM) on DPA signatory SLM/Minni Minawi, as 
well as subsequent attacks by JEM on Government of Sudan 
positions in North Darfur at Kornoi and Um Barru. 
 
In addition, the rising levels of inter-tribal violence in 
Southern Sudan are a cause for concern and action on the part 
of the Sudanese authorities.  Such violence undermines the 
return of IDPs and refugees and the recovery of southern 
Sudan and, indeed, weakens the implementation of the CPA. 
 
The violence perpetrated by the Lord,s Resistance Army in 
southern Sudan as well as in the DRC and the CAR is of strong 
concern.  To date, LRA attacks in the DRC and Sudan have 
created some 17,000 new Congolese refugees in Sudan and 
30,000 IDPs.  We urge continued cooperation among Uganda, 
Sudan, the DRC and the CAR in eliminating this scourge. 
 
We call on all parties to end the violence and re-engage in 
constructive discussion, as begun in Doha under the 
leadership of UN-AU Joint Chief Mediator Bassol, on how to 
bring about a cessation of hostilities in Darfur, and to do 
the same to address the insecurity in Southern Sudan and 
Chad. 
 
Thus far in FY2009, the United States has contributed more 
than $350 million in humanitarian assistance to help the 
people of Sudan.  We continue to urge all parties to work 
together, in coordination with the Government of Sudan, to 
support NGOs and UN agencies undertaking the large and 
important task of filling humanitarian assistance gaps. 
 
The UN has made considerable headway on the three track plan 
U/SYG Holmes laid out in March.  Though some gaps do remain, 
UN agencies and remaining NGOs have been flexible and 
dedicated to reaching as many civilians as possible with 
life-saving assistance.  Strengthening the humanitarian 
architecture of Sudan is critical. 
 
We will continue to work closely with the UN, NGOs, other 
donors and relevant elements of the Government of Sudan to 
identify, track and address these humanitarian gaps. 
CLINTON