09USUNNEWYORK727
U/SYG LE ROY BRIEFS COUNCIL ON UNAMID
Tue Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8223
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0727/01 2091444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 281444Z JUL 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6991
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000727 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SU AF
SUBJECT: U/SYG LE ROY BRIEFS COUNCIL ON UNAMID 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. In a July 24 briefing to the Security 
Council on UNAMID, U/SYG Le Roy announced expected increases 
in UNAMID troop deployments to 92% of authorized levels by 
year,s end.  Le Roy said that the mission thus would be able 
to shift focus from deployment to operations.  Despite a 
reduction in large-scale violence, Le Roy reported increases 
in localized conflicts and interethnic fighting.  Le Roy also 
said that the Darfur peace process had been impeded by both 
the increased Sudan-Chad border tensions and the imposition 
of preconditions to negotiation by rebel groups and the 
Government of Sudan (GOS).  Council members universally 
praised the parties, acceptance of the Permanent Court of 
Arbitration,s (PCA) decision on Abyei but remained deeply 
divided over the International Criminal Court (ICC) 
indictment of President Bashir.  Many members expressed 
concern over delays in issuing visas, the deteriorating 
humanitarian situation, and the stalled Darfur peace process. 
 Austria asked about UNAMID's ability to successfully monitor 
the Chad/Sudan border, and Le Roy said that UNAMID did not 
have the capacity to do so.  End Summary. 
 
U/SYG Le Roy Briefs the Council 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On July 24, the Security Council held a debate on 
the Secretary General's July report on the hybrid United 
Nations/African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID).  Under 
Secretary General for the Department of Peace Keeping 
Operations Alain Le Roy announced UNAMID force deployments 
will increase to 92% of authorized levels following the 
arrival of battalions from Ethiopia, Egypt, South Africa, 
Tanzania and Burkina Faso, as well as infantry companies and 
police officers, by the end of 2009.  Le Roy stressed that 
with nearly full deployment reached, UNAMID could begin to 
focus its attention on operational issues. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Le Roy said that large scale violence in Darfur had 
largely given way to localized attacks and interethnic 
fighting.  He expressed concern over increased Sudan-Chad 
border tensions and the imposition of preconditions to 
negotiation by rebel groups and the GOS.  While commending 
the Court,s Abyei decision, Le Roy focused on the lack of 
concrete progress in the Darfur peace process.  Le Roy linked 
successful implementation of the CPA to an improvement of the 
situation in Darfur and noted that uncertainties in the 
electoral process, disputed census figures and high numbers 
of IDPs could lead to widespread disenfranchisement of 
Darfuris in elections planned for April 2010. 
 
Council Reaction 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ambassador DiCarlo commended the stabilizing 
presence of UNAMID and welcomed the deployment of additional 
UNAMID forces, while noting the lack of key pledged assets-- 
especially air support.  Ambassador DiCarlo identified as 
UNAMID,s top priorities the protection of civilians and the 
facilitation of humanitarian assistance.  She expressed 
concern over the level of sexual and gender-based violence 
and criticized Sudan,s expulsion of humanitarian 
organizations as well as its delay tactics in issuing visas 
for humanitarian workers and customs clearances for UNAMID 
assets.  Ambassador DiCarlo voiced full support for Joint 
UN/AU Mediator Bassole, but remarked that peace in Darfur 
will not occur so long as Sudan and Chad are engaged in 
active conflict.  Finally, Ambassador DiCarlo stressed that 
the Council could not ignore the need for Darfuris to 
participate in national elections, scheduled for April 2010. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The United Kingdom and France also welcomed the 
anticipated increases in UNAMID deployment, expressed concern 
over delays in issuing visas and customs clearances, voiced 
support for the Joint Mediator, highlighted the volatility of 
the security situation, and described the expulsion of nearly 
5,000 humanitarian workers to be "unacceptable."  Both 
countries stressed the importance of improvements in 
Sudan-Chad relations and reiterated the need for rebel groups 
and the GOS to resume participation in the mediation led by 
Bassole without preconditions. 
 
¶6. (SBU) There was general consensus among the remaining 
member states that a negotiated political solution involving 
the GOS and all rebel groups is essential for peace, and that 
regional tensions between Chad and Sudan were impeding the 
peace process.  Austria asked U/SYG Le Roy whether it would 
be feasible for UNAMID to assist with monitoring the 
Chad/Sudan border.  Most member states praised the parties, 
response to the PCA,s Abyei decision and commended efforts 
by the tripartite mechanism for resolving UNAMID deployment 
issues, as well as the efforts of Qatar and Libya in 
facilitating Bassole,s mediation efforts. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000727  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
ICC Debate 
---------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Clear divisions remain over the ICC indictment of 
President Bashir.  The United Kingdom, Austria, Mexico and 
Costa Rica voiced support for the indictment and called upon 
Sudan to cooperate with the ICC and comply with resolution 
¶1593.  China, Russia, Viet Nam, Libya and Burkina Faso 
characterized the indictment as an impediment to political 
progress and an obstacle to peace.  (Note: Libya has proposed 
an amendment to the UNAMID mandate renewal resolution 
endorsing the African Union,s position requesting Article 16 
deferral of the indictment and stating that AU members would 
not comply with executing the arrest warrant against Bashir. 
End Note.) 
 
Sudan Speaks 
------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) Speaking at the invitation of the Security Council, 
Sudan reaffirmed its commitment to the CPA while denouncing 
rebel groups for setting preconditions on negotiations. 
Sudan dismissed criticism of delays in issuing visas and 
customs clearances, denying that such tactics were an 
official government policy. Sudan stated that humanitarian 
efforts were proceeding "smoothly" and called the ICC 
indictment a "heinous decision."  Sudan denounced Chadian 
airstrikes as a violation of its sovereignty and threatened 
that its "patience will not last forever." 
 
Le Roy,s Concluding Remarks 
--------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) In response to Austria,s question about border 
monitoring, Le Roy stated that neither UNAMID nor the UN 
Mission in Chad and the Central African Republic (MINURCAT) 
have the capacity or authority to patrol the Chad-Sudan 
border.  Le Roy also said that, politically, neither Chad nor 
Sudan would support UN monitoring of the border due to 
concerns over sovereignty.  Responding to questions about 
visas, U/SYG Le Roy noted that a backlog of 327 visas remains 
and he asked that the GOS refrain from discriminating against 
certain nationalities. 
RICE