09USUNNEWYORK41
UNSC: SECRETARY-GENERAL BRIEFS COUNCIL; COUNCIL
Thu Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2993
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0041/01 0222344
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 222344Z JAN 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5671
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000041 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER UNSC KWBG KPAL IS LY EG AU
SUBJECT: UNSC: SECRETARY-GENERAL BRIEFS COUNCIL; COUNCIL 
WELCOMES GAZA CEASE-FIRE 
 
REF: A. STATE 5430 
     ¶B. USUN NEW YORK 19 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The Secretary-General briefed the Security 
Council January 21 on his recent trip to the Middle East 
during the Council's monthly meeting on the Middle East. 
Both he and Council members welcomed the unilateral 
cease-fires and the Israeli withdrawal but stressed the need 
to implement UNSCRs 1860 and 1850.  The Secretary-General 
announced the start of a humanitarian needs assessment 
mission to Gaza, the results of which would be presented to 
the Council on January 27.  The Secretary-General described 
"several incidents of outrageous attacks against UN 
facilities" and said he had demanded a thorough investigation 
by Israel and would await its report before making a decision 
on next steps though he did call for those responsible to be 
held accountable for their actions.  The Secretary-General 
did note the condemnation by Lebanon of the rockets fired 
from southern Lebanon towards Israel and said he had urged 
restraint on the part of Israel.  At the end of its 
consultations, the Council reached consensus on elements of a 
press statement welcoming the cease-fire and emphasizing the 
need for the full implementation of resolution 1860.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Secretary-General briefed the Security Council 
on January 21 about his recent trip to the Middle East during 
the Council's monthly meeting on the Middle East.  As the 
Secretary-General had lost his voice, Under Secretary-General 
Pascoe read the Secretary-General's remarks.  (Note: USUN 
e-mailed the Secretary-General's remarks to IO/UNP on January 
¶21.  End note.)  The Secretary-General, who had consulted 
with the Council prior to his departure (see ref B), said he 
had traveled with the "simple and unmistakable message" that 
the fighting must stop and UNSCR 1860 must be fully respected 
and implemented.  He commended the leadership and initiative 
of Egyptian President Mubarak to achieve the cease-fire and 
of other leaders for their contributions.  He stressed that 
efforts must continue to ensure a durable and sustainable 
cease-fire is quickly put in place. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Secretary-General spoke on the conflict's 
impact on civilians, criticizing "Hamas' unacceptable and 
irresponsible actions and Israel's blockade and use of 
excessive and disproportionate military force."  He said he 
went to Gaza January 20 to show Gazans that the UN stands 
with them,  He also described his visit to Sderot and said in 
both places international humanitarian law must be fully 
respected and civilians protected.  He praised the work of UN 
staff in Gaza and paid tribute to those who had been killed 
or injured.  He said the UN would work urgently to provide 
humanitarian assistance and begin the process of recovery and 
reconstruction.  He announced the January 22 visit to Gaza by 
Special Coordinator Serry and Under Secretary-General Holmes 
to begin the humanitarian needs assessment.  He noted that 
Holmes and UNRWA Commissioner-General Abu Zayd would report 
to the Council January 27 on the humanitarian situation and 
that the UN would launch a Flash Humanitarian Appeal within 
ten days.  He stressed that plans for Gaza's recovery and 
reconstruction would be coordinated closely with PA Prime 
Minister Fayyad and would be presented at a conference in 
Cairo and feed into the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee process. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Secretary-General described "several incidents 
of outrageous attacks against UN facilities," including the 
January 19 attack on UNRWA's main warehouse which he 
described as "still smoldering" during his visit.  He noted 
that he had called on all combatants to respect the sanctity 
of UN premises and that he had been given assurances by 
Israeli authorities that something like the January 19 attack 
would not happen again.  He noted that two days later a UN 
school serving as a shelter was attacked and two boys killed. 
 He stressed that he had met with the Israeli leadership and 
"demanded a thorough investigation by Israel into every 
single one of these incidents" and he expected to "receive a 
full explanation of each incident and that those responsible 
will be held accountable for their actions."  He said Prime 
Minister Olmert promised to provide the results of their 
inquiry.  The Secretary-General said he would decide on the 
appropriate follow-up action. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Secretary-General then turned to the political 
way forward and said he had appealed for Palestinian 
reconciliation and stated that the UN "will work with a 
united Palestinian government encompassing Gaza and the West 
Bank."  He reviewed his visit to Lebanon and his address to 
the Lebanese Parliament.  He noted the Lebanese government's 
condemnation of the rockets fired from southern Lebanon 
towards Israel and the prompt action by UNIFIL and the 
Lebanese Armed Forces.  He said he asked the Israeli 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000041  002 OF 003 
 
 
leadership to exercise restraint in response and to move 
forward with implementing outstanding elements of UNSCR 1701, 
including the withdrawal from northern Ghajar  In conclusion, 
the Secretary-General said that while the Gaza crisis 
requires conflict management and containment it is a symptom 
of broader problems and demands a true end to violence and a 
comprehensive peace between Israel and all its Arab neighbors. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In Security Council consultations immediately 
following the briefing, the majority of members welcomed the 
unilateral cease-fires and the Israeli withdrawal and 
stressed the need to implement UNSCRs 1860 and 1850 -- a 
durable cease-fire, an end to illicit trafficking in arms and 
ammunition to Gaza, and a sustained opening of the crossings 
on the basis of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. 
(Note: Ambassador Wolff delivered the U.S. remarks contained 
in ref A.  End note.)  The Libyan DPR was alone in his tirade 
about the "destruction" and "atrocities" in Gaza perpetrated 
by Israel.  He went as far as saying that the atrocities and 
crimes perpetrated by Israel show the Zionist mentality is 
based on the denial of the existence of the Palestinian 
people and even quoted the phrase "a land without a people 
for a people without a land" as proof of that mentality.  The 
Burkinabe representative, referencing the loss of life and 
infrastructure in Gaza, said those who violated international 
humanitarian law should be prosecuted. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Austrian Perm Rep noted that the European Union 
is ready to look at re-deployment of EUBAM at Rafah and asked 
for the UN Secretariat's assessment of the necessary 
conditions for such a step.  Later, Under Secretary-General 
Pascoe replied that the timing is critical but that the 
normal commercial functioning of crossings are tied to the 
arrangements being put in place to counter the illicit 
trafficking in arms and ammunition to Gaza.  Pascoe noted 
Israeli confirmation to the Secretary-General during his trip 
that humanitarian assistance may flow through the crossings 
while those arrangements are being set up. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Throughout the consultations, the UK and French 
delegations were engaged in side negotiations with the 
Libyan, Russian, and U.S. delegations on the elements of a 
press statement on which the Council eventually reached 
consensus.  The French Presidency read the following press 
statement at the press stake-out immediately following 
Council consultations: 
 
"The Secretary-General briefed the members of the Security 
Council this afternoon on his visit to the Middle East. 
 
"The members of the Security Council welcomed the cease-fire 
in Gaza, and the effort of international and regional 
partners - in particular the Egyptian initiative - in helping 
bring this about.  The members of the Security Council 
expressed their strong appreciation for the efforts of the 
Secretary-General to support the implementation of resolution 
¶1860.  The members of the Council emphasized the need for 
full implementation of resolution 1860, in particular for the 
cease-fire to be durable and fully respected by all parties, 
for the provision of arrangements and guarantees to prevent 
illicit trafficking in arms and ammunition to Gaza, and to 
ensure the sustained reopening of the crossing points, on the 
basis of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access between 
the Palestinian Authority and Israel. 
 
"The members of the Security Council restated their grave 
concern at the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stressed 
the need for unimpeded provision and distribution of 
humanitarian aid throughout Gaza.  In this regard, Council 
members recognized the excellent work being carried out in 
Gaza under very difficult circumstances by UN agencies, in 
particular UNRWA, the infrastructure of which was severely 
damaged.  Council members called upon all parties to ensure 
these agencies receive the support and protection they need 
and recalled the obligations of all parties to a conflict to 
ensure respect for international humanitarian law. 
 
"The members of the Security Council encouraged, as set out 
in resolutions 1850 and 1860, tangible steps towards 
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and stressed the need to 
continue to work towards a long-term solution.  Members 
re-emphasized that only a two-state solution, with an 
independent and viable Palestinian state living side-by-side 
in peace and security with Israel and its other neighbors, 
could bring peace to both Israelis and Palestinians.  Council 
members welcomed, in this regard, the initiatives and 
proposals aimed at organizing international meetings, 
including, as mentioned in resolutions 1850 and 1860, the 
Quartet's consideration, in consultation with the parties, of 
an international meeting in Moscow in 2009."  End text of 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000041  003 OF 003 
 
 
press statement. 
Wolff