09USUNNEWYORK894
UNSC BRIEFED ON SITUATION IN SOMALIA
Tue Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8986
OO RUEHIK
DE RUCNDT #0894/01 2862011
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 132011Z OCT 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7316
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000894 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF, IO, PM, USUN/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPKO MARR PHUM SO
SUBJECT: UNSC BRIEFED ON SITUATION IN SOMALIA 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000894  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Under Secretary-General Pascoe and UNSOA 
Director of Field Support Boyd reported to the Security 
Council on October 8 that the TFG has persevered in spite of 
the challenging security situation, and urged the 
international community to continue its political and 
financial support.  Boyd said that the security environment 
in Mogadishu will slow the Department of Field Support's 
capacity to deliver the mandated support package.  Somali 
Permanent Representative Elmi Ahmed Duale emphasized that his 
government has made much progress, including strengthening 
the overall security apparatus, but noted that the 
devastating humanitarian situation requires urgent action. 
All members called for international support for AMISOM and 
the TFG.  Ambassador DiCarlo noted Eritrea's support for 
insurgent groups.  The UK and Russia discussed augmenting the 
current sanctions regime to address external spoilers 
supporting the insurgency in Somalia. SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In his October 8 address to the Security Council, 
Under Secretary-General for Political Affairs Pascoe 
emphasized that the priority of the international community 
should remain supporting the Somali government in the areas 
of security, political dialogue, piracy, development and 
humanitarian assistance.  Pascoe stated that in spite of the 
difficulties of the last few months, the TFG has overcome 
attacks by "foreign funded and heavily armed" groups.  Pascoe 
called on the international community to support the 
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) via the Joint Security 
Committee, stating that, "money received today in Somalia 
will have a far greater impact on stability than that which 
arrives in three months time." Pascoe lauded the TFG's 
openness to political dialogue, including the recent 
agreement between the Somali government and the Puntland 
authorities. On piracy, he acknowledged the critical role 
played by the international maritime presence off Somalia's 
coast and urged member states, international organizations 
and the private sector to contribute to the Trust Fund for 
anti-piracy.  Pascoe concluded by noting that, "external 
spoilers must be neutralized," from Somalia and that, 
"targeted sanctions can be one effective way to deal with the 
spoilers." 
 
¶3.  (SBU) UNSOA Director Craig Boyd, delivering points on 
behalf of Under Secretary-General for Field Support Susana 
Malcorra, stated that due to the challenging security 
environment in Mogadishu, including attacks on AMISOM 
facilities and UN contracted ships, the Department of Field 
Support's capacity to deliver the mandated support package 
will be slowed.  Each of the four maritime vessels that have 
transported UNSOA consignments to AMISOM have been attacked. 
In spite of these challenges, Boyd pointed to several key 
achievements made by the UN Support Office for AMISOM 
including progressively phasing down the support received by 
the U.S. and its vendor as UN support arrangements for AMISOM 
come into effect as planned.  Boyd stated that a critical gap 
remains between the confirmed financial pledges to AMISOM and 
actual donor disbursements and welcomed the October 9 donors 
conference in New York to finalize contributions.  Boyd, 
however, welcomed the USD 10 million contributions made to 
the AMISOM Trust fund by donor states since July. 
 
Somalia Permanent Representative Emphasizes Commitment to 
Peace 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Somali Permanent Representative Elmi Ahmed Duale 
stated that despite ongoing security challenges his 
government has made progress via the Djibouti peace process. 
Duale underscored the importance of strengthening AMISOM to 
improve the security situation and welcomed the support of 
several Council members for the deployment of a UN 
peacekeeping force (UNPKO) in Somalia. Duale stressed that 
the root cause of piracy was inland, not on the high seas, 
and called for a reinforcement of security forces in order to 
stop pirates from capturing Somali ports.  He hoped that the 
Security Council will apply sanctions against, "all spoilers 
including individuals, entities and countries concerned." 
 
Permanent Member Views 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) All members of the Council called for international 
support of the TFG and AMISOM, addressed the security 
situation, and lamented the deteriorating humanitarian 
situation.  Ambassador DiCarlo condemned the continuing 
military offensives against the TFG and AMISOM, in particular 
the September 17 attacks, and urged donors to fulfill their 
pledges to both AMISOM and the Somali government.  She noted 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000894  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
that drought and insecurity are worsening the humanitarian 
situation, and that ongoing fighting endangers food delivery 
and other humanitarian aid to the 3.7 million Somalis in need 
of assistance. Piracy also continues to be an obstacle in 
assistance delivery. Ambassador DiCarlo urged prosecution of 
suspected pirates to ensure an environment in which aid and 
supplies can be transported safely.  Pointing to reports by 
the Somalia Sanctions Committee of Eritrea's support for 
insurgent groups operating in Somalia, Ambassador DiCarlo 
stated that the international community should consider ways 
to address this behavior. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The United Kingdom said that the "situation in 
Somalia remained extremely fragile," and the UN and 
international community must intensify implementation of its 
strategy, including by dispersing funds pledged in Brussels. 
The UK expressed concern about Eritrea's reported support to 
armed groups and stated that the UK is prepared to give the 
AU's request for sanctions "serious consideration." France 
underscored the serious humanitarian situation, reminding the 
Council of the precarious security situation that has 
resulted in the deaths of nine aid workers, as well as the 
kidnapping of 13 others.  Also mentioned was the French 
official kidnapped by insurgents in July who continues to be 
held.  France has trained 150 TFG soldiers in Djibouti and 
plans to train 350 more shortly.  France also noted the EU's 
interest in managing a training mission, as well as German 
and Russian offers to train TFG forces.  France welcomed the 
Somali government's efforts to reach out to the opposition 
and "expand the political space," and urged all parties to 
join the peace process.  Citing the need to bring pirates to 
justice, France called for the creation of a trust fund to 
support civilian and criminal justice efforts in the fight 
against piracy. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Russia focused on the security situation in Somalia, 
stating that without serious stabilization it would be 
impossible to significantly advance normalization or build 
statehood in Somalia. Russia said that the scope of AMISOM's 
mandate as defined by UNSCR 1744 is sufficient to assist the 
TFG, and that conditions are not present for a "full-fledged" 
UN operation in Somalia as there is no peace to keep.  Russia 
called on States of the region to prevent the flow of foreign 
mercenaries and arms into Somalia, adding that the Council 
should, "take additional steps to strengthen" the Somalia 
sanctions regime.  China urged the UN to play a greater role 
in Somalia, stating that while deployment of a UN 
peacekeeping operation in Somalia faces obstacles the 
international community cannot wait for conditions to ripen. 
China also urged the international community to provide 
assistance to AMISOM and noted its contribution of funds to 
AMISOM, the Somali government, as well as its cancellation of 
a large amount 
of Somalia's debt. 
 
Other Member Views 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Other members of the Council expressed concern over 
continuing attacks on the TFG and AMISOM, in particular the 
September 17 attacks. Members welcomed the TFG's efforts to 
reach out to opposition groups, including Ahlu Sunna-wa Al 
Jamma, and called on the international community to support 
the Somali government both politically and financially. 
Turkey deplored the current living conditions of AMISOM 
troops and called on donors to disperse their pledges as soon 
as possible.  Most delegations urged enhanced coordination. 
Austria said that until the root causes of piracy are 
addressed, including by enhancing the rule-of-law in Somalia, 
the international community will not "meet lasting success" 
against piracy.  Costa Rica focused on the humanitarian 
conditions in Somalia, condemning acts of violence against 
civilians and welcoming the establishment of a human rights 
focal point in the TFG. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Mexico noted concern over reports of child 
recruitment by armed groups, as well as food aid diversions 
by criminals.  Mexico underscored the importance of regaining 
control of seaports and airports in Somalia by cooperating on 
a regional basis.  Croatia commended the establishment of the 
Commission on Security and Pacification and the TFG's 
appointment of a new Minister of Defense, which will 
contribute to the government's ability to restore order. 
Croatia also noted its support of a shift to a UN "light 
footprint" on the ground in Somalia, as well as consultations 
on a possible future UNPKO.  Libya called on the 
international community to support its pledges to AMISOM and 
asked that it be transformed rapidly into a UNPKO. Vietnam 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000894  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
echoed this call.  Libya also stated that the international 
maritime presence off the coast of Somalia should not be used 
to protect illegal fishing in Somali coastal waters. 
 
Sanctions 
---------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Mexico, as chair of the Somalia sanctions 
committee, stated that sanctions implementation in Somalia by 
the Security Council should be consistent with the approach 
pursued in the sub-region, taking into account the complex 
situation on the ground. Uganda stated that the Security 
Council should deal with all spoilers of the peace firmly, 
asking, in view of the magnitude of the situation, "is the 
current approach commensurate with the threat on the ground." 
 Burkina Faso urged the Security Council to act against 
spoilers via the Somalia Sanctions Committee and other 
mechanisms.  As noted in paragraphs 6 and 7, the UK and 
Russia expressed interest in enhancing the current sanctions 
regime. 
RICE