09WELLINGTON117
TONGA PM SAYS APPROACH TO FIJI NEEDS REVISION
Tue May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO7531
RR RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0117/01 1390515
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190515Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5865
INFO RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1968
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5515
RUEHAP/AMEMBASSY APIA 0567
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0846
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000117 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
PACOM FOR J01E/J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PREL NZ
SUBJECT: TONGA PM SAYS APPROACH TO FIJI NEEDS REVISION 
 
WELLINGTON 00000117  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary.  On May 18, Tongan Prime Minister Dr. Feleti 
Seveli gave a public address in Wellington where he stated that 
critics need not worry about political reform in his country as it 
was continuing apace and is fully supported by the Tongan King.  On 
Fiji, Dr. Seveli offered a nuanced position.  He stated that 
expulsion from the PIF would not help the Fijian nation and 
isolation would ultimately be harmful to its people.  He advocated a 
softer approach to solving the Fijian problem.  Dr. Seveli spoke 
warmly of the historical relationship with the U.S. and noted that 
it formed the incentive for a Tongan contribution to military work 
in Iraq.  End Summary. 
 
Tongan PM in NZ Speaks about Political Reform, Fiji 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. (SBU)  On May 18, New Zealand's Pacific Cooperation Foundation 
and Victoria University hosted Tongan Prime Minister Dr. Feleti 
Seveli, who spoke before a large audience of foreign diplomats, GNZ 
officials, students and members of the Tongan expatriate community. 
Dr. Seveli divided his comments into three parts: Tonga's political 
reform program; Tonga's position on the interim Fijian Government, 
and, to a lesser extent, Tonga's historical foreign relations. 
 
Claims Political Reform Alive and Well in Tonga 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Political reform in Tonga has been, according to Dr. 
Seveli, an ongoing process since the enactment of the country's 
constitution in 1875.  He reminded the audience that Tonga's lengthy 
constitutional history established the balance between its executive 
branch, legislature, and judiciary with the executive power of the 
constitutional monarchy exercised through the Cabinet.  He stated 
that political reforms continue in earnest even though Tonga already 
has many constitutionally-mandated political freedoms.  He cited as 
examples the freedom of speech, freedom of the press and the right 
to a fair trial. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Dr. Seveli praised King George Tupou V of Tonga as the 
principle driver behind political reform.  He strongly refuted any 
suggestion that the Tongan royal family had "a stranglehold" on 
Tonga and highlighted the ascension to positions of influence of 
commoners, like himself, to support his claim.  Dr. Seveli spoke 
against criticism of Tonga's political and constitutional 
arrangements as "unfair" and "misinformed."  Anxiety about his 
government's commitment to reform was deemed "unfounded" and such 
critics as "unable to accept the truth and face reality." 
 
Fiji:  Wrong to Isolate, Need to Rethink Strategy 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Dr. Seveli began his comments on Fiji by underscoring 
Tonga's traditional kinship with Fiji.  He reminded the audience 
that it was the decision of the Pacific Island Forum (PIF) to expel 
the Fijian Interim government and not the nation of Fiji. 
Throughout his comments, Dr. Seveli repeated this distinction to 
demonstrate Tonga's nuanced position towards Fiji.  Although, he 
declared, Tonga does not condone the removal of a 
legitimately-elected government by Commodore Frank Bainimarama, 
undermining the interim government will ultimately hurt the Fijian 
people and will not improve the present situation.  "What is done is 
done," Dr. Seveli declared, and "what now must be strived for is the 
best possible outcome."  He went on to say that the "future of the 
Fijian nation will not be helped by its expulsion from the PIF." 
Although he stopped short of overtly criticizing the PIF's decision, 
Dr. Seveli posited that a more prudent course of action should be to 
re-consider the expulsion and to "let Fiji work out its own 
problems."  Though he did not outwardly caution against imposing 
economic sanctions on Fiji, Dr. Seveli noted that Fiji cannot be 
allowed to become an "economic basket case" given its importance as 
a regional hub of commerce. 
 
Backhanded Slap at NZ and Australia? 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Dr. Seveli stated that his talks with the NZ Government 
about Fiji left him "encouraged."  Nevertheless, he suggested that 
it may be best for others to stand back and be more patient with 
Fiji.  He said that Tonga and other regional governments can act as 
facilitators but ultimately it is for Fijian themselves to decide 
their own destiny.  He encouraged regional governments to be more 
enlightened in their thinking towards Commodore Bainimarama. 
Director of the Centre of Strategic Studies Peter Cozens later 
opined that Seveli's comments implied criticism of the NZ and 
Australian approach to Fiji. 
 
 
WELLINGTON 00000117  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Historical Bilateral Relations: Praise for US and NZ 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶7. (SBU)  In charting Tonga's historical foreign relations, Dr. 
Seveli emphasized Tonga's strong relationship with the U.S.  He 
explained there were two primary reasons why Tonga supported and 
participated in military work in Iraq.  The first was in recognition 
of the historical U.S.-Tonga relationship and the fact that many 
ethnic Tongans now call the U.S. home.  Second, Tongans feel a 
measure of gratitude to the U.S. military for its role in Tonga 
during World War Two.  On New Zealand, Dr. Seveli spoke warmly of 
his schooling days in New Zealand and noted that connections formed 
during this time helped his business and political career.  He 
praised New Zealanders for having a sound understanding of Tonga and 
having never tried to dictate terms to his country. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Throughout his address, Dr. Seveli spoke in a placid and 
quiet manner.  Nevertheless, the strength of his reaction to 
criticism of political reform in Tonga and how best to deal with 
Fiji were pointed and not lost on onlookers.  The address was in 
keeping with previous public statements by Dr. Seveli that there 
should a softer line towards Fiji, which has allowed for quieter but 
more frank exchanges with the interim government.  Expatriate 
Tongans in attendance appeared to be more focused, however, on 
political reform in their homeland.  They appeared to be supportive 
of Dr. Seveli as evidenced by statements of praise and encouragement 
made at the conclusion of his formal remarks.  End Comment. 
 
Keegan