10BEIJING366
FDI in China: Which Way Will the Pendulum Swing?
Thu Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1100
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0366 0420916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110916Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8084
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS BEIJING 000366 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV ETRD CH
 
SUBJECT:  FDI in China: Which Way Will the Pendulum Swing? 
 
This cable is Sensitive but Unclassified (SBU) and for official use 
only.  Not for transmission outside USG channels. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang's January 29 
speech at Davos and recent State Council guidelines encouraging 
foreign direct investment (FDI) in China indicate continued support 
at senior levels of government for economic reform and a more open 
investment climate, according to a senior scholar at a Ministry of 
Commerce (MOFCOM)-affiliated think tank.  However, our contact 
cautioned that a "Cold War mindset" among some policymakers might 
thwart reform progress and instead strengthen the recent trend 
towards state-led growth.  Comment:  Despite some central decision 
makers' recent reiteration of support for FDI, foreign companies 
continue to report significant and growing challenges in doing 
business in many sectors, and serious concerns remain about whether 
China's increasing use of industrial policies to skew the playing 
field toward domestic "champions" indicates a fundamental shift away 
from its decades-long policies of reform and opening.  End Comment 
and Summary. 
 
Support for FDI among Senior Officials Still Strong? 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a January 29 meeting with EconOffs, Director General of 
the MOFCOM-affiliated think tank Beijing New Century Academy on 
Transnational Corporations Wang Zhile credited FDI with 
significantly contributing to China's economic development and 
argued that even though China was now less dependent on their 
capital, multi-national corporations (MNCs) continued to provide the 
management experience and technology that was critical for China's 
continued economic growth.  He said that his views enjoyed support 
among some senior Chinese leaders, including Vice Premier Li Keqiang 
and Chongqing Party Secretary Bo Xilai.  Wang praised Li Keqiang's 
January 29 speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, in which 
Vice Premier Li noted the importance of FDI and called for breaking 
up SOE monopolies in China. 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to Wang, this high-level support for FDI was also 
evident in the working guidelines on foreign investment adopted at 
the December 30, 2009, State Council Executive Meeting chaired by 
Premier Wen Jiabao.  The guidelines call for the government to 
expand market access sectors; encourage FDI in high-end 
manufacturing, high-tech, modern service, new energy, energy-saving 
and environmental protection industries; apply industry 
revitalization measures equally to qualified FIEs; and encourage 
foreign investors to take part in reorganization and restructuring 
of domestic companies through mergers and acquisitions.  While the 
guidelines are consistent with China's long-standing policies of 
encouraging foreign investment in these sectors, Wang was heartened 
by this high-level reiteration of support for FDI. 
 
China's Shifting Views on MNCs 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Wang pointed out that Chinese policymakers vacillated on 
the question of MNCs, at times welcoming their investment in China 
and at times opposing what they saw as MNCs' excessive influence 
over China's economy.  Wang, a well-known advocate of FDI in China, 
expressed concern that the pendulum had swung against MNCs in recent 
years, as Chinese policymakers with a "Cold War mindset" had adopted 
measures to limit foreign companies' access to China's market and to 
promote SOE-led growth.  Wang pointed to the growing trend towards 
promoting and protecting domestic "strategic industries," citing 
China's steel industry as one example of state-led consolidation 
that would restrict competition and strengthen monopolies.  He said 
the politicization of the Google case had added to the difficulties 
in lobbying senior leaders in favor of foreign investment. 
 
China Needs Tougher Anti-Corruption Law 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Wang said that corruption was a serious obstacle to reform 
and economic growth, commenting that China's anti-corruption 
campaign focused on corrupt officials and essentially ignored 
companies involved in bribing officials.  He argued that China 
should study the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) and adopt 
a similar law to crack down on corrupt business practices. 
 
HUNTSMAN