10DAMASCUS172
SYRIA - 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Sun Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXRO5281
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHDM #0172/01 0591152
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281152Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7426
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 0071
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORITY 0073
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 0014
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0892
RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY 0105
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0845
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHGVA/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 0757
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0109
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0810
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 DAMASCUS 000172 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/RA, NEA/ELA, DRL/NESCA, G/TIP, INL, 
PRM, G FOR LAURA PENA 
LONDON FOR MILLER 
PARIS FOR NOBLES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PGOV PREL ASEC ELAB KCRM KFRD KMCA
KTIP, KWMN, SOCI, SMIG, SY 
SUBJECT: SYRIA - 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 002094 
     ¶B. 09 DAMASCUS 000139 
     ¶C. 09 DAMASCUS 000554 
     ¶D. 09 DAMASCUS 000727 
     ¶E. DAMASCUS 000036 
 
¶1. (U) The following is Post's submission of the annual 
trafficking in persons report.  The Embassy's point of 
contact is Anthony A. Deaton.  Office telephone: ( 963) (11) 
3391-3207.  Fax ( 963) (11) 3391-4687.  Mr. Deaton (FS-03) 
spent 30 hours in preparation of the report, which is 
structured to answer ref A. 
 
-------------------------------- 
RESPONSES TO REPORTING QUESTIONS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) 25.A: The Syrian Arab Republic government (SARG) has 
not, traditionally, made information publicly available on 
police activities in general.  Regarding trafficking in 
persons (TIP) cases, the relevant government offices and 
police authorities have received very little of the requisite 
training and experience to identify and prosecute trafficking 
cases in the country accurately and swiftly.  As a result, 
there are no reliable government-issued statistics.  In fact, 
Post is unaware that the SARG even compiles data on 
trafficking crimes.  Post sources on TIP come from a range of 
local human rights contacts, lawyers, and women's issues 
advocates, the United Nations High Commission on Refugees 
(UNHCR), the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), 
the International Office for Migration (IOM), and other 
members of the international diplomatic community.  Post 
considers the aforementioned sources to be trustworthy. 
(Note: UNHCR, UNRWA, and IOM do not want to be named in any 
State Department reporting critical of the Syrian government 
for fear it will seriously jeopardize their future access to 
Syrian government officials and undermine their work in the 
country.  Post concurs with these organizations' concerns. 
END NOTE).  On January 11, the SARG published Syria's first 
anti-trafficking law -- Legislative Decree No. 3 -- providing 
a legal foundation for defining and prosecuting TIP crimes. 
While the SARG did not respond to Post's request for 
statistics on cases pursued by judicial and law enforcement 
agencies, and on victims assisted (assuming they have the 
data), recent anti-trafficking legislation requires ministry 
officials to work with international partners in the future. 
Such cooperation could include sharing data on specific 
cases.  During the reporting period, Post did meet with 
representatives from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) on 
August 5, 2009 (ref C) and the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Labor (MoSAL) on October 12, 2009 (ref D) to discuss TIP 
issues.  We hope these first steps will produce greater 
collaboration and information sharing between the Embassy and 
the SARG on TIP once an ambassador arrives at Post. 
 
¶3. (SBU) 25.B:  Syria is primarily a country of destination 
and transit for victims of trafficking (VOT). Consistent with 
last year's TIP report, Post sources contend that in 2008, 
Syria was not a country of origin for trafficking, nor was 
trafficking systematic throughout the country.  While there 
is prostitution in the major cities, it is difficult to 
discern what percentage of prostitutes were trafficked.  Nor 
was there any official information on whether women, Syrian 
or foreign, were trafficked internally for purposes of sex 
work or other forms of forced labor.  Diplomatic and local 
contacts report, however, that there may be as many as 
several thousand women who fall into this category. Contacts 
suggest the vast majority of these women were involved in the 
domestic labor market, most of them originating from South 
East Asia and the horn of Africa, especially Indonesia, the 
Philippines, Somalia, and Ethiopia.  Post is unaware of 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  002 OF 011 
 
 
Syrian men, women, or children being trafficked inside or 
outside the country for the purposes of forced labor or 
sexual exploitation.  VOTs who are transited through Syria to 
other countries include the aforementioned nationalities as 
well as Iraqi women and children refugees, most of whom are 
subjected to sexual exploitation and prostitution.  These 
individuals are trafficked through Syria to Europe or Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait, the UAE, and Lebanon. 
 
¶4. (SBU) 25.C:  Embassy sources report most trafficking 
victims are women forced into domestic labor or prostitution. 
 Women forced into prostitution fall into two groups: (1) 
those who arrive from former Soviet States (especially the 
Ukraine), Somalia, and Morocco; and (2) Iraqi refugees. 
Women employed as dancers were forced to live in unacceptable 
conditions.  Their employers, Post has learned, held their 
passports and reportedly allowed them to leave the hotel each 
day for approximately three to four hours.  In at least one 
case, the women were locked into their hotel from between 
12-16 hours daily.  Often, multiple women shared a single 
hotel room.  The women reportedly could get more "free time" 
if they had managed to solicit a "john." Generally, neither 
nudity nor direct sexual contact (touching, etc.) are 
permitted in these clubs.  Contacts reported women from 
Eastern Europe and former Soviet States were allowed to 
return to their native countries when their visas expired. 
In some cases, those women chose to return to Damascus to 
work in the same jobs once they became eligible for another 
tourist visa to Syria.  Iraqi women and children were victims 
of sexual exploitation and forced prostitution.  There were 
no official estimates on their numbers.  Some Iraqi female 
refugees who turned to prostitution out of economic 
desperation were later VOTs after Syrian police arrested and 
deported them back to Iraq.  In these cases, criminal gangs 
along the border trafficked the women back into Syria soon 
after police returned them to Iraq.  Anecdotal evidence 
suggested that in some case Iraqi families arranged for their 
young daughters both to work in dance clubs and to 
participate in temporary pleasure marriages.  In one case, a 
young girl, reportedly 10 years old, was managed by a madam 
who rented her out as a prostitute for extended periods of 
time. 
 
¶5. (SBU) 25.C-Continued: The domestic labor industry is the 
most common reason for TIP in Syria.  Many women are 
recruited to work in Syria as domestic servants and then 
forced to live like captive slaves with the families they 
serve.  When they arrive in the country, either the 
recruitment agency or the hiring family keeps the women's 
passports.  This tactic prevents women who are subjected to 
exploitive labor practices from leaving their employers.  The 
number of domestic servants is in the tens of thousands; 
there were no reliable statistics on the percentage of 
domestic workers who were VOTs, though diplomatic and civil 
society contacts report the number is well into the thousands. 
 
¶6. (SBU) 25.D: International and local NGOs, women's rights 
groups, and church activists all reported that Iraqi refugee 
women and girls were the most vulnerable to trafficking for 
the purposes of sex.  This vulnerability stemmed from the 
economic hardships refugees faced in Syria (and Iraq). 
Economically deprived women from Eastern Europe, former 
Soviet States, and parts of Africa were also vulnerable. 
 
¶7. (SBU) 25.E: Most non-Iraqi women trafficked for purposes 
of sexual exploitation were lured to Syria.  Employers from 
both Syria and the women's home countries reportedly 
recruited women as dancers and encouraged them to sign a 
low-wage contract with the understanding they would be paid 
more under the table upon arrival.  Once they arrived, the 
dancers were told they could earn additional money from 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  003 OF 011 
 
 
prostitution during the few hours each day they were allowed 
to leave their residential hotels.  Post has an unreliable 
estimate that several hundred women may be employed in this 
fashion, mostly in Damascus.  International organizations 
have, by and large, not focused on the issue of women 
trafficked to Syria as dancers, presumably because the 
numbers are relatively low.  Contacts have reported that some 
Eastern European women enter Syria on tourist visas with 
fraudulent travel documents procured or produced for them by 
traffickers in Europe.  Contacts reported that these women 
usually remain in the country for six months and then return 
home.  Some of the women allegedly choose to return of their 
own volition once they are eligible for a new tourist visa. 
 
¶8. (SBU) 25.E-Continued: While there are reports that Iraqi 
and Syrian gangs work alone and in tandem in trafficking 
women for the sex industry, government and law enforcement 
authorities have not presented any quantifiable evidence on 
gang activity.  Anecdotal evidence from international NGOs 
suggests that in some cases, Iraqis (both men and women) 
bring Iraqi women and girls to Syria who are falsely listed 
as wives and daughters on the traffickers' passports.  In 
other cases, a trafficker may legally bring an Iraqi woman 
who is his wife through a "pleasure marriage" (which can be 
quickly and easily solemnized and then dissolved) to Syria 
and then transfer her to the proprietor of a nightclub or 
brothel.  There have been even more extreme anecdotal reports 
wherein desperate Iraqi families abandoned their children on 
the Iraqi side of the Syrian-Iraqi border with the 
expectation that traffickers will pick them up and arrange 
forged documents.  In still other cases, the traffickers may 
seek new passports for the women and girls before selling 
them to third-country nationals for employment in Lebanon, 
the UAE, Saudi Arabia, and Kuwait.  On January 20, 2010, an 
Abu Dhabi criminal court convicted seven Syrian men on 
charges of human trafficking, and six others for facilitating 
prostitution.  The 13 men were allegedly part of a large 
human trafficking ring that lured Moroccan women to Abu Dhabi 
and then forced them into prostitution. 
 
¶9. (SBU) 25.E-Continued: Excepting incidents where Iraqis are 
trafficked in private cars across the Syria-Iraq border, 
there was no evidence that the vast majority of women and 
girls working as domestics and nightclub dancers entered the 
country through anything other than legitimate commercial 
means. 
 
¶10. (SBU) 25.E-Continued: There have been reports that 
throughout Syria dozens of unlicensed domestic labor 
recruitment agencies lure women to the country with false 
promises about the quality of life and work as a domestic. 
Once the women are in Syria, these agencies and/or the 
employers maintain custody of the women's passports, contrary 
to Syrian law, and force the domestics to work long hours, 
often without providing sufficiently private living quarters. 
 There were reports that employers sometimes beat domestic 
workers who disobeyed their orders.  Some women do manage to 
escape their employers, however, and an informal network of 
escapees has formed to provide assistance to one another, 
contacts reported. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Background on Government's Anti-TIP Efforts 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) 26.A: The government acknowledged human trafficking 
was a problem in the country during the reporting period as 
evinced by the passage of the country's first comprehensive 
trafficking law, Legislative Decree No. 3, on January 11, 
2010 (ref E). 
 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  004 OF 011 
 
 
¶12. (SBU) 26.B: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor (MoSAL), the Ministry of 
Justice (MoJ), and the Ministry of the Interior (MoI) are the 
four main government bodies working directly on 
anti-trafficking efforts.  Syria's comprehensive 
anti-trafficking law, Legislative Decree No. 3, designates 
MoSAL as the lead agency on victims assistance; MoI will 
spearhead interdiction efforts and collaboration with 
international partners.  MoJ's role will be in the area of 
prosecution.  The MFA will be involved to the extent that its 
Office of International Programs has visibility over issues 
involving international NGOs.  While no government-issued 
statistics on interdiction and prosecution exist, the MoI 
has, in the past, claimed to have worked with police to 
disrupt illegal domestic labor recruitment agencies and 
brothels. 
 
¶13. (SBU) 26.C: Adequate training remained the biggest 
limitation on combating trafficking in persons crimes in 
Syria.  Even though IOM has offered many workshops on 
anti-trafficking measures to government and police 
representatives, operational protocols were still in the 
earliest stages of development at the end of the reporting 
period.  Representatives from IOM and UNHCR were looking into 
how they might support the SARG's efforts to implement 
Legislative Decree 3 by the prescribed April 11 deadline. 
Even with extensive outside support, we assess the SARG will 
still struggle to provide adequate training to police troops, 
lawyers, judges, and other government officials.  Contacts 
have intimated that despite the new law, corrupt elements 
within the SARG could obstruct enforcement and prosecution, 
though there was no credible hard evidence to support these 
suggestions.  Finally, TIP-related issues raise the risk of 
embarrassment to a conservative society that is hesitant to 
address labor and sexual exploitation publicly.  This 
cultural conservatism could hamper law enforcement efforts in 
identifying and assisting VOTs. 
 
¶14. (SBU) 26.D: The 2010 comprehensive trafficking in persons 
law tasked the MoI with establishing a dedicated 
anti-trafficking crime unit.  While the full mandate for this 
organization has yet to be determined, the law makes clear 
the unit will have oversight on enforcement issues.  Specific 
to child labor issues, the government currently monitors 
public- and private-sector industries through surprise 
inspections to ensure no children under the age of 15 are 
employed.  There were no government-issued statistics on, or 
assessments of, its anti-trafficking efforts during the 
reporting period. 
 
¶15. (SBU) 26.E: The government worked with international NGOs 
and foreign embassies in Damascus to establish the identity 
and citizenship of VOTs.  Regarding the Iraqi refugee 
population, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and relevant 
government officials coordinated with IOM and UNHCR on issues 
of identifying victims and providing assistance. 
 
¶16. (SBU) 26.F: Contacts at international NGOs remained 
cautious in their assessments of the government's capacity to 
gather sufficient information for assessing its law 
enforcement efforts.  The primary problem was the lack of 
training for police, lawyers, judges, and relevant government 
officials.  If a workaround exists in the short term, it will 
be through allowing international NGOs to play a more direct 
role in assisting the government in its operations and 
providing them with training on how best to identify and 
capture the relevant data. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  005 OF 011 
 
 
 
¶17. (SBU) 27.A: Syria enacted a comprehensive trafficking 
law, Legislative Decree No. 3, on January 11, 2010 (ref E). 
The law's date of implementation will be April 11, 2010.  The 
three-month lag is consistent with the Syrian legislative 
process and is intended to provide the relevant ministries 
with sufficient time to develop protocols and standard 
operating procedures for carrying out the law's mandates. 
Two translated copies of the law (one by Post and another by 
IOM) have been sent under separate cover to G/TIP (please 
contact Rachel Yousey for copies).  IOM is still working with 
the MoJ to polish an official English version, which Post 
will provide the Department upon receipt.  The law addresses 
trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation and 
forced labor.  Moreover, the law penalizes trafficking 
whether it be international or domestic (internal) in nature. 
 
¶18. (SBU) 27.A-Continued: In addition to Legislative Decree 
No. 3, Syria has a range of laws that allow the government to 
prosecute alleged trafficking crimes.  Under Article 3 of Law 
10 (1961), individuals who facilitate travel of Syrian women 
abroad to work as prostitutes are to be punished by one to 
five years in prison and a fine of 1,000 to 5,000 Syrian 
pounds (about $20 to $100).  If more than one victim is 
involved, or if the victim is less than 16 years old, or is a 
paid servant, the maximum sentence increases to seven years. 
The direct text is as follows: "Whoever entices a male under 
the age of 21 or a female of whatever age to leave the United 
Arab Republic (Note: Egypt and Syria were one country at the 
time End note.), facilitates his/her departure, uses or 
accompanies him/her abroad to work in prostitution, and all 
those knowing the purpose of the departure and who assist in 
the process, shall be given a one to five-year imprisonment 
and a fine of 1,000 to 5,000 Syrian pounds (approximately $20 
to $200), and the maximum penalty would be imprisonment of 
seven years if the crime was committed against two or more 
persons." 
 
¶19. (SBU) 27.A-Continued: There are other legal texts in 
Syria that could further augment the anti-trafficking law 
currently in draft form, according to IOM.  For instance, 
Section 555 of the General Penal Code states "whoever 
incarcerates another person will be subjected to a prison 
sentence of six months to two years."  Section 556 states 
that "if the incarceration (of the victim by the perpetrator) 
lasts for more than one month or includes torture, the 
sentence will include hard labor."  Decree 29 of 1970, which 
regulates the immigration of foreigners, stipulates that "any 
foreigner who tries to enter the country with false 
documentation and anyone who may have aided that foreigner is 
subject to imprisonment of three months to one year and a 
fine of 500 Syrian Pounds ($10) to 2,000 ($40)."  In 
practice, however, these laws are not targeted toward, or 
enforced against, traffickers. 
 
¶20. (SBU) 27.A-Continued: The General Penal Code also 
provides punishments for the exploitation of prostitution by 
force, fraud, and/or coercion. Article 510 states: "Whoever 
attempts to seduce or take away a girl or woman . . . . with 
or without her consent, by means of deception, violence, 
threats, use of force or other compulsory means shall receive 
a three-year imprisonment and a fine of 300 Syrian Pounds 
($6)." 
 
¶21. (SBU) 27.A-Continued: The Syrian Constitution provides 
for regulation of working hours.  In addition, Decree 27, 
published in March 2009, and augmented by Decree 108 in 
December 2009, superseded Decree 81 of 2006 (ref B) by more 
strictly regulating domestic worker recruitment agencies and 
providing guidelines for employee contracts.  In particular, 
the new laws mandated that the Prime Minister's office may 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  006 OF 011 
 
 
revoke any domestic worker employment agency's license if 
said agency (1) "fails to repatriate domestic workers at its 
own expense"; (2) "imports domestics under the age of 18"; 
(3) "imports domestic workers under the pretense of working 
for people whose identities were faked"; (4) physically 
abuses, tortures, or exploits the employee; or (5) "practices 
any type of abuse or discrimination based on race, sex, 
religion, social class, nationality or any other form of 
discrimination prohibited by the international conventions in 
force." 
 
¶22. (SBU) 27.A-Continued: Decree 108 further stipulated that 
work contracts between a domestic and an employer must be 
issued by the Ministry of Interior.  The contract must then 
be registered at with the "work injury fund" of the Public 
Establishment of Social Security.  By law, contracts must 
include language requiring domestics receive a monthly 
paycheck and employers to assist the domestic in transferring 
the money abroad if requested to do so. The standard work 
contract must include provisions for providing domestics with 
clothing, food, medicine, living quarters, sufficient rest, 
and a minimum of two weeks' annual leave.  In accordance with 
the decree, the contract must be issued in Arabic and English. 
 
¶23. (SBU) 27.A-Continued: Decree 108 delineated employer 
obligations to domestic workers, including the hiring of the 
domestic for no more than three years as specified by Article 
2 of Legislative Decree No. 62 from 2007.  Any employer 
violating his/her contractual obligations will be fined 
100,000 Syrian pounds ($2,170).  The fine is to be doubled if 
the employer repeats any violation. 
 
¶24. (SBU) 27.B: Decree 3, Article 7 states that anyone 
convicted of trafficking in persons, whether for forced labor 
or sexual exploitation, will receive a sentence of no less 
than seven years and a fine between one to three million 
Syrian pounds ($21,800 to $65,220).  The minimum seven-year 
sentence may be increased in severe cases, which are defined 
in Article 8 as trafficking crimes committed (1) against 
women or children, or against anyone with special needs; (2) 
through the use or threat of force; (3) by the victim's 
spouse, a family member, or member of a law enforcement 
agency; (4) by criminal gangs (i.e. more than one person); or 
(5) across international boundaries.  In addition, Decree 3, 
Article 5 considers any form of child pornography to be a 
trafficking crime. 
 
¶25. (SBU) 27.C: Decree 3, Article 7 applies to labor 
trafficking as well.  See para 24.B.  See also paras 21-23 
for regulations on labor. 
 
¶26. (SBU) 27.D: The General Penal Code of 1949, revised in 
1985, outlines penalties for rape and forcible sexual 
assault.  According to Article 489, the minimum sentence for 
rape or sexual assault of a female is 15 years, or 21 years 
if the victim is a minor between the ages of 12 and 15. 
According to Article 491, if the victim is less than 12 years 
old, the minimum sentence is 15 years' imprisonment.  The law 
states, however, the perpetrator can be absolved of criminal 
guilt if he agrees to marry the victim.  Article 492 
stipulates that if the perpetrator is a guardian, relative, 
or cleric, and the victim is under the age of 18, the 
punishment is nine years' imprisonment.  For kidnapping 
women, the penalty is three to seven years in prison.  The 
penalty for deflowering a virgin is five years.  Article 505 
states molestation of a female less than 15 years of age is 
punishable by 18 months in prison.  According to Article 493, 
the punishment for raping or sexually assaulting a male is a 
minimum of 12 years in prison, or 18 years if the male is 
under the age of 15.  In the case of a rape or assault 
leading to the death of a victim, the penalty cannot be less 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  007 OF 011 
 
 
that 15 years, according to Article 498. 
 
¶27. (SBU) 27.E: Post is unaware of any legal action taken 
against human traffickers per se.  There have been various 
reports of the government shutting down illegal domestic 
labor recruitment agencies and brothels, however. 
 
¶28. (SBU) 27.F: Decree 3, Article 18 tasks the Ministry of 
Interior with developing and executing "special training 
programs for the personnel involved in combating the crimes 
of trafficking in persons."  These programs have yet to be 
established.  However, IOM is working with the government on 
a developing a host of training initiatives for lawyers, 
government officials, and law enforcement personnel.  IOM has 
received funding from both PRM and G/TIP for past and current 
efforts to assist the SARG on TIP issues. 
 
¶29. (SBU) 27.G: Post was not aware of the government 
cooperating with other governments in the investigation and 
prosecution of trafficking cases during the reporting period. 
 Due to political sensitivities, the SARG would not normally 
inform other embassies if such cooperation did exist, nor 
would it publicly announce such actions.  We note, however, 
that in September, Demetris Christofias, President of Cyprus, 
raised the issue of an illegal ferry between Latakia and 
Famagusta with President Bashar al-Asad.  This ferry is known 
to transport Syrians seeking employment to Cyprus, where they 
either remain and work or travel on to European destinations. 
  There was no evidence during the reporting period that this 
ferry was used for the purposes of trafficking, however. 
 
¶30. (SBU) 27.H: There was no evidence during the reporting 
period that the government had extradited anyone charged with 
trafficking in other countries. 
 
¶31. (SBU) 27.I: Anecdotal evidence pointed to low-level 
cooperation between traffickers and local police elements 
during the reporting period.  In particular, there were 
stories that police periodically monitored a certain hotel in 
which Eastern European women were kept locked up during the 
day to ensure nobody left without permission.  The women, 
some of whom were allegedly in the country on false travel 
documents, work at a nearby men's club.  Contacts alleged the 
club did not permit on-site nudity or sexual activity, but 
that the club's proprietor encouraged the female workers to 
schedule paid-for sexual activities off premises, usually in 
the "john's" place of residence (hotel or home). 
 
¶29. (SBU) 27.J: The SARG did not identify any government 
officials involved in human trafficking or any investigations 
into government officials for said crimes during the 
reporting period. 
 
¶30. (SBU) 27.K: Syria did not contribute military forces to 
any international peacekeeping efforts during the reporting 
period. 
 
¶31. (SBU) 27.L: Anecdotal evidence suggested Syria did 
receive a small amount of child-sex tourists from Gulf 
countries, primarily Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.  There were no 
reported prosecutions of foreign nationals on charges related 
to the crime.  There was no evidence that the country's child 
sexual abuse laws had extraterritorial coverage for the 
purpose of facilitating prosecution of suspected sex tourists. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶32. (SBU) 28.A: Decree 3, Article 14 mandates that the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor create shelters to care 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  008 OF 011 
 
 
for trafficking victims.  The article further states that 
MoSAL will create a budget for said shelters, monitor their 
administration, and hire qualified individuals to staff them. 
 Article 15 stipulates that the "competent authorities shall 
take the appropriate precautions to provide protection for 
the victims of trafficking" and provide them with legal, 
medical, and psychological counseling in cooperation with 
public and private organizations.  Additionally, the article 
states that VOTs should not be held in detention facilities 
inconsistent with their status as victims.  Because Decree 3 
has yet to be fully implemented, the aforementioned 
protections have not been fully provided in practice. 
 
¶33. (SBU) 28.B: Though Decree 3 has not been fully 
implemented, the MoSAL has already worked with IOM and the 
Association for Women's Role Development (AWRD), a local NGO, 
on shelters specifically designated for VOTs.  In December 
2008, IOM in cooperation with MoSAL and AWRD opened a TIP 
shelter in Damascus.  On January 7, 2010, IOM, the 
Aleppo-based Juvenile Welfare Association for Girls, and 
MoSAL opened a TIP shelter in Aleppo.  These two shelters are 
both operated by the associated local NGO.  These shelters 
are open to victims regardless of nationality or age.  In 
addition to these shelters, the Sisters of the Good Shepherd 
Convent operate a shelter for women and girls who are TIP 
victims, as well as victims of domestic violence and 
homelessness.  There were no facilities for male victims of 
trafficking, and the current TIP shelters are not geared 
toward serving men.  During the reporting period, there were 
no reports of men being trafficked either for forced labor or 
sexual exploitation. 
 
¶34. (SBU) 28.C: See para 32 for specific language on legal, 
medical, and psychological services.  Government funding has 
so far been in the form of donated building space for the two 
shelters, political cover, and some law enforcement 
assistance.  Authorization for these resources have come from 
federal and city levels. 
 
¶35. (SBU) 28.D: The government did not provide VOTs with 
permanent residency status, nor did it offer a formal 
mechanism for relief from deportation.  VOTs may safely 
remain as temporary residents until such time as return to 
their country of origin can be arranged.  In the past, 
however, there was anecdotal reports that police arrested 
potential Iraqi refugee VOTs for prostitution and simply 
dropped them off at the border. 
 
¶36. (SBU) 28.E: The government did not offer longer-term 
shelter, housing benefits, or additional resources to VOTs 
outside those described in paras 28.B and 28C. 
 
¶37. (SBU) 28.F: Decree 3, Article 18 requires the Ministry of 
Interior to develop the proper procedures for alerting the 
"competent authorities," both a national and international, 
to the identity and status of VOTs.  The exact policy for how 
law enforcement and judicial authorities will refer women to 
shelters had not yet been fully developed at the end of the 
reporting period.  However, the SARG continued to permit the 
Sisters of the Good Shepherd access to women's detention 
facilities.  If the nuns, our contacts reported, identified 
women and girls as VOTs, they were usually able to lobby the 
SARG -- often with assistance from UNHCR and IOM -- to allow 
these women to be transferred from detention facilities to 
shelters. 
 
¶38. (SBU) 28.G: Post did not receive any numbers, anecdotal 
or official, on the number of VOTs during the reporting 
period.  Post does know, however, that in 2009, approximately 
21 Asian women who were victims of labor trafficking received 
SARG assistance in being referred to AWRD's TIP shelter. 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  009 OF 011 
 
 
 
¶39. (SBU) 28.H: The government's law enforcement, 
immigration, and social services personnel did not have a 
formal system of proactively identifying VOTs at the end of 
the reporting period. 
 
¶40. (SBU) 28.I: Victims of trafficking were not legally 
identified as such throughout the reporting period, though 
with the passage of Decree 3 in January 2010, they soon will 
be.  If arrested for prostitution, the women were detained 
and, in most cases, deported.  If they were not deported, 
they would be subject to the legal punishments for 
prostitution.  In some cases, embassies and consulates of the 
victim's country assisted with their return to their home 
country. 
 
¶41. (SBU) 28.J: Decree 3, Article 16 states that any 
individual providing information on TIP crimes be shall 
afforded government protection.  Witnesses and experts (and 
their families) assisting authorities in legal action against 
perpetrators of TIP crimes should also receive government 
protection.  This article would cover victims cooperating 
with local law enforcement.  There were no accounts during 
the reporting period of any victims seeking legal redress. 
 
¶42. (SBU) 28.K & L: In January 2008, IOM, with the assistance 
of the MoSAL and MoI, provided training to judges, lawyers 
and police on how to recognize and deal with VOTs.  There 
were no reports of Syrian embassies abroad providing 
assistance to Syrian VOTs, nor did Post receive information 
on Syrians trafficked abroad and then repatriated. 
 
¶43. (SBU) 28.M: The two main international organizations that 
confront trafficking issues in Syria are IOM and UNHCR.  IOM 
has received TIP-specific grant funding from a range of 
donors, including the U.S. and E.U.  In terms of U.S. 
involvement, the largest funder in terms of dollars has been 
PRM.  The two TIP shelters received PRM funds specifically 
allocated to assist Iraqi VOTs.  At the end of the reporting 
period, no Iraqi VOTs had yet entered the shelters.  IOM has 
administered the PRM funding, which came from a two-phased 
regional assistance program that began in October 2007. 
Funding for Phase I amounted to $656,623.  Phase II, which 
began in July 2009, amounted to $215,000. 
 
¶44. (SBU) 28.M-Continued:  As stated earlier, the Sisters of 
the Good Shepherd also assisted VOTs.  The Sisters, along 
with IOM and UNHCR, have observed a slow change in the SARG's 
attitude toward victims assistance.  Due to political 
sensitivities, the SARG had been reticent to admit any 
problem existed or to cooperate in any way with NGOs.  That 
has changed over the years, as reflected in the passage of 
Decree 3.  Cooperation has now generally improved and the 
SARG has proven a reliable, though not leading, partner in 
providing protection to VOTs. 
 
---------- 
Prevention 
---------- 
 
¶45. (SBU) 29.A: There were no government-initiated 
anti-trafficking information or educational campaigns during 
the reporting period. 
 
¶46. (SBU) 29.B: The government had not begun monitoring 
immigration and emigration patterns for evidence of 
trafficking at the end of the reporting period. 
 
¶47. (SBU) 29.C: Decree 3 required the Ministry of Interior to 
develop a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between relevant agencies, both local and international, on 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  010 OF 011 
 
 
TIP matters.  Article 17 of the law directed the MoI to 
establish a Department of Combating Trafficking in Persons to 
be comprised of individuals from diverse backgrounds, both 
military and civilian.  The article did not specifically 
state the department should have an "inter-agency" character. 
 
¶48. (SBU) 29.D: The government was in the process of 
developing a national plan of action, per requirements of 
Decree 3, at the end of the reporting period.  The government 
is consulting with IOM and UNHCR on how best to develop and 
implement said plan. 
 
¶49. (SBU) 29.E: The SARG took no specific actions to reduce 
the demand for sex acts beyond prosecuting prostitutes, 
johns, and brothel proprietors. 
 
¶50. (SBU) 29.F: There was no evidence the government took 
specific measures during the reporting period to reduce the 
participation in international child sex tourism by Syrian 
nationals, or that Syrian nationals were involved in child 
sex tourism. 
 
------------ 
Partnerships 
------------ 
 
¶51. (SBU) 30.A: The government partnered -- formally or 
informally -- with IOM, UNHCR, AWRD, the Juvenile Welfare 
Association for Girls, and the Sisters of the Good Shepherd 
to focus attention and resources to addressing human 
trafficking.  Please see previous relevant paras for details. 
 
¶52. (SBU) 30.B: There was no evidence the government provided 
any kind of international assistance to other countries to 
address TIP during the reporting period. 
 
---------- 
TIP Heroes 
---------- 
 
¶53. (SBU) Laila Tomeh:  No single person has done more in the 
last few years to effect positive change in Syrian political 
thinking about how to combat TIP that Laila Tomeh.  Tomeh, a 
National Program Officer for IOM in Damascus  was one of the 
country's leading advocates and organizational strategists on 
how Syrian legislative reform should address TIP and the 
illegal recruitment of domestic labor.  Tomeh has led dozens 
of conferences and workshops for Syrian lawyers, members of 
parliament, NGOs, and civil society activists aimed at 
raising consciousness on TIP issues that were, in the past, 
almost never publicly discussed.  In 2005, Tomeh helped 
develop a training seminar on how to draft TIP legislation 
that ultimately led to Syria's passage in January 2010 of the 
country's first comprehensive anti-TIP law. 
 
¶54. (SBU) Tomeh Continued: In a constrained social and 
political environment, Tomeh proved herself able to navigate 
governmental and public sector boundaries and get 
on-the-ground results.  Indeed, in helping open the country's 
first-ever shelter for VOTs, Tomeh helped mentor the 
fledgling Association for Women's Role Development, a local 
NGO that had no prior experience with shelter administration. 
 She, along with her IOM colleagues, won support from the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor for the project, 
convincing the ministry to donate a building for the shelter. 
 The results were dramatic.  Not only did the TIP shelter 
open in December 2008, but the government donated another 
site in Aleppo for a second shelter, which opened under the 
guidance of IOM in 2010. 
 
¶55. (SBU) Tomeh Continued: Tomeh has been an excellent 
 
DAMASCUS 00000172  011 OF 011 
 
 
contact for the U.S. Embassy on TIP-related issues.  She 
subtly lobbied her working-level contacts in the MFA and 
MoSAL on the value of meeting U.S. government officials.  As 
a result, both the MFA and MoSAL granted meetings on TIP with 
Emboffs in 2009 to discuss the Department's 2009 TIP report 
and Syria's progress on passing anti-TIP legislation. 
Tomeh's ingenuity, passion, and integrity helped Embassy 
Damascus crack open a door with the government that might 
have otherwise remained shut due to Syrian sensitivities on 
the topic. 
 
¶56. (SBU) Daad Musa:  Lawyer and women's rights and civil 
society activist Daad Musa has been one of Damascus's leading 
figures in the fight to provide assistance to VOTs.  Even 
though her civil society activism has brought unwanted 
governmental scrutiny and undermined her ability to find 
regular work as a lawyer and also resulted in a travel ban, 
Musa perseveres in her service for VOTs with little regard 
for her own privations. 
 
¶57. (SBU) Musa Continued:  Musa provides legal counsel and 
organizational expertise to the Sisters of the Good Shepherd, 
who administer Syria's first-ever women's shelter.  She does 
the same for a CARITAS shelter close to the Syrian-Lebanese 
border.  These shelters are open to all women, but in recent 
years have increasingly addressed themselves toward 
alleviating the suffering of Iraqi victims of trafficking, 
forced prostitution, and domestic violence.  For the past six 
months, Musa has worked with UNRWA to set up domestic 
violence hotlines at both the Dar'a and Yarmuk Palestinian 
refugee camps. 
 
¶58. (SBU) Musa Continued: An organizational force of nature, 
Musa has worked closely with the U.S. Embassy to recruit 
women to participate in International Visitor Programs 
focused on best practices in combating TIP and in shelter 
administration.  In September 2009, the Embassy sent a group 
of women to the U.S. on an IVP that Musa had recruited, 
shepherded through the application process, and provided 
pre-departure training on what to expect in the U.S.  Musa is 
herself an IVP alumna and has used her training, in 
conjunction with the Sisters of the Good Shepherd, to launch 
and manage Syria's first 24-hour help-line for women in need. 
HUNTER