10DOHA24
Engaging Al Jazeera on Haiti
Wed Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDO #0024 0201350
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201350Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9641UNCLAS DOHA 000024 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
For Assistant Secretary Feltman from Ambassador 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KDEM QA HA
SUBJECT: Engaging Al Jazeera on Haiti 
 
REF:  STATE 5277 
 
¶1. (SBU) On Sunday, January 17, Al Jazeera's English (AJE) news 
channel, headquartered in Doha, began running inaccurate coverage of 
U.S. and international relief efforts in Haiti.  At times, the 
coverage used inflammatory language, such as accusing the U.S. 
military of setting up a "mini-Green Zone" at Haiti's airport and 
shipping in weapons and soldiers instead of humanitarian aid. 
 
¶2. (SBU) At Ambassador's direction, the Embassy took the following 
actions: 
 
-- informed NEA/PPD senior staff of the trends in AJE's coverage, 
who quickly informed senior officials and arranged for an appearance 
by the Department Spokesman on AJE from its Washington bureau within 
hours. 
 
-- When U/S McHale decided to call AJE Director Tony Burman during 
the early morning hours of January 18, ensured that Burman was ready 
for the call and understood the serious concerns that the 
Undersecretary would convey. 
 
-- Monitored AJE's coverage on January 19 and 20, which continued to 
be largely inaccurate and confrontational, but less and less so. 
¶3. (SBU) By the morning of January 20, AJE's coverage had evolved 
markedly, with reporting focused on the work being done by U.S. 
military forces - particularly airdrops - and 50 orphans who had 
been sent to the United States on an expedited basis.  AJE's 1300GMT 
bulletin began, for example, with images of the U.S. military 
distributing aid, with a voiceover saying, "U.S. troops touch down, 
expanding their reach into other disaster-hit areas."  The bulletin 
also carried a clip of an interview with U.S. Lt. Mark Weinberg, 
explaining how his particular group was distributing aid. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comments by Al Jazeera correspondents during the morning 
of January 20 included more context than on previous days.   For 
example, correspondent Theresa Bo cited UN sources as saying that 
the obstacles to delivering aid were still immense, because the port 
had been destroyed by the earthquake, and the roads were not good, 
but "aid agencies are doing their best." 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Ambassador has directed Embassy staff to continue 
monitoring AJE's reporting, and to communicate these observations 
immediately to Washington.  If AJE, or any of Al Jazeera's channels, 
revert to inaccurate coverage, Ambassador will not hesitate to 
intervene at higher levels, starting with the Qatari Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Al Jazeera Network. 
 
LEBARON