10DUBLIN6
UPDATE ON IRELAND'S EFFORTS TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN
Fri Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDL #0006 0081508
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081508Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0399UNCLAS DUBLIN 000006 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB EI
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON IRELAND'S EFFORTS TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Despite recent negative media attention, Ireland 
has made significant strides in addressing instances of trafficking 
in persons (TIP) within its borders.  At present, 57 investigations 
are ongoing, with a single case before the courts.  A further three 
individuals were convicted in Romania, largely on the basis of Irish 
evidence.  A final case is due to commence in Wales in January 2010. 
 To date, ten suspected victims have been granted recovery and 
reflection periods, which have been extended as required.  End 
Summary. 
 
Media Attention 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 3, the Irish Independent newspaper reported that 
trafficking of foreign women for the sex industry is now endemic 
throughout the country.  In the article, Fine Gael spokesman, Denis 
Naughton noted "it is well over a year since the introduction of 
human-trafficking legislation, yet the Government has failed to 
establish adequate protections and secure accommodation for these 
victims and to ensure prosecutions against traffickers occur."  On 
January 6, PolOff spoke with Gerardine Coyle of the Department of 
Justice's Anti-Human Trafficking Unit.  Despite the negative report, 
Coyle said that anti-TIP efforts have progressed well over the past 
year. 
 
Ongoing Investigations 
---------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Coyle said that, during the past year, the police have 
investigated 57 human trafficking offences.   Of these, 37 relate to 
possible offences under the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008; eighteen to possible offences under the Illegal Immigrants 
Trafficking Act, 2000 and the remaining two to offences under the 
Child Pornography Act, 1998.  A number of files are with the 
Director of Public Prosecutions for a decision on whether or not to 
prosecute.  There is currently one case before the courts where a 
person is charged with a human trafficking offence under the 
Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008 in relation to the 
trafficking of a child for sexual exploitation.  This case was 
listed for service of a book of evidence at Dublin District Court on 
6 November 2009 when a bench warrant was issued for the accused. 
 
International Co-operation 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Coyle indicated that, following a joint police trafficking 
investigation by Ireland and Romania, three people were sentenced (7 
years imprisonment for the gang leader and 5 years imprisonment for 
each of the co-accused) in Romania for offences including the 
trafficking of human beings to Ireland, illegal possession of 
firearms ,and organizing a criminal syndicate.  The persons involved 
had returned to Romania from Ireland and were tried there largely on 
the basis of evidence gathered by the Irish police.  This case 
focused on trafficking for the purpose of labor exploitation and 
involved 28 victims.  A fourth person is awaiting trial in Wales on 
charges of trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation 
following raids on brothels in Ireland, Northern Ireland, Scotland 
and the UK under Operation Abbey.  Operation Abbey is an 
investigation primarily targeting an organized prostitution gang. 
Their activities include human trafficking, trafficking in 
prostitution, controlling prostitution and money laundering.  The 
trial in this case is due to commence in Cardiff in January 2010. 
The case is likely to involve up to 130 members of the Irish police 
and five of the alleged victims of trafficking providing evidence by 
television link from Ireland to the court in Cardiff. 
 
Recovery and Reflection 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Coyle noted that, since the enactment of the Criminal Law 
(Human Trafficking) Act, a total of ten persons have been granted a 
period of recovery and reflection.  A further person (an EU 
national) has been identified as a suspected victim of trafficking. 
Of the ten recovery and reflection periods granted, four have 
expired and these four persons have since been granted six months 
temporary residence permits with two of these in their second six 
months temporary residence permission. 
 
FAUCHER