10GUANGZHOU95
CHINA: CA PDAS Kirby's Visit to Guangzhou
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO3908
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #0095/01 0570800
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260800Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1411
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1163
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE 0478
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1164
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 0408
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0409
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0418
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000095 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FO AND CA/EX 
ALSO FOR CA/VO AND EAP/CM 
BEIJING FOR EXEC AND CG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT CVIS PREL ETRD BEXP CH
SUBJECT: CHINA: CA PDAS Kirby's Visit to Guangzhou 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000095  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. Not for release outside U.S. government channels. Not 
for internet publication. 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary:  CA PDAS Michael Kirby, accompanied by MCCA Linda 
Donahue (Beijing), visited Guangzhou on February 23-24 for an update 
on Consulate General Guangzhou's consular operation, particularly 
the growing demand for consular services in the "workshop of the 
world," the Pearl River Delta region of Guangdong Province.  PDAS 
Kirby called on officials at Guangdong's Foreign Affairs Office, 
where he thanked them for their continued support for the 
construction of the new consulate, reaffirmed U.S. commitment to 
facilitate China/U.S. trade and exchange, and inquired about China's 
goals to implement green, energy-efficient technology.   He also 
exchanged views and ideas on the visa process with leading U.S. 
business community representatives at a reception hosted by the 
Consul General. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Throughout his visit, PDAS Kirby emphasized the 
construction of the new consulate as an example of how the U.S. is 
planning for and preparing to meet the growing demand for consular 
services.  PDAS Kirby highlighted that in 2009, almost half a 
million people applied for U.S. nonimmigrant visas in China with a 
better than 80 percent approval rate, and that almost 20 percent 
were Chinese students going to study in U.S. universities.  He also 
emphasized that the new electronic visa application system will be 
even faster, easier, and more environmentally friendly.  The CG and 
the Consulate's Agency/Section Chiefs briefed PDAS Kirby, and he 
toured the Consular Section's facilities, as well as the site of the 
new consulate, scheduled for completion in January 2013.  End 
summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Emphasizing the importance of consular work 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U)  PDAS Kirby toured the Consular Section's facilities, where 
he met with 22 entry level officers (ELO) and 63 locally engaged 
staff (LES) to express appreciation and support for their efforts, 
and to emphasize the importance of consular work in the Department, 
from the Secretary on down.  During the meeting with ELOs, he gave 
valuable skills-building and career advice, commented on how CA is 
seeking to expand employment opportunities for eligible family 
members (EFMs), and took note of near-term budgetary challenges and 
possible implications for consular work.  PDAS Kirby also toured the 
site of the new consulate, scheduled for completion in January 2013; 
the consular section will feature about 65 public service windows, 
about 50 percent more than the 43 windows in the current facility. 
 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Supporting the local U.S. business community 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  At a reception hosted by the Consul General, PDAS Kirby met 
with seven leading representatives of the U.S. business community in 
south China.  PDAS Kirby pledged continued support for travel and 
trade, exchanged views and ideas about the visa process, and 
explored ways to encourage demand for visas in a growing economy. 
In addition to the president of the local American Chamber of 
Commerce, U.S. companies represented included General Electric, 
Wrigley, Amway, Huntsman, California Travel and Tourism Commission, 
and AECOM.  The feedback from the business representatives was 
positive, as they expressed appreciation for the Consulate's support 
for commercial exchanges, as well as the facilitation of visa 
services for business travelers to the U.S. 
 
¶5. (U)  The business representatives believe that south China will 
continue to prosper economically, and that the number of people able 
and qualified to travel to the United States is growing rapidly.  In 
response to PDAS Kirby's question about why more Chinese people do 
not apply for visas despite the greater than 80 percent approval 
rate and low wait times, several of the representatives agreed that 
there is a gap between perception and reality: Chinese people often 
fear losing face in a visa line and/or being refused a visa.  PDAS 
Kirby highlighted the construction of the new consulate in Guangzhou 
as an example of how the U.S. is taking steps to meet this growing 
demand for visa services.  He also discussed ways in which public 
outreach might help to close the perception/reality gap. 
 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000095  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Exploring opportunities for U.S.-China cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. (SBU)  PDAS Kirby met with the Director General of Guangdong 
Foreign Affairs Office (FAO), Fu Lang, to assure the FAO of our 
continued interest in strengthening mutual support and cooperation. 
Fu Lang began the meeting by highlighting the special relationship 
China has with the United States as its main trading partner, 
stating that one-third of China's trade is conducted with the United 
States.  He discussed the current economic situation in Guangdong, 
noting that the economic growth rate is one percent higher than 
growth rates in other parts of China, and that per capita GDP in the 
province has risen to US$10,000.  Fu Lang remarked that this figure 
represented a dramatic increase in just a few years, and that per 
capita income will probably continue to rise. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  PDAS Kirby congratulated Fu Lang on Guangdong's economic 
success, and pledged continued cooperation and support in 
facilitating joint trade and travel.  He emphasized that the United 
States welcomes Chinese people, noting that the new electronic visa 
application system will also make the application process faster, 
easier, and more environmentally friendly.  He expressed his 
appreciation for the FAO's continuing support for the construction 
of the new consulate, which will have 50% more consular windows and 
new technology designed to improve the visa application process. 
 
¶8. (SBU)  PDAS Kirby expressed his concern about police protection 
and judicial fairness for Amcits caught in business disputes in 
China.  Fu Lang agreed that both countries have an important 
interest in the safety and welfare of their citizens overseas, and 
the discussion expanded to include other concerns associated with 
rapid economic development in China, such as illegal immigrants, 
drug trafficking, and Internet scams.  PDAS Kirby inquired about 
China's plans to implement energy-efficient technology, and Fu Lang 
responded that he believes China will take more steps to reduce 
pollution by making greater use of solar power and green energy.  Fu 
Lang also cited the development of public transport, i.e., high 
speed railways and metro lines, as ways in which the Chinese 
government is working to reduce pollution and alleviate traffic 
congestion.  Both PDAS Kirby and Fu Lang agreed that there were 
growing opportunities for mutual support and cooperation between the 
United States and China. 
 
¶9. (U)  This cable was cleared with PDAS Kirby and MCCA Donahue. 
 
GOLDBECK