10JAKARTA215
Multilateral Climate Initiative for POTUS in Indonesia
Thu Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0215 0491016
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181016Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4514
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS COLL
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000215 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR HUME TO S, D, S/ECC, G, OES A/S JONES 
USAID ASIA FOR A/AA FRANK YOUNG, EGAT FOR A/AA MIKE YATES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID KGHG SENV PREL ID
SUBJECT: Multilateral Climate Initiative for POTUS in Indonesia 
 
¶1. (SBU) In advance of the President's visit, the United States 
should seek to harness a major cooperative international effort to 
help Indonesia achieve reduced emissions by preserving its forests 
and preparing it for forest carbon markets.  Countries with 
substantial (current and planned) forest and climate investments in 
Indonesia have expressed a strong interest in closer cooperation 
with us.  They have suggested a more proactive - even leading - role 
for the U.S. in promoting action on forests, peat lands and climate 
change in Indonesia.  The GOI is open to new partnerships, and a 
U.S.-led multilateral climate initiative, matched by new commitments 
of resources, would powerfully focus international funding, 
technical assistance, and political influence to help Indonesia 
sustain large, long-term reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The President's launch of this initiative during his 
upcoming visit will maximize Indonesia's and supporting nations' 
support.  The initiative's launch could be celebrated by announcing 
funding for the establishment of a climate change center in 
Indonesia focused (at least initially) on the critical 
forest/land-use sector.  Such a center could form a part of the 
platform for multilateral collaboration in Indonesia, taking into 
account the interests and potentially considerable resources of 
other countries, which might be more than the U.S. is able to 
immediately muster for a new initiative.  The GOI would be receptive 
to this idea given the recent draft proposal shared with USAID to 
establish a climate change center for the region. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Deforestation and peat land destruction have made Indonesia 
the third-largest emitter of greenhouse gases.  President 
Yudhoyono's pledge last year to reduce emissions by 26% over 
business as usual by 2020 was reaffirmed in Indonesia's inscription 
to the Copenhagen Accord.  The mitigation actions inscribed reflect 
Indonesia's recognition of the importance of forests to achieving 
meaningful emission reductions.  Making good on these ambitious 
targets will not be easy.  Money is only part of the issue here. 
Significant and difficult policy and institutional reforms are 
critical but will require strong political commitment.  Yudhoyono 
and his allies need significant and visible international financial 
and political support to counter strong vested interests at home as 
well as abroad. 
 
¶4. (SBU) There is much needed to make this effort work.  A strategy 
is needed to combine technical and financial assistance with policy 
dialogue, particularly on forest governance and enforcement.  The 
legal and financial frameworks are needed to handle anticipated 
forest carbon credits.  Much stronger emphasis needs to be placed on 
peat land management policy and capacity.  Forest programs to date 
have had little overall effect on deforestation.  Progress will be 
challenging, but chances are greater if the key group of supporting 
countries, working closely with the U.S., works through thorny 
policy issues with the GOI and coordinates assistance.  These 
countries recognize that stronger coordination and cooperation is 
needed to achieve the changes critical for long-term impact. 
Harnessing and leveraging our combined political, financial and 
technical resources makes success in our efforts achieve real impact 
- and that Indonesia meets its commitments - more certain. 
 
¶5. (SBU) OES Assistant Secretary Kerri-Ann Jones can discuss this 
initiative during her planned meeting with ministers from Australia, 
Germany, Norway, and United Kingdom next week in Bali.  This can 
include soliciting their support for the climate center as a 
platform for collaboration.  She could then discuss this proposal 
during bilateral meetings with key Indonesians in Jakarta on March 
1-2.  The U.S., along with the U.K. and Norway, are among those 
countries which pledged in Copenhagen to provide $3.5 billion in 
quick-start climate financing for forestry.  The President has a 
golden opportunity to bring together the major donors and make a 
long-term impact on reducing emissions from deforestation and peat 
land destruction in the world's third largest emitter of greenhouse 
gases. 
 
HUME