10RABAT151
CODEL CARDIN MEETS WITH GOM OFFICIALS
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0151/01 0531515
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221515Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1228
INFO RUEHVI/AMEMBASSY VIENNA 0159
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0038
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RABAT 000151 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG 
DEPT FOR H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER PHUM KTIP MO
SUBJECT: CODEL CARDIN MEETS WITH GOM OFFICIALS 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY.  On February 15, 2010, a five-member Congressional 
delegation led by Senator Cardin met with Moroccan MFA Secretary 
General Youssef Amrani and MOI Director of Internal Affairs Mohammed 
Tricha.  The parties discussed regional stability, human rights, 
counterterrorism, and other domestic and global issues.  Amrani 
stated that the bilateral relationship is built on friendship, 
respect, and cooperation.  Senator Cardin highlighted the role 
Morocco plays as a regional leader in human rights and security 
efforts but urged the GOM to do more to thwart trafficking in 
persons (TIP) and child labor.  The meeting concluded with a brief 
discussion of Western Sahara and the Middle East peace process.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
Domestic Overview 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) A five-member Congressional delegation led by Senator 
Benjamin Cardin (D-MD) and including Senator Roger Wicker (R-MS), 
Rep. Robert Aderholt (R-AL), Rep. Laura Richardson (D-CA), and Rep. 
Eni Faleomavaega (D-AS) met on February 15 with Moroccan Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Secretary General Youssef Amrani and Ministry of 
Interior Director General of Internal Affairs Mohammed Tricha.  The 
Ambassador, D/Polcouns, and Political Assistant accompanied the 
Congressional delegation.  Amrani and Tricha were joined by MFA 
Director of Communications Karim Medrek, Americas Director Fouad 
Yazourgh, and Americas Desk Officer Abderrahim Rahally. 
 
¶3.  (U) Amrani opened the discussion, thanking the CODEL for its 
visit to Morocco and describing the relationship between the United 
States and Morocco as one based on shared values of democracy, human 
rights, friendship, mutual respect, and cooperation.  He described 
Moroccan social and political reforms, particularly with regard to 
the role of women, freedom of the press, and the development of a 
vibrant civil society.  He praised the U.S-Morocco Free Trade 
Agreement, calling it a "breakthrough" in relations, and stated that 
Morocco can benefit greatly from increased interaction with the U.S. 
economy.  Amrani said that Morocco's domestic reforms have created a 
strong economy and political system, and that the focus is now on 
judicial reform and education.  "Islam is compatible with 
democracy," he said, adding that a country can be Arab and Muslim 
and still maintain dialogue with the West. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Amrani then described Morocco's vision to build a 
democratic state marked by free, transparent elections and strong 
civil society.  There must be democracy in both the design and 
implementation of policy, he said, recognizing that the country can 
do more to advance this vision.  He said the country has built a 
strong center, and the King's regionalization initiative will give 
more power to the regions to manage human resources. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Turning to security issues, Amrani noted that AQIM remains 
a threat in the Sahel and the Sahara, and that there is the danger 
of destabilizing linkages between terrorism and organized crime. 
GOM initiatives to combat terrorism include economic development and 
social and political reform.  Amrani acknowledged Morocco faces 
challenging political and security issues, but stressed that it is a 
country that knows where it is going as it seeks to "enlarge the 
space of freedom" both internally and externally. 
 
----------------------------------- 
TIP, Women's Rights and Child Labor 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Senator Cardin thanked the GOM hosts for the warm 
reception and acknowledged the strong partnership between the United 
States and Morocco on counterterrorism and for the leading role 
Morocco plays in the region in promoting human rights and regional 
stability.  He expressed concern over trafficking in persons, and he 
pressed the Moroccans to ensure that TIP victims are treated with 
the respect and dignity they deserve.  He urged the GOM to address 
the issue of child labor and to protect children from the often 
abusive practice of using them as domestic servants. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) MOI Director Tricha addressed the TIP issue, asserting 
that GOM statistics show a decrease in illegal flows of people 
across Morocco's southern and eastern borders.  He said TIP, along 
with the drug trade, gives a new economic dimension to terrorism, 
which was traditionally linked to poverty but is becoming tied to 
these lucrative activities.  Amrani called the fight against 
trafficking in persons "a GOM priority," and he added that AQIM uses 
migration routes to transport drugs, people, and weapons.  Amrani 
discussed Morocco's initiatives to fight TIP through education and 
increased economic opportunities for women. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Representative Richardson complimented Morocco's efforts 
to address women's issues, noting in particular the success of women 
candidates in the most recent local elections.  Turning to health 
concerns, she urged the GOM to ensure that sufficient budget 
resources are available to treat breast cancer and other diseases, 
especially in rural contexts where the level of care is much lower 
than in cities.  Amrani replied that progress has been made, but 
agreed that more could be done. 
 
----------------- 
Religious Freedom 
----------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Representative Aderholt noted Morocco's history of 
religious tolerance and inquired about reports that Moroccan 
security services had broken up a meeting of a group of Christians, 
detained the Moroccan participants and expelled an American citizen. 
 Amrani stated that it is part of Moroccan culture to live 
side-by-side with Christians, Jews, and others, but that the county 
must recognize the danger of extremism and promote tolerant Islam. 
Tricha added that people are free to worship but must act in 
accordance with Moroccan laws that expressly criminalize 
proselytizing.  The security services are obliged to react, he said, 
when the potential for disruption of public order exists. 
 
------------- 
Global Issues 
------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Turning to Afghanistan, Senator Wicker stated that the 
situation is improving, adding that there are many ways countries 
can assist.  He asked the GOM to consider providing additional 
support.  Citing Morocco's status as a major non-NATO ally and its 
participation in NATO missions in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, 
Amrani replied that Morocco cooperates on a range of strategic 
issues.  He characterized GOM counterterrorism efforts as a form of 
support to the mission in Afghanistan, and stated that the GOM 
continually reviews its relationship with NATO. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Representative Faleomavaega asked his GOM interlocutors 
if the military option was the best approach to the problem.  "How 
from a Muslim point of view can the Al Qaeda issue be best 
addressed?" he inquired.   Amrani replied that the issue required a 
multi-dimensional approach.  The military is important, but 
communication and outreach to the people are crucial.  Al Qaeda is 
using Islam, he said, to advance their goals.  They have reached the 
Gulf of Guinea, and Morocco is working to stop them, just as 
countries in the Persian Gulf and elsewhere must work in their 
respective regions.  The international community must use all 
available legal tools, he said, in fighting Al Qaeda. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Wrapping up the discussion, Amrani raised briefly the 
Western Sahara issue and Middle East peace.  He stressed that the 
GOM engages in good faith in efforts to find a compromise solution 
to the status of the Western Sahara, but he called them a failure. 
The issue needs to be resolved, he said, because the region cannot 
afford instability.  In discussing Middle East peace, he noted the 
GOM's concern about the lack of progress and reiterated the need to 
advance a two-state solution.  In his concluding remarks, Senator 
Cardin said the GOM can play a positive role by offering its good 
counsel in support of efforts to build confidence between the 
Israelis and the Palestinians. 
 
¶13.  (U) CODEL Cardin has cleared this cable. 
 
 
KAPLAN