10SAOPAULO112
BRAZILIAN LGBT COMMUNITY FACES CHALLENGES TO RIGHTS
Thu Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSO #0112/01 0421500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111459Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0359
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
RUEHC/USAID WASHDC 0001
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS SAO PAULO 000112 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
WHA/BSC MSIMPSON & SPOSIVAK 
DRL/AWH 
USAID FOR LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SOCI PGOV KPAO CVIS CASC BR ELAB
SUBJECT: BRAZILIAN LGBT COMMUNITY FACES CHALLENGES TO RIGHTS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Protection of the rights of Gay Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual and Transgendered (LGBT) citizens in Brazil presents a 
mixed picture.  Brazil's LBGT population has become far more 
visible in recent years and some local governments such as Sao 
Paulo have established special legal, law enforcement, and health 
programs to assist LGBT citizens.  Yet at the same time, the LGBT 
community has no federal legal protection against hate crimes or 
discrimination, and limited political clout to move legislation 
forward.  Likewise, while access to public services and protection 
has increased in some areas, LGBT activists continue to worry that 
crimes against the community remain underreported.  End Summary. 
 
Higher Profile Not Translating Politically 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) Brazil's LGBT population has gained increasing national 
and international prominence since the 2000 Sao Paulo Gay Pride 
Parade's attendance crossed the threshold of 100,000 participants. 
Despite the higher profile, however, official respect for LGBT 
rights in Brazil in recent years presents both areas of progress 
(many of them at the state and municipal level) and areas where 
more can be done.  Among the most important gaps, Brazil lacks 
federal legislation protecting citizens against discrimination 
based on sexual orientation.  Although such a law was proposed over 
10 years ago, the bill has languished without a vote and is now 
dead.  Brazil's Chamber of Deputies did pass a bill in 2009 that 
would have recognized civil unions for same-sex couples, but the 
legislation stalled in a Senate committee. 
 
¶3. (SBU) LGBT activists see opposition to measures like civil 
unions from Brazil's politically influential evangelical community 
(septel) as a significant challenge.  Lula Ramirez from the LGBT 
activist group Citizenship, Pride, Respect, Solidarity and Love 
(CORSA), told Poloff that evangelical churches have raised such 
issues with the Brazilian Congress more than their Catholic 
counterparts, primarily through the organization of a formal group 
of evangelicals in Congress from several different parties. 
Meanwhile, Ramirez and other LBGT activists such local lawyer Barry 
Wolfe say that their groups suffer from a comparative lack of 
political representation, despite the presence of several openly 
gay senators and congressmen in Brazil.  Consequently, they 
currently look to the courts to advance their cause.  As an 
example, activists reference several court cases which resulted in 
same sex partners being awarded health insurance benefits from 
private companies. 
 
Sao Paulo State Pushes Anti-Discrimination Protections 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Despite the lack of federal legal protection, states such 
as Sao Paulo have moved forward with local protections.  In 2001, 
Sao Paulo state adopted an administrative law barring 
discrimination, including employment discrimination, based on 
sexual orientation.  Although the measure has no power in civil or 
criminal court it permits a commission with the Sao Paulo State 
Department of Justice to fine companies or people who attempt to 
intimidate or discriminate against LBGT persons.  For example, in a 
case dating back to 2006, the supermarket chain Carrefour was fined 
USD 25,000 after two transgendered customers charged that the 
employees of Carrefour in Sao Jose de Rio Preto followed them 
throughout the store and intimidated them. Activists point to Sao 
Paulo's efforts, and efforts by states like Pernambuco and Bahia to 
specifically extend administrative protections like equal treatment 
in prison visit policies, as slow but noteworthy progress for the 
LGBT community at the state government level. 
 
Sao Paulo City Promotes Access to Services for LBGT Community 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Sao Paulo city has been a leader in creating public 
institutions to ensure the LGBT community's access to public 
services.  For example, Sao Paulo city government funds the 
Coordinator for Matters of Sexual Diversity (CADS) that oversees, 
in partnership with the city's departments of health and culture, 
all projects within the city government related to sexual 
diversity.  According to General Coordinator Franco Reinaudo, CADS 
operates two different centers, one of which facilitates access to 
legal representation for people who face discrimination.  The 
second is the Reference Center for Diversity (CRD), which services 
not only members of the LGBT community, but also professional sex 
workers.  This is a service center which operates as a referral 
agency helping LGBT citizens to gain access to public housing, 
health, and training opportunities.  According to CRD Director 
Irina Bacci, the Center offers extensive onsite assistance 
including:  group therapy sessions for participants, courses on job 
interview preparation, and part-time work opportunities in Carnival 
costume-making and woodworking. 
 
Special Investigative Unit Takes Root, but Statistics Uncertain 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) In 2000 the Sao Paulo State Civil Police established a 
special unit to investigate crimes of intolerance, including those 
directed at sexual orientation.  In 2006, the unit was elevated to 
a permanent investigative department by the Sao Paulo state 
legislature.  Department Deputy Margarette Barretoher told Poloff 
that since 2000 the rate of aggression towards the LGBT community 
has not changed, but the public's awareness of the community has 
increased.  She noted that from 2006-2009 the department has 
investigated about 10 cases of aggression attributed to sexual 
orientation.  While applauding the existence of the special 
investigative department, LGBT activists express concern that 
crimes are being underreported.  According to lawyer and activist 
Barry Wolfe, police abuse of transsexuals is also very common.  In 
addition, Luiz Mott from Gays of Bahia, an NGO which compiles 
information on murders related to homophobia, told Poloff they 
believe violence against the LGBT community in Sao Paulo is higher 
than reported in official statistics.  For example, the NGO 
recorded 24 deaths in 2008 in Bahia, a state with a population 30% 
smaller than the city of Sao Paulo. 
 
Health: Broader Access to Services Needed 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) While Brazil's federal government-run public health system 
does support the LGBT community in progressive ways, such as 
permitting transsexuals to apply for gender reassignment surgery 
using public funds, post LGBT contacts say more national focus 
should be placed on ensuring LGBT access to broader health 
services.  At the state level, Sao Paulo uses HIV/AIDS prevention 
funds to support a special clinic for the transgender community 
within Sao Paulo city's main public hospital.  According to 
Director Maria Filomena Aoki, the clinic aims to meet the specific 
needs of the transgender and transsexual population.  For example, 
many transgendered males use industrial-grade silicone to enhance 
their bodies, which often causes a series of health related issues. 
The CRD also offers HIV/AIDS and sexually-transmitted disease 
testing along with counseling for patients encouraging adherence to 
HIV/AIDS treatment plans. 
 
Comment: A Mixed Picture 
------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) Even though Brazilian society has moved forward in 
recognizing its LGBT population in the last ten years, improving 
health and some civil protections at the local level, activists and 
members of the community say discrimination remains common. 
Additionally, NGO research suggests that underreporting of crimes 
against the LGBT community is a serious concern.  A federal law 
against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation 
would be a major step toward increasing protection of the Brazilian 
LGBT community.  However, with limited political support to move 
such legislation, most progress on equal legal protection and 
access to services will, in the near-term, continue to occur at the 
local and state level. 
White