10UNROME23
HAITI: FEEDING HAITIANS: SEEDS FOR SUCCESS
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UN Rome
VZCZCXRO8194
RR RUEHRN
DE RUEHRN #0023/01 0501752
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191752Z FEB 10
FM USMISSION UN ROME
TO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1297
RUEHC/USAID WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0388
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 0325
RUEHFR/USMISSION UNESCO PARIS FR
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0032
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0037
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0149
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 0012
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME 1375UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 UN ROME 000023 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FOR OSEC ATUTWILER, FOR FAS/LSTOLL AND JBROWN; STATE FOR C, 
IO/HS, EEB/IFD/ODA; USAID FOR DCHA, LAC, EGAT; TREASUTY FOR 
LMORRIOS AND PGANDHI; NSC FOR GSMITH AND CPRATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: FAO IFAD WFP UN EAID EAGR HA BTIO
SUBJECT: HAITI: FEEDING HAITIANS: SEEDS FOR SUCCESS 
 
¶1. (SBU)    Summary.  Since the first days after the earthquake 
in Haiti, there has been concern - and considerable confusion - 
regarding the need for internationally sourced seed to meet the 
needs of the upcoming planting season.  Haiti's Ministry of 
Agriculture, Natural Resources and Development (MARNDR) 
requested 1,000 MT each of bean and maize seed.  FAO, as part of 
the U.N. Flash Appeal, requested $23 million, in part to fund 
this request.  Since the request, there have been questions 
regarding nearly every aspect of the program including the level 
of need, the effect on seed markets, the viability of seeds 
identified for purchase to thrive in the Haitian environment, 
and the ability to distribute seed in the Haitian market.  Based 
on recent discussions with Minister Gue of the MARDNR and with 
FAO and IFAD officials, there continues to be a need for seed 
and FAO is proceeding with plans to purchase seed, although less 
than requested due to funding shortfalls.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU)   On the margins of the IFAD Governing Council meeting 
in Rome, Ambassador Cousin spoke with Minister Gue of MARNDR 
about his request for assistance in providing seed to Haiti. 
Shortly after the earthquake, Minister Gue had asked for 1,000 
MT of bean seed and 1,000 MT of maize seed for the coming 
season.  According to the Minister, the request was based on a 
survey of needs in ten regions in Haiti.  That survey found a 
need for an additional 1,400 MT of beans, and 2,000 MT of maize, 
which would benefit 42,000 and 240,000 families, respectively. 
The MARNDR also identified a need for 500 MT of rice (10,000 
families), and 500 MT of sorghum seed (120,000 families).   He 
also reported that of the total identified need, they already 
have available in Haiti 420 MT of beans, and 600 MT of maize. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU)   Haiti's main agricultural season is during the March 
- April period.  Total annual bean seed needs for the year are 
7,500 tons, of which 3,750 are needed during the March - April 
period; total maize seed needs are also 7,500 MT, with 4,500 
tons needed in the March - April period.  Thus, the Minister is 
requesting about one-quarter of the total normal need for seeds 
for this planting season.  While it remains unclear exactly how 
much the seed supply in Haiti might have been affected by the 
earthquake, or how much was in storage prior to the earthquake, 
the Minister has been clear that his appeal is aimed not just at 
replacing lost seed, but also at increasing production in the 
coming season to enhance Haiti's ability to feed itself and to 
provide employment for the country.  In particular, he is 
looking to rural areas that are experiencing an influx of people 
as the population moves away from the devastation in 
Port-a-Prince.  Many of Haiti's farmers use unimproved seed that 
gives low yields.  Improved seed would provide additional seed 
for new populations in the countryside hoping to farm, and 
increase production to feed the increased population in the 
rural areas. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Under the original $575 million UN Flash Appeal 
launched on January 15, FAO, as the UN's Agriculture Cluster 
lead, requested $23 million to rehabilitate affected 
agricultural families and for the purchase of emergency seed, 
fertilizer and other agricultural input needs.  Despite a very 
successful response to the food, health and WASH components of 
the UN Flash Appeal for Haiti, very little has come to FAO (as 
reported by FAO, $1.75 million total $500,000 from its own 
Technical Cooperation Program (TCP) funds, $500,000 from 
Belgium, $250,000 from Brazil and $500,000 from OCHA's Central 
Emergency Response Fund (CERF).  FAO reports that their appeal 
at present has only been 8% funded.  FAO Deputy Director General 
(DDG) He has written to OCHA Emergency Relief Coordinator Sir 
John Holmes requesting that funds be made available as soon as 
possible.  According to FAO, OCHA has $70 million in unallocated 
funds that they are sitting on at present.  IFAD also has $1.5 
million in funds remaining in country on a seed program that was 
not fully implemented last year.  FAO managed this program but 
neither FAO nor IFAD could verify if the $1.5 million is in cash 
or in seed inventory, and FAO maintains that although IFAD has 
made the commitment, they have not seen the funds.  IFAD is also 
moving quickly on other funds for Haiti, but probably will not 
have these in place for seed purchase this season.  FAO is also 
pursuing the possibility of using the EU Food Facility to 
partially fund the program. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU)   Despite the funding shortfall, FAO has gone forward 
with a tender for maize and bean seed, but for only 700 MT in 
total, a considerably smaller quantity than requested.  With the 
$1.75 million they currently have, FAO believes they can 
purchase about 500 MT total.  However, they noted that the 
$500,000 from FAO TCP funds must have the Haitian Minister of 
Agriculture's approval for the purpose of seed purchase. 
Although the original tender was for 700 MT, FAO notes they 
could easily expand it if funds were made available.  Tenders 
are being conducted out of the FAO office in the Dominican 
Republic.  The 500 MT is sufficient to reach about 25-30,000 
beneficiary families, planting one-quarter hectare each. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU)    The first tender closed on February 8 and FAO 
technicians are currently evaluating the bids for compliance 
with the tender.  FAO expects to get bean seed that has been 
tested in the Haitian environment from the Dominican Republic, 
Guatemala and Costa Rica.  There is some concern that if 
purchases are not made in the near future, seed suppliers in 
these countries may sell the seed to other buyers.  The tender 
for maize was for open-pollinated varieties only so that farmers 
can continue to grow seed from their crops for several years, 
rather than have to repurchase seed next year as would be 
required if hybrid or GMO seeds were provided. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU)    There are also some other sources of seed not 
included in the Haiti total of available seeds, but these are 
relatively small.  Brazil has offered 100 MT of bean seed. 
Negotiations on this are ongoing regarding type, delivery and 
other details.  Argentina and Venezuela made statements of their 
intentions to provide seed, but neither the Ministry or FAO has 
seen anything concrete.  FAO maintains that IFAD has made the 
commitment but has not released the funds.  FAO did indicate 
that under this program there are about 40 MT of seed remaining 
in strategic stocks.  However, FAO would prefer to use this seed 
for another round of seed multiplication rather than sell the 
seed in the market.  60 kilograms of seed could provide about 
1-1.5 tons of seed for future planting. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU)    There is little concern about distribution of the 
seed once it is in the country.  FAO is working with WFP to get 
seed from the Dominican Republic to Haiti.  WFP can arrange 140 
trucks per day.  The seed will then be transported by local 
transporters and NGO's working with local MARNRD offices  There 
are currently about 50 NGO's coming to the Agricultural Cluster 
meetings that can be drawn on for this work.  The IFAD/FAO 
program worked extensively with farmer organizations and NGO's 
and they have an organized pipeline and lists of beneficiaries. 
They have primary lists of 100,000 beneficiary families, and are 
planning to do a second list as they get a better handle on the 
populations moving into the rural areas. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU)    Other seed/planting materials are also being 
considered.  Monsanto has offered 7 MT of vegetable seeds.  The 
technical team in the Ministry of Agriculture is evaluating this 
offer.  FAO is also interested in purchasing sweet potatoes and 
bananas.  These would be local (Haiti and Dominican Republic) 
purchases because of bulk and suitability.  They are hoping to 
start a program of in vitro banana plantings from cuttings from 
the DR and are looking for virus-free fields where 
multiplication can be done for eventual home garden planting. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU)    FAO is also trying to purchase 10,000 toolkits 
(shovels, pick axes, wheelbarrows) to provide to each 
beneficiary family receiving seeds.  They are looking to 
suppliers in the DR, Panama and the U.S.  When they initially 
tendered for these items, Minister Gue did not want to tender in 
Haiti, fearing it would only fuel inflation.  After better 
assessing the market, they will include Haitian suppliers in the 
second round.  FAO would like to provide toolkits to 100,000 
beneficiaries.  Of more concern is the delivery time into Haiti. 
 FAO reports that Dominican Republic routes are getting very 
clogged and wait time for sea shipments is 2-3 months.  FAO is 
not doing tenders for fertilizer and does not intend to at this 
point. 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU)    Comment: FAO remains convinced that seed is needed 
in Haiti and is pursuing the program on the expectation that 
they will receive additional funds. Minister Gue also continues 
with his request, and presents more data with each day to back 
up his claims.  Most agree that distribution will not be a 
problem given the MARNDR and NGO networks.  The outstanding 
question is on the amount of seed and the impact this could have 
on existing markets.  FAO reports they are cooperating with 
Catholic Relief services in a broader seed assessment in the 
country, this will not be completed before this planting season. 
 Minister Gue argues that that now is the time to upgrade 
Haiti's agricultural sector, and given the loss of secondary and 
tertiary economic sectors, agriculture must step up to take the 
lead in re-establishing Haiti's economy.  End Comment. 
COUSIN