04OTTAWA3410
CANADA: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Mon Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 003410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT AND TTIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC CA
SUBJECT: CANADA: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 245841 
 
¶1.  Unclassified entire text. 
 
¶2.  The Government of Canada remained steadfast in its 
condemnation of international and domestic terrorism and has 
been a helpful and strong supporter of the United States in 
the fight against international terror.  Overall 
antiterrorism cooperation with Canada remains excellent and 
serves as a model for bilateral cooperation.  Despite 
occasional differences, antiterorrism cooperation with Canada 
remains excellent and serves as a model for a cooperative 
bilateral relationship. 
 
¶3.  Canada has contributed to military activities in the 
global war on terror.  Canadian Armed Forces participated in 
Operation Enduring Freedom in 2001, and, as of December 2004, 
approximately 700 Canadian troops continue to be stationed in 
Kabul in support of ISAF VI.  In addition, approximately 200 
Canadian personnel are located in the United Arab Emirates, 
where they are providing airlift and logistics support to 
deployed troops in the Southwest Asia theater. Although 
Canada chose not to join the Operation Iraqi Freedom, it has 
contributed USD 280 million to the reconstruction of Iraq and 
has also given USD 18 million to help with the January 2005 
Iraq transitional elections. 
 
¶4. Day-to-day cooperation between the US and Canadian law 
enforcement agencies is close and continuous.  Under the 2001 
Anti-Terrorism Act, Canada strengthened its ability to 
identify, deter, disable, prosecute, convict, and punish 
terrorist groups.  It also provides investigative tools for 
Canadian law enforcement agencies while providing substantial 
safeguards to privacy and due process.  In December 2003, the 
Government of Canada established the Department of Public 
Safety and Emergency Preparedness (PSEPC), which roughly 
parallels the US Department of Homeland Security, and gave it 
the mandate of protecting Canadians from criminals and 
terrorists. 
 
¶5.  Canada cooperates closely with the United States on 
investigations, and there is a heavy volume of extradition 
requests between the two countries.  Canadian privacy laws, 
limited resources, and criminal procedures are more favorable 
to the defendant than in the United States.  This could 
occasionally inhibit a more full and timely exchange of 
information and may benefit supporters of terrorism. 
 
¶6.  Canada was the first country to ratify the Inter-American 
Convention Against Terrorism in December 2002.  Canada 
implements terrorist finance listings in compliance with UN 
requirements and coordinates closely with the United States 
on plans to freeze assets.  Efforts to counter terrorist 
financing include implementing UNSCR 1373, promoting the 
Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing of the 
Financial Action Task Force, and actively participating in 
the G-7, G-8, and G-20.  As of November 2004, Canada had 
listed all terrorist entities listed by the United Nations. 
Although they are subject to prosecution under the Criminal 
Code of Canada, the law remains untested and no prosecutions 
have taken place. 
 
¶7.  Canada and the United States take part in a number of 
joint counterterrorism forums.  In October 2003, they 
participated in a new round of talks under the auspices of 
the Bilateral Consultative Group (BCG) on Counterterrorism 
Cooperation which was formed in 1988.  Preparations are now 
underway to hold a new round of BCG talks in the spring of 
2005, to be hosted by Canada.  In May 2003, Canada and the 
United States participated in the second Top Officials 
simulation to test local, state/province, and federal 
disaster responses to a terrorist attack against civilian 
populations.  Canada will also participate with the United 
States and the United Kingdom in the next scheduled Top 
Officials simulation, scheduled for the spring of 2005.  In 
addition, the US Attorney General and Canada's Ministers for 
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness and Justice 
coordinate policy at the US-Canadian Cross-Border Crime 
Forum, which last met in Ottawa in October 2004.  The forum 
has a sub-group on counterterrorism, and future efforts 
include continued implementation of provisions of the Smart 
Border Accord and the further integration of border 
enforcement teams that are now operating in 15 regions. 
 
¶8.  Canada has signed and ratified all 12 UN conventions and 
protocols relating to terrorism, including the International 
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, 
and has listed all terrorist entities designated by the UN. 
In June the Government of Canada declined the opportunity to 
join the US and other nations to publicly reiterate the 
policy of not negotiating with terrorists even for the sake 
of securing the safety and release of the hostages. 
 
¶9.  Embassy POC is Mary Witt, Counselor for Labor Affairs and 
deputy of the political section, telephone: 613-688-5240, 
e-mail: WittMH@state.sgov.gov. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
CELLUCCI