05OTTAWA3334
ELECTIONS CANADA CHIEF ON UPCOMING ELECTIONS IN
Tue Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 003334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO S/CRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA HA PGOV KDEM PREL SCRS
SUBJECT: ELECTIONS CANADA CHIEF ON UPCOMING ELECTIONS IN 
HAITI 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Head of Elections Canada Jean-Pierre Kingsley called 
the Embassy November 7 to debrief us on his recent trip to 
Haiti.  He had met with Ambassador Wilkins just before his 
trip. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Overall Kingsley said he came away optimistic and 
confident.  He had a good deal of time with the head of 
Haiti's electoral council, Jean Bernard, with whom he 
discussed very practical, concrete issues.  Kingsley thinks 
it is still possible to maintain the December date for the 
elections, while acknowledging that the council needs to do a 
few things before then.  Specifically, he thinks there is 
adequate time to complete the required training before the 
December date. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Kingsley noted several concrete actions that still 
need to be completed.  First, the conditions for nationality 
for candidates need to be set before any list of candidates 
is developed.  Second, Bernard needs to be empowered as CEO 
of the electoral council in order to make decisions which 
need to be made quickly.  Third, electoral organizations 
should be started from the basis of reaching the most rural 
inaccessible areas first.  Fourth, the media should be told 
in advance how the results will be flowing in so as to avoid 
accusations of holding back results.  Finally, as the 
credibility of the election will depend on the production of 
voting cards, which he appreciates has slowed the process 
down, Kingsley urges the search for workable alternatives, 
such as use of receipts from registration which would allow 
people to vote. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Kingsley said the registration seems to have gone 
well and while some may have complaints about not being able 
to register, signing up 3.4 million voters is a major 
achievement. 
He was pleased with the collaboration of the OAS, Minusta and 
the electoral council, as evidenced by a group going to 
Mexico to look into alternatives for the voter card. 
Kingsley closed by saying he has left open his availability 
for a return trip, and would certainly be willing to provide 
more support.  Much depended on whether he himself would be 
organizing an election in Canada. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS