05OTTAWA2741
TFUS01 - CANADA:  STATUS OF ASSISTANCE 4 -
Mon Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 002741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR R, WHA/CAN; WHA/EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON AEMR ASEC CASC MARR AMGT US CA
SUBJECT: TFUS01 - CANADA:  STATUS OF ASSISTANCE 4 - 
SEPTEMBER 12, 2005:  JOBS AND SCHOOLS 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 2689 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 2669 
     ¶C. OTTAWA 2638 
     ¶D. STATE 162270 
 
¶1.  Canadians are still offering to assist with emergency 
relief, but we are also starting to receive offers of 
recovery assistance.  Past reports have mentioned offers by 
Canadian schools to assist students from the affected area. 
 
Jobs 
---- 
¶2.  WCG International, through its Sacramento-based US 
affiliate JobWave, has offered (free of charge) the 
technology to match job seekers with job offers nationwide. 
They are very eager for a USG contact who can facilitate 
their ability to access information from job seekers and say 
they, through their existing connections with Chambers of 
Commerce and small business, will find the jobs.  They are 
offering their management team to meet with USG officials and 
suggest focusing on Texas as there is a concentration of 
victims there.  However, they can provide service through out 
the US and can communicate with people by voice mail accounts 
(should the job seekers not have access to the Internet). 
 
WCG officials told the Ambassador and separately the DCM that 
Eloise Anderson will be spearheading their Katrina 
initiative.  She can be reached at 916-798-7985 or 
eanderson@jobwaveamerica.com .  She is the former director of 
the Department of Social Services in California and the 
former Administrator of the Division of Community Services in 
Wisconsin. 
 
Action request:  Post requests that the Task Force let us 
know if if seems likely that the USG will be able to follow 
up on this offer. 
 
Communications assistance 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Former Deputy Prime Minister John Manley has recommended 
to the DCM a company that can provide real-time information 
sharing across multiple agencies.  Black Coral LIVE is a 
software platform for shairng and disseminating critical 
geospatially referenced data and other relevant information 
and has been designed to be used by non-experts such as 
first-responders.  Its data can be displayed on devices 
ranging from personal computers to hand held devices. 
 
Education 
--------- 
 
¶4.  The web site for the Association of Univesities and 
Colleges of Canada (AUCC) www.aucc.ca/katrina/index e.html 
has a compilation of offers from Canadian institutes of 
higher learning, with offers ranging from a willingness to 
consider US students to offers to assist with tuition, room, 
and board.  Several list deadlines of this week.  US students 
interesting in studying in Canada should contact the schools 
directly.  Many are making decisions on admission and 
financial aid on a case-by-case basis. 
 
¶5.  The University of Quebec at Chicoutimi is offering to 
host students.  They will cover tuition, lodging, etc. and 
have been trying to contact a French language professor in 
New Orleans, who has taught there in the past, to offer her a 
space to teach and the option of bringing some students. 
They have not yet tracked her down. 
 
¶6.  Other Quebec schools have listed their offers with the 
AUCC (above). 
 
¶7.  The Nova Scotia College of Art and Design is offering to 
accept displaced visual arts students on a case-by-case basis 
as space permits.  Contact is admissions@nscad.ca 
902-494-8129.  More information is available at www.nscad.ca 
 
Paramedics 
---------- 
¶8.  The Quebec paramedics (CTAQ) would like to send 50 EMS 
personnel and perhaps several ambulance vehicles.  Abigail 
Friedman, CG Quebec City, is in touch with Mr. St-Jean and 
can convey any suggested contact information to him. 
 
Pumping Equipment 
----------------- 
 
¶9.  CG Quebec City has also received an offer from Luc 
Gaudreault of San Hydro in Chicoutimi, Quebec, offering pump 
and vacuum trucks and equipment. 
 
Province of Alberta 
------------------- 
 
¶10.  Alberta has made a C$5 million contribution to the 
Bush-Clinton Katrina Fund. 
 
Province of Quebec 
------------------ 
 
¶11.  The government of Quebec has contributed 20,000 cots to 
the Red Cross.  Other Quebec citizens, including the American 
Colony, continue to contribute funds to the Red Cross. 
 
Other offers 
------------ 
 
¶12.  A Canadian official who manages a Klesmer Band has 
offered to hold a benefit concert.  The disk jockey for the 
upcoming Marine Ball has offered part of his fee as a 
contribution to Katrina relief. 
 
¶13.  CG Quebec has received several offers of housing for 
hurricane victims, including a 2.5 bedroom summer home. 
 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
DICKSON