06OTTAWA1925

Wed Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO6577
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1925 1722101
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 212101Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2945
INFO RULSDMK/USDOT WASHDC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS OTTAWA 001925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, EB/TRA 
 
DOT for International Affairs (David Decarme) 
 
DOT for Federal Highway Administration (Roger Petzold) 
 
DHS for International Affairs (Karen Marmaud) and Susan 
Williams (Transportation Security Administration) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ELTN EWWT ETRD ASEC EINV CA
SUBJ: CANADA: PM Harper announces more details on transportation 
security funding 
 
Ref: Ottawa 1455 
 
¶1. Summary: On June 16, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper 
announced details regarding C$254 million worth (about US$230 
million) of new measures in the next two years to help increase 
Canada's capability to detect and respond to a potential terrorist 
attack.  The measures announced include initiatives to bolster the 
safety and security for Canada's land, sea and air travel networks. 
Funds will be used to establish a totally new program to address 
threats to passenger rail and transit networks.  End summary. 
¶2. Speaking in Toronto, the Prime Minister stated that his 
government is already taking significant actions, both in Canada and 
abroad, to confront the threat of terrorism.  Noting that terrorists 
have targeted urban transportation systems in nations such as the 
U.K. and Spain, he added Canada that must do everything possible to 
prevent such attacks from occurring here. 
¶3. Under the two-year spending plan (the C$254 million commitment 
was part of the Conservatives' May 2006 budget), the government will 
invest C$26 million in air cargo security initiatives designed to 
enhance existing air cargo security measures.  These include 
measures to ensure the integrity of air cargo security throughout 
the supply chain, as well as the evaluation of screening 
technologies.  C$133 million for the Canadian Air Transport Security 
Authority (CATSA) will enable CATSA to respond to increasing air 
passenger volumes and corresponding operating pressures by hiring 
additional staff and providing more training programs. 
 
¶4. For rail security the government is providing C$95 million to 
enhance critical security in high-risk passenger rail and transit 
security operations.  It will establish a new passenger rail and 
urban transit security program, targeted towards the high-volume 
passenger areas of commuter rail and urban transit, with a focus on 
major urban transit systems and equipment.  This program will 
provide financial assistance to commuter rail and public transit 
operators in designated major metropolitan areas to accelerate the 
implementation of new and enhanced security measures. 
 
¶5. The funding will also serve to improve the readiness of Canada's 
urban transport sector to respond to emergencies and to develop 
effective contingency plans.  This funding will support joint 
federal-provincial exercises in one or two major metropolitan areas; 
these exercises will be an essential element in preparing civil 
servants, infrastructure owners-operators, first responders, and law 
enforcement officers to respond effectively during emergencies. 
 
¶6. For marine transport operators the funding allows Canada's 
domestic ferry operators, including those that are part of urban 
transit systems, to apply for funding under the existing Transport 
Canada "Marine Security Contribution Program" to enhance the 
security of their port facilities and vessels. 
 
WILKINS