07OTTAWA1924
THE HARPER GOVERNMENT'S BLUEPRINT FOR PARLIAMENT
Wed Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO2226
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1924/01 2901804
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171804Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6719
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0132
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 0806
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/HQ USNORTHCOM  PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001924 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON SENV CA
SUBJECT:  THE HARPER GOVERNMENT'S BLUEPRINT FOR PARLIAMENT 
 
REF:  A.  OTTAWA 1910 
--       B.  OTTAWA 1922 
 
¶1.  (U)  In a tradition-heavy ceremony on October 16 that also broke 
with tradition by taking place in the early evening rather than 
mid-afternoon, Canada's Governor General opened the new session of 
Parliament by reading the government's "Speech from the Throne," 
which lays out clearly the agenda and vision of Prime Minister 
Stephen Harper for the coming session.   (Septel will discuss the 
Liberal opposition's response on October 17.)  The government 
focused on five core priorities that will create what it called a 
"better, stronger, safer Canada." 
 
"A PROUD AND SOVEREIGN CANADA" 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U)  Afghanistan:  for the first time, the Speech clarified that 
"our government does not believe that Canada should simply abandon 
the people of Afghanistan after February 2009."  It stated that 
Canada should instead build on its accomplishments and shift to 
accelerate the training of the Afghan army and police, a task that 
"will not be completed by February 2009" but "should be achievable 
by 2011, the end of the period covered by the Afghanistan Compact." 
 The government specified that a majority of Parliament would have 
to approve the mission's future and its timetable, but argued that 
Afghanistan is the area in which Canada can most clearly "make a 
difference" in the world and that this decision should honor the 
progress and sacrifices of Canadians, ensure further progress, and 
uphold Canada's international commitments and reputation.  It 
highlighted that this role was part of a UN-sanctioned mission that 
both was both "noble and necessary." 
¶3.  (U)  World role:  declaring its message to the world that 
"Canada is back," the government promised to rebuild the Canadian 
Forces with better equipment and training in order to meet Canada's 
responsibilities to the UN and to its allies and to promote  shared 
values of freedom, human rights, and rule of law.  It announced it 
would seek Parliamentary approval of honorary Canadian citizenship 
for Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma.  It pledged to maintain an active 
role in the Americas, citing Haiti as an example of working together 
with neighbors to help build democracy in a fragile state. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Arctic strategy:  acknowledging "new opportunities and new 
challenges," the government pledged an "integrated northern 
strategy" to strengthen Canada's sovereignty, protect the northern 
environment, promote economic and social development, and devolve 
governance to northern communities.  It announced its plan to build 
a "world-class arctic research station that will be on the cutting 
edge of arctic issues," including environmental science and resource 
development and the completion of comprehensive mapping of Canada's 
Arctic seabed.  It underscored that Canada's sovereignty in the 
North demands that Canada "maintains the capacity to act" with new 
arctic patrol ships and expanded aerial surveillance to guard the 
North and the Northwest Passage.  It also reaffirmed previously 
announced plans to increase the size and capabilities of the 
indigenous aboriginal Arctic Rangers. 
 
"A STRONG FEDERATION" 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U)  Relations with provinces:  the government promised to 
"reinvent" neglected federal responsibilities and cited the federal 
role in strengthening the "economic union" and promoting freer trade 
Qrole in strengthening the "economic union" and promoting freer trade 
among provinces.  The speech noted that "it is often harder to move 
goods and services across provincial boundaries than across our 
international borders. . . (which) hurts our competitive position." 
It pledged to limit federal spending power for shared cost programs 
in areas with exclusive provincial jurisdictions. 
 
"A PROSPEROUS FUTURE" 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U)  IPR:   the government announced its intention "to improve 
cultural and intellectual property rights (IPR) in Canada, including 
copyright reform. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Taxes:  the speech described a "long-term plan of 
broad-based tax relief for individuals, businesses, and families" as 
well as to cut again the federal government sales tax. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Infrastructure:  in a "Building Canada Plan" the government 
described efforts to improve transport and trade hubs, including the 
Windsor-Detroit corridor and the Atlantic and Pacific gateways. 
 
¶9.  (U)  Agriculture:  the speech indicated that the government 
plans to promote biofuels, while reiterating "strong support for 
Canada's supply-managed system" of agriculture. 
 
 
OTTAWA 00001924  002 OF 002 
 
 
"A SAFE AND SECURE CANADA" 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (U)  Law and order:  noting that peace, order, and good 
government are the "birthrights" of Canadians and that it had "no 
greater responsibilities" than protecting these, the government 
announced its plans to introduce a comprehensive omnibus "Tackling 
Violent Crime bill" that will incorporate previous flagship bills on 
mandatory minimum sentences for serious gun crime and impaired 
driving and against dangerous offenders that did not pass in the 
last session.  (Some bills had passed the lower house but not the 
Senate already, but this packaging is new.)  The government warned 
the opposition that "Canadians expect prompt passage of this crucial 
legislation." Other new bills will crack down on drug producers and 
pushers, strengthen the youth justice system, and crack down on 
property crime.  The government also pledged to ensure effective law 
enforcement, including seeking resources to recruit 2,500 more 
police officers, and vigorously to pursue its new National Anti-Drug 
Strategy. 
 
¶11. (U)  National security:  the government promised to "address 
Canadians directly" on the challenge of terrorism with a statement 
on national security.  It will introduce legislation to strengthen 
the Anti-Terrorism Act and to respond to the February 2007 Supreme 
Court decision on the unconstitutionality of immigration security 
certificates. 
 
"A  HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT FOR CANADIANS" 
----------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U)  Kyoto:  the Speech highlighted that the challenge of 
climate change requires a global solution and must include binding 
targets on major emitters. It admitted frankly that Canada's 
emissions cannot be in compliance with the Kyoto Protocol by the 
required date of January 1, 2008.  The government pledged to pursue 
a two-track process of pursuing a global consensus while moving to 
reduce total greenhouse gas emissions at home 60-70% by 2050.  The 
government announced plans to bring back to the lower house 
legislation containing elements from the failed Clean Air Act that 
had all-party consensus (likely provisions on air pollutants) and to 
put Canada "at the forefront" of clean technology.