09OTTAWA218
S) CANADA: RE-CONSIDERING ALL OPTIONS FOR ITS
Tue Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Ottawa
P 171603Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9228
INFO AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 
USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 
CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
OSD WASHDC PRIORITY
JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
CDR USCENTCOM  PRIORITYS E C R E T OTTAWA 000218 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2019 
TAGS: PREL MOPS NATO AF CA
SUBJECT: (S) CANADA: RE-CONSIDERING ALL OPTIONS FOR ITS 
FUTURE MILITARY ROLE IN KANDAHAR? 
 
REF: OTTAWA 196 
 
Classified By: PolMinCouns Scott Bellard, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF) Summary:  The minority government of Prime 
Minister Harper may not have actually ruled out extending 
Canada's 2,800-member military contingent, including combat 
forces, in Kandahar beyond 2011.  If this government remains 
in office throughout 2010, operational requirements would 
force a truly final decision no later than fall 2010, but a 
further extension of combat forces would be a highly 
sensitive political football.  PM Harper may be banking on 
President Obama's popularity here and hoping that the results 
of the USG's policy review on Afghanistan, new international 
efforts stemming from the March 31 conference on Afghanistan 
in the Netherlands, and the outcome of the NATO 60th 
anniversary summit will change Canadian domestic dynamics 
enough to give this government -- or even its successor -- 
enough new political flexibility to continue a combat role in 
addition to whatever reconstruction and development roles 
Canada will maintain after 2011. End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF) At a March Cabinet 10 meeting, ministers of Prime 
Minister Stephen Harper's minority government apparently 
agreed that "all options are back on the table" with respect 
to Canada's military role in Afghanistan after 2011, 
according to Department of Foreign Affairs and International 
Trade (DFAIT) Afghanistan Task Force (FTAG) Senior Advisor 
David Fairchild (strictly protect).   It will take time for 
the government's public rhetoric to catch up to this "new 
reality," however, requiring some "patience" on the part of 
allies, Fairchild commented privately to polmiloff on March 
¶16.  He urged that, for now, allies should not publicly press 
Canada to extend its troop deployment in Kandahar beyond 
¶2011. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF) Fairchild (who will soon complete a three-year 
assignment in FTAG) added that his "best guess at this point" 
is that by 2011 Canada's Task Force Kandahar (TFK) will no 
longer exist.  He predicted instead that TFK and its 2,800 
member Canadian Forces (CF) contingent under ISAF likely will 
be subsumed into the fast growing U.S. command structure in 
RC-S.  Fairchild further speculated that Canada might 
withdraw the CF battle group in 2011 for the one year 
"operational pause" that Chief of Land Forces General Leslie 
had envisioned in recent testimony to Parliament (reftel), 
while leaving about 1,800 to 2,000 troops in place to conduct 
the kinds of training, mentoring, enabling, and PRT force 
protection missions that the CF are doing at this time. 
 
¶4.  (C/NF) Operational requirements for any extension would 
force the government's hand no later than fall 2010, 
Fairchild noted.  If Canada begins to withdraw its troops 
starting in July 2011, as currently mandated by a March 2008 
House of Commons bipartisan motion, the U.S. and other ISAF 
partners will need at least six months to send replacements 
into RC-S (January-June 2011) in advance of a subsequent six 
month long withdrawal or draw-down of CF (July-December 
2011), he explained.  Canadian and U.S. military and civilian 
planners will need to have a plan in place by January 1, 
2011, he reasoned, in order to ensure that the necessary 
personnel and infrastructure are in Kandahar throughout that 
year. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF) Comment:  After being explicit publicly and 
privately that the CF combat mission in Afghanistan would 
definitely end in 2011 according to the terms of the March 
2008 motion, PM Harper and his Cabinet would be venturing 
into politically sensitive territory to try to re-sell a 
further extension to an increasingly dubious Canadian public. 
 Official Opposition Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff -- who 
has also been firm about the 2011 deadline -- has repeatedly 
accused PM Harper of going back on his word or obfuscating on 
other issues (notably, the economic downturns and the 
government deficit), and a reversal of course on Afghanistan 
by this government would be a political goldmine for the 
Liberals.  Given the Conservatives' minority status in the 
House of Commons, the likelihood is high for elections 
sometime over the next year (with fall 2009 a real 
possibility).  Bad news from Kandahar and repeated deaths of 
Canadian troops contribute to a growing public perception 
that Canada has already done more than its share; there is 
very little public appetite for a continued combat role after 
¶2011.  PM Harper may be banking on President Obama's 
popularity here and hoping that the results of the USG's 
policy review on Afghanistan, new international efforts 
stemming from the March 31 conference on Afghanistan in the 
Netherlands, and the outcomes of the NATO 60th anniversary 
summit could change Canadian domestic dynamics enough to give 
this government -- or its successor -- enough political 
flexibility to enable it to continue a combat role in 
Afghanistan in addition to whatever reconstruction and 
development role Canada will maintain after 2011. 
 
Visit Canada,s North American partnership community at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
 
BREESE