09OTTAWA894
CANADIAN VIEWS OF U.S. PRIORITIES FOR THE NEW AFGHAN
Fri Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO0983
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHQU RUEHSL
DE RUEHOT #0894 3242134
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 202132Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0086
INFO AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS OTTAWA 000894 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM AF CA
SUBJECT: CANADIAN VIEWS OF U.S. PRIORITIES FOR THE NEW AFGHAN 
GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: STATE 118297 
 
¶1.   (SBU)  Summary.  Canada strongly agrees with the U.S. 
priorities for the new Afghan government, notably the need for 
greater anti-corruption efforts and for greater security, 
especially in the south.  Canada also calls upon Afghanistan to 
implement its international human rights commitments, particularly 
related to women's rights.  Canada welcomes continued and enhanced 
coordination within the international community, particularly as we 
together consider new benchmarks for Afghanistan and examine the 
possibilities for one or two international conferences on 
Afghanistan in the coming months.   End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In response to reftel demarche by PolMinCouns to 
Director General Renetta Siemens of the Afghanistan Task Force in 
the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (DFAIT) 
on November 17, Director of Policy and Advocacy Adrian Norfolk of 
the Afghanistan Task Force followed up on November 20 with 
substantive comments.  He confirmed that the Canadian Embassy in 
Kabul had already conveyed a similar message to President Karzai. 
He expressed the hope to continue to work closely with the U.S. and 
other international partners in Kabul to deliver "clear, 
consistent, and coordinated messaging."     Canada hopes that the 
UN will take a leadership role in delivering to the new Afghan 
administration the expectations of the international community, he 
commented,  and that the new Afghan administration sets "clear, 
realistic goals for the next five years."   Norfolk expressed 
satisfaction with the key themes of President Karzai's inauguration 
speech, but stressed the importance now of elaborating "realistic 
and concrete plans to achieve these goals" - with the support of 
the international community. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  According to Norfolk, Canada strongly agreed with the 
U.S. that the new Afghan government's first priority would have to 
be "immediate, visible, and meaningful action to combat 
corruption," as well as to "elaborate a strategy" to combat its 
underlying causes.  He emphasized the importance that 
anti-corruption efforts be "Afghan-led" and have the "buy-in from 
the Afghan government."  He observed that "Afghans deserve 
competent and accountable leaders at all levels of government." 
Canada also agreed with the U.S. that security is the "most 
immediate challenge facing Afghanistan," especially in the south 
where Canadian Forces are located.  Canada wants to see the 
strengthening and enlargement of the Afghan National Army and 
Afghan National Police, while also calling on the Afghan government 
to focus additionally on reconciliation through a "unified, 
Afghan-led reintegration of mid-and low-level insurgents."  He 
noted the continued importance of economic development for 
long-term stability, and highlighted Canadian investments to date, 
especially in education, eradication of polio, and the 
rehabilitation of the Dahla Dam - Canada's three "signature 
projects." 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Norfolk cited a few other priorities that Canada hopes 
the international community will convey to the new government in 
Afghanistan, most notably  the importance of implementing 
Afghanistan's international human rights commitments, especially 
women's rights - which are "fundamental" to sustainable 
development.   He expressed agreement with the UN and the UK on the 
importance also of Afghanistan building strong and constructive 
relationships with its neighboring countries. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Norfolk called for the international community to be 
prepared to respond to the announcement of the new Afghan cabinet. 
He said that Canada would welcome U.S. views on whether there 
should be one, or two, conferences in Kabul or elsewhere in the 
near-term.  He expressed interest in the U.S. call for benchmarks, 
and welcomed further consultations within the international 
community on which ones as well as  their anticipated timeframes. 
He added that DFAIT had already instructed its team in Kabul to be 
in close contact with the U.S. and other allied embassies in Kabul, 
as well as the UN mission, to ensure further "cooperation and 
coordination." 
JACOBSON