07HILLAH155
BABIL:  PRT HOSTS SHEIKHS' ROUNDTABLE
Thu Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO6784
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0155 3190826
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 150826Z NOV 07
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0987
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 1051UNCLAS HILLAH 000155 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER KISL IZ IR
SUBJECT: BABIL:  PRT HOSTS SHEIKHS' ROUNDTABLE 
 
REF: A. A)  HILLAH 143 
     ¶B. B)  HILLAH 150 
 
¶1.  (U) This is a PRT Babil cable. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary:  On November 13, PRT Babil hosted a gathering 
of Sunni and Shi'a tribal sheikhs from throughout the province. 
The sheikhs criticized the current political leadership of the 
province while blaming the US for allowing foreign influences to 
penetrate Iraq.  In contrast to the current provincial 
government, the tribal leaders presented themselves as an 
untapped resource with broad connections who could be counted on 
to restore security and economic stability in the province.  The 
sheikhs welcomed the opportunity to present their views to the 
PRT and expressed the desire to maintain a dialogue with the 
PRT.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On November 13, PRT Babil hosted a gathering of 
twenty-one Babil tribal sheikhs representing both Sunni and 
Shi'a sects. The sheikhs expressed gratitude to the PRT for 
hosting the event.  They also emphasized their willingness and 
ability to work together with Coalition forces to improve 
security and foster a climate of reconciliation in Babil. 
Comment:  Although participants came at the behest of former 
Babil governor Iskander Witwit, the latter did not dominate the 
free-flowing and animated discussion.  Witwit, a former Governor 
of Babil Province has made clear his own intention to run for 
governor or other elected office in the future.  Witwit was 
removed from office by the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) 
in December 2003 due to popular discontent with his tenure and 
overwhelming rumors of profiteering.  End comment. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The sheikhs' characterization of Babil's provincial 
government as inept, corrupt, and driven by narrow sectarian 
interests formed a recurring theme throughout the three-hour 
gathering.  They pinned the blame for this state of affairs on 
political parties and the closed-list electoral system. 
According to the sheikhs, the closed-list brought forth elected 
officials unaccountable to the people they purport to represent. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) More ominously, the sheikhs alleged US policies opened 
the door to "outsiders" -- particularly, Iranians but also 
foreign Sunni fighters -- to meddle in the province.  In this 
vein, they cited the successful role of tribes against Al-Qaeda 
in Anbar province and asserted that they, with the support of 
Coalition forces, could reverse gains by outsiders in Babil. 
Moreover, the sheikhs argued that they were not sectarian and, 
consequently, could serve as a check against religious influence 
in government. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Concomitantly with their desire to play a leading role 
in restoring security, the tribal leaders stressed the need for 
a strong government role in support of economic growth. 
Specifically, the sheikhs cited the need to tackle youth 
unemployment, subsidize agriculture, clean canals, and establish 
an effective telecommunications network.  According to the 
tribal leaders, Babil officials were non-responsive to their 
requests for reconstruction projects.  The sheikhs also noted 
that no national or provincial officials consulted them on 
provincial budgetary issues, including the USD 40 million 
supplemental promised by Barham Saleh on September 30 (reftel), 
and expressed grave concern over the fate of the capital budget 
funds as a whole. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In subsequent one-on-one conversation with a well 
respected local sheikh, this long-time friend to the PRT said 
many Shi'a tribal and clan elders through southern Babil, 
Northern Najaf, eastern Karbala and western Diwaniya would 
gladly assist in a trial security zone if supported by Coalition 
forces.  He said that a large number of tribal leaders are 
increasingly concerned over what he called the growing 
repression by Iranian influenced government figures and the 
influx of money and arms to the Shi'a militias and government 
figure hired goons.  He said his fellow sheikhs are worried over 
the sending of young men, perhaps as many as 1,500, to Lebanon 
for training and their return to Iraq for "no good purpose" 
(NFI).  He also spoke of arms and explosives coming in from Iran 
hidden in trucks of fruits and vegetables while Iraqi 
authorities sympathetic to Iran just looked the other way.  He 
said the people need American help to stop the destruction of 
the country and they, the tribes, would do the work if there 
were assurances they would not be abandoned, as many Shi'a 
believe happened in 1991. 
 
WITT