08HILLAH2
IT IS NOW 2008: WHAT HAVE YOU DONE FOR US LATELY? MEETING
Tue Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO7046
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0002/01 0081615
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081615Z JAN 08
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0884
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1016
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 1080UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAIR PREL IZ
SUBJECT: IT IS NOW 2008: WHAT HAVE YOU DONE FOR US LATELY? MEETING 
WITH IRAQI OFFICIALS IN NAJAF 
 
HILLAH 00000002  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This is a PRT Najaf cable. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY: Governor Asaad Abu Gulal al-Tae and various 
advisors met with PRT Leader and PRToff at former Camp Endeavor, 
on January 2.  Recommending airport security and design 
companies, planning the upcoming tourism conference, visiting 
Kufa University, moving the PRT to Najaf, developing local 
banking infrastructure, a request for facilities for a Shi'a 
tribal office, seeking a meeting with Ambassador Crocker and 
Shi'a tribal sheikhs and delivering new scholastic textbooks 
were among the topics discussed. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Team Leader noted he had passed recommendations for 
three airport security companies to Deputy Governor Abtan, at 
his request (Armor Group, Sally Port, and Global).  The Governor 
suggested the Team Leader coordinate with Mike McCormick 
(Transportation Attache) and recommend one company.  He also 
said he would be comfortable if the USG would recommend one 
airport consultant and design manager, rather than refer choices 
to the Najaf authorities, since he had confidence in the 
expertise of the US Embassy Transportation Attache.  The Team 
Leader said he would pass the Governor's views to the 
Transportation Attache in Baghdad.  Governor Al-Tae said Deputy 
Governor Abtan was expected to return from meeting with the 
airport consulting firm in Erbil that had been the British firm 
John Scott's subcontractor in Erbil.  The Governor also stated 
that distant business people will not come to Najaf without an 
airport and that more than two million people came to Najaf 
during the recent Eid Al Adha at the end of December without 
incident. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Team Leader noted the importance of planning the Najaf 
tourism conference in advance.  The Governor recommended it be 
held during the month of March.  He went on to state that the 
airport project will contribute to the success of the conference 
and that buses from Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Kuwait had come 
to Najaf during the recent Eid Al Adha without incident.  The 
Governor supported the idea of an independent tourism training 
institute, which could be managed under the DG of Tourism.  The 
Team Leader agreed that such a training facility would useful, 
suggesting that Kufa University might also be a possible 
institutional home for such a facility.  The Governor noted that 
he had laid a foundation stone for such a facility in the past, 
but nothing further had ever happened.  Governor Al-Tae agreed 
that Kufa University could cooperate with the Tourism Committee 
and the Tourism DG in planning for such a facility, as well as 
the tourism conference. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Team Leader noted that he planned to visit Kufa 
University on January 3 to discuss TOEFL training, installing IT 
connectivity between Kufa campuses, and distant learning 
classes. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Governor Al-Tae asked for an update on the PRT's move 
to Najaf.  The Team Leader said the MiTT team had just arrived 
at Camp Endeavor and that he looked forward to working with 
Najaf from the new location in the near future.  The Governor 
reiterated that the PRT is responsible for Najaf and warmly 
welcomed its relocation to Najaf. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Team Leader introduced newly arrived Finance and 
Banking Advisor Darrell Brown, who said he was here to assist 
with the local banking industry.  The Governor responded on the 
spot that there are five or six government banks and four or 
five private banks in Najaf and promised to arrange a meeting 
between Darrell Brown and local bankers within the next week. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Governor introduced the PRT Leader to Sheikh Jasab 
Al-Hillo, his Advisor for Tribal Affairs, who requested 
assistance in funding the construction of a building for holding 
meetings of local tribal sheikhs on a regular basis.  The sheikh 
stated the tribes owned land on which the building could be 
located.  The Team Leader was non-committal. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Governor requested a meeting with Ambassador 
Crocker for himself and 22 Najaf Shi'a sheikhs.  He noted that 
the Sunni sheikhs had received a great deal of attention and 
financial support and that the Shi'a sheikhs were envious of 
that attention.  Governor Al-Tae also stated the GOI is opposed 
to CLC programs in Shi'a areas, but was concerned that the 
aforementioned envy could fan discontent toward coalition and 
GOI entities, and recommended the USG consider doing some 
programming for Shi'a tribes.  When Team Leader noted the 
Governor's colleague in Diwaniyah was completely opposed to the 
non-CLC agriculture union's seed and fertilizer support program 
for rural tribes, the Governor laughed and said, "That's because 
he is not distributing them, the Iraqi Army is doing it. 
Anyway, I would just like to see some programs to support 
tribes, and if you are doing such programs in Najaf, I don't 
even care if the Army distributes the seeds and fertilizer." 
 
HILLAH 00000002  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Team Leader gave the Governor a box of new, nicely 
illustrated Scholastic Arabic elementary school textbooks to 
review, saying many more could be made available to Najaf 
schools in the near future, if the Najaf DG of Education wanted 
them.  Governor Al-Tae admired the books and said he would like 
the books for schools with "talented" students.  He also said 
the MOE could not object to the books being placed in school 
libraries, if they were not formally made part of the school 
curriculums.  He opined that there were 1,000 schools in Najaf 
that could benefit from the books, and would respond to the Team 
Leader after reviewing them with his Education DG. 
SIMMONS