08HILLAH47
FIRST STATE OF BABIL CONFERENCE: AMIDST THE GRIPES, A PLEDGE
Sun Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO6482
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0047 1041705
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131705Z APR 08
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1073
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 1139UNCLAS HILLAH 000047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV IZ IR
SUBJECT: FIRST STATE OF BABIL CONFERENCE: AMIDST THE GRIPES, A PLEDGE 
OF IMPROVED COOPERATION 
 
¶1. (U) This is a PRT Babil cable. 
 
¶2. (U) SUMMARY:  On April 10, Governor Salam Salah Mahdi 
al-Muslimawi and Provincial Council Chairman Muhammad Ali 
Hussain Al-Massudi held a conference with District and 
Sub-District leaders on the "State of Babil." Although much of 
the discussion (at the Governor's urging) was a gripe session 
about PRT projects, this first of its kind conference was a 
first step forward in developing a province-wide dialogue.  The 
PCC agreed to improve strategic planning with districts; to move 
ahead on projects in North Babil, where security has ostensibly 
been an impediment; and to hold another conference in the future 
for further discussion of concerns.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (U) While styled a "State of Babil" address, Governor Salam 
Salah Mahdi al-Muslimawi's April 10 gathering of local and 
district government leaders was more of a town hall meeting. 
PRT, ePRT, and coalition force representatives attended the 
session and saluted the Governor's initiative, while urging that 
the focus be on better implementation of the Province's budget. 
Provincial Council Chairman Muhammad ali Husayn al-Massudi (PCC) 
and PC member Abd al-Razzak al-Nasrawi actually had the most 
substantive exchanges with the participants.  Attendees included 
the mayors of Iskandariyah, Shawmali, Hashimiyah, Mahawil, Jurf 
al-Saqr, and Madhatiyah; and the chairmen of the Hillah, Kifl, 
Qasim, and Musayyib (acting) Qadhas.  Unfortunately, only one 
Director General (Ministry of Municipalities) was present.  The 
governor's opening remarks were short and contained no specific 
program or policy announcements.  He thanked the American 
delegation for attending and noted the importance of Babil 
province as the center of Iraq.  He stressed his priority of 
maintaining security and attracting investment as key to all 
other reconstruction goals, especially those in tourism, 
agriculture and industry. 
 
¶4. (U) The governor invited the local government representatives 
to address their concerns, specifically inviting them to "tell 
the Americans about your experiences."  Many of the requests and 
complaints focused on the lack of coordination for US projects 
with provincial officials, as well as criticisms about 
contractor performance.  The DG for Municipalities also jumped 
on the bandwagon, complaining that American, provincial and 
local officials all fail to coordinate municipal projects with 
him and his ministry. 
 
¶5. (U) The governor and PCC concluded the meeting with remarks 
that acknowledged the need to improve strategic planning on 
projects in cooperation with the districts and sub-districts. 
Specifically, Jurf al-Saqr (N. Babil) got a commitment from the 
governor for more attention and more projects now that the 
security situation in the north was improving.  The Governor and 
PCC agreed to take the concerns expressed at the meeting, study 
them and discuss them.  The governor noted that he and other 
provincial leaders learn from mistakes and agreed to hold 
another meeting with local officials, which he promised would be 
more productive. 
 
¶6. (SBU)Following a break, the Governor directed Mayors and 
Council Chairs to review security during the previous three 
weeks and report back to him.  He asked participants to work 
with their IP chiefs to improve communication, though 
interestingly the IP was not in attendance. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  Outside of Hillah (the capitol) and Kifl (his 
hometown), the Governor pays infrequent visits to other 
municipalities despite numerous invitations and our urging.  The 
PRT and 3ID have promoted the idea for this conference with the 
Governor.  Although it did not adequately focus on how the 
province and Qadhas can better work together, it was a first 
step.  The Governor has shown a willingness to continue the 
process, leaving room for improvement in strengthening 
Provincial-District cooperation - a linkage that has been rather 
weak in Babil but may strengthen with the passage of the new 
Provincial Powers Act. 
 
HILLAS