06RIGA1056
TWO LATVIAN SOLDIERS KILLED IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
Fri Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Riga
VZCZCXRO6724
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHRA #1056/01 3631538
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291538Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY RIGA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3649
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RIGA 001056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MOPS PREL IZ LG
SUBJECT: TWO LATVIAN SOLDIERS KILLED IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
VOW TO CONTINUE MISSION 
 
Ref: Riga 1022 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  The deaths of two Latvian soldiers in Iraq December 27 
has topped all news in Latvia in the aftermath.  Despite nearly 80 
percent public opposition to the mission, senior officials have 
clearly stated that Latvia will remain in Iraq.  Opposition 
political leaders, and even some members of the coalition, have 
suggested that parliament should review Latvia's deployment in Iraq 
and consider an exit strategy, but appear to favor a deliberate and 
considered approach over an immediate withdrawal.  Press coverage of 
the incident has been factual and editorial writing has been 
predictable.  Those who supported the deployment want it to 
continue, those who have always opposed it, want to see it ended. 
With the relative quiet of the holiday period, we will need to wait 
until January to measure the full impact of this incident.  End 
summary. 
 
 
¶2. On December 27, a group of Latvian soldiers on patrol outside 
their base in Diwaniyah suffered what appears to be an IED explosion 
under the US-provided HMMWV in which they were riding.  Two 
soldiers, Private First Class Gints Bleija, 25, and Private First 
Class Vitalijs Vasiljevs, 24, were killed in the attack.  Three 
other soldiers were injured.  Two of those suffered only minor 
injuries and will be returned to duty, while the third suffered more 
serious injuries and has been evacuated to the American Army 
hospital in Landstuhl for treatment.  The bodies are expected back 
in Latvia in early January when state funerals will likely be held. 
Latvia previously suffered only one combat death in Iraq when an EOD 
expert was killed in 2004 in the course of his duties. 
 
¶3. Since the incident, Ambassador Bailey has been in telephone 
contact with the Ministers of Defense and Foreign Affairs and the 
offices of the President and Prime Minister to express our 
condolences and she will be sending letters to all senior government 
officials and the families of the deceased.  Embassy personnel will 
participate in events related to the deaths of the two soldiers as 
appropriate. 
 
¶4.  While expressing condolences to the relatives of the victims, 
Latvia's senior officials indicated on December 27 that the 
casualties would not provoke the withdrawal of troops from Iraq. 
President Vaira Vike-Freiberga, Prime Minister Aigars Kalvitis, 
Defense Minister Atis Slakteris and parliament's Defense, Internal 
Affairs and Anti-Corruption Committee chair Juris Dalbins have all 
rejected any suggestion that this incident should prompt a pullout 
of troops from Iraq. Dalbins reiterated that on December 14 the 
Saeima (parliament) had extended the troop mandate in Iraq through 
the end of 2007 (reftel). Foreign Minister Pabriks said that 
Latvia's participation in international operations was inevitable, 
and that by helping stabilize the situation in Iraq the Latvian 
soldiers were making a contribution towards strengthening the 
security of Latvia and its NATO allies.  Defense minister Slakteris 
has noted that there are already plans to reduce the size of the 
Latvian contingent in Iraq in 2007. 
 
¶5. Former Minister of Defense and current European Parliament deputy 
Girts Kristovskis (Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK) noted that this 
incident should not serve as the grounds for aborting the mission in 
Iraq. He acknowledged, however, that Latvia's participation in the 
mission should be evaluated and debated not only by senior officials 
but by the general public as well. New Era, the largest opposition 
party, says it is not going to urge that the troops be recalled 
immediately, but New Era's MP and former Defense Minister Linda 
Murniece urged the government to come up a plan outlining "how and 
when Latvia will leave Iraq."  The deputy chair of the parliament's 
Defense and Internal Affairs Committee Juris Dobelis from the 
nationalist Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK party has called for a troop 
pullout on a shorter timeline and said he believes there should be 
an immediate debate in parliament on the issue. 
 
¶6. Much of the press reporting to date has been factual, noting 
especially that all Latvians deployed to Iraq volunteer for the 
mission.  In fact, this was Vasilejvs's second tour in Iraq. 
Editorial writers have been mixed, with the more elite press 
focusing on the need to continue the mission and the value to Latvia 
in participating in international security operations, while the 
more populist press and Russian language press says that this 
incident highlights the need for Latvia to get out of Iraq. 
 
¶7. Comment: Latvia's political leaders have reacted calmly and 
maturely to this incident, focusing on the sacrifice that all 
soldiers know they may be asked to make and praising the 
professionalism of the Latvian military.  Even opponents of the 
mission have been responsible in their criticism.  Polling from 
October 2006 showed that 78.9 percent of Latvians oppose the 
deployment for Iraq, a figure that has changed little from past 
years.  So far that opposition has been rather muted, but as 
Latvians return from their holidays and parliament returns to 
session in early January, we can expect to see some increase in 
average people voicing opposition to the mission. 
 
 
RIGA 00001056  002 OF 002 
 
 
ANTWEILER