07CASABLANCA71
SECOND TRANSPORT STRIKE HAS MOROCCANS ON EDGE
Fri Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0071/01 0961855
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061855Z APR 07
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7676
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2885
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0770
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0270
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3719
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2249
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 7939
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 2011UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV ECON ETRD MO
SUBJECT: SECOND TRANSPORT STRIKE HAS MOROCCANS ON EDGE 
 
REF: Rabat 00492 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary: As Morocco enters the fourth day of its second 
transportation strike in less then a month, the country's citizens, 
economy, and government are paying a significant and growing price. 
The strike, initiated by a group of 46 taxi drivers unions and 
associations, was initially to last 48 hours beginning Tuesday, April 
¶3.  One day into the strike, however, with no headway made between 
the driver representatives and the Ministry of Transportation, the 
associations extended the strike another 48 hours.  The action, 
launched in protest against the pending government legislation to 
stiffen penalties for driving violations, was an extention of the 
March 11 transportation strike undertaken by transportation workers 
represented by two larger unions, the Union of Professional 
Federations (SUFP) and the Committee of Moroccan Workers (COM). 
(reftel) As the current strike plows on, the impact is again 
affecting the Moroccan economy.  Gas shortages and increased food 
costs are stirring some resentment towards what the public perceives 
is a government insensitive to the hardships of the working class. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Casablanca's port has been functioning with limitations and 
under police protection.  Morocco's agricultural sector has reported 
heavy losses mid-week as loaded delivery trucks were intercepted by 
strikers.  There have been isolated reports of violence against those 
who choose to work.  Taxi drivers have been pulled from their 
vehicles and beaten and there have been reports of attacks against 
busses and trucks.  As of Friday, it appears that the strikes may be 
easing up as a few taxis can be seen in and around Rabat and 
Casablanca.  The Prime Minister is now engaged and has agreed to 
speak with drivers representatives early next week, as negotiations 
with the Minister of Transport Karim Ghellab continue throughout the 
weekend.  End Summary 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The impact of the second transportation strike, of urban 
and long distance taxi drivers in cities around Morocco, has been 
significant.  The action, launched by a group of 46 taxi drivers' 
unions and associations, large and miniscule, has been disrupting the 
country.  Initially, the strike called for a 48-hour work stoppage 
beginning on Tuesday April 3.  Partway into the second day, the 
strike was extended for a second 48 hours due to stalled 
negotiations. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The large number of organizations involved, internal 
struggles, leadership instability, and most importantly lack of 
consensus among the unions themselves at the desired outcome, is 
making a quick solution impossible.  Is shelving of the proposed 
harsher driving code, or simply amending the fines and penalties, the 
desired outcome?  Even the largest Moroccan unions involved in this 
action are at odds.  At exactly the same time the Democratic 
Confederation of Workers (CDT) announced that the strike was 
suspended because the Prime Minister had agreed to a meeting on April 
9, the Moroccan Workers Union (UMT) announced that the strike would 
continue and threatened to bring other sectors into the action. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) This lack of consensus seems to be causing a breakdown in 
the unity of the strikers.  Friday morning, on the streets of 
Casablanca, taxis with passengers were spotted for the first time in 
nearly four days.  When asked if the strike was over, the driver 
responded "half and half."  He said he was told that negotiations are 
underway and a solution is imminent.  However, at the same time only 
a handful of drivers were seen on the streets at all.  We have heard 
reports of gouging by underground taxis this week.  One Consulate 
employee was told a trip that normally costs 10 Moroccan dirham would 
cost him 100 dirham.  Despite the fact that many Moroccans cannot 
afford to pay these fees and have been walking to work or taking the 
infrequent city busses, many others have been unable to get to their 
places of employment at all.  The problem with the lack of taxis has 
been somewhat mitigated since this is Moroccan school vacation week 
and there are fewer people traveling.  Some speculate this is the 
reason the taxi drivers decided to hold their strike this week as 
opposed to participating for more than one day in the March 11-15 
strike. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The potential repercussions of the strike could be 
serious.  Representatives of the Association of the Producers and 
Exporters of Fruits and Vegetables, while personally supportive of 
the action against the new driving code, are experiencing serious 
problems.  The association claims that in addition to attacks on 
their drivers, their trucks, loaded with local produce from the 
Agadir region, are being intercepted by strikers and held at depots 
near Agadir where the produce is going to rot.  The losses of the 
goods, on their way to the port of Casablanca for shipment to Europe 
and for local distribution, are said to be close to 50 million dirham 
each day.  Moreover, a dramatic increase in the price of produce that 
is finding its way to domestic markets is causing anxiety. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  There are varying degrees of impact around the country. 
We have reports that taxis and trucks were running as usual in 
Tangier where the only impact may be a slight increase in produce 
prices.  Marrakech, on the other hand may be feeling the impact.  As 
Morocco's most popular tourist destination, the lack of taxis in the 
city has the potential for significant financial damage.  There were 
also reports on Thursday of a possible gas shortage at the Marrakech 
airport if the situation did not ease up soon to allow more gas 
deliveries. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) There is a genuine fear on the part of the government that 
if the strike continues much longer the rising cost of staples could 
prove more damaging to the economy.  Friday, Casablancans have 
experienced a doubling or even tripling of prices in the local 
markets.  Morocco has a history of riots over food prices and the GOM 
is well aware of this factor in the background.  The Prime Minister 
is himself now involved. There is speculation that he canceled an 
official trip to Romania to avert the impending fallout from the 
strike and to meet with the union representatives on Monday, April 9. 
 This very public high level interest may be soothing the ruffled 
feathers of the striking drivers encouraging more to return to work. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment: Without a doubt, the strike is causing growing 
difficulties for Moroccans.  Despite that fact, however, there seems 
to be some public support for the strikers.  There is a public 
perception that the GOM does not fully appreciate the challenges in 
the life of the average Moroccan.  Many believe that unemployment, 
underemployment, lack of adequate housing, and everyday hardships 
experienced by Moroccans, in the view of many, should be address 
ahead of an issue like the new traffic code.  End Comment 
 
GREENE