07DAMASCUS371
Syria/Iran, Syria/Palestinian Authority, Syria/Iraq,
Thu Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0371/01 1090923
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 190923Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3338
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6743
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4475
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3094
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7623
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1693
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5030
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1237
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7362UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Iran, Syria/Palestinian Authority, Syria/Iraq, 
Palestinian Territories, Lebanon, Independence Day, Syria/Israel 
(4/17-18) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Apr. 18 reported the Apr. 17 visit to 
Damascus of Iranian FM Manuchehr Mottaki, during which he held talks 
with Foreign Minister Mouallem and senior Foreign Ministry officials 
on bilateral relations and regional issues. 
 
Papers also reported VP Shara's meeting on Apr. 16 with former 
Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmad Qurei, during which Shara confirmed 
Syria's readiness to support Palestinian national unity, and called 
for adoption of practical measures consistent with the Riyadh Summit 
resolutions to lift the siege on Palestinians.  During the meeting, 
VP Shara was briefed on efforts to rebuild and reactivate the 
Palestinian Liberation Organization.  Qurei expressed appreciation 
for Syria's support for the Palestinian people and their just cause. 
 Qurei also met with FM Mouallem on Apr. 16;  talks focused on the 
latest developments in the Palestinian arena after the formation of 
a national unity government. 
 
Papers featured Deputy FM Faisal al-Miqdad's speech in Geneva on 
Apr. 17 at the International Conference on Addressing the 
Humanitarian Needs of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons 
inside Iraq and in Neighboring Countries.  Miqdad stressed Syria's 
support for the full spectrum of Iraqi people and condemned 
targeting of Iraqi civilians and their national institutions. 
 
Government-owned Al-Thawra on Apr. 17 cited a press conference held 
in Damascus by Minister of Information Muhsen Bilal on the 
forthcoming "International Conference on Arab-Islamic Media to 
Support Palestinians" scheduled for Damascus on April 30.  Minister 
Bilal renewed Syria's condemnation of terrorist acts which target 
Iraqi civilians, stressing that Syria stands by Iraq's unity and 
territorial integrity, Iraqi reconciliation and withdrawal of 
foreign troops from Iraq.  He added, "the Conference will tackle a 
number of inquiries on Arab media discourse, the concept of 
resistance in the Arab media and the role of media in distinguishing 
between terrorism and the right of resisting occupation."  Minister 
Bilal asserted that if Israel continues to defy international 
resolutions then resistance will be the only option to regain 
rights. 
 
On the anniversary of Syria's independence, commentators stressed 
the values and significance of independence, maintaining that Syria 
continues to reject occupation and resist aggression. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"The UN praises Syria's efforts to accommodate Iraqi refugees. 
Miqdad:  The world community is called upon to help Iraqis" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/18) 
 
"UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon:  Syria hosts Iraqi refugees and 
provides them with all means for a respectable life" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/18) 
 
"Iranian FM Mottaki after his meeting with FM Mouallem:  We support 
what the Iraq neighboring countries have agreed upon at the latest 
conference in Baghdad" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
 
"Iranian FM pays a quick visit to Damascus and meets with Mouallem. 
Mottaki:  Iran's participation in Iraq's neighboring countries 
conference is under review" (Independent al-Watan, 4/18) 
 
"Shara and Qurai reiterate the importance of an Arab move to lift 
siege on Palestinians" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/18) 
 
"Under the patronage of President Asad, an International Conference 
on Arab-Islamic Media will be held in Damascus with the 
participation of 350 media representatives.  Syrian Information 
Minister Bilal:  We want to be masters of our land" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/17) 
 
"During Bush's era:  A massacre at Virginia university killing 32 
students" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/17) 
 
 
"Lahoud calls on the UN not to interfere in Lebanon's domestic 
affairs" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/17) 
 
"The Palestinian government calls on Abbas to stop meetings with 
Olmert.  Hanieh:  Prisoner swap includes all prisoners, including 
Marwan al-Bargouti" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/17) 
"Russia, China, and Switzerland establish full diplomatic relations 
with the Palestinian government" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/17) 
 
"Al-Sadr bloc officially withdraws from the Iraqi government.  Two 
US soldiers killed during an assault against al-Ramadi" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/17) 
 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------------- 
 
"Poisonous Israeli Balloons" 
 
---------------------------- 
 
Dr. Imad Shueibi, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(4/17):  "Under local, regional, and international media cover, 
Israel released a new balloon called Ibrahim Sulayman.  The external 
surface of this balloon carries some oxygen so that Israel's agents 
in the Intensive Care Unit can breathe poison and use it, through 
their media agendas and fifth column convoys, to cast doubts on the 
positions of the country of steadfastness and national, pan-Arab, 
and ethical principles, the principles which the wise national 
leadership, which is in accord with its people, waged a long 
struggle to uphold, rejecting all dictates, pressures, temptations, 
and threats from parties near and far. 
 
"What Sulayman said came from his own imagination and illusionary 
visions or megalomania.  Or perhaps he was used and deceived by the 
engineers of the Zionist-American media policy.  But their plans and 
strategies once again collapse on the walls of national and pan-Arab 
principles. 
 
"Syria is the country of resistance, steadfastness, and 
confrontation against aggression and injustice.  Through its support 
for the resistance, it scored all these victories and defeated the 
Israeli aggression on south Lebanon. 
 
"Syria is the country that embraces the Palestinian resistance, 
which dealt blows to the Zionist occupation army and forced it to 
withdraw from Gaza. It is the country that firmly rejected the 
American occupation of Iraq and exposed its political dimensions and 
colonialist objectives, namely, looting Iraq's wealth, smashing 
Iraq's military capabilities and infrastructure, and sowing 
sectarian and social strife to divide Iraq into mini-states that 
serve the interests of Zionism.  Syria is the country that restored 
security to fraternal Lebanon and protected it from the devastating 
civil war.  And Syria is the country that removed despair from the 
heart of the Arab and Islamic nation. 
 
"Syria is the country that accepted a just and comprehensive peace, 
not capitulation, so as to achieve prosperity and implement 
developmental, cultural, industrial, and tourism programs for the 
wellbeing of this great people, who made great sacrifices and showed 
wonderful steadfastness." 
 
---------------- 
 
"Damascus Peace" 
 
---------------- 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jammali, a columnist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (4/17):  "Whenever the world comes close to 
realizing that Israel is the party that rejects peace, evades its 
requirements, and obstructs every constructive effort to revive the 
peace process, the Israeli government comes out to the world with 
 
 
talk about secret negotiations between Israel and Syria to achieve 
peace.... 
 
"Israel's talk about covert talks with Syria or talks through 
unofficial channels is mere lying....  Israel's rejection of the 
Arab peace plan and of Syria's call for resuming peace negotiations 
revealed to the whole world that Israel does not want peace based on 
international resolutions, peace that can be achieved through public 
talks with international participation.... 
 
"Syria has rejected and always rejects any secret negotiations 
because its policy toward peace is based on a clear position and 
rejection of deals and bargains over rights.  Damascus' declared and 
firm peace is the peace that guarantees the return of rights in full 
and ends the Israeli occupation, with all its military and 
settlement symbols, in the Golan, the Palestinian territories, and 
south Lebanon.  Israel knows quite well the road that leads to this 
peace:  It begins and ends with serious, frank and public talks that 
take place not with individuals but officially with Syria, when 
Israel proves that it is seriously and openly ready to accept such 
peace free of the policies of maneuver, evasion, lies, and 
hypocrisy...." 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
"The Route to Peace Is Public and Clear" 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Sawwan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(4/17):  "Syria "does not need anyone to talk in its name or on its 
behalf.... 
 
"Syria not only rejects secret talks, it also refuses to beg for 
peace.  It has nothing to hide as it publicly and clearly insists on 
the achievement of a just and comprehensive peace in the light, and 
never in the dark or under the table, as Israel wants and repeatedly 
tries, with a view to distorting and casting doubts on the Syrian 
position through announcements about secret or unofficial talks or 
meetings...." 
 
---------------------- 
 
"Memory of a Homeland" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(4/17):  "Independence Day celebrations take on additional 
dimensions at this stage, in light of the looming dangers and the 
pressure Syria is coming under.... 
 
"It is impossible for Syria to accept anything less than full 
independence.  This is what made Syria a key regional player able to 
influence events.... 
 
"On Evacuation Day, the scene appears once again in all its glory 
and depth, sowing another seed toward the achievement of the larger 
evacuation through the restoration of the remaining occupied 
lands...." 
 
Corbin