07KABUL1267
THE AFGHAN NATIONAL POLICE: WHERE WE ARE, WHERE
Sun Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6059
PP RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHPW RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #1267/01 1051442
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151442Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7522
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3959
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3582UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 KABUL 001267 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A, S/CRS, S/CT, 
EUR/RPM, INL/CIVPOL, OIG/ISP 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG, 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN 
OSD FOR SHIVERS 
CENTCOM FOR CSTC-A, CG CJTF-76, POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR SNAR ASIG PREL PGOV ASEC NATO AF
SUBJECT: THE AFGHAN NATIONAL POLICE: WHERE WE ARE, WHERE 
WE'RE GOING 
 
REF: A) NOVEMBER 2006 DOS-DOD OIG POLICE TRAINING AND 
     READINESS ASSESSMENT B) KABUL 115 C) 06 
     KABUL 5566 D) KABUL 1049 E) KABUL 435 
 
¶1. Summary: This cable uses the opportunity offered by 
a tasking from the Joint Department of State - 
Department of Defense Inspector General Interagency 
Assessment of Afghanistan Police Training and 
Readiness (ref A) to review recent progress in Afghan 
police development and to describe ongoing programs. 
It will also sketch out a way forward over the next 
twelve months and also look at several long-term 
issues.  Most important is the critical need for the 
U.S. and international community to remain engaged 
over the long term, both financially and in developing 
the human capital required not only to achieve 
progress in the police sector but also in areas of 
rule of law and governance.  End summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. The Afghan National Police (ANP) has made 
significant strides since tribal leaders and warlords 
filled the security vacuum in the wake of the 
Taliban,s defeat five years ago.  It will take at 
least several more years, however, before the ANP 
develops the capacity to serve as an effective 
security partner and is able to adequately enforce the 
rule of law and order in provinces and districts 
throughout Afghanistan.  The urgent need to deploy 
forces capable of responding to emerging security 
threats competes with longer term institutional goals 
of establishing a civilian police force focused on 
community law enforcement and maintaining a sharp 
distinction between police and military roles. 
Moreover, weaknesses within the Ministry of Interior 
(MOI) and ANP have seriously impeded police 
effectiveness.  These include corrupt and/or 
incompetent leadership, limited control over 
provincial police structures, low institutional 
capacity at all levels, lack of coordination among and 
between donor countries and the Government of 
Afghanistan.   Endemic corruption and the negative 
externalities of the drug trade  exacerbate these 
challenges. 
 
¶3. Until 2005, U.S. activity in the security sector 
was focused on training the Afghan National Army. 
Germany, the lead nation for police under the Bonn 
Agreement, concentrated its efforts on building long- 
term institutional capacity, particularly through 
funding and providing personnel support for the Kabul 
Police Academy, a long-term training facility for 
police officers.  The U.S. set up a Central Training 
Center and seven Regional Training Centers to provide 
basic and in-service training to police personnel of 
all ranks.  Additionally, MOI reform was initiated, 
and the mentoring program began at the general officer 
level.  The focus on long-term development came with 
near term costs, however.  In particular, beginning in 
summer 2006 the deteriorating security situation in 
the south, southeast, and selected other areas around 
the country demanded immediate attention. 
 
¶4. The USG in mid-2005 decided to significantly increase 
its involvement in police training and equipping.  A 
Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the 
Department of State and the Department of Defense 
whereby DoD was tasked to direct, with policy guidance 
from the Chief of Mission, all USG efforts to 
organize, train, and equip Afghan security forces. 
DOS retained oversight authority and responsibility 
for the Embassy Kabul comprehensive police plan.  This 
 
KABUL 00001267  002 OF 007 
 
 
was accompanied by an influx of funding, although some 
of the effects, particularly in the distribution of 
weapons and ammunition, were not felt for almost 12 
months.   In early 2006 the USG, through the Combined 
Security Assistance Command-Afghanistan (CSTC-A) began 
implementation of a "systems approach" to reforming 
the Ministry of Interior.  Together with pay and rank 
reform and other programmatic elements, including 
closer cooperation among donor countries, there has 
been some progress toward addressing the challenges 
faced by the MOI and ANP.  The next twelve months will 
see further movement in a positive direction, provided 
that these activities receive sufficient financial and 
political support from all donor nations, and that 
Afghan senior leadership remains committed to the 
difficult effort to reform the MOI and ANP. 
 
2006 Programs 
------------- 
 
¶5. 2006 saw substantial progress in several key areas, 
as discussed in the DOS/DOD Inspector General,s 
report: 
 
- Rank reform.  The first two stages of a proposed 
four-stage process of rank reform have been completed. 
The number of generals, which was exceedingly top 
heavy, has been reduced to an appropriate level for a 
62,000-person police force.  Specifically, 120 two- 
and three-star generals and 235 brigadier generals 
have been reduced to 31 and 86 respectively.  The rank 
reform process consisted of a written exam and 
weighted application followed by international vetting 
by the United Nations Assistance Mission to 
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to determine if the candidate 
possessed any human rights violations, evidence of 
previous corruption or administrative malfeasance. 
While the Selection Board was an internal MOI body, 
the German Police Program Office (GPPO), CTSC-A, and 
UNAMA provided technical advisors and assisted in 
administering the process.  In general the Selection 
Board was able to remove several of the most 
incompetent police generals.  There were 
irregularities in the process, some of which were 
addressed through a four-month probation review of 
fourteen police officers.  This resulted in 10 
officers being fired, 2 confirmed in place, one 
transferred, and one removed from consideration due to 
illness.  Concerns remain that many of those who were 
appointed to senior positions through the Selection 
Board may have been chosen on the basis of political 
or personal connections.  In some cases it also 
appears that officers with strong paper credentials 
were not well-suited to the demands of the job.  Many 
of these were changed out in a subsequent action taken 
by President Karzai in mid-January 2007 (ref B). 
While there remain substantial weaknesses in MOI and 
ANP leadership, rank reform has been a positive step 
toward the professionalization of the police force. 
 
-Pay distribution:  Corruption has had a major impact 
on the salary distribution process.  Until recently, 
the MOI used a cadre of "trusted agents" to distribute 
salaries to police in the provincial centers and 
outlying districts.  At each step opportunities 
existed for police chiefs and other officials to take 
a cut, resulting in the patrolmen only receiving a 
fraction of what they were due.  The use of unverified 
police lists also led to the creation of "ghost 
patrolmen," in which police chiefs inflated their 
personnel rosters in order to obtain larger illegal 
payments.  Recent actions to institute a three-phase 
program with the overall intent of paying policemen by 
direct deposit to their individual bank accounts have 
 
KABUL 00001267  003 OF 007 
 
 
made enormous strides toward alleviating many of these 
abuses (Ref C).  Problems remain in regularly and 
routinely providing pay to outlying districts and 
cutting out remaining chokepoints for corruption.  The 
PRT Officers and US Embassy led assessment team 
continue to uncover instances in which patrolmen are 
not paid on time, and this issue will require constant 
vigilance 
 
- Regional Commands and the Role of Governors:  In 
late spring 2006, the Ministry of Interior created 
police commands at the regional level.  The action was 
designed to address two issues:  the lack of 
coordination between ANA and ANP, and the power held 
by many governors over provincial police forces which 
often led to misallocation of resources, favoritism, 
and corruption.  At the same time this action was 
designed to extend the authority of the MoI into the 
provinces and also improve command and control.  The 
police regional commands are in the same provincial 
centers as the ANA Corps Commands, and are led by a 
two-star general (the same rank as the ANA 
leadership).  They were originally located inside the 
Regional Training Centers but other facilities have 
since been found or built for them.  The change has in 
general empowered the police leadership and made it 
more responsive through the MOI chain of command, 
although not all attendant issues have been resolved. 
The ANP regional commands are severely undermanned and 
have limited fiscal resources at their disposal. 
Article 4 of the Afghan Constitution provides 
provincial governors with vaguely defined powers over 
ANP units.  While this Article has been reinterpreted 
by the Minister of Interior and Attorney General in an 
attempt to empower the regional commanders by 
specifying that the governors have only an advisory 
role over police forces, many governors continue to 
have de facto command and control over the units in 
their provinces. 
 
- Equipment distribution:  Due to bureaucratic delays 
in Washington and the long timeline for equipment 
deliveries, many patrolmen in 2006 still did not have 
sufficient weapons, ammunition, vehicles, or other 
appropriate equipment to face the threat.  That 
bottleneck has been alleviated somewhat and weapons 
are flowing to police units.  However the standing up 
of new forces and reprioritizing of units such as the 
border police mean that fully equipping the ANP is 
likely to take at least 18 more months. 
 
- Rebalancing:  In response to a perceived security 
threat in spring-summer 2006, the MOI, in close 
coordination with CSTC-A and with the agreement of the 
German Police Program, attempted to implement a 
revision of the ANP fielding plan that would 
temporarily increase the number of patrolmen in 
certain key districts by a total of 2,100, move 
standby police units to the south, and stand down the 
highway police with the intention of reintegrating 
these individuals into other ANP units.  Rebalancing 
proved to be difficult on several fronts and achieved 
only limited success.  The highway police have only 
recently been disbanded, the number of patrolmen 
willing to leave their current posts and move to the 
south was far less than expected, and most of the 
standby police units performed poorly due to 
inadequate leadership and insufficient quantities of 
equipment.  The recruiting effort authorized by 
rebalancing eventually led to the development of the 
Afghan National Auxiliary Police concept (see below). 
 
Ongoing Programs 
---------------- 
 
KABUL 00001267  004 OF 007 
 
 
 
¶6. Several ANP programs are ongoing which should lead 
to short- and long-term improvements in the force. 
 
- Systems approach to MOI reform:  CSTC-A has embedded 
over 65 mentors throughout the Ministry of Interior to 
assist the ministry in building capacity.  This 
approach to MOI reform encompasses fifteen separate 
systems -- examples include personnel management, 
training and logistics.  Each system includes a 
"capabilities milestones" approach to assessing MOI 
capacity.  Thus, rather than focusing on the 
individual, progress is sought by mentoring the entire 
system.  In most categories the MOI is still in the 
early stages of being able to operate independently. 
The goal is for all systems to be fully independent by 
December 2008, although in some categories significant 
challenges remain to reaching that goal on time. 
 
- Rank reform:  Rank reform continues with the 
selection and deployment of field grade officers 
(colonels, lieutenant colonels, and majors) in the 
near-term and testing of company grade officers 
(captains and lieutenants).  The company grade 
officers will be selected and reassigned later in 
summer 2007.  As rank reform proceeds further into the 
ranks, it is expected that the police force will 
gradually become more professionalized and less 
tainted by corruption.  This result will not be 
achieved overnight, particularly since many poorly 
qualified police leaders still have strong political 
connections to national and provincial decision 
makers.  Over the long term, however, rank reform 
should show significant results. 
 
- ANA/ANP pay parity:  As of spring 2007, an 
initiative under review by the Government of 
Afghanistan and the international police community is 
to achieve salary parity between the ANP and Afghan 
National Army.  Although pay and rank reform increases 
the amount received by patrolmen from USD 16/month to 
USD 70/month and pay distribution improvements mean 
they are more likely to received the whole sum, this 
is still not a competitive wage.  ANA soldiers earn 
USD 100/month for duty that is in many ways less 
hazardous than that of police officers, while private 
security companies pay substantially more than the 
ANP.  The Law and Order Trust Fund Afghanistan will 
review the pay situation at its next quarterly 
Steering Committee meeting and is likely to recommend 
pay parity with the ANA. 
 
- Increasing the size of the ANP:  A second proposal 
still under review would, if adopted, increase the 
size of the ANP from a force of 62,000 as agreed in 
the Afghanistan Compact to 82,000.   Through the 
mechanism of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring 
Board (JCMB), a broadly representative working group, 
including members of the international community and 
both Ministry of Interior and Ministry of Finance, has 
met to review the issue.  A decision is expected at 
JCMB V, in early May 2007.  Significant concerns about 
the long-term budget sustainability of a force of this 
size make this a decision that will have to be taken 
at the highest levels of the Afghan government, based 
on the JCMB recommendation.  The GOA will not be able 
to finance this increase, placing the onus for support 
on the international community for what will likely be 
a very long-term commitment.  However the U.S. 
position has been that immediate security needs are 
paramount and without this larger force - with 
concomitant improved training and equipment - the ANP 
will not be able to face difficult challenges 
particularly in isolated areas and along the borders. 
 
KABUL 00001267  005 OF 007 
 
 
 
- Auxiliary Police:  The Afghan National Auxiliary 
Police (ANAP) program was developed in fall 2006 in 
response to an urgent security need in the south and 
east that the rebalancing plan failed to address 
successfully.  The ANAP has been the focus of intense 
effort within the Afghan and international policy 
community, particularly through the mechanisms of the 
Policy Action Group (PAG) and Security Operations 
Group (SOG).  There has been a particular concern to 
make sure that ANAP patrolmen, who receive only very 
limited training (two weeks initially plus three weeks 
of follow-up sustainment training) are properly 
recruited and vetted to prevent them from turning into 
reconstituted militia forces.  Post has been very 
involved in attempting to ensure that these standards 
are met, both by participating in policy-level 
discussions and also by sending teams out to the 
provinces to inspect ANAP recruitment and training. 
See ref D for recent updates in this program and 
remaining problems in implementation. 
 
- ANCOP:  Another new program designed to extend and 
enforce the rule of law throughout the entire country 
of Afghanistan, as well as to counter instability in 
both the cities and remote areas is the Afghan 
National Civil Order Police.  The program, which will 
eventually number 5,000 relatively highly-trained, 
well equipped  patrolmen in a kind of quick-reaction 
force (replacing the present "standby police," who 
have proved ineffective) will deploy either to urban 
areas as riot police or to rural areas to counter 
threats from insurgency or other instability.  While 
this is an important program for building Afghan 
government capacity to deal with security threats, it 
will take some time to be fully operational.  The 
first classes for this program are now training at the 
Regional Training Centers in Herat and Mazar-e Sharif. 
See ref E for further information on ANCOP. 
 
- ANA/ANP Coordination:  Since 2005, the number of 
"green on green" clashes between ANA and ANP has 
sharply diminished, though they still occasionally 
occur.  In order to facilitate coordination, CSTC-A 
has assisted the Ministries of Defense and Interior in 
establishing Joint Regional and Provincial 
Coordination Centers (JRCC) and (JPCC), at which ANA, 
ANP, and National Directorate of Security officers 
work together.  In Kabul, there are ANP liaison 
officers at the National Military Command Center, and 
ANA liaison officers at the National Police Command 
Center.  While the culture of distrust  between the 
two services remains, and JPCCs are not adequately 
manned or effective in all provinces, this is a first 
step toward coordination between the various elements 
in the Afghan National Security Forces. 
 
The Way Ahead 
------------- 
 
¶7. The programs mentioned above are an indication of 
the range of activity occurring in the police sector 
in Afghanistan.  Despite the many challenges that 
remain, there have been significant positive 
improvements in both the training and equipping of 
individual policemen and reforming the leadership and 
institutions in the Ministry of Interior.  However, 
much remains to be done.   Several specialty units 
within the police, such as the border police, ANCOP, 
and ANAP have to be fully trained and 
professionalized.  In the case of ANAP, the program is 
of a short duration and it is expected that some 
patrolmen will enter into the regular police at the 
end or their contract. (Note:  ANAP contracts are for 
 
KABUL 00001267  006 OF 007 
 
 
one year, although the MOI can extend the program for 
a second year if required by the security situation. 
It is hoped that most ANAP who have proved competent 
on the job will choose to join a regular police 
unit.) 
 
¶8.  A significant increase in mentoring coverage at 
the district and company level will be essential to 
improving the quality of the police.  At present, 
police go through training at the regional training 
centers or elsewhere, but there is no follow-on 
supervision in the districts or companies.  As a 
result they are regularly unable to sustain their 
trained level of performance and have difficulty 
maintaining professional standards of conduct.  CSTC-A 
has a plan to increase mentoring coverage at the 
district and company level, depending on the 
availability of both civilian and military resources. 
The ESDP mission supported by the EU, which is 
expected to start in mid-June 2007, will concentrate 
on improving quality at the Ministry, regional and 
provincial levels, and in specialized services such as 
the Criminal Investigation Unit and liaison with the 
justice sector.   The number of civilian police in the 
ESDP mission is not expected to directly allow mentor 
coverage in the districts, but could allow for 
remissioning of US assets to provide this service. 
Also by mid-summer it is expected that the 
International Police Coordination Board will be fully 
functional.  The purpose of this body is to develop a 
joint approach for all the police training in country 
in close coordination with CSTC-A.  It will also 
increase Afghan ownership of the process by giving the 
MOI a more prominent coordinating role. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  The programs described above, and the new 
initiatives planned for this year, are expensive 
financially and require significant commitment in 
human capital.  The requested Security Supplemental 
funding is designed to cover many of the equipment and 
infrastructure needs of the police over the next 
several years.   The problem of police salaries 
remains unresolved.  Salaries are paid by 
international contributions to LOTFA, to which the 
U.S. and EU have historically been the largest donors. 
If, as expected, the size of the police increases by 
one-third, to 82,000, and the pay for patrolmen 
increases by 40 percent, from USD 70 to USD 100, the 
cost of ANP salaries and associated expenses is likely 
to reach USD 200 million a year.  The Government of 
Afghanistan does not, and will not in the near future, 
have the resources to cover this bill, which must be 
paid by the international community.  Over the longer 
term, the GOA,s commitment to international financial 
institutions, particularly the IMF, requires that it 
take on an ever-larger share of this expense. 
Ministry of Finance officials are deeply concerned 
that the cost of the security sector will impact other 
programs, particularly in the social sector, that are 
vital to Afghanistan,s future.  The U.S. and other 
donors must therefore recognize that their financial 
support will continue to be required in order to 
safeguard the security of Afghanistan. 
 
¶10.  Secondly, it must be recognized that developing 
the police sector cannot occur in isolation.  In 
particular, until the justice sector is able to take 
on the responsibility of prosecuting, judging, and 
imprisoning malefactors, the culture of impunity that 
gives rise to corruption and warlordism will not be 
controlled.  The ESDP program,s intent to link police 
 
KABUL 00001267  007 OF 007 
 
 
and justice sector reform will be an important step. 
However, the overall improvement in the law and order 
situation will depend on progress in both arenas. 
 
¶11.  Finally, police leadership is only one aspect of 
a larger governance issue that requires long-term 
support for institutions and in particular the 
development of human capital.  It has been estimated 
that 70 percent of police patrolmen are illiterate. 
Officers are of varying quality, but in general there 
are few competent, professional officers to meet the 
desperate need.  The police academy will gradually 
alleviate this situation, but Afghanistan will require 
a generation to build a literate, capable police 
force.  Our commitment must also be generational. 
This is a slow, arduous, task.  Fully supporting the 
effort both fiscally and with the appropriate levels 
of manpower is the only way to build an Afghanistan 
that is stable, secure, and able to counter the 
challenges of extremism, corruption, and rampant 
criminality -- an Afghanistan in which ordinary people 
can live safely under the rule of law. 
WOOD