07MANAGUA915
FSLN CAUCUS CHIEF DEFENSIVE ON SENSITIVE ISSUES
Wed Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0915/01 1011533
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 111533Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9770
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR NU
SUBJECT: FSLN CAUCUS CHIEF DEFENSIVE ON SENSITIVE ISSUES 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary and Comment: Embassy officials and INR 
analysts met with Edwin Castro, head of the FSLN 
Congressional caucus on 21 March.  Castro was defensive, 
almost to the point of being hostile, and dodged a number of 
questions on FSLN policy issues regarding constitutional 
reforms and trade, although he has spoken with authority in 
the past on such matters.  His demeanor could be the result 
of agitation over the recent criticism in the press for GON 
policies, or may have been because he is uninformed or 
potentially sidelined in the decision-making process.  End 
Summary and Comment. 
 
Vague on Constitutional Reforms 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (C) FSLN members recently met with constitutional analysts 
from Colombia and Mexico to discuss possible reforms.  Castro 
declined to answer a question on why the FSLN has not issued 
a formal proposal as the other parties had, but commented 
that the goal is to encourage "participatory democracy," and 
everything else is "secondary." 
 
¶3. (C) Regarding the FSLN's position on presidential 
re-election, Castro would not give a straight answer, but 
implied that he would support unlimited re-election.  He 
responded, "I am a professor of constitutional law.  In a 
democracy, the people must decide who leads them." 
 
¶4. (C) Castro became agitated when asked about the role of 
the "citizens' councils" established by the Ortega 
administration.  He said that the press and opposition have 
"demonized" the councils, even though past governments have 
made similar efforts to incorporate civil society into the 
policy process.  According to Castro, the councils will 
incorporate existing NGOs, guilds, associations, etc., and 
will not exclude anyone who wishes to participate.  The 
councils will have no budget and will be run on a voluntary 
basis by the citizens.  Local organizations will work with 
local governments and national organizations will work with 
the ministries.  In all cases, the elected officials will be 
in charge of implementing policy.  Castro could not conceive 
of a situation in which the councils and the elected 
officials would disagree on policy, stating, "If the citizens 
do not approve of the actions of the officials, they will 
vote them out." 
 
¶5. (C) Castro claimed that the FSLN had an "excellent" 
meeting with the bishops regarding the citizens' councils and 
agreed to "open lines of communication" with the Episcopal 
Conference.  They "worked out the details" of the Cardinal's 
participation in the Peace and Reconciliation Council.  The 
Cardinal was present, he noted. 
 
Pro-ALBA, Anti-CAFTA 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (C) Castro commented that Nicaragua is a poor country that 
will benefit from ALBA, an agreement that is about "brotherly 
cooperation," not just trade.  He predicted CAFTA will fail 
because it does not address the free movement of labor. 
Castro stated the U.S. should follow the EU model that 
brought Spain and Portugal out of poverty to help Latin 
America.  At the very least, Castro believed the U.S. should 
"indemnify" small producers negatively affected by CAFTA to 
address the "asymmetries" in our economies.  Castro claimed 
that the Finance Ministry (under the Bolanos administration) 
released a report in 2005 indicating that CAFTA will generate 
more poverty in Nicaragua.  (Note: The study actually reports 
that CAFTA will not decrease poverty in rural areas and uses 
projections that do not incorporate all relevant data.  End 
Note.) 
 
Defensive on Murillo, Aleman 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) When asked if Ortega spouse Rosario Murillo was active 
in government, Castro stated that she is a strong first lady 
"along the lines of Hillary Clinton" and has not done 
anything inappropriate.  He offered no comment on convicted 
ex-President Arnoldo Aleman's new-found freedom, granted by a 
Sandinista official, to move about the country at will. 
Castro replied, "What has that to do with me? He's not our 
problem." 
 
Upcoming Visit and Ties to the U.S. 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (U) Castro stated he would soon travel to Alaska for a 
whaling conference, as an NGO rep, not a GON official.  He 
mentioned that he frequently travels to the U.S. and has a 
brother that has lived in Orlando for 40 years and currently 
works as a senior executive for Oracle. 
TRIVELLI