07MANAGUA984
RESIGNATION OF NICARAGUAN OFFICIAL FROM ANTI-TIP
Thu Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0016
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0984/01 1091546
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 191546Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9866
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000984 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE TO WHA/CEN GSCHIFFER, WHA/PPC MPUCCETTI, AND G/TIP 
BFLECK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/19/2017 
TAGS: KCRM KWMN PHUM PREL SMIG ELAB NU
SUBJECT: RESIGNATION OF NICARAGUAN OFFICIAL FROM ANTI-TIP 
COALITION, A TROUBLING SIGN 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 07 00796 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 07 00882 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Maria Gabriela Zuniga, Program Director of 
the National Coalition Against Trafficking in Persons, 
tendered her resignation to the Ministry of Government last 
week, citing personal reasons for her decision.  She confided 
to us that the working conditions and culture of secrecy 
under the Ortega government made it impossible for her to 
play any effective role within the Ministry of Government or 
in the Coalition.  Instead, she intends to continue working 
on the trafficking in persons issue outside the government 
sphere, and could find a position with one of the major NGOs 
dedicated to the issue in Nicaragua.  She was one of the top 
candidates selected to participate in the International Law 
Enforcement Academy's (ILEA) anti-TIP training course 
scheduled for San Salvador later this month.  She recently 
completed an International Visitor's Program with the 
Department of State, and she has been a key contact for 
information regarding the government's anti-trafficking 
activities, and the main source of government information 
essential to completing the Department's annual trafficking 
in persons report.  Her departure will be a loss to our 
efforts to monitor Nicaragua's anti-TIP activities and 
encourage a more effective government response to the 
problem.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Losing an Asset 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) Over the past two and a half years, post has 
developed a close working relationship with Maria Gabriela 
Zuniga, Program Director of the National Coalition against 
Trafficking in Persons.  Although still at the beginning of 
her professional career, Zuniga has proven to be a leader 
in terms of generating government interest in the issue of 
trafficking in persons, developing a National Plan of Action, 
and working across agencies and civil society organizations 
to promote an integral approach to the problem.  She has 
become a valuable asset to the Embassy in her area of 
expertise, and has been cooperative and forthcoming in 
providing information to political officers during both the 
human rights report and trafficking in persons annual 
reporting exercises (Reftel A).  She was selected to 
participate in an International Visitors Program in February. 
 
¶3.  (C) Although there were rumors soon after Ortega took 
office that Zuniga would be swept up as part of the new 
administration's attempt to clean house, we were relieved 
when the Ministry of Government selected Zuniga as one of its 
leading candidates to participate in the ILEA-sponsored 
"Trafficking in Persons Course for Law Enforcement 
Professionals" in San Salvador April 23 to May 4 (Reftel B). 
We felt encouraged that this meant the Ortega government was 
serious about continuing the commitment to addressing the TIP 
problem.  Zuniga's decision to step down from her government 
position means she is ineligible to participate in this 
conference, and that a less experienced alternate from her 
organization will go in her place. 
 
Resignation was Personal Choice, but... 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (C)  When we received the news that Zuniga had decided to 
leave her position within the Ministry of Government after 
serving for almost three years, and making a name for herself 
in the trafficking in persons field, we became concerned that 
she had been forced to resign.  In contrast to the spate of 
dismissals of government officials--from both politically 
appointed and civil service ranks--Zuniga maintains her 
decision was voluntary.  During a candid meeting we held with 
her last week, she explained that for her own "sanity" she 
had to leave the position because she was at a point where 
she could no longer perform her job given the silence and 
secrecy permeating the Ministry of Government under the 
leadership of the Ortega government.  Zuniga described a 
dysfunctional and paralyzing working environment that left 
people demoralized and made it "impossible" to coordinate 
actions or make decisions at an internal level. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Zuniga contends that under this administration, the 
Ministers are not given any decisionmaking power, and are 
mere "puppets," whose strings are pulled directly by 
President Ortega or First Lady Rosario Murillo, the 
administration's Director of Communications and Citizenry. 
She explained that despite her repeated efforts to meet with 
her supervisor, the Vice Minister of Government, she failed 
and was virtually ostracized.  Given these conditions, Zuniga 
felt she had no other choice but to resign. 
 
Departure Augurs Poorly for Government's Anti-TIP Plans 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (C)  Zuniga also harbors doubts about the Ortega 
government's commitment and political will to continue to 
address the issue of trafficking, asserting that it doesn't 
much matter if someone at her level is committed, if the top 
leadership level is not.  Zuniga is also convinced that only 
constant outside pressure from civil society and 
organizations like the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) and Casa Alianza will keep the government 
focused on combating trafficking in persons.  She clarified, 
however, that TIP is not the sole responsibility of the 
Ministry of Government, but rather entails a broader 
commitment from other government agencies.  She suggested 
that other government agencies had failed to shoulder their 
share of responsibility. 
 
¶7. (C)  Zuniga explained that her experience is not unique, 
confiding that colleagues in other agencies and ministries, 
including Foreign Affairs, Family, and Immigration, were also 
leaving of their own accord or being forced out, including 
some Sandinistas.  Echoing reports we have heard from other 
disenchanted and sidelined officials, the Ortega-Murillo 
cabal does not trust anyone who is not part of its inner 
circle.  For example, the director of information for 
Immigration was fired, likely because the new administration 
doubted his loyalty. She mentioned that the person who will 
probably replace her on the Coalition comes with no prior TIP 
experience. 
 
Looking Ahead to NGOs 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) On a more positive note, Zuniga looks forward to 
continuing to work the issue outside the government sector, 
possibly with the IOM.  She and IOM National Director Raul 
Rivas have been collaborating on a National Anti-TIP Action 
Plan, which she believes is an effective project that could 
produce tangible results and bring Nicaragua into full 
compliance with international anti-trafficking standards. 
She reiterated, however, that any action by the government 
will depend on continued external and international pressure. 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIVELLI