07PARIS1537
France's Presidential Candidates' Views on the Digital
Tue Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO8224
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHFR #1537/01 1071622
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171622Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6535
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAFCC/FCC WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001537 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP, EUR/WE, AND EUR/ERA 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR JMCHALE, KSCHAGRIN, AND CHINKLEY 
FCC/INTERNATIONAL FOR TWEISLER 
COMMERCE FOR NTIA CSPECK AND ITA JBURTON 
JUSTICE FOR KWILLNER 
BRUSSELS FOR USEU JUNDERWOOD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS KIPR ETRD FR
SUBJECT: France's Presidential Candidates' Views on the Digital 
Economy 
 
 
Not for Internet distribution 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The emergence of a new generation of candidates and voters 
is helping define France's response to Internet growth and 
regulation, electronic commerce, and new technologies.  For the 
first time in a presidential campaign, this is an issue of political 
debate.  The Forum of Internet Rights, a private/public body that 
advises the GOF on internet policy, has held a series of forums in 
which leading political parties present proposals on internet 
policy.  All of the candidates are keen to encourage the extension 
through public and private partnerships of high-speed internet cable 
networks to ensure greater access and business growth, particularly 
among small and medium enterprises.  At the same time, they 
emphasize different approaches: the UMP Center-Right Party proposes 
the creation of a Junior Minister in charge of new technologies, 
while the Socialist and Center UDF favor a French style Small 
Business Act to spur the digital economy.   The Forum plans to 
produce a booklet summarizing these positions in advance of the 
first round of voting April 22.  End of Summary. 
 
The Socialist Party: Promoting equality and SMEs 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶2.  (SBU)  Vincent Feltesse, who coordinates internet policy for the 
Socialist Party, launched on March 27 the Forum series on behalf of 
Segolene Royal.  He highlighted Royal's intention to reduce the 
digital divide in France, citing the Internet as a key tool in 
creating equality throughout France.  Pointing to a recent report by 
former Socialist Prime Minister Michel Rocard, Feltesse called for a 
French "Small Business Act" in favor of small and medium-sized 
companies in the digital environment. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  While the Socialists support strengthening copyright 
regulation, they are very unhappy with the recently implemented 
Digital Copyright Law, Feltesse noted.  In an interview to online 
journal "PCinpact" on April 11, the Socialist Presidential contender 
pledged to review the law following extensive consultations with 
public and private players.  One outcome of this review, according 
to Feltesse, could lead to an administrative reform within the 
French government. (Note:  While Feltesse did not elaborate, GOF 
contacts have told us that the Socialist Party would be interested 
in merging the Conseil Superieur de l'Audovisuel (CSA) and ARCEP, 
the regulatory bodies that respectively oversee development of 
audiovisual content and the infrastructure delivering content to the 
public.   End note.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Feltesse explained his party's view that France can 
benefit from global engagement in free software development or 
shareware.  The Socialist Party recognizes the value of this 
collective effort and is willing to promote and finds means of 
structuring free software development.  He also highlighted internet 
security as an issue in the upcoming election. He said that internet 
business would increase only if potential consumers were confident 
of the security of their information. 
 
The Center-Right UMP: a minister for new technologies 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶5.  (SBU)  On April 3, Minister for Small and Medium-sized Companies 
Renaud Dutreil unveiled the UMP (Union for a Popular Movement) 
ruling party's platform.  Dutreil, who is undoubtedly the GOF's most 
technology-savvy minister, stressed the need for very high-speed 
internet to cover 80 percent of French territory through 
infrastructure built through private/public partnerships.  He called 
for a simplification of all existing legislation and administrative 
bodies in the sector (including the new authority on 
interoperability) and announced center-right candidate Nicholas 
Sarkozy's intention to establish a Junior Minister for New 
Technologies, probably under the Ministry of Economy, Finance, and 
Industry.  (Technology issues now fall under the under the Junior 
Minister of Industry, in the same ministry.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Dutreil stressed that it was urgent to spur the digital 
economy over the next five years.  Among other measures, he proposed 
that small and medium-sized businesses and medical professions be 
properly trained to use the internet to encourage growth and make 
France more competitive.  He further noted that quality of service 
would have to be improved as there are currently some 20,000 pending 
complaints before the courts from frustrated triple play 
 
PARIS 00001537  002 OF 002 
 
 
subscribers.  Finally, he advocated a lighter regulatory touch 
regarding content. 
 
Centrist UDF: E-tool to educate and promote SMEs 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶7.  (SBU)  Jean Dionis du Sejour, a UDF (Union for French Democracy) 
member of parliament outlined on April 4 the key themes of Francois 
Bayrou's thinking on technology and communication issues.  According 
to Du Sejour, the UDF would introduce a "university" to educate 
members of Parliament on key internet and communications issues so 
that they can better legislate on such topics.  Du Sejour noted that 
the debate in parliament on the controversial French Copyright bill 
(mandating interoperability of systems) was a "disaster" which 
underscored the lack of any real knowledge among French elected 
leaders on the complex issues associated with the internet.  Du 
Sejour noted that while Bayrou's personal inclination is to favor 
"freeware" and open access to information on the net, he is 
increasingly aware of the need to protect IPR and to ensure 
appropriate protection of copyrights and payment for the rights of 
artists.   Du Sejour stressed that the UDF opposes the use of 
"universal licenses." 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Du Sejour said that the UDF would support the idea of a 
"small business act" to assist small and medium enterprises in 
improving access to, and usage of, the internet.  He also noted that 
France needs more fiber optic linkages to assure the fullest use of 
the internet by government, enterprises, schools and the general 
public.   The UDF would also aim to ensure that every pupil in 
France had a lap top.  Du Sejour commented that the French 
government could not, and should not, pay for all of this.  Private 
sector partners are needed, with the State playing largely the role 
of facilitator and regulator. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Du Sejour stressed that the internet can play an 
important role in "democratizing" France and reducing the social 
divides that exist today.  However, he noted that to do so, the gap 
between those who have access to the internet and fully understand 
its benefits and potential, and those who remain unconnected, must 
be overcome. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶10. (SBU) Following the 2005 French referendum on the European 
Constitution the Internet has played an increasingly important 
political role in France.  Political parties have adapted quickly to 
e-campaigning, but are also focusing on information and 
communication policy issues that previously were not part of the 
mainstream political debate.  The passage of the Digital Copyright 
law, and recent creation of an implementing Regulatory Authority, 
will affect over half of the French population who download or 
otherwise copy material from the internet and will give added 
stimulus to public discussion of internet-related issues. 
Stapleton