07PANAMA637
PANAMA: PANAMENISTA PARTY PRESIDENT LAYS OUT
Mon Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0637/01 1132133
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 232133Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0222
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000637

SIPDIS

SIPDIS

E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/23/2017
TAGS: PGOV ECON PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: PANAMENISTA PARTY PRESIDENT LAYS OUT
POLITICAL VISIONS

REF: PANAMA 563

Classified By: Classified by Counselor for Political Affairs Brian R. N
aranjo. Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d)

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Summary
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

¶1. (C) "Panama has fifteen to twenty years to get its act
together to prevent populism from taking root here,"
Panamenista Party President and presidential candidate Juan
Carlos Varela told POLCOUNS on April 20. Varela stated that,
with the right leadership (ostensibly his), stronger
institutions, and efficient mechanisms to distribute more
equitably economic opportunity and wealth, Panama can hold
back "chavista" populism. He did not respond directly to
questions regarding intra‐Panamenista Party dynamics, but did
note that he is aggressively traveling Panama and working the
Panamenista bases. Varela said that the opposition's
agreement to put forward Aurelio Barria as its own candidate
to be Panama's next Comptroller General represented a
significant watershed in the opposition's efforts to unify.
Though governing Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD)
candidate Carlos Vallarino handily defeated Barria in the
National Assembly vote to select the Comptroller General,
Varela was pleased with the results of hard political work to
organize the opposition behind Barria and said that he hoped
to maintain this unity behind an effort to present draft
legislation to promote greater governmental decentralization
(REFTEL). Varela remained focused on efforts to promote an
inter‐party primary to solidify the opposition behind a sole
challenger to the PRD's future presidential candidate. End
Summary.

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Holding Back Populism
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

¶2. (C) "Panama's next elections need to be understood in the
context of what is happening in this hemisphere with the rise
of Chavez‐inspired populism," Varela explained. "Thankfully,
Panama has political time and space to get its house in
order." Chavista inspired rhetoric did not get much traction
in Panama, he explained, and there was no clear leader in
Panama's "non‐traditional" leftist opposition to galvanize
the "popular classes" like Chavez in Venezuela, Morales in
Bolivia, or Correa in Ecuador. He continued that nonetheless
remarkable economic growth since the U.S. invasion in 1989
had not resulted in significant reductions in Panama's
poverty levels. The Panama Canal Authority (ACP) was akin to
Venezuela's state oil company PDVSA: it dominated the
economy, was the goose that laid the golden eggs, and yet
many Panamanians did not feel that they benefited from that
goose.

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Panama Needs Stronger Institutions, Decentralization
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

¶3. (C) It was essential to strengthen and re‐build Panama's
institutions to strengthen democracy in Panama, Varela said,
and to demonstrate that democracy could deliver the goods in
improving the lives of average Panamanians. He added that a
mechanism had to be found to harness the economic engine of
the Panama Canal to improve the lives of average Panamanians.
The lack of a plan to integrate canal expansion into a
broader economic development effort was the central reason
that Varela took the Panamenista Party into opposition
against the government‐supported October 23, 2006 canal
expansion referendum. While the Torrijos Administration
belatedly promoted such a dialogue to stop the erosion of
support for the dialogue, Varela said now that the UN
Development Programme (UNDP) was facilitating such a dialogue
it was incumbent on him to participate. Though he
acknowledged that he had taken a beating for being the sole
opposition leader to participate in this dialogue, Varela
argued that his participation needed to be understood in the
broader context of his goal to strengthen institutions and to
establish a mechanism to channel and put to work the wealth
generated by the Panama Canal.

¶4. (C) Varela expressed his relieved pleasure that the
opposition was able to unify behind Aurelio Barria as its
candidate to be Panama's next Comptroller General. According
to Varela, the behind the scenes coalition building among
opposition parties and leaders was complicated and difficult.
At one point, Democratic Change (CD) President and
presidential candidate Ricardo Martinelli went public, but
with the wrong name (Octavio Amat), highlighting the
challenges the opposition faced in coordinating and
Martinelli's proclivity to try to steal the spotlight, Varela
noted. While the opposition's candidate was easily defeated
in the National Assembly vote, Varela argued that putting
forward Barria was a watershed since the opposition took a
stand against "increased PRD dominance" of Panama's branches
of government and other independent entities. (Note: In
addition to holding the Presidency, the PRD holds a
comfortable majority in the National Assembly and supports a
proposal to establish a Fifth Chamber (Sala Quinta) with
three additional magistrates that the opposition believes
would tip control of the Supreme Court to the PRD. Also, the
Torrijos Administration and the National Assembly succeeded
in adopting legislation to break up the Technical Judicial
Police (PTJ), named a new Banking Superintendent, and now has
placed Torrijos' Minister of Finance as Comptroller General.)

¶5. (C) Varela said that he hoped that he could galvanize the
opposition behind draft legislation to promote
decentralization, the centerpiece of which would be the
passing of funds to municipalities to decide independently
how to disburse. While not optimistic that this legislative
proposal would actually prevail, Varela said it would draw
attention to the Torrijos' abuse of the funds distributed
through the Community Development Program for Public
Infrastructure (PRODEC). (NOTE: PRODEC is distributing USD
166 million of canal proceeds by identifying projects in each
precinct in Panama. Panama has 620 precincts. A precinct is
composed of a handful of neighborhoods, several precincts
make up a district, and Panama has 75 districts. The first
disbursement will be USD 80 thousand per precinct.)
According to Varela, Torrijos was using PRODEC to undermine
Panama's limited decentralization by cutting out non‐PRD
mayors and councilmen ‐‐ and even some PRD mayors and
councilmen ‐‐ and effectively allowing PRD party bosses to
manage the consultative process by each community to develop
proposals to expend PRODEC's funding. In some cases, such
party bosses were directly linking funding to enlisting
voters into the PRD's ranks.

¶6. (C) Varela also underscored the need to re‐build Panama's
political parties. He railed against the "corporatization of
corruption," what Varela asserted to be the devolution of
parties into political cabals composed of political,
business, labor and other elites seeking special treatment,
privileged relations with the government, and protection from
prosecution. Such corrupted parties would enter into
"cartels" with one another to reap benefits and assure their
mutual protection so that they could "operate above the law,"
he asserted. Former Presidents Mireya Moscoso and Ernesto
"El Toro" Perez Balladares, cutting across party lines, had
benefited from shady business deals and, through their prior
appointments to the Supreme Court, controlled the Supreme
Court. Varela added, "Many ministers profited from their
tenure in Moscoso's government." (Comment: When pressed,
Varela would not provide names or examples.) He said he was
actively working the party's bases to revitalize the party
and lead it in a new direction.

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Inter‐Party Primary
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

¶7. (C) Varela said that he believed that an inter‐party
primary was vital to leading the opposition to victory in
Panama's May 2009 elections. Asked how he would convince
Martinelli, who insisted he would stay away from such a
primary, to participate, Varela asserted that Martinelli:
was reaching the limit of his popularity, had no national
party structure to help him sustain his high ratings, and
would need to participate in an inter‐party primary to
revitalize what would be his flagging standing by
August/September 2008 when an inter‐party primary could be
held. Panamanian electoral law only allowed registered party
members to participate in an inter‐party primary. Varela
believed Martinelli would have difficulty staying away from
an opposition, non‐binding "consultation" that permitted all
opposition party members and voters not registered with any
party to participate. Opposition parties would need to
"ratify" the results of such a consultation. Varela asserted
that he was prepared to stand aside in favor of another
stronger opposition member's candidacy for the presidency.
Varela also confirmed that he had agreed with Martinelli that
whichever one of them led the polls in May 2008 would support
the other. Finally, Varela said that it was critical to
bring the Patriotic Union (UP) party into an inter‐party
primary as doing so would deny prospective PRD presidential
candidate (and current 1st VP and FM) Samuel Lewis the UP's
support and increase the pressure for Martinelli to
participate. As for former President Guillermo Endara,
Varela said that Endara's fledgling Moral Vanguard of the
Fatherland (VMP) would not secure Panamenista support and
Endara's candidacy would wither.

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Comment
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

¶8. (C) Though there was little news in Varela's proposals,
it was refreshing to hear a Panamanian leader talk about
ideas and to place Panama's up‐coming elections in a broader
context. The need to promote decentralization, to combat the
scourge of corruption, and to strengthen Panama's
institutions, and to forestall the PRD's efforts to dominate
Panamanian politics are all standards in Panamanian
opposition's songbook. Promoting institutionalization and
decentralization are not on the forefront of most voters'
minds; employment, security, education, and health care are.
Varela will need to make the case that his approach can
address these core concerns. Varela's focus on better
harnessing the Panama Cana's revenues for development (which
was probably illustrative, not comprehensive) is laudable,
but insufficient. Panama's economic growth is not the
problem, but rather the problem is how to clear away the
corruption and bureaucratic obstacles while investing in
better education and health care that will ultimately yield
meaningful reductions inpoverty and income disparaties.
Finally, Varela faces significant challenges from Moscoso,
former party president Marco Ameglio, National Assembly
Deputy Jose Blandon, and current party SecGen Francisco
Aleman; he artfully deflected all questions about his
relationships with these party leaders. While he desires to
strive to build a new Panamenista party, Varela will
inevitably have to deal with the real world realities of
these and other forces in his own party.
EATON