08ANKARA1824
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9559
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1824/01 2941350
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201350Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7727
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9242
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4851
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3306
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6921
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6765
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3339
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey Elected for Non-Permanent Member to UNSC for 2009-2010 
All weekend papers and TVs reported that Turkey was elected to the 
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) as a non-permanent member for 
2009-2010.  Saturday's mainstream Sabah headline reads "Diplomatic 
Victory" and reported that PM Erdogan will go to New York in the 
upcoming days to thank the UN General Assembly.  Saturday's 
mainstream Hurriyet quoted PM Erdogan as saying "Turkey's UNSC 
status is an important success and something every citizen should be 
proud of."  President Gul also thanked all UN members in a written 
statement and said "This support to Turkey is a reflection of 
confidence and friendship from the international community.  We will 
mobilize for the security, tranquility and welfare of the nations of 
the world."  Evaluating Turkey's membership to journalists PM 
Erdogan said "I believe that diplomatic efforts carried out in the 
past five years and Turkey's contributions to peace and stability 
have an influence on this decision.  Now we have an opportunity to 
undertake a more influential, and active global role."  Today's 
Sabah reports that FM Babacan on his return to Turkey said that 
"This is Turkey's success.  We will carry our knowledge, experience 
and analytical ability to the Council." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey's Membership to the UNSC 
Ferai Tinc commented in mainstream Hurriyet: ''Turkey is now a 
non-permanent member to the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 
for two years. Turkey does not have the authority to veto, but 
nevertheless such status is a prestigious thing. When the United 
States looks at candidates for the UNSC, it takes into consideration 
previous votes at the UN General Assembly. In 2007, Turkey and the 
U.S. voted along the same line 45.5 percent of the time on 13 issues 
that interested the U.S. directly, including resolutions relating to 
Cuba, the Israeli-Palestinian problem, North Korea and Iran. Thus, 
this seat is a result of Turkey's balanced foreign policy line. 
This seat will increase Turkey's influence regarding important 
decisions over the next two years.'' 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Turkey was elected as a 
non-permanent member to the United Nations Security Council (UNSC). 
This is a great success for Turkey and we owe a great thanks to 
Foreign Minister Babacan.  Turkey's global lobbying efforts and its 
constructive approach in the Middle East and the Caucasus 
contributed immensely to Turkey's success in this bid.  It is very 
pleasing to see that Turkey received support from the EU as well. 
Recently, PM Erdogan said, 'Turkey is a country that is running 
after its targets and not its fears.'  We should continue such 
efforts." 
 
Nazli Ilicak wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Turkey's election to the 
UNSC membership is a great success.  This success strengthens 
Turkey's influence, even with the isolated, small countries in the 
world.  Congratulations to the President, the PM, and the FM, along 
with the architect of Turkey's foreign policy Prof. Davutoglu. 
 
 
Ergenekon: The Trial of the Century Begins. (Zaman) 
Media outlets are almost completely focused on the start of the 
Ergenekon trial in a sensationalist manner, with focus on 
Ergenekon's links to Turkey's most notorious assassinations and 
terrorist attacks.  After Prime Minister Erdogan's statement of 
public support for the new Chief of the Turkish General Staff, 
General Basbug, media are not reporting on the Ergenekon case as 
evidence of tensions between the military and the government. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman carries four full pages of reports 
connecting Ergenekon to the July 2008 attack against the U.S. 
Consulate in Istanbul, the Hrant Dink assassination, the shooting at 
the Danistay Court in 2006, as well as to the terrorist 
organizations, PKK and DHKP-C.  Headlines from Zaman include, "The 
PKK is under Ergenekon's Control," and "(Ergenekon's) Leaves Their 
Signature on DHKP-C's Assassination of Sabanci," and "Ergenekon's 
Fingerprints are All Over the Danistay Assassinations," and "The 
 
ANKARA 00001824  002 OF 004 
 
 
Order for the Attack Against the (U.S.) Consulate Came from the 
Prison," where the chief Ergenekon suspects are being held. 
The suspects include the senior columnist of Cumhuriyet daily, Ilhan 
Selcuk, lawyer Kemal Kerincsiz, Turkish Labor Party chairman Dogu 
Perincek and the former Istanbul University Rector Kemal 
Alemdaroglu.  They are accused of being members of an armed 
terrorist organization, supporting the terrorist organization, 
attempting to overthrow the Turkish Republic by using violence, and 
provoking the public toward an armed rebellion against the Turkish 
Republic's government. Mainstream Milliyet notes that even the 
reading of the 2455-page indictment during the hearing may take up 
to one month. Some of the suspects, including Kemal Kerincsiz and 
Dogu Perincek, will reportedly present 1000 and 1600-page written 
statements in their own defense. Mainstream Hurriyet notes that 
"there are three different points of view that are dividing the 
public on the Ergenekon case. AK Party circles take the case very 
seriously The CHP claims the case is an effort to annihilate the 
opposition. Many unions call the Ergenekon arrests 'attempts to 
oppress people and spread fear.' Many judicial experts draw the 
attention to the possibility of this case ending in a fiasco. They 
claim that dubious evidence based on private meetings and irrelevant 
telephone conversations has cast a shadow on the accuracy of the 
claims." Islamist-oriented Zaman thinks that "the case of the 
century begins" on its headline. ."  Liberal Radikal notes, "Sixteen 
months ago it started with gangs and bombs found in Umraniye (a 
neighborhood in Istanbul) and now the Ergenekon probe includes 
retired generals, politicians, and underworld leaders".  Radikal 
predicts "the first court proceedings will last for at least two 
months." 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet calls the Ergenekon investigation 
"part of the AKP's democratization program" and calls the trial 
"political" in nature.  Cumhuriyet reminds readers of "The Greater 
Middle East Project" and the AKP's "moderate Islamist" aspirations 
and connects the AKP's pursuit of the Ergenekon case to those 
political aspirations.   Oddly, mainstream Vatan focuses on the 
impending profits of the street venders in Silivri, an Istanbul 
suburb, due to the Ergenekon case, which Vatan says "could last for 
one year."  Radically Islamist Vakit carries the headline, "they 
will be held accountable." 
 
Protests against the AKP/Pro-Ocalan Protests 
Sunday's leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports that the NGOs, 
Unions and some political parties arranged a meeting in Ankara on 
Saturday to protest the AKP government's irregularities and policies 
in ruling the country.  Thousands attended the meeting in Ankara and 
carried banners saying "We don't want the AKP" and "The AKP will pay 
for its wrong policies." 
 
Sunday's Islamist-oriented Zaman and mainstream Hurriyet reported 
that PKK supporters staged protests in Diyarbakir, Adana and Mersin 
in connection with allegations that jailed PKK leader Ocalan became 
target of physical assaults in jail.  Hurriyet notes that around 
2,000 people attended the meeting organized by the DTP and some NGOs 
in Diyarbakir.  The demonstrators attacked the police during the 
rally and the police had to use water cannons and teargas to 
disperse the crowd.  There were clashes at the Adana and Mersin 
rallies as well.  Very young children were used at the front line of 
the rallies.  Today's mainstream Milliyet reports that there were 
more DTP arranged rallies in Istanbul, Sanliurfa and Antalya 
yesterday which all turned to pro-PKK/Ocalan meetings and children 
were used on the front line once again.  DTP Igdir deputy Pervin 
Buldan addressed to 3,000 people in Kadikoy-Istanbul and called for 
a general amnesty.  At the rally in Mersin DTP deputy chair Emine 
Ayna quoted as saying "the majority of the Kurds consider Ocalan as 
their leader.  If there is a physical assault against Ocalan, they 
will consider this assault against themselves."  Sabah reports that 
Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin denied allegations that jailed PKK 
leader Ocalan was maltreated. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001824  003 OF 004 
 
 
Meanwhile, Hurriyet internet site reported this morning that in 
Istanbul's Kadikoy neighborhood, early this morning, 34 cars were 
burned in arson attacks.  No one claimed the attack so far. 
 
Taraf's Interview with Author and Columnist Avni Ozgurel 
Over the weekend leftist Taraf insisted that their reporting on the 
Aktutun raid by the PKK which caused 17 Turkish soldiers to die was 
accurate. The Turkish Chief of General Staff had claimed that the 
footage taken by an unmanned aerial vehicle and printed by Taraf 
indicated to a location within northern Iraq, and not Aktutun. Taraf 
on Sunday claimed that they had not indicated to the site as 
Aktutun, and that they also had described the location as the other 
side of the border in northern Iraq. Taraf insisted in their claims 
that the Turkish military was aware of this approaching attack and 
some military members watched it live during the actual attack and 
no measures were taken despite prior intelligence reports. Monday's 
Taraf has an interview with liberal-intellectual Radikal columnist 
and author on Turkish political history, Kurdish problem and 
terrorism Avni Ozgurel as their headline story. Ozgurel notes, 
"Those commanders responsible for the Aktutun raid must be tried at 
the military court. If the investigation, which the military says is 
being conducted, does not bring those responsible for this raid to 
court, it means that the situation is very hopeless in Turkey. The 
PKK is said to have been preparing for this attack for one month. 
Right after the attack the military said, 'The intelligence we get 
from the U.S. is excellent.' Yet, you don't get intelligence to 
write your memories! You get it to assess the incoming information. 
There is also the 'What if this terrorism finishes?' side of things. 
The PKK terrorism in Turkey today provides justification for many 
things for security officials. Terrorism is such a thing that it 
gives you the chance to control politics. There are arms dealers, 
politicans, military, security units, associations involved in the 
PKK terrorism. There's also drugs business involved. Terrorism is 
such a high-income thing that it is impossible to be finished for 
all sides. The Kurdish problem is not a security matter; it has to 
do with Turkey's democratization. If you democratize Turkey, you 
will neither have the headscarf nor the Kurdish problem. If the EU's 
democracy standards prevail in Turkey, the military cannot be in 
this position of not being accountable. All articles disturbing 
Kurds in judicial statements including the constitution should be 
rewritten. In addition, they should talk to Ocalan. No power in 
Turkey except for Ocalan can solve this matter..." 
Editorial commentary on Taraf Accusations of the TAF 
Oray Egin commented in mainstream Aksam: ''Taraf daily has had only 
one objective since its first day of publication - to cause a coup 
in Turkey by making sure that their paper is raided. Even when there 
was no possibility or danger for a coup in Turkey, Taraf created the 
fears of a coup. The photographs that Taraf printed about the 
Aktutun incident were proven to be lies.  The paper aimed to damage 
the Turkish Armed Forces. When their news was refuted, they resorted 
to additional manipulation. Now they are trying to create fears that 
their paper is in danger. However, nobody is planning to raid or 
close Taraf. If someone does raid Taraf, the paper will seize the 
opportunity to blame the army." 
 
President Gul's Interview with Der-Spiegel 
Hurriyet, Milliyet:  In an interview with German Der Spiegel, 
President Gul said "many Kurds suffered from discrimination in the 
past because of their origin and they were not allowed to speak and 
write in Kurdish.  Today, there is a significant change.  Kurds' 
cultural rights have been strengthened."  Regarding the headscarf 
issue, President Gul said "Headscarf is related with Turkey's 
democratization process.  It is the personal preference of a woman 
whether or not to wear a headscarf.  Families do not create a 
problem.  Problem emerges when the politicians try to make it a 
cultural matter." 
 
Editorial commentary on the Kurdish Issue 
Ali Bulac wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: ''I think that the 
present Kurdish problem may be solved by doing the following. 1) 
 
ANKARA 00001824  004 OF 004 
 
 
Kurdish identity must be recognized at every level. 2) Turkish must 
remain Turkey's official language, but education can be provided in 
native language such as Kurdish. 3) A Kurdish channel on TRT should 
begin functioning and allowing private TV broadcasts. 4) Respect for 
human rights must be obeyed fully. 5) A comprehensive amnesty should 
be implemented for those who have gone up the mountains but have not 
shed any blood. 6) Solid, permanent and real solutions must be found 
to solve the region's economic problems. 7) Civilian pressure must 
increase on media that seeks to provoke tensions between Turkish and 
Kurdish people. 8) Local and historic names should be returned to 
the Kurdish people. A system can be implemented that uses both 
Turkish and Kurdish names for villages, mountains, regions, streams, 
plains and individual's names. 9) Relations should be improved 
regarding tourism, trade, culture and commercial interests in 
Kurdish regions in other countries like Syria, Iraq, and Iran. 10) 
Local administrations should be strengthened. 11) The spirit of 
friendship and cooperation between all ethnic groups must be 
enhanced." 
Iraqi Chief of General Staff's Exclusive with Hurriyet 
Metehan Demir of mainstream Hurriyet interviewed the Iraqi Chief of 
General Staff Babakir Zibari. "The Iraqi Chief of General Staff 
said, 'Barzani would say yes to anything that Turkey says yes to, if 
only Ankara started talking to the Kurdish regional government. This 
change in stance could change everything, even the border.' General 
Babakir Zibari, who is of Kurdish origin, and who was appointed to 
his position as the Iraqi Chief of General Staff through the 
influence of Mesud Barzani, defended the idea that Turkey's solving 
the PKK problem depends first on its regarding the Kurdish regional 
adminstration warmly. General Zibari stated that even Barzani could 
approach warmly to the debated proposals in Turkey for moving the 
border or forming a buffer zone if Turkey discussed this with him 
because this could be beneficial for Barzani as well. Zibari noted, 
'The PKK is continiously attacking like an animal squeezed in the 
corner at the moment. Turkey gave heavy blows to the PKK. In my 
opinion, a step must be taken for a political solution just at this 
point. The Turkish government must declare an amnesty for those up 
on the mountains.''' 
 
 
TV News: 
NTV Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A Molotov cocktail attack was launched against Turkish Consulate 
in Austria.  Minor material damage was reported. 
 
- DSP Leader Zeki Sezer said they could support Murat Karayalcin if 
he decides to run for Ankara Mayor as an independent candidate. 
 
- Responding to a question whether a new stand-by agreement will be 
signed with the IMF, Finance Minister Unakitan said "we never turn 
our back on the IMF.  If the country's interests require a new 
agreement, then we will do what is necessary." 
 
- The AKP Branch Office in Semdinli was damaged in bomb blast. 
 
 
International News 
 
- Democratic Presidential candidate Barack Obama raises more than 
$150 million for his campaign against McCain. 
 
- Taliban insurgents pulled some 50 passengers off a bus in southern 
Afghanistan and killed as many as 30 of them. 
WILSON