08ANKARA1766
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3395
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1766/01 2841414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101414Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7646
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9222
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4826
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3286
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6906
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6750
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3322
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 10, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Three Suspects Captured following an Attack on a Diyarbakir Police 
Bus 
All media outlets report three suspects were captured in relation to 
this week's terrorist attack against a Police Shuttle Bus in 
Diyarbakir.  The alleged mastermind of the attack, Mehmet Sah 
Yildeniz, remains at large.  Yildeniz allegedly joined the PKK in 
1998 and recently crossed into Turkey from northern Iraq in order to 
carry out the attack.  Wednesday's Diyarbakir attack came shortly 
after last Friday's attack on the Aktutun military border outpost in 
Hakkari, which killed 17 soldiers and injured 21 others. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak claims the attack in Diyarbakir "aims 
to undermine the AKP on the eve of the upcoming municipality 
elections." 
 
Meanwhile, papers report the High Board for Combating Terrorism met 
Thursday to discuss initiatives to reach out to the Iraqi government 
and the Kurdish regional government (KRG) in northern Iraq.  In 
addition, economic and social efforts were discussed in order to 
prevent terrorist recruitment. The meeting also addressed proposals 
to establish a new mechanism for coordinating the fight against 
terror and the military's demands for more authority.  Papers note 
opposition parties' proposals for the declaration of emergency rule 
in the southeast and the establishment of a "buffer zone" to prevent 
terrorist infiltrations into Turkey were rejected at the meeting. 
The board will continue discussions in a second meeting scheduled 
for October 14. 
 
U.S. Condemns Diyarbakir Terror Attack 
Liberal Radikal reports today, "The U.S. Embassy released a press 
statement condemning the terror attack against a police bus in 
Diyarbakir."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "U.S. 
Ambassador Ross Wilson spoke to reporters during a reception 
Wednesday night at the Mexican Embassy and said 'there are no 
problems in the intelligence cooperation between the U.S. and 
Turkey.'"  However, Cumhuriyet notes, "Wilson did not explain why 
there was a failure to notice PKK preparations for the attack 
against the military outpost in Aktutun." 
 
Nechirvan Barzani: "Talk to us." 
Radikal, Zaman and Taraf carried an interview with KRG Prime 
Minister Nechirvan Barzani. Stories highlighted he said, "Recent 
attacks by the PKK terrorist organization in Turkey seek to damage 
relations between Turkey and the KRG administration."  PM Barzani 
urged Turkey to seriously consider the establishment of a 
cooperative dialogue. 
 
In an exclusive interview with Turkey's semi-official wire service 
AA, Necirvan Barzani said that recent terrorist attacks in Turkey 
are being watched with concern. "We try to prevent PKK terrorists 
from using the territory in northern Iraq to stage attacks on 
Turkey, and we also try to prevent the PKK from using the roads, 
airports and hospitals in northern Iraq. We cannot be held 
responsible for the PKK's terrorist acts in Turkey." 
 
Regarding Turkey's cross border operation, PM Nechirvan Barzani said 
"No gain is possible by cross border military operations because the 
(Kurdish) problem cannot be resolved through military operations." 
In addition, the KRG PM asked, "Turkey wants concrete steps from the 
KRG, but how can we help Turkey at a time when Turkey does not even 
talk to us?"  Barzani also invited PM Erdogan to Erbil. 
 
Editorial Commentary on PKK/Kurdish Issue 
 
Cengiz Candar criticized in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The 
solution to the PKK problem requires a complete change in Turkey's 
approach to the issue.  Whenever I see angry statements against the 
Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) that accuse them of 
responsibility for the PKK problem, I realize Turkey is far from 
 
ANKARA 00001766  002 OF 004 
 
 
bringing a real solution to Kurdish problem.  First the state must 
separate the Kurdish problem from the terrorism problem, and then 
will have to change its rhetoric and approach completely.  There is 
no other way." 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek commented in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "The 
military and civilian authorities in Turkey seem to agree on the 
fact that the opposition parties' proposal for setting up a buffer 
zone inside northern Iraq is not possible.  At a press briefing on 
the attack in Aktutun, General Hasan Igsiz responded to a question 
on the probability of a security buffer region by saying such an 
endeavor would be 'very risky.'  Long debates in the parliament over 
a decree for cross border military operations have shown that the 
AKP government thinks it knows everything and shrugs off warnings 
from the opposition, but its hands are tied in the face of the 
stance of KRG President Massoud Barzani and Baghdad.  In sum, 
nothing has changed in the fight against terror." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Afghanistan's 
President Karzai called on Saudi Arabia to mediate between Kabul and 
the Taliban.  Soon afterwards, he made a call for peace to Taliban 
leader Mullah Omar, and met with a representative of Hikmetyar in 
Saudi Arabia.  I find it very interesting that the soldiers, aiming 
a resolution of the security question, proposed 'political dialogue' 
with the enemy they have been fighting against in Afghanistan.  What 
do you think?" 
 
Ihsan Dagi argued in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "It must be understood 
that cross border military operations into northern Iraq will not 
bring a solution to the terror problem.  The government must show 
that it won't allow such operations to have negative effects on 
internal politics.  We see some interesting proposals that run 
counter to Turkey's EU reforms, such as the establishment of 
emergency rule.  They, however, forget that the region lived under a 
regime of marshal law and emergency rule for 23 years (1979 - 2002). 
 This 'tight regime' did not eliminate terror; on the contrary, it 
fanned the fires of terror.  They still claim they can destroy the 
PKK through emergency rule; what they actually want is more power, 
not a solution." 
 
Vatan's Gungor Mengi: "Resign, Mr. Commander" 
Mainstream Vatan dedicates major editorial opinion pages as well as 
its front page to the calls for resignation of Turkish Air Force 
Commander General Babaoglu.  General Babaoglu was photographed 
playing golf during last Friday's PKK attack against the Aktutun 
Gendarme Station where 17 soldiers were killed.  Later, Babaoglu 
said he learned about the attack only the day after.  Vatan's senior 
columnist Gungor Mengi wrote today, "From now, on General Babaoglu 
will be seen as the golfer-commander while our children are 
martyred.  He must resign in order to prevent further damage to the 
army.  In this case, Babaoglu's resignation is an insurance policy 
that protects the institution to which he belongs.  He must have the 
courage to accept his personal mistake and go."  Columnist Necati 
Dogru joins the argument by noting, "When the Deniz Feneri court 
case in Germany drew in the Chairman of Radio-TV Board Zahid Akman, 
he declined to resign. As for the General Babaoglu case, he should 
resign. Otherwise he will end up finding himself in the same 
position with Zahid Akman." 
 
Cartoon in mainstream Sabah 
 
In "Cross-border Operation," mainstream Sabah carries a cartoon 
depicting Turkish Air Force Commander General Babaoglu in a golf 
cart amongst a convoy of military tanks that are headed across the 
border into northern Iraq. 
 
Government Inspectors question School Principal's Religious Beliefs 
Liberal Radikal, mainstream Hurriyet, mainstream Milliyet and 
mainstream Posta report elementary school inspectors launched an 
investigation into a complaint filed by a female teacher at Aksu 
 
ANKARA 00001766  003 OF 004 
 
 
primary school in Antalya that she was being harassed by the school 
principal.  The inspectors sent by the Education Ministry to 
investigate the claim asked the other teachers of the school to 
respond in writing to questions such as whether the principal was 
"Godless" or "Armenian," and whether he drinks or not.  Education 
workers' union Egitim-Is slammed the inspectors for asking such 
questions, "Turkey is a secular and democratic state, and people 
should not be questioned over their faith or ethnic origin." 
 
Will the Global Financial Crisis Lead to a Global Political Crisis? 
 
Media outlets today note the warnings of impending social and 
political crises from the IMF President, the World Bank President, 
and the German Foreign Minister.   Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "The five pillars of capitalism have been rocked by the 
financial crisis," as "the crisis swallows $18 trillion."  Economic 
daily Referans reports, "Coordinated interest rate cuts reduce chaos 
in the stock markets, but volatility in monetary markets continues." 
 CNN Turk reports, "World Bank President Robert Zoellick warns that 
the global financial turmoil will create difficulties for developing 
nations' efforts to protect the poor." In addition, CNN Turk notes, 
"German Foreign Minister Frank Walter Steinmeier says the global 
financial crisis could escalate into a global political crisis." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in "28 Countries are Under 
Threat," that "Zoellick warned that developing countries could face 
banking emergencies and corporate bankruptcies."  Mainstream Sabah 
reports Zoellick warned, "28 Countries could descend into a Very 
Difficult Situation."  In addition, Sabah also reports IMF President 
Dominique-Straus-Kahn warned, "This situation is very serious 
because there are no local solutions to this global crisis." Liberal 
Radikal notes in "28 Countries Are Expecting Financial Problems," 
that "Zoellick warned that rising food and petrol prices, along with 
the increasing global financial crisis, will create difficulties for 
developing nations to protect their poor populations."  Mainstream 
Milliyet reports, "The markets were calmed slightly with the IMF 
statement indicating they could help support some countries. 
However, this did not put out the fires." 
 
Petraeus Calls for Meetings with the Taliban at NATO Defense 
Ministers Meeting Media outlets report Petraeus' comments suggesting 
talks with the Taliban with an air of cynicism, though the language 
appears straightforward. Leftist Taraf even calls his suggestion, 
"Discussions with the enemy," which vaguely alludes to prior U.S. 
military suggestions that Turkey talk with the PKK.  CNN Turk 
reports, "U.S. Centcom Commander General David Petraeus said during 
yesterdays NATO Defense Ministers Meeting, "Negotiations with some 
members of the Taliban could provide a way to reduce violence in 
certain sections of Afghanistan."  Leftist Taraf reports, "Petreaus 
says it is necessary to open the door to dialogue with the Taliban." 
 Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The U.S., Unable to Annihilate 
the Taliban, Signals for Talks."  Mainstream Sabah calls Petraeus' 
suggestions "A Green Light to the Taliban."  Liberal Radikal 
reports, "Petraeus Approves Contacts with the Taliban." 
Lftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "The U.S. Prepares to Sit at 
the Table," with the Taliban.  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "It is 
widely debated how to end the seven-year war against terror in 
Afghanistan.  U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates now says in 
order to end the war the country will need to reach out to the 
Taliban."  Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman, "I find 
it very interesting that the soldiers, aiming a resolution of the 
security question, proposed 'political dialogue' with the enemy they 
have been fighting against in Afghanistan.  What do you think?" 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-EU 
 
Ferai Tinc observed in mainstream Hurriyet: "Until recently, both 
Turkey and the European Union have been tackling crises; Turkey has 
struggled with political and Constitution-related crises while 
Europe has suffered from a deepening economic crisis.  In other 
words, the last two years have been wasted and the future is not 
 
ANKARA 00001766  004 OF 004 
 
 
bright. The Turkish government treats EU integration as a technical 
process.  However, EU reforms that exclude political will are doomed 
to remain on paper.  And now the EU is facing the global financial 
crisis while Turkey continues its policy of not doing the homework 
on its EU reforms, which means one more year is just about to be 
wasted." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- 44 members of the pro-Kurdish DTP, including the party's 
provincial chief, were detained in the Aegean city of Izmir for 
staging an illegal demonstration in September. 
 
- Koc Holding President Mustafa Koc says a stand-by deal with the 
IMF might ease concerns in Turkish markets. 
 
International News 
 
- General David Petraeus said negotiations with Taliban could 
provide a way to reduce violence in some parts of Afghanistan. 
 
- Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman Andrei Nesterenko said Russia 
will not sell S-300 missile systems to Iran. 
 
WILSON