08CHENGDU241
SOUTHWEST CHINA'S REAL ESTATE CONTINUES PRE-QUAKE SLIDE
Mon Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO5330
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0241/01 3010808
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270808Z OCT 08
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2967
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3623UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000241 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ELAB CH
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA'S REAL ESTATE CONTINUES PRE-QUAKE SLIDE 
 
CHENGDU 00000241  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  Land prices and housing prices in Chengdu and 
Chongqing, two major cities in southwest China, have been 
declining since late last year as government regulations have 
made buying second homes more difficult.  Newly-built housing is 
routinely being advertised for 25 - 33 percent below the 
original sale price.  Residential land prices in Chengdu have 
also fallen by half or more. Some developers in Chongqing are 
working with the local government to ride out the real estate 
downturn.  In contrast, developers in Chengdu who have seen 
substantial depreciation of their undeveloped land are 
reportedly forfeiting deposits and returning the property to the 
local government. The Sichuan earthquake itself has apparently 
not had a significant effect on real estate prices.  End summary. 
 
 
 
A Downward Trend in the Market 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Contacts in Chengdu and Chongqing recently told 
Congenoff that land prices in both cities started declining in 
October 2007. Che Yong, the chairman of a Chengdu-based real 
estate firm, said that in some areas prices for land in the city 
had declined by 50 - 66 percent over the past year. David Wong, 
the managing director of a real estate firm in Chongqing, also 
saw land prices declining in Chongqing. He said that the 
declines were not as great as those in Chengdu, but he did not 
quantify the reduction in value. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Che and Wong both noted that new and existing home 
prices in their respective cities had declined over the last 
year, leading to many special offers by builders. 
Advertisements in a major Chongqing newspaper, Chongqing 
Commerce News (Chongqing Shangbao), offered additional square 
footage at no additional cost or rebates of up to 25 percent of 
the sale price that could be used for furnishing and decorating. 
 In a major Chengdu newspaper, Western Municipal News (Huaxi 
Dushi Bao), a builder offered 33 percent discounts in late 
October 2008, while another offered three bedroom houses for the 
price of two.  Wong and Che also said that in addition to price 
cuts on newly-constructed homes, the prices of existing homes 
were also declining. 
 
 
 
Tighter Regulations, Not Quake, Depress Real Estate Sales 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Central government regulations making it more difficult 
to buy a second home were cited by both Che and Wong as an 
important factor in the declining price of housing.  In 
September 2007, Beijing implemented regulations that increased 
the down payment requirements and interest rates on loans for 
the purchase of second homes.  Government officials at the 
Chengdu Real Estate Transaction Center (CRETC) said in 
mid-October of this year that the measures were intended to 
reduce the speculative inflows of money from outside the city. 
None of the real estate experts we interviewed, however, 
believed that the 12 May earthquake in Sichuan had played a 
significant role in the declining price for newly-built homes. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Existing home prices are suffering because of financing 
requirements as well.  Buyers of a previously purchased home can 
only finance 70 percent of the value of the home, as opposed to 
80 percent for new construction, according to Wong.  Buyers may 
also receive higher interest rates on loans for existing houses, 
further reducing incentives to buy older homes.  Che said that 
about 85 percent of home buyers in Chengdu rely on bank loans to 
purchase a home. 
 
 
 
Reaction from Developers 
 
CHENGDU 00000241  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
----------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) In Chengdu, Che said that developers who purchased land 
at elevated prices have subsequently seen a significant loss of 
market value.  Some developers are simply walking away from the 
property and forfeiting deposits paid to purchase the land 
rather than start construction and risk uncertain financial 
returns on their investments. In these instances, the land 
returns to the government. Wong said that the Chongqing 
government is working with developers to help them to hold on to 
their property.  Chongqing is providing extended repayment terms 
for developers who are unlikely to realize profit on their 
investment over the next 2-3 years.  Wong did not provide 
specific examples of how this is being done. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Developers are also looking to joint venture partners 
to obtain the capital needed for development.  Developers are 
prohibited from using land as collateral for construction loans, 
even if the land is wholly owned by the developer, said Wong. 
 
 
 
The Road Ahead for Chongqing and Chengdu 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Che said he was pessimistic about the outlook for the 
Chengdu housing market over the next 3-5 years.  He noted that 
global economic conditions would certainly have a negative 
impact on Chengdu's real estate sector.  Officials at CRETC also 
suggested that the housing market might decline further, 
although they did not say when the market might bottom out. 
Declining land and home prices could also squeeze local 
government budgets.  Both CRETC and Wong said that housing is an 
important source of local government revenues. Property-related 
taxes account for about 25 percent of Chongqing's revenue, 
according to Wong.  The owner-occupancy rate is another factor 
that may affect the outlook for real estate in these two cities. 
Chongqing housing is 90 percent owner-occupied, but the rate in 
Chengdu is only 54 percent, according to Wong. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comments:  Real estate and related development 
projects have played a notable role in the economies of Chengdu 
and Chongqing in recent years.  In addition to serving as a 
source of employment for thousands of laborers from neighboring 
rural areas, the real estate sector has brought in foreign 
investment as well.  For example, we understand that Singapore 
firms have invested almost USD 600 million in real estate and 
commercial development projects in Chengdu.  For local 
officials, some of whom have openly expressed their concerns to 
us about potential problems caused by unemployed Sichuan and 
Chongqing workers returning home from coastal factories, 
problems in the real estate sector are a very unwelcome headache. 
BOUGHNER