08DJIBOUTI840
Somalia - TFG and ARS Agree to Unity Government
Sun Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
VZCZCXRO5112
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHDJ #0840/01 3001709
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261709Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9628
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DJIBOUTI 000840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SO ET
SUBJECT: Somalia - TFG and ARS Agree to Unity Government 
and End to Armed Confrontation 
 
REF: Djibouti 839 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On October 26, the Transitional Federal 
Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of 
Somalia (ARS) signed a joint declaration to establish a 
Somalia Unity Government (text in para 8) and modalities to 
implement a cessation of armed confrontation (text in para 
9).  Although the Joint Security Committee had significant 
difficulty reaching agreement, the TFG and the ARS were 
impelled to produce concrete results in advance of the 
upcoming summit of the Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development (IGAD).  The agreement and declaration were 
hailed by representatives of the international community 
and Somalis present as steps that should give renewed 
momentum to a reconciliation process that has been short of 
accomplishments on the ground.  Implementation of the 
cessation of hostilities agreement will require 
constructive TFG - ARS cooperation, as well as flexibility 
from the Government of Ethiopia.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Signed Agreements in Djibouti Process 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  A weekend of negotiations managed by the UN Political 
Office for Somalia produced an eleventh-hour signed 
declaration to establish a Somalia Unity Government and a 
cessation of armed confrontation agreement by 
representatives of the Transitional Federal Government 
(TFG) and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia 
(ARS).  UN SRSG for Somalia Ould-Abdallah and members of 
his office chaired marathon sessions October 25 - 26 with 
TFG and ARS members of the High-Level Political Committee 
and Joint Security Committee in reaching agreement on the 
two texts in time for a mid-afternoon October 26 signing 
and press conference. 
 
¶3.  Immediately after the signing, country and organization 
representatives present offered their congratulations to 
the TFG, ARS, and the SRSG.  S/E Yates told those present 
that the agreement represented commitment by the leaders of 
the TFG and ARF, and was an important milestone in the 
Djibouti Process.  He said "The parties have sent a strong 
message to the spoilers who are preventing the delivery of 
humanitarian assistance destined to Somalis who are 
suffering."  The Special Envoy continued, "I feel sure that 
the Somali people will look to the courageous leaders who 
have signed here today as genuine leaders and not to those 
contemptible elements who want to prolong and worsen their 
suffering."  Also commenting were representatives of the 
OIC, AU, the Arab League, the EC, and ambassadors or 
designated representatives of France, Italy, Libya, Egypt, 
and Djibouti. 
 
--------------------------------- 
TFG and ARS Leaders Promote Unity 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  ARS Chairman Sheikh Sharif spoke after the 
international representatives and extended sincere thanks 
to the SRSG and all those who have supported the Djibouti 
Process.  He said that "we accepted to end all hostilities 
and though we cannot get all we want in one day, we will 
not derail this."  Though he had done so in a private 
meeting with us (reftel), Sheikh Sharif this time publicly 
condemned all "spoilers," including "anyone who interferes 
with humanitarian assistance, pirates, those who print fake 
currency, and criminals who are standing in the way of 
bringing back dignity to Somalia." 
 
¶5.  Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information, 
Youth and Sports Ahmed Abdisalam Adan said, "With this 
agreement, Somalis have made an important achievement - we 
have chosen to solve our differences through dialogue, not 
violence."  He spoke of all parties accepting their 
responsibility to all Somalis and as a testament to their 
support for the Djibouti Process.  Minister Abdisalam also 
extended a salute to all Somali women, calling ARS 
representative Asha Hagi Elmi, who recently won an 
international award for her work to advance the cause of 
Somali women.  He called her "a model for peace and justice 
in Somalia." 
 
--------------------- 
Concrete Deliverables 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  Comment.  The cessation of hostilities agreement, which 
had been partially negotiated at the September 17 - 19 
 
DJIBOUTI 00000840  002 OF 003 
 
 
Djibouti Process meeting, in the end proved the most 
difficult on which to find common ground, with ARS 
representatives as late as October 26 morning, arguing that 
some of the language would have to be approved by 
commanders in the field before they could sign. 
Implementation of the terms of the cease-fire agreement 
will likely be difficult, as it will meet active resistance 
from some quarters in Somalia, and will require 
coordination with the UN, the international community, and 
the GOE, in addition to the active cooperation of the TFG 
and the ARS. 
 
¶7.  The Declaration and the Agreement equip the TFG and the 
ARS with "deliverables" that should reduce GOE impatience 
with the reconciliation process at the October 27 - 29 IGAD 
Summit.  The margins of IGAD can now be used to focus the 
new unity government on implementing the cessation of 
hostilities undertaking, and quickly beginning the process 
of forming a unity government.  End comment. 
 
-------------- 
Agreement text 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  Begin text of declaration to form Unity Government: 
 
Joint Declaration 
Between 
The Transitional Federal Government of Somalia 
And The Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia 
 
In conformity with Article 9 of the Djibouti Agreement, the 
Transitional Federal Government and Alliance for the Re- 
Liberation of Somalia reaffirm once more their commitment 
to reconciliation and political cooperation. 
 
In this context the two Parties thank the Somali people for 
their support and request them to remain determined in 
their desire for lasting peace. 
 
The Parties also thank the international community for its 
continued and valuable support for the Djibouti Agreement. 
 
The Parties welcome the assistance of the international 
community and the leadership of the United Nations for the 
early establishment of a Somali Unity Government. 
 
This Government, open to all Somali nationals and based on 
partnership and respect, with an inclusive parliament, 
should address as a priority, political cooperation and 
joint responsibility for assuring security. 
 
[signed] 
Transitional Federal Government 
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia 
Djibouti 26October 2008 
 
End text. 
 
----------------------------- 
Cessation of hostilities text 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Begin text to end armed confrontation: 
 
Modalities for the Implementation of the 
Cessation of Armed Confrontation 
 
26 OCTOBER 2008 
 
PREAMBLE: 
Pursuant to the 19 August 2008 Djibouti Agreement; 
effective 26 October 2008, the parties, TFG and ARS, have 
decided: 
 
¶I. CESSATION OF HOSTILITIES AND RAISING OF AWARENESS 
¶1.  To stop waging hostile campaign against each other by 
using the media both in the country and abroad. 
 
¶2. To call on supporters of the two parties and the Somali 
population to adhere and support this cessation of armed 
confrontation for the interest of Somalia. 
 
II. CEASEFIRE 
 
¶3. Effective 26 October 2008, ceasefire observance has been 
announced. It will become effective 5 November 2008. 
 
¶4. Initial troops to restore peace and security in 
 
DJIBOUTI 00000840  003 OF 003 
 
 
Mogadishu and other areas will be ready within a period of 
45 days, renewable, starting 10 November 2008. 
 
III. RELOCATION OF ETHIOPIAN TROOPS 
 
¶5. Starting 21 November 2008, the Ethiopian troops will 
relocate from areas of the cities of Beledweyn and 
Mogadishu such as Towfiq, Mogadishu Stadium, pasta factory, 
Heyle Barise and Headquarters of the Ministry of Defense. 
 
¶6. To avoid a security vacuum in the areas vacated by 
Ethiopian Forces, security will initially be the 
responsibility of AMISOM troops with the assistance of TFG 
and ARS security forces, until the deployment of UN Forces. 
 
¶7. The second phase of Ethiopian troop withdrawal should be 
completed within 120 days in accordance with the 19 August 
2008 Djibouti Agreement. 
 
IV. RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
¶8.  In the first phase, the TFG and ARS shall prepare a 
police force of 10,000 t maintain peace and security in 
Mogadishu and other regions. UNPOS is requested to cover 
the financial needs of the force starting 5 November 2008. 
 
¶9. Effective 10 November 2008, plus 15 days, the Joint 
Security Committee and its Subcommittees shall operate from 
Somalia to implement the general ceasefire. 
 
¶10. The Joint Security Committee shall operate to protect 
humanitarian assistance and access. 
 
¶11. The military technical details of these modalities will 
be developed within a period of 10 days from the signing of 
this agreement. 
 
[signed] 
Transitional Federal Government 
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia 
 
Witnessed by 
United Nations 
African Union 
 
End text. 
WONG