08KHARTOUM1577
UNAMID DEPLOYMENT UPDATE
Fri Oct 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3300
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1577/01 2981134
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241134Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2164
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001577 
 
DEPT FOR AF A/S FRAZER, SE WILLIAMSON, AF/SPG, AF/E 
NSC FOR PITTMAN AND HUDSON 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: UNAMID DEPLOYMENT UPDATE 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 1507 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Despite minor setbacks, UNAMID deployment appears 
to be on track; end of year deployment goals should be met.  As of 
October 22, UNAMID had received more than 50 percent of expected 
Darfur staffing with a combined total of 13,700 UNAMID military, 
police and civilian staff.  Deployment of the Egyptian and Ethiopian 
Battalions has been slow and at times contentious, but should be 
completed soon.  UNAMID welcomes U.S. airlift support, but has 
concerns about overburdening local airports. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Poloffs spoke with Wolfgang Weiszegger, Deputy Director of 
Mission Support, and LTC Rick Thompson, UNAMID Logistics Officer on 
October 22 to review the latest developments in UNAMID deployment. 
 
Deployment Goals 
----------------- 
¶3. (SBU) Both contacts agree that sixty percent deployment by the 
end of 2008 is achievable, although Thompson feels the El Geneina 
deployment timeline may have to be pushed back one or two weeks due 
to the effects of bad weather on road conditions and airlift 
capacity.  In anticipation of better weather, UNAMID has just 
released task orders for commercial contractor "Agility" to 
transport contingent-owned equipment (COE) from El Obeid to El 
Geneina.  Weisgegger stated that, as of October 22, UNAMID had 
received more than 50 per cent of expected Darfur staffing with a 
combined total of 13,700 UNAMID military, police and civilian staff. 
 
 
Equipment Movement and GoS Cooperation 
-------------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Weiszegger noted recent progress in resolving outstanding 
backlogged container transportation issues.  UNAMID has also 
resolved the contracting mechanism problem for transportation 
companies for West Darfur, and contractors will begin shipments on 
November 1.  Weiszegger recently signed a contract for two IL-76s to 
make  200 sorties "which will really help complement our land 
deliveries to the west."  Thompson confirmed that equipment is 
moving, but said it was contingent on GoS cooperation, which 
"depends on the area, the subject and the day."  Customs clearances 
have been steady, but lack of communication between national and 
local authorities have led to delays in container movements. 
Recently, the Wali of West Darfur wanted to open all UNAMID 
containers before allowing them to transit the state.  However, 
UNAMID requested national government intervention, and the 
containers were moved after a day or two without the disruption. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Weisgegger said communication within the GoS needs to be 
improved.  He appreciated the presence of a GoS Major General and 
two Colonels in Nyala and Geneina who are focusing just on 
coordination with UNAMID.  Thompson said GoS collaboration is best 
where UNAMID provides funding and materials such as the El Geniena 
Airport rehabilitation project.  However, the promised 24/7 
operation (not for flights, but for preparations) at the airfield is 
still lip-service as airport officials claim to lack funding for 
staff.  Airport management has reportedly asked repeatedly for 
additional funds. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Obtaining visas in a timely fashion continues to be an 
nagging impediment to deployment, though there have been some 
improvements.  Weiszegger noted the GoS granted and renewed over 
three hundred visas from Oct 12-16; however there is noticeable 
discrimination against many Western countries.  A Swedish contingent 
has been waiting for visas since April 30, and a German contingent 
has been waiting since July.  French and American staff officer 
visas are also pending. Weiszegger lamented, "After we meet to 
discuss visa issues, they approve one or two, but they have never 
issued all the visas we requested".  Weiszegger also noted that it 
would be better for UNAMID if visas were rejected rather than held 
up, "as we could submit new applications for other individuals, but 
they will never tell us 'no' outright as this would be a SOFA 
violation." 
 
U.S.-Provided Airlift Support 
------------------------------ 
¶7. (SBU) Potential U.S. air support is greatly appreciated by UNAMID 
HQ.  However, there are concerns that the airports may be unable to 
handle additional aircraft - especially overnight - as they are 
already close to capacity. The logistics of the airlift will have to 
be coordinated carefully given the constraints on the ground. 
 
FPUs 
----- 
¶8. (SBU) Over the last week, UNAMID received long-awaited Indonesian 
and Nepalese Formed Police Units (FPUs) which should improve 
 
KHARTOUM 00001577  002 OF 002 
 
 
security at more IDP camps.  The Nepalese are in temporary 
accommodations until they move to their assigned position in the 
Nyala super camp.  The 140-strong Indonesian FPU arrived Oct 9 
before their British sub-contractors built their camp.  Their 
equipment, with the exception of APCs, is in place.  The British 
contractors did not submit visa applications until last week so they 
still lack visas.  The contractors estimate they will require 
approximately 30 days from arrival to build the camp using 
prefabricated buildings.  Meanwhile, the Indonesians have been 
working with UNAMID to make use of PAE engineers to accomplish 
preliminary engineering to flatten a hill to accommodate their 
equipment.  Upcoming deployments of Bangladeshi and Egyptian units 
are still on track. 
 
Egyptian and Ethiopian Battalion Deployment 
------------------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) Weiszegger noted that deployment of the Ethiopian battalion 
is slow-going.  Load lists of equipment for the second Ethiopian 
battalion and a Senegalese battalion are due this week.  If this 
information is not received this week, it could jeopardize the 
arrival of 350 Ethiopians troops in February, and 450 more in March. 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Lt. Col. Thompson characterized the Egyptians as   "prima 
donnas."  The Egyptians agreed to the "Brown Field" concept under 
which they would build their own camp, but are now insisting moving 
into a completed camp in Um Kadada (east of El Fasher) where a 
Rwandan battalion is currently housed, instead of showing a 
willingness to build their own camp.  However, Thompson concedes 
that UNAMID contributed to the problem by not delivering all of the 
Egyptians' equipment as promised (and much that was delivered was 
damaged).  The displaced Rwandans were moved to the El Fasher super 
camp.  They are occupying a 500-space area in the transit camp that 
has been rushed into service until UNAMID can complete permanent 
facilities in the super camp in December. 
 
Comment 
-------- 
¶11. (SBU) Although UNAMID appears to be on track with current 
deployment timelines, meeting these goals is heavily dependent on 
cooperation with the GOS - thus continued pressure and engagement 
with the regime will be essential.  Nonetheless, UNAMID continues to 
make significant progress in terms of logistics and administration. 
UNAMID must begin to more fully address its strategy for fulfilling 
its humanitarian mandate, however.  DATT and polchief will travel to 
El Fasher next week to discuss core mission elements such as 
protection and verification/monitoring with senior UNAMID officers. 
 
FERNANDEZ