08STATE112275
GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING, OCTOBER 22
Wed Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2275 2960225
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 220220Z OCT 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 112275 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL LE IS SY
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING, OCTOBER 22 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message.  USUN is authorized to 
draw from points in para 2 below during the Middle East 
Briefing scheduled for October 22. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points. 
 
-- I would like to thank Special Coordinator Serry for his 
briefing on the situation in the Middle East.  This is a 
time of transition in the region, during which the State 
of Israel is working through the process of forming a new 
government, and the Palestinian Authority is working to 
institutionalize progress it has made in improving 
security and economic conditions on the ground.  At this 
juncture, the Council should be considering not only the 
problems we face, but the real opportunities for progress 
before us. 
 
-- At the September 26 Council meeting on the Situation in 
the Middle East, Secretary Rice asked that countries in 
the region, particularly Arab states, consider ways they 
might reach out to Israel to demonstrate their ongoing 
commitment to the peace process.  I wish to reiterate this 
request.  Efforts of this nature will be especially 
important in setting the right tone for constructive 
relations with the new Israeli government, and are far 
more likely to yield positive change than attempts to 
isolate Israel, focusing one-sidedly on only its 
responsibilities without reference to the larger 
context. 
 
-- The U.S. is strongly committed to realizing President 
Bush's vision of two states, Israel and Palestine.  We 
remain optimistic about the possibility of reaching that 
goal via our support for the parties' bilateral 
negotiations.  We believe these talks are sincere and 
substantive.  They are addressing all issues, and remain 
confidential at the parties' request. 
 
-- President Bush and Secretary Rice's personal engagement 
in support of this process demonstrates our commitment to 
achieving a peaceful, two-state solution as quickly as 
possible.  We are also pleased to see Israel and Syria in 
indirect talks and hope they will cover all the relevant 
issues, including Syria's support for terrorist groups in 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories.  The United States 
will continue to focus intensively on the Israeli- 
Palestinian track. 
 
-- There can be no lasting political solution that is not 
underpinned by a robust Palestinian economy.  The U.S. 
supports Prime Minister Fayyad's economic reforms and 
priorities as outlined in the Palestinian Reform and 
Development Plan. 
 
-- Secretary Rice underscored how both the public and 
private sectors are essential for sustainable development 
in her remarks to the Palestinian Business and Investment 
Forum in Washington on October 14.  The Secretary noted 
that Prime Minister Fayyad had erased millions in private 
debt and public salary arrears, preparing the way for the 
Palestinian Authority to shift its resources to invest in 
the infrastructure necessary to support continued private 
sector expansion. 
 
-- It is in this context, of opportunities for progress 
that should not be missed, that we encourage all states to 
contribute support to the Palestinian Authority.  To 
sustain this progress, it will need significant and 
regular flows of donor assistance throughout 2009.  The 
ability of the PA to meet its budget obligations, 
including payment of salaries and implementation of its 
security efforts throughout the West Bank, is critical to 
our shared goal of establishing a Palestinian state. 
 
-- For our own part, total U.S. assistance to the 
Palestinians in 2008 will surpass our pledged level of 
$555 million, including $264 million in project 
assistance, $150 million in direct budget support, and 
$184.6 million for the UN Relief and Works Agency.  We 
are transferring an additional $150 million in 
budgetary support to the Palestinian Authority as part of 
our ongoing commitment in fiscal year 2009. 
 
-- We urge all parties to adhere to the period of calm 
that began on June 19 as a result of Egypt's efforts.  We 
condemn violent efforts by Hamas and other groups to usurp 
the lawful authority of the Palestinian government in 
Gaza.  The Quartet's principles remain determinative: 
renunciation of violence, recognition of Israel, and 
acceptance of previous agreements between the parties. 
 
-- We reiterate our deep concern at continued Israeli 
settlement activity, which damages the atmosphere for 
negotiations, and call on Israel to freeze this activity 
and dismantle outposts erected since March 2001, 
consistent with its Roadmap obligations. 
 
-- Finally, I would like to say a few words about the 
situation in Lebanon, which faces its own transition in 
elections next year.  We welcome the arrival in Beirut of 
the new Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Michael Williams, 
and wish to express our strong support for his efforts in 
carrying out the important duties of this office. 
 
-- Implementation of UNSCRs 1559, 1680 and 1701, and 
fulfillment of the pledges made in the Doha Agreement, are 
essential to safeguard Lebanon's sovereignty and security. 
Two years after the conflict instigated by Hizballah, 
however, the rearmament of this group remains the most 
important matter for the Council to consider in Lebanon 
with regard to its duty to safeguard international peace 
and security.  We remain concerned at persistent reports 
of breaches of the arms embargo along the Lebanon-Syria 
border, and condemn continued Iranian and Syrian provision 
of lethal support to Hizballah and other terrorist groups 
inside Lebanon.  We join the Secretary General in noting 
that fullimplementation of the embargo as an indispensable 
part of resolution 1701 must be observed comprehensively 
and without exception. 
 
-- We look forward to speedy implementation of the October 
17 agreement between Syria and Lebanon to exchange 
diplomatic missions before the end of the year.  Full 
normalization must also include delineation of the 
Lebanese-Syrian border.  We call on the SYG to engage with 
both parties towards immediate progress on this issue. 
 
-- We welcome the Secretary General's intention to 
strengthen the diplomatic process aimed at dealing with 
the issue of the Sheba'a Farms.  We urge him to engage 
directly with Israel, Lebanon, and Syria on this issue. 
We also strongly support the work of the UN Independent 
Investigative Commission and look forward to the opening 
of a Special Tribunal for Lebanon. 
 
End points. 
RICE