08STATE112713
OSCE/PERMANENT COUNCIL: RESPONSE TO REPORT BY
Wed Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1884
OO RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHC #2713 2962226
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 222221Z OCT 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE IMMEDIATE 4732
INFO ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS STATE 112713 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OSCE PGOV PBTS KDEM MD RS
SUBJECT: OSCE/PERMANENT COUNCIL: RESPONSE TO REPORT BY 
HEAD OF MISSION TO MOLDOVA 
 
¶1. Post is authorized to present the following statement at 
the October 23 Permanent Council meeting in Vienna. 
 
Begin text: 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It is a pleasure to welcome Ambassador Remler to the 
Permanent Council today.  His report bears witness to the 
continuing energy and focus of the OSCE Mission to Moldova, 
and highlights efforts to resolve the Transnistria conflict 
and promote democratic progress. 
 
The United States recognizes the Mission's important 
contributions to resolving the Transnistria conflict.  Under 
the leadership of Special Envoy Talvitie, the 3 2 mediators 
and observers have worked diligently to resume talks in the 
5 2 format, the only appropriate mechanism for a transparent 
and enduring settlement supported by the parties, the 
neighbors, and the international community.  Regrettably, the 
Transnistrian side declined to attend a 5 2 meeting scheduled 
for early October.  It is our hope that all participants soon 
will return to the negotiating table to discuss the core 
issues of the conflict, including the definition of 
Transnistria's status within Moldova.  To that end, we 
welcome in particular Ambassador Remler's report that 
President Voronin plans to share his ideas on a settlement - 
which we consider even-handed and thoughtful - with 
Transnistrian authorities. A settlement respecting Moldova's 
independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity must be 
the goal of all our efforts. 
 
It is also our hope that participants will take practical 
steps to build confidence and clear the way for a final 
resolution of the conflict.  Toward that end, we hope to see 
working groups identify specific means of improving 
cooperation and communication between the two sides.  This 
month President Voronin proposed that the sides destroy all 
offensive military equipment, a constructive proposal that 
would build confidence across the Nistru River and contribute 
to a peaceful and secure Moldova.  We also hope to see 
progress on the withdrawal of Russian munitions from the 
Transnistrian region of Moldova.  This is, of course, an 
important practical aspect of the broader commitment Russia 
made at Istanbul on the withdrawal of its forces.  The OSCE 
Mission to Moldova is well placed to facilitate forward 
movement on this commitment, while also ensuring both sides 
continue to exercise restraint. 
 
As Ambassador Remler noted, the OSCE Mission to Moldova is 
also ideally suited to provide advice and expertise on issues 
of democratic development, especially as Moldova's 
parliamentary elections approach.  We welcome the Mission's 
efforts to help Moldova ensure that its electoral process and 
the overall electoral environment uphold OSCE principles and 
commitments, and commend the Mission's efforts to help 
Moldova broaden media access and guarantee freedom of 
assembly. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, the United States commends the 
Mission's dedication to helping government authorities and 
civil society build capacity to fight trafficking in human 
beings, one of the most serious problems Moldova faces today. 
 
 
In conclusion, let me say the United States continues to 
support the activities of the OSCE Mission to Moldova, and 
congratulates Ambassador Remler and his staff for their 
excellent work.  We look forward to real progress in efforts 
to resolve the Transnistria conflict and further Moldova's 
democratic transformation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
End text. 
RICE