04MADRID3072
SPRING 2005 INTERN PROGRAM
Wed Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 003072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/EX/PER-MARIE PYLE AND EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER AMGT ASEC SP
SUBJECT: SPRING 2005 INTERN PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 162896 
 
¶1. In response to REFTEL, Spain wishes to participate 
in the Spring 2005 Intern Program. 
 
¶2. Pertinent data is outlined below in the order 
requested: 
 
¶A. Number of interns requested: 
 
Embassy Madrid - seven - one for the Political Section, 
two for the Management Section, two for Public Affairs 
and two for the Consular Section. 
 
Consulate General Barcelona - two - one for 
Political/Economic Affairs and one for Public Affairs. 
 
¶B. A 3/3 level of Spanish is required for all interns 
except for the IM/MGT intern for whom Spanish is 
preferable but not required.  All interns are required 
to work a full time 40 hour/week schedule.  Barcelona 
Public Affairs requires at least a 3/3 level of 
Spanish. Fluency is required for Political/Economic 
Affairs. 
 
¶C. Other special selection criteria:  It is preferred 
for the Public Affairs Cultural Affairs intern to have 
previous study/living in Spain.  The Consular Section 
interns will be working with the public and must be 
able to work full time.  Barcelona prefers that its 
Political/Economic Affairs intern have a background in 
economics, politics or international relations.  The 
intern for Public Affairs should have background in 
international relations, journalism, and basic 
knowledge of Spanish culture, society and history. 
 
¶D. Sections of assignment: 
 
Embassy Madrid - Political, Management, Public Affairs 
and Consular Sections. 
 
Consulate General Barcelona - Political/Economic 
Affairs, Public Affairs 
 
¶E. Name and title post intern contact: 
 
Madrid -Jose Salces, Human Resources Specialist 
Telephone: 011-34-91-587-2328, fax 011-34-91-587-2229 
E-mail address: salcesj@state.gov 
 
Barcelona - Josefina Guitart, Administrative Assistant 
Telephone: 011-34-93-675-4285, fax 011-34-93-205-7764 
E-mail address: guitartj@state.gov 
 
¶F. Specific duties/projects: 
 
MADRID: 
 
Political Section - help update the annual human rights 
report and work on other political topics/projects. 
 
Management Section - One intern will be assigned to the 
Information Management (IM) section.  The intern will 
help implement an improved quality management program 
by assisting unit managers in drafting quality service 
manuals and operational procedures and policies 
documentation which are compatible with guidelines set 
forth in ISO 9000 publications relating to acceptable 
information technology industry standards.  The other 
intern will assist various management subsections with 
a variety of projects.  Some of these are: conduct a 
comprehensive analysis of privileges and immunities for 
USDH employees.  Evaluate space allocations and use in 
the chancery.  Analyze work processes and draft SOPs. 
Review and revise Management policy notices.  Update 
web design. 
 
Public Affairs - The intern assigned to the Media 
Relations Office will be asked to do regular press work 
consisting of press releases, media reaction, reading 
the newspapers and selecting clips and regular office 
duties.  The intern in the Cultural Affairs Office will 
do regular cultural related work: research through 
internet, help on special programs, updating of lists 
and regular office duties. 
 
Consular Section - while working in the Visa Units and 
the American Citizen Services Unit, the interns will 
screen and provide visa information to applicants and 
provide assistance and information to American citizens 
abroad.  Interns will also work on special projects 
such as evaluating and coordinating public information 
disseminated through embassy and State Department web 
sites, printed material and caller information 
services. 
 
BARCELONA 
Political/Economic Affairs - intern will be responsible 
for gathering economic and political data for both 
regular and occasional reports.  Will assist with 
quarterly economic reports, compilation of biographical 
data, etc.  Intern will also review various news 
sources (Aragon, Balearic Islands, Andorra, etc.) and 
gather information as necessary. 
 
Public Affairs - Regular presswork, reading the 
newspapers, selecting clips and drafting op-eds. 
Support the Information Resource Center research work 
through the Internet; support specific PA projects 
(particularly speaker programs); and regular office 
duties. 
 
¶G. Housing: Madrid and Barcelona cannot repeat cannot 
provide housing.  Estimate of living expenses is as 
follows: meals and incidentals are similar to 
Washington, D.C.  Lodging expenses can vary from 450 
U.S. dollars/month if an adequate room is found in a 
family home to 2,800 U.S. dollars/month for a fully 
furnished apartment in the city.  Please note that it 
is difficult to rent a moderately priced apartment in 
the city for a less than a six-month period. 
 
¶H. Visa requirements: none for a stay of less than 
ninety days. If an intern is coming to Spain also to 
study, a student visa should be obtained from the 
Spanish Embassy or Consulates in the U.S. 
 
¶3. Thank you very much for your assistance.  Manzanares