04MADRID2430
Country Clearance granted for EPA Brobst and
Mon Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 002430 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO EPA/OIA:WAXMONSKY 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA TPHY KSCA SENV SP
SUBJECT: Country Clearance granted for EPA Brobst and 
Bastian 
 
REF: SECSTATE 138615 
 
1.Post welcomes and grants clearance to EPA Officials 
Robert Bastian, Office of Water and Robert Brobst, 
Region 8 to travel to Barcelona, Spain July 9 -16. They 
are to attend the Middle East Multilateral working 
group on the Environment: Water Reuse workshop. 
Travelers will participate by giving presentations and 
serving as session moderators. 
 
¶2. Embassy understands that no assistance is necessary. 
 
3.Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business 
need to obtain a Spanish visa prior to their arrival. 
 
4.In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and other 
large cities in Spain attract a number of criminals and 
pickpockets and frequent incidents of crimes of 
opportunity against the unwary occur.  Carry only 
essential items, including a photocopy of your 
passport.  Visitors can protect themselves from crime 
by being street-smart, alert, and aware of their 
surroundings.  In the event you are victimized by 
crime, or experience any other security-related 
incident, please contact the Embassy's Regional 
Security Office at (91) 587-2550.  Additional 
information regarding safety and security in Spain is 
available on the U.S. Department of State's website 
(http://www.state.gov). 
 
5.Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent 
Worldwide Caution issued by the Department of State. 
As the Department of State continues to develop 
information on any potential security threats to 
Americans overseas, it shares credible threat 
information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on 
the Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded 
information by calling the Department of State in 
Washington, D.C. at 202-647-5225 from their touch-tone 
telephone, or receive information by automated telefax 
by dialing 202-647-3000 from their fax machine. 
 ARGYROS