05MADRID105
SPAIN PLEDGES A GENEROUS RESPONSE TO TSUNAMI
Wed Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121544Z Jan 05UNCLAS MADRID 000105 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID AEMR PGOV SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN PLEDGES A GENEROUS RESPONSE TO TSUNAMI 
DISASTER 
 
REF: STATE 03792 
 
¶1. Summary:  The GOS has pledged a robust EUR 56 million (USD 
74 million) aid package to the Asian countries inundated by 
the December tsunami.  This package includes EUR 50 million 
(USD 66.1 million) in reconstruction credits and EUR 6 
million (USD 7.9 million) in humanitarian assistance.  In 
addition, the GOS will deploy nearly 600 soldiers, three 
planes and a naval vessel in the region to assist the aid 
mission.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Providing humanitarian assistance to Asian countries 
affected by the tsunami is a major priority for the GOS. 
Foreign Minister Moratinos and Secretary of State for 
International Assistance Leire Pajin departed Jan 10 for a 
fact-finding mission to Sri Lanka, Thailand and Indonesia. 
Secretary General of Spain's aid agency (AECI) represented 
 
SIPDIS 
Spain in the February 11 UN meeting in Geneva.  Spain's aid 
package will amount to over EUR 56 million (USD 74 million). 
Spain's aid effort is being supported by the military, which 
is deploying a force of almost 600 soldiers, three planes and 
several ships in the region. 
 
----------- 
Aid Package 
----------- 
 
¶3. We spoke with Cabinet Advisor to the Secretary of State 
for International Aid David del Campo to confirm Spain's aid 
contribution.  Del Campo stated that Spain pledged EUR 50 
million (USD 66.1 million) in Official Development Assistance 
credits for reconstruction, and will spend at least EUR 6 
million (USD 7.9 million) on emergency humanitarian 
assistance.  The GOS plans to send a plane of emergency 
assistance every 10 days until the situation has improved. 
Should the acute humanitarian situation be prolonged, the 
amount of aid provided will increase. 
 
¶4. Spain's emergency humanitarian assistance includes at 
least EUR 1 million (USD 1.3 million) donated by the 
governments of Spain's autonomous regions.  The regional 
government of Catalonia and Catalan municipal governments 
provided EUR 480 thousand (USD 635 thousand) of regional 
contributions. 
 
----------------------------- 
High Level Political Interest 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. President Zapatero held a press conference on January 8 to 
publicize Spain's response to the tsunami disaster.  He 
dispatched January 10 Foreign Minister Moratinos and 
Secretary of State for International Aid Leire Pajin to the 
 
SIPDIS 
region to meet with officials in Sri Lanka, Thailand and 
Indonesia.  In delivering reftel, we learned that the AECI 
Secretary General Juan Pablo de Laiglesia represented Spain 
 
SIPDIS 
at the January 11 UN Donor's Conference in Geneva.  Defense 
Minister Bono also worked closely with President Zapatero and 
other ministers on Spain's humanitarian response. 
 
------------------- 
Military Deployment 
------------------- 
 
¶6. Econoff spoke with The Ministry of Defense's Deputy 
Director General for Cooperation and Civil Defense General 
Jose Antonio Company Follana regarding Spain's military 
deployment in support of humanitarian efforts in the tsunami 
zone.  General Company confirmed that Spain would soon deploy 
a total force of 594 troops in the region.  Five transport 
planes were sent to Sumatra, and three will remain deployed 
in the region along with the first tranche of 70 troops. 
Spain will also send an amphibious ship, with a unit of 
engineers, a mobile hospital and helicopters. 
 
¶7. Comment. The GOS has made its humanitarian response to the 
Southeast Asian tsunami a high profile issue.  Spain's 
relatively generous aid package of EUR 56 million to a 
humanitarian disaster is noteworthy for a country that was 
itself an aid recipient during the past two decades.  The 
Socialist government has promised to increase international 
assistance during the next four years.  Spain's large tsunami 
aid package and its efforts at the highest governmental 
levels certainly indicate the GOS commitment to keeping that 
pledge.  We can also posit that the Zapatero government might 
view aid policy as an area where Spain is can take a more 
active international role in the next few years. 
MANZANARES