05MADRID3149
TFUS 01:  AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH FM MORATINOS
Tue Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 003149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12950: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID PREL US SP
SUBJECT:  TFUS 01:  AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH FM MORATINOS 
REGARDING SPANISH ASSISTANCE FOLLOWING HURRICANE KATRINA 
 
REFERENCE:  State 163366 
 
¶1.  Summary:  In a September 5 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Spanish FM Moratinos made clear Spain's desire to assist the 
United States in the wake of Hurricane Katrina.  After 
working through the reftel list of requested items, Spain is 
assembling materiel and has made two Spanish Hercules 
transports available for lift.  We are currently waiting for 
confirmation of landing slots at Little Rock AFB for the 
Spanish aircraft and assistance.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  The Ambassador met with Minister Moratinos September 5 
and began by thanking the Foreign Minister for the Spanish 
expressions of condolences and for Spain's offer of support. 
The Ambassador noted President Zapatero had informed him of 
the decision by the Spanish Government to authorize the use 
of Spanish Oil reserves (approximately 65,000 gals/day) to 
be released for use by the United States and that the 
Spanish were disposed to provide more assistance.  The 
Ambassador told Moratinos this was appreciated immensely and 
was indicative of how good friends and allies respond to 
each other in their hour of need.  Moratinos reported that 
he had had good conversations with Secretary Rice as well 
and that he had sent her a letter thanking her for the 
excellent and extraordinary efforts made by all to get the 
Spanish Parliamentarian and her family who were in the New 
Orleans Convention center out and safely into the hands of 
the Spanish Consul in Houston. 
 
¶3.  Ambassador thanked FM Moratinos for making Spanish oil 
reserves available and also presented the list of items 
provided reftel.   This message had been reviewed with the 
Deputy Foreign Minister on Sunday so the Foreign Minister 
was prepared to discuss.  The Minister advised the 
Ambassador the Foreign Ministry was working with different 
Spanish agencies (Ministries of Defense and Interior, the 
Spanish development agency AECI, and the Ministry of Health) 
as well as with various Autonomous Regions to develop a list 
of what could be made available quickly. 
 
¶4.  At the conclusion of the meeting the Minister and the 
Ambassador held a press conference where the Foreign 
Minister restated Spanish condolences and offers of support. 
He indicated the Ambassador had presented a list of needs 
that the Spanish were reviewing and that the Spanish would 
be as helpful and supportive as possible to help the U.S. 
people.  The Ambassador restated his thanks and appreciation 
to the Spanish Government and again asked Spanish citizens 
inclined to help to do so with money via Red Cross or 
Salvation Army. 
 
¶5.  In the evening of September 5, the DCM and Econ 
Counselor met with a coordinating group from the Spanish 
Government, including representatives from AECI (Spanish 
development agency), the Ministers of Defense, Foreign 
Affairs, Interior, and Health, and the Presidency.  Each 
group present reviewed the USG list of needed items and 
discussed possibilities for rapid assistance.  The Spanish 
are already participating in the NATO and EU responses to 
Hurricane Katrina.  The clear focus from the Presidency and 
MFA, however, was that the window for assistance was narrow 
and Spain wants to be seen as providing bilateral 
assistance.  They pushed Defense hard to make Spanish flag 
Hercules transports available and pushed the Ministry of 
Health representatives to come up with basic health 
supplies.  The Spanish POC, Pablo Muelas Garcia, from AECI, 
promised an answer by the morning of September 6. 
 
¶6.  Early on September 6, the Spanish MOD informed the 
embassy that two Spanish Hercules transports were available 
to fly to the United States departing the evening of 
September 6.  The MOD representative did not yet have a 
manifest of assistance, but reported that it would include 
basic medical supplies and MREs.  He requested contact 
points in the United States.  EconOff contacted Little Rock 
AFB/OFDA (POC:  Romero Galvez - 703-526-2210) to discuss the 
GOS offer. Galvez confirmed that Little Rock was the 
only/only base that should receive such assistance (for 
logistical reasons) and that it was already fully booked for 
September 6.  He asked me to ask the Spanish Government to 
delay for 24 hours and that Little Rock AFB should be able 
to receive the two Hercules tomorrow.  Galvez promised to e- 
mail EconOff with the requested contact information and time 
slot information.  EconOff then called the Spanish MOD POC 
and relayed the above information.  EconOff  then passed the 
information to Eduardo Martinez in TF1. 
 
¶7.  Embassy will report Spanish plans as soon as we confirm 
landing slots in Little Rock. 
AGUIRRE