05MADRID743
RACIAL HATE CRIME IN MADRID AGAINST AMERICAN
Fri Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

251620Z Feb 05UNCLAS MADRID 000743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/ICI/PII, DS/DSS/ITA, S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC
SUBJECT: RACIAL HATE CRIME IN MADRID AGAINST AMERICAN 
CITIZEN-STUDENTS 
 
 
¶1.  On the evening of February 22, following a Real Madrid 
Soccer game, five male and three female students, all from 
Columbia University but now attending Syracuse University in 
Madrid, were assaulted by five persons who identified 
themselves as "nazis" and had shaved heads.  The students 
were exiting a restaurant near the soccer stadium around 0130 
hours when without warning, the five "nazi youth" attacked 
specifically the three African Americans in the group.  The 
two males not being attacked attempted to assist their 
friends and were "maced" and struck.  The three females fled 
the scene looking for help.  One of the primary victims was 
hit on the head, which later at the hospital was treated with 
2 staples.  Another was cut by an edged weapon under the eye 
and received 8 micro stitches.  There were numerous bruises 
and minor injuries from punches and kicks.  During the 
incident, the attackers yelled racially insulting remarks. 
Phrases such as "racial purity" and "racial supremacy" were 
reported by the students.  The students eventually caused the 
attackers to flee the scene. 
 
¶2.  The students discovered that a cellphone of the 
"skinheads" had been dropped and found two plainclothes 
police in the area to report the incident to and turned over 
the evidence.  The police indicated that they had been 
specifically stationed in the area anticipating this sort of 
"hooliganism" following the match.  The police also indicated 
that they had witnessed the end of the fight and the fleeing 
of the attackers.  The police assisted the students to the 
hospital and directed them to the local police headquarters 
to file their report. 
 
¶3.  At 0730 hours on February 23, the students returned to 
the police station to add information to their report and to 
collect a copy for providing to their school authorities. 
Later, at 1400 hours, it was learned that through 
identification of the cellphone, the police had arrested four 
of the perpetrators.  NOTE: In Spain, a special unit exists 
which deals exclusively with racial hate crimes.  The police 
also arranged for a "line-up" for attacker identification for 
the students. 
 
¶4.  On the morning of February 24, the Syracuse University 
school administrator contacted the RSO to report the incident 
and to ask if the students could meet with him to discuss the 
attack.  At 1400 hours, the five male students met in the RSO 
office.  The RSO obtained the details of the attack and 
allowed them to vent their understandable anger and then 
discussed with them the need to move beyond their thoughts of 
regressing to vengeance and focus on their reason for being 
in Spain.  After an hour, the RSO took the young men to 
American Citizen Services to register their incident.  The 
RSO and FSNI are currently working with the Hate Crimes 
Police to investigate the incident.  The normal penalty for 
this crime is a sentence of approximately one year in prison. 
 (Comment: With the eyes of the Olympic Committee looking at 
Madrid for a possible future site, we anticipate excellent 
cooperation). 
 
¶5.  Spain has long been a country with small but strong 
Fascist-type factions, who demonstrate regularly and hold 
annual gatherings.  They are not thought of well by the 
community but are allowed to voice their opinions and 
unfortunately on occasion, their fanaticism is demonstrated 
in incidents such as this one.  The newspapers have recently 
carried articles criticizing these groups and seeking more 
controls by the GOS.  S