05MADRID1252
FALL 2005 INTERN PROGRAM
Thu Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 001252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/EX/PER-MARIE PYLE AND EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER AMGT ASEC SP
SUBJECT: FALL 2005 INTERN PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 34013 
 
¶1. In response to REFTEL, Spain wishes to participate 
in the Fall 2005 Intern Program. 
 
¶2. Pertinent data is outlined below in the order 
requested: 
 
¶A. Number of interns requested: 
 
Embassy Madrid - seven - one for the Economic Section, 
one for the Political Section, one for the Management 
Section, two for Public Affairs and two for the 
Consular Section. 
 
Consulate General Barcelona -one for Political/Economic 
Affairs. 
 
¶B. A 3/3 level of Spanish is required for all interns 
except for the MGT intern for whom Spanish is 
preferable but not required.  Barcelona requires 
fluency.  All interns are required to work a full time 
40 hour/week schedule. 
 
¶C. Other special selection criteria:  The Economic 
Section intern should have studies related to 
Economics, Finance, Spanish or European affairs.  It is 
preferred for the Public Affairs Cultural Affairs 
intern to have previous study/living in Spain.  The 
Consular Section interns will be working with the 
public and must be able to work full time.  Barcelona 
prefers that its Political/Economic Affairs intern have 
a background in economics, politics or international 
relations. 
 
¶D. Sections of assignment: 
 
Embassy Madrid - Economic, Political, Management, 
Public Affairs and Consular Sections. 
 
Consulate General Barcelona - Political/Economic 
Affairs 
 
¶E. Name and title post intern contact: 
 
Madrid -Jose Salces, Human Resources Specialist 
Telephone: 011-34-91-587-2328, fax 011-34-91-587-2229 
E-mail address: salcesj@state.gov 
 
Barcelona - Josefina Guitart, Administrative Assistant 
Telephone: 011-34-93-675-4285, fax 011-34-93-205-7764 
E-mail address: guitartj@state.gov 
 
¶F. Specific duties/projects: 
 
MADRID: 
 
Economic Section - work on issues related to the E.U. 
Draft/write reports, cables and correspondence, and 
take notes during official meetings.  Will be invited 
to meetings, representational events and outside 
lectures. 
 
 
Political Section - help update the annual human rights 
report and work on other political topics/projects. 
 
The intern will assist various management subsections 
with a variety of projects.  Some of these are: conduct 
a comprehensive analysis of privileges and immunities 
for USDH employees; evaluate space allocations and use 
in the chancery; analyze work processes and draft SOPs 
and review and revise Management policy notices.  The 
intern will also participate in Information Management 
projects and web design. 
 
Public Affairs - The intern assigned to the Media 
Relations Office will be asked to do regular press work 
consisting of press releases, media reaction, reading 
the newspapers and selecting clips and regular office 
duties.  The intern in the Cultural Affairs Office will 
do regular cultural related work: research through 
internet, help on special programs, updating of lists 
and regular office duties. 
 
Consular Section - while working in the Visa Units and 
the American Citizen Services Unit, the interns will 
screen and provide visa information to applicants and 
provide assistance and information to American citizens 
abroad.  Interns will also work on special projects 
such as evaluating and coordinating public information 
disseminated through embassy and State Department web 
sites, printed material and caller information 
services. 
BARCELONA 
 
Political/Economic Affairs - intern will be responsible 
for gathering economic and political data for both 
regular and occasional reports.  Will assist with 
quarterly economic reports, compilation of biographical 
data, etc.  Intern will also review various news 
sources (Aragon, Balearic Islands, Andorra, etc.) and 
gather information as necessary. 
 
¶G. Housing: Madrid and Barcelona cannot repeat cannot 
provide housing.  Estimate of living expenses is as 
follows: meals and incidentals are similar to 
Washington, D.C.  Lodging expenses can vary from 450 
U.S. dollars/month if an adequate room is found in a 
family home to 2,800 U.S. dollars/month for a fully 
furnished apartment in the city.  Please note that it 
is difficult to rent a moderately priced apartment in 
the city for a less than a six-month period. 
 
¶H. Visa requirements: none for a stay of less than 
ninety days. If an intern is coming to Spain also to 
study, a student visa should be obtained from the 
Spanish Embassy or Consulates in the U.S. 
 
¶3. Thank you very much for your assistance.  Manzanares