08DUSHANBE1317
TAJIKISTAN: AFGHAN REFUGEE UPDATE
Fri Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dushanbe
VZCZCXRO7751
RR RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHDBU #1317/01 2910647
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170647Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1055
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 0230
RUSBPW/AMCONSUL PESHAWAR 0016
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0268
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0006
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0179
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0166UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DUSHANBE 001317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SCA/CEN, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL PGOV PHUM UNHCR TI AF
 
SUBJECT: TAJIKISTAN: AFGHAN REFUGEE UPDATE 
 
REFTEL: DUSHANBE 564 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: According to government data through August, the number 
of new arrivals claiming asylum in Tajikistan, mainly from 
Afghanistan, had reached 957 persons, 212 more than in all of 2007. 
UNHCR reports that the Tajik government is denying status to a 
higher percentage of refugees often for vague reasons and that many 
refugee children are working rather than attending school. The 
increased numbers, coupled with the perceived deteriorating security 
situation in Afghanistan, have raised concerns among both UNHCR 
staff and international development organizations in Tajikistan. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. On October 9, Emboff met with Ilija Todorovic, UNHCR 
representative to Tajikistan, and Benjamin Phillips, Central Asia 
Director of Save the Children, to discuss the current refugee 
situation.  According to official statistics provided by the 
Government of Tajikistan, there are 1,584 refugees and 231 asylum 
seekers currently in country.  UNHCR reports that 501 persons 
approached their office since January, 327 of whom had arrived in 
¶2008.  Almost all of those who approached UNHCR are ethnic Tajik 
Afghan nationals, with only eight cases (46 persons) of Hazara 
ethnicity, four cases (22 persons) of Pashtun ethnicity, and two Sri 
Lankans.  Government data also indicates refugees from Iran, Iraq, 
Cameroon and Nigeria in country.  UNHCR reports that reasons given 
by refugees for leaving Afganistan include: forced marriage; general 
insecurity; health issues; reunification with prior refugee cases; 
conflict with armed groups and/or the Taliban; land, property or 
heritage issues; personal enmity; kidnapping; and, increasingly, 
work with international organizations.  Todorovic projected that 
Tajikistan would see nearly 1,300 newcomers this year. 
 
¶3. Both Todorovic and Phillips expressed concern at the growing 
number of refugee children working instead of attending school. 
According to Todorovic, there are a "surprising" number of Afghan 
refugee children working in the local markets and bazaars, mainly as 
porters for customers and vendors.  An asylum seeker is not legally 
authorized to work until accorded refugee status by the government. 
The process, which can drag through administrative appeals processes 
and court hearings if denied, means that even those refugees who 
arrive in Tajikistan with some means to support themselves find that 
lifeline quickly runs out. 
 
¶4. Todorovic noted that the percentage of asylum seekers actually 
accepted by the government has been decreasing, from 40% in 2007 to 
nearly 20% now.  This, according to Todorovic, is putting a strain 
on the local NGOs that provide legal counseling that UNHCR works 
with, as they then file appeals for the denied asylum seekers. 
Reasons for denial are often vague and difficult to counter, such as 
speaking out against the government of Tajikistan.  Another reason 
often given is the violation of the government resolutions 
prohibiting the settlement of refugees in the urban areas of 
Dushanbe and Khujand.  Investigators head to where the asylum seeker 
claims to live, and when they discover, as is almost always the 
case, that the person is actually living in Dushanbe, the asylum 
petition is subsequently denied. 
 
¶5. Afghan refugees, however, continue to head directly for Dushanbe. 
 In an effort to get around the prohibition of living in the city, a 
large community of Afghans has sprung up in Vakhdat, a small town 
Qlarge community of Afghans has sprung up in Vakhdat, a small town 
about 20 kilometers east of Dushanbe.  UNHCR knows of 260 refugee 
families who settled there last year.  Todorovic claimed that the 
"capacity" of Vakhdat to absorb more refugees is wearing thin. 
UNHCR is hearing of more Afghans settling in Gissor, to the 
south-west of Dushanbe.  UNHCR currently does not have a local 
presence in that area. 
 
¶6. According to UNHCR, the government continues to defend the ban on 
refugee settlement in Dushanbe and Khunjand.  They claim 
overcrowding, increased crime, and displacement of Tajik citizens 
from markets as reasons they must keep the prohibition in place. 
Less often mentioned, according to Todorovic, but likely the 
overriding concern, is the fear on the part of Tajik authorities 
that when (not if) the security situation in Afghanistan completely 
collapses, Dushanbe will become a destination for thousands of 
refugees because there will be an established community here. 
 
¶7. Both Phillips and Todorovic pressed the need for preemptive 
action to prevent the deteriorating situation that refugees in 
Tajikistan currently face.  The lack of social services, education, 
health services, trauma counseling, psychological assistance and 
basic shelter for many of the new arrivals will only be compounded 
 
DUSHANBE 00001317  002 OF 002 
 
 
should the numbers keep increasing.  Both expressed their concern 
that violence in Afghanistan is increasing, that the definition of 
the Taliban is changing to include all opposition to the state, that 
international organizations are being increasingly targeted (and are 
indeed resettling their own staff within Afghanistan) as factors 
that demonstrate that the numbers will continue to rise.  Although 
he had no firm numbers at the meeting, Todorovic also stated that 
they were seeing increased numbers arriving from southern 
Afghanistan, a group that had previously headed to Pakistan for 
refuge. 
 
¶8. Todorovic ended the meeting by stressing that UNHCR itself was 
not looking for more funding outside of established channels. 
Rather, he and Phillips wanted to make sure that post was aware of 
the situation and could help target funding directly to the local 
implementers, such as the legal service NGOs.  Todorovic again 
expressed his appreciation for the FY08 Taft Fund grant that post 
received to renovate three schools in Dushanbe.  That grant focused 
on the long-staying refugee population, those that had been in 
Tajikistan for more than 15 years.  Only recently have the new 
arrivals garnered attention.  The integration of the long-stayers 
into Tajik society remains a priority of the UNHCR office in 
Tajikistan (reftel), and could provide a basis for the further 
integration of new arrivals if successful.  In the meantime, there 
is an acute fear of an impending humanitarian crisis in Tajikistan 
this coming winter, which will impact refugee populations that much 
more seriously and impair the ability of Tajik society to absorb 
refugees. 
 
JACOBSON