04DJIBOUTI299
DISCONTENT IN THE DJIBOUTIAN MILITARY
Wed Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L DJIBOUTI 000299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/02/2014 
TAGS: MARR MOPS PGOV PREL PM DJ
SUBJECT: DISCONTENT IN THE DJIBOUTIAN MILITARY 
 
 
Classified By: POLOFF CHASE BEAMER FOR REASONS 1.5 B 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) USLO Chief has learned that on Saturday, February 28 
large groups of soldiers in the interior districts of Dikhil, 
Tadjoura, and Obock refused to accept their monthly salaries. 
 Four high ranking Djiboutian military officers have since 
been dispatched to the districts to engage the disgruntled 
troops and address their complaints.  Hypotheses are 
circulating as to the origins of the problem but each is in 
some way tied to the military pay scale.  Senior officials in 
Djibouti city downplay the significance of the action 
claiming that all differences will be resolved shortly. 
 
HYPOTHESES 
---------- 
 
¶2. (C)  There are effectively two types of soldiers in the 
Djiboutian Military:  those enlisted through standard 
procedure and those mobilized specifically for the civil war 
in the early 1990's.  Troops mobilized for the civil war have 
remained on military payrolls at a reduced pay rate since the 
end of the country's civil war.  In addition, in 2002 
President Guelleh created a "Republican Guard" force in 
reaction to a failed "coup d'etat" led by former Police Chief 
and Guelleh insider Yacin Yalah Galab.  Guelleh was less than 
thrilled by the military's response in defense of the 
Presidency during the hours long insurgency.  He established 
a 300 member elite protection force composed in overwhelming 
part of members of his sub-clan, the Issa Mammasan, and under 
the direction (in practice if not in theory) of his National 
Security Advisor Hassan Said Khaireh.  The Republican Guard 
is the best equipped and trained force in the country.  It is 
the only portion of the military to receive supplemental 
"danger pay" and monthly food rations.  The Republican Guards 
were recently enlarged to 500 members following a much 
publicized reduction of the Police Force to meet European 
Union demobilization mandates.  In January, the Republican 
Guard celebrated its second anniversary on national 
television with much fanfare and numerous promotions.  Some 
feel that the privilege of the Republican Guard has stirred 
resentment among the rest of the Djiboutian military and 
brought them to act.  Sources say that Djiboutian Military 
Chief of Staff General Fahti cut an approximately U.S. $30 a 
month food stipend from the standing military's monthly 
paycheck and that this, on top of the standing food ration 
the Republican Guard receives, was too much for soldiers to 
bear. 
 
¶3. (C)  A second and perhaps related but unconfirmed rumor in 
Djibouti City portrays a small clique of four or five young 
military officers as piqued at the slow rates of promotion in 
recent years.  This clique has organized troops in the 
interior on this issue.  Reportedly, the officers have widely 
circulated a petition at the lower levels of the military 
recruiting other officers for their protest.  The widespread 
and unified actions of soldiers in three different districts 
would suggest some level of organization and coordination 
beyond the capacity of junior non-commissioned officers and 
soldiers. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4. (C)  While the details of this incident are still gray one 
can ascertain from the absences of General Zakaria, Colonel 
Bouh, LtColonel Abdoulrahman, and Commandant Osman from the 
capital simultaneously that the Djiboutian leadership is 
treating the matter seriously.  Djibouti is under pressure 
from International donors to demobilize the mission-less 
military (Djibouti's territorial defense is guaranteed by 
French forces) and trim bureaucratic fat.  At the same time 
Djibouti's economy remains weak and unemployment is chronic. 
Add to these factors simmering resentment towards President 
Guelleh's private tribal army and you likely are not far from 
the root of these events.  End comment. 
 
RAGSDALE