04PANAMA924
PANAMA: THE CAMPAIGN OF ARNULFISTA PRESIDENTIAL
Thu Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 PANAMA 000924 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN/BRIGHAM 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/16/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR PM POLITICS FOREIGN POLICY
SUBJECT: PANAMA: THE CAMPAIGN OF ARNULFISTA PRESIDENTIAL 
CANDIDATE JOSE MIGUEL ALEMAN. IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. 
INTERESTS 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 0802 
     ¶B. PANAMA 0828 
     ¶C. PANAMA 0875 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Linda E. Watt for reasons 1.4 (b) & (d) 
 
 
Summary: Behind and fighting the Anti-Moscoso Vote 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 

¶1.  (C) Arnulfista Presidential Candidate Jose Miguel Aleman, 
a distant third in most public opinion polls, seeks to emerge 
from President Moscoso's shadow to place first in Panama's 
May 2 elections.  Neutralizing Aleman's greatest logistical 
asset, the three-party coalition that backs him and its 
political machine, President Moscoso has become his greatest 
liability.  While Aleman's opponents blame the Moscoso 
Administration for Panama's every woe and promise to remedy 
all, Aleman has to tiptoe around Moscoso's policies, 
particularly those that he helped implement as her Foreign 
Minister (September 1999 - January 2003).  Post-election, 
Aleman must also break Moscoso's grasp on the Arnulfista 
Party, over which she currently presides with an iron grip. 
Many political insiders believe that the party's strong 
grass-roots structure will propel Aleman past current number 
two, former President Guillermo Endara, but few deny that 
Endara and Aleman will compete for the same voters, who 
dislike Martin Torrijos and his Democratic Revolutionary 
Party (PRD).  In the unlikely case that Aleman is elected, 
the USG can expect continued close law enforcement 
collaboration from the GOP, the same direction on trade and 
foreign policy as Moscoso, and a focus on Panama's 
maritime/transportation infrastructure.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
Who is Jose Miguel Aleman? 
-------------------------- 

¶2.  (SBU) Arnulfista Party presidential candidate Jose Miguel 
Aleman is a successful lawyer with extensive exposure to the 
U.S. and a track record of activism in the Arnulfista Party. 
Jose Miguel is the son of Roberto "Chato" Aleman, a veteran 
political activist for the now-defunct Liberal Party.  His 
mother renounced her U.S. citizenship during the negotiation 
of the Torrijos-Carter treaty.  Aleman's first public sector 
appointment was as Vice-Minister of Government and Justice 
under President Guillermo Endara (1989-94), now his campaign 
opponent.  During the Endara Administration, Aleman 
represented Panama in negotiating a Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaty (MLAT) with the United States.  More recently, Aleman 
served as President Moscoso's Foreign Minister from September 
1999 to January 2003.  Born on May 8, 1956, Jose Miguel 
Aleman obtained a 1978 B.A. from Ripon College in Wisconsin 
and a 1981 J.D. from Tulane University.  Married to the 
former Victoria Eugenia Dutari, Aleman has two sons.  In 
addition to his native Spanish, he speaks English fluently. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Aleman is a true politician, ready to squeeze 
political mileage out of non-issues.  Many critics claim that 
Jose Miguel began campaigning for the Arnulfista Party's 
nomination for President from the time he entered the Foreign 
Ministry.  Aleman himself sheepishly admitted to DCM that he 
was planning his campaign well before leaving the Foreign 
Ministry.  That tendency made dealing with Jose Miguel as 
Foreign Minister occasionally problematic for Embassy Panama 
when he turned tired issues like unexploded ordnance (UXO) on 
former U.S. military facilities or weapons testing on San 
Jose Island (SJI) into political footballs to win over 
Panama's electorate on perceived hot-button issues. 
 
 
Who supports Jose Miguel? 
------------------------- 

¶4.  (SBU) Estimating support for Jose Miguel Aleman is tough, 
because public opinion polls are unreliable (Reftel B) and 
Arnulfista and MOLIRENA loyalists are split between Endara 
and Aleman.  Jose Miguel Aleman is running as the candidate 
of a three party coalition representing the Arnulfista Party 
(PA - 194,207 members), the National Liberal Republican 
Movement Party (MOLIRENA - 108,663 members) and the Liberal 
National Party (PLN - 51,369 members).  With a maximum 
backing of 354,239 registered party members, Jose Miguel 
needs votes from independents and dissidents from the parties 
that oppose his candidacy to become Panama's next President. 
Aleman will have difficulty tying down Arnulfista and 
MOLIRENA votes because his opponent, Guillermo Endara, is a 
founding member of the Arnulfista Party whose running mate, 
Guillermo Ford, helped found the MOLIRENA Party. 
¶5.  (SBU) In addition to his six siblings (one sister and 
five brothers) and Arnulfista stalwarts from the Moscoso 
cabinet, Aleman receives strong support from others, like 
Carlos Raul Piad and Maria Alejandra Eisenmann.  Piad, 
Aleman's Campaign Manager is a dedicated Arnulfista loyalist 
who is currently the Party's Secretary General and served as 
the General Manager of the state-owned savings bank (Caja de 
Ahorros) from September 1999 until late 2003.  Eisenmann, a 
successful attorney and social activist, was Secretary 
General of the Aleman Foreign Ministry.  Eisenmann eventually 
resigned from her MFA position, alleging that there was too 
much corruption in the Moscoso Administration.  She helped 
Jose Miguel focus the areas of his platform that address 
women and children. 
 
 
What obstacles does Aleman face? 
-------------------------------- 

¶6.  (C) Aleman's number one liability is President Mireya 
Moscoso.  Moscoso angered Aleman's opponents for the 
Arnulfista presidential nomination by publicly declaring her 
support for Aleman well before the party's June 2003 
convention.  Two other substantial negatives for Jose Miguel 
are Moscoso's open campaigning on his behalf and that of 
other Arnulfistas, which many contend violates a 
constitutional prohibition, and the perception that her 
administration is both inept and corrupt.  As noted in Reftel 
C, the Endara camp is banking on votes from Anti-PRD voters 
who want a candidate who has broken ties with President 
Moscoso and the Arnulfista Party under her leadership. 
 
 
¶7.  (C) Aleman's number-two liability is the psychological 
weight of public opinion polls that consistently show a wide 
gap between him and frontrunner Martin Torrijos.  For 
instance, an April 6 La Prensa poll showed PRD candidate 
Torrijos at 48%, Solidarity candidate Endara at 29%, and 
Aleman at 16%, with Ricardo Martinelli trailing even further 
behind at 7%.  Earlier editions from the same series of polls 
won Jose Miguel the dubious honor of being the most disliked 
candidate from November 2003 through February 2004 (the last 
month that question was included). 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Finally, critics question whether Aleman will have 
the political will to follow through with his promises to be 
more transparent than President Moscoso.  Jose Miguel is the 
only candidate who has presented a sworn declaration of 
assets for public scrutiny, but most believe he did it only 
to highlight questions about the source(s) of Martin 
Torrijos' wealth.  If elected, Aleman has promised to 
immediately eliminate President Moscoso's regulating decree 
that crippled Panama's Transparency Law, but critics note 
Aleman was on the cabinet that approved that decree.  In an 
April 16 RPC News interview, Aleman also promised to publish 
on the internet copies of all checks drawn on public funds, 
but Moscoso too promised to subject all expenditures to 
public scrutiny during her campaign, but has refused to do 
so.  Ironically, despite Aleman's pro-transparency stance, it 
was not until well after he left the Foreign Ministry that 
his old office's internet portal began providing even basic 
information on Panama's diplomatic activities. 
 
 
What would an Aleman presidency mean for the USG? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 

¶9.  (C) The USG could expect continued excellent law 
enforcement and security cooperation with the GOP under an 
Aleman administration despite the fact that Aleman took 
several politically driven stances as Foreign Minister that 
created headaches for this Embassy.  For instance, to earn 
political mileage, he revived the dead issues of Unexploded 
Ordnance (UXO) and San Jose Island (SJI).  Despite this 
populist pandering, Aleman and the Arnulfistas are not 
anti-American nationalists like some of the PRD old guard. 
The Arnulfistas tend to view security cooperation 
pragmatically as a way to build goodwill with the United 
States while obtaining logistical and/or financial support. 
 
 
¶10.  (C) Jose Miguel Aleman's populist rhetoric is second 
only to Endara's.  For instance, Aleman proudly takes credit 
for Panama maintaining WTO-maximum tariff levels on selected 
agricultural products.  Nevertheless, the Aleman campaign 
team still views trade liberalization and an FTA with the 
U.S. as major pluses.  Taking advantage of the mistaken 
perception among Panamanian voters that privatization 
inherently brings with it greater cost and poorer service, 
Aleman opposes privatizations of any type because they would 
violate (paternalistic) Arnulfista doctrines.  Aleman has 
also vowed not to privatize Panama's water utility or Social 
Security fund. 
 
 
¶11.  (C) Current Panama Canal Authority (ACP) Administrator 
Alberto Aleman Zubieta is Jose Miguel's cousin and there is 
no indication that Jose Miguel would seek to replace him. 
Jose Miguel Aleman also has a comprehensive plan for 
infrastructure development.  He wants to expand Panama's 
Atlantic and Pacific Canal-area Ports and those near its 
western border with Costa Rica, as well as upgrade the roads 
between them, particularly the Panama-Colon highway. 
 
 
Comment: Behind the skirt? 
-------------------------- 

¶12.  (C) Like Panamanians, including Martin Torrijos, who 
accused Aleman of "hiding behind President Moscoso's skirt," 
Emboffs are curious whether as president Jose Miguel Aleman 
would be able to sufficiently distance himself from President 
Moscoso to run a clean and transparent government.  He has 
made attractive promises to create jobs, improve education, 
reduce utility costs, and increase government transparency, 
but so did President Moscoso in her 1999 campaign.  Her 
tolerance for graft and her administration's meddling in 
legislative, judicial, and environmental matters show 
Moscoso's disregard for fundamental principles of 
transparency, separation of powers, and due process. 
 
 
¶13.  (C) A growing movement within the Arnulfista Party led 
by banker Alberto Vallarino and Legislator Jose Blandon 
Figueroa, among others, seeks to remove Moscoso and those 
close to her from party leadership.  Vallarino left the 
Arnulfista Party in 1999 and obtained an unprecedented 17% of 
the nationwide vote as a third-party candidate.  Many 
Panamanians looked for Vallarino to run again in 2004, but he 
dropped out of the race in January 2003, creating the vacuum 
that Endara filled.  Vallarino decided not to seek the 
Arnulfista Party nomination after Moscoso announced her 
decision to hold a nominating convention instead of 
primaries.  Vallarino knew he stood a good chance of winning 
a nationwide secret vote among all registered party members, 
but Moscoso could easily twist arms among Party delegates 
before a nominating convention. 
 
 
¶14. (C) The Alberto Vallarino/Mireya Moscoso rivalry within 
the Arnulfista Party has been divisive.  In 1998, Aleman 
supported Vallarino's failed bid for the Arnulfista's 1999 
presidential nomination, but quickly backed Moscoso when she 
came out on top.  Perhaps with Moscoso no longer running the 
government and people like Vallarino and Blandon to back him 
up, Aleman might be able to convince her to run the party in 
a more transparent and democratic manner.  However, the 
likelihood of Moscoso changing her "caudilla" top-down style 
is remote, even if (as expected) Aleman loses the election on 
May 2.  Many observers believe that Moscoso is more willing 
to concede such a defeat than loosen the tight reins she 
holds over the Arnulfista Party leadership. 
 
 
WATT