04PANAMA2553
PANAMA'S NEW ADMINISTRATION SCORES RECORD COCAINE
Fri Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 002553 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/22/2014 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM KTIA PGOV PREL PM POL CHIEF
SUBJECT: PANAMA'S NEW ADMINISTRATION SCORES RECORD COCAINE 
BUSTS, PRISONER TRANSFERS 
 
Classified By: Charge Chris McMullen for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 

¶1.  (C)  Panamanian Public Forces and Embassy Officers 
contributed to record detainee transfers and cocaine captures 
in recent weeks, as part of on-going counter-drug Operation 
Panama Express task force operations.  On September 21, 
Panama National Maritime Service (SMN) marines, Panamanian 
Public Forces (PPF) members, and EmbOffs transferred 19 
Colombian detainees and evidentiary cocaine from a 14.5 ton 
high-seas seizure to an awaiting USG aircraft at Tocumen 
International Airport.  On October 4, EmbOffs joined the PPF 
for another transfer of 16 Colombians from a 12.5 ton cocaine 
seizure.  In total the two operations reaped 35 detainees and 
27 tons of cocaine.  Each prisoner transfer operation saves 
the USG approximately $1M.  The seizures and prisoner 
transfers show that the new government (GOP) is cracking down 
on transnational crime and continuing close cooperation with 
U.S. law enforcement units.  End Summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
LARGEST SEIZURES - LARGEST PRISONER TRANSFERS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  (C)  On September 21 and again on October 4, U.S. Embassy 
Panama's  officers assisted Panamanian Public Forces in 
transferring 35 Colombian detainees, drug and non-drug 
evidence, part of two cocaine seizures totaling 27 tons, from 
Coast Guard cutters to awaiting USG aircraft at Tocumen 
International Airport.  These operations were made possible 
by the Salas-Becker shipriders agreement and comprise part of 
an on-going counter-drug task force, called Operation Panama 
Express based out of Tampa, Florida.  Panamanian National 
Maritime Service (SMN) marines armed with AK-47s along with 
Panamanian National Police (PNP) escorts guarded the 
detainees throughout their short time in Panama.  During the 
September 21 operation, an SMN patrol boat towed the 
unflagged freighter, Lina Maria, which had been captured near 
the Galapagos Islands, into port near the Canal Entrance 
(former Rodman Naval Base).  Coast Guard law enforcement 
teams discovered 14.5 tons of cocaine concealed in a sealed 
ballast tank.  Once the cocaine was removed, the Lina Maria 
listed heavily to one side, complicating the tow.  The 
seasoned SMN sailors and marines made the operation appear 
easy. 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  Marking the 38th transfer conducted in Panama since 
the Salas-Becker Bilateral Agreement took effect in 2002, 
which details cooperation between the U.S. Coast Guard and 
the GOP,s SMN.  These transfers account for more than 350 
detainees and drug seizures, most involving cocaine.  Prior 
to the Salas-Becker Bilateral Agreement and others like it in 
Guatemala and Nicaragua, the U.S. Navy and Coast Guard 
transited prisoners to the U.S. via ship.  The International 
Maritime Interdiction Support (IMIS) clause of the 
Salas-Becker accord details the protocols for detainee 
transfers and keeps USG ships in the transit zone, 
subsequently saving U.S. taxpayers an estimated $1M in 
operating costs for each operation. 
 
 
---------------- 
ON THE SAME TEAM 
---------------- 
 
 
¶4.  (C)  Lt. Angel Franco, the team leader for the Panamanian 
Maritime Marines told PolOff that the Panamanian Public 
Forces enjoy supporting counter-drug operations, but worry 
about increased illicit drug and arms trafficking in Panama. 
(Note: Recently, the  PNP seized a fishing boat with 36 
high-caliber weapons, including 33 AK-47s and ample munitions 
believed to be en route to the FARC. Emb will report in 
SepTel.  End Note).  SMN marines told PolOff the problem is 
clearly transnational, bragging (inaccurately) that "not one 
Panamanian has ever been arrested for drug trafficking."  The 
SMN marines compared themselves to U.S. Marines and presented 
themselves as part of the U.S. drug enforcement effort.  Lt. 
Franco pointed out some of the limitations of the Panamanian 
marine team in that each one earns about $300 monthly before 
taxes, and each must pay for uniforms, radios and personal 
equipment.  He noted that while motivated, his colleagues are 
often under-equipped and SMN patrol boats frequently cannot 
respond due to lack of fuel.  Despite these shortages, he 
said, the SMN sees counter-drug operations as an assault on a 
scourge affecting both the USG and GOP, but one which for 
them, hits closer to home.  The new Torrijos government has 
continued seamless support for counter-drug operations which 
cost them fuel and human resources that are in critically 
short supply. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶5.  (C)  Panama PPF conduct detainee transfers with 
professionalism and little fanfare.  They have been well 
trained.  Embassy has used IMET funds to train SMN Marines in 
the U.S.  Also, U.S. military experts provide frequent 
training sessions locally via ODC, NAS or DHS (CG/ICE).  This 
breadth of training is now paying big dividends as visiting 
USG teams often comment on the PPF,s high level of 
proficiency and law enforcement knowledge.  Law enforcement 
officials working in Panama enjoy the close proximity between 
the SMN base (former Rodman Naval Base) and Tocumen 
International Airport.  Continuous governmental support and 
the professionalism of the public forces contribute greatly 
to the success of this on-going counter-drug operations. 
 
 
MCMULLEN