09PANAMA839
PANAMA RELUCTANT TO PROSECUTE PIRATES
Mon Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0839/01 3201907
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 161906Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0090
INFO RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMAC O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/11/16 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PM KPIR EWWT
SUBJECT: PANAMA RELUCTANT TO PROSECUTE PIRATES 
 
REF: 09 STATE 110714 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Eric Geelan, POLOFF, STATE, POL; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
-------------------- 
 
Good Idea, But . . . 
 
-------------------- 
 
 
 
¶1.  (C)  Poloff delivered reftel demarche to MFA Director General 
for Treaty and Legal Affairs Vladimir Franco October 29, following 
up on an informal approach on September 22, which in turn followed 
up on a discussion between USCG lawyers and MFA officials in 
September 2008. Franco said that he understood the USG's concern, 
and shared our belief that it was time for Panama to take on its 
responsibilities as the largest ship registry in the world. He 
noted however, that if he were to bring this requests to his 
superiors, it would be rejected. He said the view of senior 
government officials is that, "we don't want those people 
(Africans/Somalis) here." He noted that the government was very 
concerned with the recent wave of illegal migrants coming from 
Somalia and other African countries, and while he saw no real 
problem with the legalities involved, he believed it to be a 
political non-starter in the current environment if advanced from 
his level. He also noted that Panama's prisons were in very bad 
shape, and severely overcrowded, which would tend to make the idea 
of bringing people in from the other side of the world to imprison 
them in Panama seem absurd to Panamanians. He did note that we were 
offering unspecified assistance with prisons. 
 
 
 
----------------------------- 
 
AMB to VP, or Even Bigger 
 
----------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2.  (C)  Franco suggested two ways to introduce the issue that 
might give it a high enough political profile to overcome the 
reluctance of the GOP to bring more east Africans into the country. 
One was for the Ambassador to raise the issue with VP/FM Juan 
Carlos Varela directly, or even with President Martinelli. The 
other was for the USG to convoke the Ambassadors in Panama of the 
leading countries in the Contact Group on Somali Piracy, and 
conduct a group demarche. He said France, and one of the 
Scandinavian countries had already raised this issue with the MFA, 
though without any success. 
 
 
 
--------------- 
 
Varela's View 
 
-------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (C)  On November 12, the Ambassador encouraged Varela to 
consider prosecuting Somali pirates that targeted 
Panamanian-flagged ships. Varela responded that the GOP was willing 
to consider trials in Panama, and asked if the pirates would have 
to remain in Panama to serve their sentences, or could be 
transferred to a third country. 
 
 
 
------------------------- 
 
Civil Responsibility Issue 
 
------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4.  (C)  Franco also referred to the "civil responsibility issue," 
calling it a "ticking time bomb." He said Panamanian flagged ships 
were not covered by their insurance policies for acts of war. He 
believed it was only a matter of time before a tanker had a massive 
oil spill, or someone got killed in an anti-piracy action. 
According to Franco, in such a case the flag country could be sued, 
along with the owner, and had ultimate legal responsibility. He 
said the GOP and Panama Maritime Authority (AMP) were ignoring 
this, though he believed it was a case of when, not if, such an 
event would take place. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Franco related that prior to our demarche, Panama had 
received several requests that Panama assume civil responsibility 
for potential damages from foreign governments whose warships were 
going to escort Panamanian-flagged ships in the waters off Somalia. 
As a matter of course, these countries send diplomatic notes to the 
MFA asking Panama to accept civil responsibility if their warships 
or sailors (who board the ships armed in order to protect them) 
cause any damage to the escorted ship or third parties. These 
requests are routed to the AMP, which has uniformly refused them 
all. Since all but one of the ships was carrying humanitarian aid 
to Mogadishu itself, the boats have all been escorted anyway - 
except for one ship that was not carrying humanitarian aid, and 
which the French government refused to escort when Panama refused 
to accept civil responsibility. 
 
 
 
---------- 
 
Comment 
 
---------- 
 
 
 
¶6.  (C)  Post will continue to engage with the GOP on this issue, 
but notes that it is not likely that Varela had cleared his 
statements with other members of the GOP or President Martinelli, 
and that a serious internal debate is likely  for precisely the 
reasons Franco lays out. The prison issue will be key - both 
whether there is an alternative to incarceration in Panama, and 
just how substantial the financial assistance for incarceration 
might be. 
STEPHENSON