06ADANA69
POLICE SHOOTING OUTSIDE US CONSULATE ADANA
Tue Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO1384
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0069 0940939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040939Z APR 06
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4077
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0626
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0542
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0674UNCLAS ADANA 000069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC TU
SUBJECT: POLICE SHOOTING OUTSIDE US CONSULATE ADANA 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On Sunday, April 2, 2006 at 10:40 am an altercation 
occurred between a TNP police member on duty at the US Consulate 
in Adana and his Supervisor.  The Supervisor has been working at 
the Consulate for approximately four years and the other 
policeman only six weeks.  The two policemen have worked 
together previously at another location several years ago. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The junior policeman was late to work, which has 
happened several times in the last couple of weeks.  The 
Supervisor asked another junior officer to tell the employee to 
report directly to him when he arrived at work.  The employee 
arrived an hour and a half late and did not report to his 
Supervisor as directed.  During a routine check, the Supervisor 
realized the junior officer had arrived at his post and an 
argument ensued between them.  This argument took place at the 
police booth on the front side of the Consulate next to the Turk 
Telecom building.  Other police officers were in the immediate 
vicinity but did not witness the entire argument as they were 
outside the police booth. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The argument dissolved into a fistfight and ended with 
the junior officer pulling his gun and firing three bullets, two 
of which hit the police Supervisor in the leg.  Hearing the 
shots the other policemen immediately joined the scene.  The 
supervisor was able to walk to his car parked only 20 feet away. 
 His driver then took him immediately to the hospital.  Two 
other policemen took control of the booth, removed the gun from 
the junior officer, and detained him until further support 
arrived.  Both the Sensitive Unit Police Chief and the Consulate 
Guard Supervisor arrived at the scene within 30 minutes of the 
incident. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The junior police officer was taken to a local station 
where he was questioned and then jailed.  He will remain in jail 
until his hearing.  The Sensitive Unit Police Chief has 
estimated that the junior officer will likely receive anywhere 
from 3 to 5 years in jail after which he will not be eligible 
for employment with any branch of the government and his police 
commission will be removed. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The PSO and the Guard Supervisor at post have both 
reviewed the Consulate camera sequences which show some but not 
all of the altercation.  The cameras concur with the reports 
received from the Consulate guards on duty, the policemen on 
duty, the Supervisor's statement, and the Sensitive Unit Police 
Chief's report to the PSO.  The PSO met with the Sensitive Unit 
Chief on Monday at 2:00 pm at the Consulate. 
 
¶5.  (U) The Supervisor was released from the hospital on Monday, 
April 3, 2006 and is on leave for two weeks to recuperate.  His 
deputy who has been working at the Consulate for a number of 
years will serve as the on site supervisor until the regular 
Supervisor returns.  The Sensitive Unit Police Chief informed 
the Consulate that the incident is being taken very seriously 
and has been discussed at the very highest police levels in 
Adana.  The PSO mentioned the possible impact this may have on 
the other police still working and guarding the Consulate.  The 
Sensitive Unit Chief said that a complete review of the team 
working at the Consulate is underway, they are looking at some 
additional training, and are working to maintain morale and 
effectiveness at work.  He also stressed that this incident was 
in no way related to the US government or the Consulate.  The 
PSO made a survey of the police booths today and did not notice 
anything out of the ordinary in terms of the policemen's 
behavior, and even remarked on the greatly improved relations 
between the police and the Consulate guards. 
 
REID