06AITTAIPEI1165
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S MEETING WITH KMT
Tue Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1165/01 0940856
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040856Z APR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9517
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5016
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6207UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S MEETING WITH KMT 
CHAIRMAN MA YING-JEOU 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Taiwan dailies April 4 focused much of their coverage 
on the Monday meeting between President Chen Shui-bian and KMT 
Chairman Ma Ying-jeou.  Nearly all Taiwan dailies ran a banner 
headline along the lines of: "President Chen Shui-bian said if 
China's President Hu Jintao announces that the '1992 consensus' is 
the principle of 'One China with Different Interpretations,' not the 
'One China' principle, Chen will absolutely respect it." 
 
¶2.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" editorialized that the way to avoid military 
conflict across the Taiwan Strait is to follow Taiwan's mainstream 
public opinion.  The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
suggested in its editorial that President Chen try to understand 
what the Taiwan people want and to refrain from doing anything that 
contradicts their wishes.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" 
said in its editorial that although the proposal for Taiwan 
independence illustrates the dilemma facing the island, the proposal 
per se cannot become an option.  The pro-independence, 
English-language, "Taipei Times" said in its editorial that while it 
is good for President Chen and Chairman Ma to engage in a 
discussion, neither Chen nor Ma can do anything if China does not 
soften it attitude toward Taiwan.  End summary. 
 
A) "Follow Mainstream Public Opinion In Order to Move Closer to Good 
Fortune and to Move Away from Disaster" 
 
The pro-independence, "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] said in 
an editorial (4/4): 
 
"... In the international community, China holds the patent for the 
'1992 Consensus,' and there are no political parties in Taiwan that 
can ignore this fact.  To use the ambiguous '1992 Consensus' as a 
way to resume cross-Strait negotiations means to allow China to put 
'The One China Principle' into the '1992 Consensus.'  Consequently, 
Taiwan will become a loser no matter [what happens] in any future 
negotiations.  It is like wrapping China's attempt to invade Taiwan 
in a peaceful [looking] guise. 
 
"[KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's] proposal supports the status quo, but 
does not seek immediate unification or independence [and] seems 
reasonable, but it is actually implausible.  What is Taiwan's status 
quo?  Mainstream public opinion has showed very clearly that Taiwan 
is a sovereign and independent democracy. 
 
"If leaders of the ruling party and opposition parties could set an 
example and cooperate with each other, it would be easy to seek 
consensus on the basis of mainstream public opinion.  This is the 
way that will move closer to good fortune and move away from 
disaster." 
 
B) "A Dialogue with Interaction, But Without Consensus" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
said in its editorial (4/4): 
 
"Ma Ying-jeou said he hoped that President [Chen Shui-bian] could 
re-adopt the 'Five No's' and Ma tried to persuade him by using the 
example of the rapid rise in Chen's approval rating in 2000.  After 
Chen stated the 'Five No's' in his 2000 inauguration speech, Chen's 
approval rating rapidly rose to 80 percent, in a sharp contrast to 
the 39 percent of the total votes he received in the presidential 
election in 2000.  Ma even said the opposition parties would 
definitely do their best to support Chen [if Chen were to re-adopt 
the 'Five No's'].  President Chen, however, did not respond at all. 
On the contrary, Chen tried to defend his controversies.  For 
example, Chen pointed out that [despite opposition from the United 
States,] he nonetheless pushed for the 'referendum' in order to 
strengthen Taiwan's democracy, even at the cost of being excoriated 
by U.S. President [George W. Bush] and consequently having a 10 
percent drop in his approval rating. ... 
 
"The process that ceased the functioning of the National Unification 
Council was [noisy and tumultuous], and it even surprised the 
international community.  What was the consequence?  There was no 
rise in the [Taiwan] president's approval rating.  The approval 
rating for the ruling party even has reached a new nadir. ... The 
fact that the approval ratings for the president and the ruling 
party are low shows that what the president and the ruling party do 
are contrary to the desires of the Taiwan people. ..." 
 
"... For President Chen, we suggest with utmost sincerity that he 
come down from the 'clouds of power' and really try to understand 
the needs of the ordinary people. ..." 
 
C) "Constitutionally One Taiwan" or "Constitutionally One 
China"? 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
 
editorialized (4/4): 
 
"The reality is that the R.O.C. has been facing a huge dilemma over 
the past 50 years; experiences over more than the past ten years 
have proved that there is no possibility to bring the Taiwan 
independence issue to the negotiation table.  Ma Ying-jeou has tried 
to solve the R.O.C. dilemma under the R.O.C. constitutional 
framework; Chen Shui-bian, however, has highlighted the R.O.C. 
dilemma.  But Chen does not have a chance to bring the solution that 
aims at pushing for Taiwan independence to the negotiation table. 
This is the dilemma that Taiwan faces:  the proposal for Taiwan 
independence points out the R.O.C. dilemma, but Taiwan independence 
per se cannot become an option. ..." 
 
D) "Chen-Ma Talks a Positive Start" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language, "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] opined in an editorial (4/4): 
 
"Chen and Ma continued to differ on the term and meaning of the 
so-called "1992 consensus,"  Chen said that he could not fin any 
official documentation to support its existence, adding that it was 
a fabrication made up by former Mainland Affairs Council Chairman Su 
Chi in 2000.  Regardless of how the ruling or opposition party views 
it, the question is what Beijing thinks.  China believes that "One 
China" refers to the People's Republic of China (PRC), and there is 
little room for either side to have its own interpretation.  Chen 
urged Chinese President Hu Jintao to clarify whether Beijing would 
agree to each side of the Strait interpreting the "One China" policy 
differently, adding that he would respect the result. 
 
"Although the pan-Blue and pan-Green camps may hold opposing views 
on cross-Strait policy, their differences are no greater than the 
disparity between Taiwan and China.  Chen has now put the ball in 
China's court.  IF China fails to adopt a flexible approach, neither 
Ma's interim agreement no Chen's proposal to establish a peaceful, 
stable framework for interaction between the two sides will mean 
anything. ..." 
 
YOUNG