06BEIJING7837
APRIL 25 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HU VISIT, NEPAL,
Tue Apr 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3823
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #7837/01 1151216
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251216Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3844
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0197
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 9205
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6331
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA 0005
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0112
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 0529
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 007837 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM PTER KNNP CH
SUBJECT: APRIL 25 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HU VISIT, NEPAL, 
TERROR ATTACK IN EGYPT, IRAN, ROK-JAPAN ROCKS DISPUTE, 
SOLOMON ISLANDS, CHAD, SILK ALLEY 
 
 
BEIJING 00007837  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the regular April 25 MFA press 
briefing are as follows: 
 
- The United States apologized for the Falungong 
incident but has to answer for the lapse in security. 
Washington should take firmer steps to stop FLG 
activities. 
 
- The MFA spokesman said he had no specifics on the 
human rights cases discussed by Presidents Bush and Hu 
but that China would handle them according to the law, 
while thanking the President for reiterating 
Washington's one-China policy and "opposition" to Taiwan 
independence. 
 
- China will continue working with the United States 
to resolve the DPRK nuclear issue through 
negotiations. 
 
- China respects Nepal's right to choose its own 
leaders and determine its political future and has 
encouraged Chinese citizens to leave for now. 
 
- China opposes terrorism and sends condolences to 
Egypt. 
 
- The international community should not abandon 
diplomatic means in response to Iran's threat to cease 
cooperation with the IAEA if sanctions are imposed. 
 
- Japan and the ROK should resolve their standoff over 
disputed islands through negotiations. 
 
- Chinese efforts in assisting victims of anti-Chinese 
riots in the Solomon Islands have been successful. 
 
- The SCO defense ministers meeting will discuss 
regional security on April 26. 
 
- The MFA spokesperson rejects allegations of support 
for Chad rebels as highly irresponsible. 
 
- China will invite countries which have diplomatic 
relations with Taiwan to the 2010 World Exhibition in 
Shanghai 
 
- The Chinese government will protect luxury name 
brands in China in the wake of the Silk Alley lawsuit. 
End Summary. 
 
President Hu's U.S. Visit and Falungong 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  In responding to questions at the biweekly MFA 
press briefing by Reuters and other correspondents 
about China's views on White House handling of the 
Falungong incident during the South Lawn welcoming 
ceremony for President Hu, MFA Deputy Spokesman Qin 
Gang said China had made a formal representation and 
the United States had apologized.  When pushed 
regarding the security issue, Qin noted that the 
United States is known for its tight security and yet 
the incident occurred anyway.  He said this is a 
question for Washington to answer. Qin underscored 
that China hopes the United States can now see clearly 
that Falungong is an evil cult and anti-China 
political organization whose intent is to sabotage 
China-US relations.  Beijing urges Washington to take 
concrete steps to stop Falungong anti-China 
activities, a move that will enhance bilateral 
relations, according to Qin. 
 
Human Rights and Taiwan 
----------------------- 
 
¶3.  When asked about reports that President Hu had 
agreed to take action on three of the six human rights 
cases raised by the President during their talks, Qin 
Gang said he did not have specific information but 
that China would handle each case according to law. 
 
BEIJING 00007837  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
President Hu also repeated China's principled position 
on cross-Strait relations and appreciated President 
Bush affirming that U.S. policy had not changed, as 
well as reiteration of the U.S. commitment to a one- 
China policy, the three Joint Communiques, "opposition 
to Taiwan independence" and no unilateral changes to 
the status quo.  China and the United States share 
broad, strategic interests in cross-Strait stability 
and checking Taiwan independence, which could 
undermine China-US relations, Qin said. 
 
Iran, DPRK Nuclear Issues 
------------------------- 
 
¶4.  When asked by Reuters and other correspondents 
about the PRC reaction to Iran's threat to withdraw 
cooperation with the IAEA if sanctions are imposed, 
Qin urged the international community not to abandon 
diplomatic means.  He called on all parties to 
exercise restraint and show flexibility in order to 
create favorable conditions to negotiate a solution. 
In response to questions regarding views exchanged on 
Iran and the DPRK at the Bush-Hu talks, Qin said 
President Hu reiterated China position that the issues 
should be resolved through diplomatic means. 
President Hu told President Bush that China will 
continue promoting peaceful denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula and communicating with the United 
States on the issue, Qin stated. 
 
Developments in Nepal 
--------------------- 
 
¶5.  When asked by a Xinhua reporter about the decision 
by Nepal's King to surrender power to a reinstated 
parliament, Qin stated that China supports the right 
of various parties in Nepal, including the King, to 
choose their government and the future of their 
country.  China considers Nepal a friend and neighbor 
and welcomes positive efforts to ensure stability in 
the country and region.  China's cooperative relations 
with Nepal will continue.  In responding to a Reuters 
reporter's question about the MFA encouraging Chinese 
to leave Nepal, Qin said a statement was issued on 
April 23 to safeguard the security of Chinese citizens 
there.  The MFA had activated its emergency response 
mechanism but did not know how many Chinese citizens 
had departed Nepal.  China encourages Nepal to ensure 
the safety and property of Chinese in the country and 
hopes the situation would normalize soon, stated Qin. 
 
China Opposes Terrorism, Sends Condolences to Egypt 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6.  In his opening remarks, Qin stated that Hu Jintao 
had sent formal condolences to the Egyptian government 
and the victims of the recent bombing there.  He said 
China severely condemned the act and was cooperating 
with international efforts to combat terrorism in all 
its manifestations. 
 
China's Stance in ROK-Japan Dispute Over Islands 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶7.  Asked about China's relations with Japan and the 
ROK in the context of the dispute over the 
Dokdo/Takeshima Islands, Qin said he had answered the 
question on China-Japan relations in the last press 
conference.   Noting that China is a neighbor of both 
countries, he urged them to solve the dispute through 
negotiations. 
 
Furthr on Chinese Victims of Solomon Islands Riots 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶8.  When pressed for more details on China's efforts 
to aid its citizens in the Solomon Islands, Qin 
asserted that efforts to date had been successful.  He 
said that 310 Chinese had been flown to Guangzhou this 
morning and the PRC is monitoring the situation.  In 
response to a Hong Kong reporter's question, Qin 
elaborated on the MFA's Consular Protection Division, 
saying it strengthens protection for overseas Chinese 
 
BEIJING 00007837  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
and that it coordinates closely with other MFA 
organizations, including the Chinese Embassies in 
Australia, New Zealand, and Papua New Guinea. 
Referring to the April 20 press conference, Qin 
repeated that while Beijing and Honiara lack 
diplomatic ties, the PRC had urged the Solomon Islands 
Government through various channels to protect PRC 
nationals and overseas Chinese. 
 
Denial of Chinese Support for Chad Rebels 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Qin denounced as highly irresponsible a report 
mentioned by a correspondent that China is supporting 
efforts to bring down the Chad government, saying he 
had not heard of such reports. 
 
SCO Defense Minister Meeting 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Asked about the upcoming Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) Defense Ministerial, Qin said it 
will take place on April 26 and that Defense Minister 
Cao Gangchuan will lead the Chinese delegation.  In 
addition to exchanging views on regional security, Qin 
said the meeting will discuss how to combat extremism, 
separatism and terrorism. 
 
Diplomatic Status of 2010 Shanghai World Exposition 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  When asked by a Taiwan CNA reporter whether China 
would engage in diplomatic warfare by including 
countries that had diplomatic relations with Taiwan at 
the Expo, Qin stated that as host, China would issue 
invitations to all member states.  China was committed 
to promoting exchanges and seeking diplomatic 
relations with all countries. 
 
Followup to Silk Alley Lawsuit, Pirated Luxury Brands 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶12.  In response to a Global Radio News reporter's 
question on what assurances China can offer regarding 
protection of copyrights and piracy of luxury brands 
in light of the successful suit against Silk Alley, 
Qin said China would protect the legitimate rights and 
interests of brand names in China. 
SEDNEY