06GUANGZHOU13564
Migrant Labor and Rural Disputes in Guangdong:
Fri Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO7842
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #3564/01 1180933
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 280933Z APR 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6855
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 013564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN, DAS LEVINE 
 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV ELAB EAGR SOCI CH
SUBJECT:  Migrant Labor and Rural Disputes in Guangdong: 
Troubles Brewing for Party Secretary Zhang 
 
REF: A) Guangzhou 13381 and previous, B) Guangzhou 3991, 
--   C) 03 Guangzhou 17541 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Migrant labor and land issues headed the 
agenda of the recent visit by two human rights officers to 
Guangdong province.  The trip was an excellent opportunity 
to probe some of Southern China's most sensitive issues: 
migrant laborer discrimination and corruption in land 
compensation deals.  Many of these issues have tainted the 
success of Guangdong Party Secretary Zhang Dejiang and could 
create some political reshuffling.  End Summary. 
 
Migrant Labor and Land Compensation 
------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) As part of a multi-city trip across China, Eric 
Richardson, Human Rights Officer from Embassy Beijing, and 
Andrew Dickson, Human Rights Officer from the China Desk, 
visited Guangdong Province, accompanied by Poloff.  The 
group met (without a Foreign Affairs Office representative) 
with demography expert Professor Zheng Zizhen at the 
Guangdong Academy of Social Sciences, to discuss migrant 
labor in Guangdong province.  Professor Zheng was optimistic 
about migrant laborer conditions in the Pearl River Delta. 
He stated that overall conditions have greatly improved 
since 2003 when a local Guangzhou resident was beaten to 
death at a shelter for migrants (ref C).  Today, the 
Guangdong government is compelled to provide five basic 
measures for migrants:  medical care, unemployment 
insurance, worker compensation, child birth support and old 
age pensions.  Arranging education for their children still 
remains up to migrant workers.  Although the policy is often 
dependent on funds available at the local level; on the 
provincial level, Guangdong province's rich coffers ought to 
provide China's best overall migrant labor support. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Regarding land disputes, Zheng mentioned that 
Guangdong Party Secretary Zhang Dejiang has "desperately" 
sought to control land grab problems with an "iron fist." 
Zhang declared in December that all land repossession 
requires approval and that compensation must be full and on 
time (see septel on Zhang's recent speeches).  In a 
subsequent meeting, a South China Morning Post reporter 
opined that Zhang may be on the way out because of his 
ineffective control over recent protests arising over land 
compensation (see ref B). 
 
An Old Village Story:  Development and Corruption 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶4.  (SBU) In order to get a ground-view perspective on 
events, the group then visited a local Guangzhou village. 
The village is called "Shima", population 600.  The 
consulate originally heard about the village through an on- 
line news report on Boxun.com (an overseas Chinese website 
based in the United States).  According to the website, 
villagers were complaining in early February about village 
officials who sold village land without the permission of 
the entire village.  Moreover, in order to prevent villagers 
from farming, officials hired thugs to destroy the land and 
make it unsuitable for growing peaches (the village is 
famous for its red peaches).  According to the website, 
village officials used the profit from land selling to buy 
votes to win village elections. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The village is on the edge of Guangzhou's modern 
development.  An airport bypass highway has already cut 
across part of the land owned by the village and another 166 
hectares (410 acres) has been lost to a man-made lake and 
electrical power station for Guangzhou city use.  The roads 
leading up to the village are filled with trash villagers 
have dumped there.  It is obvious urban sanitary services do 
not cover the area. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Two brothers of the village's largest family (the 
Li clan with over 100 members) openly complained about 
corruption.  The brothers explained that farmers have 
received no land compensation money, but instead township 
government officials spent the funds on a trip to Guangxi 
province.  Most of their anger was directed at the village 
leader, who was observing the conservation from a distance. 
According to the brothers (confirming the website 
complaints), the village leader is also corrupt and had 
 
GUANGZHOU 00013564  002 OF 002 
 
 
merely bought enough election votes to maintain power.  The 
brothers had complained to the government, and even e-mailed 
one of Hong Kong's most liberal newspapers, the Apple Daily, 
about the issue (the paper did not reply), but the sale had 
gone through regardless of villager opposition. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Besides corruption issues, villagers also face 
ecological problems.  Pollution from a nearby garment 
factory seeps into a stream running through the village. 
The water is so heavily polluted that, for example, when 
some of the creek water was mixed with some nearby fish 
ponds, all of the fish died the next day.  Before villagers 
used to drink from the creek, now they cannot even use it 
for irrigation.  Poloffs mentioned the tremendous garbage 
piles around the village.  Villagers agreed and blamed the 
situation on the village officials' laziness. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) In stark contrast to the other villagers, the 
village leader told us that he had no strong desire to 
preserve the land.  Instead he said he was willing to sell 
the land and, when asked, claimed, for the right price, he 
would even consider allowing heavily polluting factories to 
be developed in the region. 
 
Comment: NPC - Concern for Social Stability 
------------------------------------------- 
¶9.  (SBU) Discussions in early March during the National 
People's Congress highlight concerns among delegates between 
balancing demands for economic growth with reducing 
conditions for social unrest.  These conditions include 
reducing the rural-urban income gap, allowing for some 
development in civil organizations, i.e., NGOs, albeit 
tightly controlled by the government (see the Consulate's 
series on NGOs, ref A), ensuring a minimum of care for 
migrant laborers, and ensuring that land compensation issues 
are handled fairly and in a timely fashion. 
 
Comment Continued: Zhang, Losing his Grip? 
------------------------------------------ 
¶10.  (SBU) Despite these expressed concerns, the Party still 
needs to maintain control with a minimum of fuss.  Social 
reforms help ensure that people do not protest since some of 
their concerns will be addressed.  In Guangdong, one of 
China's richest provinces, where growth is the most rapid 
and difference between haves and have-nots among the most 
pronounced, it is particularly important for there to be 
few, if any, disturbances.  If Party Secretary Zhang is 
removed, it will not be because land was taken from 
peasants, but because he failed to maintain social stability 
and that failure was publicized. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) This message was coordinated with Embassy 
Beijing. 
 
DONG