06HONGKONG1687
PRC PLANS FOR INDIVIDUAL INVESTMENT ABROAD
Mon Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO1709
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHHK #1687/01 1140322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 240322Z APR 06
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6254
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HONG KONG 001687 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND EB 
TREASURY FOR DAS DLOEVINGER AND OASIA GKOEPKE 
STATE PASS USTR 
USDOC FOR 4420 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV HK CH
SUBJECT: PRC PLANS FOR INDIVIDUAL INVESTMENT ABROAD 
ENERGIZE HONG KONG'S FINANCIAL SECTOR 
 
 
(U) THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE 
PROTECT ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR RELEASE OUTSIDE U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CHANNELS.  NOT FOR INTERNET PUBLICATION. 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: China's recent announcement of steps to 
allow expanded individual access to foreign exchange as well 
as the creation of new channels for investment abroad has 
driven up Hong Kong's stock market, drawn out enthusiastic 
prognostications from media, and even impressed our financial 
strategist contacts, otherwise known for their tendency to 
downplay the potential impact of economic policy changes from 
the north.  If only a small percentage of the USD 3-4 
trillion of deposits in China's banking system flows out over 
the next five years, the result could still be: a boost for 
Hong Kong's stocks and role as a financial center; a 
reduction of China's propensity to accumulate foreign 
exchange reserves; and a structural environment far more 
conducive to a renminbi (RMB) traded according to market 
forces.  Our contacts believe China's policy change at least 
in part reflects internal alarm about the PRC's ability to 
continue absorbing (sterilizing) large net inflows of foreign 
exchange.  END SUMMARY 
 
MORE ACCESS TO FOREIGN CURRENCY FOR INVESTMENT... 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. (U) A joint circular put out on April 14 by the People's 
Bank of China (PBOC) and State Administration for Foreign 
Exchange (SAFE) is the first step towards mainland residents 
having expanded access to foreign exchange and, for the first 
time, being able to invest some of their individual assets 
abroad.  The announcement included measures allowing: 
 
o Companies that trade in goods and services to hold higher 
foreign currency balances as well as an easing of 
restrictions on services payments; 
 
o Individuals to purchase up to USD 20,000 in foreign 
exchange annually; 
 
o Domestic banks to invest corporate and individual assets in 
overseas fixed income securities; 
 
o Domestic asset management companies to take corporate and 
individual foreign exchange assets and invest them in 
overseas markets, including equity markets; 
 
o Insurance companies to have a wider scope to invest in 
overseas fixed income markets. 
 
¶3. (U) Detailed regulations are to be published by May 1, 
with the changes taking place on that date. 
 
SEEN AS SIGNIFICANT IN THE MEDIUM TERM 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Drawing from our discussions with contacts as well 
as a review of research reports and media analysis, we note 
that the change in PBOC/SAFE policy offers individual 
investors in China the ability to seek higher returns abroad 
for the first time.  There are an estimated USD 3-4 trillion 
dollars of deposits in China, most of which is tied up in 
low-yielding bank accounts (2.25 percent return) or domestic 
stock markets, whose performance in recent years has been 
poor and volatile.  If even a small percentage of these funds 
are eventually invested abroad, mainland wealth amounting to 
hundreds of billions of dollars could eventually reach the 
international financial system. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Most observers expect the new PBOC/SAFE policy to be 
implemented gradually, so a significant outflow of funds is 
not likely to take place for years.  An eventual and 
significant transfer of assets abroad, however, could over 
the next several years reduce the PBOC's propensity to 
accumulate foreign exchange reserves.  The more open capital 
market resulting from the new provisions would also be a step 
forward in creating an atmosphere where the RMB could trade 
in greater accordance with market demand.  A high outflow of 
capital even has the potential to become a depreciating force 
for the RMB. 
 
HONG KONG 00001687  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
A BOOST FOR HONG KONG 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Hong Kong Monetary Authority Chief Executive Joseph 
Yam said he hoped the PBOC/SAFE policy change would lead to 
Hong Kong serving as a conduit for new investments.  Hong 
Kong's Secretary for Financial Services and the Treasury 
Frederick Ma was in Beijing during the announcement and 
predicted that mainland institutions and individuals would 
use Hong Kong as an investment platform to buy into the local 
stock and debt markets, yielding benefits for local banks, 
brokers, and fund managers.  The news of the new investment 
channels was credited with boosting the H-share index 
(covering mainland firms listed in Hong Kong) to its highest 
level since 1997.  HSBC Senior China Economist Hongbin Qu 
told us that much of the new investment outside of China will 
actually go to fixed-income funds in the U.S. and Europe, but 
he agreed that there will a measurable percentage of the 
assets that will reach Hong Kong, probably going to 
mainland-tied stocks listed here. 
 
DRIVEN BY ECONOMIC PRESSURE 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) In a research note, UBS Managing Director Jonathan 
Anderson suggested that economic pressure -- and, perhaps to 
a lesser extent, President Hu's visit to the U.S. -- explains 
the policy shift.  First quarter 2006 trade data showing a 
higher than expected surplus was almost certainly a big 
disappointment to the PBOC, which is increasingly concerned 
about keeping control of the domestic money supply in the 
face of strong foreign exchange inflows.  Overcapacity in 
sectors like steel and cement, leading to a diminished need 
for imports, as well as moderating trends in domestic demand 
growth suggest a need for sustained intervention for the 
foreseeable future to soak up excess foreign exchange by 
taking the resulting excess funds out of the money supply 
(i.e., sterilization).  There is a risk over time that banks 
will demand higher interest rates from the government for the 
financial instruments used to do this.  The PBOC is therefore 
looking for structural solutions to reduce this net inflow. 
Bear Stearns Managing Director Michael Kurtz and HSBC's Qu 
echoed Anderson's view. 
 
SIGNIFICANT OUTFLOWS FORESEEN 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Although some of China's domestic banks, 
corporations, and pension funds have been given limited 
access to outward FDI and overseas portfolio investment in 
recent years, the PBOC/SAFE policy change marks the first 
time that households and average firms are going to be able 
to invest in this way.  It is also the first time that 
domestic residents have been able to convert renminbi funds 
for overseas portfolio investment purposes.  Bear Stearns' 
Kurtz contemplates up to 10 percent of existing deposits 
moving offshore over the next five years to seek higher 
returns, implying an outflow of at least USD 300 billion, or 
USD 60 billion per year.  In his view, this could ease 
significantly the foreign exchange inflow pressures on the 
PBOC.  The improved rates of return on personal savings could 
also lead a reduction in China's savings rate, since 
consumers would need to save less in order to amass a given 
amount of money to meet future welfare needs (e.g., 
education, health, retirement).  (Comment: In reviewing this 
message, Embassy Beijing noted that the magnitude of outflow 
contemplated by Bear Stearns is significantly higher than the 
approximately USD 10 billion quota anticipated by a SAFE 
Deputy Administrator in a discussion about the policy change. 
 That said, the program has the potential to expand either 
officially or as a larger informal outlet for funds flows. 
End Comment.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) Citibank Managing Director Yiping Huang picked up on 
the personal savings issue.  Huang emphasized the PRC 
government's awareness of the "desperate need" for retirement 
assets in China to attain higher returns. Consequently, 
insurance companies, banks, and individuals are all looking 
to Beijing to create new channels for investment.  Huang also 
noted the excessive liquidity now present in China's 
financial system, with recent data showing high rates of new 
loan creation.  The new policy can therefore be seen as a 
mechanism that offers potential for credit tightening to cool 
 
HONG KONG 00001687  003 OF 003 
 
 
the economy.  In this vein, Bear Stearns' Kurtz observed that 
improved returns on savings might also put pressure on banks 
and corporations to think harder about how they lend and 
invest capital; this could lead to better earnings and 
governance for listed companies.  HSBC's Qu focused on the 
potential for a notable change in the composition of outflows 
from China, with fewer purchases of foreign exchange by the 
government.  He assessed that this change will do much to 
boost the development of a market-based system for setting 
the value of the RMB. 
 
THE LONG-AWAITED QDII? 
----------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) China already has a Qualified Foreign Institutional 
Investor (QFII) arrangement that allows foreign institutional 
investors to invest foreign funds in stock and bond markets, 
subject to limited quotas.  There has been anticipation for 
some time about a mirror program to enable domestic funds to 
seek higher returns outside of China, and observers have 
assumed this would be called a Qualified Domestic 
Institutional Investor (QDII) arrangement.  China has yet to 
use the "QDII" terminology to describe the recent changes but 
many observers and media outlets are already referring to it 
in this manner. 
Cunningham