06KHARTOUM938
Sudan: Door Open to Restoring Relations with
Tue Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6716
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0938 1081702
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181702Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2401
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000938 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/PD, RRU-AF 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PRL PGOV SOCI CD SU
SUBJECT: Sudan: Door Open to Restoring Relations with 
Chad 
 
¶1.  Summary:  At high levels, Sudan publicly denies 
involvement in Chad, and has declined to sever diplomatic 
relations or to expel the Chadian charge d'affaires from 
Khartoum.  Sudan also maintains that the door is open for 
closer engagement with Chad.  In general, the tone of the 
official Sudanese response to Chad's breaking of 
relations is one of innocence.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  In an April 15 interview with the Voice of America, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Spokesman Ambassador Jamal 
Muhammed Ibrahim stated that Sudan had no connection with 
events in Chad, and that Chad's "allegations are 
baseless."  He added Sudan regretted Chad's decision to 
expel the Sudanese charge d'affaires from Ndjamena. 
Ibrahim said that although this constituted a crisis, 
Sudan thought it temporary and believed it could be 
resolved within the African Union. 
 
¶3.  According to the Sudan Tribune on-line news service, 
during an April 16 meeting with UN Assistant Secretary 
General for Peacekeeping Operations Hedi Annabi, 
President Bashir declared that Sudan was committed to the 
Tripoli Agreement with Chad, and had no interest in 
destabilizing it, as doing so would affect Sudan 
negatively. 
 
¶4.  According to a translation of Omdurman Republic of 
Sudan Radio in Arabic, the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) 
Spokesman, Brigadier General Uthman Muhammad al-Aghbash, 
denied on April 16 involvement of the SAF in the coup 
attempt in Chad. 
 
¶5.  In an April 16 telephone interview with Sawt Al Arab 
radio in Egypt, as reported by Cairo MENA in English, 
Minister of Justice Mohammad Ai al-Mardi said that Sudan 
was surprised both by Chad's accusations and its decision 
to break diplomatic relations.  Mardi accused 
"international powers and western organizations" as the 
source of Chad's accusations, and added that this 
"fabricated crisis is part of a foreign scheme targeting 
Sudan and its resources." 
 
¶6.  Dr. Mustafa Ismail, Presidential Advisor for foreign 
policy and former Minister of Foreign Affairs, stated on 
April 16 that the Sudanese Government does not intend to 
take the same action of breaking diplomatic relations or 
expelling the Chadian ambassador.  Quoted in Arabic daily 
newspaper Al-Khartoum Daily, he added that ties between 
the two states are between the people, and are above the 
level of the political leadership. 
 
¶7.  On April 17, Foreign Minister Lam Akol stated that 
Sudan had made several attempts to maintain bilateral 
relations with Chad, and had decided to send a 
presidential envoy to Chad in hopes of mending fences, 
although the Government of Chad had rejected the 
overture.  He added that Libya would look after Sudan's 
affairs in Ndjamena in the latter's absence. 
 
¶8.  Also on April 17, according to Sudan Daily Vision, a 
pro-government English daily newspaper, Assistant to the 
President and National Congress Party Spokesman Dr. Nafie 
Ali Nafie denied that Sudan was extending support to the 
Chadian rebels.  He added that Sudan's doors were open if 
Chad wishes to improve ties. 
 
¶9.  Local press commentary has been restrained.  Most 
editorials express hope that relations between the two 
countries will soon be patched up (Al Ayaam, April 16; 
Sudan Vision, April 17).  Several suggest that Chad's 
problems are largely of their own making (Al-Sahafa, 
April 16; Khartoum Monitor, April 17), while the pro- 
government Sudan Vision - in a piece entitled "Restrained 
Response Sometimes Misconstrued," April 18) -- is now 
firmly denying Sudanese complicity.  The pro-Southern 
English-language paper, The Citizen (April 17), on the 
other hand, argues that Chad was right:  "Sudan wants to 
export Arabism to African nations," and "is always 
interfering in the domestic affairs" of its neighbors. 
 
STEINFELD