06PARIS2665
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq - Jaafari Guantanamo
Mon Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC 
FOR ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; 
MOSCOW/PA; ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq - Jaafari Guantanamo 
Hamas 
PARIS - Friday, April 21, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraq - Jaafari 
Guantanamo 
Hamas 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Chirac's position on helping the Palestinians expressed while 
in Egypt, the Pentagon's release of the list of Gunatanamo 
detainee names, the Moussaoui trial and Jaafari's intention 
to bow out are today's major international stories. (See Part 
C) 
 
All media note today's date, April 21: one year ago today 
President Chirac got 19.88% of the votes, while the National 
Front garnered 16.86%. Reports and polls show that today, the 
extreme right remains "attractive" for the French. La Croix 
titles "The Shadow of April 21 Hovers over 2007." And inside 
an expert indicates that "a repeat of 2002 is perfectly 
possible." Liberation headlines: "Le Pen, Older, Tired, But 
Still Lying in Ambush" and reports on a poll published today 
by Ifop and the free paper Metro, which indicates that 35% of 
respondents consider that "the extreme right enriches 
France's political debate," while 34% say "the extreme right 
remains close their preoccupations." 
 
Le Monde devotes a full page to the difficulties musicians 
are facing in order to obtain a visa to travel to the U.S. 
"especially if they come from Muslim countries." The article 
is entitled "America Is Also Wary of Music." A separate 
article is entitled "For French Tourism Professionals, the 
Season Is Ruined." Francois Bostnavaron explains the 
procedure and the cost to get a tourism visa in France and 
quotes a tourism official: "For people from the provinces, it 
is already too late for this season." Says another: 
"Fortunately for us, some have turned to Canada." The article 
notes that two tour operators have offered to take on the 
cost of the new French electronic passport. 
 
Le Monde devotes a two-page report to the Latino immigrants' 
situation in the U.S., a population "which is sure of its 
strength:" "Today we march, tomorrow we vote." The article 
comments: "Americans are discovering the new 'Latin Power.'" 
Le Figaro's report on the Moussaoui trial explains how his 
own defense team "is discrediting" its client, thanks to 
information provided by Richard Reid, 'the shoe bomber', in 
order to save him from the death penalty, for reasons of 
mental imbalance. 
 
Le Figaro reports on a controversy over the hiring of 
Islamists at Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airport. A controversy 
that pits Interior Minister Sarkozy against right-leaning 
Philippe de Villiers, who is about to publish a pamphlet 
describing the airport as "a nest of Islamists" based on 
information he has gathered from confidential memos. Le 
Figaro's report indicates that Interior Minister Sarkozy is 
proposing solutions "in order to counter the effects" of the 
de Villiers pamphlet, "even before it is published." The 
question of the airport's hiring temporary personnel appears 
to be a major issue. Le Figaro also tells the story of a 
pilot who claims that "immediately after 9/11, a number of 
employees who openly said they were Islamists, disregarded 
security regulations at Roissy 2." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraq - Jaafari 
 
"Iraqi Prime Minister Throws in the Towel" 
Tanguy Berthemet in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/21): "The 
crisis shaking Iraq for the past four months may be close to 
a denouement. By admitting that he is ready to bow out, 
Jaafari is giving a chance to a quick formation of a 
government. Jaafari's gesture comes on the heels of increased 
pressure from President Bush and the UN to find a solution to 
Iraq's political crisis. The probable election of another 
Shiite candidate to the post of Prime Minister may lift the 
deadlock. But other nominations to key posts will not be 
simplified and remain the subject of intense negotiations 
among the various confessional groups in Iraq. Sistani 
himself has indicated that forming a government would be a 
quick way to jugulate the escalating violence." 
 
Guantanamo 
 
"Pentagon Reveals Guantanamo Names" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/21): "For the 
first time in four years, the Pentagon is lowering its guard 
in its 'secret war' against terrorism. forced by the Justice 
system to be more transparent. Until now the detainees' 
identities had been held secret in the name of contradictory 
arguments, going from national security to the protection of 
the detainees themselves. The U.S. Army has confirmed that 
all the light has been shed on the detainees and that the 
list 'is complete.' Nevertheless, some things remain unclear. 
In particular, there is no way of knowing which individuals 
are still being held in one of the five Camp Delta 
enclosures. Three French citizens are listed, although they 
have been sent back to France." 
 
Hamas 
 
"Europe Wants to Help the Palestinians, Not Hamas" 
Pierre Prier in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/21): "President 
Chirac is convinced that human societies are not apt to 
naturally live in harmony: 'this huge melting pot is 
something most people have not been prepared for, either 
through history or education.' This pessimistic analysis 
indirectly condemns the American will to bring democracy to 
the region, but which the U.S. is advertising less and less. 
The case of Palestine, with the election of Hamas poses a 
very concrete and serious problem for the French President: 
how not to punish the Palestinians for having voted in favor 
of a movement considered to be a 'terrorist' movement by the 
EU and which has refused to condemn the latest suicide 
bombing in Tel Aviv." 
 
"In Cairo, Chirac Pleads in Favor of the Palestinians" 
Natalie Nougayrede in left-of-center Le Monde (04/21): 
"President Chirac warned against the negative effects of 
cutting financial aid to the Palestinians. 'It would be 
unfair and politically tactless to make the Palestinian 
population pay.' France is counting on Egypt's influence and 
that of other Arab countries to incite Hamas to amend its 
position on Israel. On the Egyptian side it is hoped that 
France will weigh in on the Europeans so that Palestinian 
institutions are not asphyxiated." 
 
STAPLETON