06TELAVIV1488
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEL AVIV 001488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  Jonathan Pollard 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Major media (banner in The Jerusalem Post) reported 
that new satellite imagery released on Sunday by the 
Institute for Science and Imagery, a Washington-based 
think tank, indicated that Iran has expanded one of its 
uranium conversion sites at Isfahan and reinforced 
another at Natanz, possibly in preparation for an 
aerial bombing attack.  Leading media cited London's 
The Sunday Times as saying that Tehran has trained 
40,000 suicide bombers to attack British and American 
targets if Iran's nuclear sites are attacked.  On 
Sunday, The Jerusalem Post reported that a high-ranking 
IDF officer from Military Intelligence told the 
newspaper that the successful enrichment of uranium 
announced last week proved that diplomatic efforts to 
stop Tehran's race to the bomb had failed.  On Sunday, 
the media (lead story in Maariv) reported on the anti- 
Israel convention held in Tehran with Palestinian 
participants, during which Iranian President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad was quoted as calling Israel a "rotten, 
dried tree" that will be "annihilated by one storm." 
Leading media quoted Hamas political leader Khaled 
Mashal as saying at the meeting that Hamas will never 
recognize Israel.  The media quoted Shimon Peres, No. 2 
in Kadima, as saying that Ahmadinejad will end up like 
Saddam Hussein. 
 
Leading media reported that over the weekend, the US 
blocked the draft of a Presidential Statement by the UN 
Security Council condemning Israel's actions in the 
Gaza Strip.  Ha'aretz wrote that the resolution, 
formulated by the Qatar and PLO missions to the UN, was 
the mildest of three such documents barred by the US 
last week. 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz and Maariv cited an announcement 
made by the US Treasury Department on Friday, according 
to which US companies and citizens are barred from 
maintaining commercial ties with the Hamas-led PA, 
except in cases in which special authorization is 
given. 
 
Israel Radio cited the East Jerusalem newspaper Al-Quds 
as saying that Egypt has conveyed to the Hamas-led PA 
government a clear message, according to which the Arab 
states intend to pressure the PA government to 
recognize Israel.  The radio reported that Egyptian 
intelligence chief Omar Suleiman likely conveyed the 
message in a meeting with Palestinian FM Mahmoud Zahar. 
 
In its lead story on Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that on 
Friday, Palestinian PM Ismail Haniyeh leveled 
unprecedented criticism at Chairman [President] Mahmoud 
Abbas, accusing the "presidential institution" of 
trying to deny the elected Palestinian government its 
powers and present it as lacking the ability to govern. 
Today, Ha'aretz quoted a senior Palestinian source as 
saying on Sunday that the Palestine Investment Fund 
(PIF), a major Palestinian financial body, which was 
transferred from the Palestinian cabinet to Abbas's 
office after the January elections, will only be able 
to finance PA employee wages for two to three months. 
The source was quoted as saying that the PIF has only 
USD 200-250 million in liquid assets.  Israel Radio 
reported that Iran decided to grant the PA USD 100 
million, double the amount Iranian FM Manuchehr Motaki 
pledged on Saturday.  Israel Radio reported that the 
Karni crossing will be open this morning for transport 
of goods from and into the Gaza Strip. 
 
Israel Radio reported on exchanges of fire between the 
IDF and Palestinians in Nablus this afternoon.  The 
radio said that two Palestinians, including a 13-year- 
old boy, were wounded in the clashes. 
 
On Sunday, several media (lead story in Hatzofe) echoed 
an IDF Radio story citing the belief of Israeli 
officials that when the chaos in the PA increases, the 
US will agree to release convicted spy Jonathan Pollard 
in exchange for the release of Tanzim leader Marwan 
Barghouti, who is serving time in an Israeli jail. 
Today, Ha'aretz wrote that the initiative is supported 
by Likud MK Gilad Erdan, chairman of the Knesset Lobby 
on behalf of Jonathan Pollard.  Ha'aretz cited 
disclaims by US and Israeli officials of those reports. 
Today, The Jerusalem Post reported that Pollard's 
lawyer, Nitzan Darshan-Leitner, told the newspaper on 
Sunday that Pollard would not agree to be freed from 
his US prison in exchange for Barghouti. 
 
Ha'aretz, Yediot, and The Jerusalem Post reported that 
on Sunday, hundreds of settlers clashed with IDF 
soldiers and police officers in the West Bank, after 
the settlers violated a military ban on marching near 
Ramallah.  Ha'aretz and Yediot reported that military 
police recently arrested two IDF troops on suspicion of 
firing at Palestinian farmers and Israeli volunteers 
during one of the clashes at Skali Farm in the Nablus 
region. 
 
Citing Reuters, Ha'aretz on Sunday quoted Lebanese PM 
Fuad Siniora as saying Saturday that he would be asking 
President Bush to put pressure on Israel to pull out of 
the Sheba Farms area. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that Jerusalem 
police will bolster their presence this morning near 
the soccer field in the East Jerusalem neighborhood of 
Sur Baher in a bid to prevent a Hamas rally there.  The 
radio quoted Hamas leaders as saying that the rally is 
of a religious, not political nature. 
 
All media reported that the 17th Knesset, which 
comprises 41 new legislators, will open this afternoon. 
The media said that Ariel Sharon's chair in the Knesset 
plenum will stand empty during the swearing-in 
ceremony.  Today, all leading media, except The 
Jerusalem Post, reported on divergences between the 
Kadima and Labor parties regarding the minimum wage, 
which Labor wants raised to USD 1,000 a month. 
Ha'aretz also cited Labor's belief that Kadima's 
political guidelines are too ambiguous.  Yediot cited 
the belief of most senior police officials that Yisrael 
Beiteinu party leader Avigdor Lieberman, who is still 
under police investigation,  is fit to serve as 
internal security minister.  Yediot reported that AG 
Menachem Mazuz will oppose Lieberman supervising police 
officers investigating him. 
 
On Sunday, Yediot quoted Sheikh Raed Salah, the head of 
the northern branch of Israel's Islamic Movement, as 
saying over the weekend that Jerusalem will be the 
capital of the Arab Caliphate. 
-------------------------- 
¶1.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
Iranian nation, which, for the most part, wants 
economic prosperity while adhering to national pride, 
might pay the price of its leaders' bragging and hatred 
if it does not come to its senses and work to replace 
the current regime." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The Noise Before the Storm" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (April 
16): "The President of Iran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, has 
been gripped by a growing verbal momentum in the past 
few weeks.... This time, Ahmadinejad accused Israel of 
posing a danger to the entire Muslim world, likened it 
to a dried and rotten tree, and promised that this tree 
'will be eliminated by one storm.'  It is not 
Ahmadinejad's style that is troubling, but rather what 
is behind it -- for the storm the President of Iran is 
promising might be a nuclear one.... Ahmadinejad's 
pronouncements might prove that there is not always 
quiet before a storm.  The Iranian nation, which, for 
the most part, wants economic prosperity while adhering 
to national pride, might pay the price of its leaders' 
bragging and hatred if it does not come to its senses 
and work to replace the current regime." 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: 
"Israel's demands of Hamas ... are justified. 
Therefore Israel must not give up the opportunities to 
make these demands heard.  They must be brought before 
Hamas leaders.... [But] if the statesmen fall silent, 
only the rockets and guns will speak." 
 
Chief Economic Editor Sever Plotker wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "The fact that 
the post-disengagement reality does not resemble the 
forecasts ought to prompt Olmert to rethink his 
political plans.... Nine months after disengagement, 
this pregnancy ended only in the birth of question 
marks." 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz (April 17): "The only candidates for replacing 
the Hamas government are the Fatah activists....  But 
the clear impression in the territories today is that 
the public will not let them do so." 
 
Liberal columnist Dr. Gadi Taub wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "We have an opportunity to turn 
Hamas's interests into part of the forces of order on 
the other side.  This should be Israel's goal -- a 
sufficiently stable central government on the other 
side." 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "When the Cannons Roar" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (April 
17): "It would come as no surprise if officials in 
Jerusalem, Washington, and a number of the region's 
capitals were harboring hopes that the situation in 
Gaza would deteriorate to such a degree, that the 
population would tire of Hamas and reject it.  That 
would be a dangerous game.... Israel's demands of Hamas 
-- to renounce terror, to act against the groups that 
persist in using it, to recognize Israel and respect 
existing agreements -- are justified.  Therefore Israel 
must not give up the opportunities to make these 
demands heard.  They must be brought before Hamas 
leaders, if not through direct contact -- then via 
foreign negotiation channels.  If the statesmen fall 
silent, only the rockets and guns will speak." 
 
II.  "A Pregnancy That Ended Only in the Birth of 
Question Marks" 
 
Chief Economic Editor Sever Plotker wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (April 16): "The 
fact that the post-disengagement reality does not 
resemble the forecasts ought to prompt Olmert to 
rethink his political plans.  Will Israel truly be able 
establish its border with the Palestinians unilaterally 
-- a border that will be accepted by neither them nor 
the international community?  Will Israel be able to 
'converge' into 'settlement blocs' on the West Bank and 
annex them?  Who will finance this process, which is 
going to cost tens of billions of shekels and will not 
be perceived as a solution to anything?  Who is going 
to prevent a tragic rift in the people?  And what will 
be left of Palestine after an Israeli pseudo-withdrawal 
that will go hand in hand with a pseudo-annexation? 
Nine months after disengagement, this pregnancy ended 
only in the birth of question marks." 
 
III.  "Rallying Around Hamas" 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz (April 17): "The only candidates for replacing 
the Hamas government are the Fatah activists, who might 
be able to find a way to regain control of the 
government.  But the clear impression in the 
territories today is that the public will not let them 
do so.  The large number of Hamas voters have been 
joined by many more whose support for Ismail Haniyeh, 
Mahmoud Zahar and their persecuted colleagues has only 
increased as a result of the pressure on the elected 
government, together with the Israeli bombings, the 
siege and the collective punishment.  All this will 
only increase the hostility for and hatred of Fatah." 
 
IV.  "No To Toppling Hamas" 
 
Liberal columnist Dr. Gadi Taub wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (April 17): "We can presume that 
Hamas's strength in Palestinian society will not lessen 
if it becomes a heroic organization that sacrificed its 
rule on the altar of its determination to fight Israel. 
If Fatah returns to power in its stead, its chances of 
reining in Hamas or dismantling its terrorist 
infrastructure, will not increase but rather decrease. 
Once again, we will get a weakened Fatah that is forced 
to cope with an armed and strong opposition, with broad 
public support.... The type of pressure that Israel is 
applying is liable to completely collapse the 
infrastructure of the unsteady Palestinian regime, and 
then we will find ourselves in a Lebanon-like 
situation, only without a Syria that is capable of 
keeping order.... We have an opportunity to turn 
Hamas's interests into part of the forces of order on 
the other side.  This should be Israel's goal -- a 
sufficiently stable central government on the other 
side, which finds quiet preferable to a state of 
warfare.  It is not certain that toppling Hamas serves 
this goal.  It could prove to be less a way of teaching 
the tiger a lesson, and more as releasing the tiger 
from the golden cage of government.  And then it will 
be able to return to the chaos, where it is easier for 
it to run wild." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------- 
¶3.  Jonathan Pollard: 
--------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "[Jonathan] Pollard's transgression 
pales in comparison to [Marwan] Barghouti's 
atrocities." 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the 
late prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, opined in an 
editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: " Pollard will be released only by something 
that applies pressure to the Americans, so that they 
say: 'There is no choice.'  Until then, it is all 
speculation." 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Free Pollard, Not Barghouti" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized (April 17): "According to persistent 
reports, a deal could be in the works to swap convicted 
American spy Jonathan Pollard for convicted Palestinian 
terrorist Marwan Barghouti.... The very perception of 
Barghouti as preferable to Hamas is inherently flawed. 
His rhetoric years ago may have been milder, but the 
deeds for which he was jailed superseded any purported 
moderation.  And his newly restated aims and those of 
Hamas are all but indistinguishable.  Israeli endeavors 
to tip Palestinian political scales can only aggravate 
a bad situation.  Israel already burned its fingers 
with such meddling, ironically by encouraging the rise 
of Hamas in the late 1980s as a foil to Fatah.... 
Pollard's transgression pales in comparison to 
Barghouti's atrocities.  Pollard leaked material to 
America's ally (Israel) about an enemy's (Iraq's) 
preparations against it.  American counter-espionage 
has incontrovertibly apprehended greater and more 
harmful spies, yet they weren't treated anywhere as 
harshly as Pollard.  Jews are currently celebrating 
Pessah [Passover], the festival of freedom.  There's no 
context more suitable for Israel's premier, in his 
upcoming Washington visit, to put liberating Pollard 
from bondage at the top of his priority list.  This 
should be done because it is what Pollard deserves, 
with no strings attached -- and certainly not any 
strings connected to Barghouti." 
 
II.  "Jonathan Barghouti" 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the 
late prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, opined in an 
editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (April 17): "The Americans, as Golda Meir once 
said about others [the Israeli Black Panthers], are 
'not nice at all' when it comes to the Pollard affair, 
and the death of the 'leading man' in this unfortunate 
affair, Caspar Weinberger, makes no difference.  If 
there is no clear American interest in releasing 
Pollard, the chances are small that we will see 
Jonathan in our midst anytime soon.  The chances are 
equally small that Barghouti will stroll through Nablus 
Gate [in the Old City of Jerusalem].   Pollard will be 
released only by something that applies pressure to the 
Americans, so that they say: 'There is no choice.' 
Until then, it is all speculation." 
 
JONES