06USUNNEWYORK683
HIRC MEETING WITH SECRETARY-GENERAL ANNAN, MARCH 27
Tue Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0683/01 0942000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 042000Z APR 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8570UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KUNR SU IS KPKO UN
SUBJECT: HIRC MEETING WITH SECRETARY-GENERAL ANNAN, MARCH 27 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  Chairman Hyde and a Congressional Delegation 
from the House International Relations Committee (HIRC) met 
with Secretary-General Kofi Annan and senior members of his 
staff at the UN on March 27.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Chairman Hyde told Secretary-General Annan that the UN was 
at an historic moment in its history.  Committee members were 
in New York to listen to views and advocate for meaningful 
reform.  While Committee members "may not agree on how to get 
there," the Chairman said, "UN reform is something we all 
agree on."  He emphasized that reform needs leadership and 
that the UN needs to restore its "confidence and direction" 
in order to live up to its potential to alleviate strife and 
turmoil around the world.  Congressman Lantos added his 
personal appreciation for the Secretary-General's leadership. 
 
Annan describes reform efforts 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. The Secretary-General responded that the UN was "in the 
throes of reform."  He noted that the debate on the Human 
Rights Council had occupied a great deal of attention and he 
expressed appreciation for the U.S.'s "constructive 
attitude."  Annan stressed that it was inconceivable for the 
UN to be able to strengthen its human rights mechanism 
without active U.S. participation.  "As a country, you've 
done more for human rights around the world than anyone 
else."  Annan noted that while he had hoped for a two-thirds 
election threshold, the requirement for an absolute majority 
and the end of "automatic admission from regional groups" 
should keep the worst actors off.  He said that it was 
important for the U.S. to be involved and "hopefully" on the 
Council in its first year as it sets the agenda. 
 
¶4. Annan briefly described other key reform efforts, noting 
that the Peacebuilding Commission had been created to take a 
longer view of countries coming out of reform and hopefully 
forestall a return to violence.  He said the Central 
Revolving Fund would allow the UN to react more efficiently 
to natural disasters.  The agreement on language on 
"Responsibility to Protect" in the outcome document was an 
"important breakthrough for an organization that has insisted 
on sovereignty for all these years."   He said that the 
management reforms before the GA would provide the 
organization needed managerial flexibility and the upcoming 
mandate review would allow the entire membership to "review 
our priorities." 
 
HIRC Members press on reform, 
Darfur and anti-Israel resolutions 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Congressman Ackerman noted that the UN continues to waste 
large amounts of time and energy passing repetitive 
resolutions that attack Israel.  SYG Annan responded that the 
various Palestinian Committees would be a part of the 
programs that member states would have to address through the 
mandate review process.  He also noted that the issue has 
been a focus of the actions of the previous Commission on 
Human Rights. 
 
¶6. Congressman Smith asked the SYG to address the ongoing 
violence in Darfur and the problem of gender selection in 
China and India, which, he noted, had led to one hundred 
million "missing girls" in China.  SYG Annan said the 
situation in Darfur "continues to be unacceptable."  He noted 
that the African Union (AU) was pushing the parties to a 
ceasefire, but that we needed the Sudanese Government and 
rebels to reach a political agreement in Abuja.  Annan noted 
that there were difficulties on both parties to the 
negotiations, including with disorganization among the rebel 
groups.  The AU had taken the decision on "rehatting" but the 
Sudanese Government was very reluctant to accept a UN force. 
While "puzzled" by Khartoum's reaction, Annan was confident 
that it would be worked out.  The transition, he said, would 
take "six months or so" and it was important that there was 
no gap between the AU and the UN.  Annan made a pitch for 
logistical and financial support for the AU forces now. 
 
¶7. On the issue of family planning and gender selection, 
Annan noted that it was a subject the UN has been discussing 
with the Chinese and Indian governments, though he called it 
a "difficult situation."  He said that the governments in 
question are "beginning to understand the problem" that will 
result from lopsided gender imbalances in their populations, 
but "we need to help them" understand the gravity of the 
situation.  The SYG used the opportunity to reiterate the 
UN's "zero tolerance" policy on sexual abuse and 
exploitation, noting that he had just returned from the Congo. 
 
¶8. Congressman Payne said that he hoped the U.S. would 
participate in the Human Rights Council, noting that he was 
glad the worst abusers could "no longer be protected by the 
regional groups."  He asked Annan about problems related to 
revenue sharing as part of the North/South Agreement in Sudan 
and about the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).  Annan responded 
that transparency regarding proceeds from oil revenues made 
revenue sharing a difficult problem.  On the LRA, Annan said 
that UN forces in Eastern Congo needed better intelligence 
sharing in order to "decapitate" the LRA leadership. 
 
¶9. Congressman Burton noted reports that members of Annan's 
staff had shredded documents related to the Oil for Food 
investigation and asked whether the UN had taken disciplinary 
action.  Annan responded by defending the UN's willingness to 
open itself to an independent investigation.  "We set up the 
Volcker Commission."  Annan claimed the real scandal was with 
those companies who did deals and paid kickbacks to Saddam. 
On the specific charge of shredding documents, Annan said 
that individual in question was following UN rules of 
procedure and that the documents in question were copies 
whose destruction "did not impede the work" of the 
Commission.  "When people break the laws here, we punish 
them." 
 
¶10. The delegation did not have the opportunity to clear this 
message prior to their departure from New York. 
 
¶11. Participants: 
 
HIRC: 
Chairman Henry Hyde 
Congressman Tom Lantos 
Congressman Chris Smith 
Congressman Gary Ackerman 
Congressman Dan Burton 
Congressman Eni Faleomavaega 
Congressman Donald Payne 
Congressman William Delahunt 
 
UN: 
Secretary-General Annan 
 
SIPDIS 
Chief of Staff Mark Malloch-Brown 
Deputy Chief of Staff Alicia Barcena 
BOLTON