06CAIRO2795
EGYPT: POLICE SUPPRESS DEMONSTRATIONS IN SUPPORT
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #2795/01 1311353
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 111353Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8066
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 002795 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC STAFF FOR SINGH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/11/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT: POLICE SUPPRESS DEMONSTRATIONS IN SUPPORT 
OF JUDGES CLUB 
 
REF: A. CAIRO 2761 
 
     ¶B. CAIRO 2493 
     ¶C. CAIRO 2407 
     ¶D. CAIRO 2134 
 
Classified by DCM Stuart Jones for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Over 1000 demonstrators turned out in 
Central Cairo to express solidarity with Egypt's Judges Club 
(JC) on May 11 as two members of the JC leadership faced 
another disciplinary board hearing to answer charges of 
slander after they exposed fraud in last fall's parliamentary 
elections.  After a dispute over legal representation inside 
the hearing The demonstrators' numbers were dwarfed by 
security force numbers, which were easily in the thousands. 
A number of journalists trying to cover the event were 
assaulted.   During a meeting at parliament, Speaker Fathy 
Surour repeated to the DCM the GOE's line that the conflict 
is intra-judicial and that the GOE fully supports the 
principle of judicial independence.  The GOE has mishandled 
today's events - its apparent authorization of violence 
against demonstrators and journalists is particularly 
regrettable and likely to come back to haunt it.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C) A massive security force operation in Central Cairo 
appears to have succeeded in preventing demonstrators from 
congregating at or near the Judges Club and the Central Court 
Complex.  Demonstrators from Kefaya, the Egyptian Movement 
for Change, Ayman Nour's Ghad Party, the Muslim Brotherhood, 
and various smaller groupings, all mobilized to express 
solidarity with members of the Judges Club leadership, two of 
whom faced another disciplinary hearing today to answer 
charges that they had defamed their colleagues with their 
allegations of fraud and malfeasance in the fall 2005 
parliamentary elections. 
 
¶3. (C) The demonstrators were kept in check by riot police 
cordons that sealed off roughly ten square blocks in Central 
Cairo.  Even residents of the neighborhood were prevented 
from entering or leaving their homes.  An Amcit academic 
contact on the scene guessed that the total number of 
demonstrators was about 1500, divided into pockets along 
police cordon lines on the approaches to the courthouse.  He 
guessed that of the 1500, about 800 were from the Muslim 
Brotherhood and 700 from various secular opposition groups. 
The websites of Kefaya and the MB each cited "security 
sources" claiming that 237 demonstrators had been arrested in 
Cairo. 
 
¶4. (C) Poloff and POL FSN visiting the scene were hampered in 
their mobility by the cordons.  Well over 100 armored 
security force trucks were deployed throughout the Ramses 
Street - July 23 corridor adjacent to the Central Court 
House.  POL FSN witnessed a charge by baton-wielding riot 
police against a pocket of obviously Islamist demonstrators 
(several of whom were severely beaten) and got caught up in 
an arrest sweep, as he and dozens of others were herded into 
a paddy wagon.  He was released unharmed within half an hour, 
with RSO assistance, after establishing that he was a Coptic 
Christian passer-by and not a member of the group of Islamist 
demonstrators. 
 
¶5. (C) Our Amcit academic contact told poloff he witnessed an 
assault by "plain clothes state security" on journalists 
gathered on Talaat Harb Street about four blocks south of the 
Central Court House.  According to our contact, a Jazeera 
crew was interviewing an activist near a police cordon when a 
group of demonstrators gathered around to chant anti-regime 
slogans.  Within minutes, a "rapid response team" of dozens 
of "plain clothes security" arrived at the scene and divided 
into two groups, one of which charged the demonstrators while 
the other went for the journalists.  The attackers threw the 
equipment of the Al-Jazeera cameraman onto the pavement and 
beat him - and then moved on in an apparently systematic way 
to beat a cameraman from Reuters, and also roughed up a 
female journalist from Knight-Ridder. 
 
¶6. (C) Several blocks away, an AP correspondent told us she 
was knocked over and trampled when a group of riot police 
charged a pocket of demonstrators.  She suffered bruises to 
the back, abdomen and head but told poloff she was not 
severely hurt.  She said that in addition to the Jazeera 
cameraman, she had heard that crews from Qatar-TV and MBC had 
also been assaulted.  "No one has footage - they are clearly 
trying to prevent anyone from taking pictures of the 
violence," she stated. 
 
¶7. (C) Meanwhile, at the Central Cairo Courthouse, a separate 
drama unfolded when Judges Hisham Bastawisy and Mahmoud Mekky 
reported to the second hearing of the disciplinary board 
investigating them for slandering their colleagues by 
exposing elections irregularities.  When the two judges 
arrived at the hearing with a large entourage of legal 
advisors, they were told by the board that they could only 
bring with them four lawyers each, and that the board would 
decide which four could come in.  Bastawisy and Mekky deemed 
the terms unacceptable and humiliating and refused to enter - 
and instead returned to the Judges Club premises.  After 
several hours of uncertainty, the Supreme Judiciary Council 
announced that they would postpone the hearing by one week, 
to May 18, at the request of the Public Prosecutor.  (Note: 
Egypt's Court of Cassation is also expected to hear the 
appeal of imprisoned opposition leader Ayman Nour on May 18. 
End note.) 
 
¶8. (C) During a visit by a May 11 National War College 
delegation to the Egyptian Parliament, DCM raised the Judges 
Club issue.  Speaker Fathy Surour, who took several calls 
about unfolding developments during the meeting, repeated the 
GOE line:  The dispute is not between the GOE and the Judges 
but is rather "between the Judges Club and the Supreme 
Judicial Council."  The GOE fully supports the principle of 
judicial independence, Surour asserted, but the Judges Club's 
technical disagreements with the Supreme Judiciary Council 
have been exploited and politicized by other groups, such as 
the quasi-leftist Kefaya and the Muslim Brotherhood.  The DCM 
pushed back, asserting that both the judges issue and the 
demonstrations were being mishandled. 
 
¶9. (C) Comment:  We do not believe the Supreme Judiciary 
Council would be taking such controversial and punitive steps 
against the JC leadership without the full approval of the 
executive, which appointed its members.  The GOE has badly 
managed today's events, apparently authorizing the use of 
excessive force to punish and intimidate demonstrators.  The 
apparent targeting of journalists is particularly regrettable 
and likely to come back to haunt the GOE.  End comment. 
 
¶10. (SBU) We believe the Department, if asked, should make 
clear the USG's regret over today's events and may wish to 
make a statement along the following lines: 
 
-- We are concerned by the apparently heavy-handed actions of 
police against journalists and citizens peacefully exercising 
their right to express their views. 
RICCIARDONE