06MOSCOW5821
MFA STATEMENT ON THE SECRETARY'S MAY 31
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #5821 1521234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011234Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6847UNCLAS MOSCOW 005821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL IR RS
SUBJECT: MFA STATEMENT ON THE SECRETARY'S MAY 31 
ANNOUNCEMENT ON IRAN 
 
REF: STATE 87682 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U)  Following in para 2 is the Embassy's unofficial 
translation of the text of a Russian MFA statement, 
released on June 1, on the Secretary's May 31 Iran 
announcement. 
 
¶2. (U)  Begin text of translated MFA statement: 
 
Moscow welcomes the announcement by the American side 
of its willingness to join in direct negotiations with 
Tehran with the goal of settling the situation 
surrounding Iran's nuclear program.  We are convinced 
that a negotiated solution to this problem, as with any 
other crisis in the world today, is the only logical 
alternative.  Expanding the format of the current 
negotiations on this question became urgent long ago, 
and precedent exists for doing it.  We sincerely hope 
that the participation of the United States in the 
negotiations might help improve U.S.-Iranian relations, 
which have been in a state of crisis for more than two 
decades, contrary to the interests of the people of 
both countries.  The normalization of U.S-Iranian 
relations would benefit regional and international 
stability, and help bring about the resolution of other 
crises in the region. 
 
For its part, Russia will continue to actively 
participate in collective efforts to find a political- 
diplomatic solution.  For this, we consider it 
important that the prospects for a negotiated solution 
not be made more difficult by attempts to threaten 
Tehran or add to the negotiating agenda issues 
unrelated to the central objective of settling the 
problem of Iran's nuclear program. 
 
Today a real chance has emerged to achieve such a 
settlement.  We call on Iran to respond to it 
constructively. 
 
End text of MFA statement. 
 
¶3. (U)  Press comment thus far on the U.S. initiative 
has been minimal, although both it and the initial 
Iranian response have been widely reported. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Initial reactions from think-tank experts on 
foreign and security policy issues have been generally 
positive.  In June 1 discussions, Ivan Safranchuk of 
the Moscow office of the Center for Defense Information 
and Dmitriy Suslov of the Council on Foreign and 
Defense policy welcomed the U.S. offer of negotiations, 
with both adding that they and other colleagues had 
long called for the U.S. to enter negotiations with 
Iran on the nuclear issue.  Suslov voiced concern, 
however, that the consequences for Russia might be 
problematic, as a direct U.S.-Iran channel might leave 
Moscow with less influence.  While welcoming the U.S. 
step, Safranchuk did not expect near-term consequences, 
predicting that Iran would try end of the Bush 
Administration's term of office.  In his judgment, Iran 
would not be prepared in any event to give up its 
enrichment program, which it was pursuing as a matter 
of national pride and regional status. 
BURNS