06ABIDJAN1114
ABIDJAN-BASED REGIONAL STOCK MARKET
Thu Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO0476
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #1114/01 2780857
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050857Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2002
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABIDJAN 001114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY PASS TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN IV
SUBJECT: ABIDJAN-BASED REGIONAL STOCK MARKET 
GROWS DESPITE  IVORIAN POLITICAL PROBLEMS 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary.  The Abidjan-based regional stock market 
(BRVM) recently hosted the EconChief to discuss the current 
expansion of the bourse, its potential, limitations, and its 
place in the evolution of the market economy in Francophone 
West Africa.  Reflecting the regional understanding that Cote 
d'Ivoire remains vital to the zone's long term economic 
importance, the BRVM is healthy and expanding despite Cote 
d'Ivoire's persistent political problems.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  (U) The Director of the Abidjan Office of the 
Abidjan-based regional stock market (BRVM), Amadou Tiadiane 
BAH, briefed the EconChief at BRVM HQ on the bourse's 
expanding capitalization and its role as an anchor of the 
regional financial network.  While the West African 
Francophone-region stocks and bonds market remains a 
relatively modest player compared to its much larger brethren 
in Lagos and Johannesburg, it is growing, expanding its 
liquidity and attracting more international investors. 
 
Some key BRVM statistics: 
 
-Number of firms listed: 40 
-Number of firms that are Ivorian: 36 
-Total capitalization represented by non-Ivorian firms: over 
50%  (Senegalese telcon Sonatel and Togo-based regional 
banking powerhouse Ecobank together comprise approximately 
1/2 of total BRVM capitalization) 
-Total capitalization of stock exchange, as of (Sept. 29, 
'06):  $5.86 billion (vs. $31.92 billion in the Lagos Stock 
Exchange and $1.2 in Ghana's) 
-YTD Growth of BRVM's Composite (Oct 2, '06):  31% (vs. 35% 
on the Lagos Exchange and 4% on Ghana's) 
-Total capitalization of the BRVM bond market:  $569 million 
-Number of brokers: 20 (9 in Cote d'Ivoire, 3 in Senegal, 3 
in Benin) 
 
History, Operation of the BRVM's Stocks and Bonds Bourses 
 
¶3.  (U) The BRVM, the world's first regional stock exchange, 
was formed in 1998 under the auspices of the Francophone West 
African Economic Monetary Union (UMOEA) and its regional 
Central Bank (based in Cote d'Ivoire), the BCEAO.  The BRVM 
began with the 20 firms listed on the Ivorian-only exchange 
that had been in existence for 20 years prior to the BRVM's 
inception and has gradually added several firms from other 
West African nations as well as a number of Ivorian 
companies. 
 
¶4.  (U) The overrepresentation of Ivorian firms (in numbers, 
not capitalization) vis-a-vis those listed from other UMOEA 
countries is related in large measure to the weakness in 
privatization in the region compared to Cote d'Ivoire.  Cote 
d'Ivoire's mid-1990s privatization push (spurred in part by 
the 1994 CFA devaluation) created a natural pool for 
companies eager for public investment, particularly since, by 
Ivorian law, 20% of the shares of privatized firms must be 
made available to the public, and insurance companies are 
mandated to invest a percentage of their capital in the local 
capital markets.  Other Francophone West African countries, 
by contrast, have lagged in privatization efforts. 
 
¶5.  (U) The BRVM's bond market remains limited in size.  Both 
private and national bonds can be floated, as can bonds from 
the West African Development Bank (BOAD).  Ivorian bonds are 
backed by the country's substantial port receipts, while 
investors demand that other nations' bonds be guaranteed with 
assets, limiting the regional sovereign debt market.  Debt 
floated by Ivorian entities, public and private, dominates 
the BRVM's debt market, comprising over 60% of the total. 
(Note: Ivorian national bonds floated to pay WB arrears in 
May and June of '06 were done so outside of BRVM channels and 
are not included in this figure.  End Note) 
 
¶6.  (U) Firms listed on the BRVM are scrutinized by the West 
African Regional Securities and Exchange Commission, which 
was created by and continues to be managed by UMOEA.  Listed 
firms are required to be audited, as are brokers. 
 
¶7.  (U) Trading is done electronically.  Trading takes place 
between 8:30am and 10:30am, with settlement being completed 
by 11:15am.  All trades must be done through brokers, who 
electronically place buy and sell orders via a common 
computer interface allowing all market participants to 
instantly see the actions of the others.  Buy and sell orders 
with matching prices are automatically married during the 
settlement period following the trading morning.  BRVM HQ has 
a public viewing area to allow anyone to watch the trading as 
it goes on.  Daily volume varies greatly, as is frequently 
 
ABIDJAN 00001114  002 OF 002 
 
 
seen in small, relatively illiquid markets. 
 
Recent Expansion 
 
¶8.  (U) Ecobank, based in Lome but operating in 13 countries 
in West and Central Africa, cross-listed its share on the 
BRVM, Accra and Lagos stock exchanges on September 12.  The 
firm, with its $2.5 billion balance sheet, has added 
substantial liquidity to BRVM, and overnight the 
capitalization of the regional bourse nearly doubled. 
 
¶9.  (U) BRVM management attributes the exchange's steady, 
positive performance to the inherent profit potential of the 
listed firms as well as favorable tax treatment of investors. 
 As of June 30, 2006, of those firms listed on the BRVM stock 
exchange that had paid dividends, the average annual dividend 
was 10.22%.  Dividends are taxed at a 10% rate, and no 
capital gains taxes are levied.  Bah estimated that between 
20% and 30% of total investment into the BRVM comes from 
foreign (mainly institutional) investors, and that this 
figure is rising.  There are no restrictions on foreign 
ownership or investment in the BRVM. 
Valle