08ABIDJAN469
EAC MEETS TO DISCUSS PLANNED GENERAL STRIKE
Wed Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
O 161725Z JUL 08 
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN 
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4383 
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000469 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
BT 
 
FOR DS/IP/AF AND AF/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC PGOV AMGT IV
SUBJECT: EAC MEETS TO DISCUSS PLANNED GENERAL STRIKE 
 
Ref(s): a. Abidjan 467 b. Abidjan 452 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Ambassador convened the Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) on Wednesday, July 16, 2008, to review mission 
security and work posture following the announcement of a 2-day 
general strike beginning on Thursday, July 17, 2008 (ref a). The 
consensus of the EAC was that mission employees should be encouraged 
to remain at home on July 17 if transportation is unavailable 
although the Embassy will remain open and operational with staff who 
are able to make it to work. End Summary 
 
The General Situation 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The EAC first reviewed relevant facts. The General Union of 
Workers of Cote d'Ivoire (Union Generale des Travailleurs de Cote 
d'Ivoire-UGTCI), the largest Ivorian confederation of unions, 
decided on Tuesday July 15, 2008, to stage a 2-day strike beginning 
July 17 to call for salary increases in line with recent increases 
in fuel prices (ref b). The UTGCI is a federation of more than 231 
unions representing between 200,000 and 300,000 public and private 
workers nationwide. 
 
¶3. (U) The call for a general strike follows a 3-day public 
transportation strike (July 14-16) by taxi and mini-bus drivers that 
was triggered by a steep rise in fuel prices. As of noon July 16, 
the threat of a general strike had prompted consumers to stock up on 
gas and groceries stores in anticipation of goods unavailable on 
Thursday and Friday; the result was massive queuing, especially at 
gas stations, that contributed to an atmosphere of heightened 
tension throughout the capitol. The UGTCI has warned that a strike 
could continue into next week if the government fails to take 
action. There are media reports that the presidency is in 
discussions with labor unions to resolve the strike. 
 
¶4. (SBU) There has been remarkably little violence associated with 
the public transportation stoppage. The RSO had reports of a gas 
station being attacked in the Treichville area of Abidjan. There is 
widespread concern among mission employees, however, that in the 
event of a general strike, they could be harassed or impeded from 
trying to get to work. This concern is based on their experience 
from strikes in previous years during which citizens who ignored the 
call to strike were harassed. 
 
Precautions for Embassy Employees 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) It was the consensus of the EAC that the mission operate 
under a policy of liberal leave for the next 24 hours. Section 
chiefs agreed to identify essential personnel and ensure that 
transportation is available to them on July 17. There will be no/no 
curtailment of mission services. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Additionally, each office will activate its section recall 
roster to ensure that there is a means to communicate with mission 
employees if the strike is resolved during the evening of July 16. 
 
¶7. (SBU) As these precautions do not relate to a specific, credible 
or counterable security threat to Americans, the EAC deemed that 
no/no warden message was required for private American community; 
data currently available via the Consular Information sheet is 
sufficient. Post will monitor the situation carefully and advise 
Department of any significant changes. 
 
 
NESBITT