09ABIDJAN125
ABIDJAN: ASSESSING THE NEED FOR INCREASED
Wed Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
R 181040Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4951UNCLAS ABIDJAN 000125 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/AF, AF/RSA, INL/AAE AND DS/T/ATA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV SOCI KCRM IV
SUBJECT: ABIDJAN: ASSESSING THE NEED FOR INCREASED 
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL TRAINING 
 
REF: A) STATE 5448 B)ABIDJAN 112 C) 08 ABIDJAN 839 
 
¶1. (U) In response to reftel A, Embassy submits the following 
assessment of Cote d'Ivoire's need for increased law enforcement and 
judicial training.  Point of contact for this report is ARSO Marc 
Trahan (phone: 225.2249.4448 IVG 783). 
 
¶2. (U) Cote d'Ivoire's non-military security forces face both 
internal and regional challenges. In a country rated critical for 
crime and political violence by the U.S. Department of State, the 
ongoing political crisis weakens the ability of the police and 
security forces to carry out their duties.  Law enforcement is made 
all the more difficult as porous borders and widespread public 
corruption increase the risk of trafficking in persons (reftel B), 
trafficking in drugs (reftel C), money laundering and foreign 
terrorists' ability to use Cote d'Ivoire as an operational or 
financial base.  Cote d'Ivoire's non-military security forces are 
under-funded and under-trained. 
 
¶3. (U) The country's non-military law enforcement sector lack the 
financial and material resources as well as the training necessary 
to effectively respond to many of its internal and regional security 
challenges.  National police are often under-paid and under-staffed. 
 Many regional police units lack transportation for crime 
interdiction and basic office materials, i.e., computers and 
printers for database maintenance.  Counternarcotics police officers 
receive two weeks of training before hitting the streets, which is 
insufficient preparation to combat the increase of drug trafficking 
in Cote d'Ivoire.  The National Police has ten regional offices 
throughout southern Cote d'Ivoire each comprised of 10 - 15 
officers.  (Note: Only recently are National Police units beginning 
to operate in northern Cote d'Ivoire, which is controlled by the 
Forces Nouvelles (FAFN)).  In compliance with sanctions imposed on 
Cote d'Ivoire in 1999 under Section 508 of the U.S. Foreign 
Operations Appropriations Act, the USG has suspended most levels of 
law enforcement assistance.  Current activities consist of technical 
assistance via the PISCES program to improve interdiction 
capabilities at major border crossings, a comprehensive and 
transparent visa processing system and public diplomacy programs 
that foster support for human rights and counterterrorism 
activities. 
 
¶4. (U) Ivorian law enforcement officials have expressed an eagerness 
to receive USG assistance and to work in partnership in its 
implementation. The government would welcome joint initiatives to 
train and equip the non-military law enforcement sector, i.e., send 
National Police officers to ILEA training and provide them with law 
enforcement database maintenance resources.  Post would support this 
kind of partnership once free and fair elections are held and 
Section 508 sanctions are lifted. 
 
¶5. (U) Embassy is unaware of any type of existing or planned 
non-military regional training center in Cote d'Ivoire operated by 
either an international partner or the Government of Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
 
NESBITT