10ABIDJAN150
Rolling Power Cuts Add to Heightened Tensions in Cote
Thu Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #0150 0420922
ZNR UUUUU ZZU (CCY AD2199FB WSC6907-695)
R 110921Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0149
INFO RUEHAB/AMEMBASSY ABIDJANUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000150 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG ECON PREL ASEC IV
SUBJECT: Rolling Power Cuts Add to Heightened Tensions in Cote 
d'Ivoire 
 
¶1.   (SBU)  Summary:  On February 2, due to the breakdown of a 
large generation station, the GOCI began implementing rolling power 
cuts throughout the country, a situation the government predicts 
will last until mid-May.  The GOCI is giving priority to factories, 
hospitals and water pumping stations.  While Abidjan has yet to be 
significantly affected, northern areas have reported 24 hour 
stretches without power or water.  These widespread outages - the 
first in 15 years - are emblematic of the country's deteriorating 
infrastructure, and, combined with an increase in fuel prices, are 
likely to further strain an already tense political environment. 
This is particularly true in the north, where residents feel they 
have been singled out to receive the brunt of the cuts.   End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Simon Eddy, director general of electricity at the 
Ministry of Mines and Energy told pol/econ chief that the country 
was currently producing 800 MW (although it has an installed 
capacity of 1210 MW), while experiencing demand of 850MW.  Although 
a new 110 MW power station had come on line in December, the recent 
breakdown of the 150 MW Azito station had caused a net decline of 
40 MW, which is the cause of the current shortage.  He expects that 
French company Alstom, the plant's operator, will have repaired the 
power plant by mid-March, but there were other plants that needed 
to be taken off line for emergency maintenance, so he did not 
expect full service to be restored until mid-May. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Eddy said that priority would be given to industrial 
facilities, hospitals, and water pumping stations.  Eddy said that 
power cuts should not average more than eight hours daily, noting 
that Abidjan had yet to be severely affected by the shortages.  He 
admitted that some areas in the north have been subject to cuts of 
16 hours daily, but said that since no one in the former rebel 
zones pays their bills, it is to be expected that they would 
receive less power.   According to anecdotal accounts, cuts in the 
north have been severe, and have been coupled with lack of water 
when the current to the pumps was cut.  For example, in Seguele on 
February 3 there was no electricity after 7:30 a.m., and no 
electricity at all on February 4.  In Man, on February 1, there was 
no power or water between 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The current cutbacks are the first major ones since 
1994, according to local residents.  Ironically, Cote d'Ivoire is 
considered the region's most reliable supplier of power, with 50 
percent of the population having access to electricity (compared 
with 30 percent in Senegal and less than 10 percent in Liberia). 
The GOCI will continue to export power to the region (Burkina Faso, 
Benin, and Togo), however, but only the minimum amount required 
under its contractual obligations.  Eddy said that currently Ghana 
is providing CdI with 50 MW of power. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Comment:  The current power supply problems come at a 
difficult time for the country.   Gasoline and diesel prices have 
recently been raised and the election impasse of the past three 
weeks (reftels) has occasioned outbreaks of violence in the north. 
Many northerners perceive that they are bearing an unequal burden 
of the scheduled cuts, and this might contribute to heightened 
unrest.  The situation highlights the fragile state of the 
country's electrical infrastructure after almost a decade of no 
maintenance.  Transmission lines are completely saturated, and 
transmission and distribution losses are close to 24 percent. 
While demand is growing at 5-6 percent annually, installed capacity 
has increased by only 32 percent from 1990-2008.  This is just one 
more reason that the political and economic stalemate caused by the 
current political crisis needs to come to end soon. 
STANLEY