06NASSAU325
GOVERNOR BUSH'S VISIT STRENGTHENS TIES BETWEEN
Fri Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nassau
VZCZCXYZ0017
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBH #0325/01 0551649
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241649Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY NASSAU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2120
INFO RUEHBE/AMEMBASSY BELIZE 1223
RUEHWN/AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN 5351
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 3501
RUEHKG/AMEMBASSY KINGSTON 8290
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 0875
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 3323
RUEHSP/AMEMBASSY PORT OF SPAIN 4492
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 2599
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0196
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS NASSAU 000325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR WBENT AND WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EPET PHUM SMIG CU BF
SUBJECT: GOVERNOR BUSH'S VISIT STRENGTHENS TIES BETWEEN 
FLORIDA AND BAHAMAS 
 
REF: NASSAU 308 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  During a productive February 20 visit to The 
Bahamas, Florida Governor Jeb Bush met with Prime Minister 
Christie and members of his Cabinet, launched a cooperative 
educational program between Florida and The Bahamas, visited 
a primary school and addressed the Chamber of Commerce and 
Rotary Clubs on trade, investment and economic 
diversification.  Meeting with the PM, Bush raised concerns 
regarding detained Cuban migrants and supported a pending 
proposal by a U.S. company to build a liquefied natural gas 
("LNG") conversion facility in The Bahamas to supply Florida. 
 The Bahamian government was receptive to the Governor's 
concerns, with the PM indicating that his government would 
soon make decisions on both matters.  Christie warmly 
welcomed the education partnerships and described the visit 
as a "defining moment" in the relationship between the U.S. 
and The Bahamas.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Florida Governor Jeb Bush visited the Bahamas February 
20, accompanied by Florida Secretary of State Sue Cobb, 
Florida Commissioner of Education John Winn, Florida 
Department of Education Chief of Staff Jeanine Blomberg, 
Enterprise Florida Director Gary Schumann and other staff. 
While the visit was designed primarily to promote 
Florida-Bahamas educational partnerships and trade, Cuban 
migration and LNG issues came to the forefront of key 
meetings and press coverage. 
 
Hope for Resolution of LNG and Migration Issues 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  Governor Bush, Ambassador Rood, Secretary Cobb, and 
Commissioner Winn met with Prime Minister Christie, Deputy 
Prime Minister Cynthia Pratt, Acting Foreign Minister Vincent 
Peet, Minister of Education Alfred Sears, Minister of Tourism 
Obie Wilchcombe, Minister of Trade and Industry Leslie 
Miller, and Minister of Works and Utilities Bradley Roberts 
(reftel).  The frank meeting included discussion of 
educational partnerships, the continued detention of two 
Cuban dentists at the Carmichael Road Detention Center, and 
the prospects for moving ahead with a LNG conversion facility 
in The Bahamas.  Following the meeting, the PM told the press 
that "the Bahamian government would aggressively address the 
Governor's concern about the continued detention of the two 
Cuban dentists," adding that, "they have assurances from us 
that as we speak, we are in the process of trying to bring 
the matter to a hopeful conclusion in the best interest of 
all concerned."  Governor Bush expressed his appreciation 
that Christie "listened attentively" and "was willing to 
resolve it." 
 
¶4.  The discussions also advanced a long-standing proposal by 
an American investor, AES, to build a LNG regassification 
facility at Ocean Cay in The Bahamas.  Governor Bush outlined 
Florida's growing need for energy and his states 
determination to diversify sources, including greater use of 
natural gas.  He noted that if the Ocean Cay proposal was not 
approved, Florida had other options on the table that could 
meet its needs.  PM Christie shared his concern over The 
Bahamas ability to regulate the plant, and solicited the 
Governor's support by working with Bahamian regulators. 
Governor Bush agreed to set up a meeting between Floridian 
and Bahamian energy and environment regulators.  The PM said 
that "clearly a decision is necessary . . . it is a valuable 
resource Florida needs, hopefully from The Bahamas to the 
great benefit of The Bahamas"  and expressed hope that the 
regulatory partnership would resolve Bahamian concerns.  Post 
is coordinating with Governor Bush's staff to arrange the 
meeting of regulators. 
 
"Classroom Connections" Launches Education Partnership 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5.  In a separate meeting with Education Minister Sears, 
Governor Bush launched the first of a series of educational 
partnerships -- "Global Classroom Connections," a program to 
bring together Florida and Bahamian students through 
cultural, reading and technology exchanges.  Through the 
program, Bahamian schools will be linked with sister schools 
 
in Florida in a "21st Century" interactive pen-pal program, 
exchanging e-mail, books and cultural activities.  The 
program also extends to teachers and administrators, 
including the exchange of training and teaching methods. 
During the visit, Governor Bush and Sears announced three 
pairs of pilot schools for the program, which is scheduled to 
expand significantly over the next year. 
 
¶6.  Governor Bush visited one of the pilot schools, Woodcock 
Primary School, where he met with students, encouraged early 
reading and enjoyed a program of singing and dancing put on 
by the students.  Governor Bush and Education Commissioner 
Winn presented the school with a children's book, a series of 
books created by the Florida partner school, and a video from 
the Florida principal welcoming the students to "Classroom 
Connections."  They also received a Bahamian children's book 
for delivery to the Florida sister school. 
 
¶7.  While "Classroom Connections" was the focus of 
educational cooperation, Governor Bush laid the groundwork 
for future cooperation on teacher training, special needs 
education and partnerships between Florida universities and 
the College of the Bahamas.  The Florida Department of 
Education, Post and the Bahamian Ministry of Education plan 
further collaboration to develop and coordinate these 
programs. 
 
Promoting Trade and Blasting Cuba 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  During a lunch meeting with several hundred local 
business leaders, Governor Bush and Bahamian Minister of 
Finance and Investment Allyson Maynard-Gibson each spoke 
about Bahamian-Florida partnerships.  Maynard-Gibson's 
remarks highlighted the volume of Florida-Bahamas trade, 
pointing out that The Bahamas imports $1 billion of goods 
from Florida.  She requested Florida's assistance in 
correcting the trade imbalance, and encouraged local business 
leaders to seek opportunities in Florida's markets.  Governor 
Bush emphasized the need for diversification of a 
tourist-driven economy and Florida's use of tourism revenues 
to develop "21st Century" businesses and innovations.  The 
message of diversification, investment in new industries and 
the risks of tourism-dependence in a hurricane zone resonated 
strongly with the crowd. 
 
¶9.  In response to an audience member's question about 
Bahamian ties to Cuba, Governor Bush bluntly responded that 
The Bahamas had nothing to gain from a relationship with 
Cuba, and everything to gain from a relationship with Florida 
and the U.S.  "You are a democracy," he said, "and you are 
not going to find democracy in Cuba.  You respect the rule of 
law; not much respect for the rule of law in Cuba.  You have 
a prosperous open economy; not much Cuba can offer you on the 
economic front.  Cuba offers you nothing but threats to 
illegally send you its enslaved people."  As with his message 
on investment and diversification, these remarks were 
well-received by the business community. 
 
Visit Underscores U.S.-Bahamian Partnership 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  COMMENT:  As encapsulated by Governor Bush's comments 
regarding Cuba, the visit placed Florida's role in the 
Bahamian economy, and the Bahamian interest in continued 
cooperation with Florida on issues of common concern into 
sharp focus.  While final decisions have not been made 
regarding the Cuban detainees or the LNG plant, the 
Governor's promotion of ongoing educational and trade 
partnerships has focused Bahamians on the benefits of closer 
ties with the U.S.  Media coverage was extensive and 
positive, generating understanding for the potential of 
current and future partnerships with Florida and building 
support for resolution of the Cuban detainee and LNG issues. 
The visit was a resounding success.  END COMMENT. 
ROOD