08GABORONE553
ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS REPORT
Mon Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Gaborone
O 071613Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY GABORONE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5110
INFO SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY ABUJA 
AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO 
AMEMBASSY HARARE 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 
HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS GABORONE 000553 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF AND AF/S 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AU BC ZI
SUBJECT: ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS REPORT 
 
REF: GABORONE 547 
 
 
¶1. The Botswana Observer Team in cooperation with the SADC Election 
Observer Mission (SEOM)has shared with the Embassy the official text 
of the statement of the Botswana Observer Team regarding the June 
27, 2008 Zimbabwe Presidential run-off elections. 
 
Begin Verbatim Botswana Observer Team Text: 
 
On behalf of the Botswana Team that took part in the observation of 
the Zimbabwe Presidential run off elections I would like to start 
off by thanking the Government of Botswana for having given us the 
opportunity to be part of the SADC Election Observer Mission 
otherwise known as SEOM. 
 
Due to time constraints what we are going to present here today is a 
brief summary of our report to the Botswana Government concerning 
our observations, findings, and conclusions as we saw the situation 
on the ground. 
 
The main objective of our mission was to ensure that the Zimbabwe 
Presidential run-off elections were held in accordance with the SADC 
Principles and Guidelines Governing Democratic Elections. These 
principles constitute an essential tool for determining the 
validity, integrity and credibility of elections. The expectation 
was that at the end we should be able to make a determination as to 
whether or not the elections were free and fair. Briefly stated 
these principles are as follows: 
 
? Full participation of the citizens and political process 
? Freedom of association 
? Political tolerance 
? Equal opportunity for all political parties to access the state 
media 
? Equal opportunity to exercise the right to vote and be voted for 
? Independence of the judiciary and the impartiality of the 
electoral institutions, just to mention but a few 
 
The team which represented Botswana was made up of 50 persons drawn 
from the three political parties represented in the National 
Assembly, Civic Bodies, Civil Servants and Academics. 
 
I believe ladies and gentlemen as you can see the team is well 
represented in terms of gender balance, age and background. All in 
all, the SADC Observer Mission had 413 observers from 12 of the 14 
SADC member states. You will note that the number was quite large 
compared to the number sent in the March 29 elections. The 
Government of Botswana also availed 8 vehicles to be used by the 
Mission. The increase in the number was to allow for a better 
coverage of the election process taking into account the nature of 
these elections. You will note with the benefit of hindsight ladies 
and gentlemen, that this approach by Government has benefited both 
the Mission and SADC as well as all those concerned about the 
situation in Zimbabwe. Because of the numbers, we were able to cover 
all the 10 provinces of Zimbabwe and this gave us the opportunity 
to observe first hand what transpired during the run-up to the 
elections. 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND FINDINGS 
 
Coming to the observations and findings I will start with the 
campaign process. 
 
¶1. CAMPAIGN PROCESS 
 
In terms of the SADC principles, contesting parties are entitled to 
equitable access to the state controlled media. We however observed 
that the state media prominently featured ZANU-PF political 
advertisements and messages to the exclusion of MDC-T. In the few 
instances where reference was made to the MDC-T in the state media, 
the messages were ZANU-PF sponsored and intended to disparage, 
de-campaign and discredit the MDC-T. A case in point was a TV 
advertisement depicting Morgan Tsvangirai's head alongside those of 
some three known heads of state from the 
Western world and is entitled The Loser's Club. On inquiry by the 
observers as to why MDC-T was not covered, the Zimbabwe Electoral 
Commission responded by saying ZBH which controls the state media 
declined to flight MDC advertisements on the basis that they were 
uncomfortable with the language used. 
 
I will now move on to the observations we made under the right to 
vote and be voted for. Voting in Zimbabwe is in two ways, there is 
postal voting which is conducted some days prior to the actual 
voting day and the voting that takes place on polling day. Postal 
voting is intended for members of the disciplined forces, foreign 
missions and any other applicants whose nature of duty may take them 
away from their wards on polling day. Under postal voting ZEC informed 
the observers that in the March 29 elections 8000 people had applied 
for postal voting, but that in the Presidential run-off elections this 
number had increased to 64,000. The Observer Teams were however, not 
able to observe the postal voting process because information about 
it was not forthcoming from ZEC. Even where the Observer Teams got 
information about postal voting taking place they were denied access 
to the polling stations by the Commanders at the Police Stations 
where most of this postal voting was taking place. When the Observer 
Teams enquired about this with ZEC we were informed that it was 
within the discretion of the Commanding officers to either grant or 
refuse such authority. Worth noting however, was that the Observer 
Teams received reports that postal voting took place in the 
presence, and under the directions of Commanding Officers who 
instructed their juniors to vote for the ZANU-PF candidate or risk 
losing their jobs. 
 
¶2. HOLDING OF RALLIES 
 
The Team observed that the holding of rallies was a preserve of the 
ruling ZANU-PF, whilst the MDC-T political rallies were 
systematically disrupted by the ZANU-PF militia and youth. For 
instance, on Sunday 22nd June 2008, the Team witnessed first hand 
how a planned "star" rally organized by Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai was 
prevented from taking place by a group of youth wearing ZANU-PF 
regalia armed with sticks, stones and sjamboks. They chased and 
indiscriminately beat all the people in the vicinity of the venue 
where the rally was taking place. All this was done in full view of 
SADC observers including some members present here. Riot police 
passively witnessed these attacks making no attempts whatsoever to 
intervene. After completing their task these youth retreated to the 
ZANU-PF headquarters where they were treated to food. 
 
Other incidents of politically motivated violence by the Team 
included the following: 
 
People believed to be associated with the MDC-T party were 
subjected to severe beatings, harassment, torture, killings and 
general threats of violence. The Police also appeared not to be 
enforcing law and order, and the ZANU-PF youth and militia mounted 
illegal road blocks, forcing people to attend ZANU-PF rallies and 
had bases where they tortured perceived opponents under the guise of 
re-educating them. In contrast ZANU-PF supporters received the full 
protection of the Police as their rallies were never disrupted nor 
did they report any incidents of harassment to the Observer Teams. 
 
¶3. LACK OF RESPECT FOR THE ELECTORAL PROCESS 
 
During the campaigns, the observer mission noted with concern the 
uncompromising positions adopted by the contesting political 
parties/candidates to accept the outcome of the electoral process. 
The MDC-T Presidential candidate Mr. Tsvangirai, on the one hand 
made it clear that he will not accept a win by ZANU-PF Presidential 
candidate, Mr. Mugabe, citing politically motivated violence among 
other things. On the other hand, ZANU-PF President Mr. Mugabe made 
it clear at most political rallies and meetings he addressed that he 
would not accept the outcome of the election if the MDC-T 
presidential candidate won. His reasons were also supported by the 
leadership of the party, the Military and Police Commanders. 
 
¶4. POLITICALLY MOTIVATED VIOLENCE 
 
The team observed high level of intimidation and politically 
motivated violence that escalated with the approach to the run-off 
elections leading to injuries to persons, internal and external 
displacements of people, abductions, loss of property, loss of 
lives, theft and looting. In short, the mayhem observed by the team 
had the effect of depriving the people of Zimbabwe of the 
opportunity to fully participate in the electoral process. 
 
¶5. POLLING DAY VOTING 
 
Generally speaking there was an apparently calm atmosphere on voting 
day. But beneath this calmness was a noticeable voter intimidation 
where voters were required to record the Serial Number on their 
ballot papers and later submit that information to functionaries of 
the ruling ZANU-PF. One actually came and asked where the serial 
number is. This was intended to induce some voters into believing 
that the information pertaining to how they voted would be 
accessible and used against them. 
 
In some rural polling stations, Chiefs/Headmen were used to record 
the names of their subjects who were then required, against their 
will, to go and queue behind their chief/ headman on voting day and 
vote in a pre-determined sequence. In this way voters were made to 
believe that their voting patterns were capable of bein verified as 
to whether they indeed voted for ZANU-PF. We noticed a high number of 
those who sai they could not read and write and in such cases tey 
were "assisted" by the Presiding Officers in he presence of two 
other Plling Officers and a Police officer. 
 
¶6. WITHDRAWAL OF MR. MORGAN TSVANGIRAI FROM THE 
RACE 
 
It is now common knowledge that on 22 June 2008 Mr. Tsvangirai 
announced his withdrawal from the Presidential race citing among 
other things the prevalence and escalating politically motivated 
violence. It is also common knowledge that ZEC did not accept his 
withdrawal from the elections arguing that it was not in accordance 
with the Zimbabwe electoral laws and regulations. The bottom line, 
however, is that for all intents and purposes the election 
effectively became a one-horse race, pitting Mr. Robert Mugabe 
against a nonparticipating Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai. It is worth 
noting, however, that even after Mr. Tsvangirai's withdrawal from 
the race the level of 
violence did not go down. Voter harassment and intimidation, 
beatings and displacements continued unabated. 
 
¶7. HARASSMENT OF OBSERVERS 
 
The Team noted that some Observers were subjected to 
harassment. On different occasions, some members of the Team were 
chased away from rallies addressed by ZANU-PF and 
prevented from carrying out their observer duties. In some 
instances, Observers were threatened with violence and instructed to 
leave such rallies. The Team was in particular singled out for 
harassment on account of perceptions that Botswana was 
anti-ZANU-PF. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The level of intimidation and political violence that escalated with 
the approach of the June 27 Presidential run-off elections has been 
clearly catalogued. There were many victims of violence in the form 
of injuries, displacements, abductions, loss of property, and loss 
of lives. The atrocities have been corroborated and constitute the 
necessary evidence to conclude that the credibility and integrity of 
the election process was compromised. 
 
Notwithstanding the apparent orderly conduct that prevailed on 
voting day, the entire election process was marred by a wave of 
violence. The Team therefore concludes that the Presidential run-off 
election was not free and fair and does not represent the will of 
the people of Zimbabwe. 
 
End Verbatim Botswana Observer Team Text. 
 
DROUIN