09MANAGUA1139
Voter Registry Verification Characterized by Low
Fri Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO4118
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1139/01 3451940
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 111939Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0263
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0005
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0004
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 001139 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/12/11 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM NU
SUBJECT: Voter Registry Verification Characterized by Low 
Participation, Irregularities 
 
REF: A) MANAGUA 935; B) MANAGUA 859; C) 2008 MANAGUA 1351 
D) 2008 MANAGUA 982; E) 2008 MANAGUA 417; F) 2008 MANAGUA 1367 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: RJCallahan, AMB; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The November 27-30 verification of the voter 
registration lists for the upcoming Atlantic Coast regional council 
elections was characterized by low participation and numerous 
irregularities, both worrisome developments for the climate in 
which March's regional elections will take place.  The opposition 
parties face an up-hill climb to ensure the regional elections are 
transparent and fair.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
CSE minimizes low turn-out, FSLN deputy and opposition criticize 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) According to local press, approximately 30% of the 
electorate in Nicaragua's two autonomous regions participated in 
the process to verify their domicile and the location where they 
will vote on Election Day with the Supreme Electoral  Council 
(CSE).  Robert Rivas Reyes, CSE President, characterized the 
turn-out in both the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) and 
the South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS) as "extremely low," 
citing a lack of resources for the low participation.  However, 
Rivas minimized the low turn-out, expressing confidence that voter 
participation would reach the 35%-40% regional average during the 
March 7, 2010 election. Interestingly, Rivas's opinion was not 
shared by all government officials.  Brooklyn Rivera, YATAMA party 
leader and National Assembly Deputy aligned with the governing 
Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), voiced criticism of 
Rivas and the CSE claiming that "thousands of people would not be 
able exercise their right to vote" as a result of voter 
registration irregularities.  Rivera estimates that 30% of the 
total population in the RAAN has been impeded from obtaining 
cedulas (voter registration cards). Opposition parties, including 
the Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) and the electoral alliance 
the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance-Vamos con Eduardo-Independent 
Liberal Party (ALN-VCE-PLI), blamed the low turn-out in the region 
on poor government publicity and insufficient resources.  In some 
urban zones, low participation was attributed to the fact it 
conflicted with the end of the school year and high school 
graduation ceremonies. 
 
 
 
Numerous irregularities cited by opposition and press 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) Local press reported no violence during voter verification, 
but cited numerous procedural irregularities in both regions. In 
the RAAN, most verification centers opened on-time, except in the 
capital city of Bilwi where a lack of registration materials 
delayed opening. As in previous voter verifications in Bilwi, the 
FSLN-controlled Citizen Power Councils (CPCs) supervised all 
verification tables (Ref F).  The cities of Bonanza, Siuna, and 
Rosita, known collectively as the "Mining Triangle," experienced 
the most verification irregularities.  Guillermo Medrano, an 
ALN-VCE-PLI Alliance representative in the RAAN, cited cedula 
distribution problems, misuse of public funds for partisan 
purposes, and lack of precinct supervisors as major irregularities 
in this area.  In Rosita, a traditional Liberal municipality 
awarded to an FSLN mayor after the November 2008 elections, voters 
were required to request their cedula from the Electoral Council 
located in the FSLN party office.  Medrano confirmed that FSLN 
supporters were assured speedy distribution of their cedula (one 
week), where as some non-FSLN voters were informed of possible 
delays due to a lack of printing resources or mechanical issues. 
Medrano also accused FSLN government officials in Rosita of trying 
to falsely boost voter registration rolls by using public resources 
to transport and register FSLN loyalists from nearby Waslala, a 
municipality where citizens are ineligible to vote in the election 
since they have no representation on the regional council. 

 
 
¶4. (U) Arnoldo Aleman, former president, convicted felon and 
honorary leader of the PLC, denounced the verification process in 
the RAAS as flawed, claiming that the FSLN-controlled CSE excluded 
PLC party officials from observing verification in the municipal of 
Paiwas.  Aleman also decried a lack of logistical, technical, and 
promotional support in the region for the verification process and 
charged that the electoral lists presented prior to the 
verification process were not identical to those actually used for 
the verification.  Wilfredo Navarro Moreira , National Assembly 
Secretary and Vice-President of the PLC, announced plans to audit 
voting irregularities in order to build a case for possible 
election annulations in 2010. 
 
 
 
5). (U) La Prensa, Nicaragua's largest newspaper, reported that the 
CSE and Nicaraguan Air Force used helicopters to transport FSLN 
motorcycles to its campaign officials in the municipality of 
Bluefields, located in the RAAS.  Both the CSE and Nicaraguan Air 
Force denied the La Prensa report. 
 
 
 
Next on the election calendar 
 
 
 
¶6. (U) The regional council elections are scheduled for March 7, 
¶2010. The CSE must establish procedures for participation of 
observers by January 21, which also marks the first official day of 
campaigning. Final voter registration lists are due February 5 and 
campaigns will officially close on March 3 in anticipation of 
Election Day. 
 
 
 
Comments 
 
 
 
¶7. (C) Turn-out for the verification process was expected to be 
low; however, the irregularities are disconcerting. The 
verification processes for the regional council elections in the 
RAAN and RAAS bear similarities to the tainted verification 
processes held in past regional elections as well as the fraudulent 
municipal elections in November 2008 (Refs D, E, F).  Opposition 
parties fear with good reason that the Atlantic Coast regional 
elections will be manipulated by the FSLN as were the municipal 
elections in 2008 (Ref C).  Opposition leaders are already calling 
for neutral, international observation of the election, a difficult 
feat considering the Ortega Administration's rejection of 
international observers for the 2008 municipal elections and 
current declarations against such interventions.  For example, 
Nicaragua recently voted against the inclusion of a paragraph 
presented in a U.S.-backed resolution before the United Nations 
recognizing the need to fortify election observation through 
harmonizing the methods of the different non-governmental and 
inter-governmental organizations.  Nicaragua, Russia, Libya, Iran, 
Ecuador, Cuba, Bolivia, and Venezuela were among the 19 countries 
who voted against the paragraph in the resolution (127 countries 
voted in favor while 28 abstained). Much is at stake for both the 
FSLN and opposition parties. The FSLN wants victories in the region 
(by fair means or fraud) to demonstrate its national "popular 
support" and to continue its "socialist project" (Refs A, B). The 
opposition will have to work hard to ensure elections in the RAAN 
and RAAS are open and fair. Moreover, opposition leaders will have 
to suppress personal ambitions and overcome ideological differences 
in order to unite and counter Ortega's power grab (Ref A). 
CALLAHAN