09MANAGUA152
INL MANAGUA 2008 END USE MONITORING REPORT
Mon Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0152/01 0401858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091858Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3724UNCLAS MANAGUA 000152 
 
DEPT FOR INL/RM AND INL/LP 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR AFIN NU
SUBJECT:  INL MANAGUA 2008 END USE MONITORING REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 166080 
 
¶1.  Embassy Managua submits its 2008 End Use Monitoring Report per 
reftel instructions. 
 
¶2.  Begin Text: 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
¶A. Inventory Management 
 
EUM Program Coordinator 
 
Byron Tsao, 505-252-7711, TsaoBF@state.gov, United States Embassy, 
Km 4.5 Carretera Sur, Managua, Nicaragua. 
 
Inventory System 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
Embassy Managua's inventory system consists of spreadsheet lists of 
all commodities donated to the Nicaraguan National Police (NNP) and 
the Nicaraguan Navy.  A sticker with an INL inventory number is 
placed on each commodity for ease of tracking.   Through regular 
program monitoring, site visits are performed to assure that 
commodities are being used by the appropriate unit in the 
appropriate manner and to verify the condition of the commodities. 
As part of the agreement between Government of Nicaragua (GON) 
agencies and the USG, INL, the NNP and the Navy document the 
distribution or redistribution of commodities to other cities of the 
country or other Units through written correspondence. In the case 
of services, Post maintains attendance lists and logistics 
information of any training provided to monitor these services. 
 
Staff member EUM Responsibilities 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
In September 2008, a new INL Program Assistant was hired to manage 
financial and other logistical issues. One of the responsibilities 
of the position is to provide support in monitoring INL-donated 
equipment and draft the 2008 End Use Monitoring report.  The new INL 
Program Assistant performed site visits to track and inspect 
INL-donated equipment, updated INL inventory lists and obtained 
reports from the NNP on the status of commodities donated that could 
not be inspected. 
 
Other USG Agency Assistance 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
The DEA provided support by conducting visits to verify the use and 
condition of equipment donated by INL to the NNP.  Staff from the 
Political section also provided support by verifying the location 
and condition of INL donations in police stations located in remote 
areas of the country during programmed visits and activities in 
these areas. 
 
A maritime engineer jointly funded by INL Managua and NAS Panama 
provides support to monitor and supervise the refurbishment of three 
naval boats in the Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua. 
 
¶B. Counterpart Agencies 
 
Recipients 
- - - - - - 
 
Nicaraguan National Police (NNP) and Nicaraguan Navy.  Both 
counterparts cooperated extensively in the End Use Monitoring 
process by providing access to their facilities so Embassy officer 
could view all assets donated to them.  They also provided written 
reports with their own inventory information to help compare with 
INL's inventory list.  The NNP was very helpful in making the 
on-site inspections a quick and easy process by having all donated 
assets accounted for and on-site during the scheduled visits. 
 
Receipt 
- - - - 
 
The procedure used to document the provisions of the items provided 
to the NNP and Navy are Word documents with a specific listing of 
the items donated with serial numbers and/or vehicle motor numbers, 
signed by INL and by the recipient's representative. 
 
¶C. On-site Inspections 
 
10 scheduled on-site inspections performed 
 
3 unscheduled on-site inspections performed 
 
9 counterpart sites and 7 cities visited 
 
December 3, 2008, Managua, Drug Unit Police Station 
December 15, 2008, Managua, Juvenile Affairs Police Station 
December 18, 2008, Managua, Drug Unit Police Station 
December 23, 2008, Managua, Drug Unit Police Station 
December 26, 2008, Matagalpa, Drug Unit Police Station 
December 30, 2008, Jinotega, Drug Unit Police Station 
January 6, 2009, Managua, Drug Unit Police Station 
January 8, 2009, Managua, Drug Unit at Airport 
January 13, 2009, Peas Blancas, Drug Unit Police Station 
January 13, 2009, Rivas, Drug Unit Police Station 
January 14, 2009, Chinandega, Drug Unit Police Station 
January 14, 2009, Lesn, Drug Unit Police Station 
January 20, 2009, Bluefields, Navy 
 
1,003 donated items subject to inspection. 
 
52% of donated items personally inspected. 
 
¶D. Secondary Methods of Monitoring Resource Status 
 
Through comparison of records and discussions with police officials, 
another 20% of donated items were monitored, meaning that 72% of all 
INL-donated items were monitored and accounted for in 2008. 
 
STATUS-COMMODITIES 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶A. Type of commodity and project 
 
296 Computer equipment packages (*Note: Equipment includes CPU, UPS back-up batteries, monitors, printers, scanners, and stabilizers.) donated for NNP Drug Interdiction
 
36 Cameras donated for Drug Interdiction 
 
2 Cameras donated for Demand Reduction 
 
8 Computer equipment packages donated for Demand Reduction 
 
23 Computer equipment packages donated to Vetted Unit 
 
9 Cameras donated to Vetted Unit 
 
1 Buster Contraband Detector and 4 Buster accessories for Drug 
Interdiction 
 
1 Mobile Vapor Tracer donated for Drug Interdiction 
 
1 Power Generator for Drug Interdiction 
 
1 Power Generator for Demand Reduction 
 
1 Ion Scan 
 
129 Portable and base radios donated for Drug Interdiction 
 
4 Canines for K9 Unit. 
 
B, C and D. Location, Use and Condition 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
153 Computer equipment packages in Managua Police headquarters. This equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 134 computer equipment packages are in good condition and being used. Four computer equipment packages are in the warehouse, brand new, not being used. Seven computer equipment packages are in fair condition and being used. Eight computer equipment packages are in bad condition.
 
12 computer equipment packages are in the NNP Managua police station warehouse in bad condition.
 
4 Cameras located in Managua Police headquarters. These cameras are used by the NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or buildings, also to take pictures of any drug seizures for police records. One is in fair condition and the other three are in bad condition.
 
17 Computer equipment packages in Managua International Airport. This equipment is used by the NNP Airport Unit to write, print, file, share and exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 14 computer equipment packages are in good condition. Three computer equipment packages are in bad condition.
 
11 Cameras and camera equipment in Managua International Airport. These cameras and equipment are used by the Airport National Police to guard different strategic points within the Airport to prevent drug smuggling or handling. 9 cameras are in good condition. One camera is in fair condition.
 
1 Ion Scan in Managua International Airport.  This is used to detect 
drug traces on luggage and is in good condition. 
 
25 Computer equipment packages in Vetted Unit headquarters.  These 
computers are used by the Vetted Unit to write, print, file, share, 
and exchange data and information, related to international drug 
trafficking, corruption and money laundering, with relevant units 
and counterparts.  All the computer equipment is in good condition. 
 
 
9 Cameras in Vetted Unit headquarters.  These cameras are used by 
the Vetted Unit to carry out its day-to-day functions related to 
international drug trafficking, corruption and money laundering. 
All cameras are in good condition. 
 
21 Computer equipment packages in the Peas Blancas Drug Unit. 
These computers are used by the Peas Blancas Border Inspection 
Station NNP Unit to write, print, file, share, and exchange data and 
information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and Law Enforcement 
issues with the relevant units and counterparts.   Eight computer 
equipment packages are in good condition.  Thirteen computer 
equipment packages are in bad condition. 
 
1 Buster Contraband Detector and 4 accessories in Peas Blancas Drug 
Unit.  The Peas Blancas Border Inspection Station is located at the 
border between Costa Rica and Nicaragua.  A high volume of cargo 
traffic passes through this border crossing, making it a 
particularly important area to conduct narcotics interdiction 
operations.  In such operations, the Buster is used to detect trace 
amount of drugs as well as find false compartments in trucks 
attempting to pass through the border.  The Buster is in bad 
condition, and was recently sent to the US for repair, along with 
one piece of peripheral equipment that is in bad condition and also 
sent for repair.  3 pieces of equipment are in good condition. 
 
1 Power Generator in Peas Blancas Drug Unit.  Given the unstable 
nature of the Nicaraguan power grid, it is crucial for the Peas 
Blancas Border Inspection Station maintain an independent power 
source, in the form of a generator, to ensure an uninterrupted 
inspection effort even during the frequent blackouts and brownouts 
in the country.  The generator is in good condition. 
 
4 Cameras in Peas Blancas Drug Unit.  These cameras are used by the 
Peas Blancas officials to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, 
cargoes, or people that cross the border and are also used to take 
pictures during drug seizures.  Two cameras are in good condition, 
one in fair condition and one in bad condition. 
 
8 Computer equipment packages in Juvenile Affairs headquarters. 
These computers are used by the NNP Juvenile Affairs officials to 
support them during DARE or Second Step demand reduction program 
training sessions and conferences.  The computers are also used to 
write, print, file, share, and exchange data and information 
relevant to their demand reduction activities.  4 computer equipment 
packages are in good condition.  4 computer equipment packages are 
in bad condition. 
 
2 Cameras in Juvenile Affairs headquarters.  These are used to take 
pictures of their activities carried out under Demand Reduction. 
Both cameras are in bad condition. 
 
1 Power Generator in Juvenile Affairs headquarters.  This generator 
is brand new. 
 
2 Cameras with Mobile Inspection Unit.  These are used by the MIU to 
take pictures during their undercover inspections.  Both cameras are 
in good condition. 
 
1 Mobile Vapor Tracer with Mobile Inspection Unit.  This is used by 
the MIU to detect drug residues in vehicles during inspections.  The 
Vapor Tracer is in good condition 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in the Carazo police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Corn Island police station.  These cameras are used by 
the NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
1 Camera in Granada police station.  These cameras are used by the 
NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
8 Computer equipment packages in Chinandega police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
5 Computer equipment packages in Chontales police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
6 Computer equipment packages in Estel police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in Granada police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Granada police station.  These cameras are used by the 
NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
6 Computer equipment packages in Jinotega police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Jinotega police station.  These cameras are used by the 
NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
6 Computer equipment packages in Leon police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Leon police station.  These cameras are used by the NNP 
to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in Madriz police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Madriz police station.  These cameras are used by the 
NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in Masaya police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Masaya police station.  These cameras are used by the 
NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
6 Computer equipment packages in Matagalpa police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
6 Computer equipment packages in Nueva Segovia police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
6 Computer equipment packages in RAAN police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in Rama police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in Rio San Juan police station.  This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
5 Computer equipment packages in Rivas police station. This 
equipment is used by the NNP to write, print, file, share, and 
exchange data and information regarding Narcotics Interdiction and 
Law Enforcement issues with the relevant units and counterparts. 
All are in good condition. 
 
1 Camera in Rivas police station.  These cameras are used by the NNP 
to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses or 
buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for their 
records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
1 Camera in Zelaya Central police station.  These cameras are used 
by the NNP to take pictures of suspicious vehicles, people, houses 
or buildings, and also to take pictures of any drug seizures for 
their records.  The camera is in bad condition. 
 
8 Cameras in warehouse.  These cameras are not being used because 
they are damaged. 
 
76 Radios in warehouse at Managua Police headquarters.  70 of these 
radios are in warehouse in bad condition.  1 Radio Base in good 
condition and 5 Power Source Radio bases in good condition. 
 
31 Radios in Managua Police headquarters.  21 are in bad condition 
and 10 are in good condition. 
 
26 Radios located at Managua International Airport.  Only 12 radios 
and 2 Radio Bases in fair condition are being used for communication 
between officers.  The other 12 are in bad condition. 
 
12 Radios in Peas Blancas.  Only two radio bases are in good 
condition and being used.  The other 10 handheld radios are in bad 
condition. 
 
7 Radios in Chinandega police station.  All seven radios are in bad 
condition. 
 
4 Radios in Jinotega police station.  Three radios in fair condition 
being used by officials to communicate with each other.  One radio 
is in bad condition. 
 
7 Radios in Leon police station.  All 7 radios are in bad 
condition. 
 
4 Radios in Matagalpa police station.  Two radios in fair condition 
used by officers to communicate with each other.  Two radios in bad 
condition. 
 
4 Radios in Rivas.  All four radios are in bad condition. 
 
2 Canines, located at Peas Blancas, used to detect drugs in 
luggage, freights and people.  One was sent to Managua for 
retirement and one is ill, and is currently located at a local 
veterinary. 
 
¶E. Unmonitored Commodities 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Approximately 28% of total donations could not be monitored as they 
had been donated in 2002 or prior and have reached the end of their 
useful life-span.  Most of these commodities are in bad condition 
and either beyond repair or have had their parts used to repair 
newer models.  Two other canines were up for retirement. 
 
STATUS-INVENTORIES 
 
¶A. N/A 
 
¶B. Vehicles 
 
Nicaraguan National Police 
 
Vehicles     Inventory 
 
Toyota Hilux Double Cabin 19 
Toyota Yaris Sedan   4 
Toyota Tercel Sedan   3 
Toyota Van    1 
Toyota Ambulance   1 
Ford Van     2 
Ford Truck    1 
Hyundai Accent Sedan   2 
GMC Van     1 
Yamaha motorcycles   59 
Honda motorcycles   37 
Suzuki motorcycles   15 
Dodge Caravan    1 
Nissan Quest    1 
 
Demand Reduction - Juvenile Affairs 
 
Vehicles    Inventory 
 
Toyota Tercel Sedan   1 
GMC Pick-Up     1 
Honda motorcycles   8 
 
Vetted Unit 
 
Vehicles 
 
Honda motorcycles   5 
 
Note:  The Suzuki motorcycles, 41 Yamaha motorcycles and the 3 
Toyota Tercel will not be included in the 2009 End Use Monitoring 
Report because they have reached the end of their useful life-spans. 
  Other vehicles that will be removed: GMC Pick-Up, Dodge Caravan 
and Nissan Quest.  All of these vehicles are in bad condition and 
beyond repair. 
 
¶C.  Vessels 
 
Nicaraguan National Police 
 
Vessel     Inventory 
 
Boston Whaler   1 
 
¶D.  N/A 
 
STATUS-SERVICES-INL 
 
¶A. N/A 
 
¶B.  Demand Reduction Services 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Combat TIP - Training of police to learn how to handle TIP cases and 
learn how to operate the help telephone lines to assist TIP victims; 
TIP campaign and divulgation materials. 
 
Drug awareness programs - Training of police officers; training of 
teachers; education of preschool level students; and awareness 
campaigns for students in primary and secondary school. 
 
¶C.  Maritime Support 
- - - - - - - - - - - 

Support the Nicaraguan Navy - Refurbishment of three large naval 
boats and providing engines, spare parts, and maintenance for 
several smaller patrol boats for maritime interdiction on both the 
Atlantic and Pacific coasts. 
 
PROGRAM IMPACT 
 
¶A.  Communications equipment - The purchase of communications 
equipment helped improve communication and sharing of information 
between the different units and police stations throughout the 
country to help in the investigation of national and international 
drug trafficking. 
 
¶B.  Vehicles - The vehicles and motorcycles purchased for the NNP 
were a key factor in the NNP's record narcotics seizures in FY 2008, 
with the seizure of approximately 19.5 MT of cocaine, 52.84 
kilograms of heroin, and the arrest of 136 drug traffickers.  The 
NNP also seized $4,742,147.00 in U.S. currency and denied 109 
traffickers assets worth a total of $9,147,397.00 U.S. currency.  Of 
significance, Nicaraguan authorities also seized 18,000 dosage units 
of pseudoephedrine as it was being smuggled out of the country. 
 
¶C.  Maritime Support - With substantial support from INL Managua, 
the Nicaraguan Navy was able to proactively patrol Nicaraguan 
territorial waters and aggressively deploy their limited assets to 
respond to tactical information provided by US law enforcement 
agencies (US LEA).  This assertive maritime posture and coordination 
with US LEA resulted in the seizure of over 9,000 kilograms of 
cocaine; approximately 50% of FY-08 cocaine seizures. Of the nine 
documented maritime events, eight occurred on the Atlantic coast. 
 
¶D.  Services - Through the Demand Reduction project, material for 
the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) Program, established in 
Nicaragua in 2001, has now been translated into the Miskito language 
and widely utilized on the Atlantic coast.  In 2008, the United 
States worked with the NNP's Department of Juvenile Affairs to 
evaluate and expand a pilot effort for the Second Step (Segundo 
Paso) demand reduction/at-risk youth program which is designed for 
younger children.  The program thus far has proven to be a success 
amongst the students, teachers and parents. 
 
PROBLEMS & CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS (CAP's) 
 
¶A.  Unmonitored Resources 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Approximately 28% of inventory, including computer equipment, 
vehicles and radios were not monitored due to staff shortages.  For 
two years there was only one dedicated INL locally employed staff 
(LES) member, a Program Assistant.  This position was responsible 
for carrying out an extremely wide array of duties, including 
budgeting, reporting, and inventory which made it very difficult to 
conduct regular inventory monitoring visits.  In September 2008 a 
new INL Program Assistant was hired to manage the program budget and 
overhaul the INL Managua End Use Monitoring system.  In 2009 another 
INL Program Assistant will be hired as a Logistics Specialist who 
will be responsible for maintaining and monitoring inventory. 
 
¶B.  Repair and Maintenance of Commodities 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Maintenance of computer equipment and cameras in particular are a 
problem because the parts for repair can be extremely difficult to 
find or can at times cost more than buying brand-new equipment.  INL 
will consult with the NNP on a case-by-case basis the viability of 
buying necessary parts overseas or completely replacing the units 
when necessary. 
 
¶C.  Lack of Use or Misuse of commodities 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3 NNP project vehicles were found to be misused.  They were 
erroneously transferred with NNP officers who departed from the 
anti-narcotics units they were originally assigned to.  INL has 
addressed this issue with the NNP and it is in the process of 
getting the vehicles returned to the Drug Unit. 
 
A small quantity of recently donated items has not been put to use. 
NNP officials were advised on proper usage of the items and are in 
the process of putting the items to use. 
 
¶D.  Disposal of commodities 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Much equipment donated prior to 2002 has been disposed of by the NNP in what they call their "graveyard" or have had their parts used to fix newer equipment.
 
The Suzuki motorcycles, 41 Yamaha motorcycles and the 3 Toyota Tercels will not be included in the 2009 End Use Monitoring Report because they have reached the end of their useful life-spans. Other vehicles that will be removed: GMC Pick-Up, Dodge Caravan and Nissan Quest. All of these vehicles are in bad condition and beyond repair.
 
INL will write a letter to the NNP to offer assistance in disposing of the computer equipment and vehicles as needed.
 
¶E.  Other Problems 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
There are some gaps in INL Managua inventory records due to a 
historical lack of funding for staff to conduct regular End Use 
Monitoring visits.  INL Managua is in the process of hiring a new 
Program Assistant whose primary responsibility will be to maintain 
up-to-date inventory information and carry out quarterly monitoring 
site visits to maintain accurate records. 
 
 
CALLAHAN