10MANAGUA184
U) NICARAGUA 1/TVPRA - Goods produced by Child Labor
Tue Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0184/01 0331415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021414Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0588
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS MANAGUA 000184 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AKRAAIMOORE 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA 
DOL/ILAB LEYLA STROTKAMP, RACHEL RIGBY, TINA MCCARTER 
DEPT FOR DRL/ILCSR FOR SARAH MORGAN 
DEPT FOR G/TIP LUIS CDEBACA 
STATE FOR USOAS 
STATE PASS TO USAID/LAC 
STATE PASS TO MCC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB EIND ETRD PHUM PGOV SOCI NU
SUBJECT: (U) NICARAGUA 1/TVPRA - Goods produced by Child Labor
 
REF: STATE 131995 
 
¶1.   (U) The following is US Embassy Managua's submission regarding 
the Department of Labor request for information on forced labor and 
child labor in the production of goods for mandatory congressional 
reporting requirements as outlined in State 131995 and 131997. 
 
 
 
¶2.   (U) As reported previously (see REF C and D) there is no 
evidence of adults working under forced labor conditions; however, 
there is substantial evidence of child labor in Nicaragua.  The 
extreme poverty that exists throughout Nicaragua, and in particular 
in rural areas, results in a significant number of children working 
to ensure the basic well-being of their families.  Nicaraguan laws 
allow adolescents from age 14 to 16 to work for a limited number of 
hours a day, and only with the express consent of their parents 
(see REF D).  Nonetheless, the Nicaraguan Labor Code prohibits all 
children and adolescents from admission to hazardous work or work 
that puts them in "moral danger." 
 
 
 
¶3.   (U) There were no new studies on the number of Nicaraguan 
children working; however, the Ministry of Labor (MITRAB) plans to 
complete a new survey of child and adolescent labor in 2010.  The 
2005 National Survey on Child and Adolescent Labor (ENTIA), the 
most recent, estimated that 13.2 percent (239,220) of Nicaraguan 
children ages 5 to 17 years were employed.  In contrast, a 
longitudinal study (2004 and 2006) sponsored by Save the Children 
Norway (Save) found that over 33 percent of Nicaraguan children 
were employed, with the percentage reaching 38 percent in rural 
areas.  Further, the ENTIA study noted a 5.5 percent drop in child 
labor between 2000 and 2005, while the Save the Children research 
noted a 13.7 percent increase between 2004 and 2006. 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) As reported previously (see REF C) the majority of child 
laborers work in the informal sector (ENTIA - 75 percent, Save - 90 
percent), are found in rural areas (65 percent), work in 
agriculture and stockbreeding or related activities (over 55 
percent), and do not receive remuneration for their efforts (Save - 
75 percent, ENTIA - 61.5 percent).  The majority of child laborers 
work as part of a family unit - either in small family enterprises 
or by assisting their parents in the performance of labor for which 
their parents have been hired.  Although the majority of child 
laborers do not receive any remuneration, overall child and 
adolescent labor directly or indirectly contributed to family 
income. 
 
 
 
¶5.   (U) The following list represents products allegedly made in 
Nicaragua with child labor.  The production of the listed products 
requires the use of one or more forms of labor considered dangerous 
by its nature, as defined by the Government of Nicaragua's 
officially published list of "dangerous" forms of labor, last 
published in November 2006. This list was developed primarily 
through consultations with the international and national NGOs and 
a review of numerous studies and publications on child labor in 
Nicaragua. The Ministry of Labor (MITRAB) refused to meet with 
EmbOff in 2009 and 2010 to discuss this and other topics. 
 
 
 
Bananas 
 
- - - - 
 
 
 
¶6.   (U) Good: Bananas 
 
 
 
¶7.   (U) Type of Exploitation: Banana cultivation can include 
exploitative child labor.  The work carried out by children and 
adolescents in banana production falls within the government's 
definition of hazardous forms of labor. 
 
¶8.   (U) Sources of information and years: 2005 ENTIA Study; and 
2009 interviews with Professional for the Social and Business 
Auditing (PASE), and 2008 interviews with ILO-IPEC, MITRAB, and 
other credible NGOs. 
 
 
 
¶9.   (U) Narrative: Large-scale banana production for export is 
concentrated along the Pacific Coast of Nicaragua, primarily in the 
departments of Chinandega and Leon; however, small-scale banana 
production occurs throughout the country.  Children have been used 
in the preparation of the land for the planting of banana trees, 
which includes cutting, burning, and removing existing trees; 
planting seedlings; fumigation; and application of chemical 
pesticides.  Adolescents are used during the harvest period to do 
further fumigation, pick the fruit by hand, and carry heavy baskets 
of the bananas.  Child laborers can be exposed to chemical 
pesticides and fertilizers, and are required to carry heavy baskets 
of bananas.  These children work alongside their parents, who work 
as hired labor, or work directly for the employers. 
 
 
 
¶10.  (U) Prevalence: The incidence of child labor in small-scale 
banana production is isolated.  In the past, children were 
apprenticed at large-scale banana plantations, but this has been 
absent from the country for many years. 
 
 
 
¶11.  (U) Host government, industry or NGO efforts: Rainforest 
Alliance certification of bananas for export includes a provision 
that bananas must be harvested without child labor.  All bananas 
plantations for export actively participate in the Rainforest 
certification program. 
 
 
 
 
 
Tobacco 
 
- - - - 
 
 
 
¶12. (U) Good: Tobacco 
 
 
 
¶13.  (U) Type of Exploitation: Tobacco cultivation and harvesting 
can include exploitative child labor.  The work carried out by 
children and adolescents in tobacco production falls within the 
government's definition of hazardous forms of labor. 
 
 
 
¶14. (U) Sources of information and years: 2005 ENTIA Study; 
CNEPTI-Save 2007 Workshops; and 2008 interviews with Save the 
Children Norway, INPRHU, ILO-IPEC, MITRAB, and other credible NGOs. 
 
 
 
¶15. (U) Narrative: Tobacco production is found primarily in the 
northern departments of Esteli and Nueva Segovia.  According to 
CNEPTI and Save the Children, child and adolescent labor is present 
in informal tobacco production, where working children accompany 
their parents/families, who have been hired as contract labor. 
Child and adolescent labor is employed in the planting, growing, 
and harvesting phases of tobacco production.  CNEPTI and INPRHU in 
Esteli report that the harvesting of tobacco is done almost 
exclusively by children younger than 14 years old.  After 
harvesting, female laborers, mostly girls, are used to string 
together the leaves for drying.  Child laborers working in tobacco 
production during the planting, culling and harvesting phases are 
exposed to chemical contaminants and physical labor performed under 
extreme temperatures and inclement weather. 

 
¶16.  (U) Prevalence: The incidence of child labor in tobacco 
production is considered significant, although it is difficult to 
determine the number of children involved. There are no reliable 
figures, since the labor is concentrated in the informal and 
non-commercial sector of the industry. There was no evidence of 
child labor used in the production of cigars. 
 
 
 
¶17.  (U) Host government, industry or NGO efforts:  There are no 
current host government or industry efforts to combat child labor 
in the cultivation and harvesting of tobacco.  CNEPTI-Save the 
Children, and INPRHU have worked to raise awareness of the problem 
of child labor in tobacco production. 
 
 
 
 
 
African Palm 
 
- - - - - - - 
 
 
 
¶18. (U) Good: African Palm cultivated for its oil. 
 
 
 
¶19.  (U) Type of Exploitation: African Palm cultivation often 
includes exploitative child labor.  The work carried out by 
children and adolescents in African Palm production falls within 
the government's definition of hazardous forms of labor. 
 
 
 
¶20. (U) Sources of information and years: 2005 ENTIA Study; 2007 National Commission for the Progressive Eradication of Child Labor and Protection of Adolescent Workers (CNEPTI) CNEPTI-Save brochure on child labor "Son Incontables sus riesgos y danos"; and 2009 interviews with INPRHU, ENTERATE, and 2008 interviews with ILO-IPEC, and MITRAB.
 
 
 
¶21. (U) Narrative: African Palm cultivation is concentrated in 
Nicaragua's South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS), specifically 
in the municipality of Kukra Hill.  A CNEPTI-Save the Children 
study shows that adolescents 14 years and older are used in the 
preparation of the land - which includes cutting down trees, 
clearing land - pruning trees, and the application of chemical 
fertilizers.  Younger children are used in the preparation of the 
seedlings.  Boys ages 12 to 13 and girls aged up to 18 are used 
during the planting phase.  Boys and girls aged between 7 and 12 as 
well as teenagers are employed during the harvest season.  These 
children accompany their families, the majority of which are 
temporary migrants from the Pacific Coast who have come to the RAAS 
to work as contracted labor for the African Palm harvest. 
Adolescents work long hours and are exposed to dangerous tools, 
chemical pesticides, and fertilizers. 
 
 
 
¶22.  (U) Prevalence: The prevalence of child labor in African Palm 
cultivation is isolated. 
 
 
 
¶23.  (U) Host government, industry or NGO efforts: There are no 
current host government or industry efforts to combat child labor 
in African Palm cultivation.  CNEPTI-Save the Children have worked 
to raise awareness of the problem of child labor in African Palm 
cultivation. 
 
Oranges 
 
- - - - 
 
 
 
¶24. (U) Good: Oranges for export primarily to Costa Rica. 
 
 
 
¶25.  (U) Type of Exploitation: Oranges cultivated on large scale 
plantations often have an element of exploitative child labor.  The 
work carried out by children and adolescents at these large scale 
orange plantations falls within the government's definition of 
hazardous forms of labor. 
 
 
 
¶26. (U) Sources of information and years: 2005 ENTIA Study; 2007 
CNEPTI-Save brochure on child labor "Son Incontables sus riesgos y 
danos"; 2009 interviews with INPRHU and ENTERATE; and 2008 
interviews with ILO-IPEC and MITRAB. 
 
 
 
¶27. (U) Narrative: Large-scale orange production is concentrated 
along the San Juan River and its tributaries in the department of 
Rio San Juan.  A CNEPTI-Save the Children study found that boys 
aged between 12 and 13 are frequently used in the preparation of 
the land for planting of orange trees - this includes cutting and 
burning of existing trees, recollection of tree roots mechanically 
extracted, fumigation, and application of chemical pesticides. 
Young boys aged between eight and 13 are used during the harvest 
period to do further fumigation, pick the fruit by hand, bag the 
fruit, and load/unload bagged fruit from trucks.  Child laborers 
working in large-scale orange plantations are exposed to chemical 
pesticides and fertilizers, and are required to carry heavy loads 
of oranges on ladders.  It is unclear whether these children work 
alongside their parents, who work as hired labor, or work directly 
for the employers. 
 
 
 
¶28.  (U) Prevalence: The prevalence of child labor in orange 
production is isolated. 
 
 
 
¶29.  (U) Host government, industry or NGO efforts: There are no 
current host government or industry wide efforts to combat child 
labor in the production of oranges.  CNEPTI-Save the Children have 
worked to raise awareness of the problem of child labor in large 
scale-orange cultivation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Cattle-raising and Dairy Production 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
 
 
¶30. (U) Good: Beef and dairy products. 
 
 
 
¶31.  (U) Type of Exploitation: Cattle-raising and dairy production 
often includes exploitative child labor.  The work carried out by 
children and adolescents in stock breeding and dairy production 
falls within the government's definition of hazardous forms of 
labor. 
 
 
 
¶32. (U) Sources of information and years: 2005 ENTIA Study; 2007 CNEPTI-Save brochure on child labor "Son Incontables sus riesgos y danos"; and 2008 interviews with ILO-IPEC, Agriculture and Cattle Association of Chontales (ASOGACHO), and MITRAB.
 
 
 
¶33. (U) Narrative: Cattle-raising and the associated production of beef and dairy products is concentrated in the departments of Chontales, Boaco, and the western parts of the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) and the South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS). According to ASOGACHO, the vast majority of the country's many thousands of producers are small often family-managed businesses that employ child and adolescent labor. The ASOGACHO and CNEPTI-Save the Children study reported that the cattle sector is male-dominated; primarily employing teenage boys ages 13 to 18 in a variety of jobs. These youth are used to oversee cattle grazing, milk the cows, transport the milk, and clean and maintain stalls and equipment. They work as either hired hands on larger farms or are the children of families hired as caretakers by absentee owners. Younger children may also work on family farms or in caretaker families, but generally complete primary school before joining the workforce full-time. Child laborers are exposed to long hours of work, micro-organisms from dairy production, and the risk of physical injury.
 
 
 
¶34.  (U) Prevalence: The prevalence of child labor in 
cattle-raising and dairy production outside of family farms is 
considered significant and not isolated; however, it is difficult 
to determine the number of children involved outside of family 
farms as there are no reliable statistics. 
 
 
 
¶35.  (U) Host government, industry or NGO efforts: There is little 
to no effort by the host government, industry or NGOs to combat 
child labor in cattle-raising and dairy production. 
CALLAHAN