05NDJAMENA884
SENATOR BIDEN MEETS REFUGEES AND REBELS, URGES
Thu Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


ACTION AF-00    

INFO  LOG-00   NP-00    AID-00   AMAD-00  CA-00    CIAE-00  INL-00   
      DODE-00  DOEE-00  DS-00    EB-00    EUR-00   OIGO-00  FBIE-00  
      UTED-00  VC-00    FSI-00   H-00     TEDE-00  INR-00   IO-00    
      LAB-01   L-00     VCE-00   M-00     NEA-00   DCP-00   NSAE-00  
      NSCE-00  OIC-00   OMB-00   NIMA-00  PER-00   GIWI-00  PRS-00   
      P-00     SCT-00   SP-00    IRM-00   SSO-00   SS-00    STR-00   
      TRSE-00  FMP-00   SCRS-00  DSCC-00  PRM-00   DRL-00   G-00     
      SAS-00   SWCI-00    /001W
                  ------------------F9B4D7  022012Z /38    
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1716
INFO AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
DARFUR COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 
USLO TRIPOLI 
USMISSION GENEVAUNCLAS  NDJAMENA 000884 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/C, AF/SPG, D, DRL, H, INR, INR/GGI, 
PRM, USAID/OTI AND USAID/W FOR DAFURRMT; LONDON AND PARIS 
FOR AFRICAWATCHERS; GENEVA FOR CAMPBELL, 
ADDIS/NAIROBI/KAMPALA FOR REFCOORDS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREF KAWC CD SU VIP
SUBJECT: SENATOR BIDEN MEETS REFUGEES AND REBELS, URGES 
REALISTIC EXPECTATIONS 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary:  Senator Joseph Biden delivered a strong 
message of U.S. support for the resolution of the crisis in 
Darfur, tempered by a frank discourse on the USG limitations, 
during his visit to Chad from May 31 to June 1.  Biden 
traveled to Oure Cassoni Refugee Camp near Bahai, where he 
met with the refugee committees, visited camp schools, spoke 
with women refugees, and was treated to a demonstration in 
favor of the U.N. Security Council actions against Sudan and 
the importance of education for Sudan's "lost generation". 
The visit revealed a high-level of organization among the 
Sudanese refugees.  The refugees initially focused primarily 
on the current camp needs, but also stressed their desire for 
U.S. intervention in Darfur.  Biden also met with 
representatives of the Sudan Liberation Movement (SLM) to 
urge them to define their political agenda clearly and 
negotiate seriously.  He explained to the refugees and to the 
rebel movement members the importance of setting realistic 
goals and expectations of how to achieve them.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Senator Joseph Biden and his staff traveled to Chad 
to assess the current situation of the 200,000 Sudanese 
refugees, speak with the African Union's Cease-fire 
Commission's officers, and hear about the impact of the 
refugee crisis from local Chadian representatives. 
Ambassador Wall, P/E officer, and Defense Attache accompanied 
Senator Biden and staff members Antony Blinken, Heather 
Flynn, and Margaret Aiken to Oure Cassoni Refugee Camp 
outside Bahai, Chad on May 31.  The Prefect and Sultan of 
Bahai welcomed Biden upon arrival and asked that the 
international community not forget the sacrifice of the local 
population.  Biden promised to make every effort to ensure 
that local Chadians were not left worse off after the 
refugees depart.  Oure Cassoni Refugee Camp host some 29,000 
Sudanese refugees and is the northern-most camp in Chad.  The 
camp is considered temporary because it is too close to the 
border with Sudan, but efforts to relocate it were hampered 
initially by problems finding another site with water and now 
political discussions within the government as to the new 
location. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
AFRICAN UNION: DARFUR VIOLENCE ONGOING 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Ghanaian Col. Ansu, the deputy commander of the 
African Union Cease-fire Commission sector at Tine, Sudan 
briefed the delegation at the airstrip in Bahai. Col. Ansu 
said the despite all the AU's efforts to date, the situation 
in Darfur "has given way to chaos and danger".  The AU 
monitors come across residents living under trees because 
they fear attack or had already been attacked.  Ansu wondered 
where these people are going to sleep once the rains begin. 
He said in other peacekeeping operations, victimized 
civilians normally gravitate toward the peacekeepers, but in 
Darfur, the AU forces do not have a protection mandate and 
lack credibility with the local population.  For example, 
when the AU investigates a situation, villagers do not trust 
that the monitors can protect them from jandjaweed or 
Government of Sudan reprisals if they speak to the AU. 
Moreover, the GOS regularly prevents the AU from 
investigating complaints against it or the jandjaweed.  As a 
result, by the time the AU can get to the location of an 
alleged GOS or jandjaweed violation, it is too late.  On the 
contrary, violations by the rebel movements get immediate 
attention.  Ansu showed the delegation graphic pictures of 
recent victims of GOS-jandjaweed attacks, including rape 
victims. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Biden asked what the AU needs to boost its 
capabilities.  Ansu told Biden that the AU's mobility needs 
to be improved so that violations can be immediately 
investigated.  Ansu noted that the AU Peace and Security 
Council agreed to expand the AU CFC mandate to protect people 
from attack or who have been attacked.  The AU force needs to 
be increased to at least 6,000, requires helicopters, 
including gunships, armored personnel carriers, 
communications equipment, and medical support.  He noted that 
in his previous peacekeeping experiences, APC's were used to 
gather up victims and people seeking protection from attack. 
 
 
Currently, the AU has no means to move victims and potential 
victims out of danger.  Ansu also stated that accurate maps 
and a stronger intelligence network is needed to carry out 
operations in a desert environment. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
REFUGEE COMMITTEE: ON MESSAGE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Upon arrival to Oure Cassoni Refugee Camp, Senator 
Biden met with the refugee committees.  The meeting was very 
organized by refugee leaders, who also put their demands in 
writing.  Their demands included education for children of 
all ages, better pay for teachers, more supplies for the 
health center, a wider variety of foodstuffs, vocational 
training for women, and a resumption of an internal refugee 
policing program, which was discontinued last year. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Senator Biden probed the refugees for their 
thoughts on what is required for them to return to Sudan. 
They told Biden that they are isolated and have lost all of 
their possessions.  The refugees unanimously agreed that 
peace and security must be assured.  In their view, the 
following steps are necessary to make it possible to return 
to Sudan.  First, the jandjaweed and Sudanese soldiers must 
be "vacated" from the area.  Their weapons must be taken away 
from them.  Second, village infrastructures must be rebuilt. 
Third, the GOS must compensate the refugees for everything 
that they have lost.  Finally, the refugees raised the issue 
of emissaries from the GOS trying to carry out 
"reconciliation".  The refugees stated that "they do not 
know" these traditional leaders and want them to stop what 
they are doing. (Note: This is a reference to 
"reconciliation" committees established by the GOS and 
traditional authorities in late 2004 to settle conflicts over 
land, cattle and camel theft, and local disputes on the 
border between Chad and Sudan.  However, the refugees view 
them as GOS-sanctioned provocateurs.  End Note.)  The leader 
of the women's refugee committee added that all war criminals 
should pay for what they did at the war crimes tribunal in 
Arusha, Tanzania. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The refugees burst into applause several times in 
support of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1593 and U.S. 
efforts on behalf of Darfur.  They stated that only U.S. and 
European troops can resolve the security situation in Darfur. 
 Biden urged the refugees to be realistic in outlining their 
demands and describing what it is that they need after 
security is restored. He then outlined U.S. efforts to date, 
including $500 billion in assistance on the Darfur issue, 
leading the diplomatic community in putting pressure on 
Khartoum, and logistical support for African Union forces. 
Biden continued to explain the political realities of 
committing U.S. troops to Darfur and what the refugees could 
realistically expect the U.S. to provide.  He asked them to 
be clear on what they want and need from a political 
settlement because the leaders in the U.S. must justify their 
policies to the American taxpayer.  It is important for 
legislators to be able to demonstrate that the situation can 
be resolved and explain the best options.  Biden assured the 
refugees that he would continue to work for a resolution to 
the Darfur crisis, including his continued advocacy for a 
high-level special envoy to play the role that former Senator 
John Danforth played in brokering the North-South agreement. 
 
- - - - - - - 
SCHOOL VISIT 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Biden visited with children in one of the camp's 
school blocks.  Over 7,500 children are attending classes in 
101 tents.  There are two shifts, one in the morning and one 
in the afternoon due to the limited classroom space.  He 
urged them to take school seriously because it is the key to 
their future and the future of Sudan.  The children in school 
zone A had organized a demonstration, complete with signs and 
chants in support of more education, the United Nations 
Security Council, and the United States. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - 
WOMEN'S VOICES 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  A group of women refugees were assembled to speak 
with Senator Biden on a range of issues.  Biden told the 
refugees of his interest in issues that affect women, ranging 
from family issues to protection and gender-based violence. 
He told them about his effort to provide legislation that 
would enhance protection of women and children in refugee 
camps.  The women repeated earlier messages from the refugee 
committee meeting and focused on their immediate needs, such 
as education, income-generating activities, a variety of food 
sources, and a resumption of the internal camp security 
provided by the refugees.  Biden asked what types of security 
problems are present in the camp.  The refugees said that the 
absence of this refugee security team meant that fights 
between women and others between children cannot be 
controlled.  They did not raise issues of rape or sexual 
violence in the camp. 
 
- - - - - - - 
REBEL AGENDA 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  In N'Djamena, Senator Biden met with 
representatives of the Sudan Liberation Movement (SLM) led by 
Bahar Arabie.  Biden asked Bahar to outline the situation in 
Darfur, SLM's objectives, and how the various tribes in 
Darfur identify themselves as Arab or African.  Bahar thanked 
Biden for the support the U.S. is providing the people of 
Darfur, noting that Americans are responsible for 70 to 80 
percent of the assistance.  He said that the SLM's 
declaration of principles include an autonomous status for 
Darfur and a transitional period similar to that in the 
North-South agreement.  According to Bahar, SLM has not 
discussed details such as the number of portfolios in the 
government because 28 percent of them have been given to the 
South.  This means that the Darfur groups will need to 
discuss these issues with representatives from both the north 
and the south.  The jandjaweed must be controlled and an 
alternative court must be established to try war criminals. 
Arabie stated that it would not be easy for SLM to get key 
members to Abuja for a June 10 resumption of the talks. 
However, SLM would try and also plans to keep the size of its 
delegations to about 20 or 30 representatives. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  Biden asked Arabie if the rebel movement is 
united.  Bahar stated that SLM has its internal differences 
and must have a conference to select its representatives, 
chief negotiator, and a technical committee to implement 
decisions.  However, Bahar assured Senator Biden that SLM 
will present a united front at the talks in Abuja.  Bahar 
said the movement is concerned that the AU's mandate is too 
restrictive and there are not enough troops on the ground. 
He welcomed U.S. and NATO assistance to provide logistics and 
personnel to strengthen the AU.  Bahar told Biden that 10,000 
troops are needed due to Darfur's large size.  Bahar also 
asked if SLM could visit the U.S. and make its case to the 
U.S. Congress. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  Senator Biden offered his assistance on this 
front, but urged the SLM to develop a clear message, select a 
few articulate individuals, and develop an organized 
presentation.  He explained that many members of the U.S. 
Congress view Darfur as a humanitarian tragedy and are 
motivated to assist and seek a resolution.  However, in order 
to get Congress and the American public to commit more 
resources to Darfur, including NATO support, it is critical 
that the movement is organized and clear about its 
objectives, including what a victory in Darfur looks like. 
Senator Biden told Bahar that SLM needs to define the next 
steps after the killing is stopped.  Biden advised that SLM 
get together and work on these issues.  He recommended that, 
when they are ready, they should work through the Embassy to 
contact his staff.  He offered to send a staff member back to 
help SLM with its presentation for members of Congress. Biden 
described what the Congress realistically can do on Darfur 
and his own advocacy on the issue, particularly his support 
 
 
for NATO logistics support for the AU and a high level U.S. 
envoy for Darfur. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  The assurances of continued U.S. interest and 
advocacy on Darfur, tempered by a realistic view of the 
limitations on U.S. support, were important messages to 
convey to the refugees and the rebel movement.  UNHCR and its 
implementing partners are reporting a positive impression 
from the visit in the camp, especially as a result of Senator 
Biden's willingness to spend over three hours listening and 
talking to the refugees.  Due to its proximity to the border, 
Oure Cassoni's refugee population is clearly more politicized 
than in the other camps.  They demonstrated a high level of 
organization and political savvy, and most refugees we spoke 
with were definitely "on message".  We note that the  African 
Union helicopter was an essential part of the delegation's 
travel, since the road between Bahai and Oure Cassoni was 
covered by blowing sand.  Post greatly appreciates the 
efforts of the African Union's Mission in Sudan and 
Cease-fire Commission authorities on behalf of the U.S. 
delegations. 
 
¶14.  (U)  Senator Biden did not have a chance to clear this 
message prior to departure. 
 
¶15.  (U) Khartoum and Tripoli Minimize Considered. 
WALL 
 
 
NNNN