07NDJAMENA200
ABECHE: EASTERN CHAD HUB FOR THE UN, NGOS AND ANY
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO3830
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0200/01 0611557
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021557Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5001
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1664
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 2129
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0968UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PRM/AF/GPARKER, AF/C/MASHRAF, S/CRS/JBEIK/JVANCE 
LONDON AND PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREF PREL KCRS KPKO CD SU
SUBJECT: ABECHE: EASTERN CHAD HUB FOR THE UN, NGOS AND ANY 
PKO FORCE SENT TO CHAD 
 
 
¶1.  (u) Summary.  Abeche is the major city in eastern Chad, 
used as a hub by the UN agencies and international 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that work in the 
region. Security remains an issue, with the UN still drawn 
down to essential personnel only (Phase IV)).  UN and NGO 
staff favor a strong UN force, even though its presence would 
likely increase their costs of operating in Abeche.  End 
summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Abeche is the principal city in the East, and the 
fourth largest city in Chad.  Its population in 1993 was 
54,628 (Note.  There has been no city census since then; 
however, extrapolating based on an annual 3.1% growth rate, 
the population now would be about 83,800.  End note).  It has 
a national museum and two modern campuses.  Abeche's history 
goes back hundreds of years, and it became the capital of the 
Ouaddai Sultanate in the early 19th century when the former 
capital ran out of water, remaining the capital until the 
French arrived.  Today, water and electrical utilities are 
very spotty.  Overall, Abeche is an undeveloped city with 
little infrastructure, located in the rugged Sahel. 
 
¶3.  (U) No refugee or IDP camps are located in or near Abeche 
itself, but it is the administrative and logistical hub for 
humanitarian activities in eastern Chad.  If the UN does 
establish a peace-keeping operation (PKO) for eastern Chad, 
it would most likely be headquartered in Abeche as well. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Abeche has a paved 10,000 foot runway just north of 
the city.  The airport houses an Chadian National Army (ANT) 
helicopter detachment, a French military detachment of over 
200 personnel, and the aircraft that fly around eastern Chad 
transporting UN and NGO staffs, and their many visitors.  Due 
to problems obtaining visas and permission to enter Sudan and 
go to Darfur, many visitors transit Abeche instead, on their 
way to visit Darfur refugee camps in eastern Chad.  Visitors 
in the last few weeks included the UN Human Rights Commission 
delegation that was refused permission to enter Sudan, UNICEF 
Goodwill Ambassador Mia Farrow and UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador 
Angelina Jolie, as well as a former French prime minister and 
a French author. 
 
Security in Abeche 
------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Although Chadian rebels did briefly occupy Abeche 
last November, most UN and NGO staffers there think it 
unlikely that it will be attacked again.  There is a sizable 
ANT garrison in the city, and there are often attack 
helicopters at the airport.  In addition, most interlocutors 
believe that the rebels are weaker now than they were several 
months ago. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) However, Government of Chad (GoC) capacity is weak. 
 One interlocutor estimated that there are eight to ten 
murders each month in Abeche, usually committed by the ANT. 
The ANT is not well-disciplined, and some soldiers harass 
locals, who are afraid of them.  There is no functioning 
judicial system and therefore no serious investigations or 
criminal trials.  There is also the perception that the GoC 
is not spending any development funds in eastern Chad 
(actually, not outside of Ndjamena itself).  At the same 
time, there are also many heavily armed Sudanese rebels in 
the city wearing similar uniforms.  It's not clear if the 
authorities know or care about their presence. 
 
Security in Eastern Chad 
------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The UN remains in Phase IV security posture in 
eastern Chad (only essential personnel allowed to remain). 
At the refugee and IDP camps, only a fraction of the UNHCR 
staffs are present.  Most NGOs follow UN guidelines and are 
also at minimum manning.  The UN and the NGOs all have 
curfews for their staffs, with some as early as 5:15 p.m. 
However, one NGO, Oxfam, returned to Phase III about four 
weeks ago and has increased its staff out east. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) There are serious security concerns in eastern 
Chad, especially southeast of Abeche, due to either rebel 
activity or simple bandits, and all travel has to be cleared 
daily with the UN security officer in Abeche.  He reported 
that one day about two weeks ago was exceptionally quiet, so 
 
NDJAMENA 00000200  002 OF 002 
 
 
the UN took advantage of that to stage as many ground convoys 
as possible that day.  While most interlocutors did not think 
the rebels were strong enough to attack Abeche again, no one 
discounted their ability to make harassing attacks anywhere 
or to carjack SUVs. 
 
Effects of a UN Peace-Keeping Force 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) All UN and NGO staffers questioned wanted a strong 
UN force deployed as soon as possible, with the mandate to 
protect refugees, IDPs, and humanitarian workers, due to the 
current security situation.  Most hadn't considered the issue 
whether such a force would be perceived by Chadian rebels as 
being pro-GoC, but those that had considered it a definite 
possibility.  Interlocutors were aware of the logistical and 
manpower requirements outlined in the Secretary General's 
most recent report (from obtaining water to finding 800 
Chadian gendarmes), and privately do not think a force is 
feasible on that scale. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) One side effect of a PKO would be its effect on 
Abeche itself.  The airport tarmac is already crowded (Emboff 
observed 11 aircraft on the tarmac at one point, including a 
French C-160 Transall, a French helicopter, an ANT attack 
helicopter, plus the various UN, NGO, and transient 
aircraft). 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Housing prices in Abeche are already highly 
inflated.  One room of a three bedroom house in western 
Abeche could be sub-let from the German agency, GTZ, for 
approximately USD 100 per month, plus USD 24 to help pay for 
the guards, and some amount to help pay for generator fuel 
(most residences do not run generators during the day, just 
at night).  A new three bedroom house being built between the 
airport and the UNHCR compound was asking in the range of USD 
$1,000 per month.  There are new houses under construction. 
By comparison, lodging at a UNHCR guest house (where Emboffs 
usually remain overnight) costs approximately USD 27 per 
night.  However, the insertion of a large PKO, headquartered 
in Abeche, would drive real estate prices up significantly, 
making it more expensive for UN agencies and NGOs to operate 
there.  The resulting increase in visitors would also at the 
same time make it more difficult to obtain UNHCR guest 
quarters.  Assuming the force's presence led to the 
reinstatement of Phase III, then even more UN and NGO staff 
would return to Abeche, adding to the housing congestion. 
 
¶12.  (U) On the other hand, it might stimulate the local 
economy in other ways.  The current UN and NGO international 
population does not appear to be big enough to have created 
any businesses catering to them, such as western-type 
markets, souvenir shops, restaurants or internet cafes. 
While a PKO force here would boost local employment, the 
drawback is that it would cause an inflationary effect on 
food prices, which would adversely affect the local 
population. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Abeche will remain the hub for the UN agencies and 
NGOs serving in eastern Chad.  If a UN PKO does deploy there 
(currently blocked by President Deby), it will be welcomed by 
the UN and NGOs, but will compete with them for airport 
tarmac space and the renting of housing and office compounds. 
WALL