07FRANKFURT1315
Neo-Nazi Influence In Elite Frankfurt Police Unit
Mon Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO9139
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #1315 0781423
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191423Z MAR 07
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0436
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS FRANKFURT 001315 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ASEC SCUL GM
SUBJECT: Neo-Nazi Influence In Elite Frankfurt Police Unit 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Media revealed this week that at least three 
members of an elite Frankfurt-based police unit that provides close 
personal protection to public figures (among them Jewish leaders and 
CG Frankfurt) had neo-Nazi affiliations.  ConGen Frankfurt was told 
the allegations first emerged in the course of a fraud investigation 
in late 2005, at which time all implicated persons were suspended or 
reassigned.  Opposition leaders and Jewish representatives 
criticized the state for withholding its findings and not 
prosecuting (or firing) all those implicated in the sensational 
case.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Investigations Ongoing 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) According to media reports confirmed by official sources, 
Frankfurt prosecutors have investigated three "protective division" 
(bodyguard) personnel (ages 26, 32, and 43) for neo-Nazi 
affiliations.  In the most sensational case -- a 26-year-old officer 
who had distributed a photo of himself in an "pseudo-SS" uniform (a 
jacket with SS insignia) and used other Nazi/neo-Nazi symbols -- 
prosecutors dropped charges on the grounds that questionable 
materials were shown to a limited group of people (his colleagues) 
and not distributed widely as propaganda (a criminal offense). 
Investigators also found far-right music files on his private 
computer.  He remains on suspension.  The 32-year-old acted as an 
accomplice to the "SS" photo but investigators say they found little 
other evidence.  An investigation is also ongoing against a 
43-year-old officer whose computer contained the banned "Horst 
Wessel Song" (SS marching song).  NOTE:  Police representatives told 
RSO they removed all officers involved from protective duty 
regardless of charges and disposition.  END NOTE. 
 
¶3. (U) The case is sensational as well since the three policemen 
implicated in neo-Nazi activities served as bodyguards to Michel 
Friedman, former deputy head of Germany's Jewish community (and a 
prominent public figure).  Friedman expressed shock at the case, 
reflecting that it shows far-right influence can pervade all walks 
of German life and criticizing state authorities for not acting more 
quickly and openly. 
 
Political Reactions 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Opposition representatives attacked Hessen Interior 
Minister Volker Bouffier (CDU/Christian Democrats) for knowing about 
the case for months and not informing the public -(nor apparently 
those affected such as Mr. Friedman).  SPD and Greens state 
spokepersons called on Bouffier to resign or to identify those 
responsible for the case, pointing to other scandals within the 
ministry.  National Greens party head Claudia Roth called on 
Bouffier to take respnsibility for the affair and warned of a 
"massiv problem of growing right-wing extremism and anti-emitism" 
in Germany.  Jewish community members aso voiced criticism over the 
case.  Critics particularly want to know any signs of broader 
far-rigt influence in the Frankfurt police. 
 
COMMENT 
------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) A close ally of Hesse Minister-resident Roland Koch (CDU), 
Bouffier has shown n signs of considering resignation and is likely 
to argue that investigators were diligent in the cas.  Nonetheless, 
the case is highly embarrassing or authorities.  A larger question 
is how elite embers of the Frankfurt police felt comfortable 
haring neo-Nazi sentiments with their colleagues. 
 
¶6. (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Belin. 
 
POWELL