05RECIFE150
RESPONSE TO VIOLENT PROTEST AT RECIFE CONSULATE DURING
Wed Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Recife
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RECIFE 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/CC, DS/ICI/PII, DS/IP/ITA, DS/IP/WHA, BRASILIA 
FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC KPAO PTER BR US
SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO VIOLENT PROTEST AT RECIFE CONSULATE DURING 
PRESIDENTIAL VISIT 
 
REF: RIO DE JANEIRO 1167, SAO PAULO 1248 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Demonstrators protesting President Bush's 
visit to Brazil marched on the U.S. Consulate in Recife -- 
peacefully on Friday November 4 and violently the next day.  The 
second group of approximately 200 protesters included members of 
the Landless Movement (MST), who came armed with sticks, stones 
and a sickle. Despite a valient effort by two policemen, the 
leaders cracked the security glass of the Consulate guard 
booth, covered the walls with red paint and attacked the 
policeman who tried to arrest the perpetrators.  After analyzing 
surveillance tapes, the Consul met with the state police 
commander and then requested an investigation by Federal Police. 
 In a public diplomacy effort to prevent violence at future 
demonstrations, the Consul gave interviews to local TV and 
newspapers pointing out the importance of rule of law to 
guarantee freedom of expression and public safety. End Summary 
 
¶2. (U)  On November 3, the Consulate learned that a 
demonstration against the presidential visit was being planned 
for the next day.  A warden message advised Americans to avoid 
the area and take precautions. Police protection was requested. 
The small group of 50 demonstrators who marched on November 4 
were peaceful, limiting their action to burning an effigy on a 
donkey cart. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Rumors of a second demonstration reached the Consulate 
the same day, and PSO advised the police that the Saturday 
march, starting from the bankworkers union, would mobilize 
several hundred protestors. Due to a major soccer game, police 
sent only one patrol car to the Consulate at the last moment. 
The regional leader of the Landless Movement (MST), Jaime 
Amorim, can be seen on the Consulate's surveillance tapes, 
giving orders and taking a stick to one of the policemen. Amorim 
later spoke to reporters who came to cover the protest, charging 
that police threatened his group with their guns. The tapes 
clearly show the police evading blows and retreating immediately 
after the attack led by Amorim. The windshield of the patrol car 
was smashed. 
 
¶4. (U) After consultations with RSO and Embassy Brasilia, the 
Recife Consulate asked for a meeting with the commander of 
Pernambuco's uniformed police (policia militar) Col. Claudio 
Jose da Silva. Da Silva agreed that in the future more police 
protection would be provided and the street could be closed to 
head off the march. He noted that only the Federal Police could 
open an investigation into the attack on the Consulate, 
according to international law. In a meeting with Federal Police 
Superintendent Bergson Toledo Silva, the consul turned over the 
surveillance tapes and the football-size stone that badly 
cracked the security booth glass.  The Federal Police asked for 
an official request to prosecute those responsible for the 
damage to the Consulate and said charges made by the Pernambuco 
police would be adjudicated together with the Consulate's 
complaint. Police leadership welcomed the Consulate's effort to 
provide evidence and to draw the line against violence. 
 
¶5. (U) As the Consul pointed out to the police, legal action 
could have limited results unless public opinion can be 
mobilized on the side of the law. The police agreed that copies 
of the tapes, showing the violent attack on the Consulate, could 
be made available to television reporters.  Both evening and 
morning newscasts of the local TV Globo and SBT affiliates 
showed the footage of the attack and quotes from the consul to 
the effect that action by a few delinquents endangers both 
peaceful protestors and passersbys.  Both major newspapers in 
Recife carried the story November 9 on the Consulate's request 
for a police investigation and noted the inadequate protection 
given to the diplomatic mission. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: The violence was premeditated and the leaders 
can clearly be identified. In the spirit of zero tolerance for 
threats to U.S. citizens and missions, the Consulate hopes to 
ensure that those who plan to use violence will now know that 
there will be consequences for any future attack. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE