09DILI299
SJAFRIE SJAMSOEDDIN'S HISTORY IN TIMOR-LESTE
Fri Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dili
VZCZCXRO0857
RR RUEHCHI RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHDT #0299/01 3100830
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060830Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY DILI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4605
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 1352
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON 1172
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RHHJJPI/PACOM IDHS HONOLULU HI
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0965
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1141
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDT/AMEMBASSY DILI 4157UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DILI 000299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/RSP AND CA/FO 
NSC FOR J. BADER AND D. WALTON 
DHS/ICE/VSU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL CVIS ID TT
SUBJECT: SJAFRIE SJAMSOEDDIN'S HISTORY IN TIMOR-LESTE 
 
REF: A. JAKARTA 1785 
     ¶B. JAKARTA 1732 
     ¶C. JAKARTA 1571 
 
DILI 00000299  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Indonesian General Sjafrie Sjamsoeddin served in 
Timor-Leste on multiple occasions during the Indonesian 
occupation.  As commander of the Kopassus Intelligence Task 
Force in 1991 he was present for the November 12 Santa Cruz 
massacre in which many dozens of peaceful protestors were killed 
and dozens more remain missing.  His claim that he was rescuing 
Western journalists during the massacre cannot be confirmed. 
Sjamsoeddin served in Timor-Leste again in 1999 at the time of 
the August 30 popular consultation.  Multiple independent 
investigations declare him criminally responsible for the 
atrocities that occurred at that time, and put him near the top 
of the list of responsible parties.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
Indonesian Invasion and Early Occupation 
 
 
 
¶2.  Sjafrie Sjamsoeddin played an active role in Indonesia's 
occupation of Timor-Leste from the moment of the invasion in 
¶1975.  He was part of Operation Seroja and a Group Commander in 
Komando Pasukan Sandi Yudha, the forerunner of Kopassus, playing 
a role in both combat and intelligence.  He then served as 
Commander of a Nanggala counter-insurgency unit in 1976.  The 
Nanggala units were known in Timor-Leste for their brutality and 
ferocity. 
 
 
 
1991 Santa Cruz Massacre 
 
 
 
¶3. Sjamsoeddin served again in Timor-Leste from 1990 to 1992 as 
part of Kopassus' Intelligence Task Force (Satuan Tugas 
Intelijen or SGI).  Although Sjamsoeddin does not list his 
military affiliations on his non-immigrant visa application, as 
required, other sources identify him as the SGI commander in 
Timor-Leste during this period. 
 
 
 
¶4. On the morning of 12 November 1991, Indonesian security 
forces opened fire on a thousand or more demonstrators gathered 
at the Santa Cruz Cemetery in Dili.  The crowd was attending a 
flower-laying service for Sebastiao Gomes, a Timorese killed in 
a raid on the Motael Church several weeks earlier.  The 
Timor-Leste Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation 
(CAVR), an independent body created and operated with the 
support of the United Nations which has produced the most 
comprehensive documentation to date of the 1974 to 1999 period 
in its 2500-page Chega! report, estimates that 200 mourners were 
killed or remain missing.  Two Portuguese NGOs put the number of 
dead or missing at over 500.   A UN Special Rapporteur concluded 
subsequently that the procession was a peaceful demonstration. 
Forensic evidence presented in court proceedings showed that a 
high proportion of the victims sustained bullet wounds in the 
back. 
 
 
 
¶5.  Ten low-ranking members of the security personnel involved 
in the events of 12 November were tried and convicted before 
military courts in Indonesia.  Sentences ranged from eight to 18 
months and all those convicted were dishonorably discharged. 
Other security personnel were not charged on the grounds that 
they were following orders of superior officers.  The convicted 
personnel included at least one intelligence officer. 
 
 
 
¶6.  Multiple Western journalists were present in Dili on 
November 12, including Americans Allen Nairn and Amy Goodman, 
Australian Bob Muntz and Briton Max Stahl.  All have spoken 
 
DILI 00000299  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
publicly or written about their experiences surrounding the 
Santa Cruz Massacre.  None of these journalists have ever 
mentioned a rescue scenario like the one Sjamsoeddin claims to 
have been involved in.  Similarly, there is no record in the 
CAVR archives or with the November 12 Committee, a Timorese NGO 
dedicated to preserving testimonial records and identifying the 
missing victims of the massacre, that corroborates Sjamsoeddin's 
version of his whereabouts on November 12. 
 
 
 
¶7.  Several Timor-Leste experts characterize Sjamsoeddin as the 
key man behind the Santa Cruz massacre.  They cite testimony 
received from Timorese observers as well as Sjamsoeddin's 
position as the in-country head of Kopassus intelligence. 
 
 
 
1999 Popular Consultation 
 
 
 
¶8. Sjamsoeddin became Asisten Teritorial Kepala Staf Umum (Aster 
Kasum) for the TNI in 1998 (Territorial Assistant to the Armed 
Forces Chief of General Staff, Lt. Gen. Sugiono).  He remained 
in that position throughout 1999, including during the extensive 
violence that surrounded the August 30 popular consultation. 
Multiple independent investigations identify Sjamsoeddin as a 
direct participant in the gross human rights violations that 
occurred in Timor-Leste in 1999. 
 
 
 
¶9. The late Sergio Vieira de Mello, at the time UN Transitional 
Administrator in East Timor, commissioned a report on the nature 
and causes of the atrocities committed in 1999.  It found that 
widespread extra-judicial, summary or arbitrary executions, 
including both mass murder and individual killings, as well as 
torture and violence against women, were carried out against the 
people of East Timor.  The report recommended 23 senior military 
officers for criminal investigation for crimes against humanity. 
 It put at the top of the list the generals that "planned the 
formation of the militia, providing its units with arms, money, 
and targets."  Sjamsoeddin was third on the list, after Zacky 
Anwar Makarim and Adam Damiri.  The report assessed that 
Sjamsoeddin was "one of the key military officers responsible 
for the development of the TNI strategy that led to serious 
crimes against humanity in East Timor." 
 
 
 
¶10. A report commissioned by the UN Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights put Sjamsoeddin in a group of 
several dozen high-ranking TNI officers and senior civilian 
officials that planned and coordinated the pro-integration 
militias and the violence surrounding the popular consultation. 
The report concluded that this group of planners bore criminal 
responsibility for crimes against humanity.  It identified 
Sjamsoeddin as bearing both individual and command 
responsibility for crimes against humanity.  Sjamsoeddin was 
ranked second on a list of officials recommended for criminal 
investigation, behind Zacky Anwar.  The report was written by a 
UN officer present in Timor-Leste throughout the second half of 
¶1999.  The United Nations Serious Crimes Unit investigated 
Sjamsoeddin but did not indict him. 
 
 
 
¶11. Sjamsoeddin visited a Falintil base on August 27.  General 
Wiranto named him Chief Liaison Officer to UNAMET on August 31. 
He returned to Dili no later than September 1.  Contemporary 
reports indicate Sjamsoeddin and Zacky Anwar held an extended 
meeting on September 1 finalizing contingency plans in the event 
that the results of the popular consultation rejected special 
autonomy in favor of independence. 
 
 
 
 
DILI 00000299  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶12.  Eyewitness testimony puts Sjamsoeddin at the residence of 
Bishop Belo, a Nobel Peace Laureate, on September 6.  TNI, 
Brimob and militia groups attacked and burned the Bishop's 
residence in an effort to forcibly evict several thousand 
refugees from the compound.  At least one refugee was killed and 
more than a dozen injured.  The eyewitness, who knew Sjamsoeddin 
personally, maintains that Sjamsoeddin, in civilian dress, 
directed the operation from the road outside the compound. 
 
 
 
¶13. COMMENT: The near total absence of formal convictions makes 
assigning blame for the atrocities committed in Timor-Leste 
during the Indonesian occupation an interpretative matter.  The 
facts as described above lead us to conclude that Sjafrie 
Sjamsoeddin held senior positions of command responsibility in 
both 1991 and 1999, moments when atrocities undeniably occurred, 
and strongly indicate his personal culpability. END COMMENT. 
KLEMM