04QUITO2923
ECUADOR BANS EXPORT OF SHARK FINS
Fri Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EC ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL SENV
SUBJECT: ECUADOR BANS EXPORT OF SHARK FINS 
 
¶1.  Summary.  President Gutierrez has issued a decree banning 
the export of shark fins.  The ban applies to all shark fins, 
whether they are intentionally harvested or are the result of 
bi-catch.  Despite having been consulted prior to the 
decree's issuance, a local fishing group is asking President 
Gutierrez to revoke it.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  President Gutierrez signed a Presidential decree on 
October 7, 2004 banning the export or internal sale of shark 
fins taken in Ecuadorian territorial waters.  The ban covers 
all shark fins, whether they were intentionally harvested or 
are the result of bi-catch.  Those caught harvesting shark 
fins will have their fishing licenses suspended until a 
judicial authority issues an appropriate sanction.  The 
decree also bans the importation of equipment used to harvest 
shark fins and prohibits discarding sharks on the high seas. 
 
¶3.  The decree was issued only after the proposed ban was 
presented to and discussed by all parties which it would 
affect, including the Consejo Pesquero (Fishing Council), a 
group that represents fishing interests in the islands.  The 
Consejo approved of the ban, but has since withdrawn its 
support because of protests from some of its members.  The 
Consejo is now calling on the President to revoke the decree. 
 Environmental groups praise the ban. 
 
¶4.  The decree could have a positive impact on conservation 
efforts in the Galapagos.  We have congratulated GOE 
officials on the decree and will urge that they keep it in 
place.  Political support for the fishermen is limited to 
coastal Manabi and Guayas provinces. 
 
KENNEY