04QUITO3202
ECUADOR PREPARING TO MOVE FORWARD ON CIVIL
Fri Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 003202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR PGOV EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR PREPARING TO MOVE FORWARD ON CIVIL 
AVIATION LEGISLATION 
 
REF: GUAYAQUIL 1303 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Ecuador's Congress is preparing for the second 
debate on proposed civil aviation legislation sometime in 
January.  A legal advisor to the committee in which the draft 
legislation is pending says a vote on the floor of the 
Congress is likely sometime in February.  The passage of this 
legislation would represent a necessary step towards Category 
I status under the International Aviation Safety Assessment 
(IASA) program.  The Embassy is pushing for passage of this 
legislation and is working with the Ecuadorian Civil Aviation 
Authority (DGAC) and U.S. Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) officials to ensure that the final legislation will 
meet security standards.  Many special interests groups are 
already lobbying on behalf of the legislation and urging 
Congress to move as quickly as possible.  Despite past 
delays, we believe prospects for Congressional passage are 
good.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Civil Aviation Legislation - Long Time Coming 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Civil aviation legislation meeting international security 
standards has languished in Congress since early 2003. 
Several reviews and revisions have taken place since then. 
In April 2003, the FAA reviewed the draft legislation and 
provided feedback to the DGAC about necessary revisions to 
meet FAA's International Aviation Safety Assessment (IASA). 
In the ensuing year and a half, FAA officials have met with 
DGAC officials to provide additional guidance.  The FAA 
agreed to give the legislation a final review in December 
¶2004. 
 
------------------- 
Let's Pull Together 
------------------- 
 
¶3.    The Embassy has been working closely with the FAA and 
DGAC to ensure that Ecuador's legislation meets international 
standards.  In addition to the Embassy, many special interest 
groups are lobbying for passage of this legislation.  The 
Congressional committee overseeing this legislation has 
already received numerous inquiries from the DGAC, airline 
associations, pilots associations, and other groups. 
 
¶4.  The Ambassador stopped over in Guayaquil en route to the 
Galapagos and met with Nicholas Romero, Director of 
Guayaquil's Airport, to discuss the legislation (Reftel). 
She told Romero and Guayaquil Consulate officials that active 
participation from stakeholders in Guayaquil would be 
necessary for passage of the legislation.  She urged them to 
work together to present a united front in favor of passage. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  We are cautiously optimistic that the Congress will pass 
civair legislation early next year.  Our key concern has been 
making certain that the legislation passed actually meets 
standards. 
KENNEY