04QUITO3257
DECEMBER TIP UPDATE
Fri Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 003257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: DECEMBER TIP UPDATE 
 
REF: QUITO 3099 
 
¶1. Summary.  Ecuadorian police conducted 130 raids from 
November 12 to December 9 and found 28 minors who may be 
trafficking victims.  The congressional committee reviewed 
the Trafficking in Persons (TIP) bill, and it has been 
amended and is ready for Congress' second reading.  Several 
embassies are committed to fighting trafficking, and we will 
work with them to promote GOE engagement.  The new Minister 
of Government has named an undersecretary as his ministry's 
POC on TIP.  End Summary. 
 
Police Conduct 130 Raids Looking for TIP Victims 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  The unit of the police dedicated to protecting children, 
DINAPEN, conducted an impressive 130 raids from November 12 - 
December 9.  DINAPEN clarified that males found in these 
raids are not believed to be TIP victims; they are usually 
picked up for underage consumption of  alcohol or, in a 
lesser number of cases, soliciting the services of sexually 
exploited females.  Twenty-eight females were found who may 
be trafficking victims. 
 
TIP Bill Ready for Congress' Second Review 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  The congressional committee reviewing trafficking 
legislation recently gave us the revised version Congress 
will debate after the holidays.  (A copy was emailed to 
WHA/PPC and G/TIP on December 15.)  The bill correctly 
defines the crime of TIP and raises the age of consent to 18. 
 The penalties for traffickers range from 12 to 25 years, and 
criminals typically receive a more severe sentence when the 
victim is a minor.  The ABA will travel to Ecuador in 
mid-January and will review anti-TIP bills. 
 
Diplomatic Community Supports Trafficking Fight 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4.  Several other embassies are interested in working to 
encourage the GOE to fight TIP.  We have spoken with the 
Spanish, French, Peruvian, Colombian, Belgian, and Dutch 
embassies between November 29 and December 9.  All expressed 
interest in cooperating with us and the GOE to combat TIP. 
PolOff will contact the MFA and set up a joint meeting with 
the other embassies to show the importance of combating 
trafficking to jointly encourage GOE anti-TIP efforts. 
 
New Advisor for TIP 
------------------- 
 
¶5.  On December 15, PolChief and PolOff met with newly-named 
Undersecretary of Government Eduardo Ruiz, who was designated 
by Government Minister Damerval to handle the TIP portfolio. 
We explained the differences between trafficking and alien 
smuggling, the USG's trafficking report and tier levels, and 
our impressions of the GOE's efforts to fight TIP.  We 
encouraged Ruiz to convoke the GOE's inter-institutional 
anti-TIP group, which his minister heads.  He pledged to do 
so, and said Minister Damerval was ready to lobby Congress in 
support of pending anti-TIP legislation. 
KENNEY