04QUITO3099
NOVEMBER TIP UPDATE
Fri Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 003099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER TIP UPDATE 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2773 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 3027 
 
¶1.  Summary:  This cable reports significant anti-TIP 
developments since our interim TIP report (Ref A).  USAID and 
Geneva Global will mount six new projects to combat TIP 
(Trafficking in Persons) by the end of the year.  We recently 
met with two organizations who provide services to children 
and are interested in adapting their programs to help TIP 
victims.  The director of the Ricky Martin Foundation met 
with government officials to promote anti-TIP television 
broadcasts.  The police continued stepping up TIP efforts by 
conducting 64 raids on nightclubs and bars from October 28 - 
November 11 reuniting 54 minors with their families.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Progress on Victims Services 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  USAID and Geneva Global will provide $600,000 to fund 12 
to 15 projects to address TIP issues in Ecuador.  Geneva 
Global held a conference on November 15 with 38 NGOs to 
solicit proposals for projects.  The organization will 
coordinate with the Embassy to choose proposals that target 
Ecuador's needs and will choose six projects by the end of 
the year.  The remaining projects will be chosen by March 
¶2005.  We met with Geneva Global on November 16 to coordinate 
and explain our priorities:  shelters, psychological 
services, and alternative job training for victims. 
 
¶3.  PolOff and AIDOff recently met with two potential 
providers of victims services:  Street Children and the San 
Jose Foundation.  The former organization is faith-based and 
runs a shelter for 12 to 15 boys; provides food, education, 
and before- and after-school activities to many more 
children; and has victims centers in seven cities.  The San 
Jose foundation is largely funded by the municipality of 
Quito with some support from local businesses.  It will open 
a transitory shelter in January 2005 that will house 60 
people of all ages and currently runs programs to assist 
victims of child labor.  The foundation runs a shelter for 
beggars and impoverished senior citizens.  The directors of 
both organizations were interested in providing services to 
TIP victims but need assistance tailoring their programs to 
meet the needs of TIP victims.  PolOff will work with AID to 
see what assistance we can provide, and we put both 
organizations in contact with Geneva Global. 
 
----------------------- 
Ricky Martin Foundation 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  Angel Saltos, executive director of the Ricky Martin 
Foundation (RMF), met with the DCM, PolOff, AIDOff, and IO on 
November 19 to explain RMF's interest in combating TIP in 
Ecuador.  Saltos and PolOff met with the National Committee 
on Women and the police on November 22 to encourage further 
cooperation on combating trafficking.  The RMF's People for 
Children works to prevent TIP and assist victims, 
particularly children.  The MFA is trying to get free airtime 
for Ricky Martin's public service announcements (PSA) against 
trafficking.  These spots have already aired on one 
television channel in Quito in August during the noon news. 
Saltos said that one of the PSAs was aired in Ecuador on 
October 10 in an UNICEF telethon.  He also recorded a 
10-minute radio interview that PAS will distribute to 60 
radio stations and did a radio interview with Radio Quito to 
raise awareness of TIP and its consequences. 
 
-------------------------- 
New Minister of Government 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The DCM and PolChief met with the new Minister of 
Government, Jaime Damerval, on November 15 (Ref B).  They 
encouraged him to appoint someone soon to cover TIP and call 
a meeting of the Interagency TIP Commission he heads. 
Damerval was more focused on other concerns, such as 
political reforms but said he would personally lobby Congress 
to pass pending anti-TIP legislation. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Sixty-Four Raids in the Last Two Weeks 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  From October 28 - November 11, DINAPEN conducted 64 raids 
of nightclubs and bars and found 55 minors who may have been 
involved in prostitution.  With the exception of one minor 
who was taken into protective custody, all victims were 
handed over to family members.  We are requesting additional 
information on the activities of the potential TIP victims. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
News from the Office of the Presidency 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  PolOff met with Carlos Larrea, the President's legal 
advisor and secretary of the Interagency TIP Commission, on 
November 24.  He said he would lobby in favor of the bill and 
was trying to build a coalition.  However due to Congress' 
coming recess, he expects no further progress will be made on 
the legislation until mid-January.  Larrea said he would ask 
all committee members to provide him with a report on their 
progress and will continue to press MinGov Damerval to 
appoint someone to cover TIP. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  We will work with organizations, such as Geneva Global 
and the Ricky Martin Foundation, to develop public-private 
partnerships to combat TIP and help victims.  We have 
encouraged the GOE and local NGOs to work with these 
foundations and will consider them for USG matching funds. 
The MFA is taking steps in the right direction by working to 
air the anti-trafficking videos.  Larrea is emerging as a key 
supporter and TIP ally while the new Government Minister 
assembles his team.  We will continue promote GOE 
coordination with NGO's, and urge Congress to take up TIP 
reforms. 
KENNEY