05QUITO346
NOTES ON NEW ECUADORIAN AMBASSADOR TO UN
Fri Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 000346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV CU MX EC CHR
SUBJECT: NOTES ON NEW ECUADORIAN AMBASSADOR TO UN 
 
REF: SECSTATE 22969 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The Ambassador and DCM met with 
newly-named Ecuadorian Ambassador to the UN, Jaime Moncayo 
Garcia, to express USG interest in a collaborative 
relationship at the UN.  Separately, PolChief raised deep USG 
concerns over a Mexican human rights initiative (RefTel). 
Moncayo expressed eagerness to engage with USUN after his 
arrival in New York in early March.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Moncayo met with the DCM and PolChief on February 9 
at our request.  The Ambassador joined the meeting to 
congratulate Moncayo on his posting and offer Embassy 
assistance to help smooth his transition to New York. 
Moncayo was appreciative and expressed interest in 
cooperative and friendly relations with USUN.  He planned to 
call on Ambassador Anne Patterson, a friend from his time as 
Ambassador in Washington, shortly after his arrival in New 
York, in early March. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Moncayo said he was evaluating Ecuador's chances 
for a temporary seat on the Security Council in 2007 
(Guatemala and Venezuela are already contending within 
GRULAC, he said), and would report back to FM Zuquilanda once 
he reached a conclusion.  In doing so, he said, he would also 
have to factor in existing resource constraints which might 
limit Ecuador's abilities to shoulder this additional 
responsibility.  Ecuador is hopeful that Security Council 
reform (i.e., expansion) be included in a resolution for 
debate at the 2005 General Assembly. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  PolChief expressed to Moncayo deep USG concern 
that Mexico's proposed informal consultation initiative 
within GRULAC could be used to prevent a country-specific 
resolution on Cuba at the UNCHR.  Moncayo was surprised to 
hear of the Mexican initiative, saying it seemed to go beyond 
GRULAC's usual non-binding and non-substantive consultative 
mechanisms. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) We consider Moncayo to be friendly toward and open 
to dialogue with the United States. Traditionally, Ecuador's 
UN ambassadors exercise wide latitude on voting issues. 
Moncayo, who owes his position to FM Zuqilanda, may be less 
likely than his predecessor to act independently. 
Regardless, we encourage USUN to engage early with Moncayo to 
encourage mutual understanding.  We will follow-up separately 
on the Mexico-GRULAC initiative, and encourage Ecuador's 
candidacy for the Commission on the Status of Women. 
 
Bio Notes 
--------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Moncayo is a former Ambassador to the U.S. 
(1989-92), Finance Minister (1974-75), and member of 
Ecuador's negotiating team which resolved border disputes 
with Peru in 1998.  He earned a masters degree in public and 
international affairs from the University of Pittsburgh in 
1967, and is married to the former Susan Gurin, an AmCit. 
Their daughter (also an AmCit) also lives in NYC. 
Kenney