06LIMA3636
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FOR OPIC OFFICER STEVEN SMITH
Wed Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPE #3636/01 2561427
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131427Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY LIMA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2266UNCLAS LIMA 003636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV OTRA OPIC EC ASEC PE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FOR OPIC OFFICER STEVEN SMITH 
 
REF: STATE 150665 
 
¶1. (U) The Embassy grants country clearance for the visit to 
Peru of OPIC Officer Steven Smith from September 13, 2006 
through September 19, 2006.  The purpose of this trip is to 
conduct site visit. 
 
Per your request Embassy will make arrangements for visit 
with Econ and FCS officers. 
 
When departing Lima by air, the Republic of Peru imposes an 
airport departure tax on any outbound passenger of 30.25 USD 
for international flights and 6.05 USD for domestic flights. 
 
¶2. (U) POINT OF CONTACT, TELEPHONE NUMBERS, ADDRESS AND 
COMPUTER USE:  Embassy point of contact will be Economic 
Officer Marcos Mandojana, office telephone number 
(51)(1)618-2411, cellular telephone  (51)(1)9-632-0869. 
Embassy after-hours direct line for Marine Security Guard is 
(51)(1)618-2936.  The Embassy address is Av. La Encalada, 
Cuadra 17, in the Monterrico Sur Section of Lima. 
 
State Department TDY visitors requiring OpenNet-Plus Systems 
access during their stay should directly contact George K. 
Philpott, ISO, in advance of their arrival so a computer 
account can be created if needed. 
 
Any employee who intends to bring U.S. Government portable 
microcomputers (laptops) for use in CAA or non-CAA areas must 
notify post,s ISSO and RSO in advance of travel.  12 FAH-6 
h-314 prohibits the installation or use of any privately 
owned computer in a government building where classified 
information is processed or stored.  Accordingly, post policy 
prohibits Personal Electronic Devices (PED), Personal Digital 
Assistants (PDA) e.g. &Palm Pilots8, MP-3 players, etc. 
within the Chancery facility.  Such devices are never 
authorized in CAA spaces and are not authorized connectivity 
within OpenNet unclassified or classified networks, or 
stand-alone classified PCs.  Personnel who wish to bring PDAs 
authorized under the Department of State,s Secure Wireless 
Extended Enterprise Technology (SWEET) program into the 
Chancery must notify Post,s ISSO and RSO in advance of 
travel.  Find information concerning the SWEET program at 
http://sweet.irm.state.gov.  Please refer to 03 STATE 286036 
for detailed guidance regarding Post,s Information Systems 
security requirements. 
 
¶3. (U) PASSPORT/VISAS: 
 
To ensure full protection for travelers, the mission requires 
that all visitors eligible for official/diplomatic passports 
use them when traveling.  Official travelers are advised not 
to use tourist passports.  In exceptional cases where 
official travelers must use tourist passports, they do not 
need to have an official visa, as long as they stay in the 
country less than 90 days. 
 
The Migrations Office at the airport in Lima grants all 
visitors a 90-day stay in the country.  Travelers with 
oficial/diplomatic passports, who are scheduled to stay less 
than 90 days in Peru, do not need to have an official visa. 
 
Visitors with official/diplomatic passports, who are 
scheduled to stay more than 90 days in Peru, or whose initial 
stay is less than 90 days but later may need to stay longer, 
must have an official visa. 
 
DOD personnel on personal travel must use a tourist passport. 
 If official visitors arrive via military ship, a passport is 
not required unless the individual is required to exit Peru 
via commercial or military air.  If an official visitor is a 
Peruvian National serving in the U.S. Armed Forces, a valid 
Peruvian (maroon) passport is absolutely necessary in all 
cases in order for the individual to enter or exit Peru. 
Proof of residency in the U.S. (green card) is required for 
return to the U.S.  All visas for onward travel should be 
obtained prior to arrival in Peru. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SECURITY: 
 
Post reminds all TDY personnel requesting country clearance 
for temporary duty of 30 days or more of the requirement to 
complete mandatory personal security training effective 
January 1, 2005.  Personnel requesting country clearance for 
periods of 30 days or more must certify that they have or 
will complete the required training prior to their travel, or 
may request a waiver as per the above policy.  For extended 
TDY requests, individual bureaus (not the Bureau of Human 
Resources) are responsible for ensuring that their staff, in 
all employment categories (Civil Service, Foreign Service, 
WAE, PSC, etc.), meets the training requirement.  See 04 
State 66580 for more information about the mandatory personal 
security training requirement. 
 
Country clearance is granted for travel to non-Embassy 
restricted areas only.  Visitors who plan to travel to 
Embassy restricted areas must request Post approval upon 
arrival.  A list of these areas can be obtained from the RSO. 
 It is imperative that the Mission be notified immediately of 
delays or changes in plans or itinerary.  Personnel must not 
change hotels without first notifying control officer.  The 
State Department has designated Peru as high threat for 
indigenous terrorism, medium threat for transnational 
terrorism and political violence, and critical threat for 
crime.  Two terrorist groups operate in Peru:  Sendero 
Luminoso (SL) and Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru 
(MRTA).  Both organizations continue to be potential threats 
and have targeted U.S. facilities in the past.  Due to GOP 
efforts, the activities of the SL and MRTA have been greatly 
reduced and are now largely confined to rural areas. 
Overland travel outside of Lima and other large cities during 
the hours of darkness is prohibited due to unsafe road 
conditions and the threat of armed criminals.  Terrorist 
groups operate with relative impunity in some interior areas 
and are known to target vehicular traffic.  Crime is a 
serious problem in metropolitan Lima and popular tourist 
areas such as Arequipa, Cuzco, and Machu Picchu.  Most crimes 
involve petty theft, pickpocketing, bag slashing, 
grab-and-run, and theft from occupied and unoccupied 
vehicles.  More violent crimes include armed robbery, 
carjacking, and choke-and-rob.  Criminals frequently react 
violently when resistance is encountered.  In almost all 
instances it is advisable not to offer resistance.  Most 
areas of downtown Lima are dangerous and should be avoided 
during the hours of darkness.  Visitors are cautioned to 
remain alert to their surroundings at all times, particularly 
when in crowded areas, such as on public transportation, at 
outdoor markets, and at tourist sites.  Countermeasures 
against crime also protect against terrorism.  Special care 
should be exercised at the Jorge Chavez International Airport 
in Callao.  Criminals frequent this area, especially at 
night, and are known to target foreigners both inside and 
outside the terminal. 
 
Security briefings are mandatory for all official visitors to 
Peru.  Briefings are given in the RSO Conference Room at the 
Embassy, on Wednesdays, promptly at 9:00 a.m. 
 
¶5.  (U) ICASS TDY Policy and Action Request: 
 
Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must 
bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the 
visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation 
will be charged for the actual costs attributed to their 
visit.  Direct charge costs include, but are not limited to: 
American and LES staff overtime (e.g., expediter, 
accommodation exchange, representational event support), 
field travel-lodging and M&IE by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
office supplies and all other costs that are directly 
attributable to the visit.  Also, for TDYers over thirty (30) 
days, there is a charge for ICASS support services.  If your 
sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS services at 
post, please be prepared to sign a MOU for ICASS support 
services upon arrival.  The agency should provide post with a 
written communication, generated by the traveler,s 
headquarters that confirms the agency will pay ICASS charges 
for the TDYers, provides the agency ICASS billing code the 
TDY support charges should be applied to, and authorizes the 
traveler to sign the ICASS invoice generated by the TDY 
module.  Where travel is urgent, the TDYers should bring this 
documentation with them to ensure there are no interruptions 
in the provision of service.  Post will not provide any 
service to a TDYer staying in excess of thirty days without 
provision of this documentation before day 31 of the TDY. 
 
¶6.  (U)  HEALTH CONCERNS: 
 
Travelers to the jungle areas of Peru should have up-to-date 
yellow fever vaccine and malaria prophylaxis for 
chloroquine-resistant strains of malaria.  Primary prevention 
against malaria and dengue fever includes avoiding the 
mosquito vectors of these diseases: using insect repellant, 
appropriate protective clothing, and bed netting. Hepatitis A 
and B vaccinations are strongly recommended for all persons 
before coming to Peru. Rabies is present in country, and 
those individuals whose work and/or leisure activities might 
expose them to wild animals, bats or stray dogs, should 
consider receiving the rabies vaccine. Travelers 
diarrhea/dysentery is quite common in Peru. Visitors should 
substitute bottled beverages for potentially contaminated 
water.  Fish, shellfish, and vegetables should not be eaten 
unless well cooked, and all food should be eaten while still 
hot.  Fruits with a peel are generally safe, provided they 
are peeled before being eaten. Typhoid vaccine is also 
recommended. Cholera is endemic in Peru and disease rates 
reach high levels from January to May--the same food and 
bottled water precautions apply.  Travelers planning to 
travel to high altitude areas of Peru, such as Cuzco, Machu 
Picchu, and Puno, should consult with their health care 
provider first, and be fully aware of the health dangers of 
high altitudes and measures to minimize these dangers. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) MEDICAL CLEARANCES: 
 
All employees who are at post in TDY status for more than 60 
days are required to have a medical clearance from the Office 
of Medical Services.  Contractors who are not direct-hire USG 
employees do not have access to the Embassy Health Unit. 
STRUBLE