06QUITO259
UNREALISTIC HUAORANI CONFRONT LOGGING AND
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 000259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID SOCI EPET ECON PGOV PHUM EC
SUBJECT:  UNREALISTIC HUAORANI CONFRONT LOGGING AND 
PETROLEUM ISSUES 
 
¶1. Summary:  With an agenda focusing on illegal logging, 
their relationship with the petroleum industry, and 
institutional corruption, the Huaorani indigenous group held 
a general assembly in the jungle community of Nemonpari. 
While laudable in its effort to tackle these pressing 
issues, the new Huaorani leadership holds unrealistic 
expectations regarding its ability to shape government 
policy, influence the private sector, and manage the 
Huaorani population.  USAID programs support the territorial 
integrity of the Huaorani lands and the institutional 
stability of the Huaorani leadership.  However, political 
weakness -- in both Ecuador's indigenous groups and the 
Ministry of Environment -- undermines efforts to protect the 
fragile, mega-diverse ecosystem in the rainforests of the 
Ecuadorian Amazon.  End Summary. 
 
NEW LEADERSHIP CALLS GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Four months after forcing out the previous Huaorani 
leadership, the indigenous group's new directorship held an 
Extraordinary General Assembly on December 27-28, 2005.  The 
Huaorani leadership represents some 2900 Huaorani who live 
in 32 disparate communities spread out over a legalized 
territory that covers over 1.6 million acres and includes 
parts of Yasuni National Park, considered by leading 
biologists to be one of the most biodiverse locations on the 
earth.  Over 120 Huaorani traveled to the community of 
Nemonpari -- some traveling up to 5 days in canoes and over 
land -- to attend the assembly.  Representatives from all of 
the 32 communities were present. 
 
¶3.  The eight new directors, who represent the Huaorani in 
their relations with both the private sector and the GOE, 
addressed critical matters facing the Huaorani, including 
illegal logging, the Huaorani's relationship with petroleum 
companies, and corruption on the part of prior directors. 
Econoff and AID specialist attended the Assembly to discuss 
these issues with community representatives and the new 
Huaorani leadership. 
 
ILLEGAL LOGGING UNFETTERED 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Utilizing petroleum roads to gain access to the 
rainforest, loggers have been penetrating Huaorani (and 
other indigenous) lands to illegally extract, among other 
wood, cedar and mahogany.  (Ecuador's deforestation rate is 
nearly half a million acres per year.)   Loggers, who in 
recent years have included Colombians, make frequent threats 
against indigenous people who attempt to intervene in their 
activities.  Some deaths, including the 2003 massacre of 23 
members of the Tagaeri tribe, have been linked to loggers. 
Most recently, after months of reported threats from 
loggers, a building used to check timber transport out of 
Yasuni National Park was burned to the ground on December 
¶24. 
 
¶5.  While the threat is primarily external, Huaorani Vice 
President Moi Enomenga acknowledges that some Huaorani 
facilitate (and benefit from) illegal logging on Huaorani 
land.  For example, the Bave family (a father and two sons) 
have become wealthy by controlling the waterways at the end 
of the Via Aucas, a road that originally was built to 
facilitate petroleum extraction.  Loggers pay the Baves for 
safe passage on these waterways -- primarily the Tiguino and 
Cononaco Rivers. 
 
¶6.  As is the case in other parts of Ecuador, federal 
government officials are minimally involved in trying to 
control the illegal traffic of timber from Huaorani lands. 
In response, the Huaorani have been working over the past 2 
months with provincial government officials -- to include 
the military, elected officials, and representatives of the 
MOE -- along with petroleum companies such as Encana and 
Petrobras, to develop a plan allowing for the Huaorani to 
patrol and control the flow of timber from their lands and 
that of Yasuni National Park.  While agreements at the local 
level have been reached, implementation of the plans still 
requires support from Ministers in Quito. 
 
LOVE-HATE RELATIONSHIP WITH THE PETROLEUM SECTOR 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶7.  The Huaorani have a love-hate relationship with the 
petroleum sector.  On the one hand, Huaoranis claim that 
petroleum roads facilitate illegal logging, petroleum 
companies pollute their rivers and undermine their health, 
and petroleum money erodes their culture.  On the other 
hand, petroleum companies are often the major source of 
funds to the local communities and, through agreements 
signed with Huaorani leaders, provide ONHAE (the Huaorani's 
legal organization) with a budget over 2 million dollars per 
year to help pay for ONHAE's administration and to cover a 
wide variety of health and education projects in the 
territory. 
 
¶8.  What is particularly disturbing to many Huaorani is the 
manner in which corrupt Huaorani leaders have abused the 
petroleum sector relationship at the expense of the rest of 
the Huaorani community.  During the Assembly, a wide range 
of Huaorani, from current directors to illiterate elders, 
recounted stories of petroleum money intended for schools or 
health care disappearing into the hands of the directors and 
never reaching its intended targets.  Meanwhile, oil 
companies complain that no sooner do they reach an agreement 
with representatives of one indigenous group that a new 
group of leaders claiming to represent the same indigenous 
group want to strike their own agreement. 
 
¶9.  Much of the Huaorani furor during the Assembly was 
targeted at former ONHAE President Armando Boya, who in 
early 2005 signed an agreement with Petrobras that granted 
the Brazilian oil company access to Huaorani territory in 
exchange for financial support for the Huaorani.  Sensing 
kickbacks and corruption on the part of Boya, the Huaorani 
community has sought to nullify the agreement.  Responding 
to pressure, the Ministry of Environment has temporarily 
halted the construction of a Petrobras road into Huaorani 
territory within the Yasuni National Park.  At the General 
Assembly, Huaorani representatives voted to not abide by the 
agreement Boya signed with Petrobras and to prohibit any 
future relations with Petrobras.  The legal significance of 
this vote is unclear.  Meanwhile, Huaorani representatives 
at the Assembly remained open to agreements with other 
petroleum companies. 
 
MINIMAL INSTITUTIONAL OVERSIGHT 
------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Over the past two decades, a series of Huaorani 
Directors have taken advantage of weak community oversight 
of the Huaorani leadership.  Low literacy levels and a lack 
of Spanish fluency among the Huaorani had for many years 
allowed Directors to misrepresent contracts being signed by 
ONHAE.  Even with improved literacy and Spanish, 
geographical factors remain an obstacle to proper oversight. 
Given their isolation the 32 communities can easily be kept 
out of the loop on important decision-making.  More 
importantly, ONHAE headquarters (and the Directors' homes) 
are located in the city of Puyo, which is not even in 
Huaorani territory.  This physical separation limits the 
ability of community representatives to oversee ONHAE 
activities and provides opportunities for the Huaorani 
leadership. 
 
¶11.  As many Huaorani acknowledged to Econoff, a position 
with ONHAE is for many Huaorani an opportunity to make some 
quick money -- those elected to the Directorship are 
considered "lucky."  Recently ousted President Juan 
Enomenga, when discussing accusations of wrongdoing, 
appeared undisturbed.  However, there are some directors, 
including those in the current leadership, who appear 
sincerely interested in bettering the Huaorani's situation. 
While US and European NGOs support such directors, the NGOs 
come and go as funding and the relative popularity of other 
environmental causes fluctuate.  This inconsistency 
undermines stability in the Huaorani leadership.  Most 
recently, NGOs which provided financial assistance for the 
current leadership to hold August 2005 elections that ousted 
the Boya directorship were either unable or unwilling to 
show up to the December General Assembly.  In the eyes of 
some Huaorani, their absence undermined the standing of the 
new leadership. 
 
POLITICAL WEAKNESS FORCING HUAORANI TO GO LOCAL 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶12.  Huaorani leaders have for many years overestimated 
their capacity to affect the political landscape.  Both with 
respect to illegal logging and petroleum exploration and 
extraction, ONHAE leadership has acted as if the territorial 
titles they have received from the GOE came with the 
political power to determine government policy and 
enforcement in those territories.  This has proven an 
exaggeration.  In order to overcome their political 
weakness, the Huaorani have altered their tactics and are 
working directly with actors at the local level, as they 
have been doing with respect to logging in Yasuni. 
 
¶13.  The Huaorani also are looking into their own community 
for leadership on health, logging, and petroleum issues. 
With the help of the UASAID-backed CAIMAN project, AMWAE, 
the Association of Huaorani Women of the Ecuadorian Amazon, 
was founded one year ago.  AMWAE brings a needed voice into 
community debates and AMWAE President Alicia Cahuyia 
represented the Huaorani at the UN in May 2005.  However, 
women clearly still played a minor role during the 
Assembly's deliberations. 
 
USAID PROGRAMS PROVIDE NEEDED ASSISTANCE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  USAID, through the CAIMAN Project, runs several 
programs to address shortcomings in the management of 
Huaorani institutions and territory.  Given the complete 
lack of fiscal oversight during the previous administration, 
USAID did not directly support ONHAE (opting instead to 
focus support on AMWAE).  The recently installed ONHAE 
leadership has demonstrated greater commitment to 
transparent administration.  As a result, AID has agreed to 
provide support to strengthen ONHAE oversight by funding an 
accountant to help track spending and the distribution of 
grants.  AID also works to facilitate Huaorani assemblies, 
increasing the contact that ONHAE has with community 
representatives.  While legalizing their land with the GOE 
was critical for its management, the Huaorani also need to 
demarcate the territorial boundaries, which AID has 
facilitated through the funding of work parties. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶15.  While these USAID programs successfully tackle specific 
concerns associated with the Huaorani community's management 
of its mega-diverse territory, they do not change the 
overall political landscape in which the Huaorani operate. 
A weak MOE, underdeveloped Huaorani institutions, and 
endemic corruption limit the Huaorani in their efforts to 
productively manage logging and petroleum issues. 
 
JEWELL