08BOGOTA2215
AMBASSADOR'S VISIT TO BARRANQUILLA, JUNE 7, 2008
Thu Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #2215/01 1712203
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192203Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3223
INFO RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0583
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ JUN LIMA 6281
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 1887
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 6947
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 4464UNCLAS BOGOTA 002215 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL SNAR KCOM KAID EC CO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S VISIT TO BARRANQUILLA, JUNE 7, 2008 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Ambassador visited Barranquilla, Atlantico 
Department, on June 7 to receive a major food donation funded 
by the United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID) and destined for the World Food Program (WFP). 
Barranquilla Mayor Alejandro Char, Atlantico Governor Eduardo 
Verano, and port President Fernando Arteta touted the 
Barranquilla port as key to Colombia's international trade. 
The commander of the port's Narcotics Affairs Section 
(NAS)-supported Colombian National Police antinarcotics unit 
briefed the Ambassador on local interdiction efforts. 
American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM) members voiced hope for 
U.S. Congressional approval of the Colombian Trade Preference 
Agreement (CTPA).  During a visit to the Mars Colombia 
factory, the Ambassador toured one of the most successful 
U.S. foreign direct investments in Colombia.  He also joined 
a children's soccer game supported by a local civic group. 
The Ambassador received universally positive media coverage. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Outreach to the Most Vulnerable 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The Ambassador received USAID's 1620 metric ton 
donation of lentils, green peas, and vegetable oil and 
ceremonially turned it over to the WFP in a ceremony with WFP 
and local officials.  USAID food donations are distributed to 
the neediest populations, including the displaced, other 
vulnerable groups, school children, and pregnant and 
lactating women, in 200 municipalities.  The Ambassador 
highlighted President Bush's desire to increase the amount of 
international food aid to $1 billion worldwide, and said the 
USG already provides 50% of the world's food aid. 
 
¶3.  (U) Over 150 children from Barrio La Paz, one of 
Barranquilla's poorest neighborhoods, turned out for a soccer 
match hosted by Futbol con Corazon.  Futbol con Corazon, a 
local civic group, builds leadership, teamwork, and conflict 
resolution skills through its innovate soccer program for 
at-risk youth.  Samuel Azout, founder of Futbol con Corazon 
and the largest investor in Payless Shoes' expansion into the 
Colombian market, highlighted the organization's commitment 
to strengthening at-risk communities by working with children 
and their families.  The Ambassador's co-ed team of children 
aged 10-12 won 2-1.  The event got great press, with pictures 
featuring the seriously sweating and out-of-shape Ambassador 
playing soccer with the children and donating 100 soccer 
balls to the teams. 
 
--------------------------- 
Local Goals for Development 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The governor, mayor, and port president outlined their 
goal to further expand Barranquilla's commercial relevance as 
a port, noting the limitations faced by neighboring ports in 
the tourist cities of Cartagena and Santa Marta.  They 
emphasized the city's capacity to handle increased trade 
through its 23 sea and river port concessions.  Mayor Char 
outlined Barranquilla's road infrastructure, highlighting the 
need for a beltway around the city.  Governor Verano 
presented a proposal for Atlantico and Texas to become 
"brother states."  The Ambassador recognized the similarities 
between the Houston and Barranquilla seaports, and urged for 
more outreach and exchange between the two cities. 
 
¶5.  (U) In discussions with the governor, mayor, and business 
community leaders at a luncheon hosted by the port, the 
Ambassador outlined goals for development in the coastal 
region, including the CTPA, ongoing USG investment in English 
language programs, assistance to increase flights between 
Barranquilla and the United States, as well as help in 
reviving the Caribbean coast's baseball league. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The tour of the Mars Colombia facility in 
Barranquilla's Malambo free trade zone highlighted how 
foreign direct investment can positively impact local 
communities.  The 104 Mars factory workers earn, on average, 
double what they earned prior to working for Mars.  Mars 
opened its Barranquilla plant (under the name Masterfoods) in 
January, 2007 after initially considering investing in 
Venezuela.  The Mars facility produces pet food products for 
regional distribution and is the regional distribution hub 
for imported Mars candies. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Interdiction at Barranquilla Port 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Colombian National Police Captain Alexander Duarte, 
the port's anti-narcotics unit commander, outlined the 
challenges the interdiction unit faces in Barranquilla.  He 
said the majority of exporters using the Barranquilla port 
are local producers known to the interdiction team. This 
facilitates the investigation process, since his unit 
regularly visits the exporters' factories and assesses their 
in-house security systems.  Duarte reported that many 
exporters are satisfied with the rapid processing their goods 
receive once they arrive in the United States, attributing 
the expedited treatment to their active collaboration with 
law enforcement in Colombia.  He said his unit reviews 100% 
of all shipments to Mexico, because the majority of drug 
shipments are directed there.  The port's largest 
interdiction--seized on March 13--was a 4.2 ton shipment of 
cocaine bound for Mexico. 
 
-------------- 
PRESS COVERAGE 
-------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Ambassador received outstanding print and broadcast 
press coverage throughout his visit, with the highlights 
being the food donation and the soccer game with local kids, 
showcasing the Ambassador's extraordinary athletic skills and 
USG soft side efforts to help the displaced.  El Heraldo, the 
main Barranquilla-based daily (liberal, circ. 256,900/Sunday 
298,400) ran stories on both Sunday and Monday following the 
visit.  El Heraldo's coverage featured fantastic photos along 
with the title, "William Brownfield, an Excellent 
'Gambeteador'" (double meaning: Football-player and tough 
question avoider).  La Libertad, a small distribution daily 
based in Barranquilla, ran the headline: "Brownfield, an 
Ambassador with a Colombian Heart."  El Tiempo (Colombia's 
largest and most influential daily, centrist, circ. 
1,198,000/Sunday 2,247,300) gave great play to the 
significant donation of food to displaced and vulnerable 
Colombian populations orchestrated by USAID.  RCN TV (the 
largest private TV network, audience 9,467,300) and other 
broadcast outlets focused their coverage on the Ambassador's 
response to the question of whether the Manta base would move 
to Colombia.  They quoted him as saying: "We are still 
waiting for the final decision from the Government of 
Ecuador." 
BROWNFIELD