10QUITO54
Embassy Quito Request for Funding of Biotech Proposal
Fri Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0054/01 0152234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 152233Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0653
INFO RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITOUNCLAS QUITO 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR WHA/AND 
DEPT FOR EEE/TPP/MTAA/ABT -MARCELLA SZYMANSKI AND JACK BOBO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD TBIO KPAO EC
SUBJECT: Embassy Quito Request for Funding of Biotech Proposal 
 
REF: 09 STATE 122732 
 
¶1.   Summary.   In response to reftel, Embassy Quito is requesting 
funding for a biotech proposal as part of the Department of State's 
2010 Biotech Outreach Program.   The project is focused on 
informing a key group of journalists who, by providing accurate 
information on biotech issues, have the potential for improving the 
domestic debate on biotechnology during this critical time when new 
legislation is being developed.   The program consists of a trip to 
the United States covering both policy and technology issues and 
would cost close to $23,000.  Proposal details are provided below. 
End Summary. 
 
Background on Biotech in Ecuador 
 
¶2.   Ecuador's acceptance of biotechnology is currently at a 
crossroads.  The 2008 Ecuadorian Constitution declares Ecuador free 
of transgenic crops and seeds while also granting the President the 
power to allow the importation and planting of biotech commodities. 
Several laws concerning biotechnology exist but are not enforced. 
At the same time, new laws and regulations are being drafted in 
order to fulfill the Constitution's mandate.  Much of this 
legislation would restrict the trade of biotech crops and seeds if 
passed and enforced.    The Presidential exception in the 
Constitution was added only as a result of lobbying from Ecuador's 
influential agro-businesses.   Ecuador's Food Sovereignty Law of 
February 2009, which was intended to provide specifics on the 
regulation of biotechnology, only reinforces the constitutional 
mandate.  As a consequence, it is expected that the National 
Assembly will approve legislation that will affect biotechnology, 
the use and commercialization of seeds, and consumer protection 
issues regarding genetically modified organisms. 
 
¶3.  Currently, Ecuador imports biotech commodities from its 
international partners, including the United States, Argentina, and 
Brazil.  There have not been any recent disruptions in the 
importation of biotech commodities but, because of current and 
pending legislation, this could change. 
 
Program Proposal 
 
¶4.  Post requests funding to support the travel of five Ecuadorian 
journalists to the United States to participate in a one-week 
biotech tour.  Public opinion on biotechnology in Ecuador is 
currently ambivalent about biotechnology and most of the general 
public appears to be uneducated about the topic.  The purpose of 
the biotechnology tour for journalists is to educate opinion-makers 
about biotechnology with the goal of generating honest, 
science-based biotech news coverage consistent with the USG 
position on biotechnology.   See paragraph 12 for a notional 
itinerary for the program. 
 
Costs 
 
¶5.  The total estimated cost for the program is $22,900.  The 
breakdown of costs is as follows: 
 
-Airfare, lodging/M&IE, and US visa for each journalist is $2, 884. 
Total $14,420. 
 
-Airfare and lodging/M&IE for a translator is $980. 
 
-Translation services are estimated at $5,000. 
 
-Miscellaneous is $2500. 
 
 
 
Target Audience 
 
¶6.  The target audience for this program is Ecuadorian journalists 
from major newspapers and TV shows who specialize in public opinion 
pieces (editorials), scientific journalism, and day-time TV shows. 
The ultimate goal of the program is to reach the Ecuadorian 
consumer through their coverage of biotech issues. 
 
Specific agricultural biotech issues to be addressed 
 
¶7.  Specific Agricultural Biotech Issues to be Addressed within the 
Proposed Program Include: 
 
- Global and U.S. perspective on biotechnology 
 
- Biodiversity of agricultural crops and the effects of U.S. 
agriculture off the farm 
 
- Positive impacts of biotechnology (focusing on the state of 
Kansas) 
 
- U.S. industry perspective on biodiversity and biosafety and 
coexistence 
 
- Regulation of biotechnology 
 
- Perception of biotechnology 
 
 
 
Purpose and Impact of Project 
 
 
 
¶8.   The United States supports the production of biotech 
commodities and seeds.  Soybeans and corn, two of the United 
States' top export commodities, are commonly produced through the 
use of biotechnology.  As Ecuador is a commercial market for these 
products, (In 2008, the United States exported over $33 million in 
soybean meal and over $44 million in coarse grains to Ecuador), it 
is in the interest of the USG to garner public support for 
biotechnology.  Pro-biotech coverage from trusted Ecuadorian media 
will help to change public opinion.  A positive public opinion 
towards biotechnology will undoubtedly affect future legislation. 
Pro-biotech press coverage will lay the foundation for positive 
opinion and help prevent public outcry if/when the President or 
National Assembly allow for biotech testing and planting. 
 
 
 
Length of Program 
 
 
 
¶9.   The duration of the program is one business week.  The 
delegation will arrive in the United States on Sunday and depart 
Saturday after meetings in Washington DC and St. Louis, Missouri. 
 
 
 
International Information Programs (IIP) 
 
 
 
¶10. Post is not requesting resources from IIP and can arrange for 
speakers/experts during the program. 
 
 
 
Post Contact Information 
 
 
 
¶11.  ECON:   Janice Fair; fairjr@state.gov 
 
FAS:   Eugene Philhower; Eugene.philhower@fas.usda.gov,  and Henry 
Vega; henry.vega@fas.usda.gov 
 
 
 
¶12.  Notional Itinerary for Proposed Biotech Trip to United States 
for Ecuadorian Journalists 
 
 
 
Sunday 
 
Delegation arrives in Washington 
 
 
 
Monday 
 
-Global Developments and U.S. Perspectives on Biotechnology - 
USDA/Foreign Agricultural Service 
 
-Discussion on Biodiversity of Agricultural Crops and the Effects 
of US Agriculture on the off-farm Environment -  USDA/Foreign 
Agricultural Service 
 
-Discussion on Positive Impacts of Biotechnology and the State of 
Kansas  - Representative of the 
 
                                Department of Agriculture, State of 
Kansas (TBC) 
 
-Industry Prospective on Biodiversity/Biosafety and Coexistence - 
Biotechnology Industry Organization 
 
-Presentation and Discussion on the U.S. Approach to the Regulation 
of Products for Environmental Safety -  U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency 
 
- Biotechnology Coordinator for the Office of the Secretary, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture 
 
-Presentation and Discussion of Perceptions of Food Biotechnology 
 
 
 
Tuesday 
 
Schmidt Farms (MD) 
 
Tour of Chesapeake Farms Research Facility (MD) 
 
 
 
Wednesday 
 
Delegation travels to St. Louis 
 
 
 
Thursday 
 
U.S. Soybean Export Council 
 
Stemme Farms 
 
Tour of Donald Danforth Plant and Science Center 
 
 
 
Friday 
 
National Corn Growers Association 
 
Monsanto-Chesterfield Village Research Center 
 
Tour of East Hannibal Elevator 
 
 
 
Saturday 
 
Delegation returns to Ecuador 
HODGES