09SANJOSE1156
Embassy San Jose: December 2009 Merida Report
Thu Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1156/01 3512114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 172112Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0132
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DC
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RUEADRO/HQ ICE DRO WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0118
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SAN JOSE 001156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR CS PGOV
SUBJECT: Embassy San Jose: December 2009 Merida Report 
 
REF: STATE 114752; SAN JOSE 994; SAN JOSE 978 
 
¶1. Per Ref A, Post submits the following report detailing Embassy 
San Jose's Merida activities for November and December 2009. 
 
 
 
Issues for Washington 
 
 
 
¶2. Post appreciates the support that we have received from NAS 
Mexico in their role as certifier of funds for all Merida 
Initiative-related support.  However, if possible we would 
appreciate a set standard of service reaction time on the 
certification of funds from NAS Mexico.  Response times have varied 
and sometimes have taken up to a week.  Although it has not been a 
limiting factor yet, this potentially could add to our bureaucratic 
wait time to order equipment and arrange training. 
 
 
 
¶3. Embassy San Jose does not have a fully-equipped Narcotics 
Affairs Section (NAS).  Instead, we have a political officer who is 
double-hatted as a Narcotics Affairs Officer (NAO) with two locally 
engaged staff (LES).  Handling a $10 million+ budget for Merida is 
challenging, and without proper staffing, Post's ability to 
implement Merida in a timely manner is limited.  Anticipating 
staffing issues, we requested an additional Pol/NAO officer in our 
FY2011 MSP.  In the absence of a Pol/NAO officer, we will attempt 
to recruit an Eligible Family Member (EFM) to assist in staffing. 
Also, INL is currently working to hire a Personal Service 
Contractor (PSC) to assist us with our Merida maritime support. 
 
 
 
¶4. The NAO and two LES dedicate an enormous amount of time to 
Merida.  Combined with the number of reports that must be done 
(including International Narcotics Control and Strategy Report, 
End-Use Monitoring, Operational Plan, Mission Strategic Plan, 
Performance Plan and Report, Merida Monthly Reports, etc.) and the 
support that must be provided for visiting Merida evaluation teams 
(such as FBI fingerprint team, prison expert, communications 
expert, CBP border inspection team, etc.), the task of ordering 
police equipment for the various GOCR agencies takes a long time. 
We estimate that for each item that we order, a staff member spends 
at least one hour of time to do the research, obtain quotes, verify 
the item is what the host nation requires, procure, receive, and 
finally do the donation document.  This does not take into account 
the staff time that our General Services Office (GSO) and Budget 
and Finance Office (B&F) here and at NAS Mexico spend on each 
individual item.  We currently have over 150 separate line items 
that Post is in the process of ordering for Merida equipment. 
 
 
 
 
¶5. Post may be requesting an additional LES hire to help us 
accomplish our Merida tasks over the next 2-3 years.  Although the 
political section has office space for an additional political 
officer/EFM and a maritime PSC in the Controlled Access Area, there 
is little room at Post for another LES in the unclassified portion 
of the Embassy. 
 
 
 
Internal Developments 
 
 
 
¶6. On December 14, President Oscar Arias highlighted some recent 
improved security developments in Costa Rica, possibly showing at 
 
least a short-term positive trend on various indices measuring 
criminal activity.  For instance: 
 
 
 
                -The budget for the Ministry of Public Security has 
nearly doubled since 2006.  In 2006, the budget was approximately 
$111 million.  For 2010, it will be approximately $220 million. 
 
                -January to November crime statistic indicators 
comparing 2009 with 2008 show a slight decrease nation-wide, 
thanks to increased police presence on the streets and the 
Ministry's new "Community Policing" program.  For example, in 2008, 
the total number of murders nation-wide from January to November 
was 396; in 2009 the number slightly dropped to 383.  Additionally, 
the number of homicides in the violence-prone province of Limon has 
dropped from an average of two murders per week in 2008 to only 
three murders between July and November 2009.  However, the 
dramatic decrease in Limon has been largely due to increased police 
operations there that will not be able to be maintained 
indefinitely.   Post still assesses that, per Ref C, while Costa 
Rica is not as dangerous as the rest of Central America, it is not 
safe. 
 
                -The political campaigning season is in full stride 
with national elections taking place on February 7, 2010.  In Costa 
Rica, in addition to a complete change of the executive branch, 
every seat in the Legislative Assembly will change as there are no 
consecutive terms here.  While we assess that our law enforcement 
and security relationship with Costa Rica will remain dynamic no 
matter which of the major parties captures the presidency and the 
Assembly, there could be continuity issues that might delay 
implementation of cooperation projects such as Merida in 2010. 
 
 
 
Implementation Activities 
 
 
 
¶7.  The following implementation activities took place in November 
and December 2009: 
 
 
 
                -Per Ref B, from November 2-13, Post coordinated 
Merida supported U.S. Marshal Service-provided prisoner transfer 
training.  This expert team instructed 68 Costa Rican law 
enforcement officers on officer safety, defensive tactics, and 
prisoner handling techniques.  At the end of the training, we 
donated over 70 pairs of prisoner restraint devices such as 
hand-cuffs and leg-irons.  The event received positive local media 
coverage. 
 
 
 
                -Also per Ref B, from November 4-6, Post arranged 
for two trainers from CSECO (Campbell/Harris Security Equipment 
Company) to teach 26 Costa Rican law enforcement officers to 
properly use the CT-30 drug detection kit.  We conducted this 
training at the northern border with Nicaragua at Penas Blancas. 
At the end of the training, we donated six of these kits to the 
Costa Ricans; these kits should enable the GOCR to better detect 
drugs in hidden compartments of tractor trailers and shipping 
containers. 
 
 
 
                -All FMF-related maritime letters of agreement have 
been signed.  Repair parts and engine-rebuild kits have been 
ordered for Costa Rica's three 82-foot patrol boats.  We expect the 
first overhaul of 82-foot patrol boats to occur in March, 2010. 
Additionally, we have on order three USCG-approved SAFE boats via 
the FMF process; though we do not expect to receive them before the 
 
second quarter of CY2010. 
 
 
 
                -In November and December, we ordered approximately 
$130,000 worth of police equipment, primarily for Costa Rica's Air 
Wing that included equipment such as advanced avionics for several 
aircraft as well as basic police equipment for their ground support 
units. 
 
 
 
                -ILEA: 10 Costa Ricans attended the ILEA course 
Personnel and Facility Security Course from 9-20 November. 
 
 
 
                -We meet as a Law Enforcement Group, which also 
serves as our Merida Initiative meeting group, every Monday.  In 
November we met on November 9 and November 30.  In December we met 
on December 7 and December 14. 
 
 
 
Significant Merida Supported Host Nation Seizures 
 
 
 
¶8. On December 8, the Costa Rican Drug Control Police (PCD), using 
equipment and training provided under the Merida Initiative, seized 
256 kilograms (approximately 563 pounds) of cocaine at the Penas 
Blancas border (on the northern border with Nicaragua).  The 
interdiction involved a 1998 Freightliner truck.  An inspection of 
the tires of the tractor-trailer revealed  approximately sixteen 
kilograms of cocaine in each tire (16 tires) for a total of 
approximately 256 kilograms of cocaine.  This case was 
independently developed by PCD agents based on targeting indicators 
and random inspections of outbound commercial cargo. 
 
 
 
The PCD agents utilized Merida-supplied CT-30 drug detection kits 
(which cost approximately $17K each) that contain fiber optic 
inspection scopes, probes, density meters, etc.  The CT-30 kit was 
provided to the PCD in November 2009, and PCD agents were trained 
in the use of the kit by representatives from the Embassy San Jose 
DEA Country Office and Narcotics Affairs Office. 
 
 
 
The Month Ahead 
 
 
 
¶9. Below are Post's planned activities for January: 
 
 
 
                -January 6: Quarterly Merida meeting between 
Embassy Merida representatives and GOCR law enforcement agencies 
that benefit from Merida Assistance.  This meeting is in accordance 
with Merida Letter of Agreement requirements to have quarterly 
meetings with the host nation to review progress on Merida goals. 
 
                -ILEA: Seven Costa Ricans will attend the Law 
Enforcement Management Development Program at ILEA from January 
18-February 26, 2010. 
 
                -Mid-January: We expect the new ambassador to 
arrive and will provide in-depth briefings on Merida Initiative and 
other counter-narcotics related activities. 
 
                -We plan to advertise an EFM position to assist the 
Pol/NAO officer in Merida-related management. 
 
-Continue to place police equipment orders for 
Costa Rican law enforcement agencies. 
 
                -From February 16-26, 2010, a two person team from 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection will be travelling to Costa Rica 
as part of the Merida Initiative to assess Costa Rica's land 
borders and provide the GOCR with 10 additional CT-30 drug 
detection kits, as well as related training. The CBP visit will 
support the Penas Blancas border, as well as border points on the 
porous southern border region with Panama in the Paso Canoas area. 
BRENNAN