06KIGALI847
NEW JUSTICE MINISTER ON PLANS FOR REFORM
Thu Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0847 2431438
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311438Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3184
INFO RUEHJB/AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA 1535
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM 0731
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 1435
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 0104
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0582
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0121UNCLAS KIGALI 000847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL RW
SUBJECT: NEW JUSTICE MINISTER ON PLANS FOR REFORM 
 
REF: KIGALI 842 
 
 Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.  New Minister of Justice Tharcisse Karugarama outlined his 
plans for a reformed Justice Ministry in a meeting with the 
Ambassador on August 28.  A revamped administrative 
structure, strenuous efforts to reduce lagging caseloads, and 
a pledge to ensure "even-handed investigations" formed the 
core of his commitment to revitalize the ministry, said the 
Minister.  He agreed that press freedom was essential to 
Rwandan society, and pledged his personal efforts to erect a 
proper regard for a freely-functioning media within the GOR. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Karugarama, previously the senior judge on the High 
Court, became Justice Minister August 8.  He began the 
meeting by expressing his keen recognition of the great task 
just handed to him.  As the senior judge, he said, he had 
chosen cases in which he could influence case law, and he had 
encouraged his fellow justices to be assertive and challenge 
the power of the government.  In naming four rulings which 
limited executive authority, he said, "I wanted to show that 
the government could lose."  Now, he said, he headed that 
government's legal arm, and had to represent it in many 
different fora.  The change in perspective and tasks was 
quite overwhelming, he said. 
 
¶3.  Karugarama said that one of his primary tasks was to 
reduce the justice system's caseload.  He had several means 
to do so, and had great hopes of eventual success. First, the 
recent election of the "abunzi" mediators (who operate at 
cell and sector levels) put in place a modernized system of 
customary mediation for small civil disputes.  Many cases, 
particularly run-of-the-mill land cases, would now be heard 
by the "abunzi."  Secondly, he hoped to put in place a 
mandatory requirement that all cases by "treated" within six 
months (put on a docket and opened for deliberations).  Many 
cases languished without any formal proceedings ever 
beginning, he said, and he believed that cases formally 
opened would necessarily move forward to completion.  Third, 
he hoped to reduce the number of judges sitting on most cases 
from three to one (thereby tripling the number of cases 
heard) and to increase the administrative staff to match this 
tripling of judicial effort.  Fourth, he hoped to begin a 
thorough revision of court administration (and he hoped for 
donor funding to do so). 
 
¶4.  Beyond administrative reforms, Karugarama said he 
intended to put in place a system of investigations that 
would be accepted by the entire spectrum of Rwandan society. 
Every investigation, he said, must be "even-handed."  The 
Ambassador took the opportunity to discuss the recent series 
of claims of press harassment (reftel), and asked the 
minister to reconsider the utility of criminal libel 
statutes.  For the international community, said the 
Ambassador, these statutes were considered a tool for press 
harassment.  Ambassador also questioned the wisdom of 
allowing police officials to begin press investigations on 
their own initiative.  The risk of arbitrary decisions was 
too high. 
 
 
¶5.  Karugarama closed by asking for assistance with 
translation of draft legal texts ("I have done last-minute 
translations myself," he said, recounting one late night 
exercise in correcting his subordinates' poor work). 
Ambassador presented Karugarama with the text of a model 
trafficking in persons statute used elsewhere in Africa, and 
urged its consideration by the minister.  Both agreed to stay 
in close contact on justice system issues. 
ARIETTI