06KHARTOUM1063
CONTINUOUS RIOTS CLOSE JUBA UNIVERSITY
Thu May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4291
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1063/01 1241510
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041510Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2627
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001063 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM SOCI SU
SUBJECT: CONTINUOUS RIOTS CLOSE JUBA UNIVERSITY 
 
REF: Khartoum 00547 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  After a series of riots over the student's 
right to form a union, the government has again closed 
Juba University in Khartoum until further notice.  As a 
university founded to support the advancement of the 
South, many southerners want the university to return to 
its home in Juba, but believe the North intends to 
maintain its control over the institution and keep it in 
Khartoum.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2.  Juba University was established in 1977 as a result 
of the Addis Ababa Agreement signed in 1972 between the 
Government of Sudan (GOS) and South Sudan Liberation 
Movement (SSLM) that granted Southern Sudan limited 
regional autonomy.  It is a national institution 
particularly established to train southern manpower for 
the development of Southern Sudan.  Throughout its 
history, Juba University has had recurring riots on the 
formation and reformation of the Student's Union.  The 
last elected union was in 1986.  It was dissolved in 
1987, when clashes occurred between the Juba University 
for Southern Sudan Association (JUSSA) heading the union 
alliance and Jamaa El Dawa el-Islamiya of the National 
Islamic Front leading the opposition alliance.  The 
university was closed for 2 years.  In 1989, the 
university was reopened and moved to Khartoum due to 
insecurity in the south.  Since then, the university has 
not had a union.  The issue of reforming the unions was 
once again raised, which led to the recent riots and 
closure of the university (reftel). 
 
---------- 
First Riot 
---------- 
 
¶3.  On February 6, 2006, the students of Juba University 
presented a memorandum to the administration requesting 
the formation of the union, return of the University to 
Juba, and asking that the institution put a stop to 
building new facilities in Khartoum, with a threat of 
violence.  The administration was given 3 days to respond 
to students' demands.  After the administration failed to 
respond, students at the Kadoro campus (home to nine 
colleges) rioted on February 11, burning 12 cars and 
destroying four electronic generators, a laboratory 
containing 14 computers, and several offices.  Many 
students were arrested and detained by police and 
security forces.  After the incident, the Dean's Board 
issued a press release explaining the incident in Kadoro 
campus, condemning it, and suspending lectures 
indefinitely. 
 
----------- 
Second Riot 
----------- 
 
¶4.  Classes resumed in late March, at which time the 
students again presented a memo to the administration 
demanding immediate release of detained students, 
reinstating of the expelled students, and extension of 
examinations.  The administration was given three days to 
respond to the memorandum.  After the three days passed, 
the administration ordered that students were prohibited 
from entering the Kadoro campus without prior notice and 
the campus was besieged by police and security forces. 
Students immediately held a rally outside the campus, 
which was violently broken up by the police and security 
forces.  Several students were arrested, and there are 
allegations that others were detained in ghost houses and 
tortured.  After the incident, the Minister for Higher 
Education and Scientific Research issued a decree closing 
the university. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Amnesty International, GoSS Speak Out; GNU Silent 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  The Government of National Unity (GNU) has not 
commented on the riots, while the Government of Southern 
Sudan (GOSS) has urged for the return of the university 
to Juba.  Amnesty International condemned the use of 
excessive force by police and security forces in ill- 
treating the students.  Amnesty International also urged 
the government to allow the families of detained students 
access to visit them. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Southerners Want Their University 
 
KHARTOUM 00001063  002 OF 002 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  The students feel they should be allowed to form a 
union as part of their right to free association, a right 
denied to them for almost 20 years.  Many southerners 
believe the ruling party, the National Congress Party 
(NCP), wants to control higher institutions of learning 
in order to propagate its program of Arabization and 
Islamization.  They fear that the NCP is attempting to 
block the return of the university to Southern Sudan, 
revise Juba University's policy of admitting 75% southern 
students, and transform the university into a completely 
Muslim institution.  The establishment of a student's 
union is considered the best approach to maintaining and 
expanding southern control of the university. 
 
STEINFELD