06KHARTOUM1033
Update on Darfur Security and Humanitarian
Tue May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0732
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1033/01 1221239
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021239Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2577
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR D, AF/FO, AF/RSA, AND AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MOPS KPKO PREF UN AU SU
SUBJECT:  Update on Darfur Security and Humanitarian 
Access - May 2, 2006 
 
Ref:  A. Khartoum 001030, B. Khartoum 00985 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Sudanese Armed Forces military 
equipment continues to enter El Geneina, and UN staff 
remain in "lock down" mode.  Chadian militia are 
returning gradually to Chad from Western Sudan; there 
does not appear to be jinjaweed activity in Chad.  The UN 
will conduct an assessment mission of Geraida on May 3; 
at present it is calm, although the area has received an 
influx of 3000-4000 internally displaced persons 
recently.  The UN High Commissioner for Refugees Louise 
Arbour visits Nyala on May 2.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Security Update: 
 
-- Roads from Mukjar traveling toward Um Dukhom, For 
Baranga, and around Mukjar are closed to UN travel due to 
Chad militia moving out of Sudan into Chad (Note:  no 
information is available on numbers, although they are 
considered to be large movements.  End note.)  There does 
not appear to be jinjaweed activity in Chad.  Most of the 
INGOs have halted travel as well; 
 
-- There is a significant influx of Sudanese Armed Forces 
(SAF) military assets into El Geneina, and the UN staff 
are in "lock down" status.  The UN has placed an 
additional aircraft in Darfur in the event additional 
airlift may be required in an evacuation; 
 
-- There are reports of cargo planes delivering an 
estimated at 70 to 80 tons of military supplies/stores 
into El Geneina (including fuel and military supplies) 
over the past two days, perhaps in preparation for 
support to the Chadian rebels/militia currently crossing 
into Chad; 
 
-- In South Darfur, north of Geraida, the WFP reports 
that during an April 27 visit to Geraida, representatives 
noted that the village of Hilat Goz was burning, and that 
there were reports from the people in the area that 
jinjaweed was burning villages around Joghanna.  The WFP 
also reports that the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) have a 
battalion in Joghanna; 
 
-- In Nyala, National Security officers are patrolling 
the streets of Nyala looking for "insurgents" and 
weapons.  The GOS believes the SLA is moving arms through 
Nyala; 
 
-- The SLA stated that given the GOS breaking of all 
cease-fire agreements, the SLA should no longer honor the 
agreement and may take the fight to the SAF.  This is 
thought to mean small attacks on GOS-held towns and 
villages; and 
 
-- The UN, including UNICEF, WFP, and OCHA, are planning 
a helicopter day trip to Geraida on May 3 for assessment 
purposes. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Humanitarian Update: 
 
-- UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour 
traveled to Nyala on May 1; 
 
-- Relief agencies report that Geraida town is still 
under an uneasy calm; 
 
-- There has been an influx of 3000-4000 individuals 
counted by the ICRC outside the "old" camp south of 
Geraida town under the trees and in the bush with no 
shelter and little in way of possessions; 
 
-- Another inestimable number have arrived to stay with 
families and are at present an unknown quantity; 
 
-- 340 individuals have arrived from the Dito area; 
 
-- Another 82 individuals have arrived from Dagama 
(northeast of Geraida); 
 
-- 70 families have arrived from Abu Lala (north of 
Geraida); 
 
-- Relief agencies reports seeing 540 patients per day in 
its clinic, an increase from their usual 400 to 450 per 
day, with many new patients reporting they are from 
Joghanna; 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001033  002 OF 002 
 
 
-- Relief agencies notes the area northeast of Geraida - 
Dagama, Dito, and Donkey Dereissa, is now highly 
volatile, making passage risky; 
 
-- The Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) are now highly active 
in the area, and are considered a new, unknown element; 
 
-- Relief agencies will not risk movement without 
engaging first the SAF for information sharing and travel 
assurances; so far its representatives have been unable 
to meet with any representatives of the SAF; 
 
-- Relief agencies will take the road that travels 
through Sanam al Naga and will therefore need to discuss 
travel with the SLA, GOS/SAF, and jinjaweed in the areas 
between Nyala and Geraida; 
 
-- Dito is reported to be under Mahadi tribal control; 
there is a large number of armed militias in the area; 
 
-- Relief agencies would like to restart convoys to 
Geraida on May 3 if they get proper travel assurances 
from all the elements operating in the area between Nyala 
and Gereida; and 
 
-- Relief agencies plan to do an assessment in Joghanna 
once it has gained travel access and access to interview 
newly arrived internally displaced persons properly. 
 
STEINFELD