06KUALALUMPUR797
9TH MALAYSIA PLAN: AMBITIOUS AGENDA AND CHALLENGING IMPLEMENTATION
Tue May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kuala Lumpur
VZCZCXRO0368
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHKL #0797/01 1220810
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 020810Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6537
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1375
RUEHC/USDA FAS WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 KUALA LUMPUR 000797 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA AND IRS 
STATE FOR USTR - WEISEL AND JENSEN 
STATE FOR FEDERAL RESERVE AND EXIMBANK 
 
 
STATE FOR FEDERAL RESERVE SAN FRANCISCO - TCURRAN 
USDOC FOR 4430/MAC/EAP/J.BAKER 
USDA FAS FOR OA/BIG, ITP/AAD 
GENEVA FOR USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/27/2016 
TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD EINV PREL MY
SUBJECT: 9TH MALAYSIA PLAN: AMBITIOUS AGENDA AND CHALLENGING IMPLEMENTATION 
 
REF: 2005 KUALA LUMPUR 03692 
 
Classified By: Economic Counselor Colin Helmer.  Reasons: 1.4 (b) and ( 
d). 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Prime Minister Abdullah recently unveiled the Ninth 
Malaysia plan (9MP) which envisages spending RM 220 ($60 
billion) of government and private development funds during 
2006-2010 and targets an average economic growth rate of 
6.0%.  9MP identifies five key areas, such as improving 
Malaysia's human capital, becoming a knowledge-based economy, 
and investing in key infrastructure, in which Malaysia must 
improve to achieve its goal of becoming a developed 
industrialized nation by 2020.  Analysts are confident that 
the infrastructure projects, projected rate of economic 
growth, and some technology projects will unfold as planned, 
but deem projects in other areas, such as education and 
agriculture, to be unrealistic.  While laudatory in their 
public comments, Malaysian economists we have spoken to in 
private are disappointed with the plan.  They also question 
the GOM's ability to implement the reforms needed to attract 
a higher level of foreign direct investment.  9MP calls for 
Malaysia's private sector to take the lead in further 
developing the country, but our sources doubt Malaysian 
leaders will give private industry the freedom to transform 
the economy.  Prime Minister Abdullah views 9MP as his top 
economic initiative, is aware of the challenge of 
implementation and is taking steps aimed at improving follow 
up.  End Summary. 
 
Five Key Thrusts 
---------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The 9MP lays out five broad goals that Malaysia is to 
meet by 2010 to keep on schedule for the "Vision 2020" goal 
of becoming an industrialized, developed nation by the end of 
the next decade.  The economists with whom we met agree that 
these goals are well laid out, pragmatic, and correctly 
describe the path Malaysia needs to travel.  They are:  to 
move the economy up the value chain; to raise the capacity 
for knowledge and innovation and nurture a "First Class 
Mentality;" to address persistent socio-economic inequalities 
constructively and productively; to improve the standard and 
sustainability of quality of life; and to strengthen 
institutional and implementation capacity. 
 
Show Me the Money 
----------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The 9MP will provide about RM 220 billion (US$60 
billion at RM 3.65=$1) of government and private development 
spending during 2006-2010.  Approximately 40% of this is 
allocated to what the GOM defines as economic programs, 40% 
to social programs, 12% to security and 8% to general 
administration.  Funding for the subsectors that follow will 
come from either the social or economic segments of 9MP. 
Although the 9MP budget is 17.6% higher than the previous 
plan, 35% of 9MP's budget is earmarked for finishing up 8MP 
projects that were not completed during the last five year 
plan. 
 
¶4. (SBU) About 23% of 9MP funding will be devoted to 
infrastructure and utilities development projects, an 
increase of 21.2% over the 8MP.  As compared to Mahathir-era 
plans with their large infrastructure projects, PM Abdullah 
chose to cut the pie into many small projects so that more 
construction contractors might participate.  According to Dr. 
Yeah Kim Leng, Managing Director and Chief Economist at RAM 
Consultants Group, the GOM conducted cost/benefit analyses to 
identify projects that would produce a higher return on 
investment.  This apparently was not done in the past. 
 
¶5. (U) Although human capital development has been one of 
Abdullah's stated priorities, and despite media reports 
suggesting education was one of the big winners in the plan, 
education and training will receive only about 20% of the 
total budget.  This is about the same as in the preceding 
5-year plan (8MP) developed by Abdullah's predecessor, 
Mahathir Mohamad.  New initiatives include strengthening the 
national (public) schools so that they become the "School of 
Choice" for all races in Malaysia. 
 
¶6. (U) Agriculture, one of Abdullah's favored sectors, will 
receive about 6% of the funding -- a 70% boost over 8MP. 
However, 9MP sets a goal of transforming Malaysia into a net 
food exporter by 2010, which outside analysts believe is 
impossible given control over land use by the individual 
states and the higher returns from land uses other than food 
and livestock production.  Biotechnology will get 1%, 2.5 
times more than it received in 8MP. 
 
Ambitious Growth Targets 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U) In its last five-year plan, the GOM projected an 
average economic growth rate of 8%, but the actual rate 
during 2000-2005 was about 4.5%.  In the background to the 
9MP, government analysts place partial blame for the 
shortfall on the U.S.: "Global growth slowed due to a 
decelerating United States of America economy, and dampened 
electronics demand, exacerbated by the attacks of September 
11, 2001.  Overall economic performance remained sluggish 
until the second half of 2003, weighed down by the invasion 
of Iraq and the regional outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome." 
 
¶8. (C) The government is targeting a more modest average 
annual growth rate of 6% during 9MP.  The economists that we 
interviewed (a mixture of academics, investment advisors, 
consultants, and think tank researchers) voiced a variety of 
opinions about that target, with Yeah of RAM asserting, "this 
is eminently achievable."  Dr. Mohamed Ariff of the Malaysia 
Institute of Economic Research presented a study to the GOM 
where he argued for a 5-6% growth rate as opposed to the 7-8% 
that many ministers supported.  He maintains that it is 
better to aim lower than to fail to meet the target.  The 
chief economist at CIMB agrees that 6% is within Malaysia's 
grasp.  Wong Chee Seng, chief economist at ECM Libra 
Securities, is much more negative, saying "The government 
will not meet its targets.  It moves too slow."  University 
Malaya professor Andrew Sheng (formerly chairman of the Hong 
Kong Securities Commission and Bank Negara Assistant 
Governor) disagrees.  Looking at regional growth estimates 
from the International Monetary Fund, he wonders why the GOM 
did not set the growth bar higher.  He believes that Malaysia 
should link its growth to China and India by exploiting 
complementary business opportunities. 
 
Seeking Private Help 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) The 9MP calls for the private sector to lead growth, 
aided by the public sector in its role as facilitator and 
regulator.  Our economic contacts agree with this idea, but 
observe that it will require a significant increase in 
private investment, both domestic and FDI.  Under 9MP, the 
GOM projects private investment to grow at an annual rate of 
11.2% and public sector investment at 5% -- rates that are 
inconsistent with recent trends.  Under the 8MP, private 
investment actually contracted about 1% each year.  Changing 
this situation would require the GOM to give the private 
sector more freedom from regulation and control than its 
socioeconomic objectives for the bumiputera (ethnic Malay) 
community currently allow.  For example, the current 
requirement that 30% of equity and employment be reserved for 
bumiputeras is a significant investment disincentive.  As 
Yeah put it, "Why would you want to do all the work of 
setting up a business in Malaysia only to have to turn 30% of 
it over to someone else?" 
 
¶10. (SBU) One of PM Abdullah's signal economic achievements 
has been to shrink the government's budget deficit, now down 
to 3.8% of GDP.  9MP appears likely to slow further progress 
on deficit reduction.  According to Wong, Abdullah concluded 
that too many people depend on government contracts to keep 
applying the screws to expenditures.  At the end of the 9MP, 
the overall federal government fiscal deficit is forecast to 
be RM 107.6 billion, or 3.4% of GDP, assuming the government 
can meet its growth targets.  The majority of our contacts 
are not overly concerned with this change in fiscal stance. 
Sheng argues that it is reasonable for a developing country 
such as Malaysia to pursue deficit spending on infrastructure 
projects that will generate growth.  The difficulty in the 
past, he says, has been large public projects that do not 
offer a good return on investment. 
 
Ambitious Development Goals 
--------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Some examples of the sort of investment that 
University Malaya's Sheng sees as positive are biotechnology 
research, ICT infrastructure (such as high-speed internet and 
more training in schools), and development spending on 
tourism.  Sheng sees these as high-growth projects with the 
potential to leverage more investment and business for 
Malaysia in the future.  Pointing to India and its 
back-office outsourcing, Sheng asks, "Why shouldn't Malaysia 
be able to offer similar services at a competitive price?  We 
have the education, English language, and with this type of 
incremental investment, we can do business with New York via 
the internet."  He is similarly enthusiastic about the plan 
to promote the tourism sector, which in 2005 drew 16.4 
million tourists and generated RM 32.4 billion (US$ 8.8 
billion) -- 80% more than export earnings from palm oil, six 
times more than rubber, and only 30% less than the oil and 
gas industry. 
 
¶12. (C) Some of 9MP's ambitious goals are so lofty as to 
appear unachievable in five years.  For example, the plan 
calls for Malaysia to increase the percentage of university 
professors with PhDs to 60% from the current level of 20%. 
Time and resource constraints, coupled with the fact that 
highly educated workers can do better elsewhere, make 
achieving this goal unlikely.  As Wong of ECM Libra noted 
bluntly, "I tell my children to stay in New Zealand.  What 
opportunity does a Malaysian educated abroad have here?" 
 
¶13. (C) Some of the agriculture goals seem equally 
unrealistic.  For example, the government proposes to 
increase rice production by approximately 50% by 2010. 
According to Ministry of Agriculture Deputy Secretary General 
Zulkifli Idris, the prime minister pushed for sharp 
production increases to benefit Malay farmers in the 
politically sensitive northern states.  Traditionally, 
Malaysia has grown about two-thirds of the rice it consumes 
domestically, importing the remainder from low-cost producers 
like Thailand and Vietnam.  Although the cheap imports allow 
the GOM to maintain low fixed retail prices for urban and 
rural consumers, the government loses money on every ton of 
rice produced domestically: it pays direct subsidies to 
farmers while Bernas (the government-linked monopoly rice 
importer and the main marketer of domestically produced rice) 
buys locally produced rice at a higher price and sells it at 
low, government-fixed retail price.  Working-level contacts 
indicate that the sharp rice production increase in 9MP is 
unrealistic, and Zulkifli admitted as much in his statements. 
 Nonetheless, the planned investment in such areas as 
improved irrigation, mechanization, and farmer organizations 
in the northern states will likely have a political payoff 
for Abdullah. 
 
NEP Rides Again 
--------------- 
 
¶14. (U) With the publication of the 9MP, Prime Minister 
Abdullah also went firmly on record in support of maintaining 
the National Economic Policy (NEP).  The NEP was introduced 
in 1970 with the goal of transferring at least 30% of 
Malaysia's equity and wealth to bumiputeras through 
affirmative action policies favoring the Malay majority's 
participation in the economy.  The NEP was initially intended 
to have been completed in 1990, but when the target was not 
met the government replaced the NEP with the National 
Development Policy (NDP).  With 9MP, Abdullah has pledged to 
continue these policies through 2020 with the hope of finally 
achieving the 30% goal. 
 
 
¶15. (U) The 9MP will try to raise the bumiputera equity stake 
to 20-25% in 2010 from 18.9% in 2005.  The plan also seeks to 
narrow the income gap between bumiputeras and ethnic Chinese 
from a ratio of 1:1.64 in 2004 to 1:1.50 in 2010, and between 
bumiputeras and ethnic Indians from 1:1.27 in 2004 to 1:1.15 
in 2010.  It also sets a target of halving the country's 
overall poverty rate from 5.7% in 2004 to 2.8% in 2010, and 
completely eliminating "hardcore poverty" in 2010. 
 
¶16. (C) Non-government economists support these goals 
publicly but deplore them in private.  Some challenge the 
reliability of the government's data.  For example, a 
significant amount of publicly listed shares are held under 
nominee accounts, many of which are bumiputera-owned, but the 
government considers all of them non-bumiputera.  Others 
decry the added cost of business the NEP policies place on 
private investors and the disincentive they pose to FDI. 
 
Implementation - GOM versus Private Industry 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (U) Since the 9MP roll-out, the government has generated 
a steady media buzz about the importance of effective 
implementation of the plan.  Abdullah has publicly promised 
to fire any civil servants who get in the way.  But the GOM 
and industry have different ideas of what constitutes good 
implementation.  The GOM has announced that 9MP will feature 
better governance, world class project management, increased 
due diligence, less corruption, and speedy disbursement of 
funds.  In a recent speech, Effendi Norwawi, Minister in the 
Prime Minister's Department for Economic Planning and 
Abdullah's point man for the 9MP, explained that the GOM 
wants to work in partnership with the private sector.  He 
emphasized Abdullah's personal commitment and noted the 
creation of a new agency, the National Implementation Action 
Body (NIAB) to monitor the performance of agencies 
implementing major projects under the 9MP.  Abdullah will 
head the organization, with Deputy Prime Minister Najib Razak 
as deputy chairman and ministers with specific 9MP authority 
sitting on the council.  It will meet every two weeks and, 
according to Effendi, Abdullah will be demanding progress 
reports. 
 
¶18. (C) The prime minister's own office is set to receive a 
large allocation under the 9MP.  Although there is no detail 
as to how the funding will be spent, 9MP sets aside RM 26.5 
billion (13.2% of the total) for Abdullah's department - a 
threefold increase over 8MP (RM 7.3 billion and 4.3%).  The 
public spin on these figures is that the resources will 
enable the prime minister to focus on his key goals and move 
the process along.  In private, however, economists voice 
concern over the potential for abuse of funds. 
 
¶19. (C) When the private sector talks about good 
implementation, they hope the GOM will remove the mass of 
government red tape and regulation that increases costs and 
scares away investment, both local and foreign.  Minister 
Effendi himself related a story about a hotel venture that 
required 73 different licenses before it could open.  Some 
took so long to obtain that the operator needed to repeat the 
application process because they only lasted for a year. 
Yeah detailed a similar process in Penang, saying "at least 
at the international level, there is MIDA to be one-stop 
shopping for the licenses.  A Malaysian investor must deal 
with both state and local regulations and the government 
needs to move to change this quickly."  But few economists 
believe that the GOM will move decisively to cut red tape and 
reduce its economic meddling.  Sheng compared Malaysia to 
China: "In Shanghai, they were trying to take some business 
from Hong Kong and the manufacturer asked if they could move 
his product from China to the distribution point, including 
customs, in 24 hours.  Shanghai's mayor was able to make this 
happen.  Would that be the case in Malaysia?" 
 
Economists Not Overly Optimistic 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (C) Comment:  Successful implementation of the 9MP is 
Abdullah's top economic priority, but the economists we 
surveyed are not optimistic that he will be able to achieve 
all his goals for the plan.  While they see some good 
initiatives, they do not see bold steps that would lift 
Malaysia back up to the growth rates of the late 1980s. 
There is a sense of urgency in both the senior levels of the 
government and among senior economists that Malaysia is at a 
crossroads.  Wong suggested that, "there are two camps in the 
government, the ones who see that if we do not make changes 
that we will settle into second class and the others who are 
happy with the way things are."  Sheng, in a presentation to 
senior business leaders, government managers and economists, 
argued that Malaysia was in a similar situation as the U.K. 
and Japan in the early 1980s.  The U.K. was not doing well 
and opted to open its financial sector to bring in FDI and 
investment.  Japan, in contrast, tried to hold onto its 
manufacturing lead and 
 did not open to foreign investment.  He suggested that 
Malaysia might want to examine how the two nations are faring 
today and consider its options.  End Comment. 
LAFLEUR