06PARIS3455
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Montenegro Olmert to Washington
Tue May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 003455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR 
ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Montenegro Olmert to Washington 
PARIS - Tuesday, May 23, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Montenegro 
Olmert to Washington 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The probable merger between Euronext and the NYSE is today's lead 
story for le Figaro and the economic press. Les Echos, which leads 
with the general downward slide of international markets, has this 
commentary about the merger: "The path appears to be narrowing for 
Deutsche Borse and the London Stock Exchange in the face of the 
number one transatlantic market which is slowly taking shape." Le 
Figaro Economie acknowledges that "Wall Street's Mermaid Call Has 
Charmed Euronext." In its editorial titled "Questions for the 
Future" La Tribune comments: "Let us hope that the future will not 
go wrong. What will happen to the notion of independence, which made 
Euronext's strength? And what will Europe's influence be if 
tomorrow's European financial markets will be made up of the NYSE 
and Euronext on one hand, the Nasdaq and London on the other? What 
will be left in this American-American market for the Europeans?" La 
Croix's editorial titled "Finances Without Borders" faults 
government authorities in Europe for not defending "a European 
federation of finances." 
 
Liberation interviews professor of economics Bruno Biais, who 
describes the advantages of the merger: "To attract American 
investors to Europe and to make it easier for European investors to 
diversify their portfolios through American stock." Asked whether 
the David-Euronext runs the risk of being swallowed by the 
Goliath-NYSE, Biais says: "The NYSE appreciates the competence and 
creativity of Euronext and it is in its interest to allow Euronext 
to maintain a certain freedom." 
 
The main international story is the outcome of the referendum in 
Montenegro, and the choice for independence from Serbia, which 
according to Le Figaro's front page "leaves Europe somewhat 
embarrassed." The editorial warns against the "Domino Effect" while 
Le Monde's editorial comments: "The EU has come to the conclusion it 
cannot force coexistence on people who do not want to live 
together." (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro reports on Olmert's visit to Washington (See Part C) 
and Blair's surprise trip to Baghdad, where he saluted "A New Iraqi 
Era." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Montenegro Referendum 
 
"Careful About the Domino Effect" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/23): "It is a 
relief to see that in the Balkans a nation like Montenegro can 
achieve independence without bloodshed. This is an incredible 
progress when compared to the wars of the 90s, which led to 
Yugoslavia's break up... The referendum went smoothly because it was 
mere confirmation of an existing situation... Serbia-Montenegro was 
practically already defunct... It would be a waste of energy to 
fight against the inevitable. Europe cannot reject these 
pro-Europeans and favor those who still support Milosevic. Europe 
has to deal with this new deck of cards and with Serbia's trauma, 
and Kosovo's future independence. It is the Kosovars who will gain 
the most from this referendum: indeed no one will dare deprive them 
of their hopes for independence. But the danger of an endless domino 
effect must be considered, because it can 'balkanize' the entire 
region and reach far beyond into Abkhazy... The birth of a new 
European nation cannot serve as a model for one and all. Each 
situation must be appraised independently. And the European Union 
will have to send out this message all the while helping Montenegro 
and Serbia to handle their divorce as best they can." 
 
"Montenegro on the Road to Europe" 
Pierre Haski in left-of-center Liberation (05/23): "This is the last 
act of a play involving Yugoslavia. With their choice for 
independence, the Montenegrins have also decided the fate of Serbia, 
which finds itself alone and independent, but without having chosen 
its future... It is commendable that this last act was played out 
without any shots being fired. The Montenegrins have chosen to 
follow the rules set by Europe. How far can this principle go? 
Indeed the question becomes thornier when applied to other Republics 
from former Yugoslavia... And even within Europe, the Basque and 
Catalan independence groups are looking at the Montenegro precedent 
closely... Is Europe condemned to such a fate on the basis that 
'small is beautiful' and a desire to preserve a national integrity, 
which has been underestimated in the European construction? This is 
one more paradox in these times of globalization and political as 
well as economic regrouping." 
"Balkanization" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its editorial (05/23): "The EU has come 
to the conclusion it cannot force coexistence on people who do not 
want to live together. Self-determination is a praiseworthy 
principle, but it carries a certain amount of danger. If applied to 
the letter, it can lead to the region's 'balkanization' through 
contagion." 
 
Olmert to Washington 
 
"Olmert Presents Bush his Pullout Plan" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/23): "If protocol 
did not reserve the expression to heads of state, this would be a 
'state visit.' Washington's welcome and the program set for Olmert 
establish the foundations for a personal relationship and a common 
strategy for the future. Like his predecessor, Olmert is coming with 
an 'all inclusive' plan he will offer the Americans. Olmert is 
preparing to pursue the unilateral pullout plan implemented by 
Sharon, all the while making overtures to Abbas and speaking in 
favor of the roadmap... In order not to antagonize the American 
President, Olmert will only broach the broad lines of convergence, 
which can be adjusted if needed... According to an Israeli diplomat, 
the Americans and the Israelis will speak publicly of their support 
for the roadmap, and in private of what they would do if it does not 
work out. And indeed the situation is not ripe for the success of 
the peace process. Hamas is in power but is still not a respectable 
political entity as long as it does not recognize Israel or give up 
violence... But the White House has nothing concrete to offer: since 
President Bush presented his 'vision' of two states living side by 
side, his policy has basically been one of 'laissez-faire.' 
According to Brent Snowcroft, 'the U.S. failed because it should 
have injected lots of money into Gaza after the pullout. We let 
Hamas fill a vacuum. Now we are trying to push Hamas to fail. And if 
we succeed, we will be held accountable.' While Washington has 
reluctantly accepted the system to distribute humanitarian aid, the 
disagreement with the Europeans remains over Palestinian salaries. 
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has receded as a priority for the 
Americans. And Olmert, whose margin of maneuver has grown, will 
nudge Bush on his obsession of the day: nuclear Iran." 
 
"Olmert Wants to Rally Bush to His Plan" 
Joel David in Catholic La Croix (05/23): "President Bush does not 
seem ready to give his green light to Olmert without seeing the 
entire plan: before he gives his political and financial support, 
Bush expects to have all the ins and outs of the plan explained to 
him. For the time being he will stick to the roadmap... The 
Americans will be asking for time, and will caution against 
precipitous unilateralism. This is also what the Europeans and Arab 
countries want. Mired in Iraq and falling steadily in the polls, the 
American President cannot afford to take risks with the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For the time being it would appear 
that priorities, whether they are examined in Jerusalem or in 
Washington, are not exactly the same." HOFMANN