06PHNOMPENH977
REGIONAL PROGRESS ON COMMIT PROCESS
Tue May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO3650
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #0977/01 1430655
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 230655Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6720
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 2369
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1448UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000977 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN CB
SUBJECT:  REGIONAL PROGRESS ON COMMIT PROCESS 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The Coordinated Mekong Ministerial 
Initiative Against Trafficking (COMMIT) held the Fourth 
Senior Officials' Meeting (SOM 4) on human trafficking 
in Phnom Penh, Cambodia on May 10-12, 2006.  Over 
thirty senior government officials from the six Greater 
Mekong Sub-region (GMS) Governments (Cambodia, China, 
Laos, Burma, Thailand and Vietnam) attended the meeting 
to review and assess the progress of cooperation on 
trafficking to realize a vision of a trafficking-free 
Mekong region.  Each country briefed on its efforts in 
bilateral cooperation, development of legal frameworks, 
and implementation of other actions to eradicate 
trafficking in the region.  The meeting closed with the 
group updating COMMIT's Sub-Regional Plan of Action to 
focus attention on the areas of law enforcement and 
criminal justice while maintaining focus on efforts on 
prevention, protection, recovery and reintegration of 
victims.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Country-by-Country Progress Report 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Cambodia:  The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) 
reported several achievements in bilateral cooperation 
as well as in several internal areas.  The RGC reported 
signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for 
Eliminating Trafficking in Children and Women and 
Assisting Victims of Trafficking with both Thailand and 
Vietnam.  Also reported was that the new anti- 
trafficking law was drafted by the Ministry of Women's 
Affairs, and forwarded to the Ministry of Justice to be 
reviewed and finalized; the law is expected to be sent 
to the Council of Ministers by the end of 2006.  The 
Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth 
Rehabilitation (MOSAVY) is working on a National Child 
Protection Policy.  The RGC presentation noted that the 
five-year National Plan of Action (NPA) against 
trafficking in persons and sexual exploitation would be 
finalized in 2006.  The Ministry of Women's Affairs 
(MOWA) reported its work with the International Office 
of Migration (IOM), supported by funding from USAID, 
and MOWA's collaboration with the Ministry of Interior, 
the Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs to implement prevention programs in awareness- 
raising, economic development and legal protection of 
victims.  The MOSAVY reported work with IOM to 
establish reintegration services for Cambodian victims 
of trafficking from Vietnam and Malaysia; development 
of a specialized police unit since 2002; and the 
training of senior anti-trafficking officials along 
with prosecutors, judgers and students of the Royal 
School of Judges and Prosecutors. 
 
¶3.  China:  Chinese delegates reported China's 
participation in the first conference on "Against Human 
Trafficking between Myanmar and China," and on a 
campaign including both Chinese and Vietnamese police 
on cross-border trafficking of Vietnamese women. 
China's delegates also reported that transit centers 
for trafficked women and children have been 
established, including the first transit center for 
foreigners. 
 
¶4.  Laos:  Laotian delegates reported that the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with Thailand on cooperation to combat 
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, 
and has approved the Lao Women's Union (LWU) law- 
implementing decree on the "Protection and Development 
of Women" law.  The report noted that dissemination 
workshops have been held countrywide by LWU to promote 
the Protection and Development of Women law.  LWU has 
also officially opened a Counseling and Protection 
Center for victims.  Laos reported on establishment of 
a special trafficking unit called the Lao anti-people 
trafficking unit (LAPTU), Child Protection Networks in 
five provinces and plans for a National Workshop in 
Human Trafficking and Labor Migration in Vientiene. 
 
¶5.  Burma:  Burmese delegates reported the signing of a 
Regional Treaty on mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal 
Matters (Malaysia, January 2006) and reported 
strengthening of relationships with Thailand and China 
through multiple bilateral meetings.  Other reported 
progress included enacting an Anti-Trafficking in 
Persons law, completion of national level workshops on 
the implementation, development, and distribution of a 
screening checklist for "victim identification," and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000977  002 OF 002 
 
 
related training in its use, and conducting four in- 
country workshops on Child Sex Tourism. 
 
¶6.  Thailand:  Thai delegates reported signing 
Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) for cooperation of 
anti-trafficking of women and children with Cambodia 
and Laos, and noted that they are in the process of 
finalizing a MOU with Vietnam on elimination of 
trafficking in children and women and on the rescue of 
victims of trafficking.  Also reported was:  Thailand 
has signed a MOU on Employment Cooperation with 
Cambodia, Laos and Burma; Thailand's Cabinet has 
approved a national policy and plan on prevention, 
suppression and handling of trafficking in children and 
women in domestic and cross-border situations; the Thai 
government has passed a resolution and opened the 
region's first integrated anti-trafficking center; in 
December 2005, the Cabinet passed a resolution 
approving a special scheme for employment of illegal or 
undocumented migrant workers from Burma, Laos and 
Cambodia; the Thai government has established a one- 
stop service center to document and provide work 
permits for undocumented migrant workers from Burma, 
Lao and Cambodia.  Also reported was that, while 
Thailand is currently using an existing law on 
prevention and suppression of trafficking in women and 
children to fight trafficking, the Cabinet has approved 
a new bill on prevention and suppression of trafficking 
in persons and the bill is now being considered by the 
Judicial Council.  And finally, in cooperation with the 
U.S. Embassy in Thailand, and other agencies, Thailand 
is planning an international conference on trafficking 
in Greater Mekong Sub-region for 22-24 May 2006. 
 
¶7. Vietnam:  Vietnamese delegates reported signing of a 
Bilateral Cooperation Agreement with Cambodia, and that 
a Bilateral Agreement with Thailand on "Elimination 
Against Trafficking in Women and Children and Support 
for Victims" is being finalized.  Delegates supported 
China's country report by noting that Vietnamese and 
Chinese Ministries of Public Security carried out 
border province campaigns to rescue and return victims 
and apprehend traffickers. The Vietnam presentation 
also noted publication in September 2005 of a handbook 
to help prepare "intending migrant workers," and the 
development of standards and standard operating 
procedures for victim identification and for providing 
protection and support, especially in Vietnam-China and 
Vietnam-Cambodia border provinces. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  The Secretariat for the COMMIT Process -- the UN 
Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking in the GMS -- 
organized and funded the COMMIT SOM4 with Cambodia's 
Ministry of Women's Affairs.  The event gave 
governments and partners a chance to review priorities, 
demonstrate action taken, and revisit plans for 
activities in the coming year.  The COMMIT Sub-regional 
Plan of Action hopes to set the standard for anti- 
trafficking work in the Asian region, including 
establishment of the legal framework to support anti- 
trafficking efforts.  The hosting of the event in 
Cambodia helped Cambodia's Ministry of Women's Affairs 
demonstrate its lead role in fighting trafficking. 
MOWA's Secretary of State chaired both the Cambodia 
COMMIT Task Force and the SOM4 Organizing Committee for 
this event.  The event also drew attention to the 
challenges that Cambodia faces in developing and 
implementing a legal framework to combat anti- 
trafficking in humans.  With the anti-trafficking law 
of Cambodia still in a draft and review stage, Cambodia 
is challenged to compete with neighboring countries 
that have already established anti-trafficking laws. 
End Comment. 
 
STORELLA