06TELAVIV1963
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEL AVIV 001963 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Upcoming Visit of PM Olmert to Washington 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
In its lead story, Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday, 
the US published a draft of a new international treaty 
that would forbid the production of fissionable 
materials for use in nuclear weapons, overriding 
Israel's objections to the proposed document.  The 
draft, which was presented to the UN Disarmament 
Commission in Geneva, aims to "freeze" existing stocks 
of fissionable materials worldwide in order to keep 
them from expanding.  Although Washington sent messages 
to Israel assuring it that it has nothing to fear from 
the treaty, Jerusalem is worried by any move that might 
erode its policy of nuclear ambiguity and generate 
future pressure on it over its nuclear program. As a 
result, Israel made a last-minute effort to persuade 
the U.S. not to submit the draft for discussion. 
Ha'aretz wrote that Washington has also rejected 
Israel's request for an upgrade in its civilian nuclear 
status.  The newspaper reported that Israel was hoping 
that it could cut a deal similar to the agreement the 
US signed with India.  However, Ha'aretz said that the 
US administration asked Prime Minister Ehud Olmert not 
to raise this issue during his visit to Washington next 
week because the issue requires thorough study by 
administration professionals first. 
 
Maariv reported that the GOI is conducting informal 
talks with the Palestinians in order to reach an 
understanding with PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud 
Abbas bypassing Hamas.  The newspaper wrote that 
Justice Minister Haim Ramon and top Abbas aide Saeb 
Erekat are involved in the contacts.  Maariv also 
reported that talks took place in Europe.  Yediot 
reported that Abbas, FM Tzipi Livni, and Vice PM Shimon 
Peres will meet in Sharm el-Sheikh on Sunday. Ha'aretz 
printed an AP story quoting EU officials as saying 
Thursday that the EU is hoping that the US will 
persuade Israel, during Olmert's visit to Washington 
next week, to resume peace talks with the Palestinians 
instead of conducting a unilateral pullout from the 
West Bank. 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Olmert as saying this week in 
a private conversation that his convergence plan will 
involve the removal of fewer than 70,000 settlers, the 
figure most widely quoted in the media. 
 
Israel Radio and other media quoted Olmert as denying 
in an interview with The New York Times that there was 
any Palestinian "humanitarian crisis," and that he was 
prepared to buy medical supplies for the Palestinians 
with USD 50 million in tax revenue that Israel is 
withholding.  Olmert told The New York Times that 
Israel "will pay if necessary out of [its] own 
pockets."  Yediot quoted Olmert as saying in the 
interview that he thanks God for America and President 
Bush every morning. 
 
Leading media reported that an Israeli couple was 
wounded last night in a probable ambush near the 
northern West Bank settlement of Tapuah.  Leading media 
reported that the Karni crossing was closed on Thursday 
due to terror warnings.  Israel Radio reported that 8 
Qassam rockets were fired at Israel from the Gaza Strip 
Thursday and that the IDF responded with artillery 
fire. 
 
Yediot quoted Abbas as saying privately that the Hamas 
government will soon collapse and that new elections 
will be held in the PA in three months.  Yediot quoted 
Israeli defense sources as saying that the Palestinian 
economy is collapsing. Some media said that a state of 
civil war was already prevailing in the PA.  Israel 
Radio quoted Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice as 
saying Thursday that she hopes that the internal 
Palestinian situation will calm down and that the US 
believes that Abbas should be able to exercise his 
responsibilities. 
 
Maariv reported that on Thursday, FM Livni rebuked Chen 
Yonglong, the Chinese Ambassador to Israel, over 
meetings between some of his aides with Hamas members 
in the territories, which Livni reportedly said might 
lead to the imposition of restrictions to the freedom 
of movement of Chinese diplomats in Israel and possibly 
to their expulsion from Israel.  Other media reported 
on Livni's summons. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the US-backed Iraqi 
government sent an official representative to this 
week's meeting of the Arab Boycott Office in Damascus, 
prompting criticism from members of Congress and the 
Bush administration.  The Jerusalem Post reported that 
Tom Casey, a spokesman for the State Department, told 
the newspaper that Washington was unhappy with 
Baghdad's action and was raising this issue with the 
Iraqi government.  The newspaper reported that 
according to figures released this week by the Israel 
Export Institute, there has been a 46 percent rise in 
Israeli sales to Iraq (valued at USD 320,000), with 27 
exporters active in that market primarily with the US 
military. 
 
Maariv reported that around two weeks ago, a 
representative of former Greek-Orthodox Patriarch 
Irineos rented a building in central West Jerusalem to 
Tanzim member Imad Awad, an Abbas associate, and his 
men.  The newspaper, which said that on Wednesday, the 
Jerusalem Magistrate's Court issued an order against 
their presence there, quoted associates of current 
Greek-Orthodox Patriarch Theophilos III as saying that 
Irineos, who is supported by Israel, is trying to 
create links with the Palestinians and that that such 
incidents are due to the fact that Israel is delaying 
its recognition of Theophilos. 
 
Leading media quoted Samir Geagea, a former head of 
Christian Phalanges in Lebanon, as saying in an 
interview that will appear Saturday in the Lebanese 
daily As-Safir that four Iranians -- three diplomats 
and a journalist -- missing in Lebanon since 1982 were 
killed by Phalangist militiamen.  Iran had claimed that 
Israel had either killed or detained the four. 
Ha'aretz noted that the Iranian claims had been made 
repeatedly in an effort to justify and explain the lack 
of willingness of its Lebanese surrogates, Hizbullah, 
to reveal any information on the fate of the captured 
Israel air force navigator Ron Arad.   Ha'aretz said 
that Geagea's confirmation is unlikely to have any 
effect on Iran and Hizbullah regarding Arad. 
 
Leading media quoted former IDF Chief of Staff Moshe 
Ya'alon as saying at Haifa University Thursday that the 
decision-makers in the disengagement process should be 
investigated. 
Maariv reported that 31-year-old Israeli draft resistor 
Dan Tzahor has been lecturing on American campuses on 
behalf of a Muslim student organization, comparing the 
IDF to the Nazi army.  The newspaper cited a cable sent 
by Consul for Communication and Public Affairs at 
Israel's Consulate-General in Los Angeles Gilad Milo, 
which reported that Tzahor also addressed three US 
soldiers who refused to serve in Iraq. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday, High Court of 
Justice President Aharon Barak denied having predicted 
that the court would overturn the Citizenship Law if 
the Knesset were to extend it again. 
 
The Jerusalem Post cited a study first reported in The 
New York Sun this week, according to which US citizens 
who have ties to Israel or an Israeli-American dual 
citizenship encounter difficulties in obtaining 
security clearance from the Pentagon and are dealt with 
in a manner similar to that of Americans who have ties 
with hostile nations. 
 
Citing AP, Ha'aretz quoted Israeli and British 
officials as saying Thursday that Israeli authorities 
have been detaining Ayez Ali, a British citizen, since 
May 9, and that they are holding him for questioning on 
an unspecified security-related matter. 
 
Ha'aretz (Hebrew Ed.) reported that the American Jewish 
Committee (AJC) pledged this week to help shoulder the 
potential costs involved in fighting attempts to 
boycott Israel.  The newspaper wrote that the AJC has 
set aside USD 10,000 to relaunch its anti-boycott fund. 
The move follows the recent announcement of a planned 
academic boycott of Israel by the UK's National 
Association of Teachers in Further and Higher 
Education. 
 
Yediot reported that in December 2005, Swiss 
intelligence thwarted an attempt to blow up an El Al 
airliner at Geneva Airport. 
 
Yediot disclosed American documents proving that Israel 
and South Africa conducted a nuclear test off the 
Antarctic coast in September 1979.  The newspaper wrote 
that then-US President Jimmy Carter whitewashed the 
affair. 
 
Yediot reported that on Thursday, an Israeli- 
Palestinian team reached the summit of Mt. Everest. 
 
Yediot displayed the picture of a painting by Israeli 
artist Zigi Ben-Haim, which was commissioned by NASA. 
The work depicts the Columbia shuttle disaster. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Yitzhak Ben-Aharon, a 
veteran Labor Party politician and a leading mentor of 
Israeli Socialism, died this morning in his kibbutz, 
Givat Haim Meuhad, aged almost 100.  The radio cited 
eulogies of Ben-Aharon by President Moshe Katsav, PM 
Olmert, and Vice PM Peres. 
 
Ha'aretz (Hebrew Ed.) reported that this week, the 
Overseas Vote Foundation, a nonpartisan initiative 
aimed at increasing participation among American 
expatriates, released data according to which Israel 
ranks eighth in the world in the number of overseas US 
voters who have already registered for the November 
2006 elections. 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶1.  Upcoming Visit of PM Olmert to Washington: 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea, at this time a research 
fellow at the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at 
the Brookings Institution, "addressed" Prime Minister 
Olmert from Washington in mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: "Mr. Prime Minister.... Weak or 
strong, George Bush is the only president you have." 
 
Washington correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "The 
President is now in 'listening mode'.... [However], 
questions are expected to be raised." 
 
In popular, pluralist Maariv, senior columnist Dan 
Margalit imagined Prime Minister Olmert's ideal 
comments to President Bush: "In the absence of 
international support for [the convergence plan], the 
number of evacuated settlers might drop to about 
20,000." 
 
Defense and foreign affairs columnist Amir Oren wrote 
in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "[For the United 
States], the Middle East is the lead region, but within 
it Israel and its disputes have become secondary." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in Maariv: 
"Olmert must only leave the White House after Bush 
understands ... the scope of the [Iranian] threat [to 
Israel]." 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized: "[The 
convergence plan] won't be discussed during Olmert's 
Washington visit, since President Bush has aligned 
himself with the Europeans' line." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Ehud, Fasten Your Seat Belt" 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea, at this time a research 
fellow at the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at 
the Brookings Institution, "addressed" Prime Minister 
Olmert from Washington in mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (5/19): "In two days, Mr. Prime 
Minister, you will get on the plane on the way to 
Washington.... Weak or strong, George Bush is the only 
president you have. In the next two and a half years, 
during which, as you see it, the convergence plan will 
either rise or fall, he will be the tenant at the White 
House.  It will, therefore, be only natural, if and 
when you go out to meet the media, that you will heap 
compliments on Bush's leadership, on his courage, on 
his determination.  You will say that never before has 
Israel had such a steadfast friend, so outstanding, in 
the White House.... [Ariel]  Sharon forged an 
intriguing relationship with Bush.  It began with 
mutual deterrence, continued with suspicion and 
ultimately became one of sweeping support.  The turning 
point for Bush was the September 11 terror attacks. 
Sharon was convinced that Bush's next step would be 
conciliation with the Arab world at Israel's expense. 
On October 4, 2001, less than a month after the terror 
attacks, Sharon lashed out against the Bush government 
with the most serious possible accusation: the 
Americans had sacrificed Israel just as Chamberlain 
sacrificed Czechoslovakia.  Bush was insulted to the 
depths of his soul.  It is the irony of history that 
Sharon's mistake was one of the smartest acts of his 
life.  The insult brought him respect: Bush was 
convinced that Sharon was a real man, and that he would 
not hesitate to confront the President of the US for 
the existential interests of his country." 
 
II.  "Capitol Gains" 
 
Washington correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (5/19): "The 
President is now in 'listening mode' -- ready to hear 
about Olmert's grand 
convergence/consolidation/withdrawal plan, yet far from 
being in a position either to endorse or reject it.... 
[However], questions are expected to be raised.... 
Olmert is not expected to have all the answers, though 
experts agree that in order for the convergence plan to 
succeed, the Israeli PM will have to be given much more 
than Sharon got for Gaza -- some international gesture 
of support and formal recognition, at least from 
America, of the legality of the new temporary borders 
he is going to set." 
 
III.  "The Washington Speech" 
 
In popular, pluralist Maariv, senior columnist Dan 
Margalit imagined Prime Minister Olmert's ideal 
comments to President Bush (5/19): "Israel is seriously 
handling ... the convergence plan -- not instead of the 
Roadmap, but only as a bench warmer.  Israel may have 
to evacuate 40,000 or 50,000 settlers as part of a 
difficult, painful step accompanied by an intra-Israeli 
struggle.  In the absence of international support for 
that measure, the number of evacuated settlers might 
drop to about 20,000.  The convergence plan is based on 
the assumption that we won't have a Palestinian partner 
for peace, but we will have an international body 
headed by America to verify that move and back it up." 
 
IV.  "From Convergence to Submergence" 
 
Defense and foreign affairs columnist Amir Oren wrote 
in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/19): "The Bush 
administration made a serious blunder and allowed Hamas 
to take part in the elections, on the basis of a 
complacent supposition that Hamas would not win -- a 
mistake that has left the Israeli-Palestinian process 
completely stuck.  Until its consequences are 
overturned -- which will not happen quickly -- Israel 
is being asked not to be a nuisance.... Israel's place 
according to the American approach has changed.  Until 
about 15 years ago, the Middle East was a secondary 
region (with respect to the confrontation with the 
Soviets, which centered in Europe), but within it the 
Israeli-Arab conflict played a leading role.  Now the 
Middle East is the lead region, but within it Israel 
and its disputes have become secondary.  Israel's 
mission within the framework of the alliance headed by 
Bush is not to interfere with the main effort." 
 
 
¶V.  "The Ahmadinejad Code" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in Maariv 
(5/19): "Olmert will tell [Bush], 'The Iranian 
nuclearization is a real existential threat to Israel.' 
He shouldn't say it publicly.  In any case, talk that 
Israel pushed America into the Iraqi quagmire is 
growing.  But Olmert must only leave the White House 
after Bush understands ... the scope of the threat." 
 
VI.  "A Courtesy Visit" 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized (5/19): 
"The 'convergence' plan prepared by Prime Minister 
Olmert is very similar to the withdrawal plan prepared 
by the State Department in the wake of the Six-Day 
War.... At this point, it won't be discussed during 
Olmert's Washington visit, since President Bush has 
aligned himself with the Europeans' line.... But the 
warm handshake between Prime Minister Olmert and 
President Bush is in itself important.  We can only 
congratulate Mr. Olmert with the traditional blessing: 
'Go in peace and return in peace.'" 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The signs [that 
the US is on the way to offering the Iranians talks] 
are accumulating." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Good-Bye to Pressure" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/19): "The signs 
[that the US is on the way to offering the Iranians 
talks] are accumulating.... The question of whether 
there has been a shift with respect to talks with Iran 
is very important, truly crucial.  'If the Americans 
start going in the direction of direct dialogue, it 
could be that this will be the end of the process as we 
know it, and perhaps with this it will be possible to 
say goodbye to pressure on Iran,' explained a source in 
Jerusalem this week.  Israelis who are following the 
developments are identifying innumerable obstacles on 
the way to such talks, above all the question of 
whether 'the Iranians want to talk at all.'" 
 
JONES