06TUNIS1230
Special Media Reaction: DepSec Visit to Tunis
Tue May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #1230/01 1431202
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231202Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0752
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS TUNIS 001230 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR D (MILLS) NEA (GRAY) NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE) NEA/PPD 
(WHITE, AGNEW) NEA/PI (CARPENTER, MULENEX) NEA/PA NEA/IPA 
I/GNEA CWG-PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO OIIP TS
SUBJECT: Special Media Reaction: DepSec Visit to Tunis 
May 18 -19, 2006 
 
Ref: A) 03 Tunis 2054 B) 05 Tunis 326 C) 06 Tunis 358 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Tunisian print and broadcast media 
positively and prominently covered the May 18 - 19 DepSec 
Zoellick visit to Tunisia.  While both the government and 
privately-owned press highlighted the DepSec's positive 
statements on Tunisian modernity and moderation, the 
private press also included coverage of the DepSec's 
encouragement for greater political reform.  All papers 
also focused on the possibility of a Tunisian role in the 
international efforts in Darfur.  Comment:  The Tunisian 
media coverage of this visit showed a slight, but 
important, evolution in Tunisian reporting on visits of 
American officials in that it provided a more balanced 
image of the visit including accurate coverage of the 
DepSec's statements on the need for reform in this 
country. End comment and summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On May 20, all Tunisian newspapers covered the 
visit of Deputy Secretary Zoellick to Tunisia.  Most 
papers published articles by the government-controlled 
Tunisian News Agency (TAP) reporting on the meetings with 
FM Abdallah, Minister of Development and International 
Cooperation Jouini, and President Ben Ali.  The TAP 
articles concentrated more on what was said by the 
Tunisian interlocutors and included only a brief resume 
of the DepSec's message, noting his praise for Tunisia 
and the discussion of ways to strengthen US-Tunisia 
bilateral relations. 
 
3.(U) Most papers also covered the May 19 DepSec press 
conference.  Government-owned daily "La Presse" glossed 
over the DepSec's comments on the need for greater 
political reform in the country and instead focused on 
the issues of Tunisian bilateral cooperation, Darfur, and 
Iraq.  Privately-owned dailies "As Sabah" and "Ash 
Shourouq" also reported on Iraq and Darfur, noting the 
possibility of Tunisian participation in international 
efforts in Sudan.  Privately-owned "Le Temps" joined "As 
Sabah" and "Ash Shourouq" in their coverage of the 
DepSec's encouragement in the areas of freedom of 
assembly and expression in Tunisia, accurately reporting 
his observation that the educational and cultural levels 
of Tunisian society naturally lend themselves to a desire 
for greater freedom and knowledge.  Privately-owned "Le 
Quotidien" focused its reporting on the press conference 
on the international issues of Libya, Darfur, and Iraq. 
 
4.(U) On May 19, the government-controlled broadcast 
media also covered the DepSec's meeting with President 
Ben Ali and included coverage from the press conference 
on Darfur, Iraq, and positive bilateral relations. 
 
5.(SBU) Comment: Given the GOT's track record on press 
coverage of American USG visits to Tunisia (reftels), the 
relatively accurate coverage of the DepSec's May 18 - 19 
visit represents a slight, but significant, evolution in 
the local media scene.  Whereas in the past TAP has 
either falsely attributed comments to such dignitaries as 
former SecState Powell or embellished American praise for 
Tunisian social and economic reforms into accolades for 
the human rights and political situation in the country, 
the TAP articles on the DepSec visit strategically 
focused on the GOT side of the bilateral discussions and 
refrained from commenting too widely on what was said by 
the American official.  The accurate coverage on the 
DepSec's comments on reform presented in the privately- 
owned newspapers, and the particular mention of freedom 
of expression and assembly, also represent an evolution 
in Tunisian reporting.  End comment. 
 
¶6. (U) Sample headlines on the visit include: 
 
"La Presse" (government-owned French language daily): 
"Tunisia-US - President Ben Ali receives the Deputy 
Secretary of State - Deep discussions on questions 
 
SIPDIS 
related to peace and stability in the world.  Mutual 
willingness of both sides to reinforce the already 
excellent bilateral ties and to pursue political 
discussions."  "Deputy Secretary of State Robert 
Zoellick, in a press conference, `Tunisia is a great 
nation that has made remarkable achievements.' `Tunisia 
played a positive role in the normalization of Tunisian- 
American relations.' `Tunisia distinguishes itself by its 
tolerance, modernity, and moderation.'" "Tunisian- 
American working meeting: Common will to diversify 
 
bilateral cooperation" "Cooperation: The progress 
realized by Tunisia will encourage American investors." 
 
"Le Renouveau" (ruling party French language daily): 
"President Ben Ali receives the Deputy Secretary: 
Reinforcement of relations of cooperation and 
coordination.  Examination of regional and international 
issues of common interest in the Middle East and on the 
African continent." "Abdallah-Zoellick working session: 
Consolidation of secular and solid ties." "Robert 
Zoellick press conference: Homage to the role played by 
Tunisia in the normalization of US-Libyan relations." 
 
"Ash Shourouq" (private Arabic language daily): "Ben Ali 
discusses with Zoellick support for bilateral relations 
and regional and international issues." "American Deputy 
Secretary in a press conference: `I proposed Tunis 
 
SIPDIS 
participation in the international forces in Darfur.'" 
"We are in Iraq because the Iraqi people want us to be." 
 
"Le Temps" (private French language daily): "President 
Ben Ali receives the US Deputy Secretary of State: 
Promotion of ancient and excellent relations between 
Tunisia and the United States." "Deputy Secretary of 
State Robert Zoellick in a press conference: `My visit to 
Tunisia was short, but interesting.' `There is an 
opportunity to increase the domain of economic 
development in the Maghreb.'" 
 
"As Sabah" (private Arabic language daily): "The American 
Deputy Secretary in a press conference: `There is an 
opportunity to widen the economic development field in 
the Maghreb.'""We noticed positive signals of Tunis 
readiness to help in Darfur""We don't want to remain in 
Iraq longer than necessary." 
 
"Le Quotidien" (private French language daily): "Tunisia- 
US: Common will to promote bilateral cooperation." 
"American Deputy Secretary of State: `My country has a 
profound respect for Tunisia.'" 
 
"Al-Horriya" (ruling party Arabic language daily): "The 
Head of the State receives the American Deputy 
Secretary." "Discussion of the traditional and excellent 
 
SIPDIS 
relations and horizons to increase their development." 
"The American Deputy Secretary when received by Mr. 
Abdelwahab Abdallah: `Strengthening of exchange in 
officials visits between the two countries and the 
reinforcement of bilateral collaboration and 
cooperation.' `The U.S. is impressed by the Tunisian 
development approach.'" "In a press conference: "Praising 
the Tunisian positive role in American-Libyan 
normalization" 
 
"As-Sahafa" (government-owned Arabic language daily): 
"President Ben Ali receives the American Deputy 
Secretary." "Promoting the traditional and excellent 
 
SIPDIS 
relations between the two countries and horizons to 
increase the development of these ties." "Meeting between 
the Tunisian Foreign Minister and the American Deputy 
Secretary: `The economic and political reforms that Tunis 
 
SIPDIS 
has achieved protect it from forms of extremism.'" "The 
American Deputy Secretary in a press conference: `Praise 
for the positive Tunisian role in the normalization of 
the American-Libyan relations." 
HUDSON