06BOGOTA10691
CARAMAGNA SAYS PEACE PROCESS RESPONSIBLE FOR
Fri Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #0691/01 3281556
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241556Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0970
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 7282
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 8453
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ NOV LIMA 4505
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 9770
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 5167
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 3777
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHEHOND/DIRONDCP WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L BOGOTA 010691

SIPDIS

E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2016
TAGS: KJUS PGOV PINR PREL PTER CO
SUBJECT: CARAMAGNA SAYS PEACE PROCESS RESPONSIBLE FOR
AIRING POLITICAL-PARAMILITARY TIES

Classified By: Political Counselor John S. Creamer Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d)

-------
Summary
-------

¶1. (C) Sergio Caramagna, Director of the Mission to Support
the Peace Process in Colombia (MAPP/OAS), told us on November
20 that the peace process with the paramilitaries has helped
expose the ties between the paramilitaries and politicians.
Caramagna was pleased by a recent meeting held with top GOC
civilian and military officials on the need to combat new,
emerging criminal groups. Defense Minister Santos suggested
a monthly meeting to exchange information. Caramagna also
said the MAPP/OAS has unofficial GOC approval to extend its
mandate for three years. End summary.

---------------------------------------
Caramagna's Reaction to Recent Scandals
---------------------------------------

¶2. (C) MAPP/OAS Director Sergio Caramagna told us on
November 20 that politician-paramilitary ties would not have
become a public issue if not for the peace process with the
paramilitaries. He was encouraged by the public exposure of
such links and hoped the truth would continue to emerge. He
said Colombia's judicial system needed more resources to
implement the Justice and Peace law, but stressed that
Colombia was the only country in the world with a plan to
compensate victims and to punish the main perpetrators of
crimes against humanity.

¶3. (C) Caramagna said when he visited La Ceja two weeks ago,
former paramilitary leaders told him they had not been able
to control their former mid-level commanders for some time.
He noted the former paramilitary leaders were alone and
resentful. Even though they are better off in La Ceja than
they would be in other prison facilities, what was important
was that "they feel imprisoned."

--------------------------------------------- --
MAPP/OAS and GOC Establish Information Exchange
--------------------------------------------- --

¶4. (C) Caramagna was pleased with a November 10 meeting
convoked by Vice President Francisco Santos to exchange
MAPP/OAS and GOC information on rearmament and emerging
criminal groups. Caramagna said the purpose was to offer the
GOC an opportunity to respond to the MAPP/OAS's VIII
Quarterly Report, which focused on the emergence of new
criminal groups. GOC officials in attendance included Vice
President Santos, Minister of Defense Juan Manuel Santos,
Prosecutor General Mario Iguaran, Peace Commissioner
Restrepo, the chiefs of the branches of the Armed Services,
National Police Director General Jorge Castro, DIJIN Director
General Oscar Naranjo, and Carabineros Director Jorge Gomez.

¶5. (C) Caramagna said the MAPP/OAS presented its report to
the GOC on 22 criminal structures associated with former
demobilized paramilitaries (please see paragraphs 12 and 13
for information on the groups). Caramagna noted the 22
criminal structures have survived military and police
operations to dismantle them. He gave special attention to
former mid-level paramilitaries from the North Bloc, whose
organizations remain largely intact and are especially strong
in Cesar and southern Magdalena. MAPP/OAS also warned of
cooperation in certain regions between these criminal groups
and elements of the security forces.

¶6. (C) Defense Minister Santos said the GOC should meet
monthly with the MAPP/OEA to evaluate the situation. Santos
said the GOC should receive the MAPP/OAS quarterly reports
with gratitude rather than resistance, and use them
constructively. Permanent coordination and confidence
building should include constructive criticism. He said he

"perceived government willingness to combat these gangs but
it has not been enough." The Colombian Army Intelligence
motto should not say "God rewards persistence," but rather
"God rewards persistence and efficiency." He also suggested
the information reward system be expanded, not only to cover
leaders such as Vicente Castano and "Los Mellizos," but also
to include former mid-level paramilitary leaders. Lastly, he
recommended that the Administrative Department of Security
(DAS) and the Reinsertion Commissioner's Office attend these
meetings.

----------------------------------------
Actions Against Emerging Criminal Gangs
----------------------------------------

¶7. (C) In the November 10 meeting, National Police Director
General Castro emphasized the increased police presence in
demobilized areas and the number of operations against
emerging criminal groups. In 2006, the police inaugurated 54
stations in 18 departments to establish GOC control over
areas formerly controlled by the ex-paras. Moreover, the
police established 12 additional stations in areas associated
with new criminal groups. The police have 2,733 new officers
dedicated exclusively to securing areas formerly controlled
by the ex-paras. Castro hoped to add 38 additional stations
by the end of 2006, with 50 more planned for 2007. He said
that in October, the police conducted 15 operations against
these groups and captured 90 people.

¶8. (C) Military Commander General Mario Montoya stressed
that the last paramilitary group demobilized in August which
means the AUC no longer exists. He characterized the task
facing security forces as combating "criminal gangs or
delinquents at the service of narcotraffickers." Montoya
emphasized the need for the military to occupy strategic
areas previously occupied by the paramilitaries. He said
mobile brigades have been sent to key areas and joint task
forces have been created in the departments of Choco,
Cordoba, Meta, Cauca, Narino, Antioquia Risaralda, and areas
between Valle and Choco.

¶9. (C) Peace Commissioner Restrepo agreed with the MAPP/OAS
assertion that emerging criminal gangs have been hit. But he
noted they had not been eliminated because "they are anchored
to the region's illicit economy and their social control over
the population persists." Restrepo said the police needed
more resources to fight the groups. He stressed that
corruption within security forces needed to be addressed.
Examples should be made of corrupt officials to show that the
government was serious.

-----------------------------------
MAPP/OAS Plan of Action for 2007-10
-----------------------------------

¶10. (C) Caramagna said the GOC has unofficially approved an
extension of the MAPP/OAS mandate for an additional three
years. He talked to Minister of Foreign Affairs Maria
Consuelo Araujo and Peace Commissioner Restrepo, and both
agreed with extending the Mission's mandate beyond its
current January 2007 deadline. The MAPP/OAS is also working
on a new action plan which it plans to present to the Group
of Friends on November 28.

¶11. (C) The new action plan includes two strategies:
consolidate the work with the AUC, and expand support for any
similar process with the ELN or FARC. The first strategy
includes post-demobilization and reinsertion verification;
Justice and Peace Law monitoring; support for the Reparations
and Reconciliation Commission; and support for local and
civil society initiatives. The second strategy consists of
improving MAPP/OAS's analytical capacity on the armed
conflict and scenarios for a political negotiation;
confidence building efforts; geographical presence in key
territories; and technical support for any future peace
processes. Caramagna said the only international group
prepared to assist in a future peace process with the ELN or

the FARC was the OAS. He said both the European Union and
the United Nations would face political and technical
difficulties in playing such a role.

--------------------------------------------- -
Information on the 22 Emerging Criminal Groups
--------------------------------------------- -

¶12. (C) The MAPP/OAS identified 22 cases of rearmament of
former demobilized paramilitaries. It had verified the
existence of fourteen groups in ten departments and was
examining reports regarding eight more groups. It estimated
there were a total of 3,000 criminal group members, among
them common criminals, narcotraffickers, paramilitaries who
never demobilized, and former demobilized paramilitaries.
The percentage of the former demobilized paramilitaries
participating was still small, but this could change. The
following are the 14 cases of rearmament:

- Guajira Department: three groups called "Aguilas Negras,"
"Aguilas de la Sierra," and "AUC," composed of 160 members,
led by former mid-level paramilitary leaders. The modus
operandi was control of illicit economy -- narcotrafficking
and hydrocarbons contraband.

- Atlantico Department: a 60-member group led by former
mid-level paramilitary leaders; they continue to call
themselves AUC. The modus operandi is control of illicit and
licit economy -- education and healthcare sectors.

- Cesar Department: three groups composed of 400 members led
by former mid-level paramilitary leaders; one group's name is
"Aguilas Negras." The modus operandi is control of illicit
and licit economy -- public works projects.

- North Santander Department: a 300-400 member group led by
former mid-level paramilitary leaders; they continue to call
themselves "Aguilas Negras." The modus operandi is control
of illicit economy -- narcotrafficking, arms trafficking, and
hydrocarbons contraband.

- Bolivar Department: a 50-member group led by former
mid-level paramilitary leaders; their group name is unknown.
The modus operandi is control of coca production, kidnapping,
and selective killings.

- Cordoba Department: a 50-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leader; the group name is "Los
Traquetos." The modus operandi is control of coca production
and control over the population.

- Tolima Department: a 20-member group; the group name is
"Bloque Pijao." The leader is undetermined. The modus
operandi is extortion and kidnapping.

- Casanare Department: a 200-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leader; the group name is
undetermined. The modus operandi is extortion. Military
operations, however, have forced its displacement.

- Caqueta Department: a 50-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leader; the group name is not
determined. The modus operandi is extortion and control over
the population. Military operations on October 21 led to the
death of two members, one of which was the principal
commander.

- Narino Department: a 250-300-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leader; the group name is "Nueva
Generacion Colombia" or "Mano Negra." The modus operandi is
control of extortion and control over the population. In
September and October the FARC's 29th Front confronted the
group. These combats led to the displacement of residents in
several administrative units or "corregimientos."

¶13. The following are eight groups still being identified:

- Cesar Department: a 70-member group led by former mid-level
paramilitary leaders; the group name is not determined. The
modus operandi is extortion and control over the population.

- Magdalena Department: a 150-member group led by former
mid-level paramilitary leaders; the group name is "Mano Negra
and/or Power Rangers." The modus operandi is extortion and
control over the population.

- Sucre Department: a 20-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leader; the group name is "Cartel
Verde" or "Aguilas Negras." The modus operandi is economic
and political control over the population.

- Antioquia Department: a 60-member group led by former
mid-level paramilitary leaders; the group name is not
determined. The modus operandi is control over the
population and the illicit economy.

- Santander Department: a 25-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leaders; the group name is not
determined. The modus operandi is extortion and illicit
economy.

- Meta Department: a 200-member group led by a former
mid-level paramilitary leader; the group name is not
determined. The modus operandi illicit crops and
narcotrafficking.

- Narino Department: a 100-member group; group's leader has
not been determined; the group has several names "Nueva
Generacion Colombia," "Mano Negra," "Los Traquetos, and "Los
Rastrojos." The modus operandi is narcotrafficking.

- Putumayo Department: a 350-member group; the group's leader
has not been determined; the group has several names
"Rastrojos," "Cruzados," or "a faction of Sur Putumayo Front
that never demobilized." The modus operandi is
narcotrafficking.
WOOD