09CARACAS340
AS CHAVEZ EXPANDS CONTROL, OPPOSITION IMPLODES
Wed Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO3987
PP RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHMT RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHCV #0340/01 0772125
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 182125Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2757
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CARACAS 000340

SIPDIS

HQSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD
DEPARTMENT PASS TO AID/OTI (RPORTER)

E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/12/2029
TAGS: PGOV KDEM VE
SUBJECT: AS CHAVEZ EXPANDS CONTROL, OPPOSITION IMPLODES

CARACAS 00000340  001.3 OF 002

Classified By: A/POLITICAL COUNSELOR DANIEL LAWTON, FOR REASON 1.4(D)

¶1. (C) Summary: Opposition party leaders are considering coordinating their messages and actions more, but are still a long way from doing so. Instead, fracture lines within opposition parties are even more pronounced in the wake of President Chavez's victory in the February 15 referendum to eliminate term limits. As Chavez grabs greater control over state and local resources (Reftel), opposition parties have not yet developed a strategy or communicated a vision to counter the Venezuelan president's further concentration of power in his hands or broaden their appeal among poor Venezuelans and independent voters. Opposition parties do not now possess the cohesiveness, grassroots strength, or public support to constitute a real check on the Venezuelan president's ongoing efforts to "accelerate" his Bolivarian revolution. End Summary.

------------------------
OPPOSITION IN POOR SHAPE
------------------------

¶2. (C) Although the opposition parties were able to bring an unprecedented number of "No" votes to the polls on February 15, their party structures remain top-heavy and media-focused with little grassroots reach. Polling from the prominent Datanalisis firm from November 2008 indicates that just 11.7 percent of respondents self-identify as a member of an opposition party. Of those, 5.3 percent claim Un Nuevo Tiempo (UNT) membership, 2.8 percent Primero Justicia (PJ), 2.3 Accion Democratica (AD), and 0.8 percent Christian Democrats (COPEI). In contrast, 24 percent claim to be members of Chavez's United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV) and 48.5 percent of respondents say they are independents, or "ni-ni."

¶3. (C) Opposition activists report that major opposition parties are making efforts to create a "dialogue platform" of party representatives to try to coordinate opposition messages and actions. Such a group would also get a headstart on trying to establish consensus opposition candidates for the parliamentary and municipal elections in late 2010. The opposition failed to win dozens of mayoral seats in November 2008 because opposition parties did not field consensus candidates. Political insiders concede that many in the opposition are actually relieved that the National Assembly intends to postpone municipal council elections from late 2009 to 2010, affording them more time to try to create effective mechanisms to designate consensus candidates.

---------------------
UNT: ROSALES V. LOPEZ
---------------------

¶4. (C) UNT activists report that there was increasing friction between Maracaibo mayor Manuel Rosales and former Chacao mayor Leopoldo Lopez over leadership of the party. She complained that the older politicians in control of UNT -- namely Rosales -- are only interested in claiming power for themselves, rather than grooming rising stars in the party who may generate broader public appeal. One young UNT activist told Poloff that while Rosales had connections and power in Zulia State, Lopez was far more charismatic and popular. She added that the Primero Justicia mayor of the Sucre Borough of Caracas had made an effort to communicate directly with the poor residents of the densely-populated Petare slum, and they had responded by voting across party lines for him in November 2008. Rosales, she lamented, is uninterested in supporting such grassroots efforts to expand the party's base.

¶5. (C) Charismatic former student leader Stalin Gonzalez, who waged a strong, but unsuccessful longshot bid for the mayorship of the Libertador Borough of Caracas in November 2008, is being considered a contender for UNT's Secretary General slot, according to a senior UNT official. UNT is planning to hold internal party elections in May to replace Gerardo Blyde, who was elected mayor of the affluent Baruta borough of Caracas. The Comptroller declared Chacao mayor Leopoldo Lopez ineligible to run for office until 2017, making him a natural choice to succeed Blyde. Gonzalez's ascension would be a slap in the face to Lopez, and could herald a potential split in the party. (Note: Lopez was a co-founder of PJ but left the party to join UNT in 2007. End Note.) Lopez was very critical of other opposition leaders during his March 16 meeting and stressed that the opposition needed to "renew itself by conveying more hope and less confrontation."

---------------------------------------
TENSIONS IN ACCION DEMOCRATICA, PODEMOS
---------------------------------------

¶6. (C) Accion Democratica (AD) President Victor Bolivar confided to PolCouns March 11 that he continues to have differences with AD Secretary General Henry Ramos Allup and is considering stepping down from his post. Bolivar is concerned about the fractured state of the opposition and acknowledged that his own party's internal party rules are undemocratic and make it difficult for talented younger members to rise through the ranks. Bolivar said he has high hopes for Caracas Mayor Antonio Ledezma, a former member of AD, to rise to be a national figure able to compete with Chavez in 2012. Bolivar argued that unlike the other three major opposition parties, AD maintains nationwide membership and party structures.

¶7. (C) National Assembly (AN) Deputy Juan Jose Molina, of the formerly pro-government Podemos party, told PolCouns March 13 that he has been active in the effort to organize dialogue "mesas," or tables, among the opposition to create a common platform. He lamented the relatively slow progress in such efforts and accused some unspecified opposition leaders of negotiating with and "selling out" to the Venezuelan government. Molina claimed that Podemos is going to use the lull in elections in 2009 to "renovate" itself and suggested that the party may seek new leadership, instead of sticking with party leader Ismael Garcia. Another long-time Podemos activist complained to Poloff March 12 that Garcia spends too much time speaking on the opposition-oriented Globovision cable network. He suggested that the party is considering turning to Henry Rosales, a former mayor of Maracay and unsuccessful Aragua gubernatorial candidate in 2008, to lead Podemos

-------
COMMENT
-------

¶8. (C) An anticipated 18-month lull in elections provides the opposition with a rare opportunity to unite and to develop political strategies and platforms that can compete for votes among Chavez's political base of poor Venezuelans. So far opposition parties are only talking about coordinating better among themselves and are instead beset by in-fighting. Opposition leaders appear committed to rebuilding their parties from the bottom up are still the exception, not the rule. Moreover, opposition parties continue to react to the Venezuelan president's political agenda rather than creating and communicating their own. Consequently, the opposition does not right now represent any real check on the Venezuelan president's efforts to concentrate even more power in his presidency or his measures to undermine the five opposition governors and 48 opposition mayors elected in November 2008.

CAULFIELD