09PANAMA84
PANAMA: INSIDE SCOOP ON THE QUADRILATERAL SECURITY
Thu Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0084/01 0291241
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 291241Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2915
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2754
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0771
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3775
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 1975
RHMFISS/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEABND/DEA WASHDC
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000084 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: INSIDE SCOOP ON THE QUADRILATERAL SECURITY 
MEETINGS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
 (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------ 
 
¶1.  (C)  The aim of the recent quadrilateral meeting of the 
presidents of Panama, Colombia, Mexico and Guatemala was to 
establish the means to quickly extradite Colombian and 
Mexican drug traffickers from Panama to their native 
countries, Panamanian National Security Advisor Marcel 
Salamin told POLOFF January 20. He said the meeting was a 
Panamanian initiative, after U.S. officials informed the GOP 
that the U.S. could not accept suspected traffickers who did 
not have indictments pending in the U.S. Salamin said the key 
to the agreement was the development of a quick and simple 
mechanism for turning suspected drug traffickers over to 
their host countries, since Panama did not have the capacity 
to hold high level criminals in its prisons. He said that 
once agreement was reached on such a legal mechanism the four 
countries would move on to joint targeting of suspects, and 
operational planning. The agreement also calls for greater 
information sharing from national data bases. Salamin said he 
would chair a group to look into how the initiative might be 
linked into the Merida Initiative in the future. End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Trying to Move Out the Colombians and Mexicans 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (S//NF)  Marcel Salamin, President Torrijos' National 
Security Advisor, told POLOFF January 20 that President 
Torrijos had asked him to organize the meeting on security 
with President Calderon of Mexico, and President Uribe of 
Colombia. He said Guatemala had been a later addition. He 
said the main focus of the meeting had been to try to develop 
mechanisms to quickly transfer high-level drug trafficking 
suspects from Panama to Mexico or Colombia.  He said the 
effort was based on President Torrijos' belief that the 
current crime wave in Panama was linked to the presence of 
representatives of the Colombian and Mexican drug trafficking 
cartels in Panama. Salamin said that after Embassy officials 
explained to GOP officials that the U.S. could not accept 
suspects who were not under indictment in the U.S., the GOP 
began to plan this initiative. He said Panama wanted to 
cooperate fully with Colombia and Mexico to arrest these 
criminals, but needed a very fast judicial mechanism to get 
them out of the country because it did not have the high 
security prison capacity to hold them for even relatively 
short periods of time.  Salamin asserted that the cartels 
sent representatives to Panama because drug shipments changed 
possession in Panama from the originating cartels in Colombia 
to Mexican cartels that transport the drugs to the U.S. He 
said Panama was particularly worried about Mexican drug 
trafficking cartels bringing more people into Panama by 
taking advantage of a "wave of immigration" from Mexico to 
Panama, as a result of the economic crisis in the U.S. 
Salamin said Guatemala had been an add-on, and that it had 
been more trouble than it was worth to bring them into the 
process, due to the fact that President Colom did not have 
any loyal intelligence service upon which he could rely, 
noting that the Army and Police were both penetrated by drug 
traffickers and not very loyal to President Colom. 
 
-------------------- 
Quickie Extraditions 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  Salamin said the meeting had revealed a legal vacuum 
that had to be dealt with before Panama could deliver 
suspects to Mexico and Colombia. He said Panamanian law had a 
procedure known as "simple and conditioned deliveries" 
(entregas simples y condicionadas)  that allowed the GOP to 
turn over dangerous suspects in Panamanian custody to foreign 
governments that have more serious charges against them. 
Salamin asserted that the procedure was very fast and not 
subject to judicial appeal. He said it was originally 
designed to allow Panama to quickly move dangerous drug 
trafficking suspects that Panama could not hold to the U.S. 
for prosecution. Salamin said Colombian and Mexican law did 
not recognize this procedure, greatly restricting Panama's 
ability to persue Colombian and Mexican drug traffickers, 
since Panama did not have the capacity to hold them in 
custody for long periods while a traditional extradition made 
its way through the courts. Salamin said that Colombia had 
been "assigned" the task, following the meeting, of reviewing 
all the existing extradition and legal assistance agreements 
and treaties among the four countries, and then presenting 
one unified document that all four could adopt that would 
bring all the agreements together. Salamin said the idea was 
that this document would contain an acceptable mechanism for 
the rapid transfer of suspects to Mexico and Colombia. 
 
--------------- 
Joint Targeting 
--------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  Salamin said the four presidents ordered another 
group to follow up after the meeting as well. This group 
would be made up of one or two personal representatives of 
each president, discuss specific information on possible drug 
trafficking targets, and plan operations to arrest them. For 
Panama, the representative to this meeting would be the 
Director of the National Intelligence and Security Service 
(SENIS) Erik Espinosa and possibly Salamin as well. Salamin 
said no actual operations would take place until a mechanism 
had been worked out to allow them to quickly be turned over 
to their native country. Salamin told POLOFF on January 27 
that he had given Colombian officials a list of 60 Colombians 
that the GOP suspected of drug trafficking and were ready to 
arrest and turn over to Colombia once a mechanism had been 
found, and assuming Colombia had judicial cases against them. 
He said Panama had identified 500 Colombians, Mexicans and 
Guatemalans it was prepared to move against eventually. 
 
------------- 
Intel Sharing 
------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Salamin said that the presidents had also agreed to 
greater information sharing from national databases. He said 
Colombia would give Panama access to its criminal and civil 
databases (not intel data bases), so that Panama could 
quickly and easily identify Colombian suspects in Panama. 
Colombia would also provide Panama real-time access to a 
finger print database that would allow Panama to fingerprint 
Colombians and check the results against Colombia's records. 
At present, Panama did not have real-time access. He said 
Mexico was sending people down next week to look into ways to 
allow Panama to connect its database on suspected drug 
traffickers with Mexico's larger "Plataforma Mexico" 
database. Salamin said he had proposed the creation of a 
program like the USG program for visa waiver countries, 
whereby visitors had to provide their personal data to 
immigration officials on-line before they could get on the 
plane. He said this type of program would give them time to 
run the names and identify suspicious individuals. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Last November, First Vice President and Foreign 
Minister Samuel Lewis approached the Ambassador and asked 
that the USG do more to remove dangerous drug trafficking 
suspects from Panama, due to the GOP's fear that Colombian 
and Mexican drug trafficking organizations were increasing 
their activities in Panama and contributing to an increase in 
crime. National Intelligence and Security Service (SENIS) 
members later approached Embassy DEA officers with a list of 
prisoners in Panamanian jails who they said President 
Torrijos considered too dangerous to keep in custody, due to 
the risk they would bribe or shoot their way out of jail, and 
asked that the USG quickly take them out of the country for 
prosecution. While some were under indictment in the U.S., 
others on this list had no cases pending in the U.S., and no 
real prospects of being indicted. DEA officers explained that 
the USG could not act against anyone if there were no charges 
against them in the U.S. The quadrilateral meeting seems to 
have been a direct consequence of the GOP's discovery that 
the USG could not take all the drug traffickers in Panama out 
of the country. The agreement worked out among the three 
(Guatemala does not seem to have played an important part, 
and Salamin did not seem excited about the idea of adding 
more Central American countries to the initiative) is a 
win-win proposition. Panama will work closely with Mexico and 
Colombia to track down wanted drug traffickers in Panama and 
arrest them, as long as a mechanism can be found to allow 
them to be sent home rapidly and easily. Panama is not/not 
willing or able to hold these prisoners in Panama. For Mexico 
and Colombia, the agreement offers the chance to weaken the 
cartels, while Panama becomes a much less hospitable place 
for them to operate in. The GOP's ability to put this meeting 
together so quickly, and to get such good press out of it is 
very impressive, and shows what the GOP is capable of when it 
sees its interests being served by regional cooperation. 
Salamin indicated he would look at how the Merida Initiative 
might plug into this quadrilateral initiative in the future. 
STEPHENSON