05CAIRO2517
CODELS PELOSI/KILPATRICK/SMITH/DREIER IN CAIRO
Thu Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 002517 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2015 
TAGS: OREP PREL MOPS MASS IR IS IZ SU EG
SUBJECT: CODELS PELOSI/KILPATRICK/SMITH/DREIER IN CAIRO 
MARCH 20-24:  MINISTER OF DEFENSE STRESSES EGYPT'S 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO COMMON INTERESTS IN THE REGION 
 
Classified by Charge Gordon Gray for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) During the week of March 20-24, Egyptian Minister of 
Defense Tantawi met with 20 members of Congress and staff 
from CODEL Pelosi (March 20, eight representatives), CODEL 
Kilpatrick (March 23, five representatives), CODEL Smith 
(March 23, one senator), and CODEL Dreier (March 24, six 
representatives).  Tantawi used each opportunity to emphasize 
Egypt's contributions to our common interests in the Middle 
East, with emphasis on Egypt's facilitation of U.S. transits 
through the Suez Canal, numerous military overflights of 
Egyptian airspace, training of Iraqi security personnel, 
deployment of a field hospital to Afghanistan, donations of 
humanitarian goods to Afghanistan and Sudan, and extensive 
engagement with both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian 
dispute.  Tantawi also highlighted Egypt's efforts to curb 
smuggling into Gaza and said Egypt and Israel were close to 
an agreement on the deployment of military border guards on 
the Egyptian side of the border with Gaza. 
 
¶2.  (C) Tantawi affirmed Egypt's appreciation for U.S. 
security assistance and appealed to his guests to counter any 
attempt to reduce military aid to Egypt.  The presentation in 
each meeting was clearly designed to provide Congress with a 
different view of the Egyptian military than the MoD 
anticipates will be suggested by Congressman Lantos if he 
reintroduces legislation to redirect a portion of our 
military aid to economic assistance (an amendment which 
gained 131 votes in the House last July).  Citing the 
uncertainty of future developments in the Middle East, 
Tantawi emphasized the importance of a strong and stable 
Egypt -- complete with a credible defensive and deterrent 
capability -- to U.S. interests in the region.  He said 
changes in U.S. assistance "would not serve stability" in the 
region. 
 
¶3.  (C) Each CODEL received a briefing on Egypt's allocation 
of Foreign Military Funding (FMF) from the United States, 
which has been declining in purchasing power over the years 
and is increasingly obligated to maintenance and upgrading of 
U.S. equipment.  The MoD emphasized its goal of maximizing 
efficiency in planning how to allocate FMF dollars.  With 
Senator Smith, Tantawi looked forward to the day when Egypt 
might no longer require this assistance, but emphasized the 
need to sustain current levels of funding over the near term. 
 Congressional participants in these meetings acknowledged 
Egypt's important role and listened carefully to Egypt's 
appeal for sustained levels of FMF. 
 
¶4.  (C) The CODELs discussed the situation in Iraq, Smith 
having visited recently and others (Pelosi and Dreier) having 
plans to visit within a few days.  The conversations were 
positive, with hopes for establishment of a stable new 
government soon in Baghdad.  On Sudan, Tantawi told his 
visitors that tribal conflicts and limited rainfall 
highlighted a humanitarian situation that "was not a new 
issue," but which needed to be addressed carefully.  He noted 
Egypt's contribution of humanitarian goods and military 
monitors, as well as Egypt's promise to send peacekeeping 
troops to southern Sudan at an appropriate juncture.  Asked 
about Iran, Tantawi reaffirmed the GOE desire for a WMD-free 
region. 
 
¶5.  (U) The CODELs did not have an opportunity to clear this 
message before departing Egypt. 
 
Visit Embassy Cairo's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/cairo 
 
You can also access this site through the 
State Department's Classified SIPRNET website. 
 
GRAY