05CAIRO4441
SYRIAN "HIT LIST" NOT NEWS IN EGYPT
Mon Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 004441 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/ELA BASKEY AND NEA/PD BENZE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPAO EG SY
SUBJECT:  SYRIAN "HIT LIST" NOT NEWS IN EGYPT 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Egyptian media have largely ignored 
recent press reports citing U.S. comments about a possible 
Syrian 'hit list' of targeted Lebanese public figures 
opposed to continued Syrian influence in Lebanon.  To the 
extent the issue has been covered locally, two pro- 
government newspapers ran unsigned editorials June 12 and 13 
blaming the U.S. of being behind the original stories in 
order to justify its "aggression" against Syria. 
Surprisingly, opposition and independent newspapers, often 
the first to criticize Washington policies, have been silent 
on the topic.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) While pan-Arab satellite channels reported 
extensively on continued reports of a Syrian "hit list" 
containing the names of Lebanese opposition figures, 
Egyptian TV did not offer commentary on the story in its 
June 10 - 13 coverage.  Leading pro-government newspaper Al 
Ahram (circulation: 750,000), widely considered to be the 
government's "voice," also ignored the story.  Al Ahram 
editors and reporters told PA LES on June 12 that Al Ahram 
would not publish any reports or commentaries about the USG 
accusations against Syria, and did not offer reasons for 
their position. 
 
¶3.  (U) Meanwhile, two unsigned editorials appeared in pro- 
government newspapers Al Gomhouriya (circulation: 200,000) 
and Al Akhbar (circulation: 800,000) on June 12 and 13, 
respectively.  The Al Gomhouriya editorial claimed: 
"Accusing Syria now is similar to the U.S. having falsely 
accused Iraq of possessing WMD, which was used to justify 
aggression against the Iraqi people. These accusations are a 
threat to the region's stability and security."  Taking a 
similar line, the Al Akhbar editorial, under the headline 
"Does the U.S. Want to Confirm the Israeli Occupation of 
Syria?" stated:  "The Bush administration has a history of 
false accusations - like those against Iraq, which led to 
the American occupation of that country.  The whole world 
believes Syria, because she has no history of lying and has 
respected international laws to regain her territories 
occupied by Israel.  So, what is the main goal behind the 
U.S. accusations?  The clear objective is that the U.S. 
wants to attack Syria - or ignore a possible Israeli attack 
to confirm its occupation of the Golan Heights."  (Note: 
Both newspapers traditionally publish editorials with an 
anti-American line, viewing USG policy in the Middle East as 
"aggressive" and serving Israel's interests.  End note.) 
 
 
GRAY