05CAIRO3901
MIXED COMMENTARY ON NAZIF VISIT TO WASHINGTON:
Mon May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 003901 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC PGOV KPAO EG
SUBJECT:  MIXED COMMENTARY ON NAZIF VISIT TO WASHINGTON: 
EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, MAY 16 TO 22 
 
 
¶1.  Headlines:  President Mubarak's visit with Libyan 
leader Moamar Gaddafi and other African leaders to discuss 
Darfur May 17 - 18 was widely covered, as was Mubarak's May 
17 statement encouraging Egyptians to get out and vote on 
the constitutional amendment referendum on May 25. 
Mubarak met May 21 with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas 
in Sharm El Sheikh, with statements of both leaders urging 
Israel to "apply the Sharm understandings" covered in 
Egyptian newspapers.  The publication by a UK tabloid of 
Saddam Hussein in his underwear received front-page 
coverage the weekend of May 20  21, as did Afghan 
President Hamid Karzai's call for the USG to investigate 
allegations that soldiers tortured to death two Afghani 
prisoners, as reported in the New York Times on May 20. 
End headlines. 
 
¶2.  Nazif goes to Washington:  PM Nazif's meeting with 
President Bush at the White House on May 18 was reported 
enthusiastically by pro-government newspapers and TV, 
highlighting President Bush's praise for Egypt's "historic 
reform initiative," ongoing U.S. economic assistance to 
Egypt, and the "strong relations" between Egypt and the 
U.S.  Commentary about Nazif's visit, however, was mixed. 
While pro-government and conservative commentators praised 
the visit, the opposition and independents seized on 
Nazif's "insulting" remarks to USA Today on May 15 that 
democratic reform in Egypt would "take some time, because 
[opposition] parties are not yet mature enough."  Much of 
the commentary on Nazif's remarks was moderate in tone, 
with critics charging that Nazif had made a "mistake" -- 
save for opposition Al Wafd (circulation: 180,000), which 
used more strident language throughout the week to 
criticize Nazif's remarks to his "American masters." 
 
¶3.  Opposition's boycott of referendum on Article 76: 
"Egyptians should stay home on the day of national 
mourning!" was the banner headline in Al Wafd on May 21, as 
the newspaper continued its ongoing media campaign against 
the May 25 referendum on a constitutional amendment.  On 
May 22, all newspapers reported on the Shura Council's 
retort to the opposition's planned boycott, stating that it 
was "political weakness and an attempt to gain the 
limelight."  A pro-government commentator who appeared on 
Egyptian TV Channel One's program "Halat Hiwar" ("State of 
the Discussion) on May 22 described the opposition's 
boycott as displaying "a complete lack of understanding 
about how democracy works."  Notable was the amount of 
commentary in the Egyptian media about the boycott and the 
opposition's motives, compared to the paucity of discussion 
about the referendum itself. 
 
¶4.  Ruby's latest video:  The newest music video by 
Egyptian pop star Ruby, "Ib'a Abilni" ("Meet Me"), can now 
be seen (repeatedly) in Cairo's cafes and clubs.  (Note: 
Most cafes and clubs that cater to young people in Cairo 
have a TV set turned on to an Arabic video channel.  End 
note.)  In the video, Ruby dances provocatively in Pharonic 
costumes.  A chorus of conservative Ruby critics claim the 
singer has "overstepped the line" by insulting Egyptian 
culture and heritage, according to pan-Arab news website 
"Al Bawaba" on May 19.  Ruby's response?  She claims to 
portray the Pharaohs' "humanistic side," aiming to show her 
audience that ancient Egyptian civilization "celebrated the 
pleasures of life." 
 
GRAY