05CAIRO5054
QURANIC TEACHINGS, BLACK MAGIC, AND SCHOOL
Tue Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 005054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR SCUL KPAO EG
SUBJECT:  QURANIC TEACHINGS, BLACK MAGIC, AND SCHOOL 
SCANDALS:  CAIRO'S ISLAMIC MEDIA 
 
REF:  Cairo 4362 
 
¶1.  Summary:  While Egypt plays host to several religious 
media outlets, only Holy Quran Radio has any real influence 
on the Egyptian population  and that remains a religious 
influence.  Tightly controlled by the Egyptian government, 
Holy Quran Radio avoids hard news of any kind, while the 
three religious print publications, also government- 
controlled, limit their coverage to non-controversial 
religious topics.  Aqidati, the most sensationalist of the 
three, routinely publishes stories on black magic and false 
prophets.  The other two newspapers adopt a more 
instructive tone, advising readers on health matters and 
reporting on the latest news from Al-Azhar, Cairo's most 
prestigious mosque and religious studies institute.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  Like other countries with a majority Muslim population, 
Egypt plays host to several media outlets whose purpose is 
to spread religious messages and news related to the 
religious community.  Most prominent among these is the 
popular FM radio station, Holy Quran Radio.  Visitors to 
Cairo are likely to find themselves in a taxi listening to 
a reading of the Quran or commentary on the Hadeeth or to 
hear Holy Quran Radio coming from shops and cafes as they 
walk along the street.  A December 2004 Pan-Arab Research 
Centre survey on Egypt's media sector found that 58 percent 
of Cairo respondents claimed to listen to the station more 
than any other.  Avoiding politics altogether, government- 
controlled Holy Quran Radio broadcasts readings of the 
Quran and Hadeeth, Quranic interpretations, and religious 
programming.  Announcers routinely instruct listeners to 
regularly attend mosque, study Islamic teachings, not cheat 
on their spouses, and not drink or smoke.  Holy Quran 
Radio's ubiquitous religious teachings remain a popular way 
for Egypt's hard-working and illiterate working class to 
easily do their duty as Muslims. 
 
¶3.  Like Holy Quran Radio, Cairo's three weekly Islamic 
newspapers are government-owned and controlled and 
generally avoid discussing political issues.  However, 
unlike Holy Quran Radio, these newspapers have a limited 
audience.  Aqidati ("My Belief") - published by government- 
owned printing house Al-Gomhouriya and controlled by the 
ruling National Democratic Party (NDP), which appoints its 
editors - is the most sensationalist of the three. 
Headlines from its June 27 edition included:  "Christian 
and Muslim protests in Jerusalem lead to banning of sexual 
orgy" and "Aqidati continues campaign against witchcraft 
and magic."  The June 27 issue's lead article, "Azhar 
Secondary School students cheat on exams by using cell 
phones," profiled allegations that the school was awarding 
diplomas to cheating students, with published photos of 
students behind the school reportedly sending text messages 
to friends taking their exams inside.  The newspaper does 
touch on political issues if they relate to religion, as it 
did when it published a series of reports on the alleged 
desecration of the Quran at the detention facility at 
Guantanamo Bay.  The reporters were decidedly skeptical of 
USG claims that no such desecration occurred (reftel). 
Aqidati's circulation is estimated at 10,000. 
 
¶4.  Sawt Al-Azhar ("The Voice of Al-Azhar") bills itself as 
the official voice of Al-Azhar, Egypt's most prestigious 
and important mosque and source for religious studies.  Its 
reporting tends to follow the statements and actions of the 
Grand Sheikh of Al Azhar, who is appointed by the GOE.  The 
banner headline in its June 24 issue, for example, read: 
"The Grand Sheikh ratifies the results of the Koran 
Memorization Contest at Al-Azhar,"  a markedly  less jaded 
view of education at Al-Azhar than that of Aqidati.  Other 
articles in the issue reported on student summer activities 
at Al-Azhar; an interview with the head of the Kuwaiti 
Authority for Implementing Sharia, claiming that a "savage" 
world-wide campaign against Muslims is taking place; and 
alleged "Zionist" designs to destroy the Al-Aqsa mosque in 
Jerusalem.  Sawt Al-Azhar also touches on politics when it 
involves the Grand Sheikh.  For example, Sawt Al-Azhar did 
address the allegations of Quran desecration at Guantanamo, 
but with a focus on the efforts of the Grand Sheikh to seek 
clarification from the USG (reftel). 
 
¶5.  Cairo's third Islamic newspaper, Al-Liwa Al-Islami 
("The Islamic Banner") is also controlled by the NDP, but 
is more moderate in tone than Sawt Al-Azhar and less 
sensational than Aqidati.  The lead article in its June 30 
issue profiles a debate among Muslim scholars about "mercy 
killings" (euthanasia) in hospitals.  While, other June 30 
articles offer practical advice on how to prevent youth 
from smoking and stress that "foreign pressure" is not 
responsible for improvements to Al-Azhar's curriculum. 
 
¶6.  Comment:  While Holy Quran Radio has found a niche as 
an easy source for 24 hour religious instruction, none of 
the three newspapers has found much of an audience.  None 
costs over one Egyptian pound (around 15 US cents), but 
their insignificant reporting gives them a limited appeal. 
Tightly controlled by the Mubarak government and the NDP, 
these outlets shy away from controversial subjects, such as 
political reform, covered by more popular media sources. 
As long as the Egyptian Government deems unacceptable any 
attempt by Islamic activists to assert themselves in the 
political realm, these outlets are likely to remain in the 
realm of kitsch.  End comment. 
 
CORBIN