06CAIRO5124
SYRIAN PRESIDENT'S SPEECH BRUSHED OFF BY OFFICIAL
Wed Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #5124 2281541
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161541Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0657
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 005124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER EG SY LE
SUBJECT: SYRIAN PRESIDENT'S SPEECH BRUSHED OFF BY OFFICIAL 
SOURCES, ENDORSED ON THE STREET 
 
 
Classified by ECPO Minister Counselor William R. Stewart for 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  The vitriolic August 15 speech by Syrian 
President Bashar Asad before the Syrian Journalists Union, 
elicited a predictable mixed reaction from Egyptians, with 
official sources largely brushing off its significance, 
pro-government media sources lashing back, and the general 
public largely in agreement with Asad's attacks against Arab 
leaders, Israel, and the United States.  One senior MFA 
contact confided that the foreign minister had received a 
detailed analysis of the speech August 16, but confirmed that 
there had not been any formal public reaction from senior GOE 
officials to the speech.  Pro-government, and some 
independent media, blasted the speech in August 16 
editorials, mocking Asad for his bravado and insisting that 
his words harmed Lebanon's interests.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) MFA Cabinet Staff Advisor on Lebanon and Syria, Nazih 
El Negeiry told poloff August 16 that he had just completed 
an analysis for the Minister of the August 15 speech by 
Syrian President Bashar Asad to the Syrian Journalists Union. 
 Reviewing the gist of his analysis, Negeiry noted the 
challenge involved in deciphering the high number of 
"messages" that Asad had sent in his speech to Arab 
neighbors, various Lebanese factions, Israel, and the U.S. 
among others.  Asad, he felt, was looking to "remind us" that 
Syrian interests can not be ignored in 
ongoing diplomatic wrangling over the future of Lebanon and 
the region.  "No one likes hearing such attacks and 
criticism," but such behavior is neither new, nor unexpected, 
Negeiry said.  While Asad's words certainly registered on the 
street where support for Hisbollah and its leader remains 
particularly strong, Negeiry viewed the important thing as 
the "realities on the ground" in Lebanon.  Hizbollah is 
weakened, the Lebanese armed forces are moving into the 
southern border area of Lebanon, and UNIFIL is being 
strengthened.  Nevertheless, he warned against public 
statements that could "humiliate" Hizbollah, since public 
support in Egypt and elsewhere for the group was so palpable, 
and since Hizbollah's disarmament had yet to take place. 
 
¶3.  (U) Egypt's August 16 pro-government daily Al Gumhouriya 
responded to Asad's speech with disdain, warning Asad away 
from a "strategy of escalation" that would damage Syria's 
interests.  The front-page unsigned editorial accused Asad of 
"getting high on someone else's victory" and of 
hypocritically seeking to take advantage of the destruction 
in Lebanon.  Furthermore, the article stated, "behind closed 
doors, Syria says it does not support the resistance."  Nor 
did Syria take action to liberate the Golan or even defend 
Lebanon from Israel earlier when Syrian troops were there. 
Lebanese, the editorial asserts, believe Syria seeks to start 
another civil war in Lebanon to pave the way for a Syrian 
return.  At least one editorialist in opposition paper Al 
Wafd also criticized Asad for his "boastful statements" that 
he asserts could lead to another civil war in Lebanon and to 
angry reactions from Arab capitals. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Echoing popular sentiment among rank-and-file 
Egyptians, Muslim Brotherhood-dominated institutions such as 
the Egyptian Bar Association and MB Parliament members have 
been quick to endorse Asad's comments publicly and to repeat 
the major accusations that are leveled in his speech.  Such 
comments are likely to find voice in Friday mosque sermons 
and other Islamist channels of communication. 
RICCIARDONE