06CAIRO713
ANGER IN EGYPT OVER DANISH CARTOONS EXPRESSED
Mon Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000713 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD PREL PGOV ECON ASEC EG DE
SUBJECT: ANGER IN EGYPT OVER DANISH CARTOONS EXPRESSED 
PEACEFULLY THROUGH BOYCOTTS AND GOVERNMENT-SANCTIONED 
PROTESTS 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Egyptians are peacefully expressing their outrage 
over Danish cartoons of the Prophet Mohamed, which is finding 
expression through various official and private channels. 
Businesses and consumers are boycotting Danish products, and 
the government is publicly condemning the cartoons in a 
measured way, while making stronger private protests. 
President Mubarak made a balanced statement February 3 that 
noted the importance of freedom of speech, but emphasized 
that attacking religious beliefs was unacceptable and would 
spur terrorism and violence in the region.  The GOE has 
increased security around certain embassies to prevent a 
repeat of the destruction witnessed in Syria and Lebanon. 
Meanwhile, indignation continues to spread among the 
rank-and-file.  Aware of the importance and volatility of 
this issue, the GOE is expressing displeasure at the cartoons 
in a way that will not further inflame emotions.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
Boycott of Danish Products 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Two of Egypt's largest private grocery chains -- 
Metro and Seoudi -- were among the first businesses to 
announce a boycott Danish of products last week.  The 
companies ordered all their stores to remove Danish items in 
stock, mainly dairy products, and place signs up explaining 
that the absence of goods was due to a boycott.  Many small, 
local stores run by individual proprietors followed suit. 
Some shops bear signs noting that Danes are not welcome; a 
few embassy personnel have been asked if they were Danish 
when entering shops and taxis. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Egyptian Federation of Chambers of Commerce, 
which represents mainly local industries, quickly backed the 
boycott, even to the extent of urging companies to cease 
business activities with shipping companies that transport 
Danish goods.  It also urged its members to convey to its 
foreign trading partners the serious consequences of "racist" 
campaigns.  Meanwhile, capitalizing on the situation, local 
companies supplying goods that compete with Danish products 
have reportedly been offering discounts up to 10% on their 
products, presumably in an attempt to develop new, loyal 
customers.  The Muslim Brotherhood made a statement that it 
supported the boycott of Danish and Norwegian products. 
 
------------------- 
Government Reaction 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The GOE has not taken a position for or against the 
boycott, but the members of the People's Assembly expressed 
their displeasure with Denmark by refusing to act on an offer 
of a 60 million euro loan from the Danish government.  As the 
controversy picked up steam last week, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs published on its web page a summary of steps 
it had taken since October in response to the original 
publication of the cartoons.  It noted that in early October, 
Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit had sent a letter of protest to 
the Danish Prime Minister and sought meetings with his Danish 
counterpart to address the issue.  Aboul Gheit convoked the 
Danish Ambassador in late October and warned that the lack of 
an official apology from the Danish Government would fuel 
resentment.  When the controversy broke last week, Aboul 
Gheit sent letters to the Ambassadors of all 25 EU countries 
calling on them to urge restraint in further publication of 
the offending cartoons.  Similar messages were conveyed to 
the Norwegians, as Norway was the first country after Denmark 
where the offending cartoons were published.  The Ministry 
also highlighted its engagement with the Arab League and the 
Organization of Islamic Conference, where the GOE had put the 
cartoons on the agenda. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) President Mubarak's reaction came relatively late 
in the controversy.  In a measured statement to the Middle 
East News Agency late on February 3, Mubarak stated that 
"Freedom of opinion, speech and journalism -- which we 
guarantee and respect -- should not be used as a pretext to 
desecrate sacrosanct beliefs and religions."  The President 
warned that republishing the cartoons could be dangerous and 
have severe repercussions, further intensifying negative 
feelings in the Islamic world toward the west, and giving 
more ammunition to extremists and terrorists.  To prevent a 
repeat of the destruction witnessed in Syria and Lebanon, the 
GOE has increased security around European embassies in 
Cairo, particularly the Danish and Norwegian chanceries on 
the island of Zamalek. 
 
--------------- 
Public Reaction 
--------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) As of February 6, public demonstrations have been 
peaceful and limited to two events, both carefully managed by 
Egyptian authorities.  Public demonstrations were permitted 
following Friday mid-day prayers on February 3.  On February 
6, government-sanctioned demonstrations took place in Cairo 
and other major cities, such as Alexandria.  The Cairo 
protest at the Al Azhar mosque/university complex attracted 
some 10,000 demonstrators, according to media reports. 
Egypt's two most prominent Muslim leaders, the Sheikh of Al 
Azhar and the Mufti, participated in the Al Azhar 
demonstration, as did the President of Al Azhar University 
and the Minister of Religious Endowment.  The presence of the 
Sheikh was seen as important, as he had been severely 
criticized for a perceived soft public response to the 
cartoon controversy when a newspaper quoted him as saying 
that the Prophet should not be criticized because he was not 
around to defend himself.  The Sheikh claimed he was 
misquoted. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) While sentiment is strongly aligned against the 
Danish Government and other governments where the cartoons 
have been published, there have been some isolated voices 
questioning the response.  An editorial in Masry Al Yom 
criticized Muslims for focusing their attention on external 
battles rather than waging the internal ones, such as living 
up to the teachings of the Prophet through daily acts and 
fighting corruption and injustices in local society.  Also, 
Amr Adib, the moderator of Al Qahera Al Yom, one the most 
popular TV news shows in Egypt, called on Muslims everywhere 
to show restraint, arguing that violence risked reinforcing 
negative stereotypes of Muslims.  Meanwhile, the 
pro-government newspaper Al Akhbar is under fire after Al 
Masry Al Yom reported that Al Akhbar had published the 
cartoons in its February 2 morning edition, which was quickly 
withdrawn from circulation.  Some Egyptians have criticized 
TV for dwelling on the cartoon controversy at the expense of 
coverage of the ferry disaster. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) While anger and resentment over the publications of 
the cartoons has not manifested itself in violent 
demonstrations, the sentiments are nonetheless strong and 
widespread.  Emotions are kept raw as emails of the offending 
cartoons circulate, and friends pass along cell phone text 
messages urging support of the boycott and a day of fasting 
and prayer to invoke Allah's revenge on the offenders.  The 
GOE appears to be steering a middle course aimed at 
expressing its dissatisfaction with the publications of the 
cartoons while seeking to channel public emotions on the 
issue.  End comment. 
RICCIARDONE