06CAIRO2364
DEFMIN TANTAWI AND U/S JOSEPH DISCUSS IRAN, MIDDLE
Wed Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0022
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #2364/01 1091457
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 191457Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7554
INFO RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0069C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 002364 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/18/2016 
TAGS: PREL PARM PTER EG IR KNNP
SUBJECT: DEFMIN TANTAWI AND U/S JOSEPH DISCUSS IRAN, MIDDLE 
EAST WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION FREE ZONE, FMF, AND 
BILATERAL RELATIONS 
 
Classified by Ambassador Francis J. Ricciardone for reasons 
1.4(b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Minister of Defense Field Marshal Tantawi told Arms 
Control and International Security Under Secretary Robert 
Joseph April 13 that Egypt:  shares U.S. concerns over Iran's 
effort to acquire nuclear weapons, will discuss possible 
measures to combat Iran's aims, resents threats of a possible 
reduction in military assistance, and believes that the U.S. 
does not value sufficiently Egypt's contribution to regional 
stability.  U/S Joseph told Tantawi that:  Iran's nuclear 
program poses a critical and immediate threat to the region; 
Egypt should publicly denounce Iran's program and support the 
Proliferation Security Initiative and other defensive 
measures to bolster international security; and that while 
Congressional questions regarding security assistance are 
legitimate, the Administration supports the continuation of 
security assistance to Egypt.  End summary. 
 
---- 
Iran 
---- 
 
¶2.  (C)  U/S Robert Joseph, joined by the Ambassador, the 
CENTCOM J-5, Joseph's delegation and Embassy representatives, 
told DefMin Tantawi on April 13 that Iran's nuclear weapons 
program poses both an immediate threat and a long term 
challenge to the region that must be countered with greater 
international resolve.  After Joseph reviewed the 
implications of Iran's progress in its nuclear program, 
Tantawi asked how Iran got its nuclear "know how."  Joseph 
explained that among other possible sources, the A.Q. Khan 
network helped Iran's already strong cadre of scientists to 
develop its current capability on uranium conversion, 
enrichment, and weaponization capabilities.  Iran's recent 
statements, Joseph said, indicated that it will not comply 
with the UNSC Presidential Statement or with its IAEA 
obligations and will instead move to full-scale enrichment. 
As a result of Iran's actions, this issue is at a "critical 
stage," a "very dangerous point." 
 
¶3.  (C)  In light of this, Joseph stressed, the international 
community, with Egypt playing a leading role, must consider 
taking steps such as sanctions and a range of defensive 
measures to dissuade or counter Iranian efforts.  Among 
others, these measures include: 
--disrupting Iranian financial networks and 
technology/equipment procurement by Iranian front companies; 
--imposing sanctions; 
--fielding missile defense capabilities and strengthening 
early warning data sharing; 
--conducting combined military training and exercises, 
including passive defenses for and responses to the use of 
chemical and biological weapons; and 
--bolstering support for the Proliferation Security 
Initiative. 
 
Signaling strong international resolve, using the full range 
of measures available, will defend U.S. interests and those 
of its friends and allies while at the same time enhancing 
prospects for diplomacy.  After thanking Tantawi for Egypt's 
support on Iran thus far, Joseph urged Egypt to endorse the 
PSI, underscoring that success will require tangible 
concerted action as well as continued dialogue. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Tantawi declined to comment on the request to 
endorse PSI, but stressed that a nuclear-armed Iran would 
worsen Egypt's already bad relationship with that country. 
Tantawi said that sanctions would backfire unless they target 
the regime only, and not the Iranian people.  Tantawi then 
promised to discuss the Iranian file with FM Aboul Gheit 
after Joseph's meeting with him (septel). 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Tantawi concerned about threats to military assistance 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Joseph told Tantawi that the U.S. would like to 
expand the areas of U.S.-Egyptian cooperation and said the 
Administration will work proactively to educate Members of 
Congress on Egypt's valuable contributions to regional 
stability in order to ensure the continuation of military 
assistance.  Joseph cautioned that Congress will look closely 
at a range of issues including, for example, Egypt's support 
on Iran, its efforts to help counter weapons of mass 
destruction, its role in Darfur, and the pace of democratic 
reform.  In this context, there are certain things that Egypt 
must do to build support in Congress. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Tantawi responded that while bilateral relations 
with the U.S. have always been good, Egypt and the Egyptian 
people resent the perception in Congress that Egypt must earn 
its assistance.  "Our respect is being violated and our 
dignity is threatened," Tantawi said.  In Tantawi's view, the 
impact on the relationship, and especially on the armed 
forces, is very bad.  "If we agree that, as equals, we both 
gain from the relationship, we can better cooperate to 
achieve our interests," Tantawi said.  "Don't spoil the 
relationship by threatening our military assistance" because 
this form of pressure "will not work."  After complaining 
about the U.S. decision not to release new defense systems, 
Tantawi asked Joseph (again) to tell Congress of Egypt's 
value and argued that Egypt's cooperation with the U.S. has 
been steadfast.  Egypt even disposed of the former 
USSR-donated chemical weapons it received decades ago just 
because the U.S. requested it, Tantawi argued.  Noting that 
Mubarak proposed the creation of a Middle East Weapons of 
Mass Destruction Free Zone, Tantawi said solving the 
Israeli-Palestinian problem would eliminate the need for WMD. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Joseph said that while the WMD Free Zone is a 
worthwhile goal, the international community must remain 
focused on Iran -- a clear and immediate problem confronting 
us today.  "We must stand together to prevent future Irans," 
Joseph urged.  When Tantawi said that sources of civilian 
nuclear energy will remain critical, Joseph agreed and said 
the U.S. is exploring ways to shape the future of nuclear 
energy while at the same time advancing shared 
nonproliferation objectives.  Tantawi requested more 
information on the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The Under Secretary's staff cleared this message. 
RICCIARDONE