08CAIRO126
GAZA BORDER UPDATE JANUARY 26
Sat Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO1948
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #0126 0261432
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261432Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7971
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS CAIRO 000126 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL EG IS
SUBJECT: GAZA BORDER UPDATE JANUARY 26 
 
REF: CAIRO 123 
 
¶1.  Egyptian riot police and armored vehicles continue to 
block Gaza cars from entering Egypt.  The local press reports 
dozens of Egyptian riot police are forming a human barrier to 
block two openings through the breached border wall. 
Egyptian armored vehicles are also reportedly blocking roads 
into and out of the town of Rafah. 
 
¶2.  According to media reports, Egyptian security forces are 
forcing Palestinian vehicles to depart Egypt and are 
preventing others from entering.  Egyptian security forces 
are focused on preventing Palestinians from moving from Rafah 
to North Sinai governorate capital El Arish, and have ordered 
hotel and apartment owners not to rent to Palestinians. 
 
¶3.  An Egyptian security contact reported January 26 that he 
understood an order had been given adjusting the rules of 
engagement to allow Egyptian security forces to use 
additional force, including return fire, and to remove 
Palestinians from Egypt and to prevent additional 
Palestinians from entering from Gaza.  However, the contact 
said that Egyptian security forces have not been told to 
round up and expel Palestinians, or to close the border, 
although he expected this could change in the immediate 
future.  Also, he was not aware of any plans to increase the 
number of Egyptian Border Guard Forces on the border. 
 
¶4.  Local press reports say that returning Palestinians 
thanked President Mubarak for "saving us from starvation." 
There are further press reports of "masked men" attacking 
Egyptian security forces at the border, injuring twelve 
(other reports have the number of wounded Egyptian security 
forces at three dozen).  President Mubarak is quoted as 
saying that Egypt is ready to host a Palestinian dialogue in 
Cairo and welcomes both Fatah and Hamas.  There are 
conflicting press reports on the Palestinian responses to 
this offer, with some reporting that both sides have welcomed 
Mubarak's call for dialogue, while others say that only Hamas 
has accepted the offer, and Abbas still refuses to talk to 
Hamas. 
 
¶5.  The following is from the Egyptian Minister of Foreign 
Affairs website: 
 
Begin quote:  The Ministry's spokesman said that the events 
that took place at the Egyptian Gaza border and the flow of 
thousands of Palestinians into Egypt are a direct result of 
the imposed Israeli blockade on the Gaza Strip...the 
instructions of President Mubarak were clear, allowing the 
Palestinians from Gaza to enter Egypt to buy food medicine 
and other essential supplies in light of the great ties 
linking both peoples, as well as Egypt's consideration of the 
very difficult living conditions suffered by the Palestinians 
in Gaza, and keeping in mind Egypt's historical 
responsibility towards the Palestinians.  The spokesman added 
that the fact that Egyptian security forces did not interfere 
with the Palestinians stems from a solid Egyptian commitment 
of embracing the brotherly Palestinian people, particularly 
in time of distress and crisis. 
 
The spokesman added that, meanwhile, all sides should 
shoulder their responsibilities, and within this framework he 
stressed Israel's legal responsibility as an occupation force 
under the Fourth Geneva Convention and that of the 
authorities responsible for Gaza, which control the internal 
situation.  The spokesman outlined that Egypt respects its 
legal commitments regarding the borders with Gaza, including 
the Rafah border crossing, pointing out that Egypt calls upon 
the three parties to the agreement regulating movement across 
crossing points between the two countries to reconsider the 
modalities of reactivating the agreement.  End quote. 
Ricciardone