08CAIRO959
GOE RAISES FUEL PRICES TO OFFSET SALARY INCREASE
Sun May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0959/01 1320906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110906Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9223
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0404UNCLAS CAIRO 000959 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/RA, AND EEB/IDF 
USAID FOR ANE/MEA MCCLOUD AND RILEY 
USTR FOR MOWREY 
TREASURY FOR MATHIASON AND CONNELLY 
COMMERCE FOR 4520/ITA/ANESA/OBERG 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EPET PGOV EG
SUBJECT:  GOE RAISES FUEL PRICES TO OFFSET SALARY INCREASE 
 
Ref:  Cairo 930 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Parliament passed a series of revenue generating measures 
to offset the cost to the budget of the 30% wage increase announced 
by President Mubarak on April 30 (reftel).  The measures include 
fuel and cigarette price increases, higher automobile registration 
fees, and imposition of some new taxes.  The measures met with 
considerable opposition both in parliament - with all independents 
and members of the Muslim Brotherhood bloc voting against the 
changes and several ruling party members not supporting the measures 
- and among the Egyptian public.  Many contacts believe the move 
essentially cancels the positive effect of the salary increase. 
Economic analysts are also concerned that the measures, especially 
fuel prices increases, will exacerbate inflation.  From a fiscal 
viewpoint, the new revenue will help ensure that the deficit does 
not worsen, but politically, this step may make it more difficult 
for the GOE to make structural changes to the subsidy system.  End 
summary. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PARLIAMENT PASSES NEW REVENUE MEASURES 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On May 5, Egypt's parliament approved several new revenue 
measures to offset the cost of the 30% public sector salary increase 
(approximately LE 4.86 billion, or $916 million) announced by 
President Mubarak on April 30 (reftel).  Mubarak had ordered the 
government to ensure that the salary increase was "budget-neutral." 
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) had already submitted the FY 2008/09 
budget to parliament before Mubarak announced the salary increase, 
thus necessitating additional revenue-generating measures to ensure 
the projected deficit of 6.9% did not worsen.  While the new 
measures may prevent the deficit from worsening, they are unlikely 
to help the GOE reach its stated goal of reducing the deficit to 4% 
by FY 2010/11.  Inflation is also likely to increase as the new 
measures, especially a decrease in the fuel subsidy, take effect. 
Inflation continued to climb in April, reaching 16.4%, up from 14.4% 
in March.  Analysts expect inflation to reach 20% in May, when the 
fuel price increases register on the CPI. 
 
--------------------------- 
ANATOMY OF THE NEW MEASURES 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) The new revenue measures include (NOTE:  All revenues 
estimates are taken from media reports): 
 
-- An increase in the price of 90, 92 and 95-octane gasoline, diesel 
(gas oil), and kerosene by 35%, 32%, 57%, 47%, and 47% respectively. 
 The new price for a liter of each of these fuels is now LE 1.75 
($.33), LE 1.85 ($.34), LE 2.75 ($.51), LE 1.1 ($.20) and LE 1.1 
($.20) per liter, respectively.  These measures are expected to 
reduce the GOE fuel subsidy bill by LE 5.94 billion ($1.11 billion), 
bringing to it to an estimated LE 52.06 billion ($9.73 billion) for 
FY 2008/09. 
 
-- A 10% increase in sales tax on locally-made cigarettes and 33% 
percent on imported cigarettes.  This is expected to raise LE 1.3 
billion ($243 million) in additional revenues. 
 
-- A 20% tax on interest earned on treasury bills. 
 
-- Private schools and universities will lose their tax exemptions, 
raising an estimated LE 100 million ($18.8 million) in May-June 
¶2008. 
 
-- Prices of natural gas used by energy-intensive industries, 
including steel, fertilizer and petrochemicals,  will increase 58% 
from LE .36 ($.06)/cubic meter to LE .57($.10)/cubic meter, 
generating an estimated LE 1.6 billion ($299 million) in revenue. 
 
-- Energy-intensive industries operating in industrial free zones 
will also be subject to increased registration fees, equivalent to 
LE 600 million ($112 million) in revenues. 
 
-- Quarried clay, used in the manufacture of cement, will be subject 
to a new LE 35($6.5)/metric ton tax, expected to bring in LE 1 
billion ($187 million) in revenue. 
 
-- New annual registration fees for private vehicles.  Registration 
fees on vehicles are not high in nominal terms, but will increase 
significantly on a progressive basis determined by engine size.  The 
GOE expects this measure to earn about LE 1.1 billion ($205 million) 
annually. 
 
-------------- 
UPSET REACTION 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Debate was heated in parliament before the measures passed 
by 297 votes.  The National Democratic Party (NDP) MPs largely (but 
not unanimously) supported the changes and all opposition 
parliamentarians (including the 87-member bloc of Muslim Brotherhood 
(MB) MPs) voted against them.  The opposition accused the government 
of conspiring to undermine the impact of the wage increase.  One 
opposition MP told emboff that the regime proved through this move 
that it enjoys "a great deal of stupidity and foolishness."  The 
government argued on the parliamentary floor and in coordinated 
appearances by senior ruling party officials and ministers on 
evening TV talk shows, that the changes were necessary to prevent 
the wage increase from exacerbating inflation.  The MB posted a 
statement on its website opposing the fuel price increases, and 
called on the government instead to "restore the country's stolen 
wealth from business tycoons and punish the corrupt."  The MB 
roundly blames the government for the current economic difficulties 
faced by the poor and middle class and predicted that higher fuel 
prices will further deteriorate most Egyptians' standard of living. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) We polled several Egyptian contacts on their reaction to 
the price increases.  Some said that the government should have 
raised passage fees on the Suez Canal or the price of controversial 
natural gas exports to Israel instead of burdening the 
already-suffering Egyptian population.  Other contacts argued that 
the president and his government have made those who refused to take 
part in the recent May 4 general strike "feel like real fools," 
adding that "the government would have sufficient funds for 
everything if it simply cut ministers' expenses and the Ministry of 
Interior's legions of Central Security Forces, which beat Egyptian 
demonstrators."  Many sought comfort in saying that "the president 
cannot live much longer and this could be the beginning of a big 
wake-up in Egypt."  Others derided the government and NDP policies, 
saying that "they will ultimately bring the president down." 
Separately, gas station workers, who do not receive salaries and 
rely on tips instead, said they will be hard-hit by the increase in 
fuel prices because customers will stop tipping. 
 
¶6.  (U) Despite these comments, the immediate impact of the price 
hikes has been minimal, with no major demonstrations or violence. 
However, press reports claim that fistfights, like those seen in 
bread lines recently, have been breaking out around Cairo during 
rush hour as minibus drivers dispute prices with passengers. 
Cairo's privately-run minibuses, which service low-income earners, 
have increased their prices as of May 7 by as much as 50%.  For 
intercity travel, for example, the price of a ticket to go from 
Shobra (in Cairo) to the delta city of Mehalla has gone from LE 7 
($1.32) to LE 8 ($1.50).  Within Cairo, the price has gone from 30 
($.05) to 50 piasters ($.10).  For already squeezed lower-income 
Egyptians, such price increases are difficult to bear.  There are 
unconfirmed reports that in the wake of the price increases, 
thousands of plain-clothes policemen were deployed throughout Cairo 
"just in case." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Analysts had been concerned that the 30% salary increase, 
coupled with additional spending on subsidies, would set the GOE's 
deficit reduction goal back by several years.  From a purely fiscal 
standpoint, the government's new measures help address these 
concerns.  The larger-than-expected increase in salaries may have 
caught the MOF somewhat off guard, as the new revenue-raising 
measures are a mixed bag of ideas MOF had on hold pending the need 
to generate additional revenue and hastily conceived ideas that are 
not yet fully developed.  The energy increases, for example, are the 
third in a series since 2004 and are part of a longer-term subsidy 
reduction plan previously articulated by the government. 
Elimination of the exemption for energy-intensive industries 
operating in the free zone, however, lacks some clarity.  Tax exempt 
status is an important part of being a "free zone," so it remains to 
be seen how the move will impact business. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Some measures may have unintended positive effects.  The 
tax free status of t-bill earnings has until now been a major factor 
in the reluctance of Egyptian banks to identify new customers and 
expand their lending.  The measure could act as an incentive to 
encourage banks to more aggressively seek profits through lending 
and through expanding their loan portfolios, providing more credit 
to the economy.  Banks have had the luxury of not pursuing new 
customers, given the favorable rates on t-bills, combined with their 
tax free status.  As the measure will not apply to bonds, and the 
government is trying to expand the bond market, the measure could 
also spur development of longer term debt instruments, which the 
Egyptian economy needs. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) From a political standpoint, the skeptical Egyptian public 
views the 30% salary raise, closely followed by the gas and 
cigarette price increases, as President Mubarak "giving with one 
hand, and taking away with the other."  The price increases feed 
into already simmering public resentment about inflation in general. 
 In the current economic environment, we do not believe the 
government will undertake major structural reform of the subsidy 
program, though it will continue to chip away at the fuel subsidy. 
Even with the current price increase for gas, however, Egypt still 
has some of the most regressive energy pricing in the world. 
Equally unlikely is the prospect that the government will tackle the 
other major fiscal drain, the bloated civil service. 
SCOBEY