08CAIRO2481
AMBASSADOR AND MOD DISCUSS IRAQ, PIRACY, AND
Mon Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
P 080820Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1008C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 002481 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2018 
TAGS: PREL MASS MARR MOPS IZ IR IS KPAL SO EG
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND MOD DISCUSS IRAQ, PIRACY, AND 
MILITARY COOPERATION 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey per 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  During a December 6 meeting, Ambassador and 
Minister of Defense Field Marshal Tantawi discussed regional 
security issues, including the new U.S.-Iraq security 
agreement, Iran, combating piracy, Palestinian 
reconciliation, and the upcoming Military Cooperation 
Committee (MCC) meeting in Washington.  On combating piracy, 
Tantawi noted that Egypt stood ready to contribute naval 
assets under a United Nation's force.  On the security 
agreement,Tantawi agreed that the agreement's approval 
represented a defeat of Iranian efforts to interfere in Iraqi 
affairs and believed the lost would encourage a "change in 
Iranian" policy on Iraq and dealing with the U.S. government. 
 On the Arab-Israeli peace process, he hoped President-elect 
Obama would immediately engage on supporting a comprehensive 
peace agreement and reaffirmed Egypt's commitment to the 
difficult task of mediating intra-Palestinian reconciliation. 
 End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Iraq, Security Agreement, and Iran 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador noted the importance of the recently 
approved U.S.-Iraq security agreement, adding that the 
agreement clearly affirms Iraqi sovereignty, calls for the 
withdrawal of combat troops by 2011, and gives Iraqi 
authorities jurisdiction over some criminal cases involving 
U.S. personnel.  Ambassador also noted that unlike the 
security agreement, which focuses on the next three years, 
the recently approved Strategic Framework Agreement will 
support a wide-range of cooperation between the American and 
Iraqi governments on economic, political, social, and 
cultural issues.  Tantawi agreed that the security 
agreement's approval represented a defeat of Iranian efforts 
to interfere in Iraqi affairs and believed the lost would 
encourage a "change in Iranian" policy on Iraq and dealing 
with the U.S. government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Piracy: Ready to Contribute to United Nation's Force 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.  (C) During a general discussion on combating piracy, 
Ambassador expressed USG support for deepening cooperation 
with the international community to counter piracy in the 
Horn of Africa region.  Tantawi expressed confidence that the 
United Nations could find a solution to the question of 
handling the detention and prosecution of pirates captured at 
sea.  Tantawi also shared Egypt's willingness to contribute 
naval assets to combating piracy under the "United Nation's 
flag."  Ambassador also applauded Egypt's leadership on 
bringing together Red Sea states to coordinate counter piracy 
efforts (reftel). 
 
----------------- 
Israel-Palestine 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Tantawi hoped that President-elect Obama would 
immediately engage on negotiations for a comprehensive peace 
agreement after entering office.  Ambassador noted the USG's 
appreciation of Egyptian efforts to mediate between 
Palestinian factions.  Tantawi noted that the mediation 
efforts were "difficult" but expressed Egypt's commitment to 
supporting Palestinian reconciliation. 
 
-------------------- 
Military Cooperation 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Tantawi looked forward to the upcoming MCC meetings 
in Washington December 16 - 17.  Major General Fuoad al Halmi 
noted that the major topics of conversation would be 1) 
Foreign Military Financing cases in support of Egypt's 
five-year modernization plan, 2) co-production of M1A1 tanks, 
and 3) military cooperation, including Bright Star exercises. 
 
¶6.  (C) Ambassador agreed with Tantawi in the continued 
strategic importance of Bright Star exercises as a symbol of 
cooperation between moderate Arab countries and the United 
States on combating regional security threats.  She 
recommended that he discuss this with General Petraeus when 
they meet.  Halmi also noted that Egypt hoped to discuss the 
"political release" of certain weapons systems such as the 
TOW-2B, Javelin, and Apache Longbow.  Ambassador noted that - 
while not the only impediment - the lack of the necessary 
agreement providing end-use assurances and ensuring proper 
protection of certain U.S. origin technology impeded further 
discussions on releasability. 
 
SCOBEY