08CAIRO270
CAIRO RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FY 2008 TIP SOLICITATION
Tue Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0032
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0270/01 0431357
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121357Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8129UNCLAS CAIRO 000270 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA AND G/TIP (FARAJ) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC ELAB KCRM PHUM PREL SMIG EG
SUBJECT: CAIRO RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FY 2008 TIP SOLICITATION 
 
REF: 2007 SECSTATE 161293 
 
¶1.  We have reviewed three anti trafficking-in-persons project 
proposals in response to reftel request for our recommendations for 
FY 2008 INCLE and ESF appropriations.  Summary evaluations are 
below.  We have forwarded full proposals to G/TIP and NEA POCs per 
reftel instructions. 
 
¶2.  We endorse the proposal submitted by the International Research 
and Exchanges Board (IREX) for FY 2008 ESF funds.  The IREX proposal 
emphasizes strengthening the capacity of the Egyptian National 
Council for Childhood and Motherhood (NCCM) and the National Council 
for Women (NCW) to provide victims services, followed by 
strengthening civil society organizations (CSOs) to work with those 
governmental bodies.  The NCCM and NCW are at the forefront of the 
Government of Egypt's (GoE) efforts to address trafficking. 
Additionally, and the GoE's anti-trafficking lead at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has told us that improving governmental and 
non-governmental victim protection services, and improving the 
coordination between the two, is a GoE anti-trafficking priority. 
Finally, IREX's proposal to work with the Egyptian Center for 
Development Services - an established and well-respected Egyptian 
organization - addresses potential GoE sensitivities to receiving 
aid from U.S. organizations. 
 
---- 
IREX 
---- 
 
¶3.  Applicant: International Research and Exchanges Board (IREX) 
 
Total funding: $382,180 (federal share), $0 (non-federal share) 
 
Project title: Strengthening Skills and Collaboration to Combat 
Trafficking in Persons in Egypt 
 
Project Duration: 12 months 
 
Proposal abstract: 
 
Although there is a widespread problem with human trafficking in 
Egypt, the government and civil society have done little to address 
the problem. However, new policies adopted in 2007 by the government 
of Egypt and an increase in leadership on anti-trafficking issues by 
government aligned organizations have created a promising window of 
opportunity that might allow for a systematic effort to coordinate 
activities and significantly strengthen Egypt's efforts to combat 
human trafficking. IREX's 12 month program pursues this opportunity. 
The program will be implemented in the Cairo metropolitan area, 
focusing on key federal institutions and other agencies and 
organizations that have established credibility in dealing with 
trafficking issues.  IREX will provide support and mentor 
organizations to strengthen their understanding of human trafficking 
issues and increase their ability to engage one another. It will 
facilitate government and civil society stakeholders to develop 
mechanisms for collaboration, share information and improve 
prevention, protection and prosecution programs. It also will 
strengthen the capacity of NGOs working in Cairo and its 
metropolitan area to work on anti-trafficking issues, and promote an 
understanding of the multi-dimensional roles civil society can play. 
Finally, it will link these organizations with the NCW, NCCM, and 
government institutions. 
 
----- 
CEDPA 
----- 
 
¶4.  Applicant: Centre for Development and Populations Activities 
(CEDPA) 
 
Total funding: $499,839 (federal share), $0 (non-federal share) 
 
Project title: Partnerships Against Trafficking in Persons 
 
Project Duration: 24 months 
 
Proposal abstract: 
 
Egypt is a country of origin, destination, and transit for human 
trafficking and is listed by the U.S. Department of State as a "Tier 
2 Watch List" country. The Government of Egypt has made little 
progress in addressing the issues of trafficking, which leaves 
providing prevention and protection largely to civil society. As 
such, civil society can serve an important role in advocating for 
policies, serving a "watchdog" function in monitoring government 
progress, and in providing direct services. 
 
The proposed Partnerships Against Trafficking in Persons (PATH) will 
be a two-year project, with the overall goal of increasing civil 
society's engagement with the government in the fight against 
trafficking. PATH will build on CEDPA's extensive experience in 
Egypt. In close collaboration with three established 
non-governmental (NGO) partners, CEDPA will implement PATH 
activities in the three governorates of Alexandria, Asiut, and Qena. 
PATH will meet three objectives to achieve the project goal: 
 
1) Establishing an NGO coalition to address issues of trafficking. 
The coalition will engage with, provide assistance to, and monitor 
local governments in implementing anti-trafficking responses. The 
coalition will also advocate for increased resources for long-term 
rehabilitation and reintegration of trafficking victims and better 
coordination among different stakeholders for prevention and 
awareness activities. 
 
2) Increase community awareness of trafficking. PATH will conduct 
community awareness campaigns, train police and public officials, 
and create community champions to provide leadership in combating 
the problem. 
 
3) Increase collaboration among organizations providing protection 
services. PATH will create a referral database for each governorate, 
establish collaborative mechanisms, increase awareness of services 
available, and leverage private sector resources to increase 
economic opportunities for at-risk women and youth. 
 
--- 
IOM 
--- 
 
¶5.  Applicant: International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
 
Total funding: $190,415 (federal share), $0 (non-federal share) 
 
Project title: Enhancing Understanding on Human Trafficking within 
the Framework of Irregular Migration and Building Capacity of the 
Government Officials in Egypt to Address these Issues 
 
Project Duration: 24 months 
 
Proposal abstract: 
 
The issue of trafficking is an extremely sensitive matter in Egypt, 
and so far, the GoE insists that the main problem Egypt is facing is 
that of irregular migration as opposed to trafficking per se. This 
projects aims to address the phenomenon of trafficking within the 
larger framework of irregular migration in Egypt in all its facets 
and complexities taking into consideration the country's 
geographical situation at the crossroads between Asia, Africa and 
Europe. 
 
By raising awareness of Egyptian officials of the dangers and 
challenges of such a phenomenon, IOM will thus contribute to the 
protection of the victims of trafficking through a victim-centered 
and rights based approach. 
 
The project would take place over a period of two years and would be 
implemented in Cairo, Egypt with the Ministry of Manpower and 
Migration as the main counterpart, but would also be working 
directly with the Ministry of Interior. The capacity building 
component, particularly that of MoI officials, would ensure 
sustainability once the project is over.  Ricciardone