09CAIRO939
REGIONAL ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY FOR IRAQ/VIABILITY OF
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0939 1460948
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 260948Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2589
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0329S E C R E T CAIRO 000939 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/RA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/19/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TBIO IZ EG
SUBJECT: REGIONAL ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY FOR IRAQ/VIABILITY OF 
NEW REGIONAL NETWORKS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 48144 
     ¶B. CAIRO 457 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey Reasons: 1.4 (B) and (D)
1.(S) Summary. We are providing a brief summary of Egyptian-Iraqi ties (per ref a). In addition, while we expect the Egyptians to be wary of any new multilateral architecture, they may be suited to lead or participate in a new regional health network, given Egypt's expertise and growing capacity in this sector. For more information on Egyptian-Iraqi ties see reftel b. End summary.

2.(S) The Egyptians are increasingly convinced Iraq is headed in the right direction but will be cautious in making any irreversible commitments. We are continuing to coax the Egyptians forward, including on reopening their embassy, in an effort to speed the deliberate nature of Egyptian implementation amid continuing security concerns.

3.(S) Based on conversations with MFA officials, the Egyptians seem inclined to support a focus on Iraq's bilateral relations with Arab states, as opposed to the continuation of multilateral vehicles such as the International Compact with Iraq. MFA officials have told us that Egypt wants to make its expertise and training available to Iraq, and have established ministry-to-ministry contacts in a variety of fields.

4.(S) The Egyptians see themselves as a regional political and diplomatic leader, and we should play to that in any appeal to the GOE for participation in new regional networks. In general, however, the Egyptians have been wary of new multilateral architecture, especially that which relates to regional issues. The longstanding Egyptian preference is to use existing multilateral venues and programs, e.g. U.N. agencies or projects. These concerns relate in part to strongly-held Egyptian notions of sovereignty (Cairo has agreed, for example, to participate in U.N. operations in Sudan, but has not responded favorably to the idea of participating in NATO anti-piracy operations). It may be possible to mitigate anticipated Egyptian reticence by building in linkages to existing USG or multilateral programs (in addition to the U.N., perhaps the Arab League could be included in some way).

5.(S/NF) One area where the Egyptians have shown a greater degree of flexibility on multilateral coordination is health. The GOE may be suited to lead a regional health network, given the Egyptian Ministry of Health and Population's (MOHP's) willingness to cooperate with the international community on health issues, its desire to become the rough equivalent of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for the Middle East and Africa, and its growing capacity to serve a regional role in fighting emerging infectious diseases. In this regard, the CDC and MOHP have already partnered to establish an International Emerging Infections Program (IEIP) facility in Cairo, located adjacent to NAMRU-3 (a Naval Medical Research Facility location). The IEIP is already operating in several countries in the Middle East and Africa region, including Iraq.

6.(S) Further, Minister of Health Hatim El-Gabaly, a radiologist and one of the partners in Dar El-Fouad Hospital (DAFH), is a capable, practical man who would like to see Egypt play a prominent regional health care role. El-Gabaly is a big personality who would likely seize the opportunity for a regional role. He is a quick decision-maker and a committed reformer who is not afraid to make bold statements and moves to promote health. For example, Gabaly took a lot of flack when DAFH contracted to provide care to members of the Israeli Embassy community in Cairo, and also opened Egypt's hospitals to wounded Gazans during the December/January crisis. He has taken the lead on Egypt's response to the Swine Flu outbreak, and while elements of the GOE approach have been criticized (especially the culling of pigs), overall El-Gabaly has orchestrated the swine flu campaign effectively. SCOBEY