04TAIPEI4068
News Coverage of Secret U.S. Envoy's Visit to
Mon Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 004068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: News Coverage of Secret U.S. Envoy's Visit to 
Taiwan- full text translation 
 
¶1.  An article on the front page of the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times" said (12/27): 
 
Headline:  "U.S. Secret Envoy Met with President Chen 
Shui-bian: [There Is] No Change in U.S.-Taiwan 
Relations.  A Very High-Ranking U.S. Envoy Secretly 
Visited Taipei Before Christmas and Thought Positive of 
President Chen Shui-bian's Performance, and Stressed 
That `Currently' There is no Misunderstanding Between 
the United States and Taiwan" 
 
 
¶2.  Begin Text:  "While the debate goes on over whether 
current U.S.-Taiwan relations have changed 
dramatically, a [Taiwan] high-ranking official revealed 
that the Bush Administration sent an `important envoy' 
who has the authority to represent the U.S. government 
to Taipei.  The representative met with President Chen 
Shui-bian and expressed the attitude that U.S.-Taiwan 
relations are stable and unchanged.  The move indicated 
that U.S.-Taiwan relations have not changed as rumors 
say. 
 
"The official indicated that in the high-level secret 
meeting, the United States was positive on President 
Chen Shui-bian's policy statements since his May 20 
inauguration speech.  Regarding the legislation of the 
`anti-secession law' started by the Chinese government, 
the United States and Taiwan also conducted a related 
discussion, inclusive of information sharing. 
 
"The U.S. representative, who came from Washington and 
was described as `very high-ranking,' arrived in Taiwan 
a few days before the Christmas.  The schedule of the 
U.S. representative was completely confidential and he 
left Taiwan after carrying out his mission.  The 
government, as usual, does not make any explanation nor 
describe any detail regarding the envoy's personal 
background.  However, the official said `the more 
cautious and more confidential, the tighter and more 
stable the U.S.-Taiwan relations are,' and the United 
States' sending of the person with representative 
status simply explains everything. 
 
"High-ranking communication channels between the United 
States and Taiwan so far have been good.  Even when 
United States officials openly commented on cross- 
Strait problems or on whether Taiwan is in fact 
sovereign and independent, the `second channel' between 
the United States and Taiwan is still good.  U.S. 
special envoy James Moriarty,  National Security 
Council Senior Director for Asian Affairs, traveled 
back and forth between Washington and Taipei in order 
to avoid transmission by a third party which would 
cause distortion in the language. 
 
"Sources said the United States felt that President 
Chen Shui-bian has done a good job since his May 20 re- 
election inauguration speech, the talk on the National 
Day, and the ten-point conclusions in the November 10 
National Security Council meeting. 
 
"As some people in Taiwan worry about current U.S.- 
Taiwan relations, sources said the United States 
considered that `in the past' there were 
misunderstandings on some issues, such as the 
referendum.  However, clarification is okay, and  there 
is no misunderstanding` for the time being'.  The 
United States in the future will be more concerned 
about issues like Taiwan's `revising the constitution' 
and will consistently pay attention to it in order to 
`feel safe'." 
PAAL