04TAIPEI4122
SUPPORTING THE RICE BOMBER - A DEMONSTRATION
Thu Dec 30 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TAIPEI 004122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FAS WASHDC 
USDOC WASDC 
 
STATE FOR AIT/W 
STATE PASS USTR FOR SCOTT KI 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD ECON
SUBJECT: SUPPORTING THE RICE BOMBER - A DEMONSTRATION 
AGAINST RICE IMPORTS AND THE WTO 
 
REF: NONE 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On December 26, about 500 farmers and 
activists demonstrated in central Taiwan to support Yang Ru- 
men, the "Rice Bomber," who planted a series of bombs around 
Taipei over the past 14 months.  The farmers protested 
against rice imports and other post-WTO changes in Taiwan's 
trade policy and submitted a list of ten demands to Taiwan's 
Council of Agriculture (COA). Although COA already has in 
place several programs demanded by the demonstrators, it 
expects to face considerable pressure from local farmers as 
Taiwan participates in future WTO negotiations on 
agriculture, especially when the rice issue is raised.  In 
the end, although the protestors' concerns resonate though 
much of Taiwan's society, their actions are unlikely to 
change Taiwan's trade policies.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) About 500 people demonstrated on December 26 in 
central Taiwan in support of Yang Ru-men, better known as 
the "Rice Bomber."  After his arrest on November 25, Yang 
confessed to planting at least eight of sixteen bombs around 
Taipei to protest rice imports.  Starting on October 27, 
2003, the "rice bombs" were planted in parks, telephone 
booths, metro stations and near government offices.  Often 
filled with rice, only two of the devices exploded -- and 
none caused any significant injuries or damage. 
 
¶3. (U) The demonstration was held in Erh-Lin Township, 
Changhua County, Yang's birthplace and the home of his 
grandparents.  Reportedly, this was also the site of a 1929 
protest against the ruling Japanese government's 
exploitation of local sugar cane farmers.  Speakers at the 
demonstration often alluded to the "Spirit of 1929." 
 
¶4. (U) The demonstrators consisted of activists from 
farmers' associations, county councils, community colleges, 
legal groups, academia -- and even a gangster organization. 
Approximately twenty distinct activist groups and 
organizations participated in the protest. 
 
 
The Rice Bomber as Guy Fawkes 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The demonstrators insisted that the Rice Bomber is a 
hero and not a terrorist.  The speakers said that although 
Yang may have been wrong to plant bombs in public places, he 
clearly had no intention to harm anyone.  The bomber simply 
wanted to draw the government's attention to the plight of 
local farmers.  Yang's actions were further justified as the 
only way the poor can fight back in Taiwan's increasingly 
stratified society.  Since his cause was just, the 
protestors declared that Yang should be granted amnesty and 
be released immediately.  To show their support, Changhua 
Farmers have donated money for Yang's legal defense. 
 
 
Anger at Council of Agriculture 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Speakers at the rally blamed Taiwan's Council of 
Agriculture (COA) for doing too little for farmers since the 
island's 2002 WTO accession.  They criticized COA officials 
who "sit in their air-conditioned offices" and make 
agricultural polices "without thinking of the farmer's real 
problems in the field." The demonstration's program included 
a song urging Taiwan people to eat local rice and fruit and 
a performance about how Taiwan's WTO accession has turned 
the farmers' sky black. 
 
¶7. (U) The protesters urged Taiwan's authorities to reduce 
the high tax on rice wine and renegotiate the agricultural 
part of Taiwan's WTO accession agreement.  They blamed the 
government for opening the local market to agricultural 
imports, which purportedly had "a huge impact" on prices for 
local agricultural products in recent years.  They allege 
this has made it difficult for farmers to make a decent 
living. 
 
 
Class Conflict Surfaces 
----------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) More generally, the protestors also criticized the 
lack of fairness and justice in society.  In addition to 
being exploited by local "capitalists," Taiwan's authorities 
have made local farmers and workers vulnerable to "foreign 
capitalists."  The resulting income inequality has created a 
situation where the poor cannot support their families and 
children's education while the rich consume ever more 
luxuries. 
 
 
Petitioning the Council of Agriculture 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Since the arrest of the rice bomber, reportedly more 
than 30,000 people have signed a petition with ten demands 
for COA. 
 
- Establish a Farmer's Minimum Wage.  The government should 
ensure that a farmer's income is no less than the minimum 
wage of a blue-collar labor. 
 
- Permit Rezoning of Agricultural Land.  Taiwan authorities 
should allow more land to be rezoned out of agriculture. 
Since joining the WTO, Taiwan no longer needs to keep so 
much land for farming. Although it seemingly embraces 
change, this proposal is attractive to many of Taiwan's 
farmers because it would allow them to sell their 
increasingly valuable land to developers. 
 
- Wider Use of Price Stabilization Funds.  To stabilize 
incomes, enhance agricultural development and boost the 
competitiveness of local agricultural products, COA should 
establish stabilization funds for all agricultural, fishery, 
and livestock products. 
 
- More Exports.  Increase exports of locally produced 
agricultural, fishery and livestock products to reduce 
supplies and maintain local prices. 
 
- More Market Information.  COA should provide more data on 
the situation and outlook on all agricultural, fishery and 
livestock production in order to control local supplies and 
prices. 
 
- More Funding to Educate Farmer's Children.  Farmers should 
receive assistance in educating their children, especially 
those at the lowest income levels. 
 
- More Protection for Producers Hurt by Imports.  All 
agricultural, fishery and livestock products should be 
eligible for Taiwan's import relief measure, which pays out 
to farmers hurt by increasing in imports. 
 
- Payments for Conservation.  COA should create a permanent 
fund to purchase land from farmers for conservation 
purposes. 
 
- Increased purchases of locally produced agricultural, 
fishery and livestock products for humanitarian food aid 
shipments. 
 
If Taiwan authorities do not respond to these farmers' 
concerns, activists have threatened to continue and even 
escalate their protests. 
 
 
Press Reaction 
-------------- 
 
¶10. (U) The event was covered by AP yesterday and also 
received prominent coverage in the United Daily News and 
Apple Daily. In all, eight newspapers had coverage of the 
demonstration.  In terms of editorial reaction, a United 
Daily News editorial urged the government to look seriously 
into the problem of Taiwan's agricultural industry, while a 
Liberty Times editorial said the protest sent the wrong 
message by condoning the rice bomber's violence.  The split 
between supporting the rice bomber's goals and condemning 
his methods makes it uncertain whether he will gain a large 
like Jose Bove, the French agrarian anti-globalization 
protestor. 
 
 
Council of Agriculture Reaction 
------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) According to COA, Taiwan already has in place 
several of the ten programs demanded by farmers.  For 
example, COA already makes conservation payments and 
actively promotes Taiwan agricultural exports.  COA also 
assists farmers by subsidizing fertilizer in order to cut 
local agricultural production costs.  COA insists that it 
has always been a strong advocate for Taiwan's farmers and 
is willing to communicate with them about their further 
concerns. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Although COA tried to explain current agricultural 
polices to farmers in its response to the ten-point 
petition, it does not plan to change its policies.  This 
does not mean COA is unconcerned - it expects to face 
considerable pressure from local farmers as Taiwan 
participates in future WTO negotiations in agriculture, 
especially when the issue of rice is raised. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Although concern for the farmer resonates with 
many Taiwan residents who are often just a generation or two 
away from the farm, public distaste for violence has likely 
undercut widespread support for the protest.  Farmers will 
likely to continue blaming WTO and COA for their low 
incomes, despite the fact that rural poverty is primarily a 
result of Taiwan's small scale and inefficient farming 
sector.  The fact that agricultural prices are largely 
unchanged since Taiwan's WTO accession has not been 
recognized widely.  Low farm incomes, combined with some 
minor pressure from imports, will likely fuel some continued 
protests against imported agricultural products. 
 
¶14. (SBU) It is also worth noting that some of the ten 
policies suggested in the petition are contradictory.  For 
example, the petition combines market-oriented elements such 
as the land-zoning proposal and better market intelligence 
with larger support payments.  The linking of higher 
agricultural support payments with increased competitiveness 
reveals a lack of sophisticated economic thinking amongst 
the petition's drafters. 
 
¶15. (SBU) AIT/AGR expects that COA will continue its 
combination of palliatives for producers and continued 
resistance to further agricultural trade liberalization. 
Most concretely, this is likely to take the form of 
continued active Taiwan participation in the anti- 
liberalization WTO Group of 10 and in strong opposition to 
any attempts to further open Taiwan's rice market. 
 
Paal