05BRUSSELS2166
EU TO LAUNCH COOPERATION WITH LIBYA ON
Tue Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002166 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR IAO, BORDER PATROL 
DOJ FOR CRM 
ROME ALSO FOR INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PREF PTER CMGT CVIS KCRM LY EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT:  EU TO LAUNCH COOPERATION WITH LIBYA ON 
MIGRATION ISSUES 
 
REFS: (A) USEU BRUSSELS 1514 
      (B) USEU BRUSSELS 2148 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  EU Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
on June 3 agreed to cooperate with Libya to combat 
clandestine migration and will help Libya build 
institutional capacity.  This decision "in 
principle" ties development of this cooperation to 
Libya respecting certain basic principles - 
particularly those enshrined in the Geneva 
Convention of 1951.  The financial implications are 
not yet clear, but this decision should not involve 
significant direct EU financial assistance to Libya. 
The Council also endorsed the five-year action plan 
tabled by the Commission for implementing the Hague 
program of EU actions in the field of Freedom, 
Justice and Security.  Ministers agreed an update of 
the EU action plan for combating terrorism, prepared 
with CT Coordinator de Vries, should be endorsed by 
the June 16-17 European Council. The Commission made 
a presentation of its plan for establishing the 
second-generation Schengen Information System (SIS 
II).  Council decisions on justice-related issues 
have been reported Ref B.  Full text of Council 
conclusions have been transmitted to EUR/ERA.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
COOPERATION WITH LIBYA ON MIGRATION ISSUES 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Following on its April 14 meeting, when the 
Commission reported on a mission to Libya on illegal 
immigration (REF. A), the EU Justice and Home 
Affairs Council on June 3 agreed "in principle" to 
launch dialogue and cooperation with Libya on 
migration issues.  Noting that Libya is one of the 
main transit countries to the EU, Luxembourg 
Minister Delegate for Foreign Affairs and 
Immigration Nicolas Schmit told a press conference 
the Commission would now conduct further exploratory 
talks to verify whether Libya agrees to engage in 
dialogue, based on basic principles, including 
respect for human rights and those enshrined in the 
Geneva Convention of 1951.  The Council adopted 
conclusions aimed at "clarifying the modalities" of 
cooperation.  The text calls on the Libyan 
authorities "to show evidence that they are really 
determined to respect their obligations under the 
OAU Convention regulating the specific aspects of 
refugee-related problems in Africa, in which the 
Geneva Convention concerning the statute of refugees 
is considered as the universal basic instrument with 
respect to the statute of refugees and implying 
effective cooperation with the UNHCR."  The EU will 
also press Libya to refrain from forcible returns 
and the Commission will "look at ways it could help 
the Libyan authorities to respect their 
obligations." 
 
¶3.  Taking questions from reporters, Schmit said the 
goal was "to lead Libya step-by-step to adopting 
higher standards."  Schmit underlined that the text 
also contains explicit references to the situation 
of Bulgarian and Palestinian health workers who have 
been sentenced to death in Libya, saying the issue 
(on which another ruling is now scheduled for 
November 2005) was another crucial element for the 
development of relations. 
 
¶4.  The EU also pledged to increase the frequency of 
joint maritime patrols in the Mediterranean and 
called for Member States to contribute aircraft and 
naval vessels to create an ad hoc operational unit 
for this purpose.  A Council official told us that 
some countries, led by Germany, had problems with 
using EU funds for border control activities, 
while others like Italy, Spain and Malta counter 
that the Hague program explicitly allows for this 
(the JHA conclusions on this point simply take up 
wording from the Hague program).  The financial 
implications are not yet clear, but our 
understanding of the JHA Council's decisions is that 
they should not involve significant direct EU 
financial assistance to Libya. 
 
ACTION PLAN FOR THE HAGUE PROGRAM 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The Council endorsed the five-year action plan 
tabled by the Commission for implementing the Hague 
program of EU actions in the field of Freedom, 
Justice and Security.  This blueprint for EU 
measures in the fight against terrorism, migration 
management, visa policies, asylum, privacy and 
security, the fight against organized crime, and 
criminal justice will be endorsed by EU leaders at 
the June 16-17 European Council meeting (details at 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/justice_home/news/i nformat 
ion_dossiers/the_hague_priorities/index_en.ht m). 
Minister Frieden cautioned that endorsement of the 
action plan should not be interpreted as meaning the 
EU Member States will easily reach agreement on the 
specific draft pieces of legislation to be reviewed 
by the Council in the months and years to come. 
Following the French and Dutch votes on the draft 
Constitutional Treaty, Frieden said construction of 
an EU area of freedom, security and justice -- where 
many issues would have come under qualified majority 
voting if the Constitutional Treaty entered into 
fore -- would likely be "more difficult" because of 
the continued requirement that decisions be taken by 
consensus. 
 
EU ACTION PLAN FOR THE FIGHT AGAINST TERRORISM 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  The Presidency presented an update, prepared 
with CT Coordinator de Vries, of the EU action plan 
for combating terrorism, also for endorsement by the 
June 16-17 European Council.  Frieden noted that EU 
cooperation made it possible to avoid some attacks, 
noting the increased involvement of EUROPOL and the 
EU SitCen (Situation Center located within the EU 
Council Secretariat) in the preventive work. 
 
SCHENGEN INFORMATION SYSTEM 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7.  In a Joint Committee meeting of Schengen 
participating countries, the Commission presented 
its long-awaited plan for establishing the second- 
generation Schengen Information System (SIS II). 
Commission Vice-President Frattini underlined that 
setting up of SIS II is a major condition for 
allowing the new EU Member States to fully 
participate in the Schengen area from 2007 and for 
the lifting of border controls with the new EU 
members.  SIS II will not only be used in the 
context of policies linked to the movement of 
persons but was also designed as "an essential tool 
for supporting police and judicial cooperation in 
criminal matters," according to the Commission 
announcement.  The new system will offer "a more 
flexible technical infrastructure and better ways of 
guaranteeing identification than the current SIS. 
For example, the new SIS will be able to store 
fingerprints and facial images for verifying the 
identity of a person and thus address the problems 
of misidentifications made by the current system. 
In addition, SIS II will have the ability to cope 
with evolving users' requirements, which is simply a 
reflection of the changing political environment in 
which SIS operates.  For instance, SIS II will 
ensure immediate dissemination of a European Arrest 
Warrant issued by a Member State across Europe. 
 
MORE SCHENGEN-RELATED ISSUES 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8.  The Council adopted without discussion a 
Regulation intended to give vehicle registration 
services of the EU Member States access to the 
Schengen Information System in order to better 
combat the theft of vehicles. 
 
OTHER DECISIONS 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  The Council reached agreement in principle on a 
proposal to make the European Police College (CEPOL, 
a UK-based network of national institutes in charge 
of training senior officials of police departments 
in the Member States) a body of the EU.  CEPOL will 
thus be funded under the EU budget and the statute 
of its staff will be amended accordingly. 
 
MCKINLEY