05HANOI509
INPUT FOR 2005 TIP REPORT - VIETNAM
Wed Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Hanoi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 16 HANOI 000509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/BCLTV, EAP/RSP 
STATE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF CH TW CA VM OMIG CVR TIP
SUBJECT:  INPUT FOR 2005 TIP REPORT - VIETNAM 
 
REFS:  A. 04 STATE 273089; B. HANOI 207; C. 03 HANOI 3232; 
 
¶D. 04 HANOI 2921; E. 04 HANOI 1724; F. 04 HANOI 3071; G. 04 
HANOI 1188; H. 04 HANOI 3021; I. 04 HANOI 2499 
 
¶1. Mission Vietnam's response to the TIP questions in ref A, 
paragraphs 18-21 follows, following the alphabetical 
checklist format. 
 
¶2. OVERVIEW OF VIETNAM'S ACTIVITIES TO ELIMINATE TIP 
 
¶A. Characterization of trafficking in Vietnam: 
 
Vietnam is a country of origin for trafficked women and 
children; the highest percentage of victims are 
undereducated rural women between 18 and 40 years of age. 
Exact (or even rough) numbers are very hard to come by; 
however, government and NGO sources agree that the number is 
in the "thousands" per year.  In press reports, Vietnamese 
police spokesmen have said that 50,000 Vietnamese women have 
been sold into prostitution in the past decade, but the 
source of this figure is unknown.  Vietnam now has a 
dedicated crime statistics office, but it only opened in 
August 2003.  That office tracks data only on arrests, 
prosecutions and convictions of traffickers and therefore 
will not be a source of data on the total number of 
trafficking victims in Vietnam.  Mission Vietnam recommended 
in January 2005 that a Vietnamese NGO receive USG funding to 
conduct a project to improve the baseline TIP data available 
in Vietnam (Ref B). 
 
Trafficking occurs within Vietnam's borders, as well as from 
Vietnam to other countries. 
 
¶B. Source and destination of trafficking victims: 
 
Vietnamese trafficking victims come from almost all 
provinces and cities in Vietnam.  The two main destinations 
for Vietnamese trafficking victims are China and Cambodia; 
in general, most northern and central trafficking victims 
are trafficked to China, while victims in the south are 
trafficked to Cambodia.  The highest concentration of 
victims trafficked north came from Thanh Hoa Province, south 
of Hanoi.  This province has traditionally been the source 
of migrant populations in northern Vietnam.  The Cambodian 
border provinces of An Giang and Tay Ninh have a relatively 
high number of victims trafficked to Cambodia. 
 
A small number of women from Ho Chi Minh City and the Mekong 
Delta who married men from Taiwan are forced into 
prostitution or domestic servitude after their arrival in 
Taiwan each year.  Since 1995, as many as 85,000 Vietnamese 
women have gone to Taiwan as brides.  Vietnamese and Taiwan 
estimates of the number who have encountered difficulties, 
including but not limited to trafficking, range from five to 
ten percent.  The number of actual trafficking victims, as 
differentiated from women who found themselves in unhappy 
marriages, is estimated by Taiwan and Vietnam authorities as 
between one and two hundred per year (Ref C). 
 
Cambodia and China are the destinations for the vast 
majority of Vietnamese trafficking victims.  Official 
figures acknowledge that 500 Vietnamese women and children 
are trafficked annually to Cambodia to work as prostitutes 
or slaves, although this number is universally considered to 
be lower than the actual figure.  The Ministry of Public 
Security (MPS) notes that Vietnamese women have also been 
trafficked to Macao, Hong Kong and Malaysia for 
prostitution, although in smaller numbers. 
 
¶C. Changes in direction or extent: 
 
Because Vietnam has only recently begun collecting data on 
trafficking, and so it is not possible accurately to 
evaluate changes in the direction or extent of trafficking 
at this time.  However, there is at present no credible 
indication of any change in direction or extent. 
 
¶D. Reports or surveys planned or underway: 
 
In early 2004, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) 
and MPS released a survey of over 1,700 trafficking cases 
from 17 cities and provinces in Vietnam to determine the 
nature and extent of the problem.  This survey covers only 
confirmed cases of trafficking.  The report states in its 
introduction, "we are aware that the figure is very low 
compared to reality."  Other NGOs have expressed interest in 
doing research on trafficking in Vietnam and publishing 
their results, and the Mission has recommended that the USG 
fund such a study to create a baseline to assist in the 
planning and evaluation of other TIP projects. 
 
¶E. Conditions for victims trafficked into Vietnam: 
 
Vietnam is not known to be a destination point for 
trafficked victims. 
 
¶F. Targets and methods of traffickers: 
 
The primary population targeted by traffickers in Vietnam is 
unmarried women from poor and rural areas.  More than 90 
percent of trafficking victims have less than a high school 
education, and 92 percent reported their occupations as 
either unemployed or farmer.  There has been no systematic 
analysis of who the traffickers are, but in Mission 
interviews with trafficking victims (and their relatives and 
friends), as well as numerous press reports, traffickers 
have been residents or former residents of the trafficking 
victims' provinces or communities.  In some cases, the 
traffickers are traders or businesspeople, but in 
approximately half of the cases, the traffickers were former 
trafficking victims themselves.  The primary tactic of 
traffickers is to offer a so-called "easy" job as a trader, 
waitress or domestic helper in either China or Cambodia.  In 
many (at least 25 percent, according to the UNICEF study) 
cases of victims being trafficked to China, the victims are 
told they are going to China to marry a wealthy man who 
cannot find a suitable Chinese wife.  Victims are generally 
moved across the Chinese and Cambodian borders without 
documents.  In more than 80 percent of surveyed cases, 
victims crossed the border away from legal crossing gates. 
The MPS admits that Vietnam's long land borders with China 
and Cambodia are extremely porous.  In the relatively small 
number of cases involving victims trafficked to more distant 
destinations such as Hong Kong, Taiwan or Malaysia, MPS 
representatives stated that traffickers disguise victims as 
legitimate tourists or workers under a labor export program. 
 
Vietnamese authorities, in cooperation with other third 
country law enforcement officials, have documented cases of 
trafficking in Vietnamese babies for international adoption, 
especially in the area of directed adoption, involving 
payments to parents in exchange for releasing their babies 
for adoption.  In addition to this, small children and 
infants are reportedly sometimes kidnapped and sold to 
traffickers in China.  There were no confirmed reports of 
this in 2004, however. 
 
¶G. Political will to combat TIP: 
 
There is political will at the highest levels of government 
to combat trafficking in persons.  In July 2004, Prime 
Minister Phan Van Khai published the Decision of the 
Government on the Approval of the National Program of Action 
Against Trafficking in Women and Children from 2004-2010 
(ref D).  The plan addresses the major elements of 
prevention, prosecution and protection and identifies both 
the deficiencies in Vietnam's previous approach and the 
challenges and constraints facing the GVN as it wrestles 
with the trafficking problem.  Importantly, the plan assigns 
specific roles to specific agencies under the overall 
direction of MPS, thus eliminating some of the confusion 
regarding overlapping jurisdictions.  The GVN is also 
committed to implementing its commitments under the Regional 
Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in 
Persons and Related Transnational Crime (aka the Bali 
Process) and the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative 
on Trafficking (aka COMMIT) and is moving with deliberate 
speed towards concluding a bilateral MOU on trafficking in 
persons with Cambodia, Thailand and China. 
The United Nations assesses the GVN's commitment to 
enforcement of TIP laws (and the proportionality of 
penalties) as strong.  To date, there have not been any 
government officials directly linked to TIP. 
 
The GVN does not have extensive resources, but it has 
recently focused more of its economic development efforts on 
rural and mountainous communities in part to change the 
conditions of poverty that contribute to the persistence of 
trafficking.  On the prosecution side, it has created a 
separate office in MPS to focus on trafficking.  Local 
communities, provincial-level Women's Unions and provincial 
Departments of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs are 
charged with -- and have been generally active in -- 
facilitating the reentry and rehabilitation of trafficked 
victims. 
 
¶H. Government complicity in trafficking: 
 
There were no cases in 2004 that would lead to the 
conclusion that governmental authorities, forces or 
individual members facilitate or condone trafficking in 
persons.  However, the GVN has a persistent problem with 
corruption within its ranks, and that problem is 
particularly severe among street-level police and border 
agents.  There may have been cases in 2004 of officials 
prosecuted for their involvement in trafficking, but they 
were not publicized.  Statistics on criminal prosecution of 
traffickers are not disaggregated by profession. 
 
¶I.  GVN's ability to address the problem: 
 
The limitations on the GVN's ability to address the problem 
come primarily from the socioeconomic conditions in Vietnam, 
the usually low levels of ability of the police and armed 
forces and the extensive land borders with China and 
Cambodia, the primary destination countries for Vietnamese 
victims of trafficking. 
 
Vietnam is poor; CY 2004 per capita income was USD 537, and 
in rural and mountainous areas, the figure is much lower. 
Jobless women believe that China is a much richer place with 
significant numbers of prosperous businessmen who cannot get 
married in China because there is a lack of eligible women. 
Many in the south believe that there is money to be made in 
Cambodia working as the servant of a rich man or in the 
entertainment industry.  Real economic opportunity in 
Vietnam is concentrated in urban areas, home to less than 20 
percent of the population.  For the majority of Vietnamese 
women, a rural, uneducated life at or below the poverty line 
is the best they can expect.  Thus, the pool of potential 
trafficking victims is vast. 
 
The socioeconomic conditions in Vietnam also affect the 
ability and integrity of the police and border guards as 
well as other public officials.  Vietnam does not have the 
resources to train or equip these personnel extensively, and 
salaries are low, between twenty and forty dollars per 
month.  These deficiencies contribute to the problems of 
corruption and incompetence in the Vietnamese police and 
public officials, especially at the local level.  The GVN 
acknowledged this problem explicitly in the Plan of Action: 
"There are [inadequacies] and [limitation] in State 
administration over relevant facets such as business; 
services; labor management; entry-exit management; marriage; 
giving up and adoption of children involving foreigners; 
and, border management; the structure and organization of 
[the State administration's management] exposed many 
shortcomings failing to meet the requirements such that 
criminals can [take advantage of these shortcomings] for 
their practices." 
The porous borders between Vietnam and the two main 
destination countries represent the third limitation on the 
GVN's ability to combat trafficking.  Traffickers are able 
to evade the police easily.  MPS officers admit that the 
long borders between Vietnam and China and between Vietnam 
and Cambodia offer traffickers many options for crossing the 
border illegally with trafficking victims.  Vietnamese 
border authorities in the south have admitted that in remote 
areas, they rely on local residents informing the police in 
the event a stranger passes through the area heading for the 
border.  In practice, this does not represent an effective 
border control strategy.  However, considering the limited 
resources of the Border Army and the thousands of kilometers 
of easily crossable borders, it is difficult to implement a 
truly effective strategy. 
 
¶J. Government monitoring of anti-TIP activities: 
 
The July Government Decision on the National Program of 
Action Against Trafficking in Women and Children contained a 
frank evaluation of existing efforts to combat TIP on all 
fronts and offered recommendations for improvement. 
Monitoring and evaluation of efforts to combat TIP in 
Vietnam is difficult due to the fact that no data exist to 
describe the baseline against which anti-TIP results can be 
compared. 
 
In March 2004, MPS, working with UNICEF, produced a review 
of the actual situation of trafficking in persons to China 
and Cambodia and an examination of prevention and 
investigation efforts.  Because this study focused solely on 
trafficking cases that had been brought officially into 
Vietnam's criminal justice system, it greatly underreported 
the total number and extent of cases. 
 
The GVN does not have a formal mechanism for sharing TIP 
monitoring and evaluation information.  It is available upon 
request on a case-by-case basis. 
 
¶K. Legalization/decriminalization of prostitution: 
 
Prostitution is subject to penalties in Vietnam.  Brothel 
owners, procurers, prostitutes and customers are all subject 
to arrest.  Brothel owners and procurers face jail time 
under the Penal Code and prostitutes and customers are 
usually given "administrative punishment," imposed by the 
police without the involvement of prosecutors or courts. 
Prostitutes are routinely sent to rehabilitation centers, 
while customers face fines.  Customers who are found with 
prostitutes under the age of 18 are subject to prosecution 
and jail time. 
 
¶3. PREVENTION: 
 
¶A. GVN acknowledgement of the problem: 
 
The GVN acknowledges the problem of trafficking publicly and 
privately at all levels of government and with domestic and 
international audiences.  The Plan of Action, signed by the 
Prime Minister, states (verbatim) in its opening paragraph: 
"The situation of trafficking, especially trafficking of 
women and children, to other countries has become more and 
more complicated, serious and tended to increase.  According 
to informal statistics, there have been tens of thousands of 
Vietnamese women and children trafficked up to now, mainly 
to China, Cambodia, and some other countries.  Trafficked 
women and children end up to prostitution or working in 
worst conditions and suffer discrimination.  Trafficking of 
women and children has become an urgent, topical and 
pressing problem badly affecting society, customs, 
tradition, social morals, and laws and sabotaging and taking 
away the happiness of many families, posing threats upon 
future generations and increasing the risks of transmitting 
HIV/AIDS, with negative implications for national security 
and social order." 
¶B. Agencies involved in anti-TIP efforts: 
 
The lead agency is the Ministry of Public Security, which 
has an office dedicated to trafficking enforcement as well 
as the responsibility for coordinating interagency efforts. 
The other agencies involved are the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFA), the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social 
Affairs (MOLISA), the Border Army, the Women's and Youth 
Unions, the Committee on Protection of Families and Children 
(CPFC), the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) and the People's 
Supreme Court. 
 
¶C. Government-run anti-TIP information or education 
campaigns: 
 
The GVN has not mounted separate, specific anti-TIP 
campaigns, but the issue of trafficking has been raised in 
combination with other information and education programs. 
For example, Vietnam Television occasionally addresses the 
issue in a popular television program about home economy, 
featuring returnees discussing their trafficking experiences 
and advising others on how to avoid being trafficked. 
 
Trafficking in persons is normally included with other "anti- 
social evil programs" run by MOLISA's Department of Social 
Evils Prevention (DSEP). (Note: The GVN defines "social 
evils" as drug abuse, HIV/AIDS, prostitution and trafficking 
in persons.  End note.)  For example, the GVN's official 
anti-prostitution program has been underway since 2001. 
This program includes trafficking information and education 
campaigns.  This program, according to DSEP, targets 
victims, high-risk groups and the entire society.  In 
addition to this program, the Plan of Action tasks the 
Women's Union with education of the community on prevention 
of TIP.  In general, government-run anti-trafficking 
programs in Vietnam target potential trafficking victims 
rather than the demand for trafficking.  Separate propaganda 
campaigns target consumers of prostitution. 
 
In addition, in the summer of 2004 UNICEF, the governments 
of Vietnam and China, the Vietnam Women's Union and the 
Women's Union of China began a joint mass communications 
effort to educate people and local government leaders on 
trafficking, tactics used by traffickers, signs to detect 
persons being trafficked and related issues.  The year-long 
campaign also addresses the protection of victims, including 
health checks for repatriated victims, training on how to 
counsel trafficked persons and workshops on local laws 
regarding sexual exploitation and the trafficking of women 
and children.  UNICEF's goals for the campaign are to reduce 
cross border trafficking and to create a social movement 
against trafficking. 
 
The campaign will take place in Vietnam and China 
simultaneously, with the same materials (in different 
languages) used in both countries.  In Vietnam, the campaign 
is concentrated in Quang Ninh, Lang Son, and Lai Chau 
Provinces in the north and An Giang and Dong Thap Provinces 
in the south.  UNICEF estimates that the campaign will reach 
approximately 4,000 Vietnamese people directly and millions 
more indirectly, through television, radio and newspaper 
announcements (ref E). 
 
¶D. GVN support of other programs to prevent trafficking: 
 
The GVN supports several domestically funded and foreign 
funded anti-trafficking programs. 
 
On February 12, 2004, the GVN approved its 2004 - 2010 
National Program of Action on Protection for Children in 
Special Circumstances.  The program has four objectives 
targeted at: 
 
- providing for homeless children; 
- ending the worst forms of child labor; 
- preventing women and children from being trafficked; and 
- capacity building and advocacy. 
 
In addition to this program, the GVN also supports various 
ongoing trafficking projects throughout Vietnam, including 
international programs, such as following ILO projects: 
-  ILO - Japan Asian Regional Program for Extension of 
Employment Opportunities for Women, Capacity Building, 
Credit Schemes and Income Generation; 
-  National Program for the Prevention and Elimination of 
Child Labor in Vietnam; and 
-  The Mekong Sub-regional Project to Combat Trafficking in 
Women and Children. 
 
The main GVN anti-poverty program, Project 135, is also 
specifically designed to improve conditions for "people in 
difficult circumstances."  The GVN uses the same language to 
describe the most populations most vulnerable to 
trafficking, especially in the north. 
 
Other NGOs and international organizations such as the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM), Action Aid, 
Save the Children UK, United Nations Office of Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC) and UNICEF are assisting in combating 
trafficking.  These projects all contain a GVN component, 
mostly in the form of in-kind contributions. 
 
¶E. GVN ability to support prevention programs: 
 
Though prevention in the form of socioeconomic development 
for the high-poverty areas where many trafficking victims 
originate is the GVN's top priority for addressing the issue 
of trafficking in persons, the magnitude of the task of 
improving the standard of living for all those living in 
rural poverty exceeds the GVN's resources.  The GVN is 
dependent on overseas assistance to meet many of its 
developmental goals, which themselves are insufficient to 
eliminate the potential pool of victims. 
 
¶F. Relationship between government officials, NGOs, other 
relevant organizations and other elements of civil society 
on the trafficking issue: 
 
The GVN's ability to operate in an interagency context is 
limited, but has improved with the issuance of the Prime 
Minister's decision on the National Plan of Action. 
Communication technology is antiquated and there is little 
tradition of interagency cooperation.  The GVN works well 
with relevant organizations on the TIP issue, especially 
those connected to the UN such as UNICEF and UNODC.  MPS has 
played an active role in several UNICEF and UNODC 
trafficking projects, going so far as to assign one senior 
officer full time in the UNODC office as the national 
project coordinator.  This greatly improves UNODC's ability 
to work with MPS. 
 
On the trafficking issue, civil society representation comes 
from the Women's Union, a mass organization under the 
Vietnam Fatherland Front for women's issues in Vietnam.  The 
Women's Union has branches and offices throughout the 
country down to the commune level.  Relations between the 
Women's Union and other agencies on the subject of 
trafficking are excellent. 
 
¶G. GVN border control adequacy and monitoring of 
emigration/immigration patterns for evidence of TIP: 
 
Representatives from the General Criminal Division of MPS 
have admitted that, along Vietnam's 5,000 km of land 
borders, there are "countless forest paths where people 
cross the border unofficially."  Sophisticated monitoring of 
immigration and emigration patterns for evidence of 
trafficking would exceed the GVN's technical and human 
resource abilities.  Vietnam began collecting statistics on 
trafficking last year; building and exploiting an effective 
database are yet to come. 
 
¶H. Existence of trafficking and corruption task forces: 
 
MPS has overall coordination authority over a group of 
ministries charged with combating trafficking in persons. 
The GVN does not have a broad-based TIP task force, except 
for the TIP office in MPS that is focused solely on 
enforcement.  There is no interagency task force on 
corruption in Vietnam, although there is a State 
Inspectorate as well as a Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
an Internal Affairs Commission of the Communist Party of 
Vietnam (CPV), all of which have investigatory and 
supervisory powers. 
 
¶I.  GVN participation in international anti-TIP efforts: 
 
The GVN's most significant international effort to combat 
trafficking in persons is through its participation in the 
Bali Process connected with the Bali Regional Ministerial 
Conferences on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and 
Related Transnational Crime held in February 2002 and April 
¶2003.  In addition to the commitments from the Bali Process, 
Vietnam intends to participate in the Asia Regional 
Cooperation to Prevent People Trafficking Project funded by 
AusAid when that project expands beyond Thailand, Burma, 
Laos and Cambodia.   According to the ASEAN Secretariat, the 
purpose of that project is to strengthen regional 
cooperation and legal policy frameworks through identified 
ASEAN Secretariat plus China (Yunnan Province) national 
points of contact and build national and regional capacity 
to prevent trafficking in women and children. 
 
Vietnam also played a role in the COMMIT process, the first 
inter-country, inter-ministerial forum for forging concrete 
alliances and arrangements to combat human trafficking in 
the region.  Vietnam attended and contributed to the COMMIT 
Senior Officials Meetings in July and October of 2004 and 
attended the Ministerial level meeting in Rangoon in October 
¶2004.  Vietnam signed on to the COMMIT MOU which pledges 
practical cooperation in combating TIP through the creation 
of a network for repatriation of victims, building similar 
networks between specialist police units, and improving 
extradition procedures.  Vietnam is scheduled to host the 
next meeting of COMMIT countries in the first half of 2005 
(Ref F). 
 
¶J. GVN plan of action for TIP: 
 
The GVN's National Plan of Action for Combating Trafficking 
was released in July 2004.  MPS, MOJ, MOLISA, MFA, the CPFC, 
the Supreme People's Court and Supreme People's Procuracy 
and the Vietnam Women's and Youth Unions were involved in 
the Plan's development. 
 
NGOs were not formally consulted in the development of the 
National Plan of Action, but the GVN intends to rely heavily 
on assistance from the ILO, UNODC and UNICEF to implement 
the plan.  The plan was distributed publicly through the 
GVN's regular channels for the publication of official 
documents, assisted by the NGO community. 
 
¶K. Entity or person responsible for developing anti- 
trafficking programs within the government: 
 
According to the Plan of Action and the instructions from 
the Office of the Prime Minister, MPS is the point of 
contact for anti-trafficking activities among the Ministry 
of Health, MOLISA, MFA, MOJ, Border Army, the Women's Union 
and other mass organizations. 
 
MPS is responsible for reporting to the Office of the Prime 
Minister on the issue of trafficking in women and children 
after collecting and analyzing all information from other 
concerned ministries and agencies.  In practice, the 
Criminal Police Department within the General Department of 
People's Police (part of MPS) handles issues pertaining to 
trafficking in persons. 
 
¶4. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
¶A. Laws specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons: 
Most traffickers in Vietnam are prosecuted under the current 
Penal Code Articles 119 and 120, according to the Law 
Department of the Office of the National Assembly.  Article 
119 concerns trafficking in women and provides for penalties 
ranging from two to 20 years in prison.  Article 120 
concerns trafficking in children, and penalties range from 
three years to life in prison.  Trafficking in women and 
children for all purposes, not just prostitution, is covered 
under these articles.  Trafficking for the purposes of labor 
exploitation is covered in Vietnam under Penal Code 275 
(titled "organizing and/or coercing other persons to flee 
abroad or to stay abroad illegally").  GVN authorities, 
including the MOJ, recognize that although all forms of 
trafficking can be prosecuted one way or another under the 
Vietnamese Penal Code, existing legislation in Vietnam does 
not comprehensively cover trafficking in persons.  The GVN 
is engaged in a legal reform project now that is designed to 
correct the flaws in the current code concerning trafficking 
in persons and provide the legislative basis for Vietnam to 
accede to international protocols on trafficking in persons. 
According to the MPS Criminal Police Department, the GVN is 
currently "developing and gradually perfecting the legal 
system concerning the prevention, the prosecution of crimes 
and the violation of laws on trafficking in women and 
children."  Vietnamese law does not address the issue of 
trafficking in men for sexual purposes, and there are no 
indications that this is a problem in Vietnam.  If it did 
happen, however, it would be possible to prosecute the 
traffickers under laws criminalizing the procurement of 
prostitutes, according to MOJ. 
 
The Vietnamese Labor Code contains a section on "Vietnamese 
working abroad."  Included in this section's articles is a 
stipulation that only "Vietnamese citizens who are 18 years 
of age in full or over, who have the ability to work, who 
are voluntary and satisfy all other standards and conditions 
in accordance with Vietnamese laws and the laws and 
requirements of the foreign party may work in a foreign 
country."  The Code also includes the requirement that 
enterprises have a permit to send workers abroad, thus 
ensuring some measure of government control over the system. 
The Code details the rights and obligations of both workers 
and enterprises, including all enterprises' obligations "to 
manage and protect the interests of laborers during the 
period of working abroad under their contracts in accordance 
with the law of Vietnam and the law of the foreign country;" 
"to pay compensation for damage to the laborer caused by the 
breach of the contract by the enterprise;" and "to complain 
to the authorized State body against breaches of the laws in 
the field of labor export." 
 
An updated Decree (July 2003) provides the legal mechanism 
to implement these provisions.  This regulation requires 
that companies "monitor, manage, and protect the legal 
rights of labor during their time of working abroad" and 
"have cadres for the management of the labor depending upon 
the foreign market."  The enterprises are thus required 
regularly to inspect overseas workplaces both before and 
after signing labor contracts.  The information from the pre- 
inspection must be included in the registration of a labor 
export contract submitted to MOLISA.  According to one labor 
export company, MOLISA carries out both scheduled and 
surprise inspections of labor export companies. 
 
The July 2003 implementation Decree highlights the 
conditions for granting and revoking licenses for labor 
export.  Vietnam now has 126 licensed labor export 
companies.  Of these, 119 are state enterprises "owned" by a 
wide range of ministries and provinces, while the remaining 
seven are private companies.  Since the implementation of 
this Decree in July 2004, MOLISA has been reviewing the 
current licenses and new applications.  This process is 
still ongoing, and MOLISA has already denied 20 applications 
for new companies that did not meet necessary conditions 
under the Decree.  MOLISA has also used its power to revoke 
and suspend the licenses of "irresponsible" labor export 
companies.  This happened ten times between 2001 and 2003, 
and in 2004 at least ten more enterprises had their licenses 
revoked and 50 had their licenses suspended because of 
"inefficient operations."  For more serious abuses of 
worker's rights, MOLISA coordinates with MPS to prosecute 
violators under criminal statutes.  Notably, an interagency 
circular (an internal GVN regulation) was jointly issued by 
MOLISA and MPS on January 18, 2005 to guide prevention of 
and combat against violations in labor export.  The Circular 
listed crimes that may face administrative sanction or 
criminal prosecution and clearly defined the 
responsibilities of MPS, MOLISA and police and labor 
agencies at the local level. 
 
At a March 2004 interagency conference to review the results 
of a USG-funded UNODC survey of the Vietnamese anti-TIP 
legal framework (Ref F), the participants created a 
framework for action.  They agreed on the need to harmonize 
Vietnamese law with relevant international conventions; 
agree on a definition of trafficking and specific criminal 
acts of trafficking as well as a mechanism for interagency 
cooperation to allow the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers; establish the legal authority for the 
protection of witnesses and victims of trafficking; 
facilitate the repatriation and reintegration of victims of 
international trafficking and resolve problems relating to 
legal jeopardy for trafficking victims; promote 
international and regional cooperation to combat TIP; and, 
address the problems at the source of trafficking in 
persons: poverty and difficult economic circumstances. 
According to MOJ, as of March 2005 efforts in all of these 
areas are "actively ongoing" but have yet to show results. 
 
¶B. Penalties for traffickers: 
 
The revised Penal Code of Vietnam states in Article 119 that 
those who commit acts of "trading" women for the purpose of 
prostitution shall be sentenced to between five and twenty 
years of imprisonment.  Article 120 provides sentences of 
between ten and twenty years of imprisonment for those who 
commit the crime of trading in, fraudulently exchanging or 
appropriating children for use for prostitution purposes. 
Traffickers of people for labor exploitation are prosecuted 
in Vietnam under Penal Code section 275 and face penalties 
of between two and twenty years in prison depending on the 
severity of the crime. 
 
¶C. Penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault: 
 
Penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault range from six 
months in prison to capital punishment.  Capital punishment 
is reserved for cases in which: the victim is killed, 
seriously disabled or infected with HIV/AIDS; the 
perpetrator is a participant in a gang rape; or the 
perpetrator has raped more than one person.  With the 
exception of the potential of the death penalty or life in 
prison in the circumstances mentioned above, the penalties 
for rape/sexual assault and for trafficking in persons are 
similar. 
 
¶D. Prosecution statistics: 
 
The GVN's Department of Crime Statistics was established in 
the Supreme People's Procuracy in August 2003.  It provided 
its first set of statistics to the USG in late February 
¶2004.  The following is the number of cases against 
traffickers in women and children (Articles 119 and 120 of 
the Penal Code) in CY 2004.  This data does not include 
cases involving those guilty of trafficking in men for labor 
exploitation. 
 
Indicted:    113 suspects in 162 cases; 
Prosecuted:  94 suspects in 142 cases; 
Convicted:   110 suspects in 175 cases. 
 
¶E. Information on traffickers and beneficiaries of 
trafficking: 
Although the GVN refers occasionally to the involvement of 
organized crime in trafficking cases, there is no evidence 
to date to indicate that international organized criminal 
syndicates are involved in trafficking in Vietnam.  Most of 
the traffickers caught and prosecuted in Vietnam are small- 
scale traffickers operating close to their home villages as 
individuals or in small groups.  In many cases, the 
traffickers are either former trafficking victims 
themselves, or relatives of the trafficking victims.  In a 
review of the cases of 428 people arrested for trafficking 
in the north of Vietnam from 1999-2002, the MPS General 
Criminal Department determined that 80 percent of the 
perpetrators were unemployed, farmers or itinerant vendors. 
There have been several cases where "matchmaking" agencies 
in Ho Chi Minh City have been accused of defrauding women in 
the process of arranging marriages between men from Taiwan 
or South Korea and Vietnamese women, but there is so far no 
indication that trafficking is involved in these cases. 
 
The proceeds of trafficking do not appear to concentrate in 
any particular place or gravitate towards any particular 
group in Vietnam, but instead are shared among the members 
of small free-lance ad-hoc groups of traffickers, according 
to UNODC. 
 
¶F. GVN investigation of trafficking cases: 
 
The GVN actively investigates trafficking cases, and 
prosecutes and convicts traffickers.  In general, the GVN 
does not use active investigative techniques in any criminal 
investigations, including narcotics cases.  According to the 
DEA, the Vietnamese police do not have the authority or the 
capability to use wiretaps effectively in criminal cases. 
Legally, they can conduct undercover operations, but MPS 
states that it lacks implementing regulations spelling out 
exactly what is legal and illegal in undercover operations, 
and so does not yet conduct them.  Vietnamese law does not 
permit granting immunity from prosecution in exchange for 
information, and American-style plea bargains do not happen. 
In criminal cases, the judge does have the discretion to 
mitigate sentencing if defendants have been cooperative 
throughout the investigation and trial process, but a pre- 
arranged bargain is not legal. 
 
A project aimed at improving and refining the legislation 
covering tools available to investigate and prosecute cases 
is currently underway under the auspices of UNODC.  MOJ is 
the implementing agency for this project. 
 
¶G. Training for GVN officials in TIP issues: 
 
At the moment, the GVN does not provide special training in 
recognizing, investigating or prosecuting instances of 
trafficking.  However, in 2004 MPS cooperated with UNODC on 
a U.S.-funded project that to train 121 Border Army 
officers, police officers, judges, prosecutors and Border 
Army and Police Academy instructors in recognizing and 
investigating trafficking at high-risk border crossing 
points in Quang Ninh and Tay Ninh Provinces.  According to 
UNODC post-training evaluations, "all participants now have 
a basic knowledge of human trafficking, and some have an in- 
depth knowledge." 
 
¶H. International cooperation in TIP enforcement: 
 
The GVN cooperates with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases, but not 
often.  According to MPS, this has happened "less than ten 
times."  However, one case in April 2003 received a great 
deal of press attention when Vietnam-Cambodia cooperation 
resulted in the elimination of "several" trafficking rings 
and long prison sentences handed down to some leaders.  MPS 
officials also cited two instances in which China and 
Vietnam jointly (and successfully) investigated trafficking 
cases, both in 2001.  MFA officials have noted that, with 
the assistance of UNICEF, Chinese and Vietnamese border 
authorities meet "regularly" to exchange information, and to 
"work out plans to coordinate actions to prevent cross- 
border smuggling of women and children."  In the context of 
a USG-funded TIP project implemented by the Asia Foundation 
and the Vietnam Women's Union, Vietnam and Cambodian 
government representatives met in November 2004 near the 
Vietnam-Cambodia border to discuss techniques for combating 
trafficking between Vietnam and Cambodia. 
 
¶I. GVN extradition of traffickers: 
 
Vietnam can and does extradite foreigners who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries, even in the absence of 
extradition treaties, but only on a case-by-case basis. 
According to Interpol-Vietnam, statistics for extradition 
cases in 2004 and other years are unavailable, but the 
number of trafficking-related extraditions in 2004 was "less 
than ten." 
 
MOJ officials noted, however, that Vietnam does not 
extradite its own citizens anywhere for any purpose, in 
accordance with the 1998 Citizenship Law. 
 
¶J. Evidence of GVN tolerance of or involvement in TIP: 
 
Vietnam suffers from endemic corruption, particularly at the 
working levels of law enforcement.  While cases of 
trafficking-related corruption appear rarely if at all in 
the press, NGOs and international organizations believe that 
they exist. 
 
The most recent press account of possible official 
involvement in corruption appeared in the "Great Solidarity" 
newspaper (published by the Vietnam Fatherland Front) in 
February 2004.  In that case, one trafficking victim was a 
cousin of the police commander for the commune involved. 
The newspaper quoted a Women's Union official who noted that 
in cases where a family relationship exists between the 
authorities and the traffickers, the law enforcement system 
breaks down.  The article stated that, at the commune level, 
where most people have at least some distant family 
relationship with each other, the fact that many traffickers 
are people who return to their hometowns from overseas makes 
law enforcement "more difficult."  MPS contacts note that 
the professionalism and capabilities of law enforcement in 
rural areas is usually lower than at the central level. 
 
Post has no information indicating the existence of 
trafficking-related corruption at the central level of the 
GVN. 
 
¶K. Steps to end official participation in TIP: 
 
MPS officials stated that a combination of internal 
administrative punishments and legal prosecution would be 
used to combat any official corruption or participation in 
trafficking.  To date, the GVN has not confirmed any cases 
of corruption directly related to trafficking, but MPS 
officials noted that there may have been cases in which 
traffickers also had some official capacity, especially at 
the local level.  Those cases would be contained in the 
aggregate indictment, prosecution and arrest statistics 
under Articles 119 and 120.  The GVN does not analyze that 
data to determine if any of the individuals involved are 
public officials. 
 
¶L. Vietnam has in some cases been a destination for 
international child sex tourism.  Foreign law enforcement 
sources state that although its investigative capacity is 
limited, the GVN is "extremely responsive" to requests for 
cooperation in cases where foreign pedophiles are wanted for 
child sex tourism crimes.  In late 2004 and early 2005 the 
GVN (at the request of the Australian Government) deported 
two Australian citizens for child sex crimes in Vietnam.  In 
2004, Vietnam cooperated closely with U.S. authorities in 
returning a wanted U.S. citizen pedophile back to the United 
States for prosecution.  Under Article 6 of the Vietnamese 
Penal Code, Vietnamese citizens who commit crimes outside of 
Vietnam are still subject to prosecution under Vietnamese 
law.  This also applies to sexual crimes against children, 
though Vietnamese are not generally considered to be 
significantly represented in the ranks of international 
child sex tourists. 
 
¶M. GVN ratification of international instruments: 
 
ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and immediate 
action for the elimination of the worst forms of child 
labor: Signed and ratified.  Date of ratification: December 
19, 2000. 
 
ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor: 
Not yet signed. 
 
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution, and 
child pornography: Signed and ratified.  Date of 
ratification: December 20, 2001. 
 
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime: Not yet 
signed, but according to UNODC and MOJ, Vietnam hopes to 
ratify the UN Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime in 2005 and sign the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children 
simultaneously. 
 
¶5. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
¶A. GVN assistance to victims: 
 
In accordance with the Prime Minister's directive number 
776/TTg, MOLISA has the responsibility for caring for 
victims of trafficking.  In practice, MOLISA interprets this 
as the responsibility to "coordinate with relevant agencies 
in providing guidance and directions to localities to 
conduct job training and generation activities and to 
provide medical treatment to victims of trafficking."  The 
effect of this interpretation is to shift primary 
responsibility (financial and operational) for actually 
caring for victims of trafficking back to the provincial and 
local level.  At the local level, it is usually the Women's 
Union representatives who care for returnees.  In 
particularly hard-hit communes in provinces such as An 
Giang, Lang Son and Quang Ninh, local People's Committees 
and Women's Unions work together to provide services and 
care to returnees.  The level of this care, in particular 
medical care, depends on the political will and the 
financial resources of the commune.  Medical care is 
generally rudimentary in the communities from which 
trafficking victims originate, and so many victims likely do 
not receive adequate care. 
 
¶B. GVN funding of NGOs providing services to victims: 
 
Local governments often work with NGOs to provide support to 
returned trafficking victims in the form of vocational 
training, farmland or capital for microcredit loans.  In 
addition, nearly all international organization and NGO anti- 
trafficking programs have a GVN component, usually in the 
form of an in-kind contribution such as office space, 
personnel or services. 
¶C. Treatment of victims: 
 
Trafficking victims in Vietnam are not detained, arrested or 
placed in protective custody against their will.  The GVN 
routinely sends prostitutes to "rehabilitation centers" 
where they receive medical care and vocational training 
during a period of incarceration, but trafficking victims 
are not sent to these centers unless they are caught 
engaging in prostitution after their return to Vietnam. 
MOLISA officials noted that trafficking victims have the 
opportunity to enter a prostitute rehabilitation center 
voluntarily to take advantage of the medical care and 
vocational training, but that this is very rare. 
 
Victims of trafficking for prostitution within Vietnam do 
run the risk of being sent to rehabilitation centers. 
However, police and local government officials in Danang and 
Ho Chi Minh City (and other provinces in Vietnam) have told 
Embassy officers that the most likely outcome for a 
trafficking victim caught up in an anti-prostitution sweep 
would be to be sent back to her home village or district to 
receive care there.  The rehabilitation centers are usually 
reserved for women who have been arrested multiple times for 
prostitution or for those who also need help with drug 
addiction (ref G). 
 
¶D. Rights of victims and treatment of returnees continued: 
 
Post has no information indicating that returned trafficking 
victims in Vietnam are treated as criminals.  In all 
official meetings, in conferences, in seminars, and in the 
press, returnees are referred to as "victims."  The Director 
of MOJ's Legal Aid Agency has advocated changing the law 
explicitly to acknowledge the victim status of returnees, 
but so far this has not occurred. 
 
¶E. Victim participation in investigations or suits against 
traffickers: 
 
According to the MOJ, trafficking victims in Vietnam are 
encouraged to assist in the investigation and prosecution 
process.  They are also encouraged to file suit against the 
traffickers.  Article 31 of a new Criminal Procedures Code 
(see section F below) explicitly states the right of any 
Vietnamese citizen to make complaints or statements during 
criminal proceedings. 
 
Depending on the court ruling, if a ruling is against an 
employer (for example, the employer is sentenced to 
imprisonment), then compensation will be awarded to the 
victim by the court, including back pay.  Article 29 of the 
new Criminal Procedures Code establishes the right to 
compensation and the restoration of reputation and other 
benefits for the victims of injustice, including 
trafficking. 
 
Victims may leave Vietnam in accordance with emigration 
regulations. 
 
¶F. Protection of victims and witnesses: 
 
On November 26, 2003, the National Assembly passed the 
Revised Criminal Procedures Code, which took effect on July 
1, 2004.  Point 3, Article 55 under the Code states: "the 
witness has the right to request the government to protect 
his life, health, reputation, dignity, assets and other 
legitimate rights and interests when taking part in the 
prosecutorial process." 
 
According to Article 7 of the Code, "citizens have the 
rights to have their life, health, reputation, dignity and 
assets protected by law.  Any acts ruining life, health, 
reputation, dignity or assets will be dealt with by law.  If 
the life, health, reputation, dignity or assets of the 
victim, witness, or anyone else taking part in the 
prosecutorial process, or their loved ones, are threatened, 
competent authorities shall apply necessary measures for 
protection as stipulated by the law."   According to the 
National Assembly's Law Department, in practice security and 
police authorities have provided protection for victims and 
witnesses, in most cases at their request.  Also according 
to the Law Department, in some exceptional cases, the GVN 
automatically offers to provide protection, depending on the 
seriousness and the importance of the case. 
 
The GVN does not run or fund shelters for victims or 
witnesses. 
 
¶G. GVN specialized training for officials dealing with 
trafficking, especially related to protection of victims: 
 
The GVN does not in general provide specialized training but 
has sent labor attaches to nine of its embassies overseas 
located in countries that have the largest number of 
Vietnamese workers (ref H).  These attaches are responsible 
for working with the local authorities, the employers of 
Vietnamese workers and other Embassy staff members to 
monitor labor conditions and intervene on behalf of 
Vietnamese workers if necessary.  These officers have access 
to a fund that can be used to help Vietnamese workers who 
find themselves in a difficult situation (such as an abusive 
workplace, or a bankrupt employer) to go home.  This 
provides an important protection for workers against being 
trafficked for labor.   In addition, MFA officers assigned 
to Taiwan receive special briefings on working with 
Vietnamese women who are married to men from Taiwan, and are 
instructed to "work with Taiwan authorities to give a 
helping hand to the victims, to detect and take timely 
action against traffickers in women under the cloak of 
marriage brokers," according to MFA Consular Director 
General Dinh. 
 
Also see Paragraph 4, subsection G regarding the USG funded 
anti-TIP training program for GVN officials. 
 
¶H. GVN assistance to repatriated nationals who are victims 
of trafficking: 
 
In accordance with the Prime Minister's directive number 
776/TTg, MOLISA has the responsibility for caring for 
victims of trafficking.  In practice, MOLISA interprets this 
as the responsibility to "coordinate with relevant agencies 
in providing guidance and directions to localities to 
conduct job training and generation activities and to 
provide medical treatment to victims of trafficking."  The 
effect of this interpretation is to shift primary 
responsibility (financial and operational) for actually 
caring for victims of trafficking back to the provincial and 
local level.  At the local level, it is usually the Women's 
Union representatives that care for returnees.  In 
particularly hard-hit communes in provinces such as An 
Giang, Lang Son and Quang Ninh, local People's Committees 
and Women's Unions work together to provide services and 
care to returnees.  The level of this care, in particular 
medical care, depends on the financial resources of the 
commune.  Medical care is generally rudimentary in the 
communities from which trafficking victims originate, and so 
many victims do not get care. 
 
In 2004, the GVN created and funded a new account for the 
protection and welfare of overseas workers, allowing the GVN 
to assist overseas workers in distress without requiring 
workers to rely on either the labor export companies 
responsible for sending them overseas or the employers in 
the host country.  This also allowed the GVN for the first 
time to use public funds to repatriate workers whose 
employment situation outside of Vietnam deteriorates to the 
point that they need assistance to return to Vietnam (ref 
I). 
 
¶I. NGOs working with trafficking victims in Vietnam and 
cooperation with the GVN: 
 
Major ongoing NGO projects in Vietnam include: 
 
--  Oxfam Quebec, Save the Children UK, and Save the 
Children Sweden:  In the northeast (Bac Giang, Quang Ninh, 
and Lang Son provinces), this project is aimed at awareness- 
raising through the distribution of leaflets and local 
economic development through the provision of training and 
support for women starting their own businesses. 
Counterpart agency: the Women's Union. 
 
--  the ILO:  The ILO's project is part of a subregional 
project including all of the Mekong subregion countries.  It 
is located in Quang Ninh and Thanh Hoa provinces as well as 
in Ho Chi Minh City.  ILO focuses on: advocacy and awareness- 
raising; capacity building in MOLISA, Border Guards, MPS and 
the Women's Union; and direct assistance.  Counterpart 
agencies are MOLISA, MPS and the Women's Union. 
 
-- IOM:  IOM plays a vital leadership role among 
governmental and non-governmental organizations combating 
TIP in Vietnam.  In its direct project activities, IOM is 
focused on protection of returnees.  Also a regional Mekong 
project, IOM has opened a shelter for returned trafficked 
children in Ho Chi Minh City and provides assistance to 
trafficking victims who want to return to Vietnam.  IOM 
received USG funding in 2004 to expand the shelter project 
to the northeastern province of Quang Ninh.  Counterpart 
agencies: MOLISA and the Women's Union. 
 
--  UNICEF has a Vietnam component to a subregional 
antitrafficking project, which focuses on protection of 
victims and institutional capacity building, as well as 
legal reform.  UNICEF's project is unique in that it 
incorporates children themselves in project planning. 
Counterparts: MPS and MOLISA. 
 
--  A UNODC project, with USG funding,  focuses on capacity 
building among law enforcement agencies, legal reform 
leading to accession to UN protocols on trafficking, and 
international law-enforcement cooperation.  Counterpart: 
MPS. 
 
--  The Asia Foundation, also funded by the USG, focuses on 
prevention of trafficking in Quang Ninh and An Giang 
Provinces.  TAF works with Vietnamese NGOs and the Women's 
Union to improve conditions and opportunities for women in 
the provinces.  Activities include training of women 
political candidates and business managers, and provision of 
microcredit loans for women starting small businesses. 
Counterpart: the Women's Union. 
 
--  the UN Interagency Project (UNIAP) in Bangkok 
administers a USD three million (total project cost) project 
against trafficking in women and children in the Mekong Sub- 
region, including Vietnam, which attempts to collect data 
and to improve internal coordination among GVN agencies. 
The UNIAP is currently on hiatus in Vietnam pending the 
GVN's approval of its "second phase" projects.  Counterpart: 
MOLISA. 
 
These organizations altogether are spending less than USD 
five million dollars annually in Vietnam.  Most projects are 
small-scale and focused mainly on raising awareness of 
trafficking in at-risk communities, with some additional 
efforts to address "root causes" and protect returning 
victims of trafficking.  The major exception is the UNODC 
project.  In all cases, the projects have a GVN partner 
organization and draw heavily on donated staff from the 
Women's Union, MOLISA and local Departments of Labor, 
Invalids, and Social Affairs and in some cases MPS.  The 
GVN's contribution to these projects is nearly always in- 
kind, in the form of office space, personnel, equipment and 
supplies if available.  The international community in 
general, and the NGO and International Organization 
community in particular, is unanimous in its positive 
assessment of GVN cooperation.  UN agencies with experience 
working with the GVN in several different sectors state that 
interaction on the issue of trafficking is the most 
productive and effective of all of their projects.  Even on 
the issue of law enforcement cooperation, an area where the 
GVN is infamously bad, has a bright spot in the area of TIP: 
the Ministry of Public Security genuinely cooperated with 
the Australian Federal Police in 2004 on two cases involving 
Australian pedophiles and with U.S. law enforcement officers 
on one case, resulting in the deportation of three 
individuals: two to Australia and one to the United States. 
 
POC AND TIME SPENT ON REPORT: 
 
POC: Benjamin Moeling, Political Officer 
(moelingbw@state.gov) tel: 84-4-772-1500x2216 fax:84-4-772- 
¶2614. 
 
Time spent on report: 
FSN-10, 14 hours 
FSN-9, 2 hours 
FO-02, 30 hours 
FO-02, 1 hour 
FE-MC, 1 hour 
 
MARINE