05TAIPEI2246
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S INAUGURATION
Fri May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

200927Z May 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002246 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S INAUGURATION 
ANNIVERSARY 
 
 
¶1. Summary: As May 20 is President Chen Shui-bian's 
first inauguration anniversary of his second term, 
several Taiwan dailies covered, among other issues, 
Chen's approval rating, his constitutional reform plan 
and the 2008 presidential race.  The pro-unification 
"United Daily News" printed an opinion survey of Chen's 
approval rating on its front page, which showed that 
Chen's popularity has dropped from 41 percent in May, 
2004 to 38 percent, and 47 percent of the respondents 
said they are dissatisfied with Chen.  Several 
newspapers also reported in their inside pages 
President Chen's remarks on constitutional reforms 
Thursday, but their focuses differed.  The pro- 
independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, 
ran a banner headline on its page two that read: "Bian 
announced that the time for comprehensive 
constitutional reform has come."  The "United Daily 
News," however, headlined on its page two: "Bian [said] 
on the eve of May 20: Issues that have not been 
generally agreed upon by the public will not be 
included in current constitutional reforms."  The pro- 
independence "Taiwan Daily," on the other hand, spent 
almost its whole page two discussing the possible 
candidates for the 2008 presidential race. 
 
¶2. Several newspapers also editorialized on President 
Chen's inauguration anniversary.  Both the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times" and "Taiwan Daily" 
editorials urged Chen to concentrate on Taiwan's 
domestic affairs rather than looking to China for its 
illusive goodwill gestures.  A "United Daily News" 
editorial, however, outlined two tasks for the 
remainder of President Chen's second term, namely, 
cross-Strait relations and constitutional reforms.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "[We] Expect President A-bian to Faithfully 
Implement His Campaign Promises" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
800,000] editorialized (5/20): 
 
". President A-bian slightly modified his policy 
direction and shifted toward the route of the 
mainstream prior to [last Saturday's] National Assembly 
election.  It remains to be seen whether he will 
finally determine and stick to one direction or will 
continue flip-flopping in the next three years.  We 
want to remind [A-bian] that even though the voter 
turnout for the National Assembly election was low, the 
result of the election still indicated that [KMT 
Chairman] Lien Chan and [PFP Chairman] James Soong have 
failed to win public support for their enthusiasm of 
kowtowing to Beijing.  Should A-bian plan to focus his 
future administrative achievements on his unrealistic 
meeting with [Chinese President] Hu Jintao, or even 
imagine that he can win a Nobel Prize for peace because 
of that, he is doomed to lose at both ends.  A-bian has 
pointed out recently that China's barbaric suppression 
of Taiwan at the World Health Organization indicated 
that Beijing had first set a trap of the 1992 Consensus 
and then let Lien and Soong fall into the trap in an 
attempt to destroy the Republic of China.  What Chen 
said is exactly true, and isn't the so-called Bian-Hu 
meeting similarly dangerous [for Taiwan]? ." 
 
B) "With His Approval Rating Dropping, Chen Shui-bian 
Should Take Far-reaching Measures to Promote Reforms in 
an Attempt to Regain the Public's Confidence" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 
150,000] noted in its editorial (5/20): 
 
".Taiwan does not have the ability to play a peace card 
before China extends an olive branch.  It is better for 
Taiwan to put its focus on its domestic affairs rather 
than allowing China to make repeated demands on us. 
President Chen should explain his administrative 
visions to all his people and should start proactively 
promoting reforms and major construction projects for 
the nation.  He needs to mold a Cabinet team of solid 
strength and demonstrate good and efficient 
administrative capability so as to regain the public's 
confidence and support." 
 
C) "From Chen Shui-bian to Emperor Wu of the Han 
Dynasty - President Chen's Actual Term of Office Will 
Last Only One and a Half Years" 
 
The editorial of the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 600,000] wrote (5/20): 
 
"Time and tide wait for no man.  We believe that what 
is important for President Chen during his remaining 
brief term of office is that he must not expect to 
attain any immediate administrative achievements. 
Instead, he should make the best use of his limited 
term of office to make some arrangements in advance for 
his future status in the history. . In a nutshell, the 
two major tasks for Chen during the remainder of his 
second term will be: first, cross-Strait relations, and 
second, constitutional reforms. 
 
"With regard to constitutional reforms, we believe that 
the so-called `new constitution movement' must be 
stopped.  Over the past five years, Chen has destroyed 
our constitution, and as a result, our national 
identity was torn apart because of him; the 
constitutional system was thus sabotaged by him; and 
the constitutional spirit was trampled by him. . 
 
"President Chen should cease any efforts with regard to 
the constitution immediately after the constitutional 
amendments are made by the ad hoc National Assembly 
members elected [last Saturday].  In other words, he 
must not rashly start the so-called new constitution 
movement for 2006 to 2008. . 
 
"As for cross-Strait relations, . President Chen must 
lead the DPP out of the dead end of Taiwan independence 
within his term of office. . Should Chen want to look 
for a breakthrough in the cross-Strait relations, he 
must try and focus on the mechanism for real 
interaction.  If he could put the three links across 
the Taiwan Strait into practice within his remaining 
term of office, the interaction structure across the 
Taiwan Strait will be established.  Consequently, the 
factor of Taiwan independence will be resolved, and 
Chen's historical status will thus be determined. ." 
 
PAAL