05TAIPEI1960
FALLOUT OVER AIRPORT VIOLENCE CONTINUES
Thu Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

280921Z Apr 05UNCLAS TAIPEI 001960 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AIT/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC TW
SUBJECT: FALLOUT OVER AIRPORT VIOLENCE CONTINUES 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) The April 26 clash between Pan-Green and Pan-Blue 
radicals at Taipei's Chiang Kai-shek (CKS) International 
Airport over KMT Chairman Lien Chan's visit to Mainland China 
continues to dominate the Taiwan media, attracting almost as 
much attention as Lien's ongoing visit itself.  The violence 
erupted despite the presence of some 3,500 National Police 
Agency (NPA) officers around the airport.  The Chen 
government has expressed outrage and embarrassment over the 
violence and the police failure.  Premier Frank Hsieh stated 
the violence has tarnished Taiwan's international image and 
pledged a full investigation.  Both media and legislators 
have also harshly criticized the NPA, and there were media 
reports that few of the airport police officers had received 
riot training.  Hsieh announced April 27 that NPA Aviation 
Police Bureau Chief Chen Juei-tien had been relieved of his 
duties because of his failure to direct the police on the 
scene to quell the violence.  Protesters from both camps have 
vowed to return to CKS airport when Lien returns on May 3, 
but NPA officials have announced that police officers with 
anti-riot training will be present and will not allow 
protesters to enter the terminal or the demonstrations to 
turn violent. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Police have started rounding up alleged ringleaders 
of the violence with ten arrested so far.  Prosecutors also 
notified three deep-"Green" Legislative Yuan (LY) members as 
well as popular talk show host and Taiwan Solidarity Union 
(TSU) supporter Wang Ben-hu that their activities on April 26 
were under investigation.  Police have charged Democratic 
Progressive Party (DPP) legislator Wang Shih-chien with 
instigating the violence and DPP legislator Hsu Kuo-yung and 
TSU Caucus Leader Lo Chih-ming with fueling the clashes.  Lo 
 
SIPDIS 
Chih-ming resigned as TSU Caucus Leader and Minister of 
Interior Su Jia-chyuan offered his resignation, which was 
refused by Premier Hsieh.  Both ruling DPP and TSU leaders 
formally apologized for the violent actions of their 
supporters.  In his apology, DPP Caucus Whip Lai Ching-teh 
vowed to discipline any party members or public office 
holders found to have engaged in unlawful activities. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Several members of the ethnic Mainlander Bamboo 
United Gang caught on camera violently beating Pan-Green 
demonstrators were also detained.  Leaders of the 
pro-unification KMT New Party faction, which brought pro-Lien 
demonstrators to the airport, denied any links with the 
Bamboo United Gang, which had participated in violent 
anti-DPP clashes after the March 20, 2004, presidential 
election.  New Party Chairman Yok Mu-ming, however, was 
publicly embarrassed when a photograph of him at the airport 
with well-known Bamboo Gang leader Wang Lan surfaced in the 
press. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment:  The violence that erupted over Lien's 
visit is particularly damaging to the DPP government, which 
has tried in recent days to portray the Lien visit in a 
positive light, after earlier acerbic criticism.  The shock 
over the violence in Taiwan has overshadowed the local 
coverage of the early stages of the Lien visit, and further 
protests could stoke additional animosity between Pan-Green 
and Pan-Blue camps in the LY.  Images of the CKS airport 
violence broadcast worldwide on April 26 also handed the PRC 
a propaganda coup, portraying Taiwan as violently divided and 
unstable.  The CKS scenes, on the other hand, could also 
reinforce pressure from a public tired of unification and 
independence extremes to move to the pragmatic middle ground 
in support of the status quo.  President Chen's quick 
condemnation of the clashes suggests he might try to use 
public revulsion to claim he is seeking moderation and 
cooperation with the opposition after Lien returns from 
Beijing. 
PAAL