05TAIPEI2650
MEDIA REACTION: Cross-Strait Affairs
Thu Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 002650 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ROBERT 
PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Cross-Strait Affairs 
 
¶1.  Summary: Taiwan dailies focused June 16 on the dispute 
between Taiwan and Japan regarding their overlapping 
exclusive economic zones, and China's plan that would allow 
Taiwan people to work in China.  The conservative, pro- 
unification "United Daily News" carried a headline banner on 
its front page that read: "CCP Greatly Loosens Its 
Restrictions To Allow The Taiwan People To Work In China." 
 
¶2. Taiwan dailies editorialized and commented June 16 on 
local issues (e.g. a new retirement plan for laborers, the 
government's plan regarding a minimum tax scheme) and the 
Taiwan-Japan relationship (e.g. protest held by Taiwan 
aboriginal Legislator May Chin in front of Japan's Yasukuni 
Shrine).  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," however, 
commented on an incident where a local Taiwan college 
removed the national flag and a portrait of Dr. Sun Yat-sen 
in order to show goodwill to Chinese guests. The "Liberty 
Times" editorialized that the incident shows that a minority 
of Taiwan people lack a Taiwan-centered identity.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "The Incident of the Removal of the National Flag Is A 
Shameful Behavior That Has Disgraced The Country" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
800,000](06/16) editorialized: 
 
". As a matter of fact, one cannot view the incident [where] 
the Hsiuping Institute removed the national flag and the 
portrait of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, founder of the Republic of 
China, as a single case.  It, however, reflects a fact that 
a minority of the Taiwan people has a confused and a 
vacillating attitude regarding a Taiwan-centered identity, 
and lacks a concrete national identity.  Consequently, 
Taiwan has lost its position, and lowered its status even 
before Taiwan would benefit from cross-Strait exchanges. 
During the recent fishery disputes between Taiwan and Japan, 
some politicians, disregarding Taiwan's difficult situation 
in the international community, criticized the government's 
negligence in protecting Taiwan fishermen, and advocated 
that Taiwan fishermen should hang the PRC's national flag on 
their boats [in order to get China's protection].  The fact 
also showed the abnormal attitude [of some Taiwan people] 
that tries to depreciate the status of their country [i.e. 
Taiwan], and to view China as the mother country.  Hence, 
the Hsiuping incident is just the tip of an iceberg, which 
distinctively indicates that Taiwan is facing a serious 
crisis of national identity. ." 
 
PAAL