05TAIPEI3642
Preliminary report on candidates running for
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TAIPEI 003642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
DEPT FOR EAP/TC, INR/EAP 
 
FROM AIT KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON TW
SUBJECT:  Preliminary report on candidates running for 
yearend mayoral/magistrate elections 
 
¶1. Summary.  Although the registration for candidates 
running for the year-end mayoral/magistrate elections has 
not yet begun, both the KMT and DPP have already announced 
their candidates. Following are the biographies of the 
candidates nominated thus far, and a synopsis of the current 
outlook.  With the exception of Taitung County, where the 
incumbent is an independent, all incumbents are DPP members. 
Despite the KMT's apparent resurgence following the KMT 
Chairmanship election, Southern Taiwan popular opinion 
continues to tilt heavily "Green" and it seems likely that 
all incumbents will prevail. End Summary. 
 
Kaohsiung County 
---------------- 
¶2.  Yang Chiu-hsiung (DPP): incumbent Kaohsiung County 
Magistrate elected in 2001 
     Age: 46 years old 
     Education: Master, Civil Engineering, National Taiwan 
     University Bachelor, Civil Engineering, National Taiwan 
     University 
 
Yang was first elected as a Provincial Assembly Member in 
1994, and as a Legislative Yuan Member in 1998.  Yang has a 
"clean" image and performed well this term.  He has the 
advantage of being an incumbent and people expect that he 
will win his re-election bid. 
 
     Lin Yi-shih (KMT): incumbent Legislator elected first 
     in 1998, 2001, and 2004 
     Age: 37 years old 
     Education: Graduate of Department of Dentistry, Taipei 
     Medical College 
 
Lin is son of Lin Hsien-pao, the leader of the Red Faction 
in Kaohsiung County.  He supported Wang Jin-pyng in the KMT 
Chairman election.  He is well known because he served as 
the emcee for many campaign rallies during the last 
presidential election and because he frequently participates 
in political TV talk shows. 
 
Chiayi City 
----------- 
¶3. Chen Li-chen(DPP): incumbent Chiayi City Mayor running 
for re-election 
     Age: 44 years old 
     Education: Master in Environmental Medicine, China 
     Medical College, Taiwan 
     BA in Public Hygiene Dept., China Medical College, 
     Taiwan 
 
Chen served as Acting Mayor when former Mayor Chang Po-ya 
was appointed Minister of Interior Ministry in May 2000 and 
she was later elected as Mayor in 2001 with Chang's support. 
She was an independent until 2003 when she joined the DPP. 
Her switch in affiliations surprised Chiayi City residents 
and she had to publicly tell people that Chang was aware of 
her decision.  She won the party primary over the son of the 
President's adviser, Lee Hung-shih, to become the DPP 
candidate. 
 
   Huang Min-hui (KMT), incumbent Legislator elected 2001 
   and 2004 
        Age: 46 years old 
        Education: Bachelor of National Normal University, 
        Taipei 
 
Huang was a former National Assembly member.  Huang's father 
was a Taiwan Provincial Assembly member from 1990 until his 
death in 1998.  Because of the long-time constituent 
services performed as public servants by both her and her 
father, our contact said that Huang has chance to win the 
race. 
Chiayi County 
------------- 
¶4.  Chen Ming-wen (DPP): incumbent Chiayi County Magistrate, 
running for re-election 
     Age: 50 years old 
     Education: Bachelor, Philosophy Department of Tung Hai 
     University, Taiwan 
 
Chen is the leader of the Lin Faction, one of the two 
dominant factions in Chiayi County.  He was a KMT member 
until 2001.  He joined the DPP in 2002 and ran as a DPP 
candidate for Chiayi Magistrate against KMT candidate, Weng 
Chung-chun, who is one of the Huang Faction heavyweights. 
 
KMT candidate -- KMT has not announced its nominee because 
no one of the Huang faction wants to run against the 
incumbent due to Chen's good performance and high approval 
rating.  It is said that KMT will recruit the Director of 
Civil Affairs Bureau of Taipei City Government Ho Hong-Jung 
to run, but this has not yet been confirmed.  Ho Hong-jung 
is a native of Chiayi County.  Judging from the current 
situation, it is expected that incumbent Magistrate Chen has 
a good chance to win his re-election bid. 
 
Tainan City 
----------- 
¶5.  Hsu Tain-tsair (DPP): incumbent Tainan City Mayor, he is 
running for re-election 
     Age: 55 years old 
     Education: BA and MA in Economics, Chinese Culture 
     University, Taipei.  Studied at doctoral program in 
     Business Administration, Rutgers University, New Jersey 
 
Hsu studied in the U.S. for more than 10 years during the 
1980's.  He was "blacklisted" by Taiwan authorities because 
of the pro-Taiwan independence views he expressed as a 
student in the U.S.  He was legislator from 1992 to 2001. 
He quit the DPP in 1995 and ran unsuccessfully against 
former Mayor George Chang.  He re-joined the DPP in 2001 and 
was endorsed by President Chen to run against DPP's 
incumbent. Hsu easily won the election. As an incumbent 
facing a weak KMT candidate, Hsu has very good chance to win 
his re-election bid. 
 
 
     Chen Jung-shen (KMT): KMT candidate ran in 2001 Mayoral 
     election, former Provincial Assembly member (1991 - 
     1995) and Tainan City Councilor (1987-1991) 
     Age: 56 years old 
     Education: Bachelor in Public Administration, Tung Hai 
     University, Taiwan.  Studies at Seattle City Community 
     University 
 
Chen unsuccessfully ran in the 2001 mayoral election.  He 
became the KMT candidate simply because there was no other 
better KMT candidate. According to our observations, he is 
not popular and has a poor image and his campaign style has 
not appealed to voters so far. One of our contacts in the 
Tainan area even told us that his chance to win is almost 
zero. 
 
Tainan County 
------------- 
¶6.  Su Huan-chih (DPP): incumbent Tainan County Magistrate, 
he is running for re-election 
     Age: 50 years old 
     Education: LL.B., National Taiwan University, Taipei 
                LL.M., Fujen Catholic University, Taipei 
 
Magistrate Su studied Environmental Science at the 
University of Denver. He was a legislator from 1992 to 2001. 
He was President Chen's campaign assistant in the 1989 
legislation election and First Lady's (Wu Shu-chen) 
assistant when she was a legislator.  Compared with former 
Magistrate Mark Chen's (incumbent Minister of Foreign 
Affairs) performance, Su's performance has not been good, 
especially because of his interactions with his staff and 
the County Council. Since Tainan County is the home of 
President Chen, Chen is expected to campaign strongly on 
Su's behalf, and Su expects that will have a major positive 
impact on his re-election campaign. 
 
   Kuo Tien-tsai (KMT): former Legislator (2001-2004) 
    Age: 43 years old 
     Education: Doctor in Education, National Cheng Chi 
     University, Taipei 
     Master in Education, National Kaohsiung Normal 
     University, Kaohsiung 
     Post-doctorate Research, Illinois University 
 
Kuo was the Director of the Education Bureau of Changhua 
County before being elected to the Legislature in 2001.  His 
high level of education and his good image appeal to the 
young and middle class. He also has the support of scholars 
because of public service he has completed in the 
educational field. Kuo expects that the new KMT Chairman Ma 
Ying-jeou's support will increase voter turnout for Kuo, but 
Magistrate Su does not think that people who are 
dissatisfied with the ruling party will switch their support 
to KMT candidates because of Ma. 
 
Pingtung County 
--------------- 
¶7.  Tsao Chi-hung (DPP): former Legislator (1999-2004), and 
former Provincial Assembly member (1994-1998), and former 
National Assembly member (1992-1994) 
     Age: 57 years old 
     Education: Bachelor in Education, Chinese Culture 
     University, Taipei 
 
Tsao was a teacher at junior high school before he was 
 
SIPDIS 
elected to the Legislature.  As a ruling party legislator, 
Tsao feels that "change of Taiwan" cannot rely on 
 
SIPDIS 
politicians, but he hopes that the enthusiasm in politics 
can carry over to improving one's community.  He has been 
advocating a "community development project" to promote the 
idea of reforming the living environment in Taiwan. 
 
    Wang Chin-shih (KMT): incumbent Pingtung City Mayor, 
    elected in 2001 
      Age: 57 years old 
      Education: Master in Public Affairs, National Sun-Yat- 
      Sen University, Kaohsiung 
 
Wang ran for Pingtung Mayor eleven years ago and lost by a 
small margin.  A journalist for 27 years, he finally was 
elected as Pingtung City Mayor in 2001.  Wang maintains a 
good relationship with the former Magistrate Su Chia-chuan, 
the current Minister of the Interior Ministry. Compared to 
DDP candidate Tsao Chi-hung, Wang's campaign seems to be 
falling behind because of the influence of the KMT 
Chairmanship election and the Central Standing Committee's 
elections. 
 
Taitung County 
-------------- 
¶8.  Hsu Ching-yuan (Independent): incumbent Magistrate 
elected in 2001. 
     Age: 48 years old 
     Education: Bachelor in Business Administration, 
     National Cheng Kung University 
 
Hsu began his political career in 1986 as Taitung County 
Councilor while he was KMT member.  He also served as 
Provincial Assembly member (1994-1998).  He withdrew from 
the KMT in 1997 to run for magistrate against the KMT 
candidate, but failed.  In 1998 he defeated the KMT and DPP 
candidates to become the first non-KMT Legislator in 
Taitung.  While serving as Provincial Assembly Member he 
became then Governor James Soong's associate.  When James 
Soong formed the PFP in 2000, he joined the PFP, ran for 
magistrate, and won the election. 
 
In 2004 legislature election, he campaigned for DPP's 
candidate under the promise that Central Government would 
allocate funds to expand Nan-huei High Way (the highway 
connects Taitung County and Pintung County). In return, the 
DPP did not nominate a candidate to run for magistrate in 
the upcoming election. 
 
     Wu Chun-li (KMT): incumbent Speaker of Taitung County 
     Council 
     Age: 43 years old 
     Education: graduate of Ho-chun Technical Junior 
     College, Kaohsiung County 
 
Wu was the KMT candidate in the 2001 magistrate election. 
He has an aggressive campaign style, but compared to 
Magistrate Hsu, he does not presently appear popular enough 
to win the election. 
 
Penghu County 
---------------- 
¶9. The Penghu County Magistrate Lai Feng-wei is serving his 
second term and cannot run again. Lai will seek to be the 
KMT candidate for Kaohsiung City Mayor for the year-end 2006 
election. That leaves the race without an incumbent. 
 
     Chen Kuang-fu (DPP): incumbent DPP Penghu County Office 
     Chairman 
     Age: 50 years old 
     Education: Graduate of Fuhua Senior High School, 
     Kaohsiung City 
 
Chen is a native of Penghu, but has lived in Kaohsiung for a 
long time.  He was elected to the Legislature in 1992 in 
Kaohsiung City and served until 1998.  He returned to Penghu 
to run as the DPP candidate for Magistrate in 2001, but was 
defeated by incumbent Magistrate Lai. He stayed in Penghu to 
serve as DPP Office Chairman in order to cultivate 
connections for the upcoming elections. Because he is doing 
well and people are recognizing his work, he appears to have 
a better chance at winning this time. 
 
     Wang Chien-fa (KMT): incumbent Makung City Mayor (one 
     biggest city in Penghu, half of all Penghu residents 
     live in the city). 
       Age: 56 years old 
       Education: Graduate of National Open University 
 
Wang is a native of Makung City.  His older brother served 
as Penghu Magistrate from 1989 until his death in 1992. 
Before being elected as Makung City Mayor, Wang served in 
the County Government as Director of the Tax Bureau and 
Bureau of Finance. 
 
If a candidate in the Penghu County elections can win in 
Makung City, then the candidate is ensured of a victory in 
the election. It is still hard to see who presently has the 
upper hand in Makung City. 
 
THIELE 
 
KEEGAN