05TAIPEI4158
TAIWAN'S DECEMBER ELECTION:  REFERENCE GUIDE
Wed Oct 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

120925Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TAIPEI 004158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS AIT/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV TW
SUBJECT: TAIWAN'S DECEMBER ELECTION:  REFERENCE GUIDE 
 
REF: TAIPEI 3642 
 
¶1.  On December 3 Taiwan will hold key local "three-in-one" 
elections for (1) county magistrates and city mayors, (2) 
county and city councilors, and (3) township and village 
chiefs.  The county magistrate and city mayor elections, 
however, are receiving the lion's share of media attention as 
a test of strength between ruling and opposition parties and 
as an indicator of trends heading into legislative and 
presidential elections in 2007 and 2008.  A total of 77 
candidates are registered to run in the 18 county magistrate 
elections and five city mayor elections (excluding Taipei 
City and Kaohsiung City, which hold mayoral elections in 
2006).  The competition is primarily between the "Pan-Green" 
(independence-leaning) Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and 
the "Pan-Blue" (tending toward improving relations with the 
PRC) Kuomintang (KMT), with several smaller parties and 
independent candidates also vying for positions.  The fellow 
Pan-Green Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU) has only one 
candidate for mayor in Tainan, while the Pan-Blue People's 
First Party (PFP) and New Party have five candidates in play 
in various elections. 
 
¶2.  KMT officials hope to win back Taipei, Ilan, and Nantou 
Counties.  On the other hand, the DPP hopes to take one or 
more counties from the KMT but faces strong challenges in 
Taipei and Ilan Counties, and Chiayi City.  The DPP is 
concerned about the effect of negative publicity from recent 
scandals on party election prospects, and the KMT hopes to 
gain a boost from its new Chairman, the youthful and 
energetic Ma Ying-jeou.  The most important race for both 
parties is Taipei County, which is by far the most populous 
electoral district on the island. 
 
¶3.  Following is a catalogue of Taiwan's 23 election 
districts with lists of registered candidates, biographical 
notes, and an early status report, jointly prepared by AIT/T 
and AIT/K. 
 
------------ 
Keelung City 
------------ 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Hsu Tsai-li (Incumbent) 
Keelung native; served as member and Speaker of Keelung City 
Council for 20 years. 
 
PFP:  Liu Wen-hsiung (LY Member, Keelung City) 
Keelung native; Legislative Yuan (LY) Member since 1998, 
first for the KMT, then re-elected for the PFP in 2001 and 
¶2004. 
 
TSU:  Chen Chien-ming (former TSU Secretary General) 
 
SIPDIS 
Left KMT to join TSU in 2001; served as LY Member for Taipei 
City, 2001-2004. 
 
Comment:  Both Pan-Blue coalition candidates, KMT's Hsu and 
PFP's Liu, insist on staying in the race, with Liu citing 
Hsu,s age and health problems (diabetes) as a reason to run. 
 The DPP nominee (Wang Tuo) dropped out of the race October 3 
and endorsed TSU candidate Chen, giving the Pan-Green 
coalition a single candidate around whom to rally.  While 
this might enhance Chen,s chances by dividing the Pan-Blue 
vote (which occurred in 1997), Chen is not a Keelung native 
and has not previously been involved in Keelung politics. 
Furthermore, recent surveys conducted by Era TV, United Daily 
News (UDN), and the China Times show Pan-Blue candidates 
leading the Pan-Green candidates by a small margin, but with 
a significant number of undecided voters.  (Comment:  While 
Taiwan media polls have often proven unreliable in previous 
elections, they can offer some indications of trends.  With 
that healthy measure of caution, we will include them in this 
early pre-campaign preview.  End comment.) 
 
------------- 
Taipei County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
DPP:  Lo Wen-jia 
Taipei City native; former Vice Chair of the Council of Hakka 
Affairs; served as campaign manager for President Chen 
Shui-bian and as LY Member for Taipei City (2001-2004). 
 
KMT:  Chou Hsi-wei 
Taipei County native; MPA from University of Southern 
California; served as LY Member for Taipei County since 1998; 
served in Taiwan Provincial Assembly (1994-1998). 
 
Comment:  Lo, who is popular among younger voters and is a 
proven campaign organizer, is emphasizing his Hakka ancestry 
to attract votes from this sizable minority in Taipei County. 
 His strategy of keeping his distance from the DPP leadership 
in a county that has a majority of Pan-Blue voters may also 
improve his vote.  Meanwhile, public opinion polls show Lo 
and Chou nearly even, with Chou's popularity on the decline. 
Chou left the PFP to rejoin the KMT earlier this year, 
believing it would strengthen his chances of being elected in 
Taipei county.  He is turning to the popular new KMT 
Chairman, Ma Ying-jeou, for support in hopes of winning the 
county back from the DPP for the first time in 16 years. 
 
-------------- 
Taoyuan County 
-------------- 
 
KMT:  Eric Chu Li-lun (Incumbent) 
Earned M.A. and Ph.D. from New York University; taught at 
National Taiwan University; served as LY Member, Taoyuan 
County (1998-2001). 
 
DPP:  Cheng Pao-ching 
Served as LY member (1995-2001); appointed Chairman of 
state-run Taiwan Salt Corp. after failing in his bid for a 
third term. 
 
Comment:  Chu tied for the highest approval ratings of all 
city mayors and county magistrates in Taiwan according to a 
Commonwealth Monthly poll in September.  To date, DPP 
candidate Cheng Pao-ching has made little progress attracting 
voters in what is widely considered a safe Blue county.  The 
withdrawal of a second Pan-Blue PFP candidate only increased 
Chu,s lead. 
 
------------ 
Hsinchu City 
------------ 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Lin Cheng-che (Incumbent) 
Hsinchu native; M.A. from National University (U.S.). 
 
DPP:  Chen Hui-yuan (Hsinchu City Councilor) 
Member of Hsinchu City Council for 12 years; served as Chen 
Shui-bian,s Hsinchu City campaign manager in 2000 and 2004. 
 
Comment:  Lin is maintaining a large lead over Chen in all 
public opinion polls to date.  The September Commonwealth 
Monthly survey found almost 73 percent of Hsinchu City 
residents are satisfied with Lin's performance as Mayor. 
Recent China Times polls similarly show Lin with 50 percent 
support to Chen's seven percent, and 43 percent of poll 
respondents still undecided. 
 
-------------- 
Hsinchu County 
-------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Cheng Yung-chin (Incumbent) 
Hsinchu native; served as Member, Deputy Speaker, and Speaker 
of Hsinchu County Council (1992-1997); served as Hsinchu 
County Legislator (1997-2001). 
 
DPP:  Lin Kuang-hua (Taiwan Provincial Governor) 
Hsinchu native; served as Member of Hsinchu County Council, 
Hsinchu County Legislator (1992-1997), and Hsinchu County 
Magistrate (1997-2001). 
 
Comment:  Cheng received the third highest approval rating in 
the September Commonwealth Monthly survey of Taiwan county 
magistrates and city mayors.  The DPP is not optimistic about 
winning Hsinchu County, but Lin is trying to use Cheng,s 
earlier pledge not to seek reelection to attack his 
credibility.  The charge has not struck much resonance, 
however, as Cheng,s poll numbers have continued to rise.  In 
an October 3 UDN poll, 47 percent of respondents favored 
Cheng, though 38 percent remained undecided. 
 
------------- 
Miaoli County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Liu Cheng-hung (LY Member) 
Miaoli native; has served as LY Member from Miaoli since 
1998; earlier served in Miaoli City Council for eight years. 
 
DPP:  Chiu Ping-kun 
Miaoli native; served as Mayor of Miaoli City for eight years 
and before that served on the Miaoli City Council. 
 
Independent:  Hsu Yao-chang 
Miaoli native; has served as LY Member from Miaoli County 
since 2001; served as Toufeng Town Chief; a PFP member, Hsu 
is running as independent. 
 
Comment:  Incumbent County Magistrate Fu Hsueh-peng, an 
independent not running for reelection, has agreed to 
cooperate with the DPP and support DPP candidate Chiu, who 
withdrew from the KMT to join the DPP after the KMT nominated 
a non-Hakka politician as its candidate in the race.  Chiu 
may be hurt by President Chen Shui-bian,s reported promise 
of a Central Government job for Fu if Chiu wins.  Although 
the KMT's Liu has a modest lead in recent Era TV and China 
Times polls, his chances may be jeopardized by PFP Legislator 
Hsu Yao-chang,s insistence on running as an independent 
Hakka candidate who can unite the county's Hakka majority, 
thus splitting the Pan-Blue vote in what is usually a 
strongly Blue county.  Three other independent candidates are 
also running in this race, but they are not considered viable 
candidates and were not included in recent polls. 
 
------------- 
Taichung City 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Jason Hu Chih-chiang (Incumbent) 
Born in China; Ph.D. from Oxford University; served as 
Director of Government Information Office, Taiwan 
Representative to the United States, Foreign Minister, and 
KMT Secretary-General. 
 
PFP:  Shen Chih-hui (LY Member, Taichung City) 
Taichung City native; Taichung City LY Member since 1989; KMT 
member before joining PFP in 2000; background in journalism. 
 
DPP:  Lin Chia-lung 
Taichung City native; Ph.D. from Yale; former Director of the 
Government Information Office; served on the National 
Security Council; served as member of the National Assembly. 
 
Independent:  Lee Fu-kui 
 
Comment:  Hu,s health has remained a concern since he 
suffered from a minor stroke last year.  Lin is young, has a 
good public image, and has the full support from President 
Chen Shui-bian and other DPP leaders.  Shen may withdraw from 
the election depending on the outcome of the on-going 
negotiations between the KMT and the PFP.  Hu, however, has a 
considerable lead in the polls. The latest Era TV poll in 
August Hu had 48 percent support, DPP challenger Lin had 25 
percent support, and Shen about 7 percent. 
--------------- 
Taichung County 
--------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Huang Chung-sheng (Incumbent) 
Taichung native; served as Chief Secretary of the Wuchi Town 
Farmers Association and an advisor to the KMT and the China 
Youth Corps. 
 
DPP:  Chiu Tai-san (Vice Chairman, MAC) 
Taichung native; LY Member, Taichung County (1998-2004); 
served as Vice Chairman of the Mainland Affairs Council 
(2004-2005). 
 
Independent:  Lin Cheng-chang 
 
Comment:  Despite incumbent KMT County Magistrate Huang,s 
deep ties with local factions and high approval ratings in 
recent months, he faces a strong challenge from the DPP's 
Chiu.  Independent candidate Lin is probably not a serious 
threat to either candidate.  The DPP views Taichung County as 
an important battleground and potential win for the party. 
The young and energetic Chiu is backed by President Chen 
Shui-bian and the DPP,s New Tide Faction.  Although Huang 
had a healthy 16-point lead in the September Commonwealth 
Magazine poll, nearly half of poll respondents were 
undecided.  The DPP is hoping for a last minute surge in 
support in Taichung County, which gave DPP President Chen 
Shui-bian 55 percent of the vote in the 2004 presidential 
election. 
 
--------------- 
Changhua County 
--------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Cho Po-yuan (LY Member, Changhua County) 
Changhua County native; served as deputy magistrate of 
Changhua County and member of the Changhua County Council; LY 
Member, Changhua County, since 2001. 
 
DPP:  Weng Chin-chu (Incumbent) 
Changhua County native; served as member of the National 
Assembly; served as LY Member, Changhua County (1992-2001). 
 
Independent: Chen Chin-ting (LY Member, Changhua County) 
Member of Nonpartisan Solidarity Union (NSU) party; former 
National Assembly Member; business background. 
 
Comment:  A member of the DPP New Tide Faction, incumbent 
Magistrate Weng has been preparing for her reelection for a 
long time.  With a potential PFP candidate already out of the 
race, Weng will be facing Cho head-to-head, and a late 
September UDN poll shows Weng with a slight lead. Independent 
Chen has only marginal support. 
 
------------- 
Nantou County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Lee Chao-ching (Mayor, Nantou City) 
Former Nantou County Councilor; former director of the Nantou 
City KMT branch office. 
 
DPP:  Tsai Huang-lang 
Nantou County native; Nantou LY Member for 10 years; resigned 
earlier this year to run for magistrate; served as Chairman 
of the DPP Nantou County Committee, 1994-1995. 
 
Independent:  Lin Tsung-nan (Incumbent) 
Nantou County native; M.A. from Meiji University in Japan; 
withdrew from the DPP after failing to win the DPP,s 
nomination. 
 
Independent:  Lin Ming-chen (Nantou County Council) 
KMT member who lost the KMT nomination. 
 
Comment:  The Nantou County election is complicated by the 
presence of two independent candidates, Lin Tsung-nan and Lin 
Ming-chen.  When they lost their respective DPP and KMT party 
nominations, both bolted to run as independents.  Polling by 
the China Times shows the two Pan-Greens with a moderate lead 
in the county, with DPP Tsai and Green Independent Lin 
Tsung-nan almost tied. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
------------- 
Yunlin County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Hsu Shu-po (LY Member, Yunlin) 
Graduate of Luven University (Belgium); former Taiwan 
Provincial Government Secretary-General; has served as Yunlin 
LY Member since 1995. 
 
DPP:  Su Chih-fen 
Daughter of prominent Taiwan politicians Su Tung-chi (father) 
and Su Hung Yueh-chiao (mother); served as campaign assistant 
to a number of DPP politicians including former DPP Chairman 
Shih Ming-te, former legislator Chou Ching-yu and acting 
Kaohsiung mayor Yeh Chu-lan; Member of the National Assembly 
(1996-1999); advisor to the Executive Yuan (1999-2000); 
served as LY Member, Yunlin County (2001-2004). 
 
Independent:  Lin Chia-yu 
 
Comment:  The DPP's Su is a major political rival of 
incumbent KMT Yunlin County Magistrate Chang Jung-wei, who is 
in custody on corruption charges.  The current acting DPP 
Magistrate, appointed in Chang,s place by Premier Hsieh, 
supports Su.  A recent China Times polls shows a very close 
race, with Su holding a narrow two-point lead over KMT's Hsu, 
and almost half of voters still undecided.  Independent 
candidate Lin is not a viable candidate. 
 
----------- 
Chiayi City 
----------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Huang Min-hui (LY Member, Chiayi) 
Former high school teacher; served in the National Assembly; 
first elected as LY member in 2001. 
 
DPP:  Chen Li-chen (Incumbent) 
Master in Environmental Medicine, China Medical College, 
Taiwan; BA in Public Hygiene Dept., China Medical College, 
Taiwan. 
 
Comment:  Incumbent DPP Mayor Chen Li-chen, who is very 
worried about her re-election prospects, is in a 
neck-and-neck race with KMT candidate Huang Min-hui, who has 
an excellent reputation and a high popularity rating.  A 
late-September China Times poll shows the candidates in a 
statistical dead heat, with 40 percent of voters still 
undecided. 
 
------------- 
Chiayi County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Chen Ming-cheng (KMT Chiayi County Chairman) 
Recently drafted by KMT to run. 
 
DPP:  Chen Ming-wen (Incumbent) 
Bachelor, Philosophy Department of Tung Hai University, 
Taiwan. 
 
Comment:  Incumbent Magistrate Chen Ming-wen is relatively 
popular in office, with a 65 percent approval rating in a 
September Commonwealth magazine survey.  The KMT announced a 
candidate at the last minute because they were having trouble 
finding anyone to run (see reftel).  The incumbent appears 
very likely to be reelected since KMT candidate Chen 
Min-chen, who is chairman of Chiayi County Chapter, is weak 
in terms of popularity and administrative resources.  An 
October 1 China Times poll shows DPP,s Chen has almost 48 
percent support, while the KMT,s Chen trails with only 8.5 
percent. 
 
----------- 
Tainan City 
----------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Chen Jung-sheng 
Bachelor in Public Administration, Tung Hai University, 
Taiwan; studied at Seattle City Community University; ran as 
a KMT candidate in the 2001 Mayoral election; former Tainan 
City Councilor (1987-1991); former Provincial Assembly member 
(1991-1995). 
 
DPP:  Hsu Tain-tsair (Incumbent) 
BA and MA in Economics, Chinese Culture University, Taipei; 
studied at Rutgers University, New Jersey, in a business 
administration doctoral program. 
 
TSU: Chien-Lin Hui-chun (TSU Tainan City Chairperson) 
 
SIPDIS 
Former Legislator (2002-2004). 
 
Comment:  Although the KMT candidate is not particularly 
strong, TSU candidate Chien-Lin joined the race, which could 
split the Pan-Green vote.  So far, incumbent Mayor Hsu is 
still leading in the polls, but running against two opponents 
has complicated the race.  KMT candidate Chen, who is weak 
both in terms of personal charm and administrative resources, 
is running for his third time for this mayoral position.  An 
Era TV poll in late September showed the DPP,s Hsu with 31 
percent support, followed by the KMT,s Chen at 17.5 percent, 
and the TSU,s Chien-Lin at 10.9 percent. 
 
------------- 
Tainan County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Kuo Tien-tsai 
Doctor in Education, National Cheng Chi University, Taipei; 
Master in Education, National Kaohsiung Normal University, 
Kaohsiung; post-doctorate research, Illinois University; 
former LY Member (2001-2004). 
 
DPP:  Su Huan-chih (Tainan County Magistrate) 
LL.B., National Taiwan University, Taipei; LL.M., Fujen 
Catholic University, Taipei. 
 
Independent:  Chang Po-sheng 
Served as campaign assistant to Magistrate Su and President 
Chen during their previous campaigns.  It was a surprise to 
the DPP that he registered as candidate. 
 
Independent:  Tsai Ssu-chieh 
Retired government employee.  This is his fourth time running 
in the magistrate election.  He favors using the flood as his 
main issue in campaign. 
 
Comment:  The DPP cannot afford to lose in President Chen,s 
home county as such a loss would reflect the inherent 
weakness and lack of popularity of the Chen administration. 
Although Magistrate Su is leading in the polls, his 
performance is not considered good.  The KMT,s candidate is 
young, highly educated, and "clean", so Kuo and Chairman Ma 
Ying-jeou may press very hard for a win in this election. 
Although there are two independent candidates, this is still 
considered a race between the DPP and KMT. 
 
---------------- 
Kaohsiung County 
---------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Lin Yi-shih (LY Member, Kaohsiung) 
Son of Lin Hsien-pao; the leader of the "Red Faction" in 
Kaohsiung County; supported Wang Jin-pyng in the KMT Chairman 
election; first elected to LY, Kaohsiung County, in 1998. 
 
DPP:  Yang Chiu-hsing (Incumbent) 
Served as Provincial Assembly Member in 1994; served as LY 
Member, Kaohsiung County, in 1998. 
 
Comment:  Incumbent Magistrate Yang,s approval rating in the 
September Commonwealth survey was over 70 percent, and he was 
more than 15 points ahead of KMT candidate Lin in a 
late-September TVBS poll.  The KMT candidate, however, has 
seen his poll numbers rise from a early low of 9 percent to 
his current 29 percent support.  Kaohsiung County is 
generally considered to be a safe Green county, but the KMT 
is hoping the image of their young, well-educated, and 
spanking clean candidate will gel with the Ma Ying-jeou,s 
reform message, bringing out more undecided voters. 
 
--------------- 
Pingtung County 
--------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Wang Chin-shih (Incumbent) 
Master in Public Affairs, National Sun-Yat-Sen University, 
Kaohsiung. 
 
DPP:  Tsao Chi-hung 
Bachelor in Education, Chinese Culture University, Taipei; 
former National Assembly Member (1992-1994); former 
Provincial Assembly Member (1994-1998); former LY Member 
(1999-2004). 
 
Independent:  Soong Li-hua (Pingtung County Councilor) 
Wife of independent, but pro-KMT, LY Member Tsai Hao; served 
on Pingtung County Council since 2002. 
 
Independent:  Lee Ching-wen 
He is an old face in Pingtung who has run in all legislative, 
magisterial and city council elections in the past ten years. 
 
Comment:  Since Soong,s husband is pro-KMT, her candidacy 
could split the Pan-Blue votes.  The DPP has welcomed Soong's 
run in the hope of boosting Tsao,s chance to win.  Local 
observers note that the recent investigation by authorities 
of independent candidate Soong for vote-buying might actually 
boost her popularity and prospects as the highly telegenic 
Soong may use it to gain support from sympathetic voters. 
The race between DPP candidate Tsao Chi-hung and KMT 
candidate Wang Chin-shi, before Soong joined the race, was 
already very close.  A late-September UDN poll shows a 
virtual tie between Wang and Tsao, with Soong trailing by 
about 5 points, but 49 percent of voters are undecided. 
 
----------- 
Ilan County 
----------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Lu Kuo-hua (Mayor, Ilan City) 
Ilan County native; Lu has worked in the Taiwan Provincial 
Government; served as a section chief in the Ilan County 
Government; and as Mayor of Ilan City. 
 
DPP:  Chen Ting-nan 
Served as Ilan County Magistrate (1981-1989); then as Ilan LY 
Member (1989-2000); Minister of Justice (2000-2005). 
 
Independent:  Hsieh Lee Ching-yi 
 
Comment:  As the former county Magistrate, the DPP's Chen 
appeared to enjoy the upper hand in the early weeks of the 
pre-campaign , but KMT's Lu has been catching up rapidly in 
public opinion polls in recent weeks, probably because of his 
youthful image and pledge to revitalize Ilan,s economy.  Lu 
may get a further boost from the PFP candidate's decision to 
drop out of the race at registration time.  This is Lu,s 
second run for Ilan Magistrate, having lost in the previous 
election by just 7,000 votes.  Chen and Lu are nearly tied 
according to various opinion polls, giving the KMT a chance 
of winning Ilan for the first time in 24 years.  Pan-Greens, 
however, enjoy a 55 percent majority of voters in Ilan 
County. 
 
-------------- 
Hualien County 
-------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Hsieh Shen-shan (Incumbent) 
Former Chairman of the National Federation of Labor Union; 
legislator, KMT deputy Secretary-General and 
Secretary-General of the Executive Yuan. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PFP:  Fu Kun-chi (LY Member, Hualien County) 
Served as Vice Chairman of the World Federation of Taiwanese 
Chamber of Commerce; has served as Hualien LY Member since 
¶2001. 
 
DPP:  Lu Po-chi (LY Member, Hualien County) 
Hualien native; served as Member of the Hualien County 
Council; has served as Hualien LY Member since 2001. 
 
Independent: Ko Tzu-hai 
 
Comment:  Incumbent KMT Magistrate Hsieh enjoys strong local 
support with nearly 66 percent job approval rating in the 
September Commonwealth magazine poll.  DPP challenger Lu will 
probably campaign on his close relationship with the central 
government, but Hsieh,s lead may be insurmountable. 
Pan-Blue PFP candidate Fu, currently facing legal problems, 
is drawing little support.  A China Times poll in September 
shows Hsieh with 52 percent support, compared to Lu's 9.4 
percent and Fu's 6.4 percent.  Independent candidate Ko is 
not a viable candidate. 
 
-------------- 
Taitung County 
-------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT running as Independent:  Wu Chun-li (Speaker, Taitung 
County Council) 
Graduate of Ho-chun Technical Junior College, Kaohsiung 
County. 
 
DPP running as Independent:  Liu Chao-hao (Deputy Magistrate) 
His elder brother was a former National Assembly member and a 
KMT member; former Judge serving for 6 years. 
 
Independent:  Peng Chuan-kuo 
Has never run for political office before, the name is 
totally new, emerging only on registration day. 
 
Comment:  This race came as a surprise because both DPP and 
KMT have their members running as independent candidates. 
Incumbent Magistrate Hsu Ching-yuan (independent and former 
PFP member) gave up his bid for re-election, thus allowing 
his deputy, Liu Chao-hao, a DPP member, to register at the 
last minute as an independent candidate.  Wu Chun-li, who 
would have registered as a KMT candidate, instead registered 
as an independent candidate, allegedly at the insistence of 
Chairman Ma in order to avoid the issue of the lawsuit and 
sentencing lodged against Wu for corruption. 
 
Previous polls showed the current Magistrate Hsu,s approval 
rating at 32.8 percent, Wu,s at 19 percent, and 44 percent 
undecided.  Whether Hsu,s deputy, Liu will be able to 
inherit Hsu,s support in the polls is doubtful, not to 
mention that Liu has not even prepared his campaign.  But 
Liu, who is a new face in politics, will put KMT on the 
attack in the election. 
 
------------- 
Penghu County 
------------- 
 
Candidates: 
 
KMT:  Wang Chien-fa  (Makung City Mayor) 
Served in the County Government as Director of the Tax Bureau 
and Bureau of Finance; serving as Mayor of Makung City, which 
accounts for half of Penghu,s population. 
 
DPP:  Chen Kuang-fu (DPP Penghu County Office Chairman) 
Chen lost the last LY election to Lin Ping-kun, who has had 
strong support from local residents over the past decade; 
served as Kaohsiung City LY member (1992-1998); lost as the 
DPP candidate for Magistrate in 2001; stayed in Penghu to 
serve as DPP Office Chairman in order to cultivate 
connections for the upcoming elections. 
 
Independent:  Hsu Ching-ming 
Former DPP member who ran in the last LY election in 2004 and 
lost. 
 
Comment:  DPP candidate Chen Kuang-fu and KMT candidate Wang 
Chien-fa are in a very close race.  Local observers say Chen 
Kuang-fu has a good chance to win since he is competing 
against a different opponent from a previous legislative 
election.  Although KMT has dominated the county for long 
time, the DPP anticipates a real shot at a win in this race. 
 
------------- 
Kinmen County 
------------- 
 
New Party:  Lee Chu-feng (Incumbent) 
Kinmen County native; served as Secretary of Kinmen County 
Government; served as LY Member, Kinmen County. 
 
Independent:  Chen Ping 
 
Independent:  Chen Fu-hai 
 
Comment:  The KMT, PFP, and New Party have jointly agreed to 
support Lee, who will likely win a second term in this "deep 
Blue" county.  The two independent candidates pose little 
threat. 
 
------------------------- 
Lienchiang County (Matsu) 
------------------------- 
 
PFP:  Chen Hsueh-sheng (Incumbent) 
 
Independent:  Yang Sui-sheng 
 
Independent:  Wu Shih-Tsu 
 
Comment:  Both the KMT and PFP have agreed to support Chen's 
continued leadership of this Pan-Blue stronghold.  Chen is 
expected to win another term. 
PAAL