05TAIPEI260
MEDIA REACTION: BUSH'S SECOND TERM, MIDEAST
Fri Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 000260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: BUSH'S SECOND TERM, MIDEAST 
 
 
¶1. Bush's Second Term 
 
A) "[Condoleezza] Rice Has Endorsed the Neo- 
conservatism" 
 
The "International Outlook" column of the centrist, pro- 
status quo "China Times" commented (1/21): 
 
"Secretary of State appointee Condoleezza Rice's 
congressional confirmation hearing showed that neo- 
conservatism is indeed a powerful force in the Bush 
administration.  Even though Rice herself is not a 
follower of neo-conservatism, her testimony showed her 
determination to implement neo-conservative policy - 
namely, she will promote global democratization even if 
it means that she has to use force to do so. . 
 
"But in the aftermath of the United States' invasion of 
Afghanistan and Iraq, what are the results of 
Washington's attempts to implement political 
democratization [in these two countries]?  The answer 
is evident if one just takes a look at the situation in 
Iraq.  The Bush administration is clearly aware that it 
is a `mission impossible' to hold a genuine democratic 
election in Iraq now.  The United Nations and European 
countries all believe that holding an election so 
rashly [now] would do more harm than good [to Iraq]. 
Some Iraqi officials who are like United States' 
puppets also believe that the election to be held in 
Iraq in late January should be postponed.  But the Bush 
administration is determined to have the election held 
as scheduled and its purpose is to show [the world] the 
success of the United States' overthrow of the Saddam 
Hussein regime and the implementation of democracy [in 
Iraq]. . 
 
"The blacklist proposed by Rice [during her 
confirmation hearing] is just a move to endorse the 
Pentagon; also, it is actually an excuse prepared for 
the Bush administration's move to launch another war 
again and a warning signal sent in advance to the 
international community." 
 
B) "Hopes for Peace in Bush's Next Term" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
editorialized (1/20): 
 
". Anyone familiar with international politics must 
agree that the greatest challenge to US diplomacy is a 
clash of civilizations between the US and the Muslim 
world, and the question of how to deal with China's 
rise in Asia. . 
 
"The question of China's growing strength directly 
clashes with the traditional friendship between Taiwan 
and the US since Washington's China policies have a 
direct impact on the quality of Taiwan-US interaction. 
 
"Bush will not be controlled by electoral concerns 
during his final four years in office.  Nor will he be 
as likely to be controlled by vested interests.  He 
will be able to let go and demonstrate a politician's 
vision and ideals.  Hopefully, Bush will be able to 
strengthen his insistence on the universal values of 
democracy and human rights in the US-China 
relationship, and carefully measure the latent threat 
that China poses to the Asian region, while at the same 
time offering stronger support for Taiwan's democratic 
development and its realization of human rights. 
 
"Taiwan and China share a common language and heritage 
as well as historical links.  For this reason Taiwan is 
ideally placed to understand China's authoritarian 
nature.  Taiwan should continue to caution the Bush 
administration that Beijing is manipulating guilt over 
China's treatment by Western powers and Japan in the 
19th century, in combination with a rising tide of 
nationalism, its growing military might and the lure of 
its huge market, as a way of forcing the US to conform 
to its `one China' policy that oppresses Taiwan. . 
 
"Although Bush's involvement in the Iraq war has been 
repeatedly criticized, the fact that he won a second 
term shows that this involvement passes the test of US 
popular opinion.  As a staunch ally of the US, Taiwan 
supports Bush in his war against terror, and hopes that 
by working with the US, stability in the Taiwan Strait 
can be strengthened and Taiwan's democratic reforms can 
avoid becoming a victim of manipulation from across the 
Strait. ." 
¶2. Mideast 
 
"Two Elections Give Hope for Peace in the Middle East" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" said in an editorial (1/21): 
 
". [Mahmoud] Abbas is the `address' for Israel 
communications.  He must show he can take decisions, 
and if he makes promises, he can deliver on those 
promises.  As for the Israeli public, they must first 
feel secure before they will back a comprehensive peace 
deal - by the Palestinians ceasing attacks on civilians 
and ending rocket attacks.  The Islamic world, which 
generally welcomed the election of Abbas, must help by 
assisting in dismantling the structure of the refugee 
society - by giving the Palestinians people the 
prospect of a permanently secure and prosperous future. 
. 
 
"Abbas has a popular mandate for change - what about 
Iraq?  The election is less than two weeks away and 
bombings continue.  . The election is vitally important 
- it will legitimize the new Iraqi government and give 
it a positive dynamic for a peaceful future.  The U.S.- 
led coalition must look towards withdrawing from Iraq 
as local security forces and the Iraqi army take over 
more responsibilities. 
 
"Imperfect though the Iraqi election is, it is a step 
in the right direction and will give a forward movement 
to peace.  The Iraq election will mean that only the 
Palestinians and the Iraqi have genuinely popularly 
elected leaders - no small achievement.  Other 
elections in the Arab would have been shams. 
 
"So, while these two elections have been marred by 
violence, they will at least produce elected 
governments - and provide an example to the rest of the 
Middle East.  And that is no small achievement.  The 
Middle East is inherently unstable, but peace between 
the Israelis and the Palestinians and an end to unrest 
in Iraq would go a long way towards making the Middle 
East - and the world - a more peaceful and happier 
place." 
 
PAAL