05TAIPEI2738
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, U.S.
Thu Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, U.S. 
ARMS SALES 
 
Summary:  Local politics and the fishing dispute 
between Taiwan and Japan remained the focus of the 
major Chinese-language Taipei dailies June 23.  The pro- 
independence "Taiwan Daily" did nonetheless run an 
editorial discussing the possibility of both sides of 
the Taiwan Strait moving towards unification.  With the 
unification model set by West and East Germany in mind, 
and the recent discussion of the possible unification 
of South and North Koreas, the editorial asserted that 
only when China establishes a democratic system and 
eliminates the differences between the two sides of the 
Taiwan Strait can Taiwan and China unify.  The limited- 
circulation, pro-independence English-language "Taipei 
Times" also looked past fishing and local politics to 
run editorial discussing U.S. arms sales to Taiwan. 
The editorial urged Washington to continue to exert 
pressure on the Pan-Blue camp so as to pave a way for 
passage of the arms bill in the Legislative Yuan. End 
summary. 
 
¶1. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
"Only When China Establishes a Democratic and Free 
System and Eliminates the Differences [between the Two] 
Can Both Sides of the Taiwan Strait Create a Win-Win 
Situation" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 
150,000] editorialized (6/23): 
 
". If [we] view the development of the cross-Strait 
situation from the `unification models' set [possibly] 
by South and North Koreas and by East and West 
Germanies, it is worth pondering that even though East 
and West Germany and South and North Korea are 
generally regarded as nation-states that share a common 
language and are of a common ethnicity, their road to 
unification [has been and will be] rugged and tough. 
When we look at Taiwan and China, both are independent 
sovereign states.  But after having been ruled by 
foreign races such as the Dutch, Japanese and Chinese 
people, Taiwan has generated a culture and value system 
that are distinct from those of China's.  The big 
differences between Taiwan and China, ranging from 
their daily customs, languages, cultures, and social 
values, are exactly the barriers to their unification. 
Over these past years, many incidents have happened 
during exchanges between both sides of the Taiwan 
Strait, which are evidence that the divergence in 
people's thoughts and values between the two sides of 
the Taiwan Strait will not be eliminated but will be 
enlarged due to these exchanges.  In reality, the gap 
present in the minds of the people on both sides of the 
Taiwan Strait still exists. 
 
"Even though voices in Taiwan calling for a closer 
relationship with China and union with the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) are strong, and the political 
powers supporting this trend are large, too, both sides 
of the Taiwan Strait cannot unify with each other 
simply for the sake of unification.  Should there be 
the possibility of unification in the future, it must 
be built on a system of democracy and freedom. 
Taiwan's unification with China should not be a 
situation that it is annexed or devoured by a bigger 
country.  Instead, Taiwan and China should establish a 
cooperative partnership, putting aside their political 
differences and working jointly for their economic 
prosperity in an attempt to create a win-win situation 
that will benefit the development of both sides. 
Taiwan, on the other hand, also needs to strengthen its 
democratization and localization concepts, deepen its 
human rights education so as to resist the threats of 
the pro-China and pro-CCP groups and face the various 
kinds of united front attacks launched by China after 
it enacted the Anti-Secession Law." 
 
¶2. U.S. Arms Sales 
 
"Allies Need to Face the Awful Truth" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] commented in an editorial (6/23): 
 
". Before a united national identity can finally be 
forged, Taiwan's allies and friends need to reflect on 
just who their true friends in this country really are. 
 
"Taiwan needs to be equipped with advanced weaponry to 
strengthen its ability to defend itself against China's 
military juggernaut. 
 
"The US must continue to exert pressure, therefore, on 
the pan-blue camp so that a road can be paved for the 
passage of the arms bill." 
 
PAAL