06AITTAIPEI2785
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2785 2280818
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160818Z AUG 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1625
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5539
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6752UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002785 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - SCOTT WALKER 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Former DPP Chairman Shih Ming-teh's efforts to oust 
President Chen Shui-bian and investigations into the Presidential 
Office's special state affairs expense account stayed in the Taiwan 
media's spotlight today.  News coverage also focused on a scandal 
allegedly involving the director-general of the Civil Aeronautics 
Administration, and on Taiwan's reaction to Japanese Prime Minister 
Koizumi's visit to the Yasukuni Shrine Tuesday. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, compared 
the tightened security checks at U.S. airports to the calls by some 
Taiwan businesses to open the three links across the Taiwan Strait, 
saying that Taiwan's pro-China politicians should be ashamed for 
failing to safeguard Taiwan's national security.  An opinion piece 
in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times" criticized former AIT Director Douglas Paal's recent 
speech at the Brookings Institution, saying he has forgotten China's 
real motives.  End Summary. 
 
A) "Look at Contention over Three Links in OurNation from Security 
Checks at U.S. Airports" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (8/16): 
 
"... It is true that time is money, but money cannot buy a nation's 
security or lives.  How can one live as a free man when one's 
country loses its sovereignty?  American people and American 
businesses are clearly aware of this logic.  But look at Taiwan: 
China arbitrarily passed the 'Taiwan Invasion Authorization Act' 
(namely, the 'Anti-Secession Law') on March 14, 2005, but it's a 
shame that pan-Blue people have been vying to visit China, and the 
DPP government has also maintained a continuously relaxed policy 
toward cross-Strait relations.  Not only that, but the government 
also hosted the second Economic Development Advisory Conference in 
the hope of significantly easing the island's restrictions on 
investment in, and 'financial aid' to China.  The name of the 
conference was changed to the 'Conference on Sustaining Taiwan's 
Economic Development' afterwards.  But one would feel ashamed if he 
recalled the scenes in which Taiwan businessmen, for the sake of 
their personal interests, urged the government to start quick, 
direct cross-Strait transportation, and then looked at the American 
people, who were willing to queue for one or two hours for security 
checks [at airports] just for the needs of their national security. 
We want to show our respect to the U.S. Government for its 
responsible attitude towards safeguarding the nation, but we also 
feel ashamed for some Taiwan businessmen and pro-China politicians. 
In short, what Taiwan really needs now is a Taiwan-centered national 
consciousness.  But what has the government done in this aspect over 
the past six years?  Yet it is still not too late to take 
precautions.  We hope the DPP, which upholds nativism, will take 
this opportunity to learn from the United States, reflect on itself 
and correct its previous mistakes." 
 
B) "Paal Has Forgotten China's Real Motives" 
 
Winston Dang, a DPP legislator and director of the DPP's Department 
of International Affairs, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (8/16): 
 
"In his speech at the Brookings Institution on July 13, titled 'Some 
Reflections on My Time in Taiwan,' former American Institute in 
Taiwan director Douglas Paal said that China's intent to restrain 
Taiwan lay behind its rapid military buildup. ...  Paal seems to 
feel that the policies of the US and China regarding Taiwan, 
although articulated differently, are essentially the same in terms 
of maintaining peace in the Taiwan Strait. ...  With deep regret, I 
must conclude that Paal's assessment of cross-strait circumstances 
is far removed from reality.  Taiwan is constantly under the threat 
of invasion by China because of its pursuit of peace and democracy 
and its attempts to establish itself in the international arena. 
China has never renounced its ambition to attack Taiwan.  This was 
the reality for decades before Lee's Cornell visit.  Beijing's goal 
is to become a hegemonic power, supplanting the US in East Asia. 
... 
 
"I disagree with Paal's mentioning the democratic US and the 
dictatorial China together against a background of military 
expansion and understanding of peace and democracy. ...  I also 
disagree with Paal's understanding that Taiwan's long-time wish to 
ink a free trade agreement (FTA) with the US as soon as possible 
stems from political consideration alone. ...  Taiwan's democratic 
achievements and economic prosperity are built on universal values. 
Don't let China's saber rattling wipe out all the hard work the 
Taiwanese people have invested in their democracy and freedom." 
 
YOUNG