06AITTAIPEI2512
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.- TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2512/01 2070924
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260924Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1267
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5463
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6670UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002512 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.- TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage July 26 on the Cabinet-sponsored Sustainable Economic 
Development Conference; follow-up moves to oust President Chen 
Shui-bian; Typhoon Kaemi, which swept over Taiwan Tuesday; and 
investigations into the Taipei City Government's alleged role in a 
cable car construction corruption case and the details regarding the 
Presidential Office's allowance for state affairs.  The 
pro-unification "United Daily News" ran a front-page banner headline 
that read "Proposals Favorable for Cross-Strait Trade and Economics 
Are Overturned in Sustainable Economic Development Conference."  The 
sub-headline added, "Sub-group Discussing Cross-Strait Trade Issues 
Deletes Entire Paragraph on Direct Cross-Strait Transportation and 
Lowering of Ceiling for Investments on Mainland, Indicating That 
Executive Yuan Has Completely Yielded to Pro-Independence Faction 
and Su Revisionist Line Suffers Setback." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an opinion piece in the 
pro-status quo "China Times" discussed the association between U.S. 
neo-conservatism and Taiwan's nativism.  The article said President 
Chen made two moves to safeguard his political power:  reiterating 
the "Four Nos" to AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt, and seeking 
support from pro-independence heavyweights.  Washington 
correspondent Charles Snyder, writing in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," criticized Deputy 
U.S. Trade Representative Karan Bhatia's recent testimony before a 
congressional committee regarding a Free Trade Agreement with the 
United States.  End Summary. 
 
A) "Bian Makes Two Correct Chess Moves" 
 
Wu Ting-feng, assistant professor at Kai Nan Management College, 
opined in an opinion piece in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 400,000] (7/26): 
 
"... Israel insisted that its 'counterattacks' were not merely a 
result of its feud [with Lebanon] but also a move to echo support of 
the United States' global war on terrorism.  In reality, however, 
such an argument was like putting the cart before the horse.  Since 
President George W. Bush came into power, the U.S. national defense 
and foreign relations have been solely controlled by 
neo-conservatives, whose inspiration for international strategy 
happened to derive from the Six-Day War in 1967.  Israel's 
'pre-emption' during that war was the protocol of the 'preventive 
battles' evidenced in the U.S. anti-terrorist war in Iraq, launched 
by the neo-conservatives.  ... 
 
"Taiwan cannot possibly be a regional expansionist, but for the U.S. 
neo-conservatives, the island, like Israel, has its 'unique cultural 
values.'  Among Chinese countries in Asia, Taiwan is the only 
pro-U.S. democracy.  When they compare it with 'China's socialism,' 
'Hong Kong's one country, two systems,' and 'Singaporean Asian 
values,' the American neo-conservatives undoubtedly have special 
feelings for Taiwan, especially since the island has undergone its 
first political power transfer. 
 
"In other words, Taiwan's 'democracy' for the United States is just 
like 'nativism' for the deep-Green supporters; namely, they have won 
greater support and tolerance from the public.  Besides, for the 
neo-conservatives, there is always a shadow haunting them in East 
Asia, namely, the rise of the giant dragon, China.  ...  Based on 
such an assumption, when it comes to the interpretation of China's 
image and its possible threat, the American neo-conservatives 
actually share a common language with Taiwan's Green stalwarts. 
 
"Back to Taiwan:  Even though Chen Shui-bian has been plagued by 
many scandals, low approval ratings and the pro-Green scholars' 
recent statement [calling for his resignation], he has, after all, 
made two seemingly contradictory chess moves in an attempt to save 
himself.  First, when the U.S. expressed concern about the 
presidential recall motion, Chen proactively reiterated the 'Four 
Nos' pledge to AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt.  Such a move secured 
Washington's interest in continuing to offer help to cultivate 
Taiwan's 'democracy,' rather than changing to a different leader 
under the premise that U.S. geopolitical interests would not be 
harmed.  Second, Bian called a meeting with pro-independence 
heavyweights in an attempt to win the nativists' support for him. 
Bian's two moves were more or less the keys that helped to resolve a 
major part of his political crisis. 
 
"During the early years of the Cold War era, the unpopular KMT 
secured its political foothold because of U.S. containment policy 
needs.  During the post-Cold War era, Taiwan unexpectedly associated 
with the U.S. neo-conservative authorities, who, as a result, 
provided support for Bian, who no longer enjoys the people's 
support.  No matter whether the island is totalitarian or 
'democratic,' Taiwan's leaders always have a guardian behind them. 
This is the real sadness of being the Taiwan people, who cannot be 
their own masters." 
B) "The Truth about a US-Taiwan FTA" 
 
Washington correspondent Charles Snyder wrote in an analysis in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (7/26): 
 
"... In essence, Bhatia, who was stating the US administration's 
position on a Taiwan FTA, demanded that Taiwan enter into a 
neo-colonial relationship with the US, with Washington as master, 
before the possibility of an FTA could even be entertained.  His 
testimony evoked the specter of the Dutch East Asia Company, of the 
Taipans of colonial Hong Kong, and the Opium War, when the appetites 
of greedy business interests were held supreme irrespective of the 
well-being of the people of East Asia. ... 
 
"It has been clear for some time why Taiwan will never get a FTA. 
First, China absolutely opposes it, and the George W. Bush 
administration would not do such a thing to alienate Beijing. 
Second the US law that enables such agreements, known as 
'fast-track' trade negotiating authority, expires next summer, and 
an FTA would take too long to negotiate.  And third, there is no 
interest among US businesses for a Taiwan FTA.  Former Deputy USTR 
Charles Freeman was most honest about the third factor, which likely 
holds the key to the issue.  He publicly stated that the USTR does 
only what US businesses want it to.  If there is no groundswell 
among US firms for an FTA, then USTR will not promote it, he openly 
admitted. 
 
"That is honest.  To try to justify a do-nothing approach with a 
Taipanesque demand for preferential treatment is not, especially in 
the 21st century.  Unfortunately, there is little evidence that an 
FTA would yield great rewards for either US or Taiwan businesses or 
their economies.  Which is the fourth reason that Taiwan will never 
or at least in our lifetimes get a US FTA.  Let's be open about it. 
There's no need to be imperialistically condescending." 
 
YOUNG