06AITTAIPEI4216
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN
Fri Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0018
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #4216 3632020
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 292020Z DEC 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3579
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6138
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7367UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 004216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage December 29 on the third session of trial hearings in the 
Presidential Office Allowance for State Affairs case today and on 
the record-high lottery draw Thursday evening, December 28.  The 
pro-status quo "China Times" ran a news story on page eight with the 
headline "United States: Bian Had Better Not 'Create Surprises' in 
His New Year's Day [Address] Any More."  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" discussed the trial 
in the Presidential Office Allowance for State Affairs case and 
President Chen Shui-bian's future.  The article said "To repay the 
faithful backing given by 'deep green' followers, President Chen is 
expected and obliged to tilt further, during the remainder of his 
tenure, toward the ideology of Taiwan independence on such issues as 
the proclamation of a 'second republic' with the adoption of a new 
constitution."  End summary. 
 
"President Chen May Become More Radical" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (12/29): 
 
"... Numerous instances have proven that Chen can rely on the 
determined support of those 'deep green' people, although they are 
in a minority, to weather one political storm after another.  In 
terms of political effectiveness, their numerical disadvantage has 
been more than made up for by their aggressiveness and individual 
combat capability.  Look at the aggressive performance of the 
lawyers for the defendants during the trial sessions [i.e. of the 
Presidential Office Allowance for State Affairs case], who 
repeatedly challenged the prosecutors and judges.  Indeed, such a 
phenomenon of defiance of the judicial authority is rarely seen in 
any modern democracy.  In doing so, the legal team hired by the 
accused attempted to overpower the court psychologically. 
 
"To repay the faithful backing given by 'deep green' followers, 
President Chen is expected and obliged to tilt further, during the 
remainder of his tenure, toward the ideology of Taiwan independence 
on such issues as the proclamation of a 'second republic' with the 
adoption of a new constitution.  Many have suggested that once the 
DPP nominates its presidential candidate for the 2008 elections, the 
president will lose his effective control of party and government 
affairs and become a lame-duck head of state, but this may not 
necessarily be the case as long as he continues to be firmly 
supported by the 'deep-green' voters, who form the backbone of the 
DPP electorate.  In other words, touted as the 'son of Taiwan,' Chen 
will be able to control the DPP and the government apparatus through 
exercising his influence on the 'deep-green' constituency.  How 
great this influence will be and for how long depends on how much he 
has done to satisfy the demands of these people. 
 
"Without having to worry about any more elections, Chen may be 
tempted to run high risks in policy making, regardless of domestic 
public opinion and reactions from the United States, for personal 
benefit rather than in the national interest.  Apparently, what 
concerns Chen most now is whether he can serve out his second term 
and whether he can avoid being prosecuted for corruption after he 
steps down.  The continued strong support of hardcore 'deep-green' 
people will play a crucial role in President Chen's calculations. 
He needs to redouble his efforts to capture the hearts of the ardent 
advocates of the Taiwan independence movement for self-protection." 
 
 
WANG