06AITTAIPEI2245
MEDIA REACTION: AFTAERMATH OF THE PRESIDENTIAL RECALL
Fri Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2245/01 1810042
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300042Z JUN 06 ZDK
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0939
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5361
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6569UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002245 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFTAERMATH OF THE PRESIDENTIAL RECALL 
ATTEMPT 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  As the presidential recall attempt came to an end, 
Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies began to shift their focus 
June 29 to possible discord between President Chen Shui-bian (DPP) 
and former President Lee Teng-hui (Taiwan Solidarity Union) and 
between the KMT and the PFP, as well as on a speculated alliance 
between Lee and KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou.  News coverage also 
focused on investigation into the alleged role of the First Family's 
personal physician in First Lady Wu Shu-chen's involvement in the 
Sogo Department Store gift certificates scandal, and the probe into 
the Presidential Office's special allowance expenditures; and the 
year-end Taipei-Kaohsiung mayoral races.  The pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, carried the results of a 
latest DPP survey on page two, which showed that KMT Chairman Ma's 
approval rating has dropped a sharp 20 percent from 75 percent to 55 
percent.  The same poll also found that the KMT's approval rating 
also dropped from 40 percent to 25 percent, while the DPP's approval 
rating rose slightly to 17 percent. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial defined the so-called 'nativist line,' saying it is not 
linked to any certain individual or political party.  The editorial 
said that any regime that identifies with the Taiwan-centered entity 
and is willing to carry out ideals such as reforms, 
incorruptibility, progress, and prosperity can be viewed as a 
nativist regime.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" urged President 
Chen to get down to business and work to regain the people's 
confidence in the integrity of his DPP administration and its 
ability to govern.  An editorial in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
said the Green camp's corruption is not equal to the Blue camp's 
cleanliness, and this is the biggest trial facing Ma Ying-jeou.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" urged the opposition parties to return 
to a more moderate path in the wake of the Legislative Yuan's vote 
on the presidential recall motion.  End summary. 
 
A) "Nativist Line Is to Identify with Taiwan-Centered Entity - And 
to Carry out Ideals of Reform, Cleanliness, and Progress" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (6/29): 
 
"... What is the so-called nativist line?  It contains several major 
concepts:  democracy, reform, incorruptibility, progress, 
prosperity, a common destiny, and Taiwan-centered awareness.  First, 
the reason to start a nativist line is because the totalitarian rule 
of foreign regimes over the past few centuries has awakened the 
Taiwan people's consciousness to become their own masters. ... As a 
result, to identify with the Taiwan-centered entity ranks as the top 
key point of a nativist line.  But to ensure that the nativist line 
will last forever, the move to consolidate and concentrate 
Taiwan-centered awareness alone is insufficient; more importantly, 
it is about presenting visions about democracy, reform, 
incorruptibility, progress, and prosperity.  In other words, the 
ideal of a nativist line is not simply to pursue an independent 
sovereignty; it is more important to build a country of prosperity 
and justice, in which all the people can live under a happy, free 
and democratic system.  ... 
 
"... Having clarified the concept and meaning of the nativist line, 
the term 'nativist regime' will no longer be misleading and 
distorted.  The term will no longer be linked or equal to any 
certain individual or political party.  Any regime that identifies 
with the Taiwan-centered entity and is willing to carry out ideals 
such as reforms, incorruptibility, progress and prosperity can be 
viewed as a nativist regime, and any regime that violates what the 
nativist line and the people have entrusted to it is not regarded as 
a nativist regime.  ..." 
 
B) "Chen Must Get Back to Business" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (6/29): 
 
"After surviving the opposition's attempt to oust him on Tuesday in 
the country's first-ever presidential recall vote, this is not the 
time for President Chen Shui-bian to sit back and relax.  With less 
than two years left in office, Chen needs to get down to business 
and work to regain the people's confidence in the integrity of his 
Democratic Progressive Party administration and its ability to 
govern. ...  True leadership shines through difficult times.  Chen 
has the responsibility to live up to the public's expectations and 
focus on pushing ahead with effective policies that best serve the 
public and Taiwan's national interests.  He should remember that the 
public has entrusted him with a precious honor - to go down in 
history as the head of the first pro-localization regime in Taiwan. 
The rest of his legacy is something that he has to work on now." 
 
C) "A Look at Ma Ying-jeou's Predicament from Several Recent 
Events" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] noted in an 
editorial (6/29): 
 
"As expected, under the DPP's counterattacks, the presidential 
recall motion failed to pass in the Legislative Yuan.  The Taiwan 
people will surely remember that DPP legislators tied their whole 
party to Chen Shui-bian's family, and the DPP may have to pay a 
price for this in the future.  But the people's displeasure with the 
DPP is one thing, and whether they will turn their displeasure into 
support for the KMT and the PFP is something else. 
 
"Many opinion polls showed that no matter how fiercely the scandals 
involving the First Family escalated, 20 to 30 percent of local 
people said they still support the DPP.  Without a doubt, a minority 
of these nearly 30 percent of Taiwan people [do not support the 
pan-Blue camp] because of their narrow-minded nativist or ethnic 
consciousness, but still, most people also 'do not believe the KMT 
is clean anyway.'  The many scandals surrounding the First Family 
and President Chen's close aides over the past few months more or 
less manifested the ruling party's 'corrupt' image.  But the Green 
camp's corruption does not mean that the Blue camp is clean, and 
that explains why the Blue camp has yet to fulfill their hope to 
create a comparison between 'cleanliness and corruption.'  Frankly 
speaking, this is the KMT's biggest problem and the biggest trial 
facing Ma Ying-jeou. ..." 
 
D) "The Opposition Should Be Moderate in Action" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] wrote in an editorial (6/29): 
 
"... Ma is said to have decided to take his party back to the 
'middle road,' or a moderate course, after the recall attempt. 
Soong has expressed dissatisfaction with the plan, but, in our view, 
a moderate course will be in the best interests of the opposition. 
The campaign to oust Chen has had a negative impact on social 
stability.  Although it won widespread support, it has triggered 
some criticism among independent voters, who are normally annoyed by 
political strife. ...  If Chen and his family are involved in more 
corruption cases and if the DPP continues to disappoint the people 
by failing to improve the residents' livelihoods, they will be the 
victims of their own actions in future elections.  In a democracy, 
elections are the best way for the people to put an end to 
government corruption and to eliminate incompetent politicians." 
 
KEEGAN