06AITTAIPEI2052
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT CHARTER FLIGHTS, RECALL OF
Fri Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2052/01 1670027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160027Z JUN 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0699
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5317
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6528UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT CHARTER FLIGHTS, RECALL OF 
PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage June 15 on the new arrangements for cross-Strait charter 
flights; President Chen Shui-bian's remarks in response to the 
recall motion; investigations into President Chen's son-in-law's 
insider trading scandal and First Lady Wu Shu-chen's role in the 
Sogo Department Store gift certificates case.  The pro-unification 
"United Daily News" front-paged "Cross-Strait Charter Planes Will 
Fly on Four [Major] Holidays of the Year."  The sub-headline added 
"Taiwan, Mainland China Announced Simultaneously Wednesday to Expand 
and Lift Ban on Four Types of Charter Flights: Special Cargo 
Charter, Holiday, Emergency Medical, and Special Humanitarian."  The 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" and pro-status quo "China Times," on 
the other hand, both ran similar front-page banner headlines that 
said "Prosecutor's Office Will Summon Wu Shu-chen for Gift 
Certificates Case."  The "China Times" also carried results of its 
latest survey on page four, which showed that 43 percent of those 
polled said they support the motion to recall President Chen, and 47 
percent said they believe that First Lady Wu Shu-chen was involved 
in the Sogo Department Store ownership battle.  The same poll also 
showed that 46.9 percent of respondents believe the Presidential 
Office would interfere in the prosecutors' investigation of Chen's 
son-in-law's insider trading case, while 22 percent said it would 
not. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "United Daily News" 
analysis said the government chose to announce the new arrangements 
for cross-Strait charter flights amid the moves to recall President 
Chen because it wants to prove to the pan-Blue camp that Chen 
remains the state leader who holds substantive powers in his hand. 
A "China Times" analysis criticized Chen's remarks in response to 
the recall motion, saying Chen is seeking to sow discord in Taiwan 
society.  End summary. 
 
¶3. New Cross-Strait Flights 
 
"Charter Flights Are Meant to Serve as Bian and Su's Track Record" 
 
Journalist Sean Liu said in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
[circulation: 400,000] (6/15): 
 
"... The fact that [the government] sought to announce concrete 
developments made in cross-Strait negotiations will allow A-bian, 
who has determined to counterattack the pan-Blue camp, to prove that 
he remains the state leader who holds substantive powers.  Bian's 
move to act as usual to push for policies that are favorable for the 
nation is conducive for him to portray the pan-Blue camp as 'wanting 
nothing but to recall Chen and regain power.'  Beijing's pragmatic 
attitude in handling and agreeing to announce it, despite the fact 
that Beijing knows that Bian is now in the midst of a recall 
upheaval, also provided an opportunity for the Presidential Office 
to exert its power. 
 
"Having presented the 'beef' of cross-Strait policies, Chen is 
scheduled for a site visit to the Kinmen frontline today.  He wants 
to prove to the pan-Blue camp that he not only has no fear of the 
recall motion, but remains the head of his administration." 
 
¶4. Recall of President Chen Shui-bian 
 
"Presidential Office Seeking to Sow Discord Using Anti-Recall 
[Moves]?" 
 
Journalist Lin Shu-ling commented in the pro-status quo "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] (6/15): 
 
"... The fact that President Chen defined the recall motion as a 
political confrontation has highlighted that all his apologies and 
admissions of faults were all superficial moves.  Such an 
observation is evident from the Presidential Office's interactions 
with local people.  Starting from the day when the Taiwan 
Development Corporation's insider trading case and the controversial 
Sogo ownership case were unveiled, the Presidential Office has never 
agreed to hold a press conference to clarify the myths and answer 
people's questions.  But the Presidential Office invited the foreign 
press to a tea party just after the Legislative Yuan launched the 
recall motion, and during the party it asked the foreign journalists 
not to believe the news stories reported by local media.... 
 
"Frankly speaking, Chen himself should be held most responsible for 
the escalating calls demanding him to step down.  ... Many Green 
supporters are currently stuck in a dilemma.  They saw everything 
and heard everything, so they are not very willing to defend Chen 
and they don't know how to defend him.  The many remarks made by the 
President sounded like hypnotism to his supporters.  But his 
statements which relentlessly divide the Taiwan people from 
mainlanders and split those living in northern Taiwan from those in 
southern Taiwan have sown serious discord in Taiwan society. ..." 
 
 
KEEGAN