06BEIJING24165
NOVEMBER 29 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: 1992  CONSENSUS,
Wed Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1138
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4165/01 3331024
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291024Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2543
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 024165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 29 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: 1992  CONSENSUS, 
CROSS-STRAIT TRADE AND INVESTMENT, FLIGHTS,  TOURISM, VISAS 
FOR "228 INCIDENT" FILM ACTORS 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points at the November 29 Taiwan Affairs 
Office (TAO) press briefing were: 
 
--The spokesman declined to comment on Taiwan's 
internal politics and Ma Ying-jeou's 2008 candidacy, 
noting that the "1992 consensus" should serve as the 
basis for cross-Strait negotiations. 
 
-- Cross-Strait trade will continue to grow over time, 
despite obstructions from Taiwan authrities (in 
response to a reporter's citation of a 20 percent 
increase in the first ten moths of 2006). 
 
-- The Mainland hopes to strengthen cross-Strait 
financial exchange and cooperation and to normalize 
cross-Strait charter flights for Spring Festival and 
other holidays and weekends. 
 
-- Some progress has been made in discussions on 
expanding tourism for Mainland residents to Taiwan, 
but further discussions are necessary. 
 
-- Rejection of applications for Mainland actors to 
travel to Taiwan for production of a film about the 
"228 Incident" is inappropriate. 
 
Taiwan Internal Developments: No Comment 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesman Li Weiyi 
deflected reporters' questions about Taiwan internal 
politics during the November 29 press briefing.  Asked 
for an opinion on the "special funds" investigations 
in Taiwan, Li said the TAO is paying attention to 
relevant reports, but has no comment.  In response to 
a reporter's question about the possibility of a Ma 
Ying-jeou victory in the 2008 "presidential" race and 
Ma's concept of a "fifty-year peace agreement," Li 
said that the Mainland is prepared to discuss and 
promote the resolution of questions of mutual concern 
following the resumption of talks based on the "1992 
consensus." 
 
¶3.  Asked whether the importance of the Taiwan 
question has subsided in the wake of China's economic 
rise, Li stated that the Taiwan question is a core 
interest of the Chinese nation and bears directly on 
China's national security.  The Mainland will continue 
to promote stable cross-Strait relations, to oppose 
and contain "Taiwan independence" moves and to promote 
peaceful reunification on the basis of the One China 
policy. 
 
Taiwan Trade and Investment 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Asked about the increase in cross-Strait trade in 
2006 (up 20.4 percent in the first ten months of 2006 
to more than USD 88 billion, according to the 
reporter), Li said that cross-Strait trade would 
continue to grow, despite obstacles and restrictions 
imposed by the Taiwan authorities.  Asked about cross- 
Strait financial cooperation and Mainland opening to 
Taiwan banks, Li said the Mainland is enthusiastic 
about increased cooperation and is willing to promote 
negotiations between non-governmental, cross-Strait 
financial organizations on issues such as supervision 
mechanisms and transaction methods. 
 
¶5.  Li dismissed assertions by the Mainland Affairs 
Council in Taiwan that rejection of bids by Taiwan 
insurers to operate on the Mainland were rejected for 
political reasons.  Contrary to the information cited 
by the CCTV reporter, Li said only three Taiwan 
insurance companies submitted applications and said 
two were rejected for not complying with conditions 
set by Mainland insurance regulators. 
 
Tourism, Charter Flights Discussions Continue 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Asked about cross-Strait charter flights, Li said 
the TAO hopes to normalize cross-Strait charter 
flights for the Spring Festival and other holidays and 
weekends.  The Mainland will continue to push for 
realization of convenient, direct cross-Strait flights 
for both Mainland and Taiwan compatriots. 
 
 
BEIJING 00024165  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7.  Although some technical aspects of the cross- 
Strait tourism issue have been resolved through 
discussions, further discussions are required to 
resolve outstanding issues.  Discussions between non- 
governmental tourist industry organizations are 
continuing, Li said. 
 
Rejection of Film Actors' Visas 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Recent rejections of Mainland actors and 
actresses' applications to visit Taiwan not only are 
inappropriate, but also harm cross-Strait cultural 
exchange and cooperation, said Li.  The actors and 
actresses were reportedly involved in the production 
of Yun Shui Yao, a movie about the "228 Incident" of 
1947, in which an anti-Kuomintang uprising on Taiwan 
was brutally suppressed. 
Randt