06BEIJING23992
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR ECONOMIC OFFICER
Wed Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #3992/01 3260126
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220126Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2352
INFO RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8488UNCLAS BEIJING 023992 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA CH
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR ECONOMIC OFFICER 
HENRY LEW 
 
REF: HONG KONG 4515 
 
WELCOME TO CHINA 
----------------- 
 
¶1. Embassy Beijing warmly welcomes and grants country 
clearance to Henry Lew to travel to Beijing November 
29-December 8 to provide support for the Strategic Economic 
Dialogue. 
 
¶2.  Point of Contact in Beijing will be Economic OMS Lisa 
Cantonwine: 
 
Office: (86-10) 6532-3831, ext. 6999 
Mobile: (86) 136-0107-7984 
Unclassified email: CantonwineLM@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶3.  Reservations in Beijing have been made at the Kerry 
Center Hotel: 
 
1 Guanghua Road, Beijing 100020, China 
Telephone:  (86-10) 6561-8833 
Fax:  (86-10) 6561-2626 
Website: www.shangri-la.com 
 
Per request, no airport transportation has been arranged. 
 
------------------------------ 
Security and Threat Assessment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  The threat level for all China posts is considered low 
for crime and medium for terrorism. 
 
¶5.  The Regional Security Office is not aware of any specific 
threat directed against any US person or traveling 
delegation.  Should such information be developed, the 
Chinese security services are committed to advise the Embassy 
of pertinent information and to provide necessary security 
coverage. 
 
¶6.  China experiences a moderate rate of crime, including 
recent incidents ranging from petty theft to murder. 
Pickpockets are particularly active in crowded markets and 
foreigners are often sought out as primary targets.  Petty 
theft from hotel rooms is uncommon, but visitors are advised 
not to leave valuables lying loose or unattended in their 
rooms.  It is the policy of this Mission that employees, 
their family members and official visitors to China must not 
knowingly purchase counterfeit or pirated products during 
their stay in China. Also, foreigners may be approached in 
tourist areas by individuals seeking to exchange U.S. dollars 
or to sell pirated or fake products, such as compact discs, 
in violation of intellectual property rights laws.  These 
transactions are illegal, violate post policy, and must be 
avoided. 
 
¶7.  All U.S. citizen personnel serving under Chief of Mission 
authority in a temporary duty status of 30 days or more must 
complete appropriate overseas personal security training 
prior to travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who have 
completed the Security Overseas Seminar Course at State,s 
Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after June 1, 2000 meet this 
requirement.  All other TDYers must either 1) complete the 
approved four-day seminar at FSI entitled &Serving Abroad 
for Families and Employees (SAFE) or 2) have their agency 
certify to the State Department Bureau of Diplomatic Security 
that the employee has undergone equivalent security training. 
 The contact for this certification is Assistant Director of 
Training, DS/T, at telephone (703) 205-2617.  Country 
clearance will not be granted for any traveler with planned 
TDY in excess of 30 days if this information is not 
stated/certified.  POC for additional information is DS RSO, 
Beijing at: ds rso Beijing@nointernetmail.state.gov(Note: 
Travelers from DHS/CBP, DIA, FBI, DOD, and the Peace Corp 
have been pre-certified by their agencies with DS.) 
 
¶8.  All/all official visitors are required to obtain a 
pre-departure, country specific counterintelligence briefing 
from their parent agency before departing for China. 
Visitors should contact the security office of their parent 
agency.  If the parent agency is unable to give the briefing 
or needs assistance/guidance, the visitor should contact the 
Bureau of Diplomatic Security,s Division of 
Counterintelligence (DS/ICI/CI) at 571-345-7641, 3966, or 
3968 to schedule a briefing.  HQ DS/CI is located at SA-20, 
1801 Lynn St., Rosslyn, Virginia 20522-2008.  Department of 
State personnel should contact the DS/ICI/CI directly to 
schedule a briefing. Official visitors may also be required 
to attend a post specific security briefing upon their 
arrival in country.  The type of briefing is contingent on 
the length of the planned visit.  Upon arrival in Beijing, 
 
all TDY personnel should contact the Regional Security Office 
at 6532-6036 to determine level of briefing required. 
 
¶9.  Visitors are reminded to take necessary precautions in 
safeguarding sensitive material and information.  All non-USG 
facilities must be considered technically compromised and may 
not be used to discuss, process, or store classified 
information.  Telephone calls, e-mail, and Internet usage are 
routinely monitored and hotel rooms searched. 
 
¶10.  All TDY U.S. citizen employees of the U.S. Government, 
civilian or military, who are under the authority of the 
Chief of Mission are subject to the reporting requirement 
stated in 12 FAM 262 regarding contact reports, i.e. any 
initial (non-business related) contact with a national from a 
country with a Critical threat (counterintelligence) post, as 
listed on the Department,s Security Environment Threat List 
(SETL), must be reported.  In general, employee reporting 
should occur within one business day after such contact has 
occurred.  If unable to report within this time frame, or 
unsure about the need to report at all, employees should 
contact the RSO or PSO as soon as prcticable.  If the 
RSO/PSO is unavailable, notfy the Management Officer or the 
Deputy Chiefof Mission. 
 
¶11.  Per 12 FAM 262, this reporting requirement generally 
applies whenever: 
 
(1) Illegal or unauthorized access is sought to classified or 
otherwise sensitivQnformation. 
 
(2) The employee is concerned that he or she may the target 
of actual or attempted exploitation by a foreign entity. 
 
(3) That national attempts to establish recurring contact or 
seems to be actively seeking a close personal association, 
beyond professional or personal courtesies. 
 
¶12.  Travelers should be aware that previous visitors have 
reported that their unattended computers have been subjected 
to tampering.  The efforts may be directed toward obtaining 
information on the computers, but problems ranging from 
viruses left on their systems to hard drives, which are no 
longer functional, have been reported.  Hotels and private 
Chinese Internet providers have in some cases given hotel 
guests &free8 thumb drives for use with their computers. 
The source and quality of these devices are unknown.  Such 
devices could contain malicious codes and viruses and should 
not be used on government computers.  Official visitors are 
reminded that non-inspectable electrical/electronic 
equipment, i.e., cellular telephones, laptop computers, 
personal digital assistants (PDAs), etc., may not be brought 
into the controlled access areas of the Chancery.  If a 
visitor intends to travel with USG-owned computers and 
equipment for use within the chancery, please contact the 
Regional Security Officer at 86-10-6532-3831 ext. 6058, or 
SheehanRP@state.gov or EckertRA@state.gov, for information 
and guidelines. 
 
¶13.  Additionally, all classified and sensitive materials 
must be secured at the Embassy upon arrival in country.  All 
classified material must be brought into China via diplomatic 
pouch. 
 
¶14.  Travelers must contact the Embassy or nearest Consulate 
General upon arrival in China and provide telephone and 
address information while in country. 
 
¶15.  Passports and visas are required.  Americans arriving / 
transiting without valid passports and Chinese visas are not 
permitted to enter China and may also be subject to fines. 
Visas are required to transit China on the way to and from 
Mongolia or North Korea. Those visitors traveling to China on 
a single entry visa should be reminded that trips to Hong 
Kong or Macau Special Administrative Regions are treated as a 
visit outsiQainland China.  If the traveler is planning to 
return to Mainland China after a visit to one of these two 
destinations on the same single entry visa, they will be 
denied entry.  Visitors facing this dilemma will be required 
to apply for a new visa at the Chinese consulate in Hong Kong 
to gain re-entry into Mainland China. 
 
 
 
 
 
Randt