06BEIJING18460
COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR USDOC AND USDOD
Fri Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2169
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #8460/01 2440057
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010057Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 7036
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 5691
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 6793
RUEKJCS/DOD WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5746UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 018460 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 
532/BIS/EA/NSTTC/BKRITZER/GCHRISTIANSEN/KSWAS EY/KGARDNER 
USDOC FOR 3132/OIO/EAP/WZARIT/ADESSARAN 
STATE FOR EAP/CM/NZARING 
DOD FOR DTSA/MLAYCHACK/PCSESKE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP CH ETRD ETTC OTRA PREL
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR USDOC AND USDOD 
DELEGATION 
 
REF: USDOC 4760 
 
1.THIS MESSAGE IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PLEASE PROTECT 
ACCORDINGLY. Post grants country clearance and welcomes the 
arrival of the following interagency delegation of U.S. 
Department of Commerce and U.S. Department of Defense 
officials: 
 
      Elroy (Gene) Christiansen 
      Dr. Tia Hall Benson Tolle 
      Major Peter Cseke, Jr., USAF 
      David Dana Marshall 
      Dale Dean Moorman 
 
¶2. The purpose of this visit is to gain familiarization with 
the composite materials industry in China. 
 
¶3. Control Officer will be Jeannette Chu, Embassy Export 
Control Officer.  ECO Chu can be reached telephonically at 
(86)(10)8529-6655 extention 810 or via mobile phone at 
(86)139-1082-2303.  ECO Chu will meet delegation arriving on 
UA Flight 835 at Shanghai Pudong Airport on Monday, 4 
September at 1555 hrs and accompany delegation to points in 
Shanghai, Chengdu, Xian, Beijing, Tianjin and Harbin, China. 
ECO Chu has forwarded via e-mail internal flight arrangements 
and hotel reservations. 
 
------------------------------ 
SECURITY AND THREAT ASSESSMENT 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. The threat level for all China posts is considered 
low for crime and medium for terrorism. 
 
¶5. The Regional Security Office is not aware of any 
specific threats directed against any US person or 
traveling delegation.  Should such information be 
developed, the Chinese security services are committed 
to advise the Embassy of pertinent information and 
provide necessary security coverage. 
 
¶6. All/all official visitors are required to obtain a 
pre-departure, country specific counterintelligence 
briefing from their parent agency before departing for 
China.  Visitors should contact the security office of 
their parent agency.  If the parent agency is unable 
to give the briefing or needs assistance/guidance, the 
visitor should contact the Bureau of Diplomatic 
Security's Division of Counterintelligence (DS/ICI/CI) 
at 571-345-7641, 3966, or 3968 to schedule a briefing. 
HQ DS/CI is located at SA-20, 1801 Lynn St., Rosslyn, 
Virginia 20522-2008. Department of State personnel 
should contact DS/CI directly to schedule a briefing. 
Official visitors may also be required to attend a 
post specific security briefing upon their arrival in 
country.  The type of briefing is contingent on the 
length of the planned visit.  Upon arrival in Beijing, 
all TDY personnel should contact the Regional Security 
Office at 6532-6036 to determine level of briefing 
required. 
 
¶7. The Regional Security Office must be notified 
immediately whenever: 
 
(1) Illegal or unauthorized access is sought to 
classified or otherwise sensitive information. 
 
(2) A delegation member is concerned that he or she 
may the target of actual or attempted exploitation by 
a foreign entity. 
 
¶8. The political climate in China is stable.  There is 
no recent history of active political unrest or 
international terrorism, and there are no indications 
that the current conditions will change during the 
delegation's visit. 
 
¶9. China experiences a moderate rate of crime, 
including recent incidents ranging from petty theft to 
murder.  Pickpockets are particularly active in 
crowded markets and foreigners are often sought out as 
primary targets.  Petty theft from hotel rooms is 
 
BEIJING 00018460  002 OF 002 
 
 
uncommon, but visitors are advised not to leave 
valuables lying loose or unattended in their rooms. 
It is the policy of this Mission that employees, their 
family members and official visitors to China must no 
knowingly purchase counterfeit or pirated products 
during their stay in China. Also, foreigners my be 
approached in tourist areas by individuas seeking to 
exchange U.S. dollars or to sellpirated or fake 
products, such as compact discs, in violation of 
intellectual property rights laws.  These transactions 
are illegal and must be avoided as they could result 
in adverse police action. 
 
¶10. Visitors are reminded to take necessary 
precautions in safeguarding sensitive material and 
information.  All non-USG facilities must be 
considered technically compromised and may not be used 
to discuss, process, or store classified information. 
Telephone calls, e-mail, and Internet usage are 
routinely monitored and hotel rooms searched.  If the 
delegation plans to bring classified material, please 
advise the Embassy control officer who will need to 
know in advance the approximate volume of the material 
in order to arrange safe storage at the Embassy.  Note 
that all classified material must be brought into 
China via diplomatic pouch and must be secured at the 
Embassy upon arrival in country. 
 
¶11. Delegation members should be aware that previous 
visitors have reported that their unattended computers 
have been subjected to tampering.  The efforts may be 
directed toward obtaining information on the 
computers, but problems ranging from viruses left on 
their systems to hard drives, which are no longer 
functional, have been reported.  Hotels and private 
Chinese Internet providers have in some cases given 
hotel guests "free" thumb drives for use with their 
computers.  The source and quality of these devices 
are unknown.  Such devices could contain malicious 
codes and viruses and should not be used with 
government computers.  Official visitors are reminded 
that non-inspectable electrical/electronic equipment, 
i.e., cellular telephones, laptop computers, personal 
digital assistants (PDAs), etc., may not be brought 
into the controlled access areas of the Chancery.  If 
a visitor intends to travel with USG-owned computers 
and equipment for use within the chancery, please 
contact the Regional Security Officer at 86-10-6532- 
3831 ext. 6058, or SheehanRP@state.gov or 
EckertRA@state.gov, for information and guidelines. 
 
¶12. Passports and visas are required.  Americans 
arriving / transiting without valid passports and 
Chinese visas will not be permitted to enter China and 
may also be subject to fines.  Visas are required to 
transit China on the way to and from Mongolia or North 
Korea. Those visitors traveling to China on a single 
entry visa should be reminded that trips to Hong Kong 
or Macau Special Administrative Regions are treated as 
a visit outside Mainland China.  If the traveler is 
planning to return to Mainland China after a visit to 
one of these two destinations on the same single entry 
visa they will be denied entry.  Visitors facing this 
dilemma will be required to apply for a new visa at 
the Chinese consulate in Hong Kong to gain re-entry 
into Mainland China. 
SEDNEY