06GUANGZHOU10089
AmCham Presents Report on the State of Business in
Tue Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO1363
RR RUEHCN RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHPB
DE RUEHGZ #0089/01 0940907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040907Z APR 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3474
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GA
RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUANGZHOU 010089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN, CELICO, DAS LEVINE 
STATE PASS USTR 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD PGOV ELAB CH TBIO
SUBJECT: AmCham Presents Report on the State of Business in 
South China 
 
(U) THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE 
PROTECT ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR RELEASE OUTSIDE U.S. 
GOVERNMENT CHANNELS.  NOT FOR INTERNET PUBLICATION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The American Chamber of Commerce in 
Guangdong recently released survey results that found that 
three-quarters of the participants -- who were engaged 
almost equally in providing goods and services -- have 
profitable operations in China.  The production of goods or 
services for China, the U.S., or other markets was by far 
the most dominant company goal.  Participating companies 
said they set up operations in the Pearl River Delta (PRD) - 
- as opposed to elsewhere in China -- primarily because of 
opportunities present in the region's domestic market. 
Ninety percent of the companies described the business 
climate in the PRD as good, very good, or outstanding, and 
the majority of participants predicted that their business 
would increase over the next three years.  While nearly all 
participants said that Chinese government reforms had 
positively impacted U.S. business, Chinese regulatory issues 
were viewed as the biggest challenge to business growth in 
the next five years.  More than three-quarters of companies 
said the region's shortage of low-skilled migrant workers 
has not affected them.  Somewhat surprisingly, more than 
half of survey participants admitted they have not made 
plans to deal with a potential outbreak of avian influenza. 
While every post sees its share of frustrated business 
people, we presume that these positive results are fairly 
indicative of the healthy business environment in South 
China, and the success that U.S. business are having here. 
 
¶2. (U) The American Chamber of Commerce in Guangdong 
(AmCham) recently hosted a press conference and a lunch 
presentation to promote its "report card" on the state of 
business in Guangdong and the Pearl River Delta (PRD).  The 
report was based on their 2006 Business Climate Survey 
conducted among AmCham members and members of the 
Multinational Corporation Club of Guangzhou.  A total of 161 
businesses, representing a cross-section of foreign invested 
enterprises in South China, participated in the survey, 
carried out by Hewitt Associates from January 9-20, 2006. 
The following is a summary of some of the highlights of the 
survey. 
 
Who Were the Survey Participants? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Half of the survey participants had more than ten 
years of experience operating in China.  Thirty-seven 
percent had between 10-20 years of experience and 13% had 
more than 20 years of experience; one quarter of 
participants had less than five years of operating 
experience in China.  The types of business activities in 
which participants were engaged is almost equally divided 
between goods (manufacturing/trade) (54%) and services 
(46%).  While the size of these companies varied in terms of 
their global and China revenue, almost 38% of companies had 
global revenues of more than USD 500 million; roughly 31% 
had global revenues of less than USD 10 million.  The size 
of participating companies in terms of the number of 
employees varied significantly, but the majority were at the 
extreme ends of the spectrum -- 29% had less than 50 
employees while 27% had more than 1,000 employees.  Almost 
half of participants had less than five expatriate workers. 
One half of the survey participants have parent/holding 
companies in the U.S.; eighteen percent have a 
parent/holding company in China; and the parent/holding 
companies of the rest are in diverse locations. 
 
The Bottom Line and Top Priorities 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Fully three-quarters of participating companies said 
they currently had profitable operations in China.  (Note: 
The report notes that this is a marked change from past 
 
GUANGZHOU 00010089  002 OF 003 
 
 
surveys when many foreign-invested companies said their main 
goal was to become profitable in China.  End Note.)  The 
production of goods or services for China, the U.S., or 
other markets was by far the most dominant company goal 
among survey participants.  Other important goals were to 
benefit from lower labor costs and to establish or expand a 
regional base. 
 
¶5. (U) When asked why companies set up operations in the PRD 
-- as opposed to other China locations -- the top reason 
given was opportunities in the PRD's domestic market, which 
indicates that a strong local customer base exists for the 
majority of survey participants.  Geographic proximity to 
Hong Kong was also listed as an important reason, as were 
lower productions costs, a better infrastructure as compared 
to other parts of China, and greater openness (not defined) 
compared to other parts of China.  The availability of 
power, raw materials, and low-skilled labor were not listed 
as important reasons for setting up shop in the PRD, nor 
were the presence of other U.S. companies, the actions of 
competitors, or labor costs. 
 
Business is Good Now, But How Does the Future Look? 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. (U) The vast majority (90%) of the participating 
companies described the business climate in the PRD as 
good/acceptable, very good, or outstanding; nearly 50% 
described the climate as very good or outstanding.  The 
majority of participants predicted that their business would 
increase either somewhat or greatly in all dimensions over 
the next three years.  The study also found that for 2006, 
roughly 60% of participants expected to make additional 
investments of up to USD 10 million.  Over the next three 
years, nearly half expected to invest up to USD 10 million, 
with 20% saying they would invest between USD 10-50 million. 
When asked in which areas of China any likely expansion in 
the next three years would occur, 48% of companies said 
North China, 45% said the PRD, and 44% said the Yangtze 
River Delta. 
 
¶7. (U) Almost all participants commented that Chinese 
government reforms (local, provincial, and central) in the 
past five years had had a positive impact on the climate for 
U.S. businesses in China; almost two-thirds of participants 
assessed the impact as great or very great. 
Despite this positive track record, Chinese regulatory 
issues are seen as the biggest challenge to business growth 
in the next five years.  During the public introduction of 
the survey, Christian Doeringer from Hewitt explained that 
while business people found past government reforms to be 
positive, they are concerned about the uncertainty of 
potential implications for any new laws and the possible 
slowdowns that new laws could cause. 
 
¶8. (U) The next biggest challenges companies faced were 
competition from local companies, lack of qualified 
managerial and specialist talent, and foreign competition. 
Commenting on concerns about the lack of talent, Doeringer 
noted that business people have told him they are frustrated 
by Guangzhou's lack of workers with the equivalent of 
vocational/technical school degrees who can perform as 
technicians.  Somewhat surprisingly, IPR was not among the 
top five concerns, however nearly 30% of companies expressed 
some level of concern about the issue.  AmCham president 
Harley Seyedin explained in the press conference that, in 
his experience, IPR is not a concern for all companies, but 
when it is a concern, it is a serious concern. 
 
No Worker Shortage Here 
----------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Seventy-eight percent of companies noted that they 
have not been affected by the reported general shortage of 
low-skilled migrant workers in the PRD.  (Note:  Econoffs 
 
GUANGZHOU 00010089  003 OF 003 
 
 
often hear that U.S. and European companies tend to pay 
their employees more and provide better working conditions, 
allowing them to tap into the labor market with more 
success.  End Note.)  The one-quarter of companies that have 
been affected by labor shortages said they responded by 
increasing salaries and wages and improving other welfare 
benefits. 
 
Too Busy Making Money to Plan for AI? 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) From a Consular Services perspective, one 
interesting note from the survey is that slightly more than 
half of survey participants (55%) have not made plans to 
deal with a potential outbreak of avian influenza (AI).  The 
Consulate has worked hard to conduct public outreach 
activities throughout the region to educate people about the 
need to prepare for AI, but these results indicate that the 
message, if it's being heard, is not being taken to heart. 
Given that Guangdong was the birthplace of the SARS 
outbreak, it is somewhat surprising that people here are not 
being more proactive in preparing for AI. 
 
Comment:  Just How Rose Colored Are Those Glasses? 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶11. (SBU) While AmChams around the world work hard to 
promote U.S. businesses abroad, the local AmCham office is 
particularly active and forward leaning in its efforts.  The 
Chamber as a whole, and the president in particular, are 
extremely dedicated to their cause and are constantly "on- 
message" regarding their positive view of the business 
environment in South China.  Indeed, AmCham's dedication was 
clearly reflected in the survey; more than 90% of 
participants rated AmCham as doing a good/acceptable, very 
good, or outstanding job. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Econoffs often hear a less upbeat story from our 
contacts about the frustrations and hassles of operating in 
a very opaque business environment.  We recognize that our 
sampling may be skewed, however, in that usually only those 
people who are having problems seek us out for advice and/or 
assistance; people having no problems generally do not 
contact us to say that all is well.  Given that reality, we 
can only assume that the AmCham survey results are, on the 
whole, fairly representative of the positive business 
environment in South China.  It is certainly true that there 
is a lot of money being made in this corner of China, and 
based on these survey results, it appears that U.S. business 
has carved out a slice of that pie. 
 
DONG