07AITTAIPEI1
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S NEW YEAR SPEECH
Wed Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0001/01 0030710
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030710Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3584
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6139
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7368UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S NEW YEAR SPEECH 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage December 30, 2006 to January 3, 2007 on Taiwan Ministry of 
Economic Affairs' announcement to allow Taiwan semiconductor 
manufacturers to move 0.18-micron manufacturing technology to China; 
President Chen Shui-bian's New Year speech saying that the 
government's cross-Strait policy contains only the direction of 
"Taiwan First" or "Taiwan-centric consciousness," but not Premier Su 
Tseng-chang's "revisionist" line; and KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's 
 
SIPDIS 
talk at the KMT Central Standing Committee that reconciliation 
between the pan-Blue and pan-Green alliances has greater priority 
than the cooperation between the KMT and the Communist Party of 
China. 
 
In terms of commentary and editorials, the pro-unification "United 
Daily News" said in its editorial that it is difficult to interpret 
President Chen Shui-bian's New Year speech, since Chen is 
capricious.  The editorial predicted that Chen might still take an 
antagonistic stance against China, but he might not dare to move 
toward Taiwan independence.  The pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
editorialized that imposing stricter regulations on investment in 
China is the true meaning of 'Taiwan first' and 'Taiwan-centric 
consciousness.'  The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" editorialized 
that Taiwan lacks in confidence in terms of openness to China and 
added that openness will not threaten 'Taiwan-centered 
Consciousness.'  The pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
pointed out in an editorial that it is surprising that President 
Chen's New Year speech does not contain surprises.  It also said 
that greater separation from China would only cause harm, not 
benefit.  End summary. 
 
A) "Turn on the Left-Turn Light, but Take a Right Turn: 
Interpretations of President Chen Shui-bian's New Year Speech" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (01/03): 
 
"[President] Chen Shui-bian's New Year speech has elicited numerous 
different interpretations, and there are two reasons: First, Chen 
Shui-bian has been cheating himself and others, and there are always 
paradoxes in his speech;... Second, Chen Shui-bian has lost his 
integrity and has become a volatile person.  Therefore, any kind of 
interpretation will be incorrect. ... 
 
"The argument on the political and economic situation in his speech 
is filled with contradictions.  In terms of the political 
perspective, the speech has severely criticized the "one China" 
concept. ... However, in terms of opposing "one China," Chen did not 
mention any strategy at all.  He did not mention one country on 
either side of the Taiwan Strait, Taiwan's new Constitution, the 
Second Republic, a change of the nation's nomenclature, or 
constitutional reform. ... Sources' allegation that the United 
States required a 'review in advance' of the speech might not be 
groundless. 
 
"The way of 'threatening in manner but cowardly at heart' will make 
Chen Shui-bian's cross-Strait policy during the remainder of his 
term of office embedded in the paradox of 'verbal opposition to one 
China but timid action toward Taiwan independence.'  Therefore, the 
so-called 'Taiwan independence line' will become the tool to foment 
ethnic struggle on the island; it will have fewer and fewer 
connections with confronting China or solving cross-Strait issues. 
... 
 
B) "The Line of Openness is Definitely Different from the Line of 
'Taiwan First'" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] said in 
its editorial (01/03): 
 
"... President Chen's words on the [high-speed] train remind us the 
debate in 2001 whether Taiwan business people are allowed to invest 
in the construction of wafer plants in China.  Without local 
people's efforts, plus the supplementary conditions of producing 
12-inch wafers as well as quantity control, Taiwan could not have 
eighteen 12-inch wafer plants by 2008. ... Apparently, imposing 
stricter regulations on investment in China is the true meaning of 
'Taiwan first' and Taiwan-centric consciousness. ..." 
 
C) "Openness to China Will not Threaten 'Taiwan-centered 
Consciousness'" 
 
The mass-circulation Apple Daily [circulation: 500,000] pointed out 
in its editorial (01/02): 
 
"There has been a struggle of two lines inside the DPP, and their 
reflections on cross-Strait economic and trade policy are openness 
and control.  Both factions within the DPP are concerned about one 
point, namely Taiwan-centered consciousness. ... 
 
"What Taiwan lacks is confidence; it should be open to the world, 
including China, and become absorbed in globalization. ... 
Self-intimidation without self-consciousness will cause a decrease 
in the space for development and, consequently, the national 
strength. ..." 
 
D) "2007 for Better Strait Ties" 
 
The pro-unification, English-language, "China Post" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized [01/02]: 
 
"... Surprisingly, for the first time in seven years, he made no 
surprise remarks in his New Year's Day Message yesterday. But he 
remained non-committal to opening direct air and shipping links with 
the mainland, a campaign promise he has yet to keep. ... 
 
"Most DPP leaders now realize that Taiwan independence is a losing 
cause. When threatened with definite retaliation from the mainland, 
the cause loses its appeal. 
 
"It is better to live in a 'free, prosperous and self-ruled Chinese 
non-state beyond Beijing's jurisdiction' -- Taiwan's status quo as 
defined by world powers -- than to fight and give up all the good 
things in life for sovereignty. 
 
"'Give me sovereignty or give me death' cannot rally people in this 
age of Internet and globalization.  'Better red than dead' is more 
popular. Taiwan's happiness lies in greater harmony and democracy, 
more prosperity and better relations with the world, not in greater 
separation from China. 
 
"Already shunned politically by most nations, Taiwan is facing the 
danger of being marginalized, isolated and weakened economically due 
to Chen's repeated push for independence. ..." 
 
WANG