07AITTAIPEI2163
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM
Fri Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2163/01 2641015
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211015Z SEP 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6886
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7286
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8548UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM 
 
¶1. Summary:  As Taiwan's UN bid remained in the spotlight of the 
Taiwan media, news coverage on September 21 also focused on the 
Olympic torch relay route issue, and on the legislative and 
presidential elections next year.  The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times," citing the results of a recent opinion survey by ZOGBY 
International of the U.S., ran a banner headline on page two that 
said "If the [UN] Referendum Gets Passed, 70 Percent of the 
Americans [Polled] Said They Will Support Taiwan's Membership in the 
UN." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, new TECRO Chairman Edgar 
Lin said in an op-ed in the "Liberty Times" that given the 
demonstration of the will of the Taiwan public in the recent 
campaigns for Taiwan's UN bid, the United States must face up to the 
need to systemize its channel of high-level dialogue with Taiwan. 
An editorial in the pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
also said this year's drive by Taiwan to push for its UN bid was 
significant because it has successfully drawn the international 
community's attention to Taiwan's cause.  An editorial in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times," however, called on the public 
to be realistic about Taiwan's UN bid.  The article urged Taiwan to 
build up its national strength and improve its relations with the 
United States and China first before it starts to pursue its UN bid. 
 An editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post," on the other hand, criticized the DPP's UN referendum 
as another campaign gambit of the party.  End summary. 
 
A) "Taiwan Should Go over from Defensive to Offensive in Terms of 
Its Foreign Relations" 
 
TECRO (Headquarters) Chairman Edgar Lin opined in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (9/21): 
 
"... As U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific 
Affairs Thomas Christensen said, Taiwan and the United States are 
strategic partners for the security and stability of East Asia, and 
both are closely related and interdependent on each other.  Also, he 
said that nothing cannot be resolved as long as the two sides trust, 
communicate with, and understand each other.  As this is the case in 
politics, it stands true also for foreign relations.  But the 
question is whether the United States has indeed treated Taiwan as a 
closely related strategic partner?  If yes, has it shown us a 
certain degree of respect?  Or has it simply regarded Taiwan as a 
pawn that is expendable in the battles between powerful nations 
vying for supremacy? 
 
"Given my personal diplomatic experience, the harvest reaped from, 
and impact on the international community caused by, the DPP's and 
the KMT's campaigns for Taiwan to join or re-join the UN as well as 
the big rally held on September 15 are the most important attack 
that Taiwan has launched over the past five decades.  It is worth 
our celebration. ... 
 
"... Given the demonstration of the will of the Taiwan public, the 
United States must face squarely the matter of systemizing its 
channel of high-level dialogue with Taiwan.  To flatter Beijing in 
the short term will only accelerate China's economic and military 
rise, which will harm the United States in the end.  Since Taiwan is 
a closely related and interdependent strategic partner of the United 
States, we can demand improvement in Taiwan-U.S. relations.  The 
movements calling for Taiwan to join or re-join the UN this time 
have reflected that the Taiwan people can no longer accept the 
current status of Taiwan-U.S. relations!" 
 
B) "U.S. Drive Boosts Taiwan's Cause" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (9/21): 
 
"... Despite the anticipated setback, this year's [UN] drive was 
uniquely significant because, for the first time, President Chen 
Shui-bian and the Democratic Progressive Party government issued an 
application to join the United Nations directly as a new member 
under the name of 'Taiwan.'  This new effort has significantly 
advanced this cause, in part by sparking greater attention to the 
injustice of the exclusion of Taiwan from the world community and by 
clarifying the issues at stake for both Taiwan and the world 
concerning our absence from the U.N. ...  Moreover, the threatening 
rhetoric expended by Beijing and, sadly, other nations including the 
United States denouncing the drive by the Taiwan people for their 
just democratic rights reveals the world is failing to address this 
problem justly. ... 
 
"Another benefit from this year's U.N. and referendum campaign has 
been the consolidation of a foreign policy that has greater 
'relative autonomy' from the United States, which has long been seen 
as Taiwan's "patron" in the world community.  While the U.S. remains 
Taiwan's most important substantive ally and guarantor of security, 
the willingness of President Chen and the DPP government to uphold 
 
their position on the U.N. issue has punctured widespread 
impressions in global civil society that Taipei is a U.S. 'client' 
and has arguably enhanced the credibility of Taiwan's democracy and 
broadened support for 'democratic Taiwan' beyond past cold war 
alliances. ... 
 
"Moreover, opinion polls showing nearly 70 percent of our citizens 
believe the referenda on Taiwan's U.N. applications should take 
place regardless of Washington's opposition reflect the resiliency 
of the Taiwan people and may be a sign that our citizens have the 
maturity and resolve to insist upon our rights under the U.N. 
Charter's own principle of universality and self-determination to 
join the world community despite opposition from great powers. 
Finally, we believe the DPP government's bid for U.N. membership 
under the name of Taiwan and of the ongoing referendum campaign does 
indeed constitute a 'declaration,' but not of a wholly unnecessary 
'formal independence' feared in Washington and Beijing. ..." 
 
C) "[Taiwan's] UN Bid Can Be Viewed and Managed as a 'Genuine 
Topic'" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/21): 
 
"... Having gone through the 'road to UN' this year, anyone with a 
clear mind must have seen through a fact:  The issue regarding 
Taiwan's UN bid has never had anything to do with international 
righteousness and justice; instead, it is a matter conditioned from 
head to toe by international reality and politics.  In other words, 
Taiwan's UN bid is not a question about whether it 'should' join the 
UN or not, nor it is about whether the issue is 'reasonable' or not. 
 On the contrary, it is a question of whether it is 'allowed' to do 
so or not.  Taiwan's situation is a product structured by strong 
powers like the United States and China via a series of bilateral 
and multilateral agreements such as the UN resolutions and the three 
communiqus.  Taiwan's destiny is determined [by other powers] and 
cannot possibly be changed by the results of one or two referenda. 
Under the current structure and situation, the island should never 
expect that the international community will suddenly change its 
mind and support Taiwan's UN bid. ... 
 
"A ruling team with wisdom and vision would not constantly 
manipulate populist sentiment to deal with the current international 
policy situation head on; instead, it would skillfully take 
advantage of the international situation and seek the most favorable 
opportunity to plan its strategy.  When Taiwan's relations with 
China become reconciliatory, its relations with the United States 
are those built on solid and profound mutual trust, its relations 
with the neighboring countries in the Asia-Pacific region are 
cooperative and reciprocal; and when its national competitiveness is 
increasing, and its trade and economic strength robust and strong, 
who will dare to ignore Taiwan?  When Taiwan's role in regional 
development becomes indispensable, and when Taiwan gradually finds 
out how to play a critical role in the global management, its call 
for the 'UN bid' will become more righteous and self-assured.  When 
that moment arrives, Taiwan can start by applying for the status of 
observer [in the international organizations], and one step at a 
time, it can work and manage solidly to win recognition of the 
international community.  [When that happens,] who can say that the 
UN bid will be an impossible dream for Taiwan?" 
 
D) "U.N. Membership Bid Another Campaign Gambit" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (9/21): 
 
"... The DPP's U.N. bid was thwarted again yesterday, when the world 
body once again rejected a proposal from Taiwan's allies to put its 
membership bid on the General Assembly's agenda.  The rejection did 
not surprise anyone, including everyone in the DPP. ...  This is the 
15th consecutive year that Taiwan's quest for membership in the 
world body has been rejected.  The DPP will continue with this 
pursuit, but it will never succeed.  People with an adequate 
knowledge of the DPP, President Chen and Taiwan's politics are aware 
that the U.N. membership campaign is actually a ruse the party has 
devised to help its presidential candidate win the upcoming battle. 
... 
 
"President Chen has time and again promised not to seek Taiwan's 
independence or change the official title of the country during his 
term.  Yet he has now broken these promises. ...  Will this party 
continue to have enough voter support to stay put?  You can't fool 
all the people all the time, as the saying goes." 
 
YOUNG