07AITTAIPEI1314
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Jun 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1314 1620909
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110909Z JUN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5596
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6899
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8156UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001314 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 9-11 on the 2008 presidential election, on the heavy 
rainfall throughout the island over the past week; on former 
President Lee Teng-hui's visit to Japan, and on other local issues. 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" front-paged a banner 
headline June 11 that said "Blue [Camp] to Push for Referendum on 
[Cross-Strait] Direct Transportation."  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
discussed the U.S.-Taiwan relations and said China is accustomed to 
suppressing Taiwan via the United States.  The article said China's 
luring away Taiwan's ally, Costa Rica, recently was a move to kill 
two birds -- the United States and Taiwan -- with one stone.  End 
summary. 
 
"Taiwan-U.S. Engagement Is Built on the Belief in Democracy by the 
People of Both Countries" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (6/9): 
 
"During his speech to a conference on 'Democracy and Security' in 
Prague, U.S. President George W. Bush praised Taiwan for being able 
to maintain a friendship with the United States and push for 
democratic reform at the same time.  Bush also said he disagreed 
with China's leaders who believe that they can continue to open the 
nation's economy without also opening its political system.  The 
engagement between Taiwan and the United States is built primarily 
on the belief in democratic values by the people of both countries. 
... 
 
"... Taiwan's experience has nonetheless proved what Bush emphasized 
[in his speech] -- namely, 'being able to maintain a friendship with 
the United States and push for democratic reform at the same time' 
-- is plausible.  Bush's remark at this time was obviously aimed at 
expressing [his] dissatisfaction and impatience toward the 
long-stalled democratic reform in China. ... 
 
"In fact, some people in the United States and U.S. government have 
constantly questioned the rise of China.  U.S. National Security 
Advisor Stephen Hadley pointed out in April 2006 that 'we hope China 
can become a democratic country and can work with the United States, 
but China is moving in the completely opposite direction.'  Now, the 
truth lies clearly before of us, and it is impractical to have 
fantasy about China.  Owing to the most-favored-nation treatment 
granted by the United States, China, with its rapidly rising 
economy, is now having increasingly severe trade disputes with the 
United States.  The results of China's proactive military expansion 
also enables it to invade the territorial waters of Japan and 
Taiwan, to have its submarines stalk USS Kitty Hawk carrier battle 
group, and to test-fire missiles to destroy its satellites.  All 
these indicate that the so-called 'upcoming China-U.S. conflicts' 
are by no means a sensational statement. 
 
"According to Bush's diplomatic strategic conception, it is a major 
pillar to promote democracy all over the world.  But China has taken 
advantage of its economic capability to provide shelter to 
anti-democratic forces worldwide, creating trouble for the United 
States and impeding it in terms of foreign affairs, so that the 
latter has had to offer bargaining chips in exchange for [China's 
cooperation].  Among [all the things that China has done], using the 
United States to suppress Taiwan is a trick that China has often 
played.  China's diplomatic containment toward Taiwan lately shows 
that it has reached out into the backyard of the United States, 
luring Costa Rica to give up Taipei and choose Beijing.  Such a move 
indicates that China was trying to kill two birds with one stone -- 
namely, it was aiming against both the United States and Taiwan. 
This is a lesson that both Washington and Taipei should learn. 
 
"Democratic Taiwan is a longstanding friend of the United States, 
while totalitarian China is the United States' potential enemy. 
This is an enduring fundamental strategic situation.  China is 
covetous of Taiwan, primarily because it is keeping an eye on the 
Pacific and wants to challenge the U.S. domain of influence.  It is 
a pity that some American friends fail to see the bigger picture, 
and knowing China's growing threat to Taiwan and the United States, 
they still advocate that Taiwan proactively open its investments in 
China and push for the three links across the Taiwan Strait.  Given 
China's attitude in 'opening economics but tightly grasping 
politics,' if Taiwan's economy is absorbed by China, it will not 
only fail to help foster China's democratization but will also shake 
up the unsinkable battleship in the democratic camp and sabotage the 
common interests shared by Taiwan and the United States.  Only when 
Taiwan is self-determined, economically prosperous and 
democratically secure in its politics can it become a driving force 
to help the United States to promote democracy all over the world." 
 
 
YOUNG