07AITTAIPEI354
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S NAME CHANGE CAMPAIGN
Tue Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0354/01 0441023
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131023Z FEB 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4103
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6368
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7603UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000354 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S NAME CHANGE CAMPAIGN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus their coverage February 13 on the DPP government's name change 
campaign and the 2008 presidential elections.  The pro-status quo 
"China Times" ran a banner headline on page two that read "Bian 
Steps on the Red Line Again to Pave the Way Early for Elections." 
The paper also ran a news story on page four quoting former 
President Lee Teng-hui as saying in an interview with the 
Japan-based "Sankei Shimbun" that the DPP regime appears to be 
moribund. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, criticized the Blue camp for being the biggest hurdle to 
Taiwan's name-change campaign and normalization.  The article also 
said Washington's expression of no support for the name change of 
Taiwan's state-run enterprises was a surprise to Taiwan and 
obviously a misunderstanding of the island's policy.  A "China 
Times" news analysis, however, criticized President Chen Shui-bian 
for again stepping on the red line drawn by the United States and 
China in order to pave the way for the upcoming elections.  An op-ed 
in the pro-unification "United Daily News" said the United States is 
waiting to see how the Blue camp will react to the DPP's name change 
campaign.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" also lashed out at 
the DPP's move and said "Taiwan thus is more divided and isolated, 
not better identified."  End summary. 
 
A) "Pro-Unification Force Is Really the Biggest Hurdle to Name 
Change [Campaign] and Normalization of Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 550,000] 
editorialized (2/13): 
 
"... It is the same with every society; old forces will usually lash 
back during the process of eliminating old things.  Taiwan's move to 
rectify its name and write a new constitution is thus a long road, 
and it is expected that the road is rough and bumpy and full of 
obstacles.  But still, it was a surprise to see the United States 
say it 'does not support' the name changes of Taiwan's state-run 
enterprises.  The U.S. attitude was obviously the result of its 
misunderstanding of Taiwan's name-change policy.  But with adequate 
communication to clarify [with Washington] that the name-change move 
does not violate President Chen Shui-bian's Four Noes pledge, the 
misunderstanding will be easily resolved, and the United States will 
change to support Taiwan's relevant policies.  As a result, there is 
no need to worry about Washington's current attitude; instead, it is 
the opposition force in Taiwan that is the biggest hurdle to the 
name-change campaign and all other policies that may finally lead to 
[Taiwan's] normalization, and that is something [we] should never 
easily overlook. ... 
 
"In the wake of 2000, even though the pan-Blue camp's direction of 
leaning toward China but keeping its distance from the United States 
has gradually taken shape, it continues to place hope in the United 
States.  For one thing, U.S. support is of extreme importance to 
Taiwan if the latter wants to have a place and survive in the free 
world.  But any reform initiated by Taiwan, should it involve 
Taiwan-U.S.-China relations, has always triggered doubts from the 
United States.  In addition, when President A-Bian first assumed 
office, he unwisely made the Four Noes pledge to the United States. 
This pledge has become an 'incantation crown' that restricts Taiwan 
from moving forward and renewing itself [This refers to the crown on 
the head of Monkey King Sun Wukong in "Journey to the West" that 
would tighten painfully whenever the monk Xuan Zang chanted a 
particular incantation].  All the more, the pan-Blue camp has taken 
advantage of the pledge and quoted the U.S. opposition whenever it 
suits it to suppress the assertion of Taiwan-centered consciousness. 
 Washington's opposition to the name-change campaign this time was 
obviously a misunderstanding.  But the pan-Blue camp acted as if it 
had acquired a rare treasure it could use as much as it pleased; 
[its action] has all the more exposed its hollowness and its 
shutting off of itself from Taiwan. ..." 
 
B) "Bian Steps on the Red Line Again to Pave the Way Early for the 
Elections" 
 
Journalist Lin Shu-ling noted in a news analysis in the pro-status 
quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (2/13): 
 
"... Over the past year, Bian has experienced the cold bench that 
the United States put him on - Washington once penalized him by 
disallowing him to set foot in the continental United States.  But 
in a turnaround, he was granted to transit the two big cities in the 
West Coast - San Francisco and Los Angeles - in January of this year 
during his trip to Nicaragua.  "Let's rush in first [and think 
later]!" has become Chen Shui-bian's behavior pattern in handling 
the interaction between Taiwan and the United States.  Basically, 
the Bian administration believes that, even though Washington has to 
restrain Taiwan so as to be able to show Beijing, it does not want 
 
to see China expand excessively and thus threaten U.S. hegemony in 
the world.  As a result, [Chen knows that] Washington will not 
easily give up on Taiwan. 
 
"The fearless Bian administration has stronger determination and 
firmness to push for the name-change campaign compared to his move 
to 'cease the functions of the National Unification Council (NUC).' 
When playing the card of 'ceasing the functions of the NUC' in 
February 2006, the Bian administration even sought to package its 
move: to calm the United States, he repeatedly emphasized that 
'ceasing the functions' was not equal to 'abolishing.'  But this 
time, Bian announced publicly that 'name change is just a small step 
to build Taiwan proactively into a normal and complete country,' and 
that 'Taiwan is our nation.'  Bian even announced publicly that 
there will be a next step, a move of strong provocative significance 
to the United States and Beijing. 
 
"In particular, when the U.S. State Department has just stated 
publicly that it does not support the name change of Taiwan's 
state-run enterprises, Chen not only did not care about it but also 
geared up to move forward full speed ahead.  Bian's action fully 
demonstrated that he has started campaigning for the Green camp's 
victory in the legislative elections and the 2008 presidential 
elections.  In an attempt to influence the voters, Chen tried to 
heat up tensions by challenging the United States and China. ..." 
 
C) "Green Camp Strives for 'Name Change;' United States Waits to See 
Blue Camp's Action" 
 
Edward Chen, Professor of Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
American Studies, opined in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
[circulation: 400,000] (2/13): 
 
"... Prior to the Legislative Yuan elections in 2004, the DPP 
government chanted its attempt to 'change the names' of [Taiwan's] 
government-run businesses and its agencies overseas.  But the 
then-Cabinet headed by Yu Shyi-kun held its tongue after the U.S. 
State Department said it does not support the move, and the 
'name-change' campaign died away quietly.  This time, the DPP 
obviously demonstrated a tougher position, but the question is: 
What is the United States waiting for?  This writer believes that 
Washington is waiting for action of the Blue camp in Taiwan and a 
request from Beijing. ...  It is more appropriate to say that 
Washington is readily awaiting the Blue camp's action in the 
Legislative Yuan to 'counterstrike' the 'name-change' campaign than 
it is to say that Washington's reaction this time seemed less strong 
than last time. ..." 
 
D) "Name Changes to Backfire" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] (2/13): 
 
"... The draft of the new constitution is yet to be unveiled and the 
name-changing task is limited to only a few state-owned enterprises. 
 Such moves don't elevate Taiwan's status but serve Beijing's goal 
of downgrading the island. ...  Despite their rhetoric otherwise, 
the Chen-DPP leadership has long been engaged in the game of 
'breaking twigs without touching the trunk' for the obvious purpose 
of misleading independence supporters at home and avoiding offending 
Taiwan's mentor and protector the U.S.  So it abolished the 1991 
National Unification council and its guidelines last spring, dropped 
the name of the late President Chiang Kai-shek from Taiwan's main 
international airport last September and last week replaced 'China' 
with 'Taiwan' from the names of three state enterprises in an 
assertion of local identity despite criticism from the United 
States.  None helps to reduce Taiwan's Chinese-ness. ... 
 
Most people now realize that Taiwan independence is a losing cause. 
When threatened with definite retaliation from the mainland, the 
cause loses its appeal.  Endless political upheavals, economic 
stagnation and social division haunt the people.  Taiwan-based 
foreign business groups, such as the American Chamber of Commerce 
and the European Chamber of Commerce, have gone out of their way to 
oppose it.  Relations with the mainland are getting worse.  Taiwan 
becomes a flashpoint and a troublemaker in the eyes of the world. 
War is a constant worry for all.  The name-changing game also has 
caused increasing mistrust of vital allies:  the U.S., Japan and 
Singapore.  Taiwan thus is more divided and isolated, not better 
identified." 
 
YOUNG