07AITTAIPEI272
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL ISSUES, IRAN
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0272/01 0330846
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020846Z FEB 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3990
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6327
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7559UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL ISSUES, IRAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies all gave 
front-page coverage February 2 to Rebar Group founder Wang You-theng 
and his wife, who reportedly boarded a Singapore Airlines flight 
from Los Angeles and stopped over in Singapore today en route to 
Myanmar (Burma).  Coverage also focused on former President Lee 
Teng-hui's recent remarks on Taiwan independence, on the reshuffle 
of high-ranking Taiwan military officials, and on other political 
issues.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in 
the pro-unification "United Daily News" criticized President Chen 
Shui-bian and the DPP for inciting illusory "psychological Taiwan 
independence" in an attempt to tear apart Taiwan's society and fish 
in troubled waters, because they know in their hearts that there is 
no prospect for "de jure Taiwan independence."  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times," however, criticized the international media outlets for 
showing no interest in reporting on Taiwan's political situation. 
The "International Outlook" column in the pro-status quo "China 
Times," on the other hand, criticized the United States' "messy" 
Iran policy, saying Washington should not have helped to remove 
Iran's enemies.  End summary. 
 
¶2. Taiwan's Political Issues 
 
A) "'De Jure Taiwan Independence' Runs into a Blind Alley, but 
'Psychological Taiwan Independence' Keeps Burning Hot!" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (2/2): 
 
"... But even though both Chen Shui-bian and the DPP know clearly 
that there is no prospect for 'de jure Taiwan independence,' they 
have been adding fuel to 'psychological Taiwan independence.'  Their 
moves, such as expanding efforts to commemorate the sixtieth 
anniversary of the February 28 Incident, pushing the campaign to 
write a new constitution, and seeking proactively to 'de-ROC-ify' 
Taiwan's history textbooks, are all evident attempts to ignite and 
manipulate 'psychological Taiwan independence' from cultural, social 
and educational aspects. ... 
 
"As a result, [the pursuit of] 'Taiwan independence' becomes not an 
external battle but an internal struggle; people are not really 
pushing for 'de jure Taiwan independence' but are stirring up 
illusory 'psychological Taiwan independence' in an attempt to tear 
society apart and fish in troubled waters.  In fact, Chen and the 
DPP know very clearly in their hearts that there is absolutely no 
possibility of 'de jure Taiwan independence.' Then why on earth do 
they want to destroy the Republic of China and push for 
'de-ROC-ification' on the social, psychological and cognitive 
levels? ..." 
 
B) "An Independent Taiwan in 2008?" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (2/2): 
 
"... International media outlets do a good job of reporting on 
events in Taiwan, as long as there is a sexy cross-strait or 
business angle.  But when it comes to pedestrian issues, such as 
political reform, most news outlets fall short.  Correspondents for 
international wire, print or broadcast media who approach their 
overseas editors with a story lacking a 'China angle' have a tough 
fight on their hands. ...  When policymakers from, say, the US are 
left in the dark about basic aspects of Taiwan's society and 
political system, they cannot be expected to formulate meaningful 
policy.  Much of the think-tanking and analyzing that goes on in 
Washington is mere regurgitation of what is reported in major media 
outlets.  Only a handful of specialists possesses in-depth knowledge 
of Taiwan.  Meanwhile, most 'experts' who write or comment widely on 
the US' foreign policy toward Taiwan, China or East Asia have only 
superficial knowledge of Taiwanese politics. ...  Why will any of 
this matter outside of Taiwan?  Given the changes, it is possible 
that a party could win a legislative super-majority, enabling it to 
do all kinds of things, such as write a new constitution.  Or 
declare independence.  Even the international media would notice 
that." 
 
¶3. Iran 
 
"The United States Makes One Error after Another with Regard to Its 
Iran Policy" 
 
The "International Outlook" column in the pro-status quo "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] noted (2/2): 
 
"... In fact, the United States has always been messy in handling 
the Iran issue. ...  If Washington sees Iran as a big problem, it 
should not have removed its enemies...  Iran had two major enemies, 
one was the Taliban of Afghanistan, which threatened Iran because it 
was supported by Pakistan, and the other was Saddam Hussein of Iraq. 
 
...  Luckily [for Iran] the United States has been a great help; it 
destroyed the Taliban of Afghanistan and killed Saddam Hussein in 
Iraq, clearing away all the neighboring threats for Iran.  Iran, in 
return, started to re-manage its relations with the two.  What else 
could this be if not luck?  Now the United States is even giving up 
on Iran and starting to help Iraq.  If it wants to do so, why didn't 
it keep Saddam Hussein in the first place and let him deal with 
Iran?  If one makes a comparison between Saddam Hussein and Iran, 
which one on earth is more threatening to the United States' global 
strategy?" 
 
WANG