07AITTAIPEI1413
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1413/01 1720653
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210653Z JUN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5740
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6938
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8190UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 21 on the DPP administration's determination to push 
for a referendum on Taiwan's UN bid under the name "Taiwan" despite 
the U.S. State Department's reiteration Tuesday of its opposition to 
such an initiative; on the 2008 presidential election; on the sharp 
rise of the Taiwan shares to a fresh seven-year high Wednesday; and 
on other local issues.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran 
a banner headline on page four that said "Toughly Opposing the 
Referendum, the United States Refuses to Reiterate Its Six 
Assurances to Taiwan." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an op-ed in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" said "the consequence of the United 
States' responding to or acting in line with China's pressure over 
Taiwan will make it fall exactly into the trap carefully set by 
China."  An editorial in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times," on 
the other hand, pointed out some subtle but noteworthy differences 
between the proposed referendum this time and the one held in 2004. 
An editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" commented on U.S.-Taiwan relations 
and said, "Taiwan appreciates and is grateful for the US' 
friendship.  But at times, the US also has to know what being a 
friend means, and when to respect a friend's point of view."  End 
summary. 
 
A) "The United States Has Fallen into China's Trap?" 
 
Luo Chih-cheng, associate professor of political science at Soochow 
University, opined in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 500,000] (6/21): 
 
"... It is imaginable that Washington's opposition [to Taiwan's UN 
bid] was a result caused forcibly by Beijing's backlashes and 
pressure, so it went beyond its duties to impose pressure on Taiwan. 
 In fact, it is widely rumored in Beijing that the shortest route 
from Beijing to Taipei is through Washington.  But we must point out 
that the consequence of the United States' responding to or acting 
in line with China's pressure over Taiwan will make it fall exactly 
into the trap carefully set by China. 
 
"If Washington succeeds in imposing pressure on Taipei, Taipei will 
surely hold grudges against Washington.  Also, if Taiwan turns a 
blind eye to the U.S. opposition, Washington will surely be 
displeased [with Taipei].  It is very clear that the result of 
Washington's imposing pressure on Taiwan will certainly be 
deteriorated Taipei-Washington relations.  Beijing will then become 
the only winner. ...  The reality that Washington must encounter is 
that it is gradually losing the support and favorable impression of 
the Taiwan people toward the United States.  Also, in the end, it 
will have to face a crueler question:  namely, 'who lost Taiwan?'" 
 
 
B) "This Time Bundling a Referendum with the Presidential Election 
is Rather Different" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (6/21): 
 
"... Anyone with a clear mind can tell that the situation this time 
is slightly different from the previous ones.  First, Washington's 
reaction came more quickly than before and its expression was 
clearer than before.  It no longer reiterated the 'Four Nos and One 
Without' pledge; instead, it clearly indicated its 'opposition' and 
requested in public that Bian 'abandon' his initiative.  Second, the 
Blue camp's reaction was also totally different from before.  Not 
only did it no longer customarily criticize the Green camp, but KMT 
presidential candidate Ma Ying-jeou, to everyone's surprise, also 
expressed strong disagreement to the U.S. statement.  He even took a 
stand and indicated his clear support for any proposal 'that is 
conducive for Taiwan and meets Taiwan's efforts to join the UN with 
dignity.'  In other words, in the face of President Chen's move this 
time, Washington has intensified its criticism, while the Blue 
camp's attack against Chen has weakened.  Such subtle changes are 
worth observation. ... 
 
"The subtlety lies in the fact that there is no turning back for the 
Green camp's referendum on 'Taiwan's UN bid under the name Taiwan.' 
But the U.S. reaction is unusually strong because if the Green camp 
succeeds in getting through this strategic pass, it will mean the 
total collapse of the 'Four Nos and One Without' pledge.  As a 
result, there is no way that Washington will make any concession 
[over this issue].  But other than imposing some light penalties in 
terms of [its] diplomatic treatment [to Taiwan], what else is 
Washington capable of doing?  ... 
 
"The Blue camp used to play a certain subtle role of leverage during 
this sort of standoff, so that both the Green camp and the United 
States can have elbow room to make some efforts.  But the Blue camp 
has obviously learned its lesson this time.  It chose to stand on 
 
the opposite side of the United States and at the same time maintain 
a certain distance from the Green camp. ..." 
 
C) "When Being Bad Isn't Bad" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (6/21): 
 
"'We don't always have to be well-behaved.  Sometimes we must be 
bad,' National Security Council Secretary-General Mark Chen said in 
March when the US expressed opposition to President Chen Shui-bian's 
call for a new constitution.  The US has faulted Taiwan's behavior 
again.  One day after President Chen proposed that a referendum on 
the nation's bid to join the UN under the name 'Taiwan' be held 
simultaneously with next year's presidential election, the US State 
Department said it was opposed to the proposal and urged the 
president to drop it.  Back in March, Mark Chen also said:  'We must 
sometimes say 'no' to the United States.' 
 
"Indeed.  Before anyone in the US State Department again points to 
Taiwan as being a 'troublemaker,' it is worth contemplating whether 
being bad is really bad.  If bad means Taiwan exercising its 
democratic rights and letting the voice of its people be heard, 
then, yes, let Taiwan be bad in the eyes of the US State Department. 
 Taiwan is an independent state with its own government, a freely 
elected head of state and representatives, its own currency and 
national territory.  It need not be told by the US -- nor anyone 
else for that matter -- what it can or cannot do.  The Taiwanese 
government is answerable only to Taiwanese -- not the US, China or 
anybody else who does not have the right to vote in Taiwan. ... 
 
"Enough is enough.  Taiwan needs to step out and start making some 
noise to grab the world's attention.  Doing so exercises the 
universal right to self-determination that is a hallmark of 
democracy. ...  What is there to fear in having the people of Taiwan 
raise their collective voice and make themselves heard? ...  Taiwan 
appreciates and is grateful for the US' friendship.  But at times, 
the US also has to know what being a friend means, and when to 
respect a friend's point of view." 
 
YOUNG