07AITTAIPEI2272
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, TAIWAN'S UN
Wed Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0014
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2272/01 2760906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030906Z OCT 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7042
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7314
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8590UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, TAIWAN'S UN 
BID 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage October 3 on the inter-Korean summit Tuesday; on 
speculations about who will head the DPP now; and on the soaring 
commodity prices.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
editorial in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" called the United 
States' attention to China's restoration of an annual military 
exercise on Dongshan Island in early September and said Beijing's 
military intimidation against Taiwan will be the biggest test for 
the United States.  An editorial in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News," on the other hand, said the island's 
bid to join the UN under the name Taiwan this year has boosted 
Taiwan's space in the international community and placed Beijing in 
a defensive position .  End summary. 
 
¶2. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
"China's Military Intimidation against Taiwan Will Be the Biggest 
Test for the United States" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (10/3): 
 
"... China's intimidation against Taiwan appeared to be aiming at 
Taiwan's UN referendum on the surface, but in reality, China will 
intimidate Taiwan using saber-rattling anyway, even if Taiwan does 
not [push for] a UN referendum.  In the beginning, China openly 
announced its opposition to Taiwan's UN referendum by imposing 
pressure on the United States, and it acted as if it has got a blank 
check for its preparations for imposing political, military and 
economic pressure against Taiwan.  Whether China will seize this 
opportunity to endanger peace across the Taiwan Strait has indeed 
become a major test for the United States. ... 
 
"In the face of China's closing in step by step, the reaction Taiwan 
should have is definitely not to flinch; instead, it should more 
proactively safeguard its sovereignty and make full preparations 
politically, militarily and economically.  The government, in 
particular, should strive to resist external pressure and encourage 
the Taiwan people's national awareness.  It should strive to have 
the referendum on Taiwan's UN bid under the name Taiwan be passed so 
as to demonstrate to the international community the strong will of 
the Taiwan people against annexation.  Since the DPP has already 
approved its normal country resolution, it should push for Taiwan's 
name change and write a new constitution in an orderly fashion so as 
to turn Taiwan a normal country as early as possible. 
 
"While China is using the UN referendum as an excuse for its secret 
deployment designated to alter the status quo across the Taiwan 
Strait unilaterally, the United States, in addition to announce 
openly its opposition to Taiwan's UN referendum, has even decided to 
postpone the plan to sell F-16 fighter jets to Taiwan.  Such a 
decision has totally violated Washington's calls over the recent 
years for Taiwan to pass its arms procurements budget as early as 
possible so as to prevent military imbalance across the Taiwan 
Strait.  Once China decides to take risks in desperation and thus 
sabotages the stability across the Taiwan Strait, the United States 
will encounter greater risks so as to be able to maintain regional 
security in the Western Pacific.  It is really not smart to let this 
happen. 
 
"We must remind [our] American friends that opposition to Taiwan's 
UN referendum is one thing, while the fact that China is using the 
UN referendum to intimidate Taiwan is a separate issue. 
[Washington] should separate these two issues clearly and weigh 
which is more important.  The UN referendum only involves 
differences between the U.S. and Taiwan governments toward certain 
policies.  But for China's military intimidation against Taiwan, 
including Beijing's moves to use political, military and economic 
means to create crises in the Taiwan Strait, will cost immeasurable 
loss of the U.S. interests.  China will surely get greedier and 
start to make greater demands so as to have a say in terms of 
cross-Strait issues. 
 
"Given the United States' recent moves to indulge China's 
suppression against Taiwan, changes will likely occur with regard to 
the Taiwan people's constant pro-U.S. attitude. ... Now, China is 
ready to impose pressure on Taiwan unscrupulously because Washington 
caters to China in opposing to Taiwan's UN referendum.  This has 
proved that the so-called troublemaker is not Taiwan, but China; 
Washington has apparently confused its target when it placed 
pressure on Taiwan.  Which is more dangerous, Taiwan's peaceful 
referendum or China's military intimidation?  The U.S. government 
might want to think thrice about its answer." 
 
¶3. Taiwan' UN Bid 
 
"'U.N. for Taiwan' Boosted Our Space" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (10/3): 
 
"As anticipated, intense and rigid opposition by the People's 
Republic of China led to the failure of allied countries to raise 
the question of Taiwan's representation in the United Nations for 
the 15th consecutive year.  Nevertheless, the Democratic Progressive 
Party-led government and citizens or concerned foreign supporters 
should not feel dispirited or pessimistic, as this year's effort, 
which was the first campaign in which Taiwan applied directly for 
U.N. membership, obtained very positive results.  Passively 
speaking, this year's high-profile drive allowed the international 
community and the global media to gain a far greater contact, 
appreciation and understanding of the reality of the unjust and 
unfair treatment of Taiwan and our 23 million people in the global 
community and the U.N.  On a more positive or proactive note, this 
year's campaign placed the PRC regime in a defensive position and 
compelled it to engage in an expensive mobilization of over 100 of 
its supporters in the U.N. against a campaign waged by less than 20 
diplomatic allies of Taiwan. ... 
 
"In the longer run, the adoption, however belated, of an offensive 
and Taiwan-centric diplomatic strategy promises to allow our country 
to retain the initiative and to be able to select the most favorable 
battleground and tactics and compels Beijing to spend more time and 
resources on the defensive. Beijing has consistently adopted a 
strategy of diplomatically blockading Taiwan, but has now been 
placed in an unfavorable defensive position by Taipei's decision to 
'come out of the closet' and press for its proper place in 
international society and the U.N. under the name of 'Taiwan.'  At 
the same time, an offensive diplomatic strategy must not become a 
strategy of foolhardiness or adventurism, but instead must use the 
minimum resources and the maximum in wisdom and intelligence and 
manifest a high degree of creativity to boost the credibility of our 
diplomatic attractions and deterrence. ..." 
 
YOUNG