07AITTAIPEI182
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S ANTI-SATELLITE MISSILE TEST,
Wed Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0182 0240836
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240836Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3848
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6271
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7500UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S ANTI-SATELLITE MISSILE TEST, 
U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage January 24 on the debt-ridden Rebar Asia Pacific Group; on 
the government's move Tuesday to publicize the names of certain 
non-performing borrowers; on the Donald Keyser case; and on the 
Presidential Office Allowance for State Affairs case.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-status quo 
"China Times" discussed China's recent anti-satellite missile test, 
saying "the move has foretold the ongoing formation of a new 
international strategic landscape and the emergence of a new form of 
warfare."  A commentary in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" by former U.S. 
deputy assistant secretary of state Randall Schriver, on the other 
hand, commented on the evolving U.S.-Japan alliance and its impact 
on Taiwan's security.  End summary. 
 
¶2. China's Anti-Satellite Missile Test 
 
"Taiwan Needs to Remain Aware that the Strategic Environment Has 
Undergone Big Changes" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (1/24): 
 
"Beijing's anti-satellite missile test-fired on January 11 has 
shocked the world, and international concerns [over this incident] 
continue to grow.  No matter how Beijing kept silent or reiterated 
its position, the move has foretold the ongoing formation of a new 
international strategic landscape and the emergence of a new form of 
warfare. ... 
 
"Washington's concern over China's anti-satellite missile test rests 
on two levels:  the strategic and the tactical.  On the strategic 
level, the United States wants to know why Beijing test-fired the 
missile in a situation where the bilateral relations between the two 
remain stable?  Was it a move authorized by Hu Jintao, or was it a 
decision made unilaterally by the [Chinese] military?  [An answer to 
this question] is essential, as it directly affects whether the 
strategic dialogue between the two countries will be carried out 
faithfully.  ... 
 
"For its test-firing of anti-satellite weapons this time, Beijing 
chose directly to 'destroy' its own obsolete weather satellite.  Who 
gave the order [to do so]?  Why did China choose such an intense 
approach that was easily detected and will surely trigger a backlash 
from the international community?  Perhaps one will never find 
answers to these questions.  But one thing is certain, namely, 
Beijing already has the capability to challenge the United States' 
supremacy in space.  This threatening image is the last thing the 
U.S. military wants to see, but it has arrived earlier than 
expected.  [The U.S. military] cannot accept it mentally, but will 
have to factor it in strategically. ..." 
 
¶3. U.S,-Japan Alliance 
 
"US-Japan Pact Matters to Taiwan" 
 
Randall Schriver, former U.S. deputy assistant secretary of state 
for East Asian and Pacific affairs, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (1/24): 
 
"The US-Japan alliance is evolving.  This is partly as a result of 
internal developments in Japan, and partly in response to dynamic 
change in Asia.  Political leaders in Taiwan should take note of 
this evolution as the future course of the US-Japan alliance may 
have a direct impact on Taiwan's security. ...  Also embedded in 
this approach is an assumption that the people of Taiwan support a 
similar vision to that of the US and Japan for how to best promote 
an environment conducive to peace.  Taipei needs to send the right 
signals to ensure Washington and Tokyo will understand that Taiwan 
stands beside them.  Over the near term, Taiwan should take steps to 
strengthen its own defenses, improve its democracy and governance 
and develop a plan for positive engagement with China, including 
approval of direct links.  Such steps would be well-received by the 
US, Japan and the region. 
 
"The US-Japan alliance will continue to shape Asia's future.  But 
one can imagine two very different potential futures for Asia 
depending on how the alliance orients itself toward the region - the 
alliance can choose to be insular, narrow and limited in its 
regional engagement, or a proactive force for positive development 
in the economic, political and security spheres.  I strongly endorse 
an activist agenda that rests confidently in the proposition that 
Asia and its people will be far better off for a US-Japan alliance 
that embraces a robust agenda for shaping Asia.  Taiwan can and 
should help." 
 
YOUNG