07AITTAIPEI1880
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, CHINESE PRODUCT
Fri Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1880 2290917
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170917Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6429
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7138
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8390UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001880 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, CHINESE PRODUCT 
RELIABILITY 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage August 17 on Typhoon Sepat, which is expected to hit Taiwan 
later today; on the plunge of Taiwan's stock price index Thursday; 
on the strong backlash from local pig farmers over the government's 
decision to lift the ban on ractopamine residues in pork; and on the 
2008 presidential election.  Several papers carried on their inside 
pages remarks by AIT Director Stephen Young at a Chinese National 
Federation of Industries forum Thursday that the United States will 
closely cooperate with Taiwan no matter who wins next year's 
presidential elections. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" criticized the Chen Shui-bian 
administration for lifting the ban on ractopamine residues in pork. 
The article said Chen has put his personal benefits ahead of the 
health of the Taiwan people.  An editorial in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," however, criticized the tainted Chinese products 
sold all over the world and urged the Taiwan government to control 
the imports of Chinese products.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
"A Thousand Tons of U.S. Pork Breaks the Nativist Myth of the DPP" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (8/17): 
 
"During the last few years of the Qing Dynasty, great powers from 
the West knocked open China's ports with their state-of-the-art 
ships and artillery.  The same episode repeated itself after one and 
a half century, except that this time it was a thousand tons of U.S. 
pork that has knocked down the front door of the Bian 
administration. ... 
 
"Some legislators alleged that the [Taiwan] government's decision to 
lift the ban [on ractopamine residues in pork] this time was a move 
in exchange for [better] treatment for Chen's [upcoming] transit in 
the United States.  Regardless of the authenticity of such 
allegation, the policy change this time was both abrupt and full of 
many coincidences, and it has indeed put the Bian administration in 
the ridicule of 'using pork to exchange for foreign relations.' 
What a filthy deal! 
 
"Chen Shui-bian constantly emphasized 'Taiwan's dignity' in public, 
and he was daring enough to confront the United States directly with 
his odyssey and the UN referendum just to show his personal 
feelings.  On the other hand, however, he could turn around and sell 
out the Taiwan people's health in exchange for the treatment of his 
transit.  Given such circumstances, where can one find Taiwan's 
dignity?  It is obvious that in A-Bian's eyes, his personal benefits 
always come first before the United States or Taiwan. ..." 
 
¶4. Chinese Product Reliability 
 
"The Government Should Adopt Effective Measures to Control Tainted 
Chinese Products from Being Imported to Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (8/17): 
 
"... Using its competitive edge in low prices, Chinese products are 
sold all over the world, practically warding off competitors from 
other countries, ratcheting the country's foreign reserves up as 
high as USD 1.2 trillion now, and thus building up its powerful 
national strength.  However, the reputation of China's manufacturing 
industry, the hub for the country's economic growth, is severely 
damaged because of the constantly reported counterfeit and safety 
problems of its products.  Once the consumers and governments of 
other countries decide to adopt measures to boycott the cheap but 
unsafe Chinese products and to choose high-quality products 
manufactured in other countries instead, China's manufacturing 
industry will surely be severely damaged, and its economic 
prosperity will be put in a critical situation.  Given the threat of 
Chinese products flooding the world, the Taiwan government, in 
particular, should shoulder the responsibility of solidly 
controlling imports of Chinese products, in an attempt to secure 
Taiwan's economic roots and to protect the lives and safety of the 
Taiwan people.  This is the right way for Taiwan to stay safe and 
sound and shun the course of calamity given the fact that the 
bubbles of China's economic prosperity are about to burst." 
 
YOUNG