07BEIJING6760
PRESS BRIEFING ON OLYMPICS HELD OCTOBER 19 ON
Fri Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4247
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #6760/01 2921219
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191219Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2935
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BEIJING 006760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DS/P/MECU FOR JOHN HURLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY CH
SUBJECT: PRESS BRIEFING ON OLYMPICS HELD OCTOBER 19 ON 
MARGINS OF 17TH PARTY CONGRESS 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. A briefing on next year's Olympic Games was held October 
19 as part of the series of press conferences staged in 
conjunction with China's ongoing 17th Communist Party 
Congrss.  Liu Jingmin, who serves  both as Beijing Vce 
Mayor and Executive Vice President of the Beijing Organizing 
Committee for the 29th Olympiad Games (BOCOG), emphasized to 
reporters that possible boycotts and political linkages to 
the Games are "inappropriate."  Liu explained the costs of 
the Games and their impact on both Beijing and China as a 
whole and described how the Olympics will purportedly promote 
human rights in China.  Other topics addressed include 
Olympic security, efforts to host a "Green Olympics," 
legislative changes associated with the Games and efforts to 
cultivate sportsmanship and involvement by overseas Chinese. 
An Olympics fact sheet provided by BOCOG is appended below. 
End Summary. 
 
Political Linkages to Olympics "Inappropriate" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. At the October 19 press briefing, attended by a large 
contingent of foreign and domestic press as well as Poloff, 
Beijing Vice Mayor and BOCOG VP Liu Jingmin was asked if he 
was concerned that the crackdown on democratic voices in 
Burma would lead to an international call for an Olympic 
boycott.  Liu said political and other non-Olympic related 
issues should not be linked to the Olympic Games.  Referring 
to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) statements on Burma, Liu 
noted that China plays a "responsible and constructive" role. 
 Political linkages to the Games would be "inappropriate" and 
would "fail to capture public support." 
 
Possible Personnel Changes Won't Impact Games 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Liu was asked whether possible changes in China's top 
leadership following the Party Congress would impact Olympic 
preparations, especially if Beijing Mayor Wang Qishan were 
promoted.  Liu said he was unaware of any upcoming personnel 
shifts.  BOCOG had enjoyed stable leadership over the years, 
and each BOCOG executive member is assigned a specific 
portfolio, which means that even with leadership changes 
there will be "no impact" on preparations for the Games. 
 
Costs 
----- 
 
¶4. Olympic-related costs have grown from the USD 1.6 billion 
estimated during Beijing's 2001 bid to USD two billion.  The 
Vice Mayor attributed the increase to additional security 
costs and fluctuations in the exchange rate.  Liu noted that 
Beijing's total costs were still under the USD 2.4 billion 
Athens spent to host the Olympics.  He added that the 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) required three budget 
estimates and that a third and final estimate would be 
forthcoming from BOCOG. 
 
Impact of Olympics on Beijing 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. The Olympics will increase Beijing's international 
profile, promote international cooperation and establish 
Beijing as a historical and international city, Liu said.  He 
noted that foreign investment had expanded and that many 
multinational and domestic companies have established 
headquarters in Beijing.  The Olympics has also helped 
Beijing create a new urban plan that addresses long-term 
issues linked to the environment and traffic.  Finally, the 
Olympics has raised "civility and good manners" amongst city 
residents through increased training in the service industry 
and foreign language study.  Liu stated that over four 
million people had started learning a foreign language over 
the past few years in preparation for the Olympics. 
 
¶6. From the 2001 bid to 2006, the Olympics had boosted 
Beijing's economy in the following areas:  A) GDP has grown 
by an average of 12.1 percent per year; B) Per capita income 
is now USD 6300, which is 1.9 times greater than in 2001; C) 
3.9 million tourists visited Beijing in 2006, an increase of 
one million since 2001; D) 600,000 new jobs were created in 
Beijing in 2006.  Liu noted that while Beijing residents were 
the primary beneficiaries of Olympic preparations and the 
resulting increase in living standards, the rest of the 
Chinese people were also experiencing improved living 
conditions. 
 
 
BEIJING 00006760  002 OF 005 
 
 
¶7. Liu said he hoped that, through hosting the Games, China 
can convey to the world the impression of a China that is 
rapidly growing and developing and that is committed to peace 
and common prosperity.  He added that China is a key part of 
the world and hopes the Olympics will also be a way to share 
China's culture.  While the IOC uses the term "best games in 
history" at the conclusion of every Olympics to signal its 
approval, the Chinese preferred to use the term, "high-level 
Olympic Games with distinguishing features." 
 
Promoting Human Rights and Democracy 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. A reporter inquired how the Olympics would help promote 
democracy and human rights in China, in keeping with 
President Hu Jintao's Political Report to the 17th Party 
Congress.  Liu responded that the Chinese Olympic Bid 
Committee promised the IOC in 2001 that the Beijing Olympics 
would "tremendously improve and facilitate the economy, 
society and culture in Beijing and China."  Liu added that 
this promise included the development of human rights in 
China, which he said had been "tremendously boosted."  As an 
example of increased solicitation of public sentiment and 
democracy, Vice Mayor Liu pointed out that the emblem, mascot 
and slogan selections, as well as stadium designs, had all 
solicited public opinion.  He added that every six months, 
BOCOG conducts a comprehensive survey of the population so 
that Olympic preparations better reflect the wishes of the 
Chinese people.  Liu also noted that the State Council's 
Olympic regulations on foreign reporting fulfilled another 
Chinese promise to the IOC. 
 
Security Planning 
----------------- 
 
¶9. Asked about security planning, Liu noted that BOCOG would 
"absolutely guarantee" a safe and peaceful games.  He 
described the Olympic security apparatus, starting with a 
high-level command and control system.  Liu stated that the 
Ministry of Public Security leads the interagency effort on 
Olympic security, which includes the People's Armed Police. 
The interagency security coordination group "covers all areas 
and is a flexible system that can respond at a moment's 
notice."  The group has also developed a comprehensive 
security plan which was based on research of all past 
Olympics and their respective security incidents. 
Specifically, the group has formulated and implemented 
strategic plans for venue security, fire safety, 
counterterrorism, riot control and VIP protection.  Liu added 
that security had been included in overall Olympic planning, 
from stadium design and construction to the use of technology 
such as radio frequency identification (RFID) in all tickets. 
 He concluded that security was a joint effort since the 
Olympics was an international event and to that end the 
Chinese had increased cooperation with the security 
organizations from the former host countries, international 
security organizations, participating countries' security 
teams and Embassies. 
 
Green Olympics 
-------------- 
 
¶10. When questioned about BOCOG's commitment to a "Green 
Olympics," Liu began by reaffirming that BOCOG had made a 
promise in their bid to host a "green" Games.  BOCOG has a 
two-pronged approach:  1) Olympic preparations are green with 
minimal impact on the environment and 2) the Games facilitate 
environmental protection and sustainable development of the 
host cities.  During Olympic preparations, BOCOG requires 
that venue construction use pollution-free materials and 
environmentally friendly construction methods.  Olympic 
sponsors must meet BOCOG environmental standards and have a 
consistent record of complying with environmental 
regulations.  The hundreds of contract hotels must follow a 
"Green Service Guide" that includes reducing water usage and 
keeping a set temperature during the summer.  Food products 
served in Olympic venues must be pollution-free.  Regarding 
transportation, the public is encouraged to use public 
transport and vehicles must meet emissions standards.  (Note: 
none of these standards were explained in detail.) 
 
¶11. In terms of facilitating sustainable development, the 
Olympics are helping Beijing increase the use of clean energy 
and reduce emissions, Liu said.  Liu commented that of the 
16,000 coal boilers under 20 tons in Beijing, 15,000 had been 
converted to use natural gas.  Qinghe Wastewater Treatment 
plant was using the heat from wastewater to provide heating 
in the athlete's village and a 6,000 square meter solar water 
heating system will heat athlete's showers in the Olympic 
 
BEIJING 00006760  003 OF 005 
 
 
Green.  Beijing has also installed a wind power field in the 
northern part of the city. 
 
¶12. Liu commented that being green requires investment and 
advanced technology, as well as a change in lifestyle, which 
takes time.  He added that the Chinese Environmental 
Protection Agency (CEPA) and the United Nations Environmental 
Program (UNEP) were working on increasing environmental 
education through the Olympics.  Just a few days ago, CEPA 
experts began working on a study of Beijing's surrounding 
environment to see its impact on Beijing pollution. 
 
¶13. Asked whether factories will be shut down to ensure clean 
air, similar to what reportedly has been done during the 
ongoing Party Congress, Liu attributed the blue skies of the 
past week to a "strong northern wind" rather than the 
shutting down of factories.  Liu noted that, like other 
cities during their initial industrialization period, 
Beijing's factories were in the center of the city.  However, 
167 companies, such as Capital Steel, have begun to move to 
the city outskirts and reduce pollution through technological 
enhancements.  Liu also said that per President Hu's 
statement on sustainable development in China, 
industrialization cannot be at the cost of the environment. 
China must achieve sustainable development. 
 
Good Sports 
----------- 
 
¶14. Responding to comments that Chinese fans had booed the 
Japanese Women's Soccer Team during the Women's World Cup, 
Liu noted that the Chinese Government was trying to 
"extensively educate" the public through 1) encouraging more 
people to attend competitions, 2) become familiar with the 
technicalities of different sports, such as when to clap and 
3) encourage cheering for any good performance regardless of 
country.  He noted that he has seen an improvement in crowd 
behavior over the 19 test events and that International 
Sporting Federations and athletes had commented positively on 
audience participation. 
 
Olympics-Related Legislation 
---------------------------- 
 
¶15. Asked about impending legislation specifically related to 
the Olympic Games, Liu merely replied that China had tried to 
"perfect" its laws in the past few years.  He said there will 
be no new major legislation associated with the Games, but 
rather creation of regulations to overcome "deficiencies in 
current laws."  He cited the State Council's Regulations on 
Foreign Reporting as an example.  He added that Chinese laws 
were based on international standards and met the IOC's 
requirements for successful games.  He pointed to possible 
new regulations to augment administrative issues and 
commented that emblem IPR laws were being "vigorously 
enforced" by Chinese law enforcement. 
 
Overseas Chinese Involvement 
---------------------------- 
 
¶16. There are 600 million overseas Chinese, Liu said, many of 
whom played a role in the development of Beijing and China 
over the years.  For the Olympics, overseas Chinese have 
already contributed RMB 830 million (USD 111 million) toward 
the construction of the National Aquatics Center, making it a 
"souvenir trophy" to the overseas Chinese support of the 
Olympics. 
 
BOCOG Fact Sheet 
---------------- 
 
¶17. Below are the summarized contents of a BOCOG Fact Sheet 
that was distributed at today's press event: 
 
-- Most Olympic venues and relevant facilities have been 
completed.  27 venues, including the Beijing Shooting Hall 
and Shunyi Olympic Rowing-Canoeing Park.  The National 
Stadium opening is delayed until March 2008 due to additional 
technical requirements for the Opening Ceremony.  The media 
and Olympic villages will also open in 2008. 
 
-- There are 64 corporations sponsoring the Beijing Olympic 
Games and the State Council has issued "Regulations on the 
Protection of Olympic Symbols" to raise awareness of IPR 
protection. 
 
-- The plans for the Opening and Closing ceremonies have been 
finalized and rehearsals are in progress. 
 
 
BEIJING 00006760  004 OF 005 
 
 
-- The Torch Relay route has been finalized.  Using the theme 
"Journey of Harmony" the torch will travel through 113 
mainland cities in 31 provinces, including the summit of 
Mount Everest.  20,000 ut of 21,880 torchbearers have been 
selected. Provincial, local, and autonomous region 
governments will supervise the torch relay. 
 
-- The first phase of ticket sales has been completed.  Seven 
million tickets are for sale.  During phase one, 1.59 million 
tickets were allocated, including 26,000 tickets for the 
Opening and Closing ceremonies.  The average price of tickets 
is 43 percent lower than that of the Athens game.  Phase two 
begins at the end of October. 
 
-- Good Luck Beijing, the Olympic Test Events, are ongoing. 
19 of the 26 events planned for 2007 have been completed. 
"In general" venues meet the needs of Olympic Games according 
to Liu.  (Comment:  American corporate sponsors indicate that 
logistically, the test events failed to test venue 
capabilities to withstand Olympic-size crowds, as only 30 
percent of test event seating was sold to the public.  End 
comment.) 
 
-- 670,000 people have applied to be Olympic volunteers. 
100,000 volunteers are required, including 30,000 specialized 
volunteers for the dignitary program, language services, 
driving services, media operations, competition organization, 
sports presentation and ceremonies.  24,000 people have been 
selected thus far and are receiving training.  6,000 
volunteers participated in the 2007 test events. 
 
-- The Paralympics have 27 local and overseas sponsors.  The 
Paralympic torch relay will pass 20 cities in and outside 
China and be the first international torch relay in 
Paralympic history.  There was only one test event, the 
International Goalball Tournament, held from September 13-16. 
 
 
-- Olympic conventions have been observed in accordance with 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) regulations -- 
including foreign media access.  BOCOG and the IOC 
Coordination Commission held eight plenary meetings and nine 
project reviews.  BOCOG hosted the World Broadcaster 
Meetings, World Press Briefings, Sponsor Workshops, and Chefs 
de Mission Seminars.  The State Council enacted "Regulations 
on Reporting Activities in China by Foreign Journalists 
during the Beijing Olympic Games and the Preparatory Period" 
and the Service Guide for Foreign Journalists. 
 
-- Environmental Standards have improved "remarkably" through 
the "Green Olympics" program.  In 2006, 66 percent of the 
days in the year were "blue sky" days, 17.6 percent more than 
in 2000.  There has been a 42.5 percent increase in urban 
green coverage.  The Olympic Green is 475 hectares large, 
with 90 percent green coverage. 
 
-- Transportation infrastructure is progressing with the 
October 7 opening of Subway Line 5 running from the north to 
south of Beijing.  Subway Line 10, the Olympic Line and 
Airport Line will start operations in July 2008.  Terminal 3 
of the Beijing Capital International Airport will be 
completed by the end of 2007 and in use by early 2008. 
 
-- To increase accessibility, 1,000 adaptation projects are 
being carried out each year.  Beijing has built 781 sidewalks 
for the visually impaired, adapted 55 subway stations, and 
put 270 accessible buses into service.  Moreover, over 230 
service sector firms, all 3-star and above hotels, and 40 
hospitals have been adapted for accessibility. 
 
-- A campaign to "welcome the Olympics, promote civility, and 
create a favorable social environment" has been launched to 
"create a warm and peaceful atmosphere."  The four specific 
goals of the campaign are to, "cultivate good manners, 
establish sound orders, deliver quality services, and create 
a beautiful environment."  Efforts have been made to promote 
"civility" (ren wen) in social etiquette, the urban 
environment, public order, spectator behavior, and the 
service sector." 
 
-- Regulatory and supervision measures have been implemented 
to ensure "an economical and corruption-free Olympics."  In 
addition to the Supervision Committee for the Games of the 
29th Olympiad, BOCOG also has an in-house Audit and 
Supervision Department.  The Beijing Municipal Government and 
General Administration of Sport of China also have their own 
monitoring agencies.  Non-government investment funds over 50 
percent of venue construction.  BOCOG has also decreased the 
number of permanent venues and switched to more temporary 
 
BEIJING 00006760  005 OF 005 
 
 
facilities to reduce the costs of construction and 
maintenance. 
 
-- In last ten months (prior to the Games), China will heed 
the instructions of the Central Government to stage a 
"high-level Olympic Games with distinguishing features." 
Randt