07BEIJING3621
MAY 30 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: CHEN SHUI-BIAN PLOTS,
Wed May 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9528
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE REHBJ #3621/01 1500724
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300724Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8404
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: MAY 30 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: CHEN SHUI-BIAN PLOTS, 
UN MEMBERSHIP, LEE TENG-HUI TO JAPAN, KMT PARTY 
CONSTITUTION, MA YING-JEOU AND U.S. RELATIONS, CROSS-STRAIT 
TRANSPORT 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 30 Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- The TAO is highly concerned about Chen Shui-bian 
and the DPP's push for a referendum on applying for 
membership in the UN under the name "Taiwan." 
 
-- Japan should abide by the three political joint 
documents between the two countries, stick to 
commitments made on the Taiwan issue and not provide a 
platform for the Taiwan separatist movement. 
 
-- Transportation Ministry Water Transportation 
Department Director General Song Dexing provided 
details about five recently announced policy measures 
to promote cross-Strait direct shipping by sea.  He 
charged that Taiwan authorities' restrictive policies 
are hindering progress on building such links. 
End summary. 
 
DPP, Chen Shui-bian's Plots, UN Membership 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  At the opening of the May 30 regular TAO press 
briefing, spokesman Li Weiyi issued a long statement 
condemning Chen Shui-bian's "radical" and "brazen" 
attempts to implement "Taiwan independence," such as 
"name-changing," "new Constitutions" and "de- 
Sinification."  Li stressed that attempts to separate 
Taiwan from China are doomed to fail and will never be 
tolerated by any person or group under any name.  He 
also underlined the TAO stance that there is a 
difference between the majority of DPP members and a 
small number of people advocating "Taiwan 
independence," adding that the Mainland is willing to 
engage in positive exchange and cooperation. 
Responding to a Xinhua News Agency question the 
matter, Li said the TAO is highly concerned about Chen 
Shui-bian and the DPP's push for a referendum on 
applying for membership in the UN under the name 
"Taiwan" and called the effort "a plot to secede from 
China." 
 
Lee Teng-hui's Visit to Japan 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3.  When asked about former Taiwan "President" Lee 
Teng-hui's "private travel" to Japan, the spokesman 
called on Japan to abide by the three political joint 
documents between the two countries, stick to 
commitments made on the Taiwan issue and not provide a 
platform for the Taiwan separatist movement. 
 
KMT Revises Party Constitution 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  Asked if the KMT had discussed with the TAO 
changes to the KMT party constitution that replaced 
the word "unification" with "peaceful development," Li 
replied that the TAO has seen the relevant reports and 
that "there has been no communication" with the KMT on 
the subject.  Asked if it would harm United States- 
Taiwan relations if Ma Ying-jeou were elected 
"President" in 2008 and proceeded to promote 
unification, the spokesman said that the political 
foundation of cross-Strait relations, which is the 
idea that Taiwan is an inseparable part of China's 
territory, can not easily be destroyed. 
 
Strengthening Cross-Strait Transportation Ties 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5.  Before taking questions, Transportation Ministry 
Water Transportation Department Director General Song 
Dexing provided details about five recently announced 
policy measures to promote cross-Strait direct 
shipping by sea.  The measures include encouraging 
Taiwan enterprises to directly invest in Mainland 
ports and highway construction, further opening the 
Mainland's transportation industry to Taiwan 
enterprises, exempting the "mini three links" from 
sales and income taxes, providing discounted training 
and certification for Taiwanese taxes, providing 
discounted training and certification for Taiwanese 
crewmen and divers and supplying Taiwan with search 
and rescue assistance. 
 
 
BEIJING 00003621  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6.  Taiwan has not given an official response, but 
China hopes Taiwan will take reciprocal measures, DG 
Song said, responding to questions about the 
announcement.  He clarified that formal channels 
already exist for many of these measures and more 
details can be found on the Transportation Department 
website, including instructions for Taiwan enterprises 
interested in investing in the Mainland. 
 
No News on Possible Wang Jin-pyng Visit 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Asked for information on the possible visit of 
Legislative Yuan President Wang Jin-pyng to the 
Mainland, the spokesman said the TAO has taken note of 
relevant reports.  Li reiterated the Mainland welcomes 
political parities, organizations or representatives 
who recognize the "1992 consensus" to visit the 
Mainland, at the appropriate time and under the 
appropriate titles, for the development of cross- 
Strait relations. 
 
Agricultural Imports Brisk 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Taiwan fruit imports have increased in variety, 
volume and value since they began in 2005, Li said 
when asked about the current situation of Taiwan's 
agricultural product sales to the Mainland. 
Authorities have taken measures to facilitate the 
import of these products, initiate emergency 
procurement and investigate fake products, he added. 
 
Three Models of Transport Not Adequate 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The TAO hopes to break through the current three- 
model "typical approach" to promote comprehensive, 
two-way direct shipping which will better meet the 
needs and economic interests of both Taiwan and 
Mainland China, Song said when asked about figures 
recently released by the Taiwan Transportation 
Authority.  The three models are "four direct links," 
"cross-Strait third location" and "mini three links," 
he added, providing transportation figures for each. 
He charged that the Taiwan authorities' restrictive 
policies are hindering progress on building greater 
links. 
PICCUTA