07HONGKONG2683
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: ZAND DYNASTY
Thu Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #2683/01 2980239
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250239Z OCT 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3253
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 002683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: ZAND DYNASTY 
COMPANY LTD. 
 
REF: A) USDOC 07674 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided below is 
prohibited by Section 12C of the Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the Office of 
Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS), Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted 
a post shipment verification (PSV) of Zand Dynasty Company Ltd., 
Unit 502, Block H, Sui Wo Court, Shatin, Hong Kong (Zand). The items 
in question are gas turbine parts exported to Zand on or about May 
21, 2007 and valued at USD 110,000.  In reftel A, the items are 
classified under export control classification number (ECCN) 9A001. 
This ECCN is controlled for national security (NS) and missile 
technology (MT) reasons and items falling within this ECCN would 
require a license for export to Hong Kong.  The ECO notes that the 
U.S. exporter (Turbine Services Ltd. of Saratoga Springs, New York) 
did not put an ECCN on the applicable shippers export declaration 
(SED) and stated that the export could proceed NLR (no license 
required). 
 
¶3.  Zand is a Hong Kong registered company established in 2003. 
According to the Hong Kong Companies Registry, its paid-up share 
capital is the Hong Kong equivalent of USD 120.  Directors are 
listed as Hong Kong resident Tian, Xiao Hua and Hong Kong resident 
Mr. Hassan Zand.  The Hong Kong Companies Registry lists Ms. Tian's 
personal residence as being located in the same building Zand (but 
different block number). 
 
¶4.  A review of Zand's web site (http://zanddynasty.diytrade.com) 
reveals that Mr. Zand travels frequently to the Middle East and the 
United States.  A review of Immigrations and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) databases reveals a Mr. Zand who is a likely match for the 
Director of Zand Dynasty.  The Mr. Zand in the ICE database is an 
Iranian national and a U.S. permanent resident. According to the 
Zand web site, Ms. Tian is active in the mainland China market and 
has been doing business in Hong Kong for the past eight years.  The 
web site further states that the company specializes in exports, 
imports, arranging outsourcing business for a wide range of 
products. The web site advertises various gas turbine parts for 
sale. 
 
¶5.  A web search of various phone numbers and contact details on the 
Zand web site reveals that Zand is a trading company that has been 
active in a range of product lines including pesticides, car parts, 
iron ore and other products.  Certain trade leads on various trading 
sites including Alibaba include trade leads that require shipment of 
products to Iran.  Additionally, certain web references to Matlab 
Kish Co. in Tehran, Iran list Ms. Tian's internet e-mail account in 
their contact details. 
 
¶6.  On October 1, 2007, the ECO met with Ms. Tian at the offices of 
FCS.  Mr. Tian had requested the meeting occur at FCS offices since, 
she stated, Zand is actually run from her home and she preferred not 
to meet there.  In e-mail correspondence prior to the meeting, Ms. 
Tian stressed that the turbine parts were strictly for commercial 
use in the power generation sector.  Ms. Tian stated that Zand is a 
trading company that both sources items internationally on behalf of 
clients and also represents mainland Chinese manufacturers 
internationally.  She stated that its customers are primarily based 
in China, Indonesia and the Middle East.  She stated that the 
company has had customers in Iran for agricultural products and 
construction machinery.  The company has two to three employees. 
During a subsequent meeting on October 12, 2007 (described below), 
Ms. Tian stated that Mr. Zand is somewhat involved in the business 
but is also a professor at a Hong Kong university. 
 
¶7.  As to the particular items in question, Ms. Tian stated that 
they were acquired as part of a new market that Zand would like to 
enter.  In particular, GE gas turbines are used for power generation 
in mainland China.  As a result, according to Ms. Tian, there is a 
market demand for ready access to turbine spare parts for the China 
market.  However, Ms. Tian also stated that the China market is 
moving from the GE frame 5 turbine (for which the items are suited) 
to GE frame 9 turbines.  Ms. Tian stated that Zand is responding to 
a tender in Egypt for gas turbine spare parts for which the 
applicable items would be suitable. 
 
¶8.  The ECO provided Ms. Tian with extensive information about U.S. 
export and reexport controls.  That information included guidance 
from the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control 
(OFAC), which administers the U.S. embargo on trade with Iran.  The 
ECO stressed that U.S. persons (including lawful permanent 
residents) may not conduct business with Iran (no matter the 
technical parameters of the items).  Ms. Tian committed to reviewing 
the information closely and to ensuring that Zand complies with U.S. 
export and reexport controls. 
 
 
¶9.  On October 12, 2007, the ECO visited Tung Yue freight forwarders 
at the Kerry Cargo Center in Hong Kong.  The items were located at 
this location in a larger wooden box.  Ms. Tian requested that the 
box be opened but the items inside were sealed inside plastic 
packaging.  Ms. Tian stated that it would not be appropriate to open 
the packaging as purchasers would not buy the products once the 
packaging had been opened.  A review of the labels on the packaging 
revealed that this packaging material is designed to act as water 
vapor control. 
 
¶10.  The ECO recommends that OEA obtain an official commodity 
classification for the items to better ascertain their control 
status.  With such commodity classification, the ECO may approach 
the Hong Kong government concerning this matter since items 
classified as ECCN 9A001 require a license for import into Hong Kong 
as well as export from Hong Kong. 
 
¶11. At the time visited, Zand appeared to be an unsuitable recipient 
of the commodities shipped in light of its apparent dealings and 
associations with Iran.  ECO notes that while reexports of certain 
low-level U.S. origin commodities to Iran by non-U.S. persons may be 
allowed, U.S. nationals and permanent residents are severely 
restricted from entering into such trade.  The ECO recommends that 
this PSV be considered Unfavorable.