07SHANGHAI370
FRB SENIOR ECONOMIST AHMED'S VISIT TO SHANGHAI
Mon Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO7763
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0370/01 1690439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180439Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5939
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1194
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0736
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0716
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0738
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0849
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0605
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 6361UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SHANGHAI 000370 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, EEB, AND INR/B 
STATE PASS USTR FOR STRATFORD/WINTER/MCCARTIN/ALTBACH/READE 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FOR JOHNSON/AHMED; SAN 
FRANCISCO FRB FOR CURRAN/GLICK/LUNG; NEW YORK FRB FOR CLARK/CRYSTAL/MOSELEY 
STATE PASS CFTC FOR OIA/GORLICK 
CEA FOR BLOCK 
USDOC FOR ITA/MAC DAS KASOFF, MELCHER AND MCQUEEN 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - DOHNER/HAARSAGER/WINSHIP/CUSHMAN 
TREASURY FOR IMFP-SOBEL/MOGHTADER 
NSC FOR KURT TONG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PREL CH
SUBJECT: FRB SENIOR ECONOMIST AHMED'S VISIT TO SHANGHAI 
 
 
This message is UNCLASSIFIED as defined by  E.O. 12958 
 
(U) This cable is sensitive but unclassified and for official 
use only.  Not for distribution outside of USG channels. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  During his June 6-7 visit to Shanghai, 
visiting Federal Reserve Board (FRB) Division of International 
Finance Emerging Market Economies Section Senior Economist 
Shaghil Ahmed met with a cross-section of Shanghai economic 
experts and officials in the banking, securities, and real 
estate sectors.  He attended a speech by Shanghai Municipal 
Government Financial Services Office Deputy DG Fang Xinghai on 
prospects for financial deregulation in China.  He discussed 
Shanghai's stock market and related issues with Shanghai Stock 
Exchange (SSE) Executive Manager of Global Business Development 
Department Chao Kejian (aka George).  Research Works consulting 
head Hugh Peymann discussed the growing influence of Chinese 
consumerism.  McKinsey and Company China Principal Wang Yi 
outlined the general health of China's banking system.  Jones 
Lang LaSalle Senior Manager Kenny Ho and Cushman Wakefield 
Managing Director Kim Clarkson briefed Ahmed on developments in 
China's real estate sector.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
China Needs Foreign and Private Help to Deregulate 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (U) At a June 6 luncheon for about 150 participants organized 
by AmCham Shanghai's Financial Services Committee, Shanghai 
Financial Services Office DDG Fang Xinghai said that the Chinese 
government needed to take three steps to reform its financial 
services sector: (1) open the financial services sector for 
private domestic firms; (2) open the market for foreign 
financial firms; and (3) relax regulatory controls. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Fang said that the reason there were so few private 
domestic financial service firms was that Chinese regulators 
lacked the capacity to effectively regulate.  Regulations were 
either overly restrictive or inadequate, creating a difficult 
environment for private enterprise.  Chinese politicians also 
had ideological antipathy towards the financial sector.  He 
quoted Deng Xiaoping's remarks that the financial sector was the 
heart of a modern economy.  The government was reluctant to open 
up the sector too fast for fear that it would get too strong. 
 
¶4. (U) Fang said that under China's WTO and SED commitments, 
foreign financial firms were "making good progress."  The 
banking sector, which had benefited from strong WTO commitments, 
should be a model for reforming other financial services.  Local 
incorporatization of foreign banks was a very good step in 
increasing competition for Chinese banks.  And foreign banks 
were doing well.  In the first four months of 2007, loan 
portfolios of foreign banks in Shanghai had increased 32 
percent, compared to an 11 percent increase for domestic banks. 
Foreign banks in Shanghai now accounted for 15 percent of the 
total loan portfolio, although they represented only about two 
percent nationwide. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The insurance sector was relatively well-regulated and 
the SED appeared to have broken the logjam in approvals by the 
China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) for wholly-owned 
subsidiaries in the property sector.  The securities sector was 
not well-regulated or open, in part because there had been few 
WTO commitments.  Although the Chinese government knew it needed 
to open up its market, it would do so slowly so that its 
domestic players would have time to adapt and adopt foreign 
techniques.  The purpose of foreign competition was not to 
benefit the foreign firms; it was to strengthen the Chinese 
firms. 
 
¶6. (U) Fang stressed that bilateral or multilateral negotiations 
were the best means to effect financial sector reforms.  He said 
 
SHANGHAI 00000370  002 OF 005 
 
 
"innovative back-door" approaches might benefit a firm 
initially, but could lead to unforeseen consequences down the 
road.  The Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED) provided an 
excellent forum for both the United States and China to advance 
their own agendas but it would be important for both sides to 
make commitments. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Fang said the progress made in the SED was 
"encouraging," but not enough - and was too one-sided with the 
Chinese side seemingly making all the concessions.  For 
political reasons, it was important that both sides make 
concessions  - even if China's reforms would benefit China as 
well as the United States.  China ultimately was concerned with 
securing access for its manufactured products.  "China needs a 
trade surplus to grow, he said.  "China needs open markets in 
other countries.  Other countries have a right, as well, to 
demand that China open up its services sector."  "China's 
underdeveloped service sector is already hurting its own 
growth," he said.  Along these lines, Fang thought that opening 
up the SED to include Japan and the European Union might be a 
good idea since those economies' firms would benefit from 
concessions made to the United States. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Fang said that there were three reasons for tight 
regulations in China: 
 
- Regulators were rarely responsible for the effects of 
regulations that they enforced.  Regulations also were a form of 
power, and many often gave in to the temptation to abuse it. 
 
- Chinese financial firms had no effective internal risk 
controls.  Regulators, who must approve all new products and 
innovations before they can be implemented, had thus been very 
conservative.  If a regulator approved a new product, and there 
were problems, he would be blamed.  Thus, there was no incentive 
to approve innovation. 
 
- The rapid growth over the economy for a long period of time 
had concealed lots of structural problems.  When everything was 
going well, these problems were not visible.  When the economy 
slowed down, they would become more painfully obvious.  Tight 
regulations inhibited innovation and the economy needed 
innovation to grow.  But so far, no one had complained. 
 
¶9. (U) Fang said that the government should encourage private 
financial service firms -- both foreign and domestic -- to 
expand in China.  These firms had a strong incentive to make 
money and thus were required to be innovative.  They also tended 
to have better internal risk controls, which should give 
regulators more confidence and lead to better and more effective 
regulation. 
 
¶10. (U) Fang noted that during Premier Wen Jiabao's recent visit 
to Shanghai, he had held a meeting with government agencies 
responsible for financial services.  Wen emphasized that China's 
central government continued to support Shanghai's development 
into an international financial center and explicitly instructed 
Shanghai's municipal leaders to speed up the process.  He also 
told them to contact him directly to solve any policy roadblocks 
that stood in the way of accomplishing this goal. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Shanghai's Stock Market Is Not China's Economy 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶11. (SBU) SSE's Chao, also on June 6, acknowledged that the 
SSE's Composite Index was not representative of China's economy. 
 He did note, however, that the equity market  over time had 
become increasingly more representative of the economy.  Chao 
said the market capitalization of the SSE had increased from 18 
percent of China's GDP in 2003 to about 80 percent of China's 
GDP in 2006.  Total market value of Chinese equity market, 
 
SHANGHAI 00000370  003 OF 005 
 
 
recently, was RMB 15 trillion (USD 1.97 trillion). 
 
¶12. (SBU) Despite this high market cap, however, Chao pointed 
out that only about 1/3 of the total shares on the SSE were in 
the "tradable" category.  Although the non-tradable share reform 
process was basically complete, these shares had largely not 
entered the market due to required holding periods.  Chao also 
noted that the majority of Chinese blue chip companies 
(sometimes referred to as "red chips") were not listed on the 
SSE.  Some were listed on the Hong Kong or New York stock 
exchanges; some were not listed at all. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Chao said that there were four factors driving the 
recent gains in the stock market: 1) the success of the 
non-tradable share reform; 2) the expectation of continued 
strong RMB appreciation; 3) high inflation risks that depressed 
bank savings; and 4) the lack of any other investment channels 
besides property.  Furthermore, Chao laughed, "Chinese people 
love to gamble" and this had caused a great deal of speculative 
investing in the equity market. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Chao said that the best way to cool the market was to 
increase the numbers of listed companies.  The SSE had lobbied 
the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) to allow more 
blue chips listed in overseas market to be listed in the A share 
market.  But, increasing supply took time since companies needed 
to jump through so many regulatory hoops to list. 
 
------------------------------------ 
More Shareholders Than Party Members 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶15. (SBU) Chao said that there were over 100 million individual 
share accounts and less than 1,000 institutional share accounts 
in China.  The peak record for the daily new account opened was 
350,000, set this month.  He noted that there were more trading 
account holders than Communist Party members, which he estimated 
at about 70 million, although he noted that many Party members 
were stock owners as well.  Currently, retail investors owned 
about 80 percent of market value while institutional investors 
owned about 20 percent.  Chao speculated that mutual funds 
companies controlled about RMB 500 billion of the total market 
capitalization.  Of the 100 million open trading accounts, only 
one third were active; with active defined as at least one trade 
per week. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Chao said that a great number of investors were very 
angry with the SSE, since SSE had changed its circuit breaker 
trading rules on June 4 and 5 without any notice.  According to 
these rules, trading of shares that had declined or advanced by 
the maximum 10 percent per day over two days (down total of 20 
percent) would be halted during the first four hours of trading 
on the third day.  Also, any share that increased or decreased 
by 10 percent from its closing price the day before would be 
closed for trading on that day.  Chao said that, under CSRC 
pressure, the SSE did not enforce this rule on June 4 since this 
would have meant that more than one third of its shares wouldn't 
trade.  Some share owners had been caught off guard by this 
change in policy and SSE's legal office had been getting phone 
calls from investors planning to sue.  This sort of problem, he 
commented, was caused by the fact that few high-level government 
officials understood the equity market and its rules. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Chinese Now Confident Enough in Future to Become Consumers 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) In a separate meeting on June 6, Research Work's 
Peymann observed that China's consumers were increasingly 
confident about their future.  He said that in the 1980s and 
1990s as the cradle-to-grave social contract with the government 
and state-owned enterprises had fallen apart, people began to 
 
SHANGHAI 00000370  004 OF 005 
 
 
pour their earnings into precautionary savings.  They were 
afraid of the future and the uncertainty it then held.  The 
success of China's economic transition to a more market-oriented 
economy and its continued year-on-year growth had reduced 
Chinese people's uncertainty about the future.  With time, 
people would feel the need to save less and ultimately would 
consume more.  Chinese people now wanted to enjoy the benefits 
of the booming economy. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Household expectations were now what controlled the 
economy; not the government.  Chinese individuals now had more 
choices and more money than they had ever had in China's 
history.  He expected that China's individual savings rate would 
decline as people spent money and took on more debt to finance 
their purchases of "luxuries." 
 
¶19. (SBU) While this was good for the economy, Peymann said, he 
was less sanguine about what this meant for China's ability to 
increase its energy efficiency and decrease its environmental 
degradation.  The polluting and energy intensive industries, 
such as steel, cement, plastics, automobile, textiles, were the 
same ones that needed to keep producing to make the things that 
Chinese consumers wanted to buy, like houses, cars, clothes, 
televisions. The government could, by fiat, rein in these 
polluting, energy intensive industries, but then would face a 
strong backlash. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
China Uses Foreign Banks to Improve Chinese Banks 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶20. (SBU) McKinsey's Wang told Ahmed on June 7 that based on 
McKinsey's experience, the published data and statistics on 
China's banks were a fairly accurate reflection of reality and 
China's banking system was currently healthy.  Chinese banks had 
not, however, been able to change their business model from one 
of taking in deposits from individuals and lending to large 
state-owned enterprises.  They were dependent on the fixed 
interest rate spread and not ready for competition or interest 
rate deregulation - or a downturn in the economy or collapse of 
the stock market. 
 
¶21. (SBU) All of China's banks appeared to operate under the 
underlying assumption that economic growth would continue as it 
has for the past several years.  They had not factored in any 
risk to their loan portfolios.  So while current non-performing 
loans (NPLs) were low, an economic downturn would quickly 
reverse this trend.  Chinese bankers lacked the experience and 
know-how to conduct proper risk analysis of companies and so 
were unable to evaluate loans to small- and medium-sized 
enterprises.  Fundamental to these bank's calculations was the 
implicit understanding that the government would never allow 
banks to fail, said Wang. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Wang said that China has allowed foreign banks into 
China not to benefit foreign companies, but to strengthen their 
own banks.  Central Government policymakers aimed to introduce 
just enough competition so that Chinese banks would be spurred 
to improve without being overwhelmed.  Foreign competition 
educated Chinese bankers and helped them to adapt.  Wang said 
that the Chinese government generally believed that "foreign 
investors have been positive agents for change."  Nevertheless, 
China would not fully open up to foreign banks until Chinese 
banks could compete. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Real Estate: Building for the Rich 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶23. (SBU) According to Jones Lang LaSalle's Ho and Cushman & 
Wakefield's Clarkson, China's real estate market was healthy and 
booming despite the government's best efforts to rein it in. 
 
SHANGHAI 00000370  005 OF 005 
 
 
One major issue the government faced in understanding the market 
was determining what constituted "affordable housing." 
Government statistics on income did not include any of the 
wealth effect caused by capital gains in the real estate or 
equity markets.  Furthermore, private enterprises underreported 
salaries in order to avoid taxes.  This led to the market 
appearing to have been priced out of average people's reach, and 
yet continuing to grow. 
 
¶24. (SBU) While industrial, commercial, and residential property 
prices had risen in Shanghai and Beijing, Ho said, there was a 
great deal of development taking place in China's secondary 
cities.  China was on track to urbanize 250 million people over 
the next 10 years.  The government hoped to stimulate the 
development of other cities.  The ideal size for Shanghai was no 
more than 25 million people. Clarkson said that there was 
incredible demand for commercial space in Shanghai and that 
rents were rising.  Vacancy was 5 percent, below the ideal 
level.  While there was a lot of building going on now that 
would be opening in two to three years, this was desperately 
needed as Shanghai developed as China's services capital. 
 
¶25. (SBU) Ho said that the government's policy restricting 70 
percent of all new housing units to 90 square meters or less was 
not being enforced at the local level anywhere in China.  While 
most developers were continuing to mainly build high-end units 
in Shanghai, there were still not enough luxury apartments to 
meet demand.  Sales prices in Shanghai for high-end apartments 
were roughly RMB 80,000/square meter (USD 978/square foot) while 
low-end units sold for about RMB 15,000/square meter (USD 
183/square foot). There was also insufficient low-income 
housing, but developers were not generally building this. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Foreign real estate service companies, in contrast to 
financial service companies, had no special government 
restrictions on their operation in China.  Clarkson noted that 
both Cushman & Wakefield and Jones Lang LaSalle were 
wholly-owned foreign enterprises that had operated in China for 
more than 10 years.  Capital account controls had not been a 
problem for Cushman & Wakefield, said Clarkson, since due to its 
growth his company had been plowing all of its earnings into 
development in China. 
 
¶27.  FRB Senior Economist Ahmed cleared on this cable. 
JARRETT