08AITTAIPEI797
MEDIA REACTION: TIP REPORT, CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, OBAMA'S
Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
R 061121Z JUN 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9112
INFO AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
AMCONSUL HONG KONGUNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000797 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TIP REPORT, CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, OBAMA'S 
NOMINATION VICTORY 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused June 6 
news coverage on talks between Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation 
(SEF) and China's Association for Relations across the Taiwan Strait 
(ARATS), which will kick off next Wednesday; on President Ma 
Ying-jeou's remark Wednesday that the precondition for both sides of 
the Strait to seal a peace accord is that China remove missiles 
aimed at Taiwan; on Minister of Foreign Affairs Francisco Ou's green 
card controversy; on the Cabinet's decision to speed up construction 
of the Fourth Nuclear Power Plant; and on the results of the Basic 
Competency Test for Taiwan junior high school students.  Several 
papers also reported on the State Department's "Trafficking in 
Persons (TIP) Report 2008," in which Washington has placed Taiwan on 
a list of "Tier 2" countries for human trafficking for the second 
consecutive year. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed the TIP report and called 
it a burning shame for a modern society like Taiwan.  With regard to 
cross-Strait relations, an op-ed piece in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" spelled out the major points in both Taipei's and 
Beijing's new strategies toward each other and toward Washington. 
Former AIT Chairman Nat Bellocchi also opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" that cross-Strait 
talks are a good thing.  Editorials in the "China Times" and 
pro-unification "United Daily News," on the other hand, discussed 
Senator Barack Obama's nomination victory.  Both articles called 
Obama's nomination a "historic milestone" in the U.S. history and an 
"enormous encouragement" for other countries.  End summary. 
 
¶3. TIP Report 
 
"[Taiwan] Even Sold Human Beings" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (6/6): 
 
"The U.S. State Department issued its annual 'Trafficking in Persons 
Report' two days ago, in which Taiwan remains on the Tier 2 list 
among the 170 countries covered.  This indicated that Taiwan has yet 
to fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of 
trafficking, and that it remains primarily a destination for people 
trafficked for the purpose of forced labor and sexual exploitation. 
It is obvious that Taiwan's import and export [businesses] of human 
beings are still flourishing. 
 
"This is a burning shame [for Taiwan].  Respect for human beings is 
generally regarded as an indicator for a modern society, and judging 
from the report, it appears that Taiwan is a barbaric place where 
people still eat birds and animals raw.  As a result, what really 
matters are: 
 
--First, This is a very embarrassing issue in the international 
arena. 
--Second, it indicated that the Taiwan government is powerless when 
it comes to dealing with big trans-national organized crime. 
--Third, it showed that Taiwan, including both its public and 
private sectors, is in need of humanitarianism, and is not a 
thoroughly modernized [society] yet. ..." 
 
¶4. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
A) "Both Sides of the Taiwan Strait Are Starting to Launch Their 
Grand Strategies" 
 
Professor Edward Chen of Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
American Studies, currently a visiting scholar at University of 
Chicago's Department of Political Science, opined in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (6/6): 
 
"In his inaugural speech, President Ma Ying-jeou put forward a grand 
strategy for Taipei, and judging from the recent words and deeds of 
the leaders in Beijing, it is evident that a grand strategy for 
Beijing is also under deliberation.  President Ma's new strategic 
thinking includes the following five major points:  First, Taiwan 
views the United States as its most important ally, and as a result, 
Taipei's top priority is to rebuild mutual trust with Washington and 
to strengthen cooperation on bilateral security and trade.  Second, 
Taiwan also regards mainland China as its most important trade and 
economic partner.  It has thus listed the reinstatement of the 
mechanism for cross-Strait talks and the resumption of dialogue 
between Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and China's 
Association for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS) as its 
top priority job. 
 
"Third, in terms of Taipei-Washington ties, Taipei is using the 
tempo of improved cross-Strait relations as leverage to exercise of 
power, and issues such as the implementation of intellectual 
property rights, and the import of U.S. pharmaceuticals, 
NOMINATION VICTORY 
 
agricultural products and weapons, are used by Taipei as bargaining 
chips in talks with Washington.  Taipei hopes to re-open talks with 
Washington over the bilateral free trade agreement, to secure 
security protection from the United States, and to develop closer 
Taiwan-U.S. military cooperation. 
 
"Fourth, with regard to cross-Strait relations, Taipei is using the 
security and trade relations between Taiwan and the United States as 
support, and using the possibility of another transition of power as 
a tool in negotiating with Beijing.  For the next stage, Taipei 
hopes that having engaged with Beijing in talks on more sensitive 
issues, such as [Taiwan's] foreign relations and politics, will help 
resolve the marginalization crisis the island is facing in the 
process of economic integration in East Asia.  With Beijing's 
consent, Taipei hopes to become a trade partner with ASEAN and seek 
new breakthroughs in its participation in the international 
community. 
 
"Fifth, the basic operation method of Taipei's new strategic 
thinking is to use Taipei-Washington ties and cross-Strait relations 
interchangeably and have them complement one another so as to attain 
security protection from Washington and secure economic and trade 
interest from Beijing. 
 
"In response to Taipei's new strategic thinking, Beijing's new 
strategic ideas toward Taipei and Washington can more or less be 
assessed from recent words and deeds of the leaders in Beijing. 
First, the Beijing authorities have evidently decided to replace 
'one China with respective interpretations' with the '1992 
Consensus' as the new basis for both sides to resume dialogue. ... 
Second, Beijing obviously intends to replace 'one China' with the 
'Chinese nation' as the framework for cross-Strait talks. ... 
Third, for its own interests, Beijing has decided to make a clear 
distinction between the trade talks across the Strait and talks on 
issues such as foreign relations and politics. ...  Fourth, Beijing 
plans to extend the battle line of the talks on cross-Strait 
'reconciliation and truce' so as to regain an upper hand [in the 
talks]. ... 
 
"Finally, Beijing's new strategy will be to review its previous 
approach of 'influencing Taipei by getting through Washington.' ... 
In light of imminent improvement in cross-Strait relations, smooth 
channels of communication between SEF and ARATS, the KMT-CCP 
platform  serving as the first track dialogue, and diminished 
concern about Taiwan independence in the near future, Washington's 
function as a mediator has become less important than before. ..." 
 
 
B) "Cross-Strait Talks Are a Good Thing" 
 
Nat Bellocchi, former AIT chairman and now a special adviser to the 
Liberty Times Group, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (6/6): 
 
"... Talks between the two sides have been reopened. The initial 
issues - cross-strait charter flights and admitting more Chinese 
tourists to Taiwan - will likely be accepted by both sides and begin 
next month as stated by President Ma Ying-jeou.  Many, especially in 
Taiwan, see these moves as leading to a better life. Just as many 
seem less sure but will wait and watch what will follow and at what 
cost. And quite a few others believe the changes being made are 
disastrous. 
It will likely continue this way for some time.  However, as long as 
Taiwan can maintain itself as a democracy, its people hopefully will 
be able to follow the changes and express their rights when 
needed." 
 
¶5. Obama's Nomination Victory 
 
A) "Will Obama Be Able to Write [a New Page in] U.S. History?" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (6/6): 
 
"... Even though there have been people of minority groups running 
for the presidency before, Barack Obama is the first black man in 
U.S. history who has captured the presidential nomination of a major 
political party.  This is a development that people could hardly 
imagine in the past, and all the more, it is a historic milestone. 
Regardless of whether Obama will win the election in the future, he 
has marked a new page in history.  Even though there is still a long 
distance to the ideals advocated by Dr. Martin Luther King in his 'I 
Have a Dream' speech, [Obama's nomination victory] has at least 
indicated a solid stride forward. ... 
 
"The fact that Obama has been able to overcome one difficulty after 
another in the nation-wide primaries indicates that U.S. society 
has, so far, really been thinking differently about the ethnic 
NOMINATION VICTORY 
 
issue.  Even though there are people who still stick to traditional 
ideas, quite a few people are able not only to tolerate racial 
differences but also to go beyond the racial division and visualize 
a homeland for all and a common future shared among different 
individuals.  The support for an unprecedented and even 
unconventional presidential candidate is the most evident expression 
of the people's pursuit of 'change.' ..." 
 
B) "Obama:  A Vision Greater than the American Dream" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (6/6): 
 
"...  For the United States, it will not have completed the final 
task left behind by the constitution of this democracy more than two 
hundred years ago -- namely, paying no heed to race, and fulfilling 
the ideal that 'all men are created equally' -- if it fails to take 
the big step of 'electing a black man as president.'  The 
realization of such an 'American dream' will not only be an enormous 
encouragement but will also serve as a model for other countries in 
the world, which still suffer in their conflicts among races, 
religions and languages. ..." 
 
WANG