08AITTAIPEI1719
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, THE FINANCIAL CRISIS,
Fri Dec 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1719/01 3470716
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120716Z DEC 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0546
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8792
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0250UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, THE FINANCIAL CRISIS, 
U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused 
December 12 news coverage on the Central Bank's biggest interest 
cuts in 26 years; the probe into former President Chen Shui-bian's 
corruption cases; and the police's surprise eviction of members of 
the "Wild Strawberry" Student Movement from a public square. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" said North Korea is running out 
of cards to play after the change of governments in both South Korea 
and the United States, along with the deterioration of Kim Jong-il's 
health.  Another column in the "China Times" said it seems that 
China's hybrid half-planned/half-free market economy works better 
than Western society's free market economy.  "After the decline of 
capitalism," the column questioned whether a neo-capitalism can be 
formed, should Western society choose not to follow China's economic 
path.  An editorial in the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times" revealed how poor the presentation was of a 
delegation led by KMT Legislator Hsieh Kuo-liang to Washington.  The 
delegation sought to defend the Ma Ying-jeou Administration's human 
rights record.  The editorial said the delegation's terrible 
performance is a public relations disaster to the Ma Ying-jeou 
Administration.  End summary. 
 
¶3. North Korea 
 
"North Korea's Big Show of 'Communicating with the United States and 
Ceasing Communication with South Korea'" 
 
Tsai Zheng-jia, a research fellow of the Institute of International 
Relations at the National Chengchi University, wrote in the 
"International Column" in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" 
[circulation: 220,000] (12/12): 
 
"... After taking office, the Obama administration will change the 
U.S.'s previous role as world policeman and put the focus of its 
governance on reviving the domestic economy and withdrawing troops 
from Iraq.  It [the Obama Administration] apparently does not have 
much interest in the North Korean issue.  North Korea's wish to take 
advantage of the United States to seek more economic aid might end 
up with nothing. ... 
 
"Since 2002, during the period when South Korea and the United 
States have been coordinating, North Korea's nuclear issue has 
persisted.  However, after the change of governments in South Korea 
and the United States, and with Kim Jong-il's health in decline, 
thus absenting the best actor [Kim], it is becoming ever more 
difficult for North Korea to maintain this performance." 
 
¶4. The Financial Crisis 
 
"Can a Neo-Capitalism Be Formed?" 
 
The column of "International Outlook" in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 220,000] wrote (12/12): 
 
"... What makes the West least comfortable is that, if the Chinese 
style of economy is the key to success, will many countries in the 
world, especially developing countries, follow China's example?  If 
it is true, doesn't it mean that the West's values of democracy and 
freedom are bankrupt? ... 
 
"Therefore, Western scholars started researching what path should be 
followed after the decline of capitalism.  China's mode should not 
be followed and [the Chinese mode is] not feasible.  Then, there is 
only one road, which is to research 'neo-capitalism.'  Of course 
[researching neo-capitalism] is a very complicated and difficult 
task.  Establishing it takes time as well.  However, there is an 
unbreakable principle, in which borrowing money for a spending spree 
is not allowed anymore.  Such an American style of capitalism must 
be rectified.  Although the free flow of capital, commodities, and 
labor should be allowed without restriction, highly efficient 
methods which monitor the risks are required.  However, the United 
States government so far still does not agree with such an idea." 
 
¶5. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Three Musketeers or Three Stooges?" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (12/12): 
 
"The three-man team of Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) Legislator 
and chair of the legislature's Judiciary, Organic Laws and Statutes 
Committee Hsieh Kuo-liang, National Police Agency Senior Executive 
Officer John Chu and Ministry of Justice Counselor Chin Jeng-shyang 
arrived in Washington on Monday with a mission: Visit the center of 
US power to rebut recent allegations of a backslide in human rights, 
an increase in police brutality and political persecution by the 
U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
judiciary that have tarnished the reputation of the administration 
of President Ma Ying-jeou. 
 
"But if the performance at their first port of call, the 
conservative Heritage Foundation think tank, was the yardstick with 
which to judge the success of the venture, then the group may have 
been better off staying home. ... 
 
"Hsieh's repeated claims that it was the Democratic Progressive 
Party that blocked the KMT's attempts at legal reform for the last 
eight years would not have convinced this audience.  Attendees 
included people with decades of experience in and knowledge of 
Taiwanese affairs such as former American Institute in Taiwan chairs 
Nat Bellocchi and Therese Shaheen and the Heritage Foundation's John 
Tkacik, individuals who are fully aware of which party has held a 
legislative majority during that time. ... 
 
"In summary, their arguments were weak, their facts and figures were 
inaccurate and their presentation was downright awful.  As it 
stands, the video of the session could stand as a tutorial for 
future delegations of what not to do. 
 
"If the Ma administration was worried about opinion in Washington 
before the trip, this public relations disaster should have them 
even more concerned." 
 
YOUNG