08BEIJING1020
MARCH 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:TIBET, SIX-PARTY TALKS,
Tue Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7800
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1020 0780953
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180953Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5906
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BEIJING 001020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR KOLY ETRD CH JA KSKN MI
 
SUBJECT: MARCH 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:TIBET, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
OLYMPICS 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 18, 2008 regular MFA press briefing were: 
 
 
-- Situation in Tibet is now stable and the violence reveals the 
Dalai clique's "essence." 
 
-- China supports the meetings between U.S. and DPRK negotiators and 
emphasizes that the nuclear issue is not a bilateral issue but a 
Six-Party issue. 
 
-- The spokesman had not seen reports that the IOC was considering 
alternative locations for endurance events during the Olympics. 
 
Tibet Violence Reveals Dalai Clique's "Essence" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. At the March 18 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson Qin Gang 
told reporters that the situation in Tibet was normal and stable and 
relevant authorities would deal with the perpetrators in accordance 
with the law. Qin said that authorities had exercised maximum 
restraint when facing the violent protesters. Qin did not have 
specific information on surrounding provinces or regarding reports 
of a curfew imposed in some areas of Xinjiang, however, he said that 
in all areas of China people reject the "splittist" efforts of the 
Dalai Lama.  Qin emphasized that China has the ability to protect 
social stability and territorial integrity. 
 
¶3. Qin repeatedly referred to the violence as "beating, burning and 
smashing" saying that China has ample evidence to prove that the 
events were masterminded by the Dalai Lama.  When asked whether 
China would release the evidence, Qin said that the investigation 
was still underway, but China would release evidence "in due 
course."  China's position regarding the Dalai Lama and any 
countries that support him has not changed, however, said Qin. 
Responding to a question regarding the EU's request for more 
information on the events in Tibet, Qin said that it is the Dalai 
Lama, not China who should be investigated.  Though China will not 
seek to have the Dalai Lama tried in any court and Qin would not say 
whether he would be arrested if he visited China, China views the 
Dalai Lama as a political figure and a "splittist," not a religious 
figure.  Qin said that the international community supports China on 
the issue of Tibet, pointing to the fact that no country recognizes 
Tibet as an independent country as evidence. 
 
Meetings of United States and DPRK 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Qin said that he did not know what DPRK chief negotiator Kim 
Kye-gwan did during his recent trip to Beijing.  Both the United 
States and the DPRK have briefed China on the meetings in Geneva 
between the DPRK and the United States.  China feels that this type 
of communication is helpful and hopes that both sides can meet 
halfway to implement the second phase of the denuclearization 
process. 
 
¶5. Qin rejected reported DPRK comments that the nuclear issue is 
between only the United States and DPRK, saying it was an issue 
between all of the countries involved in the Six-Party Talks.  Qin 
said that progress in the talks was due to China's support and 
willingness to host. 
 
Clean Environment for Olympics 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. Qin said that he had not seen comments from the International 
Olympic Committee (IOC) saying that alternative locations might be 
necessary for endurance events during the Olympics due to pollution. 
 What he had seen were IOC reports that the air during the Olympics 
would be up to standard.  Qin said athletes can concentrate on 
setting records and China will provide a clean environment for the 
Olympics. 
 
Hu Jintao to Visit Japan, Australian Iron Ore, Mongolian Foreign 
Minister and Malawi President to Visit China 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶7. Qin said that Chairman Hu Jintao's visit to Japan would be 
important to the future of the two countries' relations and that the 
date had yet to be decided.  Qin had not heard reports that China 
was being blocked from the Australian iron ore market.  Mongolian 
Foreign Minister Sanjaasuren Oyun will visit China from March 24-27. 
 Malawi President Bingu Mutharika will visit China from March 
24-30.