08BEIJING930
NEWSPAPER REPORTS ON AIRLINE "TERRORIST" INCIDENT;
Thu Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3817
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0930/01 0731132
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131132Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5699
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAORC/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000930 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL PGOV KOLY CH
SUBJECT: NEWSPAPER REPORTS ON AIRLINE "TERRORIST" INCIDENT; 
MPS PROVIDES MEAGER OFFICIAL RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. OSC/FBIS CPP2008039968087 
     ¶B. OSC/FBIS CPP20080309968143 
     ¶C. OSC/FBIS CPP20080312701010 
     ¶D. BEIJING 892 
     ¶E. BEIJING 914 
     ¶F. OSC/FBIS CPP20080312715009 
     ¶G. OSC/FBIS CPP20080312968076 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao), a newspaper run 
by the Communist Party's flagship People's Daily newspaper, 
described on March 11 how a 19 year-old "Uighur girl" 
smuggled gasoline contained in beverage cans onboard a China 
Southern flight from Urumqi to Beijing.  The article claimed 
the girl's motive was to ignite the cans in the aircraft 
lavatory, but was subdued.  The most detailed account of the 
incident appeared on a blog of a Chinese reporter from 
Southern Weekend, a popular national newspaper owned by the 
Guangdong CCP Committee.  The Ministry of Public Security 
confirmed the basic details of the incident in a fax sent to 
the Embassy on March 12.  Chinese media denounced claims by 
"foreign media and some so-called politicians and academics" 
that the incident was a hoax used as a pretext to taint the 
Uighur community.  End Summary. 
 
CCP Media on Foiled Attack 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Xinhua reported on March 9 that CCP Politburo Member 
and Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region (XUAR) Party Secretary 
Wang Lequan and XUAR Chairman (Governor-equivalent) Nur 
Bekri, on the margins of the ongoing National People's 
Congress, both said publicly that "some people were 
attempting to create an air disaster" but that the flight 
crew had foiled the attack.  According to Xinhua, a China 
Southern flight to Beijing departed Urumqi on March 7 at 
10:35 a.m. and landed in Lanzhou at 12:40 p.m. after the crew 
reported the incident to the control tower.  Nur said the 
authorities are investigating "who the attackers are, where 
they come from and what their background is." 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao), a newspaper run 
by the Communist Party's flagship People's Daily newspaper, 
published additional details on the incident in an article 
published March 11 (ref C).  Quoting an unnamed "informed 
official source," the paper said a 19-year-old "Uighur girl" 
from Kuche in the XUAR tried "to destroy" a China Southern 
airliner flying from Urumqi to Beijing on March 7.  The girl 
passed through the business class security checkpoint at 
Urumqi's Diwobao Airport, carrying a bottle of mineral water 
and two "ring-pull cans of beverages."  Although the girl 
opened the water bottle and drank two mouthfuls at the 
request of a security guard, the "young security checker" did 
not make the girl open the cans, which contained "absolutely 
not beverages but gasoline."  "A tiny hole had been punched 
in the cans, and after the beverages had been drained out, 
they were filled with gasoline," the paper reported.  To mask 
the smell, perfume was added.  During the flight, the girl's 
"modus operandi" was to set the cans alight in the lavatory, 
but "by great good fortune," the girl's activity in the 
toilet was discovered.  She was subdued and the plane made an 
emergency landing in Lanzhou. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The most detailed account of the incident appeared 
on a blog of a Chinese reporter from Southern Weekend, a 
popular newspaper owned by the Guangdong CCP Committee.  The 
reporter described how he used the Internet to track down a 
first-hand account of the incident from a passenger onboard 
the China Southern flight.  The reporter published on his 
blog an email from a passenger using the name "Luckie." 
According to Luckie's account, after about an hour into the 
flight, a passenger complained to a flight attendant about 
the smell of gasoline.  Luckie, seated in the rear of the 
Boeing 757, heard a quarrel and saw a Uighur woman "about 20 
years old" standing.  She had been seated in the fourth or 
fifth row on the right-side of the economy class cabin.  A 
man, who Luckie presumed was a security agent, went over and 
subdued the woman.  "There was no chaos.  It was very calm," 
Luckie reported.  At 12:46 p.m., the plane landed at 
Zhongchuan Airport in Lanzhou, Gansu Province.  Luckie 
emailed periodic updates from the airport, describing the 
investigation.  "Supposedly four cans of gasoline were 
found," Luckie wrote, and four "foreigners" believed to be 
"East Turkestan elements" detained.  (The blog address is 
http://blog.infzm.com/space/?13722/action viewspace itemid 
1574.html and translated at 
 
BEIJING 00000930  002 OF 002 
 
 
http://www.zonaeuropa.com/20080311 1.htm.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) The reporter noted in his blog that his story was 
never published "for reasons everybody knows about."  (Note: 
According to a Hong Kong-based PRC media analyst, the 
reporter is probably referring to instructions from 
Propaganda authorities that would typically be issued 
following an incident of this nature banning publication.) 
 
The PRC's Official Response 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Ministry of Public Security, in response to 
Post's inquiries, confirmed the incident.  In a five-sentence 
fax sent to Embassy Beijing's Legal Attache on March 12, MPS 
said flight personnel on China Southern flight CZ6901 
discovered a passenger with "suspicious liquids."  "For the 
safety of the passengers, the plane made a safety landing in 
Lanzhou Zhongchuan Airport, all the passengers and flight 
crew were unharmed."  "Relevant departments" continue to 
investigate the incident, the MPS fax stated.  (Post emailed 
an unofficial translation of the MPS fax to EAP/CM.)  When 
pressed for details, an MPS official referred us to the 
Global Times article. 
 
¶7. (SBU) At the regular MFA press briefing on March 12 (ref 
D), spokesman Qin Gang, when asked about the incident, 
responded using points nearly identical to those mentioned in 
the MPS fax.  FM Yang Jiechi described the incident similarly 
during a separate press briefing on the margins of the 
National People's Congress (ref E). 
 
Motive Speculation 
------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Global Times, quoting an "official source," said 
the 19-year-old girl's motive was "not to cause an uproar on 
account of unhappiness with society," but to "deliberately 
cause a terrorist incident."  Li Wei, a counterterrorism 
expert from the Ministry of State Security-affiliated China 
Institutes of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), 
stopped short of saying the girl's actions could have brought 
down the plane.  Li told the paper that igniting the gasoline 
could have caused a fire or a "small explosion within the 
confined space of the aircraft cabin."  China Southern's 
Managing Director Liu Shaoyong went further, claiming in an 
interview broadcast on Hong Kong Phoenix TV on March 11 (ref 
F) that "past incidents were commonly motivated by personal 
aims," while the recent incident "exhibits an obvious 
political agenda" targeting the Olympic Games, the work of 
the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and "China's 
territorial integrity, stability and unification."  (Note: 
In his interview, Liu said the Uighur girl and a companion 
intended to store the flammable material in the lavatory 
trash bin and "activate it" at a "pre-determined moment.") 
 
Human Rights and Human Bombs 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) XUAR Chairman Nur Bekri reacted angrily to exiled 
Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer's claim that the incident was a 
hoax designed to smear her ethnic brethren (ref G).  These 
are "irresponsible claims" by "foreign media and some 
so-called politicians and academics," he stated.  "Any attack 
on a civilian aircraft should be considered a terrorist act," 
Bekri said, asking "how can you apply double standards to 
this?"  A Chinese "expert on combating Xinjiang terrorism," 
quoted in the Global Times, said "hoodwinking a 19-year-old 
girl into becoming a human bomb fully exposes the cruelty and 
savagery of the terrorist organizations" who "always carryout 
their terrorist acts in the name of human rights" in order to 
gain Western support. 
RANDT