08BEIJING3476
MINISTER OF CIVIL AFFAIRS DISCUSSES PARALYMPICS,
Mon Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7253
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3476/01 2520544
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080544Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9782
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 003476 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS MOPS SOCI EAID SENV KOLY CH
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF CIVIL AFFAIRS DISCUSSES PARALYMPICS, 
DISASTER RELIEF, ASSISTANCE TO VETERANS 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please handle accordingly.  Not 
for Internet. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) In a September 5 meeting, Minister of Civil Affairs 
Li Xueju welcomed Secretary of Veterans Affairs James B. 
Peake, head of the U.S. Presidential Delegation to the 
Paralympic Games, and wished U.S. athletes success.  Minister 
Li said that with assistance from the international 
community, the Chinese people have achieved an "interim 
victory" in earthquake relief and are now turning attention 
to reconstruction in Sichuan and other earthquake-affected 
areas.  On veterans' issues, Minister Li shared China's 
experience with helping resettle and reemploy veterans and 
expressed a desire to learn from the U.S. experience.  He 
said that one of the biggest challenges facing China is to 
provide resettlement and health care services for demobilized 
soldiers, adding that China has had only limited success and 
"many problems" addressing this issue.  He said that his 
Ministry is trying to come up with a "reasonable, uniform" 
system of support for veterans.  In response, Secretary Peake 
noted that the United States also faces natural disasters and 
the Department of Veterans Affairs works with other agencies 
to deal with such contingencies.  He said that the United 
States also faces challenges in helping men and women 
transition from active service to civilian life and noted 
that the department provides health care, educational 
assistance, and preferential housing loans to veterans. 
Secretary Peake and Minister Li agreed to maintain 
communication and cooperation on issues of common concern. 
End Summary. 
 
Paralympics Hope to Build on Olympics' Success 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a September 5 meeting with Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs James B. Peake, head of the U.S. Presidential 
Delegation to the Paralympic Games, Chinese Minister of Civil 
Affairs Li Xueju noted that the recently concluded Olympic 
Games were "very successful."  They helped promote the 
Olympic spirit of solidarity and friendship.  He 
congratulated the United States on winning the most medals 
and praised the U.S. performance, especially those of swimmer 
Michael Phelps and the U.S. men's basketball team, which he 
said left a "deep impression" on the Chinese.  Minister Li 
said that President Bush's attendance at the opening 
ceremony, Secretary of Labor Elaine Chao's attendance at the 
closing ceremony, and now Secretary Peake's visit show U.S. 
support for the Olympics and Paralympics.  Hosting Secretary 
Peake as head of the U.S. Paralympic Delegation is a "great 
honor," Minister Li said, and he extended his "best wishes" 
for U.S. success in the Paralympics. 
 
Earthquake Relief 
----------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Minister Li noted that the Ministry of Civil Affairs 
(MCA) has played an important role in disaster relief in the 
wake of the May 12 earthquake centered in Wenchuan, Sichuan 
Province.  Noting "very serious losses" from the quake, 
Minister Li said he visited the affected area six times.  Due 
to efforts of the Government and the Chinese people, as well 
as help from the international community, an "interim 
victory" has been achieved in relief efforts.  The basic 
needs of victims have been addressed, but now the Chinese 
Government and people must turn to the reconstruction effort. 
 He expressed appreciation for the condolences expressed by 
U.S. Government officials and ordinary Americans as well as 
for U.S. support for the disaster relief effort. 
 
MCA Responsible for Veterans 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Minister Li stated that the MCA deals with providing 
resettlement, retraining, and employment assistance to 
retired and demobilized soldiers from the People's Liberation 
Army and the People's Armed Police.  Noting that Li's 
predecessor, Doje Cering, visited the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs in 2002 to exchange views on these issues, 
Minister Li said that his Ministry remains interested in 
studying U.S. experiences and ideas. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Minister Li explained that the MCA helps to provide 
 
BEIJING 00003476  002 OF 003 
 
 
preferential treatment for veterans to prepare them for 
civilian life, including assistance in obtaining employment 
and housing and/or training veterans to start their own 
businesses.  The Ministry provides additional benefits for 
the families of soldiers, police, or workers who are martyred 
or disabled, including special consideration for housing, 
healthcare insurance and providing regular living allowances. 
 Veterans with slight disabilities are eligible for programs 
to help them find jobs equal to their capacity.  Individuals 
with more serious disabilities are provided institutional 
care. 
 
Challenges in Heath Care, Resettlement 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Minster Li explained that China's biggest challenges 
with assisting veterans are the issues of healthcare and 
resettlement.  Many of the veterans have chronic ailments or 
because of advanced age may have frequent health issues.  The 
Chinese health care system lacks capacity to provide needed 
care, but the Ministry is working on more preferential 
policies to help improve healthcare for veterans. 
 
7 (SBU) Arranging resettlement and employment for all the 
demobilized soldiers is also difficult, Minister Li said. 
Despite Government efforts to assist veterans, there have 
been "many problems."  (Note:  Demobilized soldiers have 
staged demonstrations in recent years, the most well-known of 
which was in April 2005, when 1600 demobilized officers 
marched on the PLA's General Political Department in 
Beijing.)  Li noted that though the MCA is trying to create a 
"reasonable, uniform" system of support for veterans, because 
of "differing local conditions" in China, some areas have had 
success in resettling veterans and others have not been so 
successful.  Minister Li said that in addition to Government 
efforts, Chinese society should also play a role in helping 
veterans reintegrate in society, adding that during wars, it 
is easy to love the troops, but less so in peacetime. 
Minister Li expressed hope that the military's outstanding 
contribution to quake relief, in which as many as 100,000 
soldiers went to the front line to face the dangerous 
conditions, will increase society's "love and support" of 
veterans. 
 
Honored to Lead Paralympics Delegation 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Saying he was honored to lead the U.S. Presidential 
Delegation to the Paralympics, Secretary Peake expressed 
appreciation for Minister Li's hospitality and admiration for 
the efforts Beijing has made to host the Olympics and 
Paralympics, noting he personally stayed up "many late 
nights" watching the games.  Secretary Peake wished the 330 
Chinese athletes participating in the Paralympic Games as 
much success in the Paralympics as their counterparts enjoyed 
in the Olympics. 
 
United States Also Plagued by Natural Disasters 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Expressing sympathy over the May earthquake, 
Secretary Peake said that the United States also must deal 
with the "power of Mother Nature," noting the  damage caused 
recently by Hurricane Gustav and the potential additional 
disruptions from two more hurricanes currently moving off the 
east coast of the United States.  While the first duty of the 
military is to defend the country, the U.S. military also can 
provide stability, hope and safety in times of natural 
calamities.  In the face of natural disasters, the Department 
of Veterans Affairs has provided needed facilities and has 
coordinated with other agencies to move veterans and provide 
home loans for reconstruction. 
 
Care of Veterans Inspires Service to Country 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Secretary Peake noted that the U.S. Government 
deals with similar issues as China in helping men and women 
transfer from active duty to civilian life.  The Department 
is heavily involved in providing healthcare and has a network 
of hospitals and clinics for veterans.  For those who are 
disabled, the U.S. Government provides compensation, 
training, educational benefits, and home purchase support. 
George Washington once observed that the way a country treats 
its veterans determines the willingness of others to serve 
 
BEIJING 00003476  003 OF 003 
 
 
their country.  Noting that every country faces challenges in 
reemploying veterans, Secretary Peake expressed appreciation 
for Minister's Li's insights into China's situation. 
Secretary Peake and Minister Li each expressed willingness to 
increase communication and cooperation in relevant fields. 
 
¶11. (U) The delegation cleared this message. 
RANDT