08BEIJING1316
April 8 MFA Press Briefing: Dalai Lama, Olympic Torch,
Tue Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6192
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1316/01 0991115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081115Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6343
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER CH PK TN TZ CI QA KZ AS SW
FR, IR, TW 
SUBJECT:  April 8 MFA Press Briefing: Dalai Lama, Olympic Torch, 
Iran Nuclear Talks, North Korea, Boao Forum, China-Japan Relations, 
EU Trade Dialogue 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 8 MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
-- The Dalai Lama "lies for a living" and wants to bring emancipated 
Tibetans back to slavery. 
 
-- United States and Chinese officials have been in contact to 
ensure safe passage for the Olympic torch in San Francisco. 
 
-- China will hold meetings in Shanghai on April 16 to discuss 
restarting the Iran nuclear talks. 
 
-- China hopes that the meetings between A/S Hill and Kim Kye-gwan 
in Singapore will yield positive results. 
 
Dalai Lama Condemned 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. At the April 8, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA spokesperson 
Jiang Yu condemned the Dalai Lama saying that he was "a ruler of a 
theocratic serfdom," which "practiced the darkest slavery in human 
history."  The Dalai Lama is seeking to return Tibet to his own 
"personal heaven" and bring the "emancipated Tibetans back to 
slavery."  Jiang said that the Dalai Lama "lies for a living" and 
that one must watch what he does and not what he says.  In spite of 
this, China is willing to conduct talks with the Dalai Lama if he 
gives up criminal, separatist and Olympic disrupting activities. 
China's differences with the Dalai Lama are not ethnic or religious 
but political, based on the territorial integrity of China. 
 
¶3. Jiang listed benefits Tibet has gained from the Chinese 
Government including protection of democratic rights and religious 
freedom, preferential policies, economic growth, lack of tax, 
subsidies and cultural and linguistic preservation.  Tibetan culture 
is currently in its "golden age," said Jiang. 
 
¶4. Jiang also said that overseas Chinese who publicly express their 
support for China do so on their own initiative.  Chinese Embassies 
to not hold events to encourage nationalist displays in foreign 
countries. 
 
Olympic Boycotts, Torch Relay Protests 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. Jiang said that the "holy flame" of the Olympic torch would 
reveal the true faces of those who wish to disrupt the torch relay. 
The protesters are "despicable" and are seeking to "tarnish the 
lofty Olympic spirit and challenge all the people loving the Olympic 
Games around the world."  China and the United States have been in 
close contact to ensure a safe and successful torch relay in San 
Francisco.  Jiang said that the flame was not extinguished in Paris, 
though it was rerouted to ensure its "security and dignity." 
 
¶6. Jiang had not seen reports that Nicholas Sarkozy will boycott the 
Olympics if China does not begin a dialogue with the Dalai Lama. 
However, Jiang said, those who try to use the Olympics to threaten 
China will only "tarnish their own image."  Regarding Hilary 
Clinton's call that President Bush not attend the opening ceremony, 
Jiang said that she hopes U.S. politicians would "separate right 
from wrong" and respect international laws governing international 
relations when they make comments on "relevant issues."  U.S. 
politicians should proceed from a productive and long-term view of 
U.S.-China relations. 
 
¶7. Jiang had not seen reports of IOC officials raising the prospect 
of cancelling the global torch relay because of the protests. 
 
Meeting in Shanghai to Discuss Iran 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Jiang announced that the P-5 plus 1 Political Directors will meet 
in Shanghai on April 16 to discuss plans to resume talks on the 
Iranian nuclear issue.  The meeting will implement the March 
consensus made by the six foreign ministers.  All parties should 
display "creativity and flexibility" in proactively seeking a 
resolution to the issue.  China is ready to play an active role in 
resolving the issue, said Jiang. 
 
A/S Hill Meetings in Beijing 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. China hopes the meetings between A/S Hill and DPRK Vice Foreign 
Minister Kim Kye-gwan in Singapore will yield positive results.  A/S 
Hill will meet PRC Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei in Beijing to 
discuss the Singapore meeting.  The South Korean and Japanese 
negotiators will also come to Beijing to meet with A/S Hill. 
 
Visa Policy 
----------- 
 
¶10. Jiang said China has "not stopped" granting multiple entry visas 
 
BEIJING 00001316  002 OF 002 
 
 
to foreign visitors.  China's visa policy is formulated in line with 
Chinese law and international practices. 
 
Boao Forum 
---------- 
 
¶11. Jiang said leaders from Pakistan, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, 
Chile, Tonga, Sweden, Kazakhstan, Qatar and Australia will attend 
the Boao Forum for Asia starting on April 10.  Taiwan's vice 
president-elect Vincent Siew will attend in the capacity of chairman 
of the Cross Straight Common Market Fund. 
 
¶12. Regarding the participation of Australian Prime Minister Kevin 
Rudd, Jiang said China hopes that China and Australia can build on 
the sound and long-term stable development of bilateral relations. 
Jiang noted that coordination and cooperation on many issues has 
been enhanced between the two countries.  China hopes the visit will 
help "upgrade the already sound relationship between the two 
countries." 
 
China-Japan Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶13. Jiang had not heard reports that Japan is transplanting coral on 
disputed islands in order to enlarge its control of the Pacific. 
China has proposed a "long-term and effective mechanism" to avoid 
issues similar to the poison dumpling event.  Jiang said that China 
and Japan should strengthen cooperation in order to resolve the 
dumpling issue.  Jiang also had no information about a possible 
military hotline between Japan and China. 
 
Trade Dialogue with European Union 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶14. The "high-level trade and economic dialogue between China and 
the EU" has yet to be decided, said Jiang.  Jiang said that China 
and the EU are comprehensive strategic partners and trade relations 
are maturing between the two sides. 
 
RANDT