08CHENGDU286
MCC ELIGIBILITY: THE CASE FOR TIMOR-LESTE
Mon Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO6094
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHCN #0286/01 3500910
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 150910Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3033
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP PRIORITY
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY 0006
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 0053
RHHMUNA/USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON PRIORITY 0001
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3693UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000286 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EAP DAS MARCIEL; MCC VP HEWKO; EEB/IFD/ODF; USAID PDELP/JLANG; 
USTR EBRYAN; TREASURY BPELTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MCC ECON EFIN TT
SUBJECT: MCC ELIGIBILITY: THE CASE FOR TIMOR-LESTE 
 
REF: DILI 281 
 
CHENGDU 00000286  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  On December 12, the Ambassador briefed Finance Minister 
Pires, Foreign Minister da Costa, Vice Prime Minister Guterres, 
Acting Speaker of Parliament Guterres, the head of Timor's MCC 
team, and President Jose Ramos Horta on the MCC Board's decision 
to not reselect Timor-Leste as Compact eligible and to offer 
Timor instead a Threshold Program.  Among the government 
leaders, the reaction was subdued.  They conveyed clear 
disappointment with the outcome, particularly given the hard 
work the government made in the past year to maintain 
eligibility.  The finance minister pointedly noted with 
discouragement the board's decision to select the Philippines, 
although it too failed the corruption indicator.  All were 
bewildered with the intent and meaning of a threshold program. 
Once we explained the purpose of a threshold program, and the 
investment it would represent, they welcomed the continued 
commitment by the U.S. in Timor's development.  Indeed, the head 
of Timor's MCC-team quickly identified anti-corruption, 
land/property rights, project management capacity building 
(i.e., government effectiveness), and girls' primary education 
as possible targets of a threshold program.  Both he and the 
finance minister inquired how quickly a threshold program could 
begin. 
 
¶2.  President Ramos Horta's reaction was sharply negative.  Long 
a skeptic of the MCC, he again blasted the Compact process as 
overly bureaucratic and complex, and unresponsive to 
Timor-Leste's needs.  The U.S., he opined, should be 
straightforwardly generous in its assistance, especially to 
fragile states such as Timor-Leste, and not require that they 
reach some sort of policy perfection before delivering aid.  He 
stated it was shocking that the MCC should deny compact 
eligibility after the meticulous and strong compliance of the 
Gusmao government over the past year with all of the MCC's 
compact development requirements.  A veteran of MCC's engagement 
in Timor over the past four years, the president regretted the 
repeated and "wasted" investments in personnel and financial 
resources the country has made in trying to secure MCC 
eligibility.  The decision represents a lack of genuine U.S. 
commitment to the development of Timor-Leste, said Ramos Horta. 
As such, he told the Ambassador that he would recommend to the 
Prime Minister that the offer of a threshold program be 
rejected. 
 
¶3.  Additionally, the President said he would propose to the 
government that it reverse Timor's agreement on Article 98, 
reconsider the bilateral SOFA, and review its policy of strong 
support of U.S. positions on human rights in the UN and other 
fora.  He stated flatly that he would not now consider 
recognizing Kosovo in response to U.S. advice. 
 
¶4.  We have not yet been able to speak to the Prime Minister, 
the crucial actor in any decision to engage on a threshold 
program.  He has been briefed on the MCC decision and we have 
been told by several that he welcomes the continued engagement 
and commitment by the U.S. that a threshold program would 
represent.  We expect that we will have a chance to speak with 
the PM during the course of the coming week, and likely no later 
than when we deliver the formal letter from MCC's CEO on the 
Board's decision.  We will continue to brief and solicit 
feedback from other political leaders, including the opposition, 
and report as appropriate. 
 
¶5.  We anticipate further negative fallout once the opposition 
becomes aware of the decision not to reselect.  Fretilin, the 
leading opposition party, has been actively using the corruption 
issue and, in its view, Timor-Leste's unlikely prospects for MCC 
eligibility to criticize the government for many months.  For 
example, it opposed funding a special MCC team within the 
finance ministry to prepare Timor's bid for a compact, stating 
that the money will be wasted as Timor will not be found 
eligible due to the government's record on fighting corruption. 
In a recent public statement, the party's secretary general, 
Mari Alkatiri, predicted the MCC Board would not reselect Timor, 
and the party is likely to use the Board's decision to again 
criticize the Gusmao government, perhaps loudly.  This, in turn, 
may complicate a determination by the government to accept a 
Threshold Program. 
 
¶6.  Comment.  We anticipated the President's irritation with the 
MCC board's decision, although not its intensity.  We suppose he 
will now add the MCC to his list of examples of U.S. "failures" 
to acknowledge Timor-Leste's record of supporting U.S. 
initiatives in international organizations, such as the UN.  It 
 
CHENGDU 00000286  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
will also reinforce his view that U.S. assistance has been 
halting and skewed to efforts such as supporting the development 
of institutions, such as Timorese political parties ("a luxury 
in Timor," said Horta), instead of targeted at effectively 
raising the incomes of Timor's rural poor.  We can rebut this 
view, and will do so.  At this point, we do not expect the 
government to take his advice regarding the Threshold Program, 
but will need to track this closely.  Similarly, we believe any 
reversal of Timor's stance on Article 98, or a reconsideration 
of the SOFA, to be highly unlikely.  What may be more difficult 
to counter will be his expressed intent to take a different 
approach to questions such as recognition of Kosovo.  The recent 
effort to gain Timor's support for a UN resolution on Iran 
demonstrated that Ramos Horta's active approval was crucial. 
 
¶7.  The promise of an MCC compact provided the U.S. with great 
potential influence on Timor's development.  The public 
consultations required by the MCC and held in the past months 
throughout Timor-Leste raised awareness among the Timorese 
public not only of the critical importance of fighting 
corruption, but also of the prospect of a major investment by 
the U.S. in Timor's future.  The decision to offer a threshold 
program instead will be seen by many Timorese, and not only the 
President, as signifying a relative decline in our commitment to 
Timor's development.  The concomitant slippage in our potential 
influence occurs in the context of a general reduction in the 
sway Timor's development partners enjoy over the government's 
decision-making given the maneuverability provided by country's 
modest oil wealth.  We nevertheless will engage the government 
on an early acceptance of a Threshold Program, both to help 
prepare Timor to someday again become Compact eligible, and as a 
means of retaining influence toward the improvement of the 
government's policy and performance.  End comment. 
KLEMM