08CHENGDU299
ASSISTANCE TO RETURNING LABORERS IN SOUTHWEST CHINA'S
Wed Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO7658
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0299/01 3660825
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310825Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3050
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3715UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000299 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN ELAB CH
SUBJECT: ASSISTANCE TO RETURNING LABORERS IN SOUTHWEST CHINA'S 
POOREST PROVINCE 
 
REF: A. CHENGDU 36  B. CHENGDU 267 
 
CHENGDU 00000299  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Authorities in southwest China's Guizhou 
province have set up booths at the capital city's train station 
to assist the thousands of migrant laborers who are returning 
home after losing jobs in coastal factories.  Although the 
booths appear to have the potential to serve as useful 
information conduits, we observed relatively low worker interest 
in their services during our recent visit.  More than one 
million migrant laborers are projected to return to Guizhou, a 
figure that greatly exceeds the usual flow of returning workers 
at this time of year.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
Government Support for Returning Laborers 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) During a late December trip to Guiyang, the capital of 
Guizhou province, Congenoff visited the city's train station to 
observe both the number of passengers arriving from coastal 
Guangzhou province and the government assistance provided to 
returning migrant laborers.  Roughly six million of Guizhou's 40 
million residents work outside the province, according to 
Guizhou statistics.  The province in 2006 was also China's 
poorest, with an average per capita income of only USD 736 per 
year.  Its economy depends heavily on remittances from migrant 
laborers working outside the province.  Recent local press 
reports have suggested that Guiyang is particularly hard-hit by 
a returning wave of migrant workers who have lost their jobs in 
coastal factories.  A late November report in the Farmer's Daily 
said that roughly 10,000 workers were returning to Guizhou every 
day, and a total of 1.2 million were expected to return by the 
end of the year. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Wang Mingzeng, the Deputy Director of the Guizhou Labor 
and Social Security Bureau (GLSSB), told us that migrant 
laborers are returning from Southeast China at a rate of about 
1,000 workers per day.  Based on the number of workers projected 
to return, however, the laborers may actually be returning a 
rate of about 10,000 per day.  According to Guizhou government 
statistics, about 397,600 migrant laborers returned to Guizhou 
between October and late November.  More than 600,000 additional 
laborers are expected to return before the start of the Spring 
Festival.  In an ordinary year, 600,000 is roughly equal to the 
total number of workers that return to Guizhou for the holiday, 
according to Wang.  The GLSSB conducted a survey in Guizhou that 
indicated slightly more than 41 percent of the workers returning 
this year have come home after the coastal factory that employed 
them closed or cut salaries as orders for their products 
declined.  While not related to job losses, the second greatest 
reason for workers gave for returning home earlier than normal 
this year - cited by about 33 percent of those surveyed - was 
the desire to avoid potentially inclement weather like that seen 
before the last Spring Festival. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) At the train station, we noticed that the GLSSB had a 
large assistance booth located directly outside the area where 
passengers exit the station.  We also observed aid stations down 
the street at the long-distance bus terminal and at a nearby 
police post.  Two police vans parked near the train station 
displayed banners indicating they were "service vehicles" for 
returning laborers.  The large booth located outside the station 
exit had a sign that read "Guiyang City Labor and Social 
Security Bureau Help and Support for Returning Migrant Laborers 
Reception Point." 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) This booth may be set up and staffed only during times 
when trains arrive from Guangdong and other origination points 
for returning migrant laborers.  We did not see the booth during 
our first visit to the train station when no trains from the 
coast were scheduled to arrive.  On our second visit when two 
trains from Guangdong arrived, the booth was staffed with about 
five employees.  The assistance booth at the long distance bus 
 
CHENGDU 00000299  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
station appeared to have only one person manning it. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Outside the station's passenger exit, the reception 
booth had a number of pamphlets and information sheets available 
for returning workers.  One pamphlet titled "Guiyang city 
employment and re-employment" included information on how to 
apply for employment assistance, as well as the addresses and 
phone numbers for district and county-level employment centers. 
Returning workers also had the opportunity to register to 
receive additional job training and employment information from 
the Labor Bureau.  We observed the staff at the booth answering 
workers' questions. 
 
 
 
Low Worker Interest for Support Services 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Despite the prominent position of the assistance 
booths, the vast majority of apparent returning migrant laborers 
did not seek assistance.  We observed roughly 10 - 15 
individuals approach the booth and look at the printed 
information or speak with the staff.  Of the visitors, many 
seemed to approach the booth out of curiosity and only a few 
took any of the print materials with them.  The few who did have 
specific questions about job training or employment received 
answers quickly and left.  The registration form for workers to 
request additional information had only two names written on it 
for the day of our visit.  Workers who live in towns and 
villages outside the provincial capital were directed to seek 
employment assistance from their local labor bureau.  We did not 
see anyone approach either the police assistance booth or the 
booth at the long distance bus terminal. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Nearly all of the returning passengers we saw quickly 
made their way out of the train station to either the local or 
long distance bus terminals.  This tracks with what we heard 
from our Guiyang-based contacts; most laborers will leave the 
train station directly for their hometown unless they have 
relatives living in Guiyang.  There was a sizeable police 
presence at the station, although it is not clear if there were 
more police that normal for this time of the year. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment:  When we spoke with an academic with the 
Guizhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences and a few NGO contacts 
in Guizhou, they were universally skeptical that the Labor 
Bureau's reception booth at the train station provided useful 
services to farmers.  One NGO contact told us that the booths 
did nothing more than provide workers with a glass of water, in 
contrast to what we saw during our second visit to the train 
station. 
BOUGHNER