08GUANGZHOU48
400,000 Stranded Rail Passengers in Guangdong
Tue Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO3553
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0048/01 0290642
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290642Z JAN 08
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6829
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000048 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELTN SOCI PGOV ELAB ECON CH
SUBJECT: 400,000 Stranded Rail Passengers in Guangdong 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Severe weather, which is causing transportation 
shut-downs in Central and East China, has left 400,000 passengers 
stranded at railway stations in Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Dongguan in 
the Pearl River Delta.  With the delays to date, it is possible that 
upwards of 700,000 passengers might not have passage home before the 
Lunar New Year.  Local government is actively engaged in trying to 
ensure order is maintained and stranded workers and families are 
taken care of.  Despite government efforts to encourage travelers to 
cancel trips home and remain near their workplace, most people at 
the train station and nearby shelters remain determined to return 
home for the holiday.  End summary. 
 
Severe Weather Strands Thousands in South China 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to Guangzhou Railway Group, severe weather caused 
transportation closures in Central and East China and left a total 
of 400,000 passengers stranded at railway stations in Guangzhou, 
Shenzhen and Dongguan.  When trains do resume, they will only be 
able to take 70,000 passengers per day.  With the delays to date, it 
is possible that upwards of 700,000 passengers might not have 
passage home before the Lunar New Year. 
 
¶3. (U) Difficulties are also mounting in terms of sanitation and 
health.  Over 100 stranded passengers at the Guangzhou railway 
square fainted and were sent to the railway station for medical 
treatment; more than 100 tons of rubbish have piled up in the area 
each day.  The city government sent 120 sanitation workers to remove 
garbage; portable toilets have been positioned at major 
intersections and walkways near the Guangzhou Rail Station. 
 
Basic Services Coming Available, Despite Strains 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Prices for food and drinks in the area went up dramatically 
as the crisis mounted, but now appear to be settling as the local 
government has taken control of the situation.  Guangzhou plans to 
open 13 shelters for stranded passengers with free food and water 
provided, and Congenoff, who spent several hours at the station 
talking with travelers, saw free bottled water and inexpensive hot 
meals being distributed at the Liuhua Convention Center, 3 blocks 
south of the train station.  Media reports indicate that as many as 
50,000 passengers have been sheltered at the site in recent days, 
with travelers gathered in different waiting areas according to 
final destination.  Congenoff noticed the availability of basic 
medical services and a robust police presence clearly meant to 
maintain order even as periodic announcements of train arrivals 
instructed stranded passengers how to proceed to their departure 
areas. 
 
Stranded Passengers Encouraged to Change Plans 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. (SBU) According to local media reports (the global economic 
situation has now been overshadowed by the crisis in travel 
arrangements), Guangdong Governor Huang Huahua inspected the 
Guangzhou Railway Station on January 28 and instructed local 
officials to try and persuade migrant workers to stay in the 
province during the Lunar New Year.  The Guangzhou Trade Federation 
has called on local branches to organize activities for migrant 
workers who decide to stay.  Outside the station, police officers 
formed the outer-most security cordon, with People's Armed Police 
(PAP) stationed behind the police and makeshift crowd-control 
barriers.  Police throughout the area were heard actively 
encouraging travelers, many of whom said they had waited overnight, 
to remain in Guangdong for the holiday. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Guangzhou Railway Group is also encouraging rail 
passengers to change their travel plans and consider travel by bus. 
However, the press continues to report that icy road conditions in 
Central China have made bus travel to northern destinations almost 
impossible and will likely continue for the next few days, with 
traffic jams along the Beijing-Zhuhai Expressway.  The local Traffic 
Bureau has arranged for more than 1,000 buses to take those stranded 
in Guangzhou back to their work places (in Dongguan and other nearby 
areas) free of charge.  At the same time, the Ministry of Railways 
has dispatched 60 extra trains, and rail ticket offices in Guangdong 
have stopped selling new tickets since January 26.  Instead, ticket 
offices have begun refunding ticket fees without penalty, although 
travelers on the street expressed concern that refund lines would be 
exceptionally long and refund procedures might be complicated. 
 
Unwavering Determination to Travel Home 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000048  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Although media reported thousands of passengers processing 
refunds and remaining in Guangdong for the holiday, most people 
waiting outside the train station and convention center remained 
firm about going home for Lunar New Year.  One man said the 
difficulties of purchasing his train ticket and the fact that he did 
not make it home last year meant he had no intention of giving up or 
seeking a refund.  Occasional bouts of frustration led some people 
to raise voices at police and one couple scaled barriers and 
attempted to run across security perimeters surrounded by police and 
PAP, only to be apprehended and sent back the way they came.  When 
asked about their dash, the couple told Congenoff that it was worth 
a try to enter the station, although they did not want trouble and 
were willing to return when stopped by PAP guards. 
 
GOLDBERG