08GUANGZHOU147
A Generation Left Behind - Migrant Education in the Pearl
Tue Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO1123
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0147/01 0710751
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110751Z MAR 08
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6962
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG SOCI PGOV PHUM
SUBJECT: A Generation Left Behind - Migrant Education in the Pearl 
River Delta 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  How successful have Chinese government and 
educational officials been in meeting one of the major societal 
challenges confronting them, i.e., the care and training of the tens 
of millions of children of the migrant workers who have driven 
China's economic boom?  Clearly the children's school attendance and 
academic performance are lower on average than that of other 
students.  Even though Beijing has mandated that local governments 
provide education for the children of migrants, public schools 
generally give priority to local children due to limited space and 
funding.  Private schools for migrant children in the Pearl River 
Delta are plentiful, but they are expensive, vary in quality and, 
for the most part, do not go beyond the ninth grade.  End summary. 
 
 
Left in the Village 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Fifty-eight million children of migrant workers in China are 
left behind in their home villages when parents go to the cities to 
work.  According to a 2006 survey by the All-China Women's 
Federation, a state sponsored NGO,   these children are more likely 
than those whose parents have not sought employment elsewhere to 
have less than adequate supervision.  Their caregivers, usually 
grandparents, often fail to enforce attendance in school.  The 
survey showed that the academic performance of 80 percent of the 
migrant children was poor or mediocre; 20 percent had disciplinary 
problems. 
 
¶3. (U) Children left behind also tend to begin school later and are 
more likely to drop out before completing the compulsory nine years 
of education.  A different study in 2006 by the China National 
Children Center, an affiliate of the All-China Women's Federation, 
reported that as many as 60 percent of children left behind by 
migrant worker parents drop out of school before completing nine 
years. 
 
Outnumbering Locals 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) According to the school attendance statistics of various 
municipalities of the Pearl River Delta, there are 1.5 million 
children of migrant workers enrolled in the region's schools.  With 
the exception of Foshan, these students outnumber their local 
classmates in every municipality.  These numbers are likely to grow 
as the Chinese government at all levels increase efforts to educate 
the children of migrant workers and more parents opt to bring their 
children with them when they leave home to seek work. 
 
Public Schools - Second Class Citizens 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Five years ago, Beijing mandated that local governments 
should provide nine years of free compulsory education to the 
children of migrant workers.  However, according to Dr. Hong Wang, a 
professor at South China Normal University, local public schools do 
not welcome these children.  Local students have priority for the 
limited spaces, and some municipalities impose additional residency 
requirements.  According to another academic, local governments fear 
that open admissions would create a flood of students.  The public 
schools also must deal with tensions in the classroom related to 
discrimination from local students and their parents. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Wang told Congenoffs that migrant parents in Guangzhou need 
to establish residency by living in one place or having the same 
employer for several years.  Only schools in the suburbs of 
Guangzhou have significant space for migrant children.  In media 
reports, Hua Tongxu, Director General of the Guangzhou Education 
Bureau stated the city would spend RMB 12.5 million (about US$1.76 
million) this year educating 400,000 migrant children. 
 
¶7. (U) In Dongguan, one of the Pearl River Delta's largest 
industrial centers, 300,000 local children have priority for spaces 
in public schools, according to the city's Department of Education. 
Officials say they are trying to expand the capacity of the public 
school system, but currently rely on private schools to educate most 
of the municipality's 430,000 migrant children.  Other cities have 
been more successful at accommodating migrant children in public 
schools.  According to the published statistics, migrant children 
account for half the public school population in Zhongshan and 
Zhuhai. 
 
Private Schools - Out of Reach for Many 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Private schools for migrant workers have sprung up 
throughout the Pearl River Delta, but according to Wang, these 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000147  002 OF 002 
 
 
schools vary in quality.  While some are quite good, others do not 
meet minimum educational and safety standards.  Congenoff visited 
Dong An School in Dongguan, which serves 4,300 migrant children. 
Local officials selected Dong An School for the Congenoff's visit. 
It has received several awards from education authorities.  However, 
Mai Liang Hui, Dong An's principal commented that many other migrant 
schools are substandard. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Mai told us that private schools charge a minimum of 800 
RMB per semester (about US$110).  In comparison, the average monthly 
wage of a migrant worker is around 1,000 RMB.  There are very few 
scholarships available for migrant children.  Paying such fees is 
easier for migrant workers who earn higher wages doing skilled work, 
those in supervisory positions, and double-income migrant families. 
However, Mai commented that even some workers with more modest 
incomes make the sacrifices necessary to send their children to 
private schools because they have few other options. 
 
¶10. (U) Dongguan has 220 private schools supervised by the local 
Education Bureau.  Eighty percent of them target migrant workers, 
operating as non-profit enterprises funded solely by tuition. 
Education Bureau officials say that with 50,000 to 80,000 more 
children arriving annually in Dongguan, more schools are needed. 
Funding for the Education Bureau is based on the number of local 
students, leaving the bureau with inadequate resources to monitor 
private schools. 
 
Fewer Opportunities Beyond Ninth Grade 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Wang and Mai both pointed out that there are fewer 
opportunities for the children of migrant workers to go beyond the 
nine years of compulsory education.  The directive from the central 
government does not address more advanced education for migrant 
children.  The Dong An School and the majority of private schools in 
Dongguan stop after the ninth year.  Public schools, on the other 
hand, continue through twelve years of education. 
 
GOLDBERG