08HONGKONG408
2008 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT:  MACAU
Wed Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ3470
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #0408/01 0650813
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 050813Z MAR 08
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4275
INFO RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK PRIORITY 0643
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORITY 1715
RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY 3588
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0447
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL PRIORITY 3268
RUEHUM/AMEMBASSY ULAANBAATAR PRIORITY 1257
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS HONG KONG 000408 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR DENNIS WILDER 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP, EAP/CM, 
USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KFRD KWMN PHUM SMIG CH HK MC
SUBJECT: 2008 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT:  MACAU 
 
REF: A. STATE 2731 
     ¶B. 07 HONG KONG 583 
     ¶C. HONG KONG 155 
     ¶D. 07 HONG KONG 2360 
     ¶E. HONG KONG 209 
     ¶F. 07 HONG KONG 1866 
     ¶G. HONG KONG 255 
     ¶H. 07 HONG KONG 1675 
 
¶1. (SBU) Per ref A, the following are post's contributions to 
the eighth annual Trafficking in Persons report for the Macau 
Special Administrative Region (MSAR) of the People's Republic 
of China.  (Note:  Per instructions, subheadings, questions, 
and paragraph letters correspond to those in paragraphs 27-30 
of ref A.  End note.) 
 
¶2. (SBU) Comment:  Post believes there has been a profound, 
positive shift within the Macau Special Administrative Region 
Government (MSARG) since our 2007 TIP Report; Chief Executive 
Edmund Ho and his administration now are fully engaged in 
tackling human trafficking.  In about eight months' time, the 
Macau government effectively implemented five of the six 
measures we have recommended since Macau was placed on Tier 2 
Watch List in the 2005 report.  It: (1) increased 
trafficking-related investigations and arrests, and carried 
out its first prosecution for trafficking; (2) established an 
interagency, anti-TIP concern committee, led by the Secretary 
for Security, who was appointed the functional lead for 
anti-TIP measures taken by the MSARG; (3) drafted and 
delivered to the Legislative Assembly a new, comprehensive 
law that expands the range of crimes considered to be 
trafficking, and increases punishments for convicted 
traffickers, as well as guarantees protections for 
trafficking victims; (4) took steps to identify and rescue 
victims, especially from organized prostitution; and (5) 
improved interagency coordination against, and provided data 
on the number of victims of, human trafficking.  (Note: The 
sixth recommendation was that Macau should assign dedicated 
police and social welfare resources to the tasks of 
investigating trafficking crimes.  Though Post believes the 
Judiciary Police and Social Welfare Institute provide the 
best platforms for this, the MSARG has not yet indicated that 
it plans to dedicate resources from among them solely focused 
on combating trafficking.  End Note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Comment (cont'd):  The Macau Government's draft law, 
although not yet passed, is a major step toward tackling the 
full range of trafficking concerns there.  The draft law 
coordinates and strengthens measures related to prevention, 
protection, and prosecution by: 
     (1) Strengthening the criminal penalties for human 
trafficking to include cases involving victims trafficked 
into, through, and from Macau, with increasingly harsher 
penalties for trafficking victims under the age of 16; 
     (2) Increasing criminal penalties for engaging in sex or 
labor exploitation, as well as organ trafficking, by means of 
force, fraud, deception, coercion or debt bondage; 
     (3) Criminalizing the act of knowingly using the 
services or organs of a trafficking victim, or confiscating, 
hiding, damaging or destroying the identification or travel 
documents of a trafficking victim; 
     (4) Identifying the criminal responsibility of legal 
persons, organizations, and societies complicit in the 
commission of human trafficking crimes; 
     (5) Providing for the prosecution of a human trafficker 
from another country which has no extradition agreement with 
Macau; 
     (6) Requiring information campaigns to raise public 
awareness, and promoting training sessions and research on 
the issue; 
     (7) Specifying the rights and safeguards of, and aids 
to, the victims of human trafficking, including free legal 
aid, police protection and privacy protection for minors 
involved in trafficking cases, and 
     (8) Creating a plan -- and associated shelters -- for 
the protection of trafficking victims. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comment (cont'd):  In effect, the law creates a 
comprehensive anti-TIP plan for Macau that appears to match 
the scope of the U.S. TVPA, as amended.  The bill also 
provides for increased sentences commensurate with the age of 
the victim(s) involved, differentiating between victims under 
age 14, those between 14 and 16, and those older than 16, 
though the MSARG and Legislative Assembly continue to debate 
these terms in the draft legislation.  Furthermore, in 
recognizable terms and despite a growing range of other 
social challenges facing Macau, the government has shown its 
clear commitment to making the fight against trafficking a 
priority.  For example, the MSARG established an interagency 
committee, titled the "Human Trafficking Deterrent Measures 
Concern Committee," that consists of 12 representatives from 
the Security, Administration and Justice, Social Welfare and 
Culture departments.  Cheong Kwoc Va, the Secretary for 
Security, leads the committee and his Head of Office is the 
managing coordinator.  The committee has already begun to 
coordinate and assist the development of measures to prevent 
trafficking and protect victims, as well as to assist victims 
to reintegrate into society or participate in the trials of 
their traffickers.  Concern committee members also met with 
their counterparts in the Hong Kong government and 
Disciplined Services in January, to discuss existing laws and 
measures in Hong Kong to prevent and prosecute cases of human 
trafficking, as well as methods to protect and support 
victims.  Post continues to press the Macau government for 
action, and looks forward to also working with local NGOs and 
activists to combat human trafficking in the coming year. 
End Comment. 
 
Overview of Macau's Activities to Eliminate Trafficking in 
Persons 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. (U) Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for internationally trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for 
each group; how they were trafficked, to where, and for what 
purpose.  Does the trafficking occur within the country's 
borders?  Does it occur in territory outside of the 
government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)?  Are 
any estimates or reliable numbers available as to the extent 
or magnitude of the problem?  What is (are) the source(s) of 
available information on trafficking in persons or what plans 
are in place (if any) to undertake documentation of 
trafficking?  How reliable are the numbers and these sources? 
 Are certain groups of persons more at risk of being 
trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus girls, 
certain ethnic groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau is not a source of trafficked persons, but it 
is a destination and transit point for illegal migration, 
labor and prostitution.  There are no good estimates of how 
many of these illegal migrants, laborers and prostitutes may 
fit the broad definition of "trafficked persons" used for 
this report, but anecdotal evidence suggests the number is 
probably rather small and probably involve mostly women from 
mainland China.  Though Macau's population is approximately 
526,000, according to government statistics, more than 27 
million visitors came to Macau in 2007, mainly to enjoy 
Macau's booming casino and entertainment industry.  Beginning 
in 2007, the MSARG began to provide information on the number 
of trafficking cases in response to our questionnaire in 
advance of our annual report.  Only one non-governmental 
organization (NGO) in Macau, operating on a shoestring 
budget, is actively combating trafficking there alongside the 
government, but local Chinese and English-language press 
regularly report on policy developments or cases possibly 
involving elements of trafficking in Macau. 
 
-- (SBU) Last year, a senior Immigration Department (ID) 
official told us that although the ID, which is subordinate 
to the Public Security Police (PSP), was not directly 
involved in any trafficking investigations, the ID 
investigated 1,800 cases of visa overstays in 2006, which may 
or may not have involved elements of trafficking, and that 
1,600 (89 percent) were PRC citizens.  The non-Chinese cases 
that same year often involved (not in order of frequency): 
Colombians, Uzbeks, Russians, and Mongolians. 
Mongolian-based NGOs cited a particularly high number of 
potential trafficking victims from Mongolia.  Although 
officials in Macau's ID could not confidently attest to the 
extent Mongolians may have been trafficked into or through 
the MSAR, ID officials were looking into the matter. 
 
¶B. (U) Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the country and any changes since the last TIP 
Report (e.g. changes in direction).  (Other items to address 
may include:  What kind of conditions are the victims 
trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted by the 
traffickers?  Who are the traffickers/exploiters?  Are they 
independent business people?  Small or family-based crime 
groups?  Large international organized crime syndicates? 
What methods are used to approach victims? (Are they offered 
lucrative jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends 
of friends, etc.?)  What methods are used to move the victims 
(e.g., are false documents being used?).  Are employment, 
travel, and tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved 
with or fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic 
individuals? 
 
-- (SBU) According to reliable contacts in the Macau 
government, most trafficking victims came from China, Russia 
or other East or Southeast Asian countries, and were 
typically told they were coming to Macau to work as dancers. 
Criminal organizations reportedly provided assistance to some 
of them to travel from their home countries, enter Macau, 
and/or settle in the city.  The government told us that 
Chinese, Russian, and Thai criminal syndicates are involved, 
and usually pass the women to local triad groups once they 
enter Macau.  The terms of repayment for such "employment 
assistance" reportedly can be onerous, often more onerous 
than the women had been led to believe.  Living and working 
conditions were also problematic, according to NGO and press 
reports, and probably involved close monitoring during off 
hours, crowded boarding arrangements, confiscated identity 
documents, long working hours, and threats of violence; 
however, the authorities investigated reports of such 
activities promptly.  Organizers of prostitution rings, 
whether or not involved in trafficked persons, were 
prosecuted under laws that criminalize profiting from the 
proceeds of another person's prostitution.  Prostitution 
itself is not illegal in Macau. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau law enforcement officials, social welfare 
workers and others told us the overwhelming majority of 
foreign prostitutes come to Macau as willing participants in 
the commercial sex trade, and typically know in advance 
specifically what they will be doing and how much they can 
expect to earn.  In a closed meeting, Immigration Department 
officials told us that its Intelligence Department had only 
uncovered a "limited amount" of organized crime involvement 
in prostitution cases; rather, "street-side prostitutes are 
often on their own, and only hotels and nightclubs usually 
have an organized crime element."  The introduction of the 
Individual Visitor Scheme (IVS) in 2003, which allowed 
tourists from certain mainland cities and provinces to enter 
Macau on an individual basis, made it possible for most 
prostitutes to enter Macau on their own, though some still 
seek the help of pimps, either because they are unaware that 
they can obtain visas on their own or because they need 
logistical and financial help with travel and housing.  While 
the IVS has weakened the role of pimps in Macau's sex 
industry, law enforcement officials believe that Chinese, 
Russian and Thai criminal syndicates are still involved in 
bringing prostitutes into Macau.  These officials, as well as 
others we spoke to, while fully aware of Macau's thriving sex 
industry, claimed that women were rarely coerced into coming 
or forced into prostitution once they arrive. 
-- (SBU) The Chi Tang Women's Association (CTWA), an 
organization that represents the concerns of women in Macau, 
advocates for legal and institutional protection of sex 
workers.  CTWA conducted a research survey in October 2006 to 
evaluate conditions in Macau's sex industry.  Although the 
survey sample was small, the findings suggest that more than 
90 percent of Macau's sex workers were self-employed and 
operated independently of control or coercive forces. 
However, 53 percent of the respondents said they were treated 
with violence by customers and/or police, and 98 percent of 
the respondents said they were afraid of calling or reporting 
to the police.  Similarly, 98 percent of respondents said 
they were afraid of being found illegally working in Macau, 
in which case they could not continue to earn money. 
 
-- (SBU) According to the MSARG, nine reports of trafficking 
in persons had been filed in the first half of 2007.  Post 
received reports of six confirmed trafficking cases in Macau 
involving 17 women during the reporting period (compared to 
10 cases involving 17 women, all exploited by the commercial 
sex industry, in 2006).  There was only one well-documented 
case of trafficking in Macau during the previous reporting 
period.  There apparently is no shortage of women wanting to 
work as prostitutes in Macau, and in general there therefore 
is little need to lock them up or use forceful or coercive 
tactics. (see ref B). 
 
¶C. (U) Which government agencies are involved in 
anti-trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
-- (SBU) The Macau government gazetted a directive (Order 
266/2007) in September that established a "concern committee" 
on deterring human trafficking.  The committee, titled the 
"Human Trafficking Deterrent Measures Concern Committee," 
consists of 12 representatives from the Security, 
Administration and Justice, Social Welfare and Culture 
departments.  Cheong Kwoc Va, the Secretary for Security, 
leads the committee and his Head of Office is the managing 
coordinator.  The Chief Executive has directed that all 
government departments should cooperate with the committee's 
activities.  According to the government gazette (similar to 
the U.S. Federal Register), the committee is responsible for: 
(1) studying and assessing TIP-related social problems, and 
(2) suggesting and supervising each department's efforts to 
combat human trafficking.  The committee aims to coordinate 
and assist the development of measures to prevent trafficking 
and protect victims, as well as to assist victims to 
reintegrate into society.  The directive also tasked the 
committee to promote international and regional cooperation 
in the fight against trafficking.  Finally, the directive 
called for a comprehensive review of trafficking-related laws 
in Macau, matching them with international standards. 
 
-- (SBU) The committee has met three times since September, 
and was scheduled to meet again on February 29.  (Note:  Post 
has yet to confirm that the group met and the agenda for the 
meeting.  End Note.)  The committee's initiatives thus far 
included:  formalizing the composition of the committee and 
coordinating measures between the agencies involved; 
overseeing the drafting of a comprehensive new law against 
human trafficking, including measures for the protection of 
victims; establishing a 24-hour hotline dedicated to 
receiving reports of human trafficking; meeting with local 
NGOs to evaluate existing victims' assistance measures; 
discussions with the Government of Mongolia on anti-TIP 
coordination; and, designing and printing anti-trafficking 
materials for a public awareness campaign. 
 
-- (SBU) Concern committee members also met with their 
counterparts in the Hong Kong government and Disciplined 
Services in January, to discuss existing laws and measures in 
Hong Kong to prevent and prosecute cases of human 
trafficking, as well as methods to protect and support 
victims.  The coordinator of the concern committee, Vong 
Chun-fat, met with Hong Kong's Permanent Secretary for 
Security Chang King-yiu, along with representatives from the 
Hong Kong Police Force, Department of Justice, and 
Immigration and Health departments; they agreed to strengthen 
regional cooperation, especially the exchange of 
intelligence, against human trafficking (ref C-D). 
 
¶D. (U) What are the limitations on the government's ability 
to address this problem in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau continues to experience varying degrees of 
"social tension," mainly stemming from a rapidly expanding 
economy following the 2002 internationalization of the 
gambling industry, and which strains almost all aspects of 
life in the MSAR.  Furthermore, the government is struggling 
to maintain an effective civil service as it loses employees 
to better-paid jobs in the entertainment industry/commercial 
sector. 
 
-- (SBU) Overall, corruption is not a problem, though Macau's 
largest ever corruption trial (not related to TIP) concluded 
in late January (ref E). 
 
-- (SBU) Comment:  One of Macau's greatest challenges in 
recent years has been to channel the MSAR's booming economy 
into sustainable social growth.  Throughout the reporting 
period, several MSARG officials welcomed -- and at times 
proactively sought -) assistance from the U.S., the Hong 
Kong Government, and NGOs to combat trafficking.  End comment. 
 
¶E. (U) To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, victim protection, and prevention) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, its 
assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
-- (SBU) Since September 2007, the concern committee has 
acted as the vehicle for systematically coordinating the 
MSARG's anti-trafficking efforts.  In December, after meeting 
with local social welfare groups, the committee reportedly 
pledged to monitor the efficiency of the government 
departments involved in anti-trafficking, protecting victims 
and carrying out the government's social rehabilitation 
scheme.  However, Post is not aware of any comprehensive 
self-evaluation or independent assessment of MSARG activities 
to date. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. (U) Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons--both for sexual and non-sexual 
purposes (e.g. forced labor)?  If so, please specifically 
cite the name of the law and its date of enactment and 
provide the exact language of the law prohibiting TIP and all 
other law(s) used to prosecute TIP cases.  Does the law(s) 
cover both internal and external (transnational) forms of 
trafficking?  If not, under what other laws can traffickers 
be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery 
or the exploitation of prostitution by means of force, fraud 
or coercion?   Are these other laws being used in trafficking 
cases?  Please provide a full inventory of trafficking laws, 
including non-criminal statutes that allow for civil 
penalties against alleged trafficking crimes, (e.g., civil 
forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt). 
 
-- (SBU) In mid-February 2008, Macau authorities, following 
consultation in the Executive Council (Cabinet-equivalent), 
submitted draft legislation to the Legislative Assembly to 
address gaps in the territory's laws related to trafficking. 
The bill provides for a new provision (Provision 153-A) to be 
added to Macau Criminal Law, and includes major reference to 
the types of criminal offenses set forth in the Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United 
Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime and 
in the Council Framework Decision on Combating Trafficking in 
Human Beings.  In other words, new charges are introduced and 
the scope of application on human trafficking offenses is 
expanded so that the acts of human trafficking are not 
limited to those for prostitution, but also include 
activities with the purpose of exploitative labor or 
services, in particular forced or compulsory labor, slavery, 
etc., so as to fulfill the obligations contained in the 
conventions of the International Labor Organization that are 
applicable to Macau (Convention Nos. 29, 105 and 182). 
Likewise, acts of human trafficking with the purpose of 
removing human organs or tissues are also established as 
criminal acts, and heavier punishment is imposed for 
activities that violate the provisions of Macau Law 2/96/M 
(Rules to be Observed in Acts Involving Donation, Removal and 
Transplant of Human Organs and Tissues).  The new law also 
does not distinguish between trafficking into, through, or 
from Macau, thus inclusively criminalizing all directions of 
trafficking that may occur across or within Macau's borders. 
Also, regarding international adoption, a perpetrator's act 
to obtain or give consent to adoption of a minor by means of 
receiving or paying money or other rewards is deemed a 
criminal act. 
 
-- (SBU) The new law also stipulates that, by amending 
Articles 77 and 78 of the Macau Criminal Procedure Code, 
court proceedings related to trafficking crimes must be held 
behind closed doors to protect the identities of victims. 
The draft law, following a unanimous vote among legislators, 
was reportedly referred to a bills committee on February 27 
in Macau's Legislative Assembly for study and debate, and as 
of this report, remained in the legislative process. 
(Comment:  The MSARG may pass the new law prior to the public 
release of our annual report, and Post will promptly report 
any progress.  End Comment.) 
 
-- (SBU) Furthermore, in order to effectively combat human 
trafficking, the bill sets forth a series of rights of the 
victims, including the necessary social and economic aid to 
the victims, and guarantees their access to necessary and 
appropriate legal, psychological, medical, pharmaceutical 
services and accommodation.  In the MSARG's "justification 
letter" to the legislature, it also stated that (as 
translated):  "The Government shall take all necessary 
measures to protect and help the victims of human 
trafficking.  The measures include: establishing a protection 
plan for victims of human trafficking; setting up a place for 
reception of the victims; arousing the public concern about 
problems brought about by human trafficking through publicity 
campaigns and educational work throughout the community; 
publicizing the rights of victims; as well as implementing 
training activities and various research works aimed at 
understanding the phenomena of human trafficking.  In the 
event that the life or physical integrity of the victims, 
their families or witnesses is endangered, the MSARG shall, 
as required by the situation promptly and effectively take 
appropriate measures to ensure these persons have access to 
protection and assistance." 
 
-- (SBU) As previously reported, Article 7 of the Law on 
Organized Crime covers the rare occasion when a person is 
trafficked out of Macau, but does not apply to victims 
exploited in Macau.  The penalty for trafficking in persons 
under this law is two to eight years imprisonment.  This 
increases by one-third, within minimum and maximum limits, if 
the victim is less than 18 years of age.  If the victim is 
under 14 years of age, the penalty is five to fifteen years 
imprisonment.  (Note:  Article 7 of the Law on Organized 
Crime, Law No. 6/97/M, will be annulled when the new anti-TIP 
law takes effect.  End Note.) 
 
¶B. (U) What are the prescribed penalties for trafficking 
people for sexual exploitation?  What penalties were imposed 
for persons convicted of sexual exploitation over the 
reporting period?  Please note the number of convicted sex 
traffickers who received suspended sentences and the number 
who received only a fine as punishment. 
 
-- (SBU) Since most trafficking cases involve prostitution, 
by far the most common, and easiest, method of prosecuting 
such cases has been under Macau's "procurement" laws. 
Although prostitution is legal, the exploitation of 
prostitution is illegal and is punishable under various 
autonomous statutes.  For example, "procurement," defined as 
"instigating, favoring or facilitating the practice of 
prostitution by another person or exploiting their state of 
abandonment or necessity for the purposes of profit or as a 
way of life," is punishable by one to five years imprisonment 
under Article 163 of the Criminal Code of Macau. 
Additionally, aggravated procurement, defined as "the use of 
violence, serious threats, or deception, or exploiting the 
mental incapacity of a victim," is a separate crime 
punishable by two to eight years imprisonment under Article 
164 of the Criminal Code of Macau.  Macau courts did not 
convict any sex traffickers during the reporting period. 
 
¶C. (U) Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are 
the prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for 
labor exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor and 
involuntary servitude?  Do the government's laws provide for 
criminal punishment -- i.e. jail time -- for labor recruiters 
in labor source countries who engage in recruitment of 
laborers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers that 
result in workers being trafficked in the destination 
country?  Are there laws in destination countries punishing 
employers or labor agents in labor destination countries who 
confiscate workers' passports or travel documents, switch 
contracts without the worker's consent as a means to keep the 
worker in a state of service, or withhold payment of salaries 
as means of keeping the worker in a state of service?  If 
law(s) prescribe criminal punishments for these offenses, 
what are the actual punishments imposed on persons convicted 
of these offenses?  Please note the number of convicted labor 
traffickers who received suspended sentences andthe number 
who received only a fine as punishmen. 
 
-- (SBU) Crimes against personal freedom, mostnotably 
slavery, are prosecuted under Article 15 of the Crminal 
Code of Macau.  This law makes llegal the sale, transfer or 
purchase of a perso made with the intention to reduce that 
person t the status or condition of slave.  Notably, thislaw has also been interpreted to include economic and sexual 
exploitation, which is punishable by 10 to 20 years 
imprisonment.  Prosecutions under this law are rare.  Macau 
courts did not convict any labor traffickers during the 
reporting period. 
 
¶D. (U) What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible 
sexual assault?  How do they compare to the prescribed 
penalties for crimes of trafficking for commercial sexual 
exploitation? 
 
-- (SBU) Some trafficking cases can be prosecuted under 
Macau's kidnapping and rape laws.  Kidnapping with the intent 
to commit a crime against sexual liberty or 
self-determination is punishable by three to ten years 
imprisonment under Article 154(1)(b) of the Criminal Code of 
Macau.  Cases where the kidnapper rapes a victim are treated 
as two different crimes, though the sentences can in some 
cases be served concurrently.  The penalty for rape is three 
to twelve years imprisonment.  (Comment:  Criminal penalties 
for trafficking under the draft law described above closely 
approximate the penalties for rape.  End Comment.)  The 
Criminal Code forbids the death penalty and life 
imprisonment.  The maximum term of imprisonment is thirty 
years in total. 
 
¶E. (U) Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? 
Are these laws enforced?  IQrostitution is legal and 
regulated, what is the legal minimum age for this activity? 
Note that in many countries with federalist systems, 
prostitution laws may be under state or local jurisdiction 
and may differ among jurisdictions. 
 
-- (SBU) There were no changes to the laws relating to 
prostitution in Macau during the reporting period. 
Prostitution is not illegal in Macau, though a number of 
activities associated with prostitution, including "pimping," 
are illegal.  Advertisements for sexual services can be found 
in regional newspapers and magazines, and are posted on ferry 
terminal walls.  There are no reliable data on the number of 
prostitutes working in Macau, but most come from mainland 
China, Russia, Eastern Europe, Thailand, and Vietnam.  Most 
prostitutes are from rural areas, are typically older than 18 
years old, and are usually poorly educated, though not 
illiterate.  They tend to be very mobile, usually staying in 
Macau for about one month before moving to Hong Kong or to 
other countries, usually at the expiration of their tourist 
visas.  Most work in hotels, casinos, or saunas and massage 
parlors.  Contacts in the Thai Consulate in Hong Kong told us 
prostitution in the casinos is normally limited to PRC 
nationals and is controlled by ethinically Chinese organized 
crime rings. 
 
-- (SBU) In July 2007, the government announced plans to 
increase pressure on illegal brothels operating in Macau. 
Following a written interpellation by local lawmakers, 
Secretary for Administration and Justice Florinda Chan said 
 
SIPDIS 
the government carried out 46 joint operations against such 
establishments in the first quarter of the year.  Apartments 
that were suspected of being "illegal inns"--a term used by 
authorities to identify a place where prostitutes could be 
held against their will to engage in prostitution--were 
reported to the Land, Public Works and Transport Bureau, 
which in turn verifies the status of the premises. 
 
¶F. (U) Has the government prosecuted any cases against human 
trafficking offenders?  If so, provide numbers of 
investigations, prosecutions, convictions, and sentences 
served, including details on plea bargains and fines, if 
relevant and available.  Please indicate which laws were used 
to investigate, prosecute, convict, and sentence traffickers. 
 Also, if possible, please disaggregate by type of TIP (labor 
vs. commercial sexual exploitation) and victims (children, as 
defined by U.S. and international law as under 18 years of 
age, vs. adults).  Does the government in a labor source 
country criminally prosecute labor recruiters who recruit 
laborers using knowingly fraudulent or deeptive offers or 
impose on recruited laborers inppropriately high or illegal 
fees or commissions that create a debt bondage condition for 
the labore?  Does the government in a labor destination 
contry criminally prosecute employers or labor agents who 
confiscate workers' passports/travel documents, switch 
contracts or terms of employment without the worker's 
consent, use physical or sexual abuse or the threat of such 
abuse to keep workers in a state of service, or withhold 
payment of salaries as a means to keep workers in a state of 
service?  Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced?  If 
not, why not?  Please indicate whether the government can 
provide this information, and if not, why not? 
 
-- (SBU) The MSARG told us that nine reports of sex 
trafficking, and no reports of labor trafficking, had been 
filed in the first half of 2007.  Post received reports of 
five confirmed sex trafficking cases in Macau involving 14 
women during the reporting period (compared to 10 cases 
involving 17 women, all exploited by the commercial sex 
industry, in 2006).  Additionally, one case of labor 
trafficking was reported in July, involving three 14-year-old 
girls employed in a massage parlor.  (Comment:  There was no 
evidence that the underaged girls in the massage parlor, 
among 52 mainland women who worked there, engaged in 
prostitution.  End Comment.)  The owners of the establishment 
were charged with employing illegal laborers, and the victims 
were handed over to mainland authorities. 
 
-- (SBU) The Public Prosecutions Office prosecuted its first 
case of international human trafficking, under Article 7 of 
the Law on Organized Crime, in January 2008.  The case was 
passed to the court and the suspect is awaiting trial (ref C). 
 
¶G. (U) Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in how to recognize, investigate, 
and prosecute instances of trafficking?  Specify whether 
NGOs, international organizations, and/or the USG provide 
specialized training for host government officials. 
 
-- (SBU) As reported last year, one corporate security 
official told us the MSARG/police were generally in need of 
training.  Furthermore, a senior Macau police official 
expressed his hope that Macau could work with the USG to 
"expand our exchange and training efforts" related to 
trafficking.  (Note: See the section below on MIGRAMACAU 
described in Protection.  End note.)  Members of the concern 
committee, when they met with their counterparts in Hong 
Kong, discussed Hong Kong Disciplined Services' enforcement 
measures, including entry-exit administration and protection 
and support to victims.  Post is not aware of any efforts 
made by the authorities in Macau to enhance their ability to 
prosecute trafficking crimes. 
 
¶H. (U) Does the government cooperate with other governments 
in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? 
If possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations on trafficking during the 
reporting period? 
 
-- (SBU) MSARG officials reportedly met with officials from 
the Government of Mongolia's (GoM) Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Mongolia-based NGOs in June 2007 to discuss ways 
to prevent trafficking in persons from Mongolia into Macau, 
based on unsubstantiated reports that as many as 300 
Mongolian sex-workers were operating in, or possibly had been 
trafficked into, Macau, as of early 2007.  The GoM reportedly 
also met with MSARG officials to discuss the establishment of 
a Mongolian Consulate in Macau that, among other things, 
would facilitate anti-trafficking measures. 
 
-- (SBU) Several police and Immigration Department officials 
have described the "good relations" between Macau, Guangdong, 
and Hong Kong authorities in dealing with trafficking cases, 
as well as the MSAR authorities' success in working with 
INTERPOL.  Post, however, is not aware of the number of 
cooperative investigations during the reporting period. 
 
-- (SBU) In addition to the joint Macau-Hong Kong efforts 
noted above, authorities in both jurisdictions have agreed to 
work together to strengthen regional and international 
cooperation against trafficking, especially including the 
exchange of criminal intelligence related to human 
trafficking networks. 
 
¶I. (U) Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post provide 
the number of traffickers extradited during the reporting 
period?  Does the government extradite its own nationals 
charged with such offenses?   If not, is the government 
prohibited by law from extraditing its own nationals?  If so, 
what is the government doing to modify its laws to permit the 
extradition of its own nationals? 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of any cases during the reporting 
period in which Macau extradited an alleged trafficker. 
However, Macau is committed to pursuing international 
cooperation in law enforcement and has been expanding its 
network of bilateral agreements on legal cooperation in 
criminal matters with other jurisdictions.  Domestic 
legislation for the implementation of these agreements is in 
place. 
 
¶J. (U) Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
-- (SBU) There is no confirmed evidence of government 
involvement in trafficking at any level.  In October, a 
police officer was reportedly arrested after he blackmailed 
two prostitutes for "protection" fees.  The case was 
delivered to the Public Prosecutions Office, but Post has not 
yet received any information on the status of the 
investigation or trial. 
 
¶K. (U) If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such 
participation?  Please indicate the number of government 
officials investigated and prosecuted for involvement in 
trafficking or trafficking-related corruption during the 
reporting period.  Have any been convicted?  What sentence(s) 
was imposed?  Please specify if officials received suspended 
sentences, were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to another 
position within the government as punishment.  Please provide 
specific numbers, if available.  Please indicate the number 
of convicted officials that received suspended sentences or 
received only a fine as punishment. 
 
-- (SBU) Aside from the case mentioned immediately above, 
there was no confirmed reports of Government officials that 
facilitated, condoned, or were otherwise complicit in 
trafficking activities.  Anti-bribery and anti-corruption 
laws are also strictly enforced. 
 
¶L. (U) As part of the new requirements of the 2005 TVPRA, for 
countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a 
peacekeeping or other similar mission who engage in or 
facilitate severe forms of trafficking or who exploit victims 
of such trafficking. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau did not contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts during the reporting period. 
 
¶M. (U) If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or deported/ed to 
their country of origin?  What are the countries of origin 
for sex tourists?  Do the country's child sexual abuse laws 
have extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT 
Act)?  If so, how many of the country's nationals have been 
prosecuted and/or convicted under the extraterritorial 
provision(s) for traveling to other countries to engage in 
child sex tourism? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau did not have an identified child sex tourism 
problem and did not have any cases of child sex tourism 
during the reporting period. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶A. (U) Does the government assist foreign trafficking 
victims, for example, by providing temporary to permanent 
residency status, or other relief from deportation?  If so, 
please explain. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau continued to lack sufficient institutionalized 
protections for victims of trafficking, though the new draft 
legislation addresses this.  As reported last year, Macau's 
Social Welfare Institute offers interview, identification, 
and counseling services, as well as shelter, for possible 
victims of forced/coerced sexual servitude. 
 
-- (SBU) The Macau government provides assistance to victims 
of violent crimes, including trafficking victims, as provided 
for in Law 6/98/M, and the government told us that the 
concern committee was considering new forms of assistance to 
victims, though they did not provide further details on the 
types or extent to which assistance would be granted.  The 
government also provides repatriation funds to those who wish 
to return to their home countries but cannot afford tickets, 
including those who claim to be victims of abuse or 
trafficking.  In addition, the draft anti-human trafficking 
legislation in Macau is poised to specify the rights and 
safeguards of, and aids to, all victims of human trafficking, 
including free legal aid, police protection and privacy 
protection for minors involved in trafficking cases. 
Specifically, the draft bill states that victims have the 
following rights (pertaining to foreign victims, in addition 
to others listed in the question immediately following): 
     (1) To immediately notify embassies, consulates or 
official representatives of the countries or regions of 
origin of the victims; 
     (2) To gain appropriate protection (including a variety 
of police protection measures); 
     (3) To stay in Macau during the period when measures 
related to the criminal case in which they are victims are 
implemented; 
     (4) To gain legal protection, including legal counsel 
and assistance; 
     (5) To gain appropriate interpreters or assistance from 
interpreters throughout the prosecution process if the 
victim(s) do not understand or are unfamiliar with any formal 
language in the Macau SAR; 
     (6) If the victim lacks the economic or social means, 
the Social Welfare Institute will provide the social aids 
necessary for returning to the countries or regions to which 
the victims belong 
     (7) To become auxiliaries and/or parties involved in 
criminal cases; and 
     (8) When the safety or physical completeness of victims, 
their family members or witnesses are endangered, the 
judicial and criminal police authorities, as well as related 
public departments -- as necessary under the circumstances -- 
instantly and effectively should take all appropriate 
measures to ensure that victims are protected and assisted; 
if these victims are not Macau residents, the necessary 
cooperative mechanism should be initiated so that the 
countries or regions these victims belong to can provide 
corresponding protection and assistance. 
 
¶B. (U) Does the country have victim care facilities which are 
accessible to trafficking victims?  Do foreign victims have 
the same access to care as domestic trafficking victims? 
Does the country have specialized facilities dedicated to 
helping victims of trafficking?  If so, can post provide the 
number of victims placed in these care facilities during the 
reporting period?  What is the funding source of these 
facilities?  Please estimate the amount the government spent 
(in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these specialized facilities 
dedicated to helping trafficking victims during the reporting 
period.  Does the government provide trafficking victims with 
access to legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, 
please specify the kind of assistance provided, and the 
number of victims assisted, if available. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau continued to lack adequate protections for 
victims of trafficking in practice, and did not offer a 
dedicated shelter for the protection and support of victims. 
As noted above, Macau's Social Welfare Institute offers 
interview, identification, and counseling services, as well 
as shelter, for possible victims of forced/coerced sexual 
servitude. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau's new legislation, in addition to those 
protections listed above, includes comprehensive protections 
for victims (listed below), and states in general that "the 
government is duty bound to take all necessary measures for 
safeguarding and aiding victims of human trafficking." 
     (1) Create a confidential plan for the free protection 
of victims to ensure that victims have an appopriate place to 
live on an interim basis and to guarantee that the victims 
are safe and have access to necessary and appropriate 
psychological, medical, social, economic and legal assistance; 
     (2) Assign places to receive victims (including 
providing for the free flow of information related to 
victims' rights); 
     (3) Sign cooperation agreements with public or private 
entities that help or house victims; and 
     (4) When the safety or physical completeness of victims, 
their family members or witnesses are endangered, the 
judicial and criminal police authorities, as well as related 
public departments -- as necessary under the circumstances -- 
instantly and effectively should take all appropriate 
measures to ensure that victims are protected and assisted; 
if these victims are not Macau residents, the necessary 
cooperative mechanism should be initiated so that the 
countries or regions these victims belong to can provide 
corresponding protection and assistance. 
 
¶C. (U) Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs and/or international 
organizations for services to trafficking victims?  Please 
explain and provide any funding amounts in U.S. dollar 
equivalent.  If assistance provided is in-kind, please 
specify exact assistance.  Please explain if funding for 
assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional or 
local governments. 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of efforts on the part of the 
Macau Government to provide funding to NGOs for services to 
victims.  The authorities did, however, provide contact 
information directly to at least one women's shelter in Macau 
in the event that a trafficking victim arrived there. 
 
¶D. (U) Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and 
social services personnel have a formal system of proactively 
identifying victims of trafficking among high-risk persons 
with whom they come in contact (e.g., foreign persons 
arrested for prostitution or immigration violations)?   What 
is the number of victims identified during the reporting 
period?  Has the government developed and implemented a 
referral process to transfer victims detained, arrested or 
placed in protective custody by law enforcement authorities 
to institutions that provide short- or long-term care?  How 
many victims were referred for assistance by law enforcement 
authorities during the reporting period? 
 
-- (SBU) As described in last year's report, according to the 
Macau Government's International Law Office, the Government's 
typical response to a trafficking complaint is: 1) police 
investigate and the victim is sent to a shelter; 2) a 
Government prosecutor investigates and, depending on what is 
found, a court case may be filed; or 3) the victim is offered 
assistance to return to her home country at the expense of 
the Macau government.  Officials noted that this last step 
often makes the case more difficult to prosecute if the 
victim does not return for the trial, but the Macau 
government provides this assistance for the physical and 
emotional protection of the victim.  Officials also noted 
that, after repatriation, some prostitutes returned to Macau 
and engaged in prostitution again.  The official said that 
most prostitutes working in Macau were "professionals" who 
knew the trafficking laws and also knew that the Government 
would buy them a ticket home if they claimed they were forced 
into prostitution.  The official also claimed that many such 
"victims" would return to Macau a few months later. 
 
¶E. (U) For countries with legalized prostitution:  does the 
government have a mechanism for screening for trafficking 
victims among persons involved in the legal/regulated 
commercial sex trade? 
 
-- (SBU) The authorities in Macau have begun to use 
aggressive law enforcement actions -- including regular 
anti-vice raids and prompt law enforcement measures following 
reports of organized prostitution -- to screen trafficking 
victims out of the substantial commercial sex trade there. 
As noted above, in July 2007, the government announced plans 
to increase pressure on illegal brothels operating in Macau. 
Following a written interpellation by local lawmakers, 
Secretary for Administration and Justice Florinda Chan said 
 
SIPDIS 
the government carried out 46 joint operations against such 
establishments in the first quarter of the year.  Apartments 
that were suspected of being "illegal inns"--a term used by 
authorities to identify places where prostitutes could be 
held against their will to engage in prostitution--were 
reported to the Land, Public Works and Transport Bureau, 
which in turn verifies the status of the premises. 
 
¶F. (U) Are the rights of victims respected?  Are trafficking 
victims detained or jailed?   If detained or jailed, for how 
long?  Are victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for 
violations of other laws, such as those governing immigration 
or prostitution? 
 
-- (SBU) Government programs, as well as charitable 
organizations, provide assistance and shelter to women and 
children who have been the victims of abuse, including 
trafficking.  A representative from one NGO repeatedly told 
us that throughout the year, in those cases where trafficking 
victims sought help from the police, the police--especially 
the Judicial Police--did "a good job" of dealing with the 
problem; however, the CTWA survey published in October 2006 
suggests that many prostitutes fear interaction with police. 
We have not seen any reports of victims being fined, jailed 
or deported solely for being a victim of trafficking, 
although related crimes have, at times, been cause for 
detention and/or prosecution. 
 
¶G. (U) Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many 
victims assisted in the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers during the reporting period?  May victims file 
civil suits or seek legal action against traffickers?  Does 
anyone impede victim access to such legal redress?  If a 
victim is a material witness in a court case against a former 
employer, is the victim permitted to obtain other employment 
or to leave the country pending trial proceedings?  Are there 
means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
-- (SBU) Post is not aware of any cases whereby the 
government encouraged victims to assist in the investigation 
and prosecution of trafficking, but we are similarly unaware 
of cases where victims were impeded or denied access to legal 
redress. 
 
¶H. (U) What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the government provide?  Are these services provided 
directly by the government or are they provided by NGOs or 
IOs funded by host government grants?  Does the government 
provide shelter or housing benefits to victims or other 
resources to aid the victims in rebuilding their lives? 
Where are child victims placed (e.g., in shelters, foster 
care, or juvenile justice detention centers)?  What is the 
number of victims assisted by government-funded assistance 
programs during the reporting period?  What is the number of 
victims assisted by non government-funded assistance 
programs?  What is the number of victims that received 
shelter services during the reporting period? 
 
-- (SBU) Please refer to paras A-C above. 
 
¶I. (U) Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in identifying trafficking victims 
and in the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, 
including the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?  Does it urge those 
embassies and consulates to develop ongoing relationships 
with NGOs and IOs that serve trafficked victims?  What is the 
number of trafficking victims assisted by the host country's 
embassies or consulates abroad during the reporting period? 
Please explain the level of assistance.  For example, did the 
host government provide travel documents for the victim to 
repatriate, did the host government contact NGOs in either 
the source or destination countries to ensure the victim 
received adequate assistance, did the host government pay for 
the transportation home for a victim's repatriation, etc. 
 
-- (SBU) As noted in last year's report, the MIGRAMACAU 
program, which included training courses and seminars for 
various social welfare and law enforcement officials (reftel 
B), formed the bulk of specialized anti-trafficking training 
in Macau.  Macau does not have diplomatic missions abroad. 
 
¶J. (U) Does the government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who 
are repatriated as victims of trafficking? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau is not a country of origin for internationally 
trafficked men, women, or children. 
 
¶K. (U) Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims?  What type of services do they 
provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities?  How much funding (in U.S. Dollar Equivalent) 
did NGOs and international organizations receive from the 
host government for victim assistance during the reporting 
period?  Please disaggregate funding for prevention and 
public awareness efforts from victim assistance funding. 
NOTE:  If post reports that a government is incapable of 
providing direct assistance to TIP victims, please assess 
whether the government ensures that TIP victims receive 
access to adequate care from other entities.  Funding, 
personnel, and training constraints should be noted, if 
applicable.  Conversely, the lack of political will in a 
situation where a country has adequate financial and other 
resources to address the problem should be noted as well. 
 
-- (SBU) The Good Shepherd Sisters' Shelter in Macau has 
embraced efforts to combat trafficking in Macau, but lacks 
the facilities and staff necessary to assist with any serious 
cases of international human trafficking.  In December 2007, 
the concern committee met with representatives from the 
General Union of the Inhabitants Associations of Macau 
(UGAMM), the Federation of the Womens' Associations of Macau, 
and Macau Caritas, all of whom pledged to give their support 
to the committee's work, and increase cooperation and 
communication with the committee. 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
 
¶A. (U) Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
-- (SBU) Yes, the Macau government acknowledges that 
trafficking is a problem there.  The Consul General regularly 
met with Macau Government Chief Executive Edmund Ho, and 
G/TIP visitors and Consulate officers met with various Macau 
officials, including the chief executive.  In those contacts, 
we consistently heard that, despite an admitted hesitation to 
tackle the problem in years past, the Macau government now is 
committed to and aggressively addressing the problem (reftels 
F-G). 
 
¶B. (U) Are there, or have there been, government-run 
anti-trafficking information or education campaigns conducted 
during the reporting period?  If so, briefly describe the 
campaign(s), including their objectives and effectiveness. 
Please provide the number of people reached by such awareness 
efforts if available.  Do these campaigns target potential 
trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking (e.g. 
"clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
 
-- (SBU) The concern committee, in an effort to enhance 
educational campaigns and to increase public awareness of 
trafficking, published brochures and other materials that 
were displayed at border checkpoints and hospitals.  The 
brochures, copies of which Post has seen at the Macau Ferry 
Terminal, a major thoroughfare for visitors from the mainland 
and Hong Kong, are entitled "Stop Human Trafficking" and 
include language (in Chinese, Portuguese and English) stating 
that: "Human trafficking is modern-day slavery...(and) is one 
of the most serious crimes in the world."  The brochure also 
advertises the recently established hotline (tel. 
853-2888-9911), dedicated to taking reports of human 
trafficking in Macau.  (Note:  A scanned copy of this 
brochure will be emailed to G/TIP, EAP/CM and EAP/RSP.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶C. (U) What is the relationship between government officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements of 
civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
-- (SBU) Coordination between the MSARG and NGOs, including 
provision of social welfare services related to trafficking, 
is not well-developed, principally because of a lack of 
helping agencies engaged in the trafficking issue, but it did 
occur.  As noted above, in December 2007, the concern 
committee met with representatives from the General Union of 
the Inhabitants Associations of Macau (UGAMM), the Federation 
of the Womens' Associations of Macau, and Macau Caritas, all 
of whom pledged to give their support to the committee's 
work, and increase cooperation and communication with the 
committee. 
 
¶D. (U) Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement 
agencies screen for potential trafficking victims along 
borders? 
 
-- (SBU) Macau has effective immigration controls, but its 
long border with Mainland China makes illegal immigration a 
continuing problem.  Macau has land border control points 
with the PRC and an international airport with regional 
flights to China, Bangkok, Manila, Singapore, Taipei and 
Moscow.  Ferries land regularly from Hong Kong, Zhuhai, and 
Shenzhen.  It is a common practice for prostitutes to go back 
and forth across the Chinese border, and probably between 
Hong Kong and Macau, when their visas expire in order to get 
new visas and continue to work.  Macau immigration 
authorities try to control such activity, and often refuse to 
issue new visas if they suspect abuse.  However, the 
increasing volume of visitors attracted by Macau's booming 
casino industry makes it easier for people to enter 
illegally, or for illicit purposes. 
 
-- (SBU) Macau allows visa-free access for nationals of many 
countries to facilitate tourism.  For citizens of 
non-visa-free countries, including Russia, visas can be 
obtained on arrival.  Immigration officers do not admit 
people they believe are entering for illegal employment, but 
they do not routinely refuse entry by targeting certain 
groups of travelers from specific countries.  Macau officials 
have made efforts to work with other governments, 
particularly the PRC central government, to develop a list of 
those known to be practicing prostitution, making it more 
difficult for those persons to get passports and exit permits 
from their home governments and visas for Macau. 
 
¶E. (U) Is there a mechanism for coordination and 
communication between various agencies, internal, 
international, and multilateral on trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi-agency working group or a task 
force?  Does the government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the 
government have a public corruption task force? 
 
-- (SBU) As noted above, the concern committee on deterring 
human trafficking, established in September 2007, consists of 
12 representatives from the Security, Administration and 
Justice, and Social Affairs and Culture departments.  Cheong 
Kwoc Va, the Secretary for Security, leads the committee and 
his Head of Office is the managing coordinator.  Chief 
Executive Edmund Ho has directed that all government 
departments should cooperate with the committee's activities. 
 According to the government gazette (similar to the U.S. 
Federal Register), the committee is responsible for: (1) 
studying and assessing TIP-related social problems; and (2) 
advising and supervising each department's efforts to combat 
human trafficking.  The committee aims to coordinate and 
assist the development of measures to prevent trafficking and 
protect victims, as well as to assist victim reintegration 
into society.  The directive also tasked the committee to 
promote international and regional cooperation in the fight 
against trafficking.  Finally, the directive called for a 
comprehensive review of trafficking-related laws in Macau, 
matching them with international standards.  (Note:  See 
response above related to cooperation between Macau and Hong 
Kong authorities to combat human trafficking.  End Note.) 
 
-- (SBU) The Commission Against Corruption (CCAC) in Macau, 
modeled after Hong Kong's Independent Commission Against 
Corruption (ICAC), was re-established under Article 59 of 
Macau's Basic Law at the 1999 handover from Portugal to the 
PRC (ref H).  According to its website 
(http://www.ccac.org.mo/en/), the CCAC is "an organization 
dedicated to combating corruption and handling administrative 
redress."  The CCAC is comprised of two functional bureaus: 
(1) the Anti-Corruption Bureau, and (2) the Ombudsman Bureau. 
 Macau Law No. 10/2000 further details the powers and 
organization of the CCAC. 
 
¶F. (U) Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were 
involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the 
process?  What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
-- (SBU) The government has not yet published a plan of 
action for the special administrative region to address 
trafficking in persons.  (Comment:  The concern committee has 
thus far actively coordinated anti-TIP measures across the 
MSARG, and in effect, Macau's draft law represents the 
beginning of a broader plan of action to combat human 
trafficking there.  Post will continue to track Macau's 
development of a comprehensive anti-TIP plan.  End Comment.) 
 
G: (U) 
For all posts:  As part of the new criteria added to the 
TVPA's minimum standards by the 2005 TVPRA, what measures has 
the government taken during the reporting period to reduce 
the demand for commercial sex acts? 
 
-- (SBU) As noted above, the government took steps to improve 
public awareness about trafficking in persons, and 
aggressively investigated reports of organized prostitution 
in an effort to proactively screen, identify and protect 
victims of trafficking. 
 
¶H. (U) Required of Posts in EU countries and posts in Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, China, Singapore, South Korea, 
Taiwan, and Hong Kong:  As part of the new criteria added to 
the TVPA's minimum standards by the 2005 TVPRA, what measures 
has the government taken during the reporting period to 
reduce the participation in international child sex tourism 
by nationals of the country? 
 
-- (SBU) The government did not make any discernable effort 
to reduce participation of Macau citizens in international 
child sex tourism. 
 
¶5. (U) Post point of contact is poloff Matthew Tyson, tel. 
(852)2841-2139, fax (852)2526-7382; unclass email: 
tysonmr@state.gov. 
 
¶6. (U) Hours required to prepare the report: 
FS4 - 180 
FS2 - 35 
FS1 - 45 
Cunningham