09AITTAIPEI379
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0379 0910934
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010934Z APR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1271
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9077
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0516UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000379 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused April 1 
news coverage on the new benefits for Taiwan's workers that the 
Legislative Yuan approved Tuesday; on the year-end mayoral and 
county magistrate elections; and on clashes occurred when a former 
Toronto-based Government Information Office official, who was fired 
for his allegedly anti-Taiwan writings,  returned to Taiwan Tuesday. 
 In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" discussed the thirty-year-old 
Taiwan Relations Act and China's challenges to the United States. 
The article called on the Obama Administration to do an overall 
examination of the United States' cross-Strait policy and stop China 
from becoming a threat to universal values.  End summary. 
 
"China Challenging the United States; Remembering [Former U.S. 
President Ronald] Reagan's Six Assurances [to Taiwan]" 
 
Political Commentator Paul Lin wrote in his column in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 700,000] (4/1): 
 
"... When discussing the Taiwan Relations Act, one must not overlook 
the 'Six Assurances' [former U.S.] President Ronald Reagan made to 
Taiwan [in 1982] with regard to [U.S.] policy toward the 
cross-Strait situation -- Namely, [the United States] would not be a 
mediator; would not exert pressure [on Taiwan] to talk [with China]; 
would not set a date for ending arms sales to Taiwan; would not hold 
consultations with Beijing regarding arms sales to Taiwan; would not 
revise the Taiwan Relations Act; and would not alter U.S. 
recognition of Taiwan's sovereignty.  Reagan was one of the greatest 
U.S. presidents, so the Six Assurances should serve as a constant 
reminder for presidents after him.  Anyone who deviates from the Six 
Assurances will not only bring disaster to Taiwan but also to the 
United States and the world. 
 
"But, unfortunately, we also saw that since the Reagan 
Administration, the United States has made so many concessions to 
Chinese hegemony that it has allowed an enemy to grow strong, thus 
creating the situation today.  Whatever concessions one makes to 
China weaken support for Taiwan's democracy.  No matter how 
inappropriate Taiwan's U.S. policy is, Taiwan is, after all, a 
democratic country; and no matter how hard China has tried to curry 
favor with the United States, China remains a one-party 
dictatorship.  Without such fundamental knowledge, any policy 
[making] will go awry. 
 
"Yet another misfortune is that, when it comes to U.S. policy, the 
State Department and the Pentagon share different views. ...  Let's 
just take a look at the financial tsunami sweeping the world now. 
Does China really draw a clear line between military, economics and 
politics when it comes to its attitude toward the United States? 
[No -- what China is conducting] is an all-out attack. ... 
 
"In the face of China's challenges, the United States should assist 
Taiwan in safeguarding the first island chain, rather than 
supporting Ma Ying-jeou's move to use 'peace' to giftwrap [the 
intention of] surrender, thus encouraging ... that Taiwan be handed 
over to the [Chinese] Communist Party and in the meantime burying 
Japan.  If cross-Strait peace were viewed as the highest value, the 
United States should have given up its support for Taiwan in the 
50s.  What need is there to let the Taiwan people enjoy [the 
sweetness of their] democracy for just a short while, then [make 
them] face the pain of losing it?  Is it possible that the United 
States will not come forward and say anything until Taiwan sinks to 
the circumstances of genocide like Tibet?  The Obama Administration, 
which is reviewing the United States' global strategy now, should do 
an overall examination of the U.S.'s cross-Strait policy in the 
retrospect to the Reagan Administration and stop authoritarian China 
from becoming a threat to universal values." 
 
YOUNG