09AITTAIPEI585
MEDIA REACTION: THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
Fri May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0585 1350913
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150913Z MAY 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1582
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9183
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0615UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000585 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused May 15 
news coverage on Nobel Laureate Economist Paul Krugman's speech in 
Taiwan Thursday; on President Ma Ying-jeou's signing of the two 
United Nations human rights covenants; and on the DPP's planned mass 
demonstration on May 17 against the Ma administration's first year 
in office.  With respect to editorials and commentaries, a column in 
the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed the recent 
election of the United States to the United Nations Human Rights 
Council.  The column said most UN member nations hope to work with 
the Obama administration, which differs from the former Bush 
administration on human rights issues, to solve global problems.  An 
editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" commented on President Barack Obama's first one hundred 
days in office.  The editorial said judging from several recent 
polls in the United States, Obama showed his leadership by 
successfully rebuilding American people's confidence that the 
situation will get better tomorrow, even though many tasks remain to 
be fulfilled.  End summary. 
 
A) "The United Nations' Expectations for the Obama Administration" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 130,000] wrote (5/15): 
 
"The United States was elected to the UN Human Rights Council with a 
total of 167 votes.  The move symbolized that the Obama 
administration is indeed different from the Bush Administration in 
terms of human rights issues. ...  The reason [behind the U.S. 
seeking a seat on the council] was simple -- namely, the United 
States cannot step aside from the Council, or it will indicate that 
there is a gap between the United States' human rights criteria and 
that of most UN members.  How can one act alone to safeguard human 
rights?  But the Bush administration was like that, arrogantly 
distancing itself from the group.  The United States will be in no 
position to criticize the UN Human Rights report in the future. 
 
"The Obama administration evidently has new considerations in terms 
of [the priority of] its interests; it understands that while 
criticizing other countries' human rights, Washington should also 
examine itself -- as in the cases of closing down the Guantanamo Bay 
prison and banning the interrogation tactics that have violated 
international laws.  The United States' foreign policy also shows a 
tendency to work with international mechanisms. ...  The United 
States won 167 out of the 191 votes at the UN General Assembly (same 
votes as those for China).  The reason why it could win so many 
votes was because the UN member nations have expectations for the 
Obama Administration.  They hope that the United States can work 
with the UN to resolve global problems and not just do things alone 
simply based on its likes and dislikes. ..." 
 
B) "The Obama Way" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (5/15): 
 
"... Opinion polls show that Obama has achieved some success in 
rebuilding America's confidence. ...  Whether many of Obama's 
policies should be considered pragmatic or inconsistent or weak 
remains controversial.  No where is this issue more conspicuous than 
his foreign affairs ventures where an 'Obama style,' different from 
those of past American president, has emerged.  This 'Obama 
doctrine' is marked by flexibility and modesty. ... 
 
"The most critical element of skillful leadership is to evoke 
people's confidence.  Although such a trust is usually built on the 
leader's success in solving certain urgent problems at hand, more 
importantly, it is concerned about a vision for the future.  Right 
now, Obama's refreshing change has inspired so much confidence in 
the American people that they are willing to give him more chances 
because they share the president's conviction that tomorrow under 
his leadership will definitely be better.  Americans realize and 
agree they need patience." 
 
YOUNG