09AITTAIPEI1411
MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1411 3351034
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011034Z DEC 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2837
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9551
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0944UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage December 1 on the city mayors' and county magistrates' 
elections around the island, which are scheduled to be held on 
December 5.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial 
in the conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
discussed U.S. President Barack Obama's plan to wind down operations 
in Iraq while possibly boosting troop levels in Afghanistan.  The 
article concluded by urging "every nation in the world to get in on 
this fight" in Afghanistan by sending troops, contributing money or 
providing other assistance.  End summary. 
 
"Afghanistan, Terrorism Is Everybody's Problem" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (12/1): 
 
"The United States has been criticized over the years for acting as 
if it were the world's policeman.  The U.S. has had a mixed 
experience with nation-building or rebuilding. ...  Today, U.S. 
President Barack Obama is winding down operations in Iraq while 
quite possibly boosting troop levels in Afghanistan.  Afghanistan is 
now being called Obama's war, but unless the entire international 
community realizes that this conflict is a global problem, it may be 
very difficult to bring even a semblance of normalcy to this 
troubled region.  For those of us in Taiwan, accustomed to the 
strict confines of an island nation, the idea of a porous border is 
a little hard to fathom.  There is no place where Pakistan ends and 
Afghanistan begins, except on paper.  For its part, Afghanistan has 
not had a stable government of any kind for decades.  To be fair to 
the U.S., if any nation could be blamed for the current situation in 
Afghanistan it's the former USSR.  The Soviet Union invaded 
Afghanistan in 1979, destroyed much of the nation's functioning 
infrastructure and activated tribal militias, laying the framework 
for today's crisis.  The U.S. is not blameless, however, having 
supplied the anti-Soviet rebels with weapons, and when the conflict 
was over, unfortunately forgot about the people and those weapons. 
... 
 
"Nations all around the world are watching the U.S.' battle for 
Afghanistan.  Some continue to accuse the U.S. of imperialism. 
Others criticize the methodology.  But few aside from Great Britain 
have actually done anything to contribute. ...  The U.S. and a few 
allies have been fighting there for over eight years.  The American 
public has no more energy for an expensive conflict, especially if 
it seems endless.  U.S. President Obama seems less inclined to 
invoke the 'with-us-or-against-us' demand made by his predecessor, 
but a consensus seems to be growing that the rest of the world needs 
to step up to the plate.  Obama's political team may have stopped 
using the term 'war on terror,' but the reality is the U.S. military 
is trying to defeat Islamic extremists that are overwhelmingly 
responsible for inspiring the sorrow and carnage many nations of the 
world have suffered over the past decade.  China has been singled 
out for criticism as it has business and commercial interests in 
Afghanistan and the surrounding area, but is loath to actually join 
the fight against extremism.  For political reasons, it's unlikely 
that China will be sending any troops anywhere soon, but every 
nation in the world needs to get in on this fight.  Those who can 
send troops should do so.  Others can contribute money or provide 
other assistance.  America isn't perfect, but what's the rest of the 
world doing to help defeat extremism?" 
 
STANTON