09AITTAIPEI359
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Mar 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0359 0860956
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270956Z MAR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1234
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9068
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0509UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused March 27 
news coverage on the Pentagon's 2009 annual report on China's 
military power, which was released Wednesday; on Taiwan's economic 
prospects; and on the ongoing investigations into former President 
Chen Shui-bian and his family's legal cases.  In terms of editorials 
and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" discussed the House of Representatives' recent move to pass a 
joint resolution defending Taiwan as well as the Pentagon's annual 
report on China's military power.  The article lashed out at China 
for attempting to incite Washington to give up its support for 
Taiwan, and at the Ma Ying-jeou Administration for what it believes 
to be Ma's "pro-China" policy.  End summary. 
 
"Attach Great Importance to the Message Delivered When the United 
States Reiterates Its Support for the 'Taiwan Relations Act'" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 700,000] 
editorialized (3/27): 
 
"... During the process when the House of Representatives discussed 
a joint resolution [reaffirming its support for the 'Taiwan 
Relations Act'], China manifestly sought to interfere by expressing 
hope that wordings such as one China, the three [Sino-U.S.] 
communiques, and the United States and China having formal 
diplomatic relations could be added to the resolution, and words 
such as security and arms sales to Taiwan could be removed.  Yet 
China's scheme has failed to prevail after all.  China's wishful 
thinking went like this:  Since the United States is caught deeply 
in the financial storm, and it needs some assistance from China, 
Beijing can seize the opportunity to ask for anything it wants from 
Washington and take unfair advantage on the Taiwan issue.  The fact 
is that Washington's long-term strategic concept for the Taiwan 
Strait far surpasses the short-term impact of the financial tsunami. 
 China, as a result, flew into a rage over its failed attempt. ... 
 
"... China continues to elevate its military threats against Taiwan 
and enacted the 'Anti-Secession Law,' stipulating that 'the nation 
will adopt non-peaceful means and other necessary measures' against 
Taiwan 'to safeguard the integrity of its sovereignty and national 
territory.'  The move is in exact opposition to the 'Taiwan 
Relations Act,' and by no means will it be accepted by the United 
States.  The U.S. Defense Department, as a result, reiterated that 
the United States, consistent with the 'Taiwan Relations Act,' will 
continue to make available weapons to enable Taiwan to defend 
itself. 
 
"One can say that there are two ways by which China can annex 
Taiwan.  First, [it can take advantage of] the complexity of the 
international situation, such as North Korea, Iraq, Iran and the war 
on terrorism.  When the United States is likely to have a favor to 
ask of China, the latter can force Washington to make concessions on 
the Taiwan issue, particularly, to abolish the 'Taiwan Relations 
Act' (TRA) or at least to modify the TRA articles on arms sales to 
Taiwan.  In that case, Taiwan will have no way to hide itself from 
the military shadow of China.  Second, [Beijing] can take advantage 
of the timing of the pro-China force becoming the ruling party in 
Taiwan to intensify its united front tactics against the island.  In 
particular, Beijing can use some economic incentives to lure a few 
financial syndicates in Taiwan and strengthen its united front 
tactics by targeting central and southern Taiwan in an attempt to 
collapse the Taiwan people's national identity from inside and thus 
'shape an irreversible trend for unification.'  Judging from the 
developments since U.S. President Barack Obama took office, 
including the House joint resolution at this time, it will not be 
easy for China to incite the United States to give up its support 
for Taiwan. ..." 
 
YOUNG