09BEIJING1271
MEDIA REACTION: GRAIN WEAPON, GLOBALIZATION, A(H1N1),
Tue May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1881
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1271/01 1320908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120908Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3935
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001271 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: GRAIN WEAPON, GLOBALIZATION, A(H1N1), 
EARTHQUAKE ANNIVERSARY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. GRAIN WEAPON 
 
"What should China use to defend itself against the American's grain 
weapons?" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/12): "The U.S. is the only country that 
has bonded grain, energy, finance, military, diplomacy and values 
together into its global strategy.  The U.S. is capable of 
implementing this strategy. China's current strategies are still 
unable to coordinate with each other.  China's strategic ability is 
still limited to self defense.  However, the Americans, through 
strategy, are able to conduct aggressive campaigns in every corner 
and field of the world.  Besides grain assistance, liberalized grain 
trade, and grain subsidies, the U.S. now also has biological energy 
as the fourth means to control grain prices.  The U.S. is the only 
country in the world capable of holding the point at which the world 
grain supply and demand are balanced.  Biological energy is a 
convenient tool with which to influence this balance.  The Chinese 
peasants' role in their society is like a soldier without a gun. 
Unfortunately, their role in providing grain security and 
sovereignty are not properly recognized by society.  Grain is 
strategic in nature.  The multi-functions of grain and agriculture 
are important.  It is fortunate that ' grain stabilizing ' is one of 
the most important issues, among several rural issues, targeted by 
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China." 
 
¶2. GLOBALIZATION 
 
"The economic crisis is not the crisis of globalization" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/12): "The problem that globalization is 
experiencing is not globalization itself but its leader, the U.S. 
The global crisis is not the crisis of globalization.  In fact, 
globalization is moving forward at a steady and firm pace.  The 
current economic crisis has disintegrated the Americans' ambition. 
In the future, the U.S. and its western partners will no longer be 
the main promoter of globalization.  The new round of globalization 
will be more democratic.  It will bring benefits to a majority of 
countries, including those who were forgotten by earlier 
globalization.  Encouraging domestic demand will not decrease 
China's connections with globalization.  China should be the leader 
of this new type of globalization." 
 
¶3. A(H1N1) 
 
"China directly faces the challenges of the A(H1N1) virus" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/12): "On May 11th, the WHO announced the 
first case of A(H1N1) in mainland China. This case came directly 
from the U.S. Whether China will be able to control the spread of 
the virus through the country will be a severe challenge.  Other 
countries have also experienced the stubbornness and repetition of 
this virus.  The world positively evaluates China's reaction.  A 
poll released that 60% of Chinese netizens believe that the flu 
prevention measures will influence their lives.  Chinese experts 
indicate that because the virus spreads quickly, it is still unknown 
whether we will be able to relax before the summer.  Since the 
internet has enabled people to receive information more easily, 
currently there is more risk for panic than in the past.  However, 
the Chinese government has the advantage of strong administrative 
power.  Normal economic manufacturing and social lives will not be 
influenced." 
 
¶4. EARTHQUAKE ANNIVERSARY 
 
"China is not afraid of huge disasters, they are afraid of 'not 
thinking clearly'" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/12): "Wu Jian Min [Chinese diplomat and 
former Ambassador to France]: the past 'belief that class warfare is 
the essential issue' has influenced many Chinese people's 
philosophy. Historically, China encountered major setbacks because 
it wasn't 'thinking clearly.'  In dealing with international 
relations, the alternative to confrontation is peace, development 
and cooperation.  Between the U.S. and China, common views are 
larger than divergences, according to President Hu Jintao.  China 
should not have enemies and is unwilling to have enemies. The 
current crisis is not a conspiracy for China.  President Hu Jintao 
mentioned on the earlier financial summit that China is willing to 
join hands with the world to pass this hard time together.  In 
 
BEIJING 00001271  002 OF 002 
 
 
dealing with the crisis, China should not only focus on their 
current interests, but also their long term interests.  China should 
take the chance to realize its transformation in economic growth and 
development.  China should combine patriotic thinking with 
internationalism.  We should not only consider the interests of our 
own country but also the interests of the world.  If the interests 
of the world are fulfilled, then our own interests are guaranteed. 
It is still too early to say that China will surpass the U.S.  In 
individual quality, psychological maturity, China can't compare with 
the U.S. yet.  China needs friends. However, the psychologies 
described in the book Unhappy China can only make enemies." 
 
WASHINGTON