09BEIJING1923
MEDIA REACTION: XINJIANG RIOT, NORTH KOREA
Thu Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6332
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1923 1900906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090906Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5083
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 001923 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: XINJIANG RIOT, NORTH KOREA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. XINJIANG RIOT 
 
a. "The west helps Rabiye take control in 'Xinjiang independence' 
organization" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (07/09): "Rabiye, who knew little about the 
'Eastern Turkish' issue, has become the behind-the-scenes director 
of the '7.5' incident.  In fact, regarding her self-accomplishment, 
being the leader of the 'Eastern Turkish' is a thing beyond her 
ability.  The main reason for this is that the west sees the Eastern 
Turkistani's deep-rooted pursuit of independence, their organization 
and their violent nature.  Western intelligence institutes are 
ardent Rabiye helpers, as are anti-China congressmen and hostile 
anti-China media.  One can see that Rabiye is walking a path of no 
return. No matter how they beautify it, the nature of the 'Eastern 
Turkish' will not change.  Rabiye seemed to advocate democracy and 
human rights, but on many occasions she is embarrassing.  She was 
unable to speak English in a speech in Norway before the Beijing 
Olympics; she cannot even speak fluent Chinese.  She can only curse 
and attack China without any real content.  Inside the 'Eastern 
Turkish' movement, she also causes controversy.  Rabiye never 
forgets to create beneficial situations for her.  By collecting 
money from Uygur households, she plans to move the head quarters of 
the 'Eastern Turkish' movement to the U.S. With the west's support, 
although there are doubts about Rabiye's possible ownership of the 
head quarter's property, insiders do not dare do anything about 
her." 
 
b. "To stop the chaos and to defend the dignity of law" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (07/09): "The recent riot in Xinjiang has 
challenged the dignity of law and greatly damaged the people's lives 
and property.  Ethnic unity and social stabilities have also been 
damaged.  Any country with rule of law will not permit such chaos. 
When chaos happens, a country should use law to promote justice and 
protect each citizen's life and property.  Only by suppressing 
separatists' rampant arrogance and severely punishing them will form 
a powerful deterrence.  It is not unexpected that the world judges 
China's way of dealing with the incident.  The facts tell the world 
that China's law is dignified and it will not change due to the 
external voices." 
 
¶2. NORTH KOREA 
 
"Be vigilant about the return of the Cold War's shadow" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (07/09): "The recent North Korean missile 
launch has obvious political meaning and indicates a psychological 
war.  Though North Korea created a sensation concerning their 
military measures, they did not really intend to start a war.  North 
Korea, in fact, intends to deter the U.S., urging the U.S. to make 
compromises; using their 'super tough' stance to avoid a 
'suicide-like war.'  However, the U.S., South Korea and Japan 
intentionally exaggerate their [North Korea's] signals therefore; 
they are stepping up their military expansion and preparation.  The 
three countries' militaries have formed a besiegement against North 
Korea, implying an initial provocation.  The unprecedented close 
coordination of these three countries when facing North Korea's 
military threat reminds people of the Cold War 'triangle of the 
U.S., South Korea and Japan.'  These military countermeasures only 
intensify the confrontation and will turn small frictions into an 
uncontrollably big disaster.  The military expansion by these three 
may have strategic intentions that are not just aimed at North 
Korea.  Their increased military cooperation will destroy regional 
balance and deteriorate the security trust in Northeast Asia.  The 
return of the Cold War's shadow can only seed bigger trouble for the 
future." 
 
GOLDBERG