09BEIJING2003
MEDIA REACTION: XINJIANG RIOTS, RIO TINTO
Wed Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7665
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2003 1960904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150904Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5190
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 002003 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: XINJIANG RIOTS, RIO TINTO 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. XINJIANG RIOTS 
 
a. "We are dependent on all ethnic groups to maintain Xinjiang's 
stability" 
 
The official Communist Party People's Daily (Renmin Ribao) (07/15): 
"With strenuous and detailed efforts after the 7/5 incident, 
Xinjiang has made great progress in maintaining stability and the 
people's regular life has resumed.  It is all the result of the 
strong leadership of the Central Committee of the party and the 
State Council.  It is all ethnic groups' common hope to maintain 
social stability and ethnic unity.  After the incident happened, the 
party and the government closely depended on all ethnic groups, and 
quickly pacified contradictions.  As the rioters conducted looting, 
attacking, crushing and burning, all ethnic groups were fighting 
together, and uniting together to help each other pass through the 
difficulties.  Everything is for the people and is based on the 
people. We should trust the people, motivate the people and organize 
the people. We advocate the principle of uniting and educating the 
majority and at the same time isolating the minority to help 
ordinary people, who have been cheated in the incident, to be aware 
of the real nature of the 7/5 incident.  To consolidate the 
foundation for stabilities, the principle of doing all things for 
the people has to be strictly implemented.  All ethnic groups in 
Xinjiang now are embracing stability and peace.  They have deep 
hatred of the 'three forces' [religious extremists, ethnic 
separatists and violent terrorism]." 
 
b. "Al-Qaeda branch threatens to take revenge on China" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (07/15): "Recently an Al Qaeda branch 
threatened to take revenge on China for the Uyghur.  This is the 
first time that Al Qaeda has threatened China.  Chinese Foreign 
Ministry said that China will take every measure with relevant 
countries to ensure the safety of Chinese overseas institutes and 
personnel. The World Uyghur Congress these days worked together with 
those extreme terrorism organizations to pursue Xinjiang 
independence together.  Chinese experts indicate the most urgent 
task is to let the world recognize the real nature of World Uyghur 
Congress (WUC).  The WUC is a covered-up terrorism, even more 
dangerous than ordinary terrorism organizations.  The WUC is not a 
non-violence organization at all as it claims.  It is responsible 
for further stimulating divergences between China and the west on 
the Xinjiang issue.  At present its main goal is using human rights 
and democracy to gain the west's support to promote separations. 
Some members of the WUC may have joined terrorism organizations 
other than the WUC and these organizations are holding consistent 
political goals. More Islamic-related countries may make statements 
on the Xinjiang issue and there are possibilities that some may make 
anti-China statements due to religious factors." 
 
¶2. RIO TINTO 
 
"China should establish laws to prohibit multinational bribery" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (07/15): "The Rio Tinto case at least has 
offered an answer to the continuous riddle why in the recent years 
the iron ore negations have never been normal.  In fact the case is 
only a small part of multinational companies' bribing activities in 
China.  60% of multinational companies have had suspicions of 
offering bribes in China. What's more, the trend is getting more 
intensified.  The means of bribery become more various, including 
both obvious briberies, and soft briberies like giving public 
relations fee or overseas tourism fee etc. The soft briberies are 
more concealed and difficult to investigate.  Every country in the 
world will crack down on business bribery.  The shortage and 
vagueness of relevant laws in China have given multinational 
companies' opportunities to take advantages. China should establish 
'Anti-corruption law on foreign business' as soon as possible, 
clearly defining various bribing activities of multinational 
companies and severely cracking down their briberies in China." 
 
GOLDBERG