09BEIJING1693
MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE COOPERATION, IRAN, CHINA'S INTERNET
Mon Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5513
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1693/01 1730905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220905Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4697
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001693 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE COOPERATION, IRAN, CHINA'S INTERNET 
MONITOR 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. CLIMATE COOPERATION 
 
"The trilateral climate meeting between China, the U.S. and Japan 
will begin in July and climate cooperation will be the key topic" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(06/22): "On 
June 5th, Japan first reported that the foreign ministries of China, 
the U.S. and Japan will hold their first trilateral dialogue in 
Washington in July. China hasn't officially responded to this news. 
Several members of a U.S. think-tank have confirmed that the level 
of the trilateral dialogue is relatively low and that it will be led 
by mid-level foreign ministry officials from the three countries. 
The U.S. will choose climate change, especially technology transfer 
as their primary topic. The trilateral dialogue is still a test. It 
won't replace the existing climate change dialogue between the three 
countries, only supplement it. In the past 10 years, China, the U.S. 
and Japan have held several unofficial trilateral dialogues; mainly 
scholars were invited to participate. A professor from Fudan 
University said that although this isn't a high-level trilateral 
dialogue, it could provide the framework to stabilize relations 
between the three counties and at the same time achieve a win-win 
situation. As China rises, the economies of China and the U.S. 
become more and more interdependent. The current global economic 
crisis has greatly adjusted the balance of power among China, the 
U.S. and Japan. In this situation, the professor commented that if 
the U.S. doesn't develop its relationship with China, there are 
other developed countries who will do so; the U.S. is unwilling to 
see it this way. Thus, the U.S. must cooperate with China. Of 
course, the U.S. doesn't want the development of the Sino-U.S. 
relationship to cause the collapse of the U.S.-Japan alliance. Aimed 
at balancing its relationship with Japan as well as its relationship 
with China, the U.S. has to cooperate with China while relying on 
the help of the U.S.-Japan alliance." 
 
¶2. IRAN 
 
a. "Western media is very excited about the chaos in Iran" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/22): "Western society has always had a 
strange fascination concerning the anti-government affairs of 
transformational countries.  Their reaction to the chaos in Iran 
proves this.  Looking at the western media reports following the 
election, many people can see that western media has become a part 
of the crisis.  Western media emphasizes freedom of speech; however, 
because they emphasize freedom of speech the media bears some 
responsibility.  The recent tension between the U.S. and Iran is 
mainly been due to the problematic image of Muslims that the U.S. 
media portrays.  The U.S. media needs to reflect on this.  In the 
information era, western media's reports and contents may be greatly 
influential, misleading the transformational country into chaos. 
Western media should not always expect that the changes they want 
will happen in other countries." 
 
b. "The U.S. has no color in Iran" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(06/22): "Iran's 
supreme leader Khameini has ordered the chaos to cease. The chaos in 
Iran seems to have come to an end. This result will greatly 
disappoint the west. The west has exaggerated the chaos in Iran; 
saying that it might possibly evolve into a green revolution. The 
west has been exaggerating for more than a week. If the chaos in 
Iran cools, they will be greatly disappointed. This shows that the 
U.S. didn't have much hope for the green revolution in the first 
place. Obama's Middle East strategy restricts the movement of those 
in the U.S. who may push the green revolution forward.  What's more, 
even if the U.S. wanted too; it is unable to make the revolution 
happen.  The U.S. has no supporters in Iran.  Furthermore, the U.S. 
doesn't have any reason to believe in these so-called Iranian 
reformists.  In fact, the U.S. needs Ahmadinejad, because the U.S. 
needs an enemy in the Middle East." 
 
¶3. CHINA'S INTERNET MONITOR 
 
"China's severe punishment for Google gains the attention of the 
west" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/22): " In response to the Chinese 
government's accusation that Google carries a great deal of 
pornographic and vulgar content, Google issued a statement admitting 
that they were wrong.  A Chinese scholar commented that this is a 
 
BEIJING 00001693  002 OF 002 
 
 
case of an international company getting used to China's local laws. 
Google's reaction shows that the Chinese government's opinion has 
been understood.  Internet supervision is necessary.  Western 
countries have formed a series of supervision measures in the field 
of internet supervision.  The internet will become a battlefield 
that each country will compete over in the future.  Therefore China 
has no reason to give up its internet supervision.  Another scholar 
commented that Google did this in order to continue operating in 
China.  Filtering the internet is not the Chinese government's 
responsibility. It is most important for internet custodians to take 
responsibility, ensuring that juveniles don't have access to 
pornographic content." 
 
PICCUTA