09BEIJING628
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, TIBET, CHINA POLICY
Wed Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6173
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0628/01 0700940
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110940Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2810
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000628 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, TIBET, CHINA POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"U.S. companies' moves to export helicopter engines to China, 
receives doubts" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/11): "American company, Honeywell, 
recently said that it will export engines to a Chinese manufacturing 
company. This arouses doubts from the American media and analysts. 
They are worried that China will use the engines for military 
purposes. Chinese experts indicate that some Americans always doubt 
China's motives when importing electronic and machinery equipment. 
After China participated in the WTO, the U.S. canceled its annual 
limitation list of things that cannot be exported to China, because 
it violates fair trade. However, the U.S. has imposed limitations on 
exports in other ways, like revising bills and enlarging the 
definitions of sensitive techniques. China always obeys the promises 
it makes concerning technical imports. What's more, the designs for 
engines built for civilian use are not sensitive. China has no need 
to steal from the U.S." 
 
¶2. TIBET 
 
a. "The Dalai should not interfere in mundane politics" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/11): "The Dalai is a special religious 
leader. He always dresses in a monk's robe. He always communicates 
with politicians who do not understand Tibetan Buddhism at all. 
Their topics for conversations are not focused on religion but on 
Tibet's political arrangement and China's human rights. It is a 
well-known fact that old Tibet was a feudal serfdom which mixed 
religion and politics. At that time, Dalai was more than just a 
religious person. The Dalai, who was later exiled, is more a 
politician than a religious person. For the most part, he was not a 
religious figure.  During the 50-years that he has been exiled his 
social activities have been closely connected with politics. Many 
Western people don't understand Tibet's current situation. But Dalai 
has not told the world the truth. The Dalai is a rarely-seen 
religious person because he is always standing on the opposite side 
of the issue than the central government. He is a political person 
who has been exiled and who is being used as a chess piece for the 
West when they deal with China. The Dalai's mistake is that he can't 
admit he has misjudged the situation. He had hoped the West would 
help resume the old Tibet's mixture of a religious and political 
system; and he does so at the West's urging. He knows the West is 
using him. However history is not easily twisted. If Dalai really 
cares about the Tibetan people's happiness, he should be a real 
religious person." 
 
¶3. CHINA'S POLICY 
 
a. "China should be cautious of being pompous" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/11): "Americans recently brought the 
concepts of the G2 and 'Chimerica'. These concepts have made some 
Chinese people believe that the U.S. and China will be able to deal 
with each other from an equal platform. China's strength is not 
powerful enough to build a G2 with the U.S. Although China has been 
the third largest economic body of the world, the U.S. total GDP has 
been several times that of China. China is left far behind on money 
per capita. China's overseas position is also not enough for China 
to be a power country. China should take the international 
responsibilities within its capabilities. The current financial 
crisis has brought a new round of voices puffing up China's 
influence. In fact the impact of the financial crisis is limited. 
The U.S.' role as a super power will not change. Economic crisis 
also doesn't change the picture that the U.S. is strong and China is 
weak. After the financial crisis broke out, the U.S.-Europe-Japan 
cooperation will be the mainstream resolution. China should clearly 
recognize its own strength and abilities. Although China's strength 
and influence has increased to a certain level, it is still not 
enough to save the world or stand as an equal to the U.S." 
 
b. "The 'hawk' theory is unhelpful for China's diplomacy" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/11): "Earlier there has been an article 
speaking about China's need for more 'hawkish' diplomacy. However, 
this theory only represents the needs of the ordinary people, 
without looking at the strategic view. This is a representation of 
the ordinary Chinese people's patriotism. However, it is not 
reasonable to upgrade this theory to the level of national policy. 
First, can the Hawks really represent the country's interests? The 
 
BEIJING 00000628  002 OF 002 
 
 
lesson, exampled by the U.S., where they returned from cannonball 
diplomacy to cooperation, is an example for China. Second, 
diplomatic strategy and techniques are not the Hawks' specialties. 
Third, is being tough all-important? Politicians should consider the 
national interest first instead of their own feelings. China doesn't 
need more Hawks, or Doves, but needs the growth of national strength 
and the development of diplomatic strategies and tactics." 
 
PICCUTA