09BEIJING2521
WELCOME TO BEIJING
Wed Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #2521/01 2450818
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 020818Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5870
INFO RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL IMMEDIATE 1343
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO IMMEDIATE 0026UNCLAS BEIJING 002521 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN CH JA KS
SUBJECT:   WELCOME TO BEIJING 
 
REF: STATE 91292 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Beijing warmly welcomes the visit of S/R 
Bosworth and delegation to China September 3, 2009 for 
consultations with Chinese officials. 
 
¶2. (U) Control Officer: 
Mark Lambert, Political Officer 
Home:  (86-10)6430-7657 
Office: (86-10)8531-3764 
Cell: (86)139-1056-2317 
Fax: (86-10)8531-3525 
Unclass E-mail: LambertMB@state.gov 
 
Control officer will meet travelers at the airport and take 
them to their hotel. 
 
¶3. (U) Hotel reservations have been made at the Westin Hotel. 
No. #1 Xin Yuan Nan Rd., Chaoyang District, Beijing 
Ph: (86-10)5922-8888 
Fax:(86-10)5922-8999 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
NEW SCREENING PROCEDURES FOR POSSIBLE H1N1 INFLUENZA 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶4. (U) The Chinese Health and Quarantine (H&Q) authorities 
has implemented the following new procedures to screen for 
the possibility of influenza among passengers on flights 
arriving from the U.S. 
 
(A)  All passengers are required to complete the H&Q health 
form (or "Quarantine Card") prior to disembarkation.  The air 
carrier will provide passengers with the necessary paperwork 
prior to landing in China. 
 
(B)  H&Q quarantine officers may board the aircraft and 
perform temperature readings on each passenger using 
noninvasive, handheld temperature wands.  During this time, 
all passengers will remain on board unless otherwise 
indicated by H&Q officers. 
 
(C)  H&Q currently provides NO special courtesies or waivers 
to individuals holding official or diplomatic passports. 
 
Should you encounter any of the quarantine procedures, please 
immediately contact your designated Embassy Control 
Officer/Point of Contact or the U.S. Embassy consular 
section: 86-010-8531-3000. 
 
------------------------------ 
Security and Threat Assessment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) The threat level for all China posts is considered low 
for crime and medium for terrorism. 
 
¶6. (U) The Regional Security Office is not aware of any 
specific threat directed against any U.S. person or traveling 
delegation.  Should such information be developed, the 
Chinese security services are committed to advise the Embassy 
of pertinent information and to provide necessary security 
coverage. 
 
¶7. (U) China experiences a moderate rate of crime, including 
recent incidents ranging from petty theft to murder. 
Pickpockets are particularly active in crowded markets, and 
foreigners are often sought out as primary targets.  Petty 
theft from hotel rooms is uncommon, but visitors are advised 
not to leave valuables lying loose or unattended in their 
rooms.  It is the policy of this Mission that employees, 
their family members and official visitors to China must not 
knowingly purchase counterfeit or pirated products during 
their stay in China.  Also, foreigners may be approached in 
tourist areas by individuals seeking to exchange U.S. dollars 
or to sell pirated or fake products, such as compact discs, 
in violation of intellectual property rights laws.  These 
transactions are illegal, violate Post policy, and must be 
avoided. 
 
¶8. (U) All U.S. citizen personnel serving under Chief of 
Mission authority in a temporary duty status of 30 days or 
more must complete appropriate overseas personal security 
training prior to travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who 
have completed the Security Overseas Seminar Course at 
State's Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after June 1, 2000, 
meet this requirement.  All other TDYers must either 1) 
complete the approved four-day seminar at FSI entitled 
"Serving Abroad for Families and Employees (SAFE) or 2) have 
their agency certify to the State Department Bureau of 
Diplomatic Security that the employee has undergone 
equivalent security training.  The contact for this 
certification is Assistant Director of Training, DS/T, at 
telephone (703) 205-2617.  Country clearance will not be 
granted for any traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 
days if this information is not stated/certified.  POC for 
additional information is DS RSO, Beijing at: 
ds rso Beijing@state.gov. (Note: Travelers from DHS/CBP, DIA, 
FBI, DOD and the Peace Corp have been pre-certified by their 
agencies with DS.) 
 
¶9. (U) All/all official visitors are required to obtain a 
pre-departure, country specific counterintelligence briefing 
from their parent agency before departing for China. 
Visitors should contact the security office of their parent 
agency.  If the parent agency is unable to give the briefing 
or needs assistance/guidance, the visitor should contact the 
Bureau of Diplomatic Security's Division of 
Counterintelligence (DS/ICI/CI) at 571-345-7641, 3966, or 
3968 to schedule a briefing.  HQ DS/CI is located at SA-20, 
1801 Lynn St., Rosslyn, Virginia 20522-2008.  Department of 
State personnel should contact the DS/ICI/CI directly to 
schedule a briefing. Official visitors may also be required 
to attend a Post-specific security briefing upon their 
arrival in country.  The type of briefing is contingent on 
the length of the planned visit.  Upon arrival in Beijing, 
all TDY personnel should contact the Regional Security Office 
at 6532-3831, ext. 6036, to determine level of briefing 
required. 
 
¶10. (U) Visitors are reminded to take necessary precautions 
in safeguarding sensitive material and information.  All 
non-USG facilities must be considered technically compromised 
and may not be used to discuss, process, or store classified 
information.  Telephone calls, e-mail, and Internet usage are 
routinely monitored and hotel rooms searched. 
 
¶11. (U) All TDY U.S. citizen employees of the U.S. 
Government, civilian or military, who are under the authority 
of the Chief of Mission are subject to the reporting 
requirement stated in 12 FAM 262 regarding contact reports, 
i.e. any initial (non-business related) contact with a 
national from a country with a Critical threat 
(counterintelligence) post, as listed on the Department's 
Security Environment Threat List (SETL), must be reported. 
In general, employee reporting should occur within one 
business day after such contact has occurred.  If unable to 
report within this time frame, or unsure about the need to 
report at all, employees should contact the RSO or PSO as 
soon as practicable.  If the RSO/PSO is unavailable, notify 
the Management Officer or the Deputy Chief of Mission. 
 
¶12. (U) Per 12 FAM 262, this reporting requirement generally 
applies whenever: 
 
(1) Illegal or unauthorized access is sought to classified or 
otherwise sensitive information. 
 
(2) The employee is concerned that he or she may the target 
of actual or attempted exploitation by a foreign entity. 
 
(3) That national attempts to establish recurring contact or 
seems to be actively seeking a close personal association, 
beyond professional or personal courtesies. 
 
¶13. (U) Travelers should be aware that previous visitors have 
reported that their unattended computers have been subjected 
to tampering.  The efforts may be directed toward obtaining 
information on the computers, but problems ranging from 
viruses left on their systems to hard drives, that are no 
longer functional have been reported.  Hotels and private 
Chinese Internet providers have in some cases given hotel 
guests "free" thumb drives for use with their computers.  The 
source and quality of these devices are unknown.  Such 
devices could contain malicious codes and viruses and should 
not be used on government computers.  Official visitors are 
reminded that non-inspectable electrical/electronic 
equipment, i.e., cellular telephones, laptop computers, 
personal digital assistants (PDAs), etc., may not be brought 
into the controlled access areas of the Chancery.  If a 
visitor intends to travel with USG-owned computers and 
equipment for use within the Chancery, please contact the 
Regional Security Officer at 86-10-8531-4111, or 
GormanB2@state.gov or MooreBM@state.gov, for information and 
guidelines. 
 
¶14. (U) Additionally, all classified and sensitive materials 
must be secured at the Embassy upon arrival in country.  All 
classified material must be brought into China via diplomatic 
pouch. 
 
¶15. (U) Travelers must contact the Embassy or nearest 
Consulate General upon arrival in China and provide telephone 
and address information while in country. 
 
¶16. (U) Passports and visas are required.  Americans 
arriving/transiting without valid passports and Chinese visas 
are not permitted to enter China and may also be subject to 
fines.  Visas are required to transit China on the way to and 
from Mongolia or North Korea.  Those visitors traveling to 
China on a single-entry visa should be reminded that trips to 
Hong Kong or Macau Special Administrative Regions are treated 
as a visit outside Mainland China.  If the traveler is 
planning to return to Mainland China after a visit to one of 
these two destinations on the same single-entry visa, they 
will be denied entry.  Visitors facing this dilemma will be 
required to apply for a new visa at the Chinese Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Office in Hong Kong to gain re-entry into 
Mainland China. 
 
HUNTSMAN