09BEIJING3091
NOVEMBER 12 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: OBAMA VISIT, OBAMA-DALAI
Thu Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5714
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3091/01 3160854
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 120854Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6786
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0533
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 0001
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 0001
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0680UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PHSA CH
 
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 12 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: OBAMA VISIT, OBAMA-DALAI 
LAMA, BLACK JAILS, PIRATES 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 12 MFA press briefing: 
 
--The U.S. President will have the opportunity to speak with youth 
in Shanghai -- China and the United States are "consulting on the 
specific arrangements" about media coverage. 
 
--China's opposition to foreign leaders meeting with the Dalai Lama 
is clear and consistent. 
 
--China hopes that "Obama would have a better understanding of the 
issue of sovereignty and territorial integrity" regarding Tibet 
because as the first black President, Obama understands the 
importance of President Lincoln's abolition of slavery.  China's 
abolition of the feudal serf system in Tibet in 1959 was "just like 
Lincoln's abolition of slavery" 
 
-- China hopes the United States respects China's position and will 
appropriately handle the Tibet issue to ensure the smooth 
development of U.S.-China relations. 
 
--There are no "so-called black jails" in China. 
 
President Obama Visit 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. U.S. President Obama would meet with Chinese leaders, meet with 
Chinese youth, and visit historic and scenic sites in Beijing and 
Shanghai, said Qin Gang at the November 12 regularly scheduled MFA 
press briefing.  The U.S. President would have the opportunity to 
speak with youth in Shanghai -- China and the United States were 
"consulting on the specific arrangements." When asked for further 
clarification on whether the U.S. President's event in Shanghai 
would be broadcast live on television, Qin reiterated that China and 
the United States were consulting on the specific details. 
 
Obama-Dalai Lama 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  Qin said China had made its position on foreign leaders meeting 
with the Dalai Lama clear on many occasions.  China's opposition to 
the Dalai Lama's activities in other countries was "consistent and 
clear cut."  Qin referred to a speech President Obama gave 
expressing gratitude to President Abraham Lincoln for abolishing 
slavery and paving the way for Obama to become the first black 
President of the United States.  Qin said that President Obama 
praised Lincoln for playing an important role in "maintaining 
sovereignty and territorial integrity."  The Dalai Lama was engaged 
in "activities to split the motherland and undermine national 
unity."  China hoped that "Obama would have a better understanding 
of the issue of sovereignty and territorial integrity" because as 
the first black President, Obama understood the importance of 
President Lincoln's abolition of slavery.  Qin said that China's 
abolition of the feudal serf system in Tibet in 1959 was "just like 
Lincoln's abolition of slavery" and China hoped President Obama 
would better understand China's position. 
 
¶4.  China hoped Obama would "hear the voice of the Chinese people," 
who overwhelmingly opposed President Obama meeting the Dalai Lama. 
The "opinion of the Chinese people could not be insulted" and the 
United States should respect China's sovereignty and territorial 
integrity.  This was one of China's core interests and concerns. 
 
¶5.  Asked what impact a meeting between President Obama and the 
Dalai Lama would have on U.S.-China relations, Qin stated that China 
"very clearly opposed any foreign leader meeting with the Dalai 
Lama."  U.S.-China relations were very important and China cherished 
good relations with the United States based on the principle of 
mutual respect, especially for core interests and concerns.  Tibet 
was a core interest and concern for China and China hoped the United 
States respected China's position and would appropriately handle the 
situation to ensure the smooth development of U.S.-China relations. 
 
 
Black Jails 
----------- 
 
¶6.  Recent western media and NGO reports accused China of 
maintaining "black jails" where citizens attempting to bring 
grievances to the central government were held in makeshift 
detention centers, deprived of food and sleep, beaten and 
threatened.  Qin offered his assurance that there were no "so-called 
black jails" in China and he did not know about the "so-called" 
Human Rights report on black jails.  China put its people first and 
all levels of government followed "proposals and suggestions" from 
the people.  If people were dissatisfied they had "proper channels" 
to "report to the relevant authorities" so they could deal with the 
people's concerns.  When asked how he could be so confident that 
 
BEIJING 00003091  002 OF 002 
 
 
China did not have black jails when the Chinese media reported about 
the arrest of a guard from a black jail on charges of raping an 
inmate, Qin said he was not aware of the specific case but the 
competent authorities would deal with the case according to the 
law. 
 
Pirates 
------- 
 
¶7. When asked about reports that the hostage situation on the 
Chinese-flagged vessel the De Xin Hai would be resolved within six 
weeks, and for comment on the Chinese government's involvement in 
rescue efforts, Qin said that the competent authorities were 
"sparing no effort" to do rescue work and "ensure the safety of the 
people" taken hostage and the smooth progress of rescue efforts. 
Qin said it was not convenient to provide more details. 
 
Rio Tinto Investigation 
----------------------- 
 
¶8.  In response to a question on reports that Australian Minister 
for Foreign Affairs Stephen Smith had said the Chinese investigation 
into the Rio Tinto case would be extended for another two months, 
Qin said that the Rio Tinto investigation was "handled by the 
competent authorities" and those authorities would "follow the 
relevant laws and the consular agreements between China and 
Australia." 
 
 
Foreign Journalists 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. Asked why the Kashgar Foreign Affairs Office was barring 
journalists from visiting Kashgar, Qin stated that China had laws 
and regulations covering journalists that were also applicable in 
Kashgar.  If journalists encountered difficulties or problems, they 
should report the issue to the competent local authorities or to the 
MFA Information Office, which would then help journalists with 
legitimate press activity. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶10.  People's Political Consultative Conference Chairman Jia Qinglin 
planned to visit Brazil, Ecuador and Peru from November 19 to 30 to 
continue to "maintain sound relations with those countries, promote 
bilateral ties, and exchange views on issues of mutual interest," 
including regional and international issues.  Jia would "explain 
China's system including the political Consultative system."  Qin 
had no information on specific agreements that Jia might sign during 
his visit. 
 
¶11.  Qin said he had no information about Saudi Arabian Minister of 
Petroleum and Mineral Resources Ali Al-Naimi's visit to China and 
advised journalists to consult the relevant authorities. 
 
 
HUNTSMAN