09BEIJING3132
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO CHINA
Wed Nov 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1256
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3132 3220947
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180947Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6873
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 003132 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO CHINA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO CHINA 
 
A: "American and Chinese leaders emphasize strategic mutual trust" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(11/18)(pg 1): "The U.S.-China joint 
statement, emphasizing the enhancement of U.S.-China strategic 
mutual trust, must be the world's largest and most ambitious 
political project.  Obama used 'partnership' directly when 
describing U.S.-China relations.  This shows that he does not want 
to leave anything to chance concerning his China policy and the 
media.  Zhao Guojun of the Shanghai Academy of Social Science said 
that, "compared to the joint statement issued in 1997, this 
statement contains broader and more substantive content."  Military 
exchanges topped the agenda, which shows the importance of military 
exchanges.  Once issues are resolved, afterwards, they are easy to 
deal with.  Professor Wang Yizhou of International Studies at Peking 
University said that "the joint statement covered most fields and 
most global issues, which shows that the U.S.-China bilateral 
relationship has a global view and is influential in almost every 
aspect of international society."  The statement has brought 
U.S.-China relations to an unprecedented height.  Wu Xinbo, Deputy 
Director of the School of International Relations and Public Affairs 
at Fudan University also said that the two countries are bringing 
the bilateral relationship to a new height and in a more respectful 
and equal manner." 
 
B: "Trade disputes between China and the United States will 
temporarily ease" 
 
The Beijing-based newspaper sponsored by official intellectual 
publication Guangming Daily and Guangdong Provincial official 
publication Nanfang Daily The Beijing News (Xin Jing Bao)(11/18)(pg 
A06): "Zhu Feng, a Professor of International Studies at Peking 
University, said that "the fact that the joint statement said that 
both sides were preparing for an exchange of visits between top 
military officials, indicates that bilateral military exchanges will 
be greatly enhanced in the future."  The joint statement reiterated 
the urgent need to resist trade protectionism, which, in the short 
run, will ease trade disputes and (emphasizes that) both countries 
need to work together to find solutions.  The actual schedule 
brought forward by President Obama during the joint statement shows 
that both sides have adopted a practical and active attitude in 
solving their bilateral divergences.  It is beneficial to enhance 
mutual trust and cooperation." 
 
C: "The new U.S.-China Joint Statements are very different from the 
past" 
 
The official Communist Youth League China Youth Daily (Zhongguo 
Qingnianbao)(11/18)(pg 5): "The new joint statements have several 
highlights: First, they emphasize the enhancement of strategic 
mutual trust.  The United States reiterated that it welcomes a 
strong, prosperous and successful China which will play a greater 
role in world affairs.  Second, the United States and China 
underlined that each country and its people have the right to choose 
their own path, and all countries should respect each other's 
choices concerning a development model.   Third, the two countries 
are convinced of the need to address climate change in a manner that 
respects the priority of economic and social development in 
developing countries.  Fourth, it is crucial to respect each other's 
core interests to ensure healthy development of the bilateral 
relations; and fifth, enhanced cooperation on regional and global 
issues, like South Asian, Afghanistan and North Korean issues, will 
help fulfill the interests of both sides." 
 
D: "The world debates the U.S. and China's exchange rate policy" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(11/18)(pg 11): "Yao Jian, the spokesperson of 
China's Ministry of Commerce, said that the RMB exchange rate is 
irrelevant to trade balances.  Currently China must insist on the 
stability of its economic and RMB exchange rate policy.  Professor 
Yang Fan of the School of Commerce of the China University of 
Politics and Laws said that "it would be disastrous for China to let 
the RMB appreciate too quickly.  Then China will walk the tragic 
path of Japanese history.  A too quick appreciation of the RMB will 
lead to asset bubbles in China.  Though there are controversies 
about whether or not the RMB should appreciate, U.S. and Chinese 
economies, as Los Angeles Times reported, no matter whether it is 
good or not, rely on each other.  The best way to solve the 
challenges of the two large countries in the world is through 
dialogue." 
 
HUNTSMAN