09CHENGDU166
FORD PROSPERS IN CHINA AUTO MARKET; CHINESE FIRMS AS FUTURE
Tue Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO1598
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0166/01 2370856
ZNR UUUUU ZZH CCY
R 250856Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3363
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4039UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000166 
C O R R E C T E D C O P Y ADDED CAPTIONS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/CM 
DEPARTMENT PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EINV ELAB ECON PREL CH
SUBJECT: FORD PROSPERS IN CHINA AUTO MARKET; CHINESE FIRMS AS FUTURE 
CAR EXPORTERS 
 
REF: BEIJING 1339 
 
CHENGDU 00000166  001.4 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) This message contains business confidential information. 
 Not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary.  China's 2009 car sales will be 12 million, a 
Ford executive told CG in Chongqing on August 7.  Ford's China 
sales were up 21.5 percent in the first seven months of 2009, 
and it has been in discussions about building a third China 
plant, possibly in Chongqing.  Ford believes its local partner 
copied engineering data from the Mazda 3 model, and now more 
tightly controls sharing of engineering data.  The quality of 
Ford cars in Chongqing is almost as good as its best plant in 
Belgium, but productivity is much lower.  Ford already exceeds 
China's minimum local content rules and seeks to further 
increase local sourcing as a cost-saving measure. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ten years from now, Chinese car manufacturers will 
begin large-scale auto exports to the U.S. and European markets. 
 Their future challenges include: self-developing designs, 
meeting more complex safety regulations, and building stronger 
supplier bases; one advantage they now enjoy is more 
"harmonious" labor relations.  China is promoting local 
manufacture of hybrid and electric cars, but the current market 
is small because of high costs.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
China's Car Market: Ford Enjoying Success 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) China's overall car sales in 2009 will be around 12 
million, Changan Ford Mazda Sales General Manager Nigel Harris 
told CG on August 7 -- a figure also predicted by Ford's 
corporate chief economist on August 18.  Overall, Changan Ford 
saw its July-over-July sales growth climb by 54 percent; in the 
first seven months of 2009, Changan Ford had sales of 123,474 
cars, a 21.5 percent increase over the same period last year, 
per an August 6 Ford press release.  The press release 
attributes Ford's success to "increasing consumer acceptance of 
its products and rapid improvement in its distribution capacity 
across China" (with the 200th Ford dealership opened in May 
2008).  Strong sales in recent months, Harris said, were also 
aided by the Chinese government's decision to halve sales taxes 
on vehicles with engines of 1.6 liters or less (as a measure to 
spur the economy in light of the global economic slowdown). 
 
 
 
¶5. (U) In Chongqing, Changan Ford produces the Focus sedan and 
hatchback, Fiesta, Mondeo, S-Max (a small minivan/sporty 
hatchback), Volvo S40 and S80, and the Mazda 2 and 3.  The firm 
has enjoyed a number of successes in the China market: Changan 
Ford announced August 15 the production of its 400,000th Focus, 
with sales in July exceeding 10,000 for the fifth consecutive 
month.  The new Fiesta sold 22,630 units in its first five 
months on the market and now averages 4,000 per month -- a 4.5 
percent share in its market segment.  July sales of the Mondeo 
and S-Max increased by 68 and 22 percent respectively over the 
same period last year. 
 
 
 
Comparison with Belgium Benchmark Plant: 
 
Chongqing Quality Solid, But Productivity Lower 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The quality of Ford cars produced in Chongqing is 
almost identical to its leading plant in Ghent, Belgium:  94 
percent of Chongqing "Mondeo" cars pass the "First Time Through 
(FTT)" quality inspection, with only six percent of cars needing 
to be taken off-line for repairs, compared to a 95 percent FTT 
for Ghent, Changan Ford Manufacturing Director Frank Chuang told 
CG August 7.  Moreover, while productivity is lower in 
Chongqing, with 35 man-hours per car versus only 20 man-hours 
for Ghent, the Chongqing factory uses only 25-30 percent as many 
robots as Ghent. 
 
 
 
Ford in Negotiations for Possible Third Plant in China 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
CHENGDU 00000166  002.4 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ford has capacity to produce 285,000 vehicles per year 
in Chongqing, and 120,000 per year at its joint venture factory 
in Nanjing, Harris said.  Changan and Ford are in discussions 
about building a third plant in China, possibly doubling its 
capacity in China over the next five years.  Ford received large 
tax breaks and "freight logistics" cost reductions from the 
municipal government in order to locate in Chongqing, and these 
incentives have been important to Ford in overcoming the higher 
costs of shipping its production to China's coastal areas. 
Chongqing has been "aggressively" courting Ford to build the 
third plant and is offering a five-year tax incentive package as 
generous as those offered to greenfield investments.  Changan 
Ford is already Chongqing's largest taxpayer, adding 300 million 
RMB annually.  (Note and Comment: One press report indicated in 
mid-August that Changan and Ford had agreed to build the plant 
in Chongqing, but Ford officials declined to confirm this with 
us.  Chongqing's mayor received a visa from ConGen Chengdu 
recently, in part to travel to Detroit in mid-August to meet 
Ford executives, presumably to secure a Ford commitment to build 
the plant in Chongqing.  End note and Comment.) 
 
 
 
Changan Copies Mazda: 
 
Long-term Relationship with Ford Will Depend on Respect for IPR 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Similar to the well known case in which General Motors 
has sued Chinese automaker Chery, accusing it of stealing 
aspects of the design for its Chevy "Spark" to build its "QQ" 
model, Ford believes that its Changan partner copied engineering 
data for the Mazda 3 model for its recent "Yuexiang" model, a 
Ford executive told CG.   For this reason, Ford headquarters (in 
Dearborn, Michigan) made a decision that any future 
manufacturing data could not be released to Changan without 
prior authorization from corporate headquarters.  Ford's 
long-term partnership with Changan will "break apart" in the 
future if the two companies are not able to establish a 
relationship of mutual trust, the executive stressed. 
 
 
 
JV's Local Content Increasing; 
 
China's Future as Auto Exporter; Labor Relations "Harmony" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) All of Ford's parts suppliers must meet the Chinese 
Government's rules of minimum 40 percent local content by value, 
Chuang explained.  Ford now sources locally 45-50 percent of the 
parts used in its Mondeo model, and seeks to increase this 
percentage as a cost savings measure.  For example, Ford has 
localized the production of engines for Mazda at its Nanjing 
plant, but imports all of its engine crankshaft parts. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Chinese car manufacturers today are going through an 
evolution similar to that undertaken by Japanese car 
manufacturers almost 60 years ago, Chuang stated.  Toyota, for 
example, started out as a sewing machine company, but purchased 
(and copied) automobile technology to get started.  Already, 
Chinese car manufacturers have started to sell their cars in 
small quantities in Europe and North America for reasons of 
"face," he asserted.  Ten years from now, Chuang predicted, 
Chinese firms will start large-scale exports into Europe and the 
United States.  At present, he felt, Chinese firms are still in 
the process of "copying" foreign car makers, and lack an 
in-house expertise to self-developed designs.  Other major 
challenges they face are: meeting more complex safety 
regulations overseas, and building a strong local supply base. 
Car headlights, for example, need to be outsourced to 
world-class suppliers, and Chinese manufacturers will need to 
know how to supply manufacturing data to those firms. 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) Chuang asserted that one advantage enjoyed by Chinese 
automakers is "very good" labor relations - particularly in 
comparison to the labor relations between Detroit's "Big Three" 
and the United Auto Workers.  Chuang, who worked well over 20 
years for Ford Taiwan, explained that Chinese workers were 
"hungry" for good jobs, and that the Chinese Government promoted 
"harmony" between companies and labor.  (Comment:  One reason 
 
CHENGDU 00000166  003.4 OF 003 
 
 
for this "harmony," of course, is that Chinese labor unions do 
not enjoy the same freedoms as unions in democratic countries. 
End Comment.) 
 
 
 
Hybrid/Electric Cars: 
 
Government Incentives, But Too Expensive for China Market? 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) China market for hybrid or electric cars is still 
small, but is the future number one global market for this kind 
of vehicle, Chuang felt.  Although the Chinese Government has 
been encouraging domestic manufacturers to produce hybrid, 
electric and other fuel-efficient cars, and providing incentives 
for them to do so, it is not easy to sell hybrid and electric 
cars in China because of their higher cost and, in the case of 
certain electric cars, the lack of infrastructure, e.g. quick 
"charge stations. 
BROWN