09GUANGZHOU57
South China Migrant Workers: Coming Back Soon, Tickets
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO8930
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #0057/01 0300927
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300927Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0156
INFO RUEHGZ/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE 0076
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0084
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0032
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0048
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 0032
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0032
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC 0053
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0047
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC 0005
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC 0073
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC 0073UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000057 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELTN ELAB PGOV SOCI ECON CH
SUBJECT: South China Migrant Workers: Coming Back Soon, Tickets 
Permitting, but Where Are the Jobs? 
 
REF: A) 2008 GUANGZHOU 48; B) GUANGZHOU 47; C) GUANGZHOU 42; D) 2008 
GUANGZHOU 715 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Last year's cold and snow storm chaos were a 
distant memory at south China train stations teeming with migrant 
workers and other travelers under the watchful supervision of 
student volunteers and police, backed up by military-uniformed 
People's Armed Police.  This year's Lunar New Year migration 
operated at full capacity for weeks, with trains leaving Guangzhou 
every few minutes throughout the day and night.  Bus lines and 
airports filled the gap for many travelers unable to secure train 
accommodations due to ticket shortages and related problems.  Most 
migrant workers still appeared clueless about the full scale of the 
economic crisis, telling us they believed their jobs to be secure, 
but, in any case, they were planning to return regardless of whether 
they had a specific position lined up after celebrating the New Year 
in their hometowns.  End summary. 
 
No Train Tickets, No Problem? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Guangdong train ticket shortages were the biggest story in 
the lead up to this year's Chinese New Year, but what a difference a 
year makes.  The talk before the annual migration was of last year's 
transportation crisis (ref A); the reality this year is that the 
government, not wanting to leave anything to chance, had done a 
pretty good job, weather permitting, planning for the exodus home. 
Though, as it turns out, you can never have enough planes, trains, 
buses, cars and motorcycles.  Media outlets estimated that as many 
as 40 million people were planning to depart Guangdong prior to 
January 26, the official first day of the Year of the Ox. 
Prospective travelers did confront difficulties in getting home, of 
course, being forced, in many instances, to stand in line for 12-36 
hours for a train ticket home, or repeatedly call a ticket hotline 
(new tickets were released 7 days before departure but sold out 
within hours of being released), or pay illegal scalpers and 
facilitators for tickets. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Standing in line was the only option for many workers who 
lack money but not time.  At one of several Guangzhou ticket sales 
centers protected by heavy security, thousands of people - starting 
almost two weeks before the Chinese New Year - lined up day and 
night to buy train tickets.  Econoff visited one of the centers late 
in the evening on January 12 and was surprised to hear eerie group 
wailing noises when waiting travelers saw on large information 
monitors that their preferred train departures had just sold out, 
forcing them to delay their planned Guangzhou departures and buy 
tickets for the next available departure.  The latter could be hours 
or even days later, and the travelers were without places to stay 
until their scheduled departures. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The railway ticket hotline was promoted by official media 
as a great way to buy train tickets, but line capacity problems and 
geographic limitations on callers meant that econoffs, interested in 
traveling with the workers, were not able to purchase tickets on any 
westward-bound trains despite calling repeatedly for several hours 
each morning from January 9-14.  One local traveler who successfully 
obtained a ticket via the phone hotline said she paid a facilitator 
RMB 100 (approximately USD 14.60) to do it for her, a fee equivalent 
to almost 50 per cent of the value of her ticket.  She explained 
that facilitators use special repeat dialing machines to keep 
calling until they get through and purchase the client's requested 
train ticket, which travelers can pick up at any station or sales 
center by providing a unique pin number issued by the hotline 
operator.  The traveler said she would not have been able to obtain 
a ticket without help, and that the fee was worth it in order to get 
home and spend the holiday with family. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Ticket scalpers remained the only other alternative for 
many travelers, a risky option for all parties.  Internet and media 
reports in the week before Chinese New Year reported thousands of 
arrests of scalpers and reiterated that travel agencies and other 
non-official sales of train tickets are banned during the Lunar New 
Year peak travel period.  In addition to high costs and gross 
inefficiencies in the market for train tickets, the threat of 
counterfeit tickets remains very high when dealing with scalpers. 
Price markup of scalper tickets appeared similar to those of equally 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000057  002 OF 002 
 
 
illegal "facilitators" who helped obtain tickets via the telephone 
hotline, and every kiosk and store front seemed willing to call 
scalper and facilitator associates about ticket availability when 
asked by econoff for help in securing train tickets. 
 
Netizens - Sold Out Trains Run Empty? 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Internet chat rooms posted numerous complaints and comments 
on the dearth of train tickets during the Chinese New Year peak 
travel period, as first reported on Consulate Guangzhou's South 
China SEZ blog.  In one posting, a traveler complained that after 
difficulty securing a standing-room only ticket, 30 per cent of 
seats on the train turned out to be unfilled, leading to speculation 
that train station officials might be collaborating with ticket 
scalpers.  The posting concluded that scalpers or some other 
connection were the only reliable way to secure tickets, an idea 
supported by another traveler with whom econoff talked, who said her 
return ticket would be purchased in Wuhan with help from a local 
police officer friend.  She speculated that without assistance, it 
might be difficult to return to her office job in Shenzhen in time 
for normal hours on Monday, February 2. (Note: For more information 
about Guangzhou's blog postings, please see: 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/ southchinasez/.  End 
note.) 
 
Migrant Workers - Blissful Ignorance 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Migrant workers awaiting their departures at Guangzhou 
train station on January 16 and 20 confidently told econoff they 
would be coming back after the holiday, regardless of whether their 
employer was willing to rehire them.  One factory worker from 
southern Guangzhou's Panyu District said she expected her employer 
to rehire her after Chinese New Year, despite layoffs and a steep 
decline in winter orders at her factory.  Another factory worker, 
from Dongguan, expressed similar optimism that he would be 
reemployed despite many job cuts at his factory in the last three 
months.  Many workers appear to be returning earlier than normal in 
order to be the first in line for factory and other jobs as the 
week-long holiday ends (ref B), as indicated by long lines at bus 
and train ticket sales centers in smaller cities like northern 
Guangdong's Shaoguan.  An unemployed laborer from southwest China's 
Guizhou Province separately told econoff that his most recent job 
had ended but he would return to look for a new one after the 
holiday.  He also said he would consider migrating to another 
coastal province if he could not find suitable work near his 
previous construction site in Guangzhou.  A lengthy job search was 
preferable to remaining unemployed in his hometown, according to the 
young man. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Managers at several export-oriented firms confirmed to 
econoff their intention to reduce employment after the New Year 
holiday, although the affected employees would not be notified until 
after final numbers of returnees became apparent in February.  The 
owner of a mid-sized Dongguan toy factory predicted he would reduce 
his employees by up to 25 per cent despite steady orders for his 
company's popular educational toys, mostly in order to hedge against 
continuing economic uncertainty (ref C).  A middle manager at an LCD 
component trading firm said her company's top management told 
department heads to plan on cutting 10 to 20 per cent of their 
employees after returning from the New Year holiday.  However, the 
manager seemed surprised when asked if employees were aware of 
impending job cuts by saying that it's unlucky to fire employees 
before the holidays, commenting that this would also give her more 
time to decide which employees should be let go. 
 
GOLDBERG