09SHANGHAI60
MEGA TRANSPORTATION HUB - LYNCHPIN OF EAST CHINA AND BEYOND
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO0424
RR RUEHCN RUEHVC
DE RUEHGH #0060/01 0330632
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020632Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7595
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHINGTON DC
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0523
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0353
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 8225UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SHANGHAI 000060 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/INA/HAARSAGER AND WINSHIP 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM, INR/B, EEP/TRA/AN 
USDOC PASS BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
USDOC FOR ITA DAS KASOFF, MELCHER, OCEA 
STATE PASS USTR FOR STRATFORD, WINTER, KATZ 
NSC FOR LOI, SHRIER 
USPTO FOR BOLAND, WU 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, EB AND E 
TRANSPORTATION FOR OST X-1, X-40 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ELTN ECON PGOV ELAB CH
SUBJECT: MEGA TRANSPORTATION HUB - LYNCHPIN OF EAST CHINA AND BEYOND 
 
REF: A) 08 SHANGHAI 18, B) 08 SHANGHAI 19 
 
SHANGHAI 00000060  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Shanghai authorities are racing to complete 
one of China's largest infrastructure projects, the city's 26 
square kilometer Hongqiao Comprehensive Transportation Hub, in 
time for the 2010 World Expo.  The mega project, located 13 
kilometers from the city center in the western suburbs of 
Shanghai, will integrate the new terminal of the Shanghai 
Hongqiao International Airport, the magnetic levitation train 
(Maglev), inter-city shuttle trains, 5 subway lines, 4 highways, 
and an extensive bus network.  In a meeting with Hu Jianzhong, 
the Director of the Chief Engineering Office at the Shanghai 
Hongqiao Integrated Transport Hub Project, said that the project 
is largely on track to be completed, but certain parts, such as 
the Maglev extension will be postponed until after the World 
Expo due to "political reasons".  The hub will not only 
facilitate transportation in the greater Shanghai metropolitan 
area, but will also have far reaching effects for the rest of 
the Yangtze River Delta (YRD) and beyond.  Hu estimated close to 
53 million people a year will transit via the hub by 2020.  The 
project is also providing jobs to over 15,000 workers, mostly 
migrant laborers, in a time of economic slowdown in the city. 
End summary. 
 
The Complexity of the Complex 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Hongqiao Comprehensive Transportation Hub has been 
in the planning for ten years and was cited in the Central 
Government's Eleventh Five Year Plan.  Hu Jianzhong explained 
that the Central Government views this project as a way to 
"facilitate and push forward development in the YRD region." 
Both the Shanghai and Central Governments are funding the 
project - the airport, subway, and road portions primarily by 
the city, and the rail component primarily by Beijing.  The site 
of the project on Shanghai's west side was chosen because it is 
relatively close to both Zhejiang and Jiangsu. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Hu said the hub will reach an estimated turnover of 
close to 53 million people by 2020.  The rail component, 
including the high speed trains, the inter-city shuttles, and 
the Maglev, will form Shanghai's third railway station, which 
will be bigger than the two current railway stations combined in 
terms of yearly passengers.  He estimated the daily capacity of 
the rail component alone to be 200,000 people.  The land area 
for the total complex is 26 square kilometers, approximately 6 
times bigger than the present Hongqiao Airport.  Hu said the 
floor area of the complex is roughly one million square meters, 
including roughly 500,000 square meters of underground space. 
The underground space alone will be one of the biggest 
underground complexes in the world.  The facility is so large 
that a special shuttle has been designed to ferry passengers 
along the corridor to various transportation connections.  The 
two ends of the corridor will also be connected by a subway 
extension. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) According to Hu, the biggest challenge of the project 
has been the relocation of local residents.  Although reluctant 
to state specifics, he did say the numbers were relatively 
small, explaining that large tracts of land adjacent to Hongqiao 
Airport were set aside in 1949, before the city engulfed the 
area.  The original plan was that Hongqiao would serve as 
Shanghai's only airport, and land was set aside for its 
eventually expansion.  Another primary challenge is coordinating 
all the various, government entities, companies and contractors 
working on the project.  Hu said his job was to make it happen. 
 
Airport - Not the Same Old Hongqiao 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) According to Hu, The current Hongqiao airport 
facility, which served as Shanghai's only airport until 1999, is 
set to be sidelined as only a service area for private jets and 
their passengers.  A new 250,000 square meter terminal located 
on the west side of the current runway will soon go into 
operation, boosting the airport's current capacity to 40 million 
passengers (4 times its current capacity) and 1 million tons of 
cargo.  Besides extending its current runway, a second runway 
 
SHANGHAI 00000060  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
will be added, which will double Hongqiao's landing capacity 
from approximately 500 flights a day to 1,000 flights a day.  It 
will also raise Shanghai's total runways to five when adding the 
three in operation at Pudong Airport.  Hu added that the new 
terminal is nearing completion and will likely go into operation 
in 2009 before the rest of the hub is completed. 
 
High Speed Train - Connecting Shanghai to Beijing 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Hu said that the high speed rail connecting Shanghai 
and Beijing (Jing Hu Railway) is well under way to being 
completed by early 2010.  It started in late 2007 after several 
delays by the Central Government.  Total length of the line will 
be roughly 1,300 kilometers, and the train will run at a speed 
of 350 kilometers an hour, shortening the travel time from the 
current ten hours to less than five with a total of 21 stops. 
The current rail line between the two cities will be dedicated 
solely to cargo.  According to Hu, the project is being 
implemented by the Beijing-Shanghai High Speed Railway Company, 
which was founded under the auspices of the Ministry of Railways 
(MOR) and in coordination with the Shanghai, Beijing, Tianjin, 
Hebei, Shandong, Anhui and Jiangsu governments.  HU estimated 
the cost at roughly RMB 200 billion (USD 29.4 billion), 
including all the relocation costs.  Hu thought the ticket price 
would be RMB 600-700 (USD 88-103). 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The hub will also incorporate inter-city "shuttle" 
trains by April 2010.  Unlike the high speed Beijing-Shanghai 
trains, the shuttle trains will run roughly 200 kilometers an 
hour.  The first inter-city shuttle is planned for the 
Shanghai-Nanjing corridor with 22 stops.  Other shuttle lines 
will link Shanghai with Hangzhou and Ningbo in Zhejiang 
Province.  Hu explained that the shuttle will target those 
customers who now take long distance buses.  These passengers 
will likely be attracted because the fare will be cheaper, and 
the shuttle train stops in far more cities than the regular 
trains already running between the cities. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Despite Shanghai Municipal and Zhejiang Provincial 
government announcements for a high speed rail link to Hangzhou, 
Hu said the plans have not yet been finalized.  He believed that 
the high speed rail to Hangzhou would likely be an extension of 
the Beijing-Shanghai line and connect at the Hongqiao Hub.  Such 
an extension would be "very beneficial" since a large number of 
Hangzhou residents already travel to Shanghai to make use of its 
airports.  Hu explained that the proposed extension has ignited 
a debate between MOR, Zhejiang Province and Shanghai.  MOR is 
pushing the high speed rail option, but Zhejiang and Shanghai 
are continuing to plan for the Maglev extension to Hangzhou.  He 
explained that the Maglev is much costlier, emits low levels of 
radiation, and would only reduce travel time by 10 to 15 minutes 
over the high speed rail option.  Many people are also against 
the Maglev extension because of the high number of relocations 
involved.  He believed that the only upside of the Maglev is 
that it is quieter than the high speed rail. 
 
Maglev - Unfinished Business 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Hu said that a Maglev station is being constructed 
along with the rest of the project but was unclear when the 
extension line connecting the hub and Longyang Station (the 
current terminal station) would be completed.  He added it 
definitely will not be before the World Expo.  When completed, 
the Maglev will connect Pudong and Hongqiao airports (55 
kilometers apart) with a 15 minute ride, including stops at 
Longyang Station (in Pudong) and the Shanghai South Rail Station 
(in Puxi).  (Note: The trip between Longyang Station and Pudong 
airport takes only seven minutes and 20 second as the train's 
normal operating speed reaches 431 kilometers an hour.  End 
note.) 
 
¶10.  (U) The Central Government first approved the plan for the 
169 kilometers to Zhejiang's capital Hangzhou in March 2006, but 
the plan was reportedly suspended in May 2007 amid environmental 
concerns about low-levels of radiation from the Maglev.  In a 
 
SHANGHAI 00000060  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
subsequent media report, Shanghai Government officials refuted 
the suspension saying it was only delayed pending an 
environmental impact report, which was released in January 2008 
for public comment.  The environmental report said that the 
Maglev will have minimal impact on the environment.  However, 
hundreds of local residents along the proposed line took to the 
street in "walk-abouts" in January and February 2008 over 
concerns of noise, loss of property value and potential health 
hazards (reftels).  Local media reports say the plan for the 
extension was again given the green light in August 2008, with 
work to begin in 2010 and completion in 2014. 
 
Subway - Connecting an Underground World 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) According to Hu, the hub will eventually serve as the 
integration point for five subway lines: 2, 5, 10, 17 and the 
Qingpu Line.  However, the immediate plan, to be completed by 
the World Expo, only calls for two lines - Line 2 and Line 10. 
Hu said that the Line 2 connection is nearing completion, and he 
is "hoping" Line 10 will connect to the hub in time for the 
Expo.  (Note:  Line 2, once completed, will link the two 
airports.)  These two lines are designed to each handle 80,000 
passengers per hour.  (Note:  The Shanghai subway system itself 
is another massive project, with seven lines currently being 
extended or started and 116 new subway stations simultaneously 
being built.  The current length of the system is a little over 
230 kilometers with 162 stations, making it the seventh biggest 
system in the world.  Plans are in place to have 510 kilometers 
of underground rail system by 2012.  End note.) 
 
Road - More Buses, Cars, and Hopefully a Shorter Taxi Line 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) According to Hu the facility will have two large bus 
stations on the east and west sides that combine both long 
distance and local buses.  The larger west side bus "plaza" will 
accommodate approximately 30 long distance buses and over 130 
local buses, with a daily circulation of an estimated 25,000 
people.  It will also contain and parking garage that can 
accommodate over 3,000 vehicles.  The hub will also connect with 
the Shanghai's expanding highway network, which by 2010 will 
include 10 highways and 60 trunk lines that connect the city to 
the rest of the YRD.  Six highways lead to Jiangsu, and four 
will connect with Zhejiang.  The hub is immediately adjacent to 
two of the major highways, the A20 outer ring road (connecting 
both with highways leading north to Jiangsu and south to 
Zhejiang) as well as the A9 (leading directly to Hangzhou.)  The 
adjacent Yan'an elevated highway also connects the hub to 
downtown Shanghai. 
 
It Takes a Small Army of Workers 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Hu said it was hard to give firm numbers of worker 
numbers because of the variety of firms involved in the 
construction.  However, he estimated that there were between 
10,000 to 15,000 laborers working on the hub, most coming from 
Anhui Province, and a lesser number hailing from provinces 
further off such as Hunan and Sichuan.  (Note:  Shanghai 
Government estimates say there are roughly 4 million migrant 
workers all together working in the city.  End note.)  The vast 
majority of the workers were housed in temporary on-site dorm 
rooms.  One contracting company recently completed 33 new dorm 
buildings that can house up to 15,000 workers. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) When the massive Hongqiao hub project initially got 
underway in 2007, there was a great deal of criticism from local 
economists that such projects were overheating Shanghai's 
economy.  Now, the project could not be happening at a better 
time for Shanghai as it continues to absorb a great deal labor, 
mostly migrant workers, who would otherwise be unemployed. 
Shanghai's unemployment rate in 2008 was 4.3 percent, and the 
Municipal Government is hoping to keep it from rising above 4.5 
 
SHANGHAI 00000060  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
percent in 2009.  The Hongqiao Comprehensive Transportation Hub 
project could contribute to helping the Government achieve its 
goal. 
CAMP