10BEIJING351
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, IRAN
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0312
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0351 0410903
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100903Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8055
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000351 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, IRAN 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "Be vigilant about being pushed to the opposition side of the 
world by the U.S." 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/10)(pg 14): "In 
2010, Sino-U.S. relations are undergoing a substantial change, which 
is: the U.S. no longer treats China as the 'potential' largest, 
strategic opponent, instead, [the U.S. treats China as] a real 
opponent.  The United States started to do more than talk in dealing 
with China, now [it deals with China] in a more disguised way and a 
delicate manner.   The point is that the United States is 
intentionally pushing China to the opposition side of the world and 
trying to transform the Sino-U.S. confrontation into [a larger 
issue] -- a confrontation between China and the world.  Along with 
China's rise, the United States feels China's strategic strength is 
threatening.  However, because of the following facts, the United 
States has to be tolerant with China: the United States 
strategically relies on China on global issues such as its rescuing 
measures during the economic crisis, support in the War on Terror, 
cooperation with Iran and North Korea and the climate change issue. 
Besides, China's development has integrated into global development, 
so that if the U.S. contains China, it will also harm itself.  China 
should take the opportunity to showcase China's positive image to 
the world, which is consistent with China's interests and which will 
transform the U.S. influence into positive rather than negative 
factors." 
 
b. "Can Washington save Sino-U.S. relations by following the example 
of 'panda diplomacy?'" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(02/10)(pg A5): "Some diplomatic experts 
said that Washington showed a sign of friendship to China by sending 
the popular giant pandas back to China in a high-profile exchange, 
which follows the example of 'panda diplomacy' from three decades 
ago, in an attempt to ease tensions between the two countries.  The 
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for public affairs, Crowley said 
that the giant panda is a tangible sign of cooperation for the two 
competitive countries.  The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for 
East Asia affairs Kurt Cambell also said that currently, the most 
appropriate description for Sino-U.S. relations is, not hot nor 
cold, but is very complicated.  Many experts believe that despite 
the 'coldness' that Sino-U.S. relations have been going through at 
the beginning of this year, the stable foundation of the bilateral 
relations will not be shaken because both sides will uphold the 
principle of utility to resolve the issue.  Cornell University's 
history professor Chen Jian said, 'We do not think that Obama will 
hold a confrontational position concerning Sino-U.S. relations. 
Currently, China and the U.S. are not having principled conflicts. 
China is a stakeholder of the United States.  China and the United 
States are fundamentally in the same boat.'" 
 
¶2. IRAN 
 
"Iran and the West: Don't even think about kidnapping China" 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/10)(pg 14): 
"Because Iran and the West have been hostile to each other for 
decades they have lost each other's trust.  For many years, the West 
has easily and continuously threatened Iran using sanctions, which 
have not solved the problem but only intensified rancor and 
speculation between the two.  This is a problem that the West must 
seriously consider.  They both believe that if they are tough, the 
other will eventually give in.  Impractically, they both believe 
that if they apply enough pressure to China, that in this 
confrontation, China will choose their side.  China does not deny 
the existence of its interests in Iran.  Meanwhile, China advocates 
the balance between the power countries' interests concerning 
regional issues.  Therefore, no one can kidnap China with either of 
these objectives.  They should be clear that China's own national 
interests outweigh the interests of any other country.  Whoever 
forces China in a more coercive way will be more likely to be 
refused by China.  Both sides should compromise to further avoid 
escalating this confrontation.  There were even voices in the West 
advocating the isolation of China through the Iran issue.  When 
dealing with a big country like China, any one, who intends to 
coerce it or harm it, will pay the price." 
 
HUNTSMAN