10BEIJING167
MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY CLINTON'S SPEECH, U.S.-JAPAN
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4925
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0167/01 0220935
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220935Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7704
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000167 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY CLINTON'S SPEECH, U.S.-JAPAN 
RELATIONS 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. SECRETARY CLINTON'S SPEECH 
 
a. "Secretary Clinton's speech promotes internet freedom" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(01/22)(pg 3): "Although the U.S. officials 
denied that Secretary Clinton's speech was targeted at China, after 
Google threatened China that it would pull out of the market, this 
is hard for the Chinese people to believe.  Yu Wanli, an expert at 
the Center for Strategic Studies at Beijing University, said that 
U.S. decision-makers realize that the Internet can be an effective 
tool, in a growing number of international events, to fulfill the 
political purposes and shape the global leadership of the U.S. 
Other than at China, Secretary Clinton's speech was also directed 
against the Islamic world.  It seems to be the one-sided wish of the 
U.S. to discuss Internet freedom during a speech as their new 
national policy. This is very likely to cause contradiction between 
nations on this issue and the world will soon be divided.  This 
so-called Internet freedom, is in nature, freedom under the U.S.'s 
control.  The U.S. will definitely not allow its enemies, like Bin 
Laden, to enjoy Internet freedom.  If there is to be Internet 
freedom, the U.S. should hand their service terminals within the 
U.S. to a world-recognized international organization, like the UN, 
and not keep them in its own hands." 
 
b. "Expose the United States' 'network diplomacy'" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(01/22)(pg 3): 
"Hu Yong, Associate Professor of Beijing University's School of 
Journalism and Communication, China's Internet observer, does not 
agree that one can link Hillary's foreign policy with the interests 
of some U.S. IT giants, but agrees that the Obama administration is 
increasingly adept at using Internet technology in its diplomacy. 
He pointed out that current diplomacy, which is focused on trade, 
climate, science and technology and many other areas, is different 
from past diplomacy, which is focused on politics and military. 
Government must attract, rather than just politicians and diplomats, 
non-governmental organizations and civilians, academics, and the 
media to participate in its diplomatic affairs.  It is widely 
speculated that Hillary Clinton's speech will not only lay-out the 
U.S. government's strategy on Internet freedom, but also release to 
the outside world the latest Internet technology.  Hu Yong believes 
that if this is true, then the 'Google incident is only the 
beginning of a rolling snowball,' which could lead to a game between 
China and the U.S., and greatly impact the trends in Internet 
development.  During the afternoon of January 21, Chinese Vice 
Foreign Minister He Yafei told reporters that if Google and other 
foreign enterprises operating in China have problems, they should be 
resolved according to the Chinese law, and that the Chinese 
government is willing to help them solve their problems.  The 
'Google incident' should not be linked to the two governments and/ 
or their bilateral relations.  He also said that when involving 
national security, and some no-good content, Internet supervision is 
normal.  In this aspect, different views can be resolved through 
legal means." 
 
c. "Internet has become a new battlefield between China and the 
U.S." 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(01/21)(pg 4): "In 
the U.S., after the Cold War, various political groups lobbied the 
U.S. legislative institutes to provide more support to 'penetrating 
the blocked Internet.'  Lately, the U.S. government has had a more 
ambitious strategic plan: to construct a network environment, which 
is beneficial for the U.S., by controlling information flow.  Thus 
the U.S. State Department is collaborating with Google, Twitter and 
other IT giants to jointly launch software that 'will enable 
everyone to use the Internet freely,' using a kind of 'U.S. 
government provided anti-blocking software,' in an attempt to spread 
ideology and values in line with the United States' demands. 
Regarding her unusual enthusiasm before and after the Google 
incident, it is still unclear how much influence Secretary Clinton 
has personally brought to this plan.  When a country thinks that 
certain parts of the Internet poses a threat, it is supposed to take 
action to restrict this content.  This is the bottom line.  However, 
the U.S. government's current behaviors are challenging this bottom 
line.  The U.S.-China divergences in their bilateral relations 
concerning information security, human rights and ideology have once 
again bubbled to the surface.  The Google incident underscores the 
importance of incorporating information security into China's 
overall national security strategy.  The emergence of information 
technology has posed a great challenge to the traditional concept of 
 
BEIJING 00000167  002 OF 002 
 
 
national sovereignty, as well as one's ability to safeguard 
sovereignty.  Countries that have information technology advantages 
put great pressure on China." 
 
¶2. U.S.-JAPAN RELATIONS 
 
"The United States and Japan are playing the 'China card'" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(01/22)(pg 2): "At present, the U.S. feels itself 
incapable in many areas: it needs a new ally as well as new partners 
like China.  The U.S. intends to use its China card to force Japan 
to come closer to the U.S., daring not to drift away from the U.S. 
At the same time, it also provokes Sino-Japan relations to increase 
its negotiation chips with Japan.  Japan is also using the China 
card to pressure the U.S.  Nowadays Japan often emphasizes that the 
relationship between the U.S., Japan and China should be 
equilateral.  Wang Yusheng, the Executive Director of China 
Foundation for International and Strategic Studies, said both the 
United States and Japan are trying to play the 'China card,' as 
China affects the new U.S.- Japan relationship.  However, because 
China upholds the principle of peaceful development and seeks equal 
partnerships, the United States and Japan are not able to play this 
card, not to mention to play it well." 
 
HUNTSMAN