10BEIJING135
MEDIA REACTION: GOOGLE, HAITI
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1471
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0135/01 0190831
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190831Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7657
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000135 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: GOOGLE, HAITI 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. GOOGLE 
 
a. "Don't be against the Chinese people's opinion" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(01/18)(pg 14): "A poll conducted by the 
Global Times website revealed that only 20% of netizens support 
Google's action, while more than 40% don't welcome it.  The poll 
result shows that the majority of the Chinese people hope the 
Internet can be more open, but they don't support Google forcing 
China into radical reform.  They especially oppose Google, together 
with the U.S. government, teaching lessons to China.  The poll 
results revealed an unprecedented split and the complicated opinions 
of the Chinese people, which is worth noting and contemplating. 
China is undergoing a transformational period. This is an occasion 
when truly knowing the Chinese people's opinion is very important. 
The West must seriously consider Chinese people's opinion when 
dealing with China.  We hope that, regarding all discussions about 
the Google incident, foreign governments and companies can be aware 
of the importance of knowing the real opinion of the Chinese people. 
 They had better make a sober judgment, not misinterpreting anything 
and not against the Chinese people's opinions.  Doing business in 
China means that the company must obey China's law and it is the 
Chinese people who will make decisions about their own issues." 
 
b. "The U.S., don't intervene in China's Internet openness" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(01/18)(pg 14): "It is normal that a 
commercial company enters or withdraws from the China market.  But 
the Google incident is different.  Its way of giving the Chinese 
government an ultimatum for a compromise obviously contains 
political significance.  The fact that it also gained the support of 
the U.S. government, U.S. Congress and Western media shows that the 
incident is thoroughly politicized.  Such political orientation has 
been imposed by the United States and the West on China.  China's 
attitude to open up to the world is indeed sincere.  For China, when 
compared with what the former Soviet Union and East European nations 
historically did, it is wiser to insist that the country walk its 
own path when it is learning from the West.  On an important issue 
like Internet supervision, the Chinese people should develop their 
own thinking and way of doing things, but not let Google's CEO or 
the U.S. Department of States decide.  Shortly before Google 
announced its withdrawal from China, Secretary Clinton held a 
small-scale banquet with the CEOs of Microsoft, twitter, Google and 
others, which will produce speculation among many people.  Looking 
at its recent measures, one can see that the U.S. government is 
implementing 'smart power' to reinstall and secure the values of the 
U.S.  It is hoped that a transnational company like Google will not 
turn into a pure political tool to export American values for the 
United States." 
 
c. "If there is no Google" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(01/15) (pg 23): 
"Without Google, the United States' economic process over the past 
decade may well be a step backwards.  Google is not only a search 
engine but also an ecosystem.  It is like China's Alibaba.com and 
Taobao.com, on which tens of millions of people are interdependent 
and seek common development.  Once they are disappeared, China's 
tens of millions of small-and-medium sized enterprises and 
self-employed individuals will face closure, unemployment and 
bankruptcy.  Google is a much larger ecosystem, which has gone 
beyond sales and become the focal point of information and a 
ubiquitous Internet portal.  Although the day without Google will 
not be the end of the world, since there are other search engines, 
when any one of the economic powers lacks sufficient innovation, 
given the interdependent nature of today's global economy, it leads 
to more economic insecurity and no country can survive another round 
of economic crisis." 
 
¶2. HAITI 
 
"The United States is afraid of chaos in Haiti" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(01/19)(pg 16): "The U.S., not only for 
humanitarian reasons but also for political considerations, is 
willing to send thousands of soldiers to Haiti for the disaster 
relief effort.  Maintaining stabilities in Haiti meets the U.S.'s 
interests.  The United States has been promoting 'American 
democracy' in Haiti for nearly a hundred years, during which its 
policies were not consistent, repeatedly back and forth, and toward 
the Haiti government specifically not always favorable.  In the last 
 
BEIJING 00000135  002 OF 002 
 
 
20 years, Haiti has swayed between a military government and a 
people-elected government, for which the U.S. had made important 
military and political interventions.  According to experts, 
Jean-Bertrand Aristide was the Haitian leader supported by the 
United States, but later discarded in favor of its political 
interests.  Politically speaking, the United States supports whoever 
is able to maintain the stability of Haiti and dumps whoever is not 
able to." 
 
HUNTSMAN