10BEIJING240
MEDIA REACTION: STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS, WAR ON TERROR
Fri Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1177
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0240/01 0290901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290901Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7833
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000240 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS, WAR ON TERROR 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS 
 
a. "Obama shouted that the United States won't be the second in the 
world" 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (3/14)(pg 1): "In 
President Obama's 71-minute State of the Union address on January 
27, he almost spent all of the time on domestic issues and only left 
9 minutes for international issues.  In the address, he repeatedly 
emphasized promoting domestic employment.  A CNN poll revealed that 
more than half of all Americans believe that the United States has 
been moving in the wrong direction.  Despite Obama's embarrassing 
current situation, President Obama, as the best orator amongst 
international politicians, mobilized the Americans in a very 
passionate tone of voice.  He even stimulated domestic unity by 
saying the U.S. must lead China and India.  A Swedish professor said 
that it is unacceptable for the Americans that Obama has given up on 
his spirit of adventure.  Also, more than risk taking, the Americans 
also have a heroic mentality.  Although Obama took office with the 
slogan of 'change,' believing it would be successful for him, he did 
not really know the hearts of the American people.  In fact it's so 
hard for him to change the spirit of the Americans.  Obama's medical 
reform plan and his tough stance against Wall Street have both 
violated the spirit of the Americans.  Obama's new foreign policy, 
which, although it has improved the image of the U.S., has damaged 
the heroic image of the U.S., is something that the Americans won't 
accept.  Obama will adjust his policies soon, for example, he will 
take a tough stance in foreign policy.  China is obviously the 
target for the American's spirit of adventure and risk taking 
mentality.  For a period of time, Sino-U.S. relations will be 
anticlimactic, which is in fact normal and we don't need to be 
worried about." 
 
b. "President Obama: Change is not easy" 
 
The official popular newspaper Beijing Youth Daily (Beijing 
Qingnianbao) (3/14)(pg B3): "President Obama made his first State of 
the Union address on January 27, in which he advocated employment as 
his primary task.  Obama, who is known for his calmness, gave the 
address like an impassionate soldier. Hoping to change his declining 
situation via the address, by using sharper words he hoped to 
re-gain the American people's good impression and trust.  He 
mentioned China twice in his address.  Is he referring to China as 
an object to learn from or as an opponent?  Quite different from 
Bush's addresses, Obama gave more emphasis on employment and 
economic recovery.  A Chinese expert said that Obama also showed 
respect and admiration as he talked about China.  He even took China 
as a good example for the development of the clean energy industry. 
The U.S. feels a sense of urgency when seeing the development of 
China, India and Russia.  Meanwhile, the U.S. upholds a 
contradictory attitude toward China.  It treats China both as a 
cooperating partner and as an opponent.  Obama's policy on job 
creation, foreign trade development and export expansion may 
challenge the Sino-U.S. economic relationship.  Especially if the 
U.S. once again brings forward the appreciation of the RMB, the 
trade war may be upgraded." 
 
¶2. WAR ON TERROR 
 
a. "The United States is focusing on retreating unscathed" 
 
The official Communist Party People's Daily (Renmin Ribao) (3/14)(pg 
21): "The Afghanistan Conference in London is focused on paving the 
way for the United States and its allies to retreat unscathed from 
Afghanistan.  It's not easy to come, neither easy to stay, thus it 
is also hard to retreat unscathed.  At this time it requires all 
parties to sit down and negotiate.  Retreating from Afghanistan is 
not only a common view of the U.S. and its allies, but also relates 
to their domestic political situations.  The war in Afghanistan has 
been a hot potato for the U.S. government for a long time; and a 
headache for U.S. society.  To ensure the Afghan Karzai government 
is stably operating is a prerequisite for a safe retreat.  However, 
there are a number of uncertainties.  Under the leadership of the 
United States, from a development point of view all concerned 
parties began to resolve the Afghanistan issue.  This approach will 
tackle the root of the problem but it will slowly take effect." 
 
b. "Western China's security should not be relaxed" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(4/2)(pg 2): "After the United States announced 
its surge in troops in Afghanistan, security uncertainties have 
increased in Western China.  The 'East Turkistan Islamic Movement' 
(ETIM) remains the number one security risk for the western part of 
 
BEIJING 00000240  002 OF 002 
 
 
the country.  Although currently there have been no big moves by the 
ETIM, they won't give up on their efforts. The external environment 
supporting their existence is still there.  This requires China's 
close attention. We must watch what the expanded military activities 
of NATO and the U.S. military, including their increased U.S. 
troops, will bring to the Afghanistan-China border.   Meanwhile, the 
Chinese government could make an inside effort to ensure regional 
security.  The Chinese central government recently launched several 
initiatives to help develop this region. These initiatives will 
place tremendous psychological pressure on the separatists." 
 
HUNTSMAN