10CHENGDU46
YUNNAN'S BORDER TRADE: HEKOU AND MOHAN GEAR UP FOR INCREASED
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO3917
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHCN #0046/01 0570808
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 260808Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3771
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4497UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CHENGDU 000046 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP DASES DAVID SHEAR, SCOT MARCIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD PREL KTIP CH VM LA BM
SUBJECT: YUNNAN'S BORDER TRADE: HEKOU AND MOHAN GEAR UP FOR INCREASED 
YUNNAN TRADE WITH SOUTHEAST ASIA 
 
REF: A) CHENGDU 044, B) 07 CHENGDU 124 C) FBS20100226266416 
 
CHENGDU 00000046  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
¶2. (U) Summary:  Yunnan's main land ports with Vietnam and Laos 
-- Hekou and Mohan -- are both preparing for significant 
increases in trade and travel flows with the January 1, 2010 
entry-into-force of the China-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA).  With the building of major new highways, travel to 
these crossing points has become much faster and more reliable 
over the last two years, and both have invested in expanding 
their port facilities and other infrastructure.  Hekou, already 
a well-established and moderately busy port, appears more likely 
to benefit quickly from expanding trade.  While Mohan's 
officials are enthusiastically encouraging extensive 
infrastructure expansion, trade on the China-Lao border remains 
very sparse.  Photos from the port visits can be viewed at 
tinyurl.com/YunnanPorts.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) Consul General and PolEconoffs made a week-long, January 
17-23 road trip to Kunming, Yunnan's capital, and to areas of 
Yunnan Province bordering Vietnam and Laos.  Ref A discusses 
Yunnan's overall trade with ASEAN, especially in light of the 
January 1 CAFTA launch.  This cable describes visits to two of 
the main land ports through which Yunnan's trade with ASEAN 
flows: Hekou on the Vietnam border, and Mohan on the border with 
Laos and on the main land route to Thailand.  (The third main 
land port for Yunnan is Ruili, on the border with Burma.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶I. Hekou: Border Town on the Red River With Frontier Flavor 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Hekou sits on the banks of the Red River (Hong He), 
across from the Vietnamese town of Lao Cai, which was one of 
three main entry points for China's invasion during the 1979 war 
between the two countries.  Trade has steadily increased since 
the border was formally reopened in 1993, but as late as 2007 
visiting Congenoffs were awoken by strains of "The East is Red" 
being blasted across the border toward Lao Cai, from whence, in 
turn, patriotic Vietnamese songs were broadcast into Hekou (Ref 
¶B.  During our January travel the loudspeakers were not to be 
heard, perhaps reflecting warmer, more pragmatic ties between 
Beijing and Hanoi.) 
 
¶5. (U) This trip on the new highway from Mengzi, the capital of 
Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous Prefecture, 128 kilometers north, 
can now be done in about two hours, less than half of the travel 
time required before.  However, though intended as a main 
transport artery for the flow of increasing trade between China 
and its Southeast Asian neighbors, the new road remains sparsely 
used.  Traffic in both directions was light: a mix of passenger 
sedans, buses, and cargo trucks.  The old road remains open and 
continues to be used by locals travelling between points in 
between.  A few kilometers outside of Hekou, looking across the 
river into Vietnam from our route, we could see parallel 
construction of a new road underway there. 
 
¶6. (U) Hekou today is clearly a town oriented around a 
well-established, bustling cross-border trade, and something of 
a Chinese-Vietnamese hybrid.  Most signs -- on business and 
government buildings -- were written in both languages.  Plenty 
of stores sold a range of standard cheap Chinese goods, while 
the central covered market was filled with low-quality 
Vietnamese goods -- baskets, ornate knives, kitchen supplies, 
and miscellaneous decorative items.  Also on sale were plenty of 
tropical fruit and various other food items from Vietnam.  Most 
of the sellers in the market were from Vietnam and mostly unable 
(or unwilling) to converse in Mandarin.  One seller, in halting 
and basic Mandarin, explained that she had come to Hekou from 
Vietnam three years ago with her family of four to try to make a 
better living -- they had not been able to return so far, though 
it was not clear whether this was due to illegal migrant status 
of lack of economic means. 
 
Sex Trade and Drugs (Well, Moonshine Actually) 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. (SBU) As previously observed in 2007, the town also appeared 
to have a thriving sex industry.  On the next level up from the 
indoor market area, we saw rows of barely disguised brothels. 
At the market below, there was the occasional sex toy for sale 
incongruously displayed among miscellaneous daily use items.  A 
Public Security Bureau officer, during our official briefing, 
confirmed that a number of women and girls from Vietnam -- 
mostly from the poorer mountainous areas -- are trafficked to 
Yunnan each year, while others cross the border illegally 
 
CHENGDU 00000046  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
seeking jobs or marriage.  He did not have detailed numbers, but 
confirmed only that such cases occurred every year.  He 
emphasized good working relationships between police on both 
sides of the border, citing in particular a joint 
anti-Trafficking in Persons (TIP) liaison office set up in 2004. 
 On a day-to-day level, he said, Vietnamese police who receive 
reports of missing Vietnamese girls will often send notes to the 
police in Hekou requesting assistance, and the Hekou police then 
send out officers to search for them. 
 
¶8. (SBU) A more relaxed frontier sensibility was also displayed 
by our hosts, who treated us to the most boisterous and informal 
banquet of the many experienced on the trip.  At our welcoming 
lunch they already brought out the local corn liquor -- a more 
caustic and volatile version of the traditional "baijiu" -- 
insisting on several rounds of toasts to kick off the afternoon. 
 The corn liquor flowed even more freely over dinner, where the 
mayor's young pretty female "secretary" joined the group with 
the apparent sole mission of encouraging overconsumption. 
 
An Overview of the Port Economy: Increasingly 
Large Scale, With Some Ocean Transshipment to Third Countries 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) During our formal briefing by local officials, Vice 
Mayor Wei Zhengfang provided an overview of Hekou's port 
economy.  He described it as an important border port, the 
biggest in Yunnan, accounting for 80 percent of the value of the 
province's trade with Vietnam.  In both 2008 and 2009 a greater 
volume of goods flowed through Hekou than any other land port in 
Yunnan.  (However, Ruili -- on the border with Burma -- 
continued to surpass it in the value of trade.)  The balance of 
trade going through the port has shifted considerably over the 
years.  Chinese exports outnumbered Vietnamese imports more than 
ten to one in 2001, but this proportion has gone down to 
approximately three to one at present, he said. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The nature of the traders has also shifted over the 
years, he continued.  In the early 1990s all border trade 
through Hekou was carried out by individuals, but by later in 
that decade, larger players had started to participate.  By 
2001, about 65 companies were trading through Hekou, and today 
there are 187 companies registered to conduct trade there. 
While a majority of exports go to Vietnam, a portion of the 
exports from China are now transshipped to a handful of 
destinations beyond Vietnam, he reported, including the United 
States, Japan, the United Kingdom and Germany.  The main 
commodities exported via the Hekou include building materials, 
fertilizer, daily necessities, and produce; the main commodities 
being imported include mineral ores, agricultural products, and 
wood.  Mr. Wei did not know what proportion of imports or 
exports handled in Hekou were coming from or going to other 
provinces outside of Yunnan. 
 
Hekou Port: Two Old, Smaller 
Rail/Road Bridges, Mix of Pedestrian and Truck Trade 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Currently a single bridge, able to accommodate both 
foot and truck traffic, serves as the main conduit of goods 
flowing between Hekou and Lao Cai.  Additionally, several 
hundred meters away, rail cargo between Kunming and Hanoi can 
still cross over an old narrow gauge railway bridge, originally 
built by the French about 100 years ago.  At the traffic bridge, 
a steady flow of traffic moved in both directions during our 
visit -- a mix of cargo trucks, tricycles with platforms piled 
so high with goods they often required several people to push 
them slowly along, and miscellaneous individuals.  Most of the 
trucks we saw appeared to be carrying produce.  The tricycle 
exporters carried dried beans and fresh vegetables, household 
goods, and various building materials-- mostly large ceramic 
tiles.  Current China-Vietnam border trade rules allow 
tariff-free trade by individuals up to the amount of goods that 
can be piled on a three-wheeled (non-motor-powered) bike, 
officials told us. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Lined up behind the Entry and Exit Inspection Center, 
on a street off of the bridge entrance, were dozens of the 
tricycles, piled with bags and boxes, waiting for inspection. 
In a separate area, people were busily unloading and reloading 
about half a dozen trucks filled with non-tropical fruit 
(apples, pears, oranges) bound for Vietnam.  Only Hekou-plated 
trucks are allowed across the bridge, so trucks arriving with 
goods from other parts of China had to transfer their loads 
before entering Vietnam.  We saw trucks from Shaanxi, Jiangsu, 
Henan, and Sichuan either in the process of unloading or lined 
up waiting to do so. 
 
CHENGDU 00000046  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶13. (SBU) Our Yunnan Province Foreign Affairs Office handler, Gu 
Qiong (who accompanied us throughout out our entire Yunnan 
journey) explained that all vehicles carrying goods in either 
direction must go through two checkpoints, one on each side of 
the border.  Negotiations are underway that include discussion 
of either establishing joint inspections or agreeing to mutually 
recognize one another's inspections, but these are taking place 
at the national level, she said, noting that neither Hekou nor 
Yunnan officials were involved.  She was uncertain regarding how 
much progress had been made on these discussions, conveying her 
impression that the difficulties mostly lay on the Vietnamese 
side, where "too many departments" were involved. 
 
Plans for the Future: 
A New Bridge and a Free Trade Border Zone 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) A few kilometers upstream, a new bridge stands still 
empty, with a large and impressive looking port building.  A 
joint Chinese-Vietnamese project, construction began in June 
2007 and was completed last year, explained Mayor Wei.  The 295 
meter long bridge will be put into operation "soon," he said, 
and is primarily intended for heavy cargo truck traffic, with 
the existing bridge focusing, in the future, on pedestrian, 
bi/tri cycle, and small vehicle trade.   A large truck parking 
lot and a new railway connection hub are being built just next 
to the new port building, which also lies closer to the highway. 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) Wei also described a new China-Vietnam Free Trade 
Border Zone that he said both governments have agreed to in 
principle.  It is to consist of two parts, he explained, one in 
Bashan Development Zone in Hekou with an area of 25 square 
kilometers, and the other in Laojie, Vietnam with an area of 160 
hectares.  Further detailed planning, construction and 
management must still be worked out by both sides, however, 
"which will take a long time." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
II. Mohan: Gateway to Future Trade with Thailand? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶16. (U) The Chinese land port of Mohan straddles the new 
Kunming-Bangkok Highway as it enters Laos.  While China-Lao 
trade remains limited, the road's importance as a potential 
gateway for China-Thailand trade is indisputable.  However, this 
remains a matter of future potential rather than present 
reality. 
 
¶17. (U) Travelling to Mohan took two and a half hours from 
Jinhong, the capital of Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture, 
along the new Kunming-Bangkok Highway, more than halving the 
previous driving time.  Traffic along this route was even 
sparser than the Mengzi to Hekou route, with much of the road 
flanked by banana and rubber tree plantations.  (Note: Our 
drivers told us that the Lao-Thai border could be reached with 
another three hours' drive.  End Note.)  Despite a flurry of 
recent building projects, we found that Mohan still remains a 
sleepy, small town. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Our official meeting with Zheng Biwu, Mohan's Vice 
Party Secretary, was arguably the most content-free in our 
Yunnan travels.  He gave a general overview of Mohan's port 
history: the port was set up in 1993, the border market in 2001, 
and the economic development zone in 2006.  Previously a mere 
town, Mohan has been upgraded to a "special county-level 
district" directly under the government of Xishuangbanna.  He 
explained that the China-Thailand trade flowing through the 
Mohan port remains small -- about USD 20 million in 2009 -- but 
has increased by about 10 percent annually over the last five 
years.  (Note: According to official numbers published by the 
Yunnan Department of Commerce, Yunnan-Thai trade was down by 6.2 
percent in 2009.  It is, however, possible that trade continued 
to increase via Mohan despite the overall decrease.  End Note.) 
 
At the Port: One Truck, One Bus, and Not Much Else 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶19. (SBU) Proceeding to the border, we were shown a very new, 
clean, and modern port facility.  While noting that it was a 
Saturday, and that there may be more activity during weekdays, 
it was a remarkably quiet border crossing.  During a half-hour 
visit, we saw about a dozen people going through the immigration 
processing, along with one truck and one bus coming into China. 
Party Secretary Zheng was notably unhelpful, presenting various 
excuses to not let us speak with any PSB officials there -- the 
 
CHENGDU 00000046  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
least credible being simply that they were "too busy."  When we 
asked whether we could walk further up toward the actual border, 
he proclaimed that the "police will stop you."  (We particularly 
noted the contrast to Hekou, where local officials arranged on 
short notice both to include a PSB officer in our official 
briefing and for a walk "across the border" and a few meters 
into Vietnamese territory by walking out to the center and 
beyond of both the old and new road bridges and the railway 
bridge, with no objection whatsoever from police on either side 
of the border.) 
 
If You Build It: 
Large Developments Reflect Mohan's Hopes for the Future 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Although a dramatic increase of traffic along the 
Kunming-Bangkok highway has not yet materialized, Mohan appears 
to be intent on being prepared when it does.  The stretch of 
road heading into the town and border crossing area was 
scattered with several large-scale construction zones, including 
a massive long-distance bus station, a logistics center, and a 
rather extravagant new government building.  The bus station is 
an investment by a company from Pu'er (a mid-sized town further 
North, named for Yunnan's famous tea) that runs the 
long-distance station there, Zheng told us.  In addition, he 
said, private investors are planning to build several new 
hotels.  When asked where the business would come from to use 
such a bus station and fill the new hotels, he said investors 
are expecting a new flow of Chinese (and perhaps Thai) tourists 
taking advantage of new roads and improved infrastructure to 
travel between China and Thailand. 
 
¶21. (U) Photos of both ports are posted at 
tinyurl.com/YunnanPorts or see Ref C. 
BROWN