10CHENGDU24
SW CHINA: YIBIN'S YANGTZE RIVER PORT PROJECT -- WASTED
Thu Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO0824
OO RUEHGH
DE RUEHCN #0024/01 0282349
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 282349Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3719
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0060
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4442UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000024 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EWWT EIND ECIN ETRD BEXP PGOV CH
SUBJECT: SW CHINA: YIBIN'S YANGTZE RIVER PORT PROJECT -- WASTED 
CAPITAL INVESTMENT, OR A WISE BET ON CHINA'S FUTURE? 
 
REF: A) 09 CHENGDU 262/263;  B) 09 CHENGDU 310 
 
CHENGDU 00000024  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  Sichuan's fifth largest city, Yibin, is 
moving ahead with a river port project that, when finished, will 
be the largest port facility in the province.  An Yibin City/ 
Shanghai International Port Group joint venture began 
construction in late 2008.  When this 20-year, USD-190-million 
project is completed in 2030, the port will have 23 berths 
capable of handling 4 million containers and 70 million tons of 
bulk cargo annually.  Geography and government efforts to 
coordinate port activity will limit competition among river 
ports on the Yangtze and its tributaries.  Yibin will provide 
farmers displaced by the construction with jobs at the new port, 
and will establish an economic development zone that officials 
hope will attract new factories.  We hope that follow-on visits 
by Senior Commercial Officer to Leshan -- and two other large, 
"second-tier" cities in Sichuan visited recently by Consul 
General -- will generate business opportunities for U.S. 
companies.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
New Port Expanding Yibin's Role in Trade 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Zhou Changqing, Human Resource Director of the Yibin 
Port Company in Yibin, 150 miles south of Chengdu, told Consul 
General January 7 that the Yangtze river port his company is 
building would make Yibin an important cargo transport hub.  The 
four berths of the first phase, begun in December 2008, will be 
completed by the end of 2010.  This will enable Yibin to 
dispatch river traffic to eastern China, rather than shipping 
through the river ports of Luzhou or Chongqing.  Zhou estimated 
that many of the shippers of the city's USD 200 million imports 
-- including of coal, phosphorous, machinery, and chemicals -- 
would also use the river port.  Yibin's new river port will also 
serve other Sichuanese cities such as Zigong and Neijiang, as 
well as nearby cities in Yunnan and Guizhou provinces. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) When completed in 2030, the Yibin port will have 23 
berths for container cargo as well as loading facilities for 
bulk cargo.  Zhou said that the 20-year project would cost 1.3 
billion RMB (USD 190 million).  Economic development zones near 
the port will increase demand for port facilities.  Yibin's new 
Lingang Economic Development Zone, is Sichuan's largest 
riverside economic zone.  Zhou expects that machinery 
manufacturers will move into the development zone. 
 
 
 
Official Hopes Cooperation Will Limit Competition, 
 
Partnering with Shanghai International Ports Group 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Luzhou and Chongqing, major ports downriver from Yibin, 
will compete for cargo with Yibin.  Zhou added that geography 
and government efforts to coordinate port activity would limit 
competition among the ports.  Cargo from southern and 
southwestern Sichuan province will likely flow to Yibin or 
Luzhou.  Chongqing, by contrast, is better situated to draw 
traffic from Nanchong, Guang'an, and Dazhou.  He further added 
that the Sichuan Provincial Government proposed a 
"Yibin-Luzhou-Leshan Port Group," which would differentiate port 
functions and reduce competition among Sichuan river ports. 
This proposal would have Yibin specialize in containers, and 
Luzhou specialize in bulk cargo.  Inter-Provincial port 
cooperation may take longer, however.  Zhou said that a 
Shanghai-Chongqing-Sichuan river shipping coordination meeting 
was held in Chongqing last year, but no agreement was reached. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Shanghai International Port Group (SIPG) has partnered 
with Yibin for the development and operation of the new port.  A 
2007-2008 SIPG survey determined that Yibin had the best 
 
CHENGDU 00000024  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
potential port location on the middle and upper reaches of the 
Yangtze. 
 
 
 
Resettling Displaced Resident around the Port 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The new port facility will displace about 200 peasants. 
  Zhou said that many of the peasants have been moved into 
temporary, transitional houses until their new houses are 
constructed.  The new housing provided will be an apartment that 
is 30 square meters (about 322 square feet) per member of 
household.  Farmers who have not yet reached retirement age will 
be given jobs at the new port, while those past retirement age 
will be entitled to the retirement benefits of all urban 
residents. 
 
 
 
Comment: Value of Visiting "Second-Tier" Cities; 
 
Yibin Port Project: Wasted or Wise Public Investment? 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Yibin is the third "second-tier" city in Sichuan 
Province that Consul General has visited formally in the last 
six months, after Mianyang (ref A) and Leshan (ref B).  Although 
"second tier," these cities, and the surrounding administrative 
regions under them, each contain several million residents -- 
smaller cities by Chinese standards, but major metropolises by 
an American yardstick.  Two of these trips have included visits 
to U.S. and Chinese multinationals and, in the cases of Yibin 
and Leshan, tours of major public infrastructure projects.  In 
each case, they have also led to, or will lead to, follow-on 
visits by Chengdu's Senior Commercial Officer.  We will continue 
this close integration of reporting, commercial work (and public 
diplomacy) during future visits to other second-tier cities in 
our consular district. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) In regards to the Leshan port development project (ref 
B), Post had questioned whether it was another example of 
excessive, wasteful capital investment by China, or a wise bet 
on the country's future.  We are similarly conflicted about 
Yibin's huge, 23-berth river port project, which is located only 
a relatively short distance downstream from Leshan's proposed 
port/development zone (and other river ports in the area).  When 
examining a schematic drawing of Yibin's completed port in the 
year 2030, one also sees a large, modern city in the background 
-- at a site where we observed in 2010 nothing more than large 
swaths of earth being sculpted, with empty agricultural land in 
the background.  Perhaps Yibin's project will merely one of a 
long series of major infrastructure projects in China that, over 
the last 30 years, have successfully propelled the country's 
rapid economic growth.  On the other hand, Yibin's new river 
port could prove to be underutilized, and scaled back in number 
of berths eventually constructed. 
BROWN