10TRIPOLI109
TRIPOLI'S CONSULAR LEADERSHIP DAY
Tue Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO9793
RR RUEHTRO
DE RUEHTRO #0109 0401447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091447Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5775
INFO RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 1544
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 6333UNCLAS TRIPOLI 000109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA/VO/F/P; CAIRO FOR RCO CHRIS ROWAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS CMGMT PREL LY
SUBJECT: TRIPOLI'S CONSULAR LEADERSHIP DAY 
 
¶1.      Summary:  Post's Consular Section spent February 4 in 
observance of Embassy Tripoli's first-ever Consular Leadership 
Day, with the theme of "Practicing 360 Degree Diplomacy." Taking 
the time out from our usual schedule to focus on improving our 
outreach to the Libyan public and American citizens in Libya, as 
well as our coordination with other sections and within the 
Consular section, was a valuable experience. End summary. 
 
¶2.      To allow sufficient lead time to clear our schedule for an 
entire day, we scheduled Consular Leadership Day for February 4 
this year. The day began with an hour-long discussion focusing 
on improving our outreach to the two communities we serve - the 
Libyan public and American citizens in Libya. Despite our being 
open for full NIV services for over 10 months, many Libyans are 
still unaware that they can apply for a U.S. visa in Tripoli. We 
brainstormed a range of public outreach initiatives that the 
Embassy could undertake to better get the word out to Libyans 
about our services. We also discussed a variety of outreach 
options to Americans in Libya, including instituting a quarterly 
ACS newsletter to send to all Americans registered with the 
Embassy, and a Consular Section open house devoted to ACS issues. 
 
¶3.      Following the brainstorming session, we spent 30 minutes 
doing "reverse interviewing," where our LES corrected some of 
the Arabic phrases the FSO's and EFM use at the NIV and ACS 
windows, and then the native English-speakers fine-tuned the 
English phrases the LES regularly use with our clients. That 
exercise was followed by a fiercely competitive game of 
"Consular Jeopardy," played on the roof of the Consular 
Section's new office facility, where all enjoyed the balmy 
weather and Consular trivia questions. 
 
¶4.      The Ambassador and DCM  spent an hour sharing a brown-bag 
lunch with all Consular section staff, discussing the importance 
of the Embassy's Consular services to the US-Libya bilateral 
relationship. The Ambassador provided feedback on the outreach 
initiatives we had come up with earlier in the day, and we will 
subsequently move forward with several of them. After lunch, we 
undertook a team-building activity that highlighted the 
importance of good communication: as one person described a 
photo, his/her partner had to duplicate the photo, drawing it 
solely based on the partner's description. This was a useful 
reminder of the importance of providing detail and clarifying 
the context when explaining the various situations that 
regularly arise during our work-day. We then focused on ways to 
further improve our customer service, and make every client who 
appears in our section have a positive experience. 
 
¶5.      We capped off Consular Leadership Day with an hour-long 
open house, with colleagues from throughout the Embassy, 
including the Ambassador and DCM, stopping by to tour our new 
waiting room, and get guided explanations of the services 
provided at each window. Overall, our first Consular Leadership 
Day was a fun, productive experience, and we look forward to 
moving forward on the various projects we collectively came up 
with during the day, as well as to being more mindful in the 
future of the importance of "360 Diplomacy," and our outreach 
efforts, from daily interactions with our clients to broader 
initiatives. 
 
CRETZ