10TRIPOLI164
EMBASSY TRIPOLI NOMINATIONS: MEPI STUDENT LEADERS PROGRAM
Tue Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO0815
RR RUEHTRO
DE RUEHTRO #0164/01 0541157
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231157Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5849
INFO RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 6407UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TRIPOLI 000164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PI FOR ELIZABETH G SULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: XF LY PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TRIPOLI NOMINATIONS: MEPI STUDENT LEADERS PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 1393 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Tripoli's Public Affairs Section submits seven 
nominations for the summer 2010 MEPI Student Leaders Program. 
The candidates are, in rank order by Embassy preference: 1) Mr. 
Ahmed A A Albibas, 2) Ms. Aram A M Ellafi, 3) Mr. Ataher A Naas, 
4) Ms. Mawada M B Elkilani, 5) Mr. Abdalla S Albayoudi, 6) Saleh 
S A Saad, and 7) Hana M ElBurki. 
 
----------------- 
CANDIDATE BIODATA 
----------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) Candidate biodata follows: 
a.    Albibas 
b.    Ahmed 
c.    Alarifi Alagili 
d.    12/05/1987 
e.    Tripoli 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Male 
j.    Suliman Kater Street, Janzour 
k.    +2180214893753 
l.    rowdy_libya@yahoo.com 
m.    None 
n.    Al-Fateh University 
o.    Mechanical Engineering 
p.    Ice Cream Factory employee; Salesman (family telephone 
shop); Engine Maintenance, car mechanic 
q.    Qaddafi Foundation 2009 Award for Charity and community 
service 
r.    Shabab alQemma Charity Group 
s.    Bee Keeping 
t.    Soccer, chess, athletics 
u.    None 
v.    Telephonic interview 
w.    Plans to become a professor of engineering 
x.    Nominee has demonstrated a commitment to community service 
and social activism.  In a country where students rarely work, 
the nominee has held multiple part time jobs to assist his 
family while maintaining strong grades throughout high school. 
He is from a town outside the capital that has not been 
developed by the Government as thoroughly as Tripoli. 
a.    As the candidate plans to become a university lecturer, he 
would benefit tremendously from seeing the U.S. model of 
education in which students and faculty have a much closer 
relationship and in which the student is empowered to design his 
or her own career plans, engage in his or her own social 
interests and be political and socially active. 
b.    As a natural leader, he will benefit tremendously from 
meeting like-minded peers from both within his country and in 
the region.  He will gain confidence in his ability to work for 
the changes he recognizes the country needs.  During the 
interview, the candidate stated that one of the greatest social 
problems that he sees is the lack of national pride among his 
youth peers.  He sees dissatisfaction with the government and 
its effect on national morale as a real impediment to the social 
development of Libyan students and leaders.  He stated that 
change of this order will originate on the college and 
university campuses of Libya. 
c.    The nominee has stated his interest in long-term 
investment in a U.S. education - Post Public Affairs Office 
would like to maintain close ties with a young leader like Mr. 
AlBibas to 'track' his educational development and, ideally, 
enroll him in further U.S. study programs. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
 
 
a.    Ellafi 
b.    Aram 
c.    Ali M 
d.    12/06/1987 
e.    Tripoli 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Female 
j.    Tripoli 
k.    +218913808700; +218213605247 
l.    aroomaa50us@yahoo.com 
m.    None 
n.    Al-Fateh University/Economic faculty 
o.    Electronic commerce Department 
p.    None 
q.    completed the Ernst & Young Internship Program in the 
Business Advisory         Services; 
r.    None 
s.    Drawing and Swimming 
t.    Plays the guitar 
 
TRIPOLI 00000164  002 OF 005 
 
 
u.    course completion Certificate (Swandean School of English) 
Wimbledon, Britain from 06/04/2002 to 09/04/2002. 
v.    Telephonic interview & test score 
w.    Plans to become a business woman 
x.    Ms. Ellafi provided a very strong short essay in which she 
identified the recently expanded drug crisis in Libya as being a 
matter of growing concern and a phenomenon that is 
disproportionately affecting the student population.  She 
proposed a plan to have students on college campuses work to 
raise awareness of the problem and form peer support groups, a 
concept familiar to Americans but unheard of on Libyan campuses. 
 She has proven herself to be a leader and a great candidate for 
the MEPI leadership workshop. 
a.    The candidate has decided that upon graduating with a 
degree in economics from Al-Fateh University, she will enter the 
private sector to establish herself as a businesswoman.  In a 
country where women are largely underrepresented in the business 
community, strong leaders like Ms. Ellafi are sorely needed. 
b.    Ms. Ellafi stands to gain considerably from her 
participation in the MEPI program.  As a woman with strong 
interests and clearly defined career goals, the self-confidence 
that comes from independent travel across the world will benefit 
her tremendously. 
c.    Ms. Ellafi is an ideal candidate for the Fulbright Program 
upon completion of her undergraduate degree in Economics. 
Public Affairs Section Tripoli plans to "market" its exchange 
programs to alumni of the MEPI program to foster a lifelong 
appreciation of education and U.S. study. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
a.    Naas 
b.    Ataher 
c.    Ahmed 
d.    12/21/1985 
e.    Tripoli 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Male; 
j.    Tripoli/Sarraj Area nearby Afriqia High school 
k.    +218926617708; +218217284687 
l.    durarcpia@gmail.com 
m.    None 
n.    Al-Fateh University 
o.    Medical faculty 
p.    IT Customer Support at Gold Adler Computer Services 
Company and IT Customer Support at the Diamond Computer Services 
company 
q.    None 
r.    None 
s.    Sports 
t.    Football 
u.    None 
v.    Telephonic interview & test score 
w.    Plans to become a physician with a view to advancing 
long-term healthcare reform in the country 
x.    Mr. Naas has written a strong essay in which he identifies 
how his career plans of becoming a physician will benefit his 
society.  He intends to work with patients directly, but to set 
a national agenda of health care reform.  He rightly identified 
during a telephone interview that Libya has an advantaged 
situation of having abundant resources and is largely improving 
its human capital but suffers from popular apathy toward public 
health programs.  His plans of working to advance health care 
reform are worthy of fostering. 
a.    Libya has recently begun to improve its capacity to train 
qualified doctors.  Most, however, focus their sights on 
establishing private practices or joining the Ministry of Health 
payroll as doctors in public health facilities.  Of the many 
medical students that Post has seen in various programs, only 
Mr. Naas has identified changing public attitudes toward health 
and reforming national health care administration as a long time 
personal goal. He will undoubtedly make great contributions to 
the local dialogue on health care and is someone that the U.S. 
Government should begin investing in early to see that he is 
empowered with a solid education and training. 
b.    This applicant is in a considerable position: his father 
is the Chief Prosecutor of the Libyan Supreme Court which 
largely gives him the right to speak frankly on matters where 
others would fear to let their voice be heard in a country where 
information is closely monitored and tightly controlled. 
c.    Because of his clear vision for his career prospects and 
social agenda, Post believes that Mr. Naas would be a strong 
candidate for a Fulbright program focusing on health care 
administration or public administration. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
 
a.    Elkilani 
b.    Mawada 
c.    M. Bushnaf 
d.    02/16/1990 
 
TRIPOLI 00000164  003 OF 005 
 
 
e.    Benghazi 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Female 
j.    Tripoli 
k.    +218913685008; +218927270523 
l.    C_mawada@yahoo.com; Living4zalfota@yahoo.com 
m.    None 
n.    Garyounis University 
o.    Faculty of Information Technology 
p.    Part time work at the RIHAM photographer Benghazi 
q.    Golden Medal for sports in primary school in Vienna; 
Silver Medal in self defense martial arts in 2001 in Slovakia; 
Honor certificate for a short film Childhood Hazard, certificate 
awarded for Social Affairs Benghazi 2007; First Award for a 
symbolic sketch in reply to the Danish sketch against the 
Prophet Mohammed in 2006; Recognition Certificate for 
participating in film making "Enough Ignoring Us" concerning 
disabled women in Libyan society as a participation in the first 
North African conference of disabled women in Tripoli; 
certificate of recognition in the competition of the "young 
Engineer" in the faculty of IT using the programming languages 
C++. 
r.    Participation in Establishing the Culture Club at the 
Al-Fateh Center Benghazi 2006; Supervising the Al-Fateh Center 
annual children fashion show 2006 
s.    General reading; watching horror films; keeping pets. 
Ice-skating, cycling, swimming and beginners, self defense; 
acting, participated in the horror film "Drops of Horror"; 
Designing and making clothes and embroidery 
t.    Writing stories, fiction novels and detective stories; 
Writing scenario and the plot for a horror film "Drops of 
Horror" produced by a group of students at the Al-Fatih Center 
for Gifted Students; Symbolic Drawing and sketching. 
u.    Primary: Arabic school-Vienna Austria; Preparatory school: 
Arabic school-Bratislava Slovakia; Secondary school: El-Fateh 
Center for Gifted students- Benghazi-Libya 
v.    Telephonic interview & test score 
w.    None 
x.    Ms. Elkilani is an exceptional candidate for the MEPI 
Leaders Program.  She is from Benghazi, far from the more 
developed and opportunity-abundant capital city of the country. 
Although she spent much of her childhood in Europe, where her 
father was posted as a Libyan diplomat, she is now back "home" 
in Libya for the first time.  She moved back to Libya with 
confidence and independence--she has leveraged these traits and 
qualities on the campus of Garyounis University. She 
participates in campus and private social activities including 
community service and social activism programs across the city. 
a.    The candidate has very definite career goals: she plans to 
enter the (largely) men-only industry of Information Technology 
in Libya. This program will help her to identify likeminded Arab 
women who will join her in breaking glass ceilings and becoming 
leaders in their industry. 
b.    Ms. Elkilani would be an active participant in on-campus 
discussions during the MEPI program.  She stands to benefit 
tremendously from exposure to the United States and the messages 
of women empowerment and entrepreneurialism that the Middle East 
Partnership present. 
c.    Embassy Tripoli prioritizes recruitment of women from 
across the Libyan Jamahiriya in its programming, particularly 
those from outside the Tripoli Capital Area. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
 
a.    Albayoudi 
b.    Abdalla 
c.    S. 
d.    06/05/1991 
e.    Benghazi 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Male 
j.    Benghazi 
k.    +218925762687 
l.    albayoudi@yahoo.com 
m.    None 
n.    Arab Medical University 
o.    Medicine 
p.    None 
q.    None 
r.    Alahly Benghazi Club, Benghazi sport centre, and Al Sahab 
Gym 
s.    Soccer and Tennis; 
t.    weight lifting; 
u.    UK. 
v.    Telephonic interview 
w.    Plans to become a sports and orthopedic physician 
x.    Mr. Albayoudi is a strong student at Arab Medical 
University in Benghazi.  He has excellent grades, speaks strong 
 
TRIPOLI 00000164  004 OF 005 
 
 
English and is excited to participate in a workshop focusing on 
leadership. 
a.    As a promising young physician, Mr. Albayoudi would 
benefit from hearing from peers about how the role of the 
physician can be much broader than treating patients. 
b.    The candidate is from the city of Benghazi in the East of 
the Libyan Jamahiriyya.  Although a large city, it lags behind 
Tripoli in terms of opportunity and development.  The impact of 
a program on leadership could be profound as Mr. Albayoudi could 
be among the cadre of doctors that establish a lasting and 
workable health care system in the East of the country. 
c.    Post makes great effort to recruit nominees from the 
economically disadvantaged communities of Libya. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
 
a.    Saad 
b.    Saleh 
c.    Salem A 
d.    2/17/1984 
e.    Bengwad Agdabia 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Male 
j.    Tripoli 
k.    +218914914162, +218913784187 
l.    salehthegreat2000@yahoo.com 
m.    None 
n.    AlFateh University 
o.    Chemical engineering 
p.    Waha Co. as Process engineer shift supervisor 
(2003-present) 
q.    None 
r.    Petroleum Institute football team and literature 
championship 
s.    Reading and watching documentaries 
t.    Extracurricular activities; 
u.    None. 
v.    Telephonic interview & test score 
w.    Plans to get PHD in the atomic chemistry engineering 
x.    The applicant has very precise career plans that involve 
continuing his education to the doctoral level and then working 
in scientific research focusing on water treatment and 
electrical generation.  The applicant has also indicated his 
long term interest in becoming a university professor. 
a.    Mr. Saad would gain tremendous insight into the U.S. 
academic world.  He also wrote a compelling essay in which he 
identified public corruption and embezzlement of public funds to 
be the greatest political and social threat that Libya currently 
faces.  In his essay, he recommends that students play a role in 
raising awareness and demands for increased accountability 
within the Libyan system. Participating in a leadership workshop 
could help him understand how students can play a responsible 
role and interact with governments. 
b.    As the nominee is interested in continuing his education 
toward a PhD, it would be great for him to understand the U.S. 
educational system so that he may one day qualify for a 
Fulbright Science and Technology Award. 
c.    A key Mission Strategic Plan agenda item for Mission 
Tripoli is encouraging the diversion of sciences in Libya away 
from weapons research and into areas of beneficial study to 
include water purification, pharmaceuticals manufacturing and 
power generation.  Our candidate has these interests in mind. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
a.    El Burki 
b.    Hana 
c.    M 
d.    11/26/1987 
e.    Benghazi 
f.    Libya 
g.    Libya 
h.    Libya 
i.    Female 
j.    Benghazi 
k.    +218913826577, +218928668553; +218925301009 
l.    smile_viva_20@yahoo.com; jamaltop-2000@hotmail.com 
m.    None 
n.    Arab Medical University 
o.    Medicine 
p.    None 
q.    Trained for one year in a pharmacy to improve her 
knowledge in drugs 
r.    Previously participated in exhibitions in drawing on her 
campus 
s.    Loves learning languages, already speaks Italian and 
learning French 
t.    Swimming, poetry and playing basketball 
u.    None. 
v.    Scholastic reports 
w.    Plans to be a doctor 
 
TRIPOLI 00000164  005 OF 005 
 
 
x.    Ms. Elburki originally applied for a separate program, but 
PAS recommends her to be considered as an alternate for the MEPI 
student leaders workshops as she has demonstrated strong 
leadership, maintained good grades, presents a clear vision for 
her professional development and as a female from Benghazi 
represents a key target audience for Mission Libya public 
diplomacy programming. 
a.    As a medical student, Post believes that Ms. ElBurki 
stands to gain much for her participation in the workshop.  Post 
hopes that she will learn about additional roles that physicians 
can play in shaping the health care environment of their home 
country. 
b.    As a woman from a city that lacks the opportunity and 
development of the nation's capital, Ms. Elburki stands to gain 
confidence and a sense of independence through her participation 
in the program. 
c.    Mission Libya prioritizes applications from candidates 
outside the national capital area and particularly from women. 
y.    Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, +218912203672, 
CaplanJS@state.gov 
---------------- 
POINT OF CONTACT 
---------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Embassy Tripoli's point of contact for this program is 
Mr. Jared Caplan, Cultural Affairs Officer, telephone: 
218912203672, CaplanJS@state.gov. 
POLASCHIK