07DAKAR1655
FRENCH PRESIDENT SARKOZY VISITS DAKAR, LECTURES AFRICAN
Thu Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO6226
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1655/01 2211720
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 091720Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8967
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 001655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ECON KISL SG
SUBJECT: FRENCH PRESIDENT SARKOZY VISITS DAKAR, LECTURES AFRICAN 
YOUTH 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) On July 26-27, French President Nicolas Sarkozy visited 
Senegal as the first stop on his mission to some of France's former 
African colonies.  With the stated goal of heralding a new era in 
Franco-African relationships, he delivered a major speech on his 
African policy at a Dakar's Cheikh Anta Diop University.  In his 
usual provocative style, he pointed out that Africa's "tragedy" is 
that "it has not been enough a part of history" and Africans "should 
stop repeating endlessly the same words and gestures" and "become 
conscious that the Golden Age they are regretting will not come back 
because it has never existed."  Though Sarkozy cited the "negative 
aspects" of colonization and the slave trade as "a crime against 
humanity," he urged African youth to stop blaming France and its 
colonial past and to recognize the responsibility of Africans 
themselves for Africa's failures.  During his visit to Senegal, 
Sarkozy also offered new economic development assistance.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
A DESIRE TO PROVOKE 
------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) As part of his July 26-27 visit to Senegal, many 
Senegalese intellectuals expected French President Sarkozy's key 
address at Dakar University to offer words, and perhaps financial 
pledges, of support to an institution suffering from overcrowding 
and acute budgetary problems.  Surprisingly, after acknowledging 
France's mistakes in its past relationships with Africa, Sarkozy 
lectured Africans and urged them to take full responsibility for the 
continent's failures.  France, in his view, could not be held 
responsible for "the dictatorships, the corruption, the fanaticism, 
and bloody wars that Africans wage against each other."  He further 
urged Africans to avoid "self-hate" and the pitfall of rejecting 
their "heritage" from Europe which is an important part of their own 
history.  He encouraged the establishment of a new partnership, 
"Eurafrica," to address the effects of globalization and boost 
economic development between Europe and Africa. 
 
MIXED REACTIONS 
--------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) The media considered Sarkozy's speech paternalistic and 
old-fashioned.  Two weeks after the speech was delivered, editorials 
and opinions are still common in the local media condemning the 
French President's attitude towards Africa.  One student told 
Embassy political staff, "Sarkozy has no respect for Africans, 
previous French presidents at least made the effort of using 
diplomatic hypocrisy . . . with Sarkozy, France shows that it does 
not count on us; we have to draw our own conclusions."  One student 
association leader noted that the speech led to heated debate on 
campus, indicating that it was at first rejected by all, but a few 
days later, students were divided into two camps - those who 
considered that Sarkozy had "insulted Africans," and those who think 
"he was just telling the truth."  This student noted that the speech 
is a starting point and it is time for Africans to "meet the 
challenge."  Some editorial writers have also used Sarkozy's address 
to highlight the need for Senegal, especially the country's 
political leaders and intellectuals, to distance itself from 
France's political and cultural influence. 
 
TOUGH TALK BUT MORE OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE 
---------------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) On July 27, during a cabinet meeting, President Wade, 
drawing from the main points of Sarkozy's visit, thanked the French 
President for his committed support to "accompany" Senegal in its 
efforts to develop a civil nuclear program.  Wade noted that the two 
countries agreed to "promote and protect investment reciprocally." 
Sarkozy reportedly promised seven million euros for programs to help 
rural communities in the Senegal River Valley, 1.8 million euros for 
drinking water and sanitation, and new financing to the Senegalese 
Water Company (SONES) jointly with the European Investment Bank and 
the West African Development Bank.  President Wade promised Sarkozy 
that he would repatriate all Senegalese that are currently living 
illegally in France. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶5.  (SBU) If Sarkozy was hoping to inspire Senegalese to keep France 
in their hearts as a key partner and cultural reference, he seems to 
have fallen short of his objective.  The speech at the university 
generated a very subdued initial response, and a mostly critical 
post facto public analysis.  The debate about colonization and 
slavery is no longer topical for many young Africans who are more 
focused on how to achieve good governance and be a winner in 
globalization.  African youth who are obsessed by a desire to leave 
the continent by any means probably did not hear Sarkozy.  Many 
Senegalese commentators believe that Sarkozy does not know Africa 
and suspect he is seeking to unilaterally impose a new form of 
"partnership" on them.  His speech may well contribute to widening 
the gap between France and African intellectuals who no longer 
consider France to be a model, and which, according to one 
 
DAKAR 00001655  002 OF 002 
 
 
commentator, "has only useless lessons to offer."  The deliverables 
and pledges that accompanied the visit will also likely not stem the 
current trend in Senegal that places an increasing importance on 
economic ties to and development assistance from Gulf countries and 
China, largely at the expense of French commercial and political 
interests. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  At the same time, the merit of Sarkozy's message, for 
some intellectuals, is that it raised real issues about Africa's 
economic underdevelopment and pushes Africans to think about the 
solutions.  It also remains to be seen if this speech will be 
translated into new French policies that would actually increase the 
pressure on African leaders to promote good governance and encourage 
the youth of the continent to demand more accountability from their 
political leaders.  End Comment. 
 
SMITH