07DAKAR2216
SENEGAL: THE SYMPTOMS OF INSTABILITY
Wed Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO6221
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #2216/01 3181736
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141736Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9568
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 002216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KISL SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: THE SYMPTOMS OF INSTABILITY 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) In a November 2, televised address President Abdoulaye 
Wade called for a "sacred union of the nation" to confront the 
country's economic difficulties.  He proposed to reduce the salaries 
of all workers to establish a national solidarity fund.  He also 
announced that he had instructed the prime minister to reduce the 
size the cabinet.  Union leaders, with the strong support of the 
public, rejected the proposed reductions and continue to call for 
demonstrations and general strikes.  On November 5, the GOS 
retreated by announcing that the measure and deductions would only 
be applied to the salaries of the president, ministers, and 
parliamentarians. END SUMMARY. 
 
CIVIL SERVANTS SAY NO TO SALARY REDUCTIONS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) The fierce and swift rejection of Wade's call for 
solidarity is unprecedented.  Senegalese workers, even under the 
unpopular rule of the Socialist Abdou Diouf, had generally accepted 
salary reductions in order to contribute to a solidarity fund.  This 
refusal is a clear political message calling for economic and 
governance reforms.  Three days before making his proposal, Wade had 
announced 19 measures he had taken or would take to alleviate the 
cost of living.  These measures include, inter alia, tax exemption 
on some food products, energy saving measures, and state-controlled 
prices on commodities.  Measures also included his usual populist 
statements such as accelerating the exploitation of Senegal's 
offshore heavy oil deposits as a response to high oil prices. 
 
WIDENING THE GAP 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Trade union reaction and the media's fierce criticism of 
Wade's governance led the GOS to revise its plans.  Deductions will 
now only be applied to the salary of President Wade (30 per cent) 
and those of the prime minister, ministers, members of the National 
Assembly and the Senate in proportions varying from 25 to 15 per 
cent.  In the eyes of many Senegalese, Wade is wasting the country's 
resources by using inducements such as huge salaries, luxury cars, 
free housing, and free gasoline to keep the political class in line. 
 This reckless spending is becoming unacceptable to ordinary people 
who have barely enough to eat and to the desperate young Senegalese 
who continue to perish by the hundreds at sea in their efforts to 
migrate clandestinely to Spain.  The media have denounced what is 
perceived as unevenly shared sacrifices and are calling for a 
reduction of unnecessary public spending.  They are asking Wade to 
forego the purchase of one of the two new executive jet planes he 
has budgeted for and the elimination of the newly-recreated Senate 
(Note: Wade eliminated the Senate shortly after being elected the 
first time because, according to him, it served no purpose.  He 
recently recreated it again as a largely consultative body.  Its 100 
members all have the status and perquisites of ministers and most 
were appointed by Wade.  End Note.)   The national mood can be 
summed up by the extremely negative comments made by readers against 
Wade on a local Website (rewmi.com) after they posted an article 
from a local newspaper reporting that Wade's acceptance of a Chinese 
limousine donated by the manufacturer.  The police detained the 
owner of the site for 24 hours and are hunting down the authors of 
the comments. 
 
SLIDING INTO STARVATION 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.   (SBU) It is more and more common to hear that many Senegalese 
in urban suburbs or the countryside can only afford one meal per 
day.  Prices for basic goods such as bread, milk, cooking oil, and 
butane gas are skyrocketing and a six percent increase in 
electricity bills is imminent.  The rise in rental costs has also 
been phenomenal.  Some inland areas are suffering from drought 
conditions due to a poor rainy season, and an equine plague has 
killed about 2000 horses, animals which are used by farmers for 
cultivation and as a means of transportation both in the countryside 
and in cities and towns.  It is becoming increasingly difficult for 
many Senegalese to make ends meet and this in turn is fueling a fair 
degree of animosity against the ruling elite. 
 
TRADE UNIONS WAKE UP 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In the past Wade had successfully divided trade unions by 
facilitating the creation of new pro-PDS unions.  Today Senegal has 
18 union associations of which only three are actually 
representative of workers.  However, a growing dissatisfaction in 
the population has led the major unions to put aside their 
difference to join forces against Wade's unpopular measures.  There 
are two main groupings: one an umbrella group called the 
"Intersyndicale des syndicates" led by members from the opposition 
Independence and Labor Party (PIT) and the "Front Unitaire" (United 
 
DAKAR 00002216  002 OF 002 
 
 
Front).  These two labor forces are planning to organize 
demonstrations and a general strike in the coming weeks.  However, 
with Wade's tactical withdrawal of his unpopular measure of salary 
reductions, it is not clear whether or not the unions will continue 
to receive popular support for a general strike. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Many union leaders feel that the GOS lost the skirmish but 
not the battle.  They believe that Wade's ultimate objective was to 
send a blunt message to dissuade workers from demanding new salary 
increases in this difficult economic context.  They all indicated 
their determination to maintain pressure on the GOS to reduce waste 
and corruption in government expenditure and to increase salaries 
across the board.  Since Wade's election in 2000 Senegal is facing 
its first real financial crisis.  The steady rise in oil prices 
caught the GOS unprepared and this was compounded by the fact that a 
large the country's resources had been channeled into political 
patronage and the building of costly infrastructure projects in 
Dakar that Wade wants as the cornerstones of his legacy.  Though 
these projects will likely have long term benefits for economic 
growth of at least the capital, people who need to survive on a 
daily basis are in effect saying to the government "we cannot eat 
roads."  The current socioeconomic turmoil is symptom of a deeper 
malaise and by proposing to reduce the size of his cabinet Wade is 
trying to send a message to the people that he hears their pleas and 
he understands.  However, for many these gestures are far too little 
and much too late. 
SMITH