08DAKAR1279
Senegal: The Misery of Local Democracy
Wed Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO3810
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1279 3101626
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051626Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1384
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 001279 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM SG
SUBJECT: Senegal: The Misery of Local Democracy 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) On October 29, President Abdoulaye Wade fired by decree 
Mbaye Ndiaye, the Mayor of the Parcelles Assainies suburb of Dakar 
for mismanagement.  Ndiaye who is one of the old guards in the 
ruling party and a Deputy at the National Assembly has been punished 
for his loyalty to Macky Sall, the current Chair of the Assembly who 
has fallen into disfavor with Wade.  This is another confirmation of 
the continuing erosion of Senegalese democracy and underlines the 
blurred lines between where the party ends and the state begins. 
END SUMMARY 
 
No tolerance for dissent 
------------------------ 
¶2. (SBU)   Ndiaye showed and independent streak by voting against 
the amending of the Constitution just to remove the Chair of the 
National Assembly.  He did not hesitate to criticize his own party 
for interfering with separation of powers.  Ndiaye is a senior 
ruling party leader who has occupied several strategic positions 
such as Special Advisor to Wade in charge of the Casamance conflict; 
Financial Officer of the PDS; Deputy at the National Assembly and 
Chair of the Defense and Security Committee of the Assembly in 2001 
and Mayor of Parcelles in 2002. 
 
The trampling of local democracy 
-------------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU)   Since his election in 2000, Wade has shown little respect 
for local democracy.  In 2001, he had the Assembly pass a law to 
dissolve all local governments because they were run by the 
Socialist Party.  In 2002, he organized new elections with the 
result that members of his party now control most local governments. 
 The mandate of these officials expired in 2006 but Wade twice, in 
2006 and then in 2007, found a pretext to extend their terms to 
avoid holding elections.  In the mean time, he has systematically 
fired, by decree, local officials belonging to opposition parties, 
(such as his former Prime Minister Idrissa Seck) or members of his 
party who disagreed with his policies.  The Chairman of the Regional 
Council of Diourbel was first in 2006 and Ndiaye is now the second. 
 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶4.  (SBU) Wade does not hesitate to violate legal procedures when 
firing local officials.  Local elections are due on March 22, 2009 
and preparations are underway at the Ministry of Interior, but 
nobody can be sure that they will be held.  If the context is 
unfavorable, it is likely that the President will find a way to 
postpone them again.  The next local elections will be crucial for 
Wade as he will place leaders who will support and work for the 
successor that he will designate.  The recent creation of three new 
regions, to gerrymander the areas where the opposition could win a 
significant number of seats, is a another source of concern.  No 
effort is currently being taken in regard to issuing new voting 
cards to the one million voters who need to change their cards as a 
result of the reshaping of administrative districts. 
Bernicat