05BRUSSELS2735
GAERC: EU FMs ASK SYRIA TO PROMOTE REGIONAL
Tue Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 002735 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SY LE IS IR IZ UZ ZI ID SU IZ CH ZK EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: GAERC: EU FMs ASK SYRIA TO PROMOTE REGIONAL 
STABILITY, CONDEMN UZBEKISTAN; EU TO MONITOR ACEH 
AGREEMENT 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  EU FM's in the July 18 GAERC urged Israel to 
exercise maximum self-restraint and the Palestinian 
Authority to take immediate and effective action 
against those involved in terrorist attacks.  They 
called on Syria to take action to promote regional 
stability, including by supporting the legitimate 
new government of Lebanon and cooperating with the 
Iraqi authorities to prevent cross-border transit 
and support for terrorists.    The Council condemned 
the refusal of the Uzbek authorities to allow an 
independent inquiry into the events in Andijan and 
agreed to review the EU-Uzbekistan Partnership and 
Cooperation Agreement following a visit to the 
region by newly appointed EUSR for Central Asia Jan 
Kubis.  It also tasked its bodies to consider 
further measures, including the introduction of an 
arms embargo.  The Council hailed the successful 
conclusion of the Helsinki negotiations on the Aceh 
region of Indonesia and agreed that the EU was 
prepared, in principle, to provide observers to 
monitor implementation of the agreement.  The 
Council reviewed the Commission's negotiations 
mandate for Turkish accession, but took no position 
on it, deferring full discussion instead to the 
informal Gymnich meeting in the beginning of 
September.  Full text of the GAERC conclusions has 
been sent to EUR/ERA and can be consulted on 
http://ue.eu.int.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  The first GAERC session under the UK Presidency 
issued conclusions on many hot spots, but 
essentially debated the Middle East, Iran and 
Syria/Lebanon.  The highlights: 
 
MIDDLE EAST 
----------- 
 
¶3.  HR Solana reported on his six-day tour of the 
Middle East.  UK Foreign Secretary/GAERC chair Straw 
told the final press conference ministers had a good 
operational discussion on the period between now and 
four weeks from now when Israeli forces are expected 
to begin withdrawal from Gaza.  Noting that the 
entire PA government was in Gaza July 18, Solana 
expressed hope that their efforts to end violence 
will be successful.  Solana urged Hamas to prove 
that it was complying with the ceasefire with 
Israel.  He also noted that the EU has an operation 
on the ground for upgrading Palestinian Police with 
equipment and sophisticated communications gear. 
Ministers agreed to provide continued support to the 
Palestinian Civil Police in the form of an ESDP 
mission, building on the work of the EU Coordination 
Office for Palestinian Policing Support.  External 
Relations Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said most 
important now was not to derail the peace process, 
calling on all leaders to show "courage and 
restraint." 
 
SYRIA/LEBANON 
------------- 
 
¶4.  Straw said ministers heard an "extremely 
interesting" report by UNSYG Special Envoy for the 
implementation of UNSC Resolution 1559 Roed-Larsen. 
Ministers adopted what Straw presented as "tough" 
conclusions on Syria's role in Lebanon.  The 
conclusions called on Syria "to take action to 
promote regional stability, including by supporting 
the legitimate and sovereign new government of 
Lebanon and allowing for smooth circulation of goods 
between the two countries; supporting the political 
process in Iraq by cooperating with Iraqi 
authorities to prevent cross-border transit and 
support for terrorists; and ending support for 
groups that oppose the MEPP and calling them to 
abstain from the use of violence."  Earlier, French 
FM Douste-Blazy told the press that a Syrian 
blockade of the Lebanese border was "not 
acceptable." 
 
IRAN 
---- 
 
¶5.  Straw said the GAERC discussed the Presidential 
election result, noting that the inauguration of the 
new President was scheduled to take place on August 
3, but offering no further comment.  He said he 
updated colleagues on work toward the presentation 
by the EU side in August (vice late July, as 
originally planned before the August 3 inauguration 
date was set) of a comprehensive package on the 
three issues covered by the November 2004 Paris 
agreement: nuclear issues; political and security 
issues and economic and technological cooperation. 
 
INDONESIA/ACEH 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  Straw, Solana and Ferrero-Waldner all hailed the 
successful conclusion of the Helsinki negotiations. 
Solana said the EU received an offer to monitor 
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding 
(200 monitors needed, he said) and announced that he 
would be visiting Indonesia next week.  The GAERC 
tasked its bodies to continue planning for a mission 
and to make contact with ASEAN and ASEAN countries 
with a view to their possible cooperation.  Ferrero- 
Waldner expressed readiness to commit EC funds on 
top of existing post-Tsunami aid to support the 
peace process. 
 
UZBEKISTAN 
---------- 
 
¶7.  The Council condemned the refusal of the Uzbek 
authorities to allow an independent inquiry into the 
events in Andijan and agreed to review the EU- 
Uzbekistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement 
following a visit to the region by newly appointed 
EUSR for Central Asia Jan Kubis.  It also tasked its 
bodies to recommend further measures as appropriate, 
including the introduction of an arms embargo. 
 
ZIMBABWE 
-------- 
 
¶8.  Straw referred to the "strong and widespread 
condemnation" of evictions and internal displacement 
undertaken under "Operation Murambatsvina" in breach 
of international standards.  He said the Council 
looked forward to a report from the UN Special Envoy 
Anna Tibaijuka and supported the decision of the AU 
to send a Special Envoy. 
 
CHINA 
----- 
 
¶9.  The Commission (Ferrero-Waldner and Trade 
Commissioner Mandelson) presented the agenda for the 
EU-China Summit, to take place in Beijing on 
September 5, to include a focus on climate change 
and energy, according to EU officials.  French FM 
Douste-Blazy told the press that the Summit would 
allow the EU "to reinforce the strategic partnership 
with China."  Douste-Blazy said it was "regrettable" 
that the EU has not respected its political 
commitments re lifting the arms embargo.  At the 
same time, he added, European publics are concerned 
about trade and textiles, and the EU should be 
careful to have the support of its populations in 
dealing with the Chinese.  China must also respect 
its IPR commitments. 
 
UN SUMMIT 
--------- 
 
¶10.  The GAERC adopted conclusions calling for a 
"balanced and ambitious" UN summit, listing a series 
of steps, inter alia, to improve UN development 
assistance, enhance good governance, make progress 
on the Doha Development Round and environmental 
issues.  The conclusions do not comment on UN 
Security Council reform, except to recognize "the 
need to reform" the main UN bodies. 
 
ESTONIA AND LATVIA BORDER AGREEMENTS WITH RUSSIA 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶11.  The GAERC heard a presentation by the Estonian 
FM on the Estonia/Russia border agreement in the 
light of the recent announcement by Russia of its 
decision not to ratify the agreement.  The Latvian 
minister also spoke on the situation regarding the 
Latvia/Russia border agreement.  At his press 
conference, Straw said that Estonia and Latvia 
received support in their endeavors for the treaties 
to be satisfactorily ratified by the parties. 
 
DECISIONS WITHOUT DISCUSSION 
---------------------------- 
 
¶12.  This GAERC also approved a number of items 
without discussion, dealing in particular with: 
 
--Terrorism:  conclusions condemning the London 
attacks as "an affront to everything the EU 
stands for"; 
 
--Sudan/Darfur:  the Council adopted a 
comprehensive supporting action to the AU 
mission in Sudan (AMIS II) in the civilian and 
military fields, such as police, planning, 
logistics, strategic and tactical airlift, 
, 
training and equipment.  The Council appointed 
former Finnish Minister Pekka Haavisto as EU 
Special Rep for Sudan; 
 
--Western Balkans:  conclusions on Albania 
(elections, stabilization and association 
process), Srebrenica commemoration and 
cooperation with the ICTY; 
 
--Iraq:  conclusions welcoming the success of the 
June 22 Brussels international conference, 
underlining the EU's commitment to ensure and 
effective follow-up, and deploring that the 
campaign of terrorist violence is prolonging 
the suffering of the Iraqi people and hampering 
progress and reconstruction in Iraq; 
 
--Central Asia: appointment of former OSCE 
Secretary-General Jan Kubis as EU Special Rep 
 
SIPDIS 
for Central Asia. 
 
MCKINLEY 
EY