08ACCRA1536
November 2008 Joint US-UNHCR Resettlement Mission to Chad
Thu Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Accra
VZCZCXRO8691
RR RUEHGI
DE RUEHAR #1536/01 3391701
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041701Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY ACCRA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7345
INFO RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA 0204
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 0197
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA 0205
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0225
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0591
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0030
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0039
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0412UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ACCRA 001536 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C, AF/W, AND PRM 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
Embassies for Refugee Coordinator 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL SU CD
SUBJECT: November 2008 Joint US-UNHCR Resettlement Mission to Chad 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: During the joint US-UNHCR Resettlement Mission to 
Chad, all partners concluded that it is both appropriate and 
possible to begin a resettlement program for Darfur refugees in 
Eastern Chad and Central African Republic refugees in Southern Chad. 
 Despite significant logistical challenges, particularly in the 
East, processing is feasible through coordination with UNHCR and 
with the International Organization for Migration(IOM)'s active 
involvement.  As security will remain a concern, partners will 
follow UN security protocols and coordinate closely with N'djamena 
RSO to respond appropriately to security issues.  UNHCR committed to 
referring some 90 refugee cases (approximately 450 persons) by the 
end of calendar year 2008 for a pilot processing initiative in 
Spring 2009.  UNHCR established a target of 5,000 referrals in 
calendar year 2009, which will require additional resources and/or 
the establishment of an appropriate P2 group. 
--------------------------------------------- - 
TRIP OVERVIEW: ESTABLISHING RESETTLEMENT PLANS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (U) PRM Admissions Deputy Director Larry Bartlett, Ndjamena 
Refugee Coordinator Perlita Muiruri, and Accra Refugee Coordinator 
Emily Mestetsky participated in a UNHCR-organized resettlement 
mission to Chad from November 3 to November 12, 2008.  UNHCR was 
represented by Vincent Cochetel (Resettlement Chief-Geneva), Malika 
Floor (Senior Regional Resettlement Chief - Dakar Hub), and Bertrand 
Blanc (Resettlement Officer N'Djamena).  Accra DHS/USCIS Officer in 
Charge also participated in the opening meeting.  The key 
implementing partners of the US Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) 
were also represented:  OPE Accra by Director Vicky Knight and IOM 
by Regional Medical Officer Dr. Qasim Sufi.  The Hebrew Immigrant 
Aid Society (HIAS) was also included in the mission, as a current 
implementing partner of psycho-social programs in Chad, resettlement 
programs in Nairobi, and a potential resettlement referral partner 
in Chad. 
 
¶3.  (U) The mission began On November 3 in N'Djamena with meetings 
with UNHCR and host government officials.  The team then proceeded 
to the South to Gore and the Dosseye refugee camp as well as to 
Abeche and the Gaga refugee camp. In both Gore and Abeche, the team 
met with UNHCR officers, implementing partners, local government 
officials and refugee representatives.  OPE and IOM also conducted 
preliminary site assessments of potential processing locations and 
medical facilities.  The team returned to N'Djamena on November 7 
for strategic planning meetings with the UNHCR country office and to 
out-brief the Embassy. 
 
¶4.  (U)  At the close of the trip, the team had developed a plan to 
conduct pilot processing of 60 refugee cases in Eastern Chad and 30 
refugee cases in Southern Chad, including an estimated total of 
400-500 refugees.  UNHCR Chad has already begun making individual 
referrals of refugees with particular protection or medical 
concerns, under UNHCR's standard resettlement criteria.  Referrals 
are expected by December 31, 2008, OPE pre-screening is anticipated 
to occur in February, and DHS interviews in March.  In Eastern Chad, 
PRM has requested that UNHCR limit the referrals to the four camps 
around Farchana, given the difficult logistics involved in accessing 
more remote camp locations.  IOM will facilitate the movement of 
refugees from the camps to Abeche and Gore for resettlement 
processing and provide temporary transit facilities, care and 
maintenance where and as needed.  This departure from usual 
procedures in West Africa - where UNHCR handles logistics prior to 
DHS approval - would be required in this logistically complex 
environment.  Processing steps will have to be compressed to 
minimize time in the transit center in the pilot phase.  UNHCR will 
identify office space for processing and DHS adjudications for the 
pilot phase and until the program has grown sufficiently to 
necessitate the establishment of a separate facility.  With 
expedited processing, the first departures could take place in the 
third quarter of FY09. 
 
¶5.  (U)  The pilot will provide an opportunity to address potential 
challenges in resettlement processing in Chad.  In addition to the 
challenging security and logistics, there are several issues that 
may arise during adjudication.  One of the issues among both Eastern 
and Southern refugee populations is the large incidence of 
polygamous unions.  Some of these marriages are forced or involve 
underage brides.  In both the East and the South, marriage is 
considered a form of security, providing refugee women and girls 
with a male protector.   Such relationships would have to be 
addressed in order to comply with US law and receive affirmative DHS 
 
ACCRA 00001536  002 OF 004 
 
 
adjudication decisions.  In the East, many of the refugees are 
sympathetic to some of the Darfuri rebel groups; some may have been 
involved as combatants; and others may have provided material 
support.  These may be considered as inadmissibilities by DHS/USCIS 
adjudicators.  It is possible for the Departments of State and 
Homeland Security to seek a waiver for certain groups; such a waiver 
would likely be required for many Darfuri refugees. 
 
¶6.  (U)  The pilot would be an interim step in establishing a larger 
on-going resettlement program in Chad.  In its annual Global 
Resettlement Needs report, UNHCR Chad had estimated the resettlement 
need for calendar year 2009 at some 4,800 individuals, based on data 
already collected.  Field officers indicated that the number is 
likely much higher.  During the mission, the UNHCR set a target for 
refugee resettlement for 1,000 individuals in the South and 4,000 
individuals in the East.  During the mission, UNHCR stated it will 
include the required additional resources in its 2009 Resettlement 
Initiative funding proposal.  Partners also agreed that in the East, 
a P2 group would provide the most appropriate vehicle for referral, 
given the projected number of referrals and the commonality of the 
refugee claims of the refugees who fled Darfur.  The 4,000 referrals 
in 2009 and any P2 group would initially be limited to the four 
camps under the Farchana office as these camps are more easily 
accessible and host the longest stayers, who began arriving in 2004. 
Given the lack of return prospects to Darfur in the medium term and 
the extremely limited prospects for self-sufficiency or local 
integration in Eastern Chad, resettlement would likely continue for 
several years to come. 
 
------------------------------------- 
UNHCR CHAD:  Progress on Resettlement 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) UNHCR Chad has begun to overcome the obstacles that had 
impeded the submission of the 50 referrals anticipated in calendar 
year 2007 and which reduced the 2008 referral target from 970 to 400 
individuals.  Although the PRM Resettlement Initiative provided 
funds to create resettlement positions in Chad, the jobs have only 
recently been filled.  The full-time Resettlement Officer arrived in 
September and two of three NGO deployees have also just recently 
arrived.  The office has begun making referral submissions, with 
close to 100 individuals referred by mid-November and is progressing 
towards the adjusted goal of 90 cases.  As the program grows, there 
will likely be a need for additional staff, as well as more 
concerted efforts in recruitment.  It must be noted that the staff 
are constrained by the limited number of hours they are able to 
spend in the camp and the requirement to take a minimum of one week 
leave every six weeks.   Abeche has only one officer who can enter 
data into the ProGress database, so either additional staff or more 
flexible procedures are required. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The participation of Vincent Cochetel, the head of the 
Resettlement Service in the Department of International Protection 
at UNHCR headquarters in Geneva, was instrumental in solidifying 
UNHCR-Chad's commitment to use resettlement as a protection tool in 
a manner consistent with worldwide policy and procedures.  He 
underscored UNHCR's commitment to ensure that refugees in Africa, 
including Chad, are not excluded from resettlement.  Similarly, 
Larry Bartlett underscored the United States' commitment to making 
this durable solution available even in the challenging Chad 
environment, as the US had done in similarly difficult locations 
around the world. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Chad Government: Positive Response to Resettlement Team 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶9.  (U)  The team met with Chad's National Commission for Refugees 
(CNAR) Executive Secretary Mahama Nour Abdoulaye, the Protection 
Chief and the Legal Advisor.  Larry Bartlett explained the United 
States Refugee Admissions Program, stressing the need for 
partnership with the host government and with UNHCR.  CNAR welcomed 
this program and offered to assist to help avoid problems and 
potential corruption.  Other than a request that the criteria for 
resettlement be clearly explained to the refugees, CNAR had no 
concerns and appeared enthusiastic about resettlement as a way to 
help some vulnerable refugees. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Embassy Support for Resettlement Program 
----------------------------------------- 
 
ACCRA 00001536  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶10. (U) PRM appreciates the generous Embassy support given to 
N'djamena-based refugee coordinator as well as to this mission.  The 
RSO provided useful information on the security situation and agreed 
in principle to conduct site surveys of the space that will be used 
by DHS/USCIS refugee adjudicators.  PRM will coordinate with Post on 
the hiring of an Assistant Refugee coordinator, a position that will 
also serve to minimize upcoming missions' impact on the Embassy. 
Accra and N'Djamena refugee coordinators will continue to coordinate 
on upcoming missions and RSO clearance on the adjudication site, 
with the final instruction cable to be sent from PRM and DS 
Washington. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
SOUTHERN CHAD:  Cases, logistics, and expectations 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶11. (U) During the visit, the team met with UNHCR Head of Gore Field 
Office Monica Sandiri, field office staff, local government 
officials, and refugee leaders.  The team met with refugee leaders 
in the Dosseye Camp and briefly explored perceptions about current 
conditions in the camp, acceptance by the local Chadian community, 
the potential for return to the Central African Republic, and 
interest in third country resettlement. 
 
 
¶12.  (U) The UNHCR field office in Gore administers a program for 
some 53,000 refugees from the Central African Republic in five camps 
in the south.  Three are situated near Gore in the Southwest and two 
near Danamadji in the Southeast.  Arrivals began in 2003, when an 
estimated 55,000 entered Chad and smaller numbers are continuing to 
arrive at 100 per month.  CAR refugees have been recognized on a 
prima facie basis, the majority of which are from the Peuhl tribe, 
nomadic cattle herders from the CAR.  UNHCR programs in the South 
have focused largely on self-reliance with a good degree of success, 
but there remain a significant number of refugees with particular 
protection or medical needs. Protection officers in the field have 
already begun identifying such individuals for resettlement 
referral.  UNHCR also plans to re-verify registration data on 
refugees in the South in order to better determine the potential 
magnitude of an on-going program and elicit additional refugee 
referrals. 
 
¶13. (U) Conditions in the South are basic, but resettlement 
processing is feasible given the availability of generators and 
satellite communications.  Security conditions in the South are good 
and Gore is accessible from N'Djamena by a 6-7 hour road trip or by 
flight to Moundou.  UNHCR has established a good platform for its 
operations in the South and has offices, housing, internet, and 
other communications equipment that the USG could access for initial 
operations.  If the program is to grow in FY2010 and beyond, there 
would likely be a need to build offices and housing facilities for 
OPE and DHS staff involved in processing and adjudication. 
 
¶14. (U)  The IOM medical officer, Dr. Qasim surveyed the MSF 
hospital in Gore as a possible site for IOM's medical screening and 
found it suitable, so long as MSF continues to work at the hospital 
beyond their planned May 2009 departure date.  As a backup, Dr. 
Qassim surveyed the hospital in Moundou and concluded it can host 
x-ray and laboratory work, the two most complicated elements of 
refugee medical screening. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
EASTERN CHAD: PLANS FOR DARFURI RESETTLEMENT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U)  In Abeche, UNHCR briefed the group on the lack of real 
possibilities for self-sufficiency, local integration or 
repatriation in the near or medium term. There are significant 
protection needs and a large number of Darfuri for whom resettlement 
would be both a protection tool and a durable solution.  In addition 
to refugees meeting UNHCR resettlement criteria (medical, disabled, 
women-at-risk, elderly, unaccompanied minors, and survivors of 
violence and torture) UNHCR also expressed concern for adolescents 
at risk of military or rebel recruitment or forced marriage. 
UNHCR's Abeche office is working to complete referrals for 60 cases 
(350-400 individuals) by the end of calendar year 2008 for the pilot 
processing program anticipated in the spring.  In calendar year 
2009, UNHCR will work toward referring 4,000 individuals, but they 
also noted that they will be requesting additional resources under 
 
ACCRA 00001536  004 OF 004 
 
 
the Resettlement Initiative to meet this goal. 
 
¶16.  (U)  The team visited the Gaga office (a sub-office of the 
Farchana field office) and the Gaga refugee camp, a 2.5 hour bumpy 
drive from Abeche.  In Gaga, in separate meetings with 
representatives of refugee men and women, the team discussed 
conditions in the camp, coping mechanisms, and durable solutions, 
including resettlement.  The women had all experienced severe 
violence and torture, but views on resettlement differed by age. 
Older women thought that they would likely die in the camps, but 
would consider returning home when Bashir and the Janjaweed were 
ousted.  Younger women were unwilling to return and interested in 
resettlement.  In the men's meeting, the prevalence of polygamy was 
raised and the fact that most resettlement countries would not allow 
them to maintain two wives. Despite the challenges of an abrupt 
shift in lifestyle and occupation, at least a quarter of the men 
present expressed interest in potential third country resettlement. 
 
¶17.  (SBU)  Resettlement referrals to date have been based on 
individual identification by protection and community services 
staff.  Given the limited staff, limited time in the camps, and the 
enormity of the need, other methods would be required to adequately 
address resettlement needs.  The Abeche office is conducting a 
verification exercise for the camps, with the exception of Am Nabak 
where refugee resistance has impeded effective registration.  During 
the verification, officers will be confirming family composition and 
noting individual vulnerabilities in the ProGress database.  This 
would allow for the more proactive identification vulnerable 
refugees and could be used as the basis for P2 group resettlement. 
 
---------------------------- 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE NEEDS 
----------------------------- 
 
(U)  Each meeting during the mission revealed two key issues 
concerning refugee resettlement.  First, there is a large number of 
vulnerable refugees for whom resettlement would offer life-saving 
protection.  Second, refugee resettlement will be logistically 
challenging.  In its evaluation, the team concluded that the needs 
of the refugees in Chad merited taking steps to address the 
logistical challenges.  Arrangements will be coordinated through 
UNHCR, to the maximum extent possible.  As noted previously, PRM 
will seek Post assistance in hiring a Refugee Assistant and in 
conducting security surveys of interviewing sites. 
 
¶19. (U)  This cable has been cleared by PRM/A Deputy Director Larry 
Bartlett and N'Djamena Refugee Coordinator Perlita Muiruri. 
 
TEITELBAUM