08AITTAIPEI1773
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1773/01 3590551
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240551Z DEC 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0618
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8815
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0275UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001773 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused December 
24 news coverage on the arrival in Taiwan of two giant pandas from 
China Tuesday; on Taiwan's sagging economy; and on the continuous 
probe into the former First Family of Taiwan's alleged money 
laundering cases.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an op-ed 
piece in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," 
written by a senior research fellow at the Atlantic Council of the 
United States, discussed U.S. President-elect Barack Obama's 
incoming administration and how it should interact with China in the 
future.  The article suggested that the new administration "indicate 
to its allies that they should expect more, not less, from U.S. 
engagement with China."  A separate "Taipei Times" op-ed piece, on 
the other hand, discussed Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou's 
cross-Strait policy and said Ma's policies "could upset the status 
quo" in the Taiwan Strait.  End summary. 
 
A) "Obama's Pragmatic View of China" 
 
Yu Tsung-chi, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council of the United 
States, opined in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" [circulation: 30,000] (12/24): 
 
"... Obama is a pragmatist at heart - he sees China not only as an 
opportunity but also as a challenge. The nomination of his national 
security team - with Senator Hillary Clinton as secretary of state, 
retired Marine General James Jones as national security adviser and 
Robert Gates staying on as secretary of defense - signaled that his 
China policy would be pragmatic rather than idealistic.  All three 
of Obama's picks indicate a sweeping shift of priorities and 
resources in the areas of national security and foreign policy. They 
all know very well that China's cooperation is very important to the 
US' domestic and international interests.  If one focuses on Asia, 
China is definitely the most crucial player the US must deal with. 
...  But for its China policy to succeed, the US must take several 
factors into account. 
 
"First and foremost, the US must tend to its economic crisis and 
keep its economy competitive and vibrant. ...  The next US 
administration will need economic power to bolster the country's 
military strength, diplomatic leverage and role as a global leader. 
If the US wasn't weighed down by an economic crisis as well as two 
wars, Washington would definitely hold more sway over Beijing on 
promoting a cooperative and constructive bilateral relationship.  In 
addition, Washington must remind Beijing that the US wants a 
cooperative relationship and is optimistic about a durable mutual 
relationship. But the dialogue on democracy, human rights, Tibet and 
military build up must be particularly careful. ... 
 
"Moreover, Obama has said the US must strengthen its capacity to 
defeat enemies and support friends, and that Washington should renew 
old alliances and forge new, enduring partnerships. 
 
"The coming administration should therefore avoid giving China the 
impression that Washington is only interested in its relations with 
China - even at the expense of making other Asian allies irrelevant. 
 On the contrary, the new administration should indicate to its 
allies that they should expect more, not less, from US engagement 
with China.  The fact is that most of Asia consists of democracies 
such as Australia, India, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.  Washington 
should indicate to China that reinforcing the multilateral 
relationships of its allies is not intended to contain China but to 
teach it the rules in Asia: freedom, democracy and respect for human 
rights.  China is welcome to join the democratic community, but it 
is not welcome to take charge of it." 
 
B) "Ma Policies Could Upset 'Status Quo' in the Strait" 
 
Taiwan New Century Foundation President Chen Lung-chu opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (12/24): 
 
"...  Since President Ma Ying-jeou took office in May this year, he 
has broken his election promises and gone against Taiwanese public 
opinion by moving rapidly in the direction of unification with his 
policy of leaning heavily toward China. ... His policies lead toward 
de-Taiwanization and away from Taiwan's sovereignty. Stressing the 
idea that cross-strait relations are more important than diplomatic 
relations, Ma has called a diplomatic truce with China and seeks to 
create an illusory atmosphere of peace between the two countries on 
either side of the Strait.  This may give the international 
community the false impression that Taiwan is willing to become a 
part of the PRC.  The Ma government has adopted these pro-China 
policies with scant regard to the opinions and rights of the public, 
aiming to sign a peace accord with China that disregards the 
concerns of other interested parties.  These unilateral actions by 
Ma threaten to upset the long-standing 'status quo' in cross-strait 
affairs.  What attitude Washington takes in response to these 
developments in Taiwan is a matter deserving of everyone's 
attention." 
 
 
YOUNG