08ANKARA2148
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2297
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2148/01 3571152
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221152Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8275
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9362
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5134
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3463
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7024
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6877
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3456
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 22, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Iraq's Sunni Vice President Tariq al-Hashemi Visits Ankara 
 
Weekend papers report Iraq's Sunni Vice President Tariq al-Hashemi 
met Saturday with President Gul in Ankara, and later with Prime 
Minister Erdogan in Istanbul. 
 
The Sunday editions of Islamist-oriented Zaman and mainstream 
Milliyet report that Iraqi Vice President Tariq al-Hashemi expressed 
the Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government's (KRG) readiness to cooperate 
against the PKK, and said 'President Talabani asked me to convey a 
strong message in this regard.'  Hashemi also said, "Turkey and Iraq 
have common interests and Iraq wants to develop bilateral relations 
in every field."  Today's edition of Cumhuriyet reports that during 
the Hashemi-Gul meeting, Hashemi indicated the Iraqi parliament is 
inclined to declare the PKK 'an illegal outlaw organization' rather 
than declare it a 'terrorist organization.'  The Iraqi parliament, 
according to Cumhuriyet, expects this decision will prevent the PKK 
from carrying out its activities through NGOs, political parties and 
media organizations. The paper notes the Iraqi parliament will soon 
adopt decision, and the KRG will follow suit; this process, at the 
same time, will constitute the first step towards the disarmament of 
the PKK.  Once all these stages are implemented, the paper notes 
Iraqi leaders expect that an extradition process for PKK militants 
can be established. 
 
CHP Changes Their Party Platform 
 
All papers cover the CHP's weekend convention and highlight CHP 
leader Baykal's criticism of PM Erdogan.  Baykal was quoted as 
saying "a considerable component of the Turkish media is under the 
control of the Prime Minister. There are two media groups outside PM 
Erdogan's control, and he has called for boycotts against the Dogan 
Group and has called for the closure of the Cukurova Group - these 
actions are worse than those of (former Argentine leader) Peron." 
 
Among the decisions made during the convention are new, more liberal 
approaches to many issues.  The party seeks to abolish the Higher 
Board of Eduction (YOK), lift parliamentary immunity for deputies, 
encourage more freedoms for women, eliminate social pressure on 
women, and raise the legal marrying age for girls to 18. 
 
Columnist Murat Yetkin of Radikal comments on the CHP's new party 
platform: "The CHP's party platform was approved with any debate or 
even any brain-storming sessions.  The CHP reformed platform seems 
likely to return to the social democrat rhetoric instead of its 
current nationalistic tone." 
 
Turkey's EU Litmus Test 
 
Liberal daily Radikal carries a front-page story entitled "The EU 
Warns Turkey About 2009," and reports EU Commissioner for 
Enlargement Olli Rehn's said he "Expects to see significant reform 
process in 2009" and he called the new year "a litmus test for 
Turkey" regarding its desire to implement the reforms necessary for 
accession to the EU.  "Turkey wasted 2008 by not implementing 
necessary reforms and has put its energy toward domestic debates.  I 
hope 2009 will be focused on reforms and steps toward a 
comprehensive solution to the Cyprus problem" Commissioner Rehn 
emphasized. 
 
Editorial Opinion on U.S.-Turkey Relations Under Obama 
Administration' 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Turkey is worried that 
Obama will be pressured by the Armenian Diaspora to use the word 
"genocide" when he refers to 1915 incidents.  If Turkey panics and 
uses threatening language against the Obama Administration to 
prevent this word, this might back-fire.  At this time, the Armenian 
 
ANKARA 00002148  002 OF 003 
 
 
apology campaign is a very good opportunity for Turkey.  Moreover, 
it will strengthen Obama's hand against the Armenian lobby and he'll 
be able to say, 'let us not damage these very important developments 
in Turkey.'  From Turkey's perspective, real patriotism means the 
continuation of this campaign." 
 
Ali Aslan wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Ankara should take 
steps to eliminate some potential problems with the new Obama 
administration.  Democrats are traditionally more sensitive on 
democracy and human rights issues, so we should act accordingly 
instead of complaining about it.  Resolving the Kurdish issue might 
be a good start.  Reforms on the EU process will also eliminate 
potential democracy and human rights issues with Washington." 
 
President Gul's Statement on his Ancestors 
All papers:  Responding to CHP deputy Canan Aritman's comments 
regarding the ethnic background of his ancestors, President Gul 
issued a written statement saying that he comes from a Muslim and 
Turkish background. 
 
Ahmet Hakan wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Gul's approach, which 
emphasizes details about family roots, only fuels racism.  If 
someone calls you 'Armenian,' your response should show that you 
don't take this as an insult.  It's more appropriate to say, 'What 
if I am an Armenian' or 'what is wrong if I am a Jew?' 
 
U.S. Troop Levels to Increase in Afghanistan 
Media outlets report that the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Admiral Mike Mullen has indicated U.S. troop levels in 
Afghanistan could reach 20,000-30,000.  Liberal Radikal reports, 
"Afghanistan Will Be Filled with American Forces." Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak reports in "They Will Be Defeated like the Soviets," that 
Taliban Spokesman Yusuf Ahmedi responded to news of the increased 
troop level by promising, "We will fight the American soldiers in 
the same way we fought the Soviet soldiers," who, the paper notes, 
"withdrew after their failed ten-year occupation of Afghanistan." 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "It appears that this increase in 
Afghanistan troop levels is a step to implement the Obama 
administration's approach to the conflict in Afghanistan." 
Mainstream Milliyet reports, "This is the first time a top U.S. 
military official has called for such a large increase in troop 
levels in Afghanistan." 
 
Pharmacists Take to the Streets 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Radikal, Cumhuriyet and others:  Today's 
papers report that approximately thirty thousand people met in 
Ankara to attend a rally arranged by the "Association of Turkish 
Pharmacists" and 51 Chambers of pharmacists to protest government's 
health policies and changes in the law envisaging payment of medical 
examination through pharmacists. 
 
Turkey to Purchase Attack Helicopters from Russia 
Mainstream Vatan reports that Turkey decided to buy attack 
helicopters from Russia after its request to buy Cobra and Super 
Cobra helicopters from the U.S .was turned down.  Turkey will 
purchase 32 Mi-28 attack helicopters from Russia to use them until 
Turkey and Italy will co-produce A-129 helicopters. 
 
Investigation against Author-Film Director Can Dundar 
Saturday's Milliyet reported that the Ankara Prosecutor's office has 
initiated an investigation against Can Dundar in connection with his 
documentary film "Mustafa."  There were three complaints against 
Dundar.  Two of the complaints said that Dundar was damaging the 
image of "Ataturk", the founder of modern Turkey, by showing him as 
a womanizer, heavy drinker, and heavy smoker.  The other complaint 
said that calling "Ataturk" as "Mustafa" reflected lack of respect. 
 
Visa Applicant Asked about Ties to Fethullah Gulen 
Mainstream Vatan carried a front-page story in Sunday's paper which 
reported that a Vatan employee from their IT department was asked 
 
ANKARA 00002148  003 OF 003 
 
 
during his visa interview by the U.S. consular officer if he/she had 
any intention of making contact with Fethullah Gulen during his 
planned travel to the U.S.   According to the applicant, the visa 
was denied when the applicant said he/she had no intention to meet 
with Gulen. 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- DTP deputy Osman Ozcelik stirs tensions by giving support to 
Armenian genocide claims in a speech in parliament. 
 
- Alevis in Adana rally to draw attention to their problems in the 
30th anniversary of Alevi slaughter in Maras. 
 
- CHP deputy Kemal Kilicdaroglu rejected the allegations that he 
would run for the post of Istanbul Mayor. 
 
- President Gul issued a message to celebrate the start of 
Hanukkah. 
 
 
International News 
 
-  Clashes between youth and police continue in Greece. 
 
-  U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mullen said that Washington 
could send up to 30,000 more troops to Afghanistan over the next six 
months. 
 
- Lebanon assigns its first Ambassador to Syria.  This is considered 
as the latest step toward normalizing relations. 
 
JEFFREY