08BUENOSAIRES1635
ARGENTINA 2008-2009 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL
Tue Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #1635/01 3370905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 020905Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2588
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 001635 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN KCRM KTFN SNAR AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA 2008-2009 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL 
STRATEGY REPORT (INCSR) PART II, MONEY LAUNDERING AND FINANCIAL 
CRIMES 
 
REF: STATE 103810 
 
This cable contains draft-sensitive information.  Not for internet 
distribution until fully cleared. 
 
¶1. (U) Per reftel, Post provides following draft of 2008-2009 INCSR 
II report on money laundering and financial crimes for Argentina. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Text: 
 
Argentina: 
 
Argentina is neither an important regional financial center nor an 
offshore financial center. Money laundering related to narcotics 
trafficking, corruption, contraband, and tax evasion is believed to 
occur throughout the financial system, in spite of the efforts of 
the Government of Argentina (GOA) to stop it. The financial sector's 
strong recovery from the 2001-02 financial crisis and post-crisis 
capital controls may have reduced the incidence of money laundering 
through the banking system. However, transactions conducted through 
nonbank sectors and professions, such as the insurance industry, 
financial advisors, accountants, notaries, trusts, and companies, 
real or shell, remain viable mechanisms to launder illicit funds. 
Tax evasion is the predicate crime in the majority of Argentine 
money laundering investigations. Argentina has a long history of 
capital flight and tax evasion, and Argentines hold billions of 
dollars offshore, much of it legitimately earned money that was 
never taxed. 
 
In 2007, the Argentine Congress passed legislation criminalizing 
terrorism and terrorist financing.  Law 26.268, ""Illegal Terrorist 
Associations and Terrorism Financing,"" entered into effect in 
mid-July. The law amends the Penal Code and Argentina's anti-money 
laundering law, Law No. 25.246, to criminalize acts of terrorism and 
terrorist financing, and establish terrorist financing as a 
predicate offense for money laundering.  Persons convicted of 
terrorism are subject to a prison sentence of five to 20 years, and 
those convicted of financing terrorism are subject to a five to 15 
year sentence. The new law provides the legal foundation for 
Argentina's financial intelligence unit (the Unidad de Informacisn 
Financiera, or UIF), Central Bank, and other regulatory and law 
enforcement bodies to investigate and prosecute such crimes.  With 
the passage of Law 26.268, Argentina also joins Chile, Colombia, and 
Uruguay as the only countries in South America to have criminalized 
terrorist financing. 
 
On September 11, 2007, former President Nestor Kirchner signed into 
force the National Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism 
Finance Agenda.  The overall goal of the National Agenda is to serve 
as a roadmap for fine-tuning and implementing existing money 
laundering and terrorist financing laws and regulations.  The 
Agenda's 20 individual objectives focus on closing legal and 
regulatory loopholes and improving interagency cooperation. The 
ongoing challenge is for Argentine law enforcement and regulatory 
institutions to continue to implement the National Agenda and 
aggressively enforce the strengthened and expanded legal, 
regulatory, and administrative measures available to them to combat 
financial crimes. 
 
Argentina's primary anti-money laundering legislation is Law 25.246 
of May 2000 (although money laundering was first criminalized under 
Section 25 of Law 23.737, which amended Argentina's Penal Code in 
October 1989). Law 25.246 expands the predicate offenses for money 
laundering to include all crimes listed in the Penal Code, sets a 
stricter regulatory framework for the financial sectors, and creates 
the UIF under the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights.  The law 
requires customer identification, record-keeping, and reporting of 
suspicious transactions by all financial entities and businesses 
supervised by the Central Bank, the Securities Exchange Commission 
(Comisisn Nacional de Valores, or CNV), and the National Insurance 
Superintendence (Superintendencia de Seguros de la Nacisn, or SSN). 
The law requires similar reporting by designated self-regulated 
non-financial entities that report to the UIF.  The law forbids 
institutions to notify their clients when filing suspicious 
transaction reports (STRs), and provides a safe harbor from 
liability for reporting such transactions.  Reports that are deemed 
by the UIF to warrant further investigation are forwarded to the 
special anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism finance 
prosecution unit of the Attorney General's Office. 
 
Law 26.087 of March 2006 amends and modifies Law 25.246 to address 
many previous deficiencies in Argentina's anti-money laundering 
regime. It makes substantive improvements to existing law, including 
lifting bank, stock exchange, and professional secrecy restrictions 
on filing suspicious activity reports; partially lifting tax secrecy 
provisions; clarifying which courts can hear requests to lift tax 
secrecy requests; and requiring court decisions within 30 days. Law 
26.087 also lowers the standard of proof required before the UIF can 
pass cases to prosecutors, and eliminates the so-called ""friends and 
family"" exemption contained in Article 277 of the Argentine Criminal 
 
 
Code for cases of money laundering, while narrowing the exemption in 
cases of concealment. Overall, the law clarifies the relationship, 
jurisdiction, and responsibilities of the UIF and the Attorney 
General's Office, and improves information sharing and coordination. 
 The law also reduces restrictions that have prevented the UIF from 
obtaining information needed for money laundering investigations by 
granting greater access to STRs filed by banks. However, the law 
does not lift financial secrecy provisions on records of large cash 
transactions, which are maintained by banks when customers conduct a 
cash transaction exceeding 30,000 pesos (approximately U.S. $9,000). 
 
 
In September 2006, Congress passed Law 26.119, which amends Law 
25.246 to modify the composition of the UIF. The law reorganized the 
UIF's executive structure, changing it from a five-member 
directorship with rotating presidency to a structure that has a 
permanent, politically-appointed president and vice-president. Law 
26.119 also established a UIF Board of Advisors, comprised of 
representatives of key government entities, including the Central 
Bank, AFIP, the Securities Exchange Commission, the national 
counternarcotics secretariat (SEDRONAR), and the Justice, Economy, 
and Interior Ministries. The UIF legally must consult the Board of 
Advisors, although its opinions on UIF decisions and actions are 
nonbinding. 
 
The UIF has issued resolutions widening the range of institutions 
and businesses required to report suspicious or unusual transactions 
beyond those identified in Law 25.246. Obligated entities include 
the tax authority (Administracisn Federal de Ingresos Publicos, or 
AFIP), Customs, banks, currency exchange houses, casinos, securities 
dealers, insurance companies, postal money transmitters, 
accountants, notaries public, and dealers in art, antiques and 
precious metals. The resolutions issued by the UIF also provide 
guidelines for identifying suspicious or unusual transactions. All 
suspicious or unusual transactions, regardless of the amount, must 
be reported directly to the UIF. Obligated entities are required to 
maintain a database of information related to client transactions, 
including suspicious or unusual transaction reports, for at least 
five years and must respond to requests from the UIF for further 
information within a designated period. As of September 2008 the UIF 
had received 4,032 reports of suspicious or unusual activities since 
its inception in November 2002, forwarded 491 suspected cases of 
money laundering to prosecutors for review, and collaborated with 
judicial system investigations of 155 cases of suspected money 
laundering.  There have been only two convictions for money 
laundering since it was first criminalized in 1989 under Article 25 
of Narcotics Law 23.737 and none since the passage of Law 25.246 in 
¶2000.  A third money laundering case brought under Law 23.737 is 
pending before Argentina's Supreme Court. 
 
The Central Bank requires by resolution that all banks maintain a 
database of all transactions exceeding 30,000 pesos, and submit the 
data to the Central Bank upon request. Law 25.246 requires banks to 
make available to the UIF upon request records of transactions 
involving the transfer of funds (outgoing or incoming), cash 
deposits, or currency exchanges that are equal to or greater than 
10,000 pesos (approximately U.S. $3200).  The UIF further receives 
copies of the declarations to be made by all individuals (foreigners 
or Argentine citizens) entering or departing Argentina with over 
U.S. $10,000 in currency or monetary instruments.  These 
declarations are required by Resolutions 1172/2001 and 1176/2001, 
which were issued by the Argentine Customs Service in December 2001. 
In 2003, the Argentine Congress passed a law that would have 
provided for the immediate fine of 25 percent of the undeclared 
amount, and for the seizure and forfeiture of the remaining 
undeclared currency and/or monetary instruments.  However, the 
President vetoed the law because it allegedly conflicted with 
Argentina's commitments to MERCOSUR (Common Market of the Southern 
Cone). 
 
Although the GOA has passed a number of new laws in recent years to 
improve its AML/CTF regime, Law 25.246 still limits the UIF's role 
to investigating only money laundering arising from seven specific 
or ""predicate"" crimes. Also, the law does not criminalize money 
laundering as an offense independent of the underlying crime.  A 
person who commits a crime cannot be independently prosecuted for 
laundering money obtained from the crime; only someone who aids the 
criminal after the fact in hiding the origins of the money can be 
guilty of money laundering.  Another impediment to Argentina's 
anti-money laundering regime is that only transactions (or a series 
of related transactions) exceeding 50,000 pesos (approximately U.S. 
$16,000) can constitute money laundering. Transactions below 50,000 
pesos can constitute only concealment, a lesser offense. 
 
In 2006 and 2007, the National Coordination Unit in the Ministry of 
Justice, Security, and Human Rights became fully functional, 
managing the government's AML/CTF efforts and representing Argentina 
at the FATF, the Financial Action Task Force for South America 
(GAFISUD), and the OAS CICAD Group of Experts.  The Attorney 
General's special prosecution unit set up to handle money laundering 
 
 
and terrorism finance cases began operations in 2007.  Although the 
Argentine Central Bank's Superintendent of Banks has not created a 
specialized anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism finance 
examination program as previously considered, in 2008 it began 
specific anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism finance 
inspections of financial entities and exchange houses. 
 
Argentina's Narcotics Law of 1989 authorizes the seizure of assets 
and profits, and provides that these or the proceeds of sales will 
be used in the fight against illegal narcotics trafficking. Law 
25.246 provides that proceeds of assets forfeited under this law can 
primarily be used to fund the UIF. Argentine courts and law 
enforcement agencies have used the authority to seize and utilize 
assets on a selective and limited basis, although complex procedural 
requirements complicate authorities' ability to take full advantage 
of the asset seizure provisions offered under these laws. 
 
Prior to the passage of terrorist financing legislation in June 
2007, the Central Bank was the lead Argentine entity responsible for 
issuing regulations on combating the financing of terrorism. The 
Central Bank issued Circular A 4273 in 2005 (titled ""Norms on 
'Prevention of Terrorist Financing'""), requiring banks to report any 
detected instances of the financing of terrorism. The Central Bank 
regularly updates and modifies the original Circular. The Central 
Bank of Argentina also issued Circular B-6986 in 2004, instructing 
financial institutions to identify and freeze the funds and 
financial assets of the individuals and entities listed on the list 
of Specially Designated Global Terrorists designated by the United 
States pursuant to E.O. 13224. It modified this circular with 
Resolution 319 in October 2005, which expands Circular B-6986 to 
require financial institutions to check transactions against the 
terrorist lists of the United Nations, United States, European 
Union, Great Britain, and Canada. No assets have been identified or 
frozen to date. The GOA and Central Bank assert that they remain 
committed to freezing assets of terrorist groups identified by the 
United Nations if detected in Argentine financial institutions. 
 
In December 2006, the U.S. Department of Treasury designated nine 
individuals and two entities that provided financial or logistical 
support to Hizballah and operated in the territory of neighboring 
countries that border Argentina. This region is commonly referred to 
as the Tri-Border Area, between Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay. The 
GOA joined the Brazilian and Paraguayan governments in publicly 
disagreeing with the designations, stating that the United States 
had not provided new information proving terrorist financing 
activity is occurring in the Tri-Border Area. 
 
Working with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's Office of 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), Argentina has established 
a Trade Transparency Unit (TTU). The TTU examines anomalies in trade 
data that could be indicative of customs fraud and international 
trade-based money laundering. One key focus of the TTU, as well as 
of other TTUs in the region, is financial crime occurring in the 
Tri-Border Area. The creation of the TTU was a positive step towards 
complying with FATF Special Recommendation VI on terrorist financing 
via alternative remittance systems. Trade-based systems often use 
fraudulent trade documents and over and under invoicing schemes to 
provide counter valuation in value transfer (hawala) and settling 
accounts. 
 
The GOA remains active in multilateral counternarcotics and 
international AML/CTF organizations. It is a member of the 
Organization of American States Inter-American Drug Abuse Control 
Commission (OAS/CICAD) Experts Group to Control Money Laundering, 
the FATF and GAFISUD. The GOA is a party to the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention, the UN International Convention for the Suppression of 
the Financing of Terrorism, the Inter-American Convention against 
Terrorism, the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 
and the UN Convention against Corruption. Argentina participates in 
the ""3 Plus 1"" Security Group (formerly the Counter-Terrorism 
Dialogue) between the United States and the Tri-Border Area 
countries. The UIF has been a member of the Egmont Group since July 
2003, and has signed memoranda of understanding regarding the 
exchange of information with a number of other financial 
intelligence units. The GOA and the USG have a Mutual Legal 
Assistance Treaty that entered into force in 1993, and an 
extradition treaty that entered into force in 2000. 
 
With passage of counter-terrorist financing legislation and 
strengthened mechanisms available under Laws 26.119, 26.087, 25.246, 
and 26.268 Argentina has the legal and regulatory capability to 
combat and prevent money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Furthermore, the new national anti-money laundering and 
counter-terrorist financing agenda provides the structure for the 
Government of Argentina to improve existing legislation and 
regulation, and enhance inter-agency coordination. The ongoing 
challenge is for Argentine law enforcement and regulatory agencies 
and institutions, including the Ministry of Justice, Central Bank, 
UIF, and other institutions to implement fully the National Agenda 
and aggressively enforce the newly strengthened and expanded legal, 
 
 
 
regulatory, and administrative measures available to them to combat 
financial crimes. The GOA could further improve its legal and 
regulatory structure by enacting legislation to expand the UIF's 
role to enable it to investigate money laundering arising from all 
crimes, rather than just seven enumerated crimes; establishing money 
laundering as an autonomous offense; and eliminating the current 
monetary threshold of 50,000 pesos (approximately U.S. $16,000) 
required to establish a money laundering offense. To comply fully 
with the FATF recommendation on the regulation of bulk money 
transactions, Argentina should review ways to do so consistent with 
its MERCOSUR obligations. Other continuing priorities are the 
effective sanctioning of officials and institutions that fail to 
comply with the reporting requirements of the law, the pursuit of a 
training program for all levels of the criminal justice system, and 
the provision of the necessary resources to the UIF to carry out its 
mission. There is also a need for increased public awareness of the 
problem of money laundering and its connection to narcotics, 
corruption, and terrorism. 
 
End Text. 
 
WAYNE