08DUBLIN707
IRELAND/CUBA: UPCOMING MINISTERIAL VISIT AND
Tue Dec 30 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO6585
RR RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0707/01 3650729
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 300729Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9679
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2018 
TAGS: PREL PREF PTER CU EI MX
SUBJECT: IRELAND/CUBA: UPCOMING MINISTERIAL VISIT AND 
READINESS TO ACCEPT GUANTANAMO DETAINEES 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires, Robert J. Faucher: Reasons 1.4 (b) an 
d (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  Ireland's Foreign Minister publicly 
announced plans for an official visit to Cuba in 
mid-February, a first for any Irish Minister.  He also 
signaled Ireland's willingness to accept Guantanamo detainees 
as part of an EU response to any plan to close Guantanamo 
proposed by the incoming U.S. administration.  EU Foreign 
Ministers will discuss the EU approach at their January 8, 
2009, informal meeting in Prague.  Once an EU position is 
adopted, Ireland would likely accept up to five detainees at 
most.  End Summary. 
 
Cuba 
---- 
 
¶2. (U) Irish Foreign Minister Micheal Martin announced to the 
press December 28 that he will visit Cuba in mid-February 
¶2009.  Martin will be the first Irish Minister ever to visit 
Cuba in an official capacity. 
 
¶3. (C) Irish Department of Foreign Affairs America's Director 
Darach MacFhionnbhairr told the Embassy December 29 that 
Martin's visit comes in the context of the recent EU decision 
to lift diplomatic sanctions following the 2003 crackdown on 
dissidents on the island.  MacFhoinbhairr added that "Martin 
will follow standard EU policy on Cuba" during the visit, 
which is intended to send a signal of encouragement to the 
Cuban government to "move on."  Martin has not yet approved a 
program for the one-and-a-half day visit, but he is likely to 
meet with Raul Castro.  No decision has been taken yet on 
whether he would meet with dissidents while in Cuba, 
according to MacFhoinbhairr.  Martin will travel to Cuba 
during the week of February 16; he will also spend two days 
on an official visit to Mexico as part of this trip. 
 
Guantanamo 
---------- 
 
¶4. (U) Martin also told the press on December 28 that Ireland 
will consider accepting detainees from the U.S. facility at 
Guantanamo.  He highlighted that the Irish cabinet still had 
to take a decision and that any potential detainees would be 
carefully screened.  Martin stressed, however, that accepting 
detainees was a logical follow-up from Ireland's call for the 
facility to be closed: "If we're against the torture and the 
nature of what went on at Guantanamo, and there are concerns 
in terms of international human rights and humanitarian law, 
there's a logical follow-through on that."  Martin added that 
Ireland would only accept those detainees with no terrorist 
links. 
 
¶5. (C) MacFhoinbhairr claimed to be surprised by Martin's 
Guantanamo statements and stressed that there was no link 
between Martin's upcoming Cuba visit and his public position 
about accepting Guantanamo detainees.  MacFhoinbhairr noted 
that it was still unsettled whether Ireland would accept any 
Guantanamo detainees, with Justice Minister Dermot Ahern 
leading the nay-sayers (closely supported by departing 
Foreign Affairs Secretary General Dermot Gallagher and 
Justice Secretary General Sean Aylward).  In early December, 
in response to a planted question in the Irish Parliament, 
Justice Minister Ahern stated that Ireland had no intention 
to accept any Guantanamo detainees. 
 
¶6.  (C) MacFhoinbhairr told the Embassy that EU Minsters 
would take up the issue of Guantanamo detainees at their 
January 8 Gymnich meeting in Prague.  Ireland hoped that the 
Gymnich will decide an EU-wide approach to Guantanamo that 
can be rolled out "in response to a proposed closure plan 
from the new U.S. administration" a few weeks later.   (Note: 
 No formal EU decisions can be adopted at a Gymnich meeting 
but they can be tee'd up for adoption at the next EU Council 
meeting.  End note.) 
 
¶7.  (C)  MacFhoinbhairr commented that, although Portugal 
tried to get a leg up in the matter via its December 11 
letter from Foreign Minister Amado, Germany remains the key 
to achieving a common EU position.  MacFhoinbhairr reported 
that Denmark and Austria lead EU Member States opposed to an 
EU plan.  He suggested that internal divisions in Germany 
have prevented Germany from pushing a more forward leaning 
stance, leading sometimes to mixed signals:  when Cowen met 
with Merkel earlier in December, for example, she did not 
raise the issue, to Cowen's surprise. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Martin's press announcement on Guantanamo should be 
seen in the context of the internal Irish government debate, 
 
DUBLIN 00000707  002 OF 002 
 
 
which Martin hopes to turn to his favor.  If Ireland 
determines that it will accept Guantanamo detainees, based on 
earlier conversations with Irish officials, we should expect 
that Ireland would accept no more that five detainees for 
re-settlement. 
FAUCHER