08JERUSALEM2294
JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (12/29): "Massacre" in Gaza
Mon Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO5892
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #2294/01 3641055
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291055Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3589
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DC//DAS-ZD/DACS-ZK//
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
RHMFIUU/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 7463
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 4448
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4296
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 5790
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4212
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2782UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JERUSALEM 002294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS BBG 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
CMC WASHINGTON DC FOR POLAD 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON FOR HKANONA AND POL - TSOU 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAL KWBG KPAO IS
SUBJECT: JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (12/29): "Massacre" in Gaza 
provokes anger with Israel, international community 
 
------------- 
Main Stories: 
------------- 
The Israeli airstrikes in Gaza constitute the dominant story in all 
the Palestinian dailies, with extensive coverage on their front and 
inside pages.  The entire front page of Al Quds is printed against a 
black background, and the headlines of Al Ayyam and Al Hayat Al 
Jadeeda are printed on black banners.  The papers describe the 
Israeli offensive as an "ongoing massacre," stating that 
approximately 360 Palestinians have been killed and more than 1000 
injured thus far, with more than 180 critically wounded. Al Ayyam 
and Al Hayat Al Jadeeda run front-page photos of victims of the 
Israeli air strikes, showing prisoners fleeing a Hamas prison 
destroyed by a missile and a prisoner emerging from under the 
rubble, as Fatah accused Hamas of abandoning Fatah prisoners in 
prisons under Israeli attack.  Al Hayat Al Jadeeda's front page 
reports that two Fatah prisoners were killed by Hamas police when 
fleeing the destroyed prison.  The papers state that Israeli has 
mobilized reservists and also report that "informed Hamas sources" 
claim that captured Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit has been injured in 
the Israeli strikes.  According to the papers, Israeli Defense 
Minister Ehud Barak will allow 100 trucks carrying medical and food 
supplies to enter Gaza today. 
 
In Egypt-related coverage of the Israeli offensive, the papers claim 
that Israeli military reporters have hinted at Israeli plans to 
reoccupy the Philadelphi border strip between Egypt and Gaza.  Al 
Hayat Al Jadeeda's front page reports that an Egyptian border police 
officer was killed by Hamas yesterday, and adds that PA President 
Abbas condemned the killing as a "cowardly act." The papers devote 
front page coverage to comments made by President Abbas after 
meeting Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak yesterday, quoting Abbas as 
saying that what happened in Gaza was "avoidable" and that he was 
seriously working to protect the Palestinians in Gaza.  The papers 
also front-page statements by Hezbollah leader Hasan Nasrallah, 
urging the Egyptian people to "go to the streets in millions to open 
the Rafah border crossing to Gaza." The papers add that Egypt opened 
the crossing to permit the injured to leave Gaza, but that Hamas 
wouldn't allow them to leave, demanding that the Rafah crossing be 
opened for normal traffic. On an inside page, Al Quds cites an AFP 
report quoting the Egyptian Foreign Minister Abu Al Gheit 
criticizing Hamas for not allowing injured Gazans to leave Gaza for 
treatment in Egypt, which had dispatched ambulances to bring in the 
injured Palestinians. 
The papers provide front page coverage of demonstrations held in the 
West Bank and around the world to protest against the Israeli 
offensive.  The papers report that two Palestinians were killed by 
the Israeli military yesterday in the villages of Ni'lin and Silwad, 
near Ramallah, in confrontations that erupted during protest 
rallies. The papers also report that 15 Palestinians in Hebron, and 
30 youths in Jerusalem, were injured during protest rallies.  An Al 
Quds inside page reports that Christians in Jericho cancelled 
Christmas and New Year celebrations in protest against the Israeli 
offensive.  The papers also report on protest demonstrations held in 
different Arab and European countries. An Al Quds inside page cites 
a Reuters report quoting Vatican sources that Pope Benedict XVI's 
planned visit to the Holy Land should not be cancelled despite the 
growing violence in the Gaza Strip.  Al Hayat Al Jadeeda's front 
page cites an AFP report that President Bush is following up the 
situation in Gaza and has been briefed by National Security Advisor 
Stephen Hadley. 
---------------- 
WEEKEND STORIES 
---------------------------- 
 
JERUSALEM 00002294  002 OF 004 
 
 
Sunday, December 28 
The three dailies dedicate their front pages to the events in Gaza. 
The main headlines appear in a large, bold font against a black 
background and read: "The massacre - 230 martyrs and 770 wounded in 
Gaza."  The papers report that Israeli F16 and Apache warplanes 
fired dozens of missiles in a surprise attack against the Gaza 
Strip, targeting Hamas' military, police, and security 
installations, as well as Hamas government buildings. Citing 
Palestinian medical sources, the papers note that the total number 
of Gazans killed could rise to 350, given the number of individuals 
with critical injuries, the lack of medical supplies in the 
hospitals, and the number of people still trapped under the rubble. 
Among the Palestinians reported killed were the Hamas Chief of 
Police Tawfiq Jabr, the governor of the central Gaza Strip, and 
Ismail Al Ja'bari, the Hamas Chief of Security and Protection. 
Meanwhile, President Abbas, the government of the Palestinian 
Authority (PA), and the Palestinian leadership are quoted as 
condemning the Israeli aggression against the Gaza Strip and calling 
for a national day of mourning and a general strike on Sunday, 
December 28.  The three papers report that President Abbas is 
reaching out to Arab and international parties to discuss the 
Israeli offensive in the Gaza Strip and the means to end it. 
President Abbas travelled to Jordan on December 27 to meet with King 
Abdullah II of Jordan and planned to visit Egypt on December 28 to 
discuss the issue with President Mubarak. 
 
Al Quds and Al Ayyam report in length on angry popular 
demonstrations that broke out throughout the West Bank on Saturday 
in response to the Israeli airstrikes in Gaza, and note that the 
protests led to confrontations with the Israeli army in a number of 
cities, including Ramallah, Hebron, and Bethlehem.  The papers also 
note that confrontations took place between Fatah activists and 
Israeli soldiers in different locations in East Jerusalem, including 
the Shu'fat refugee camp, the Qalandia refugee camp, Dahyiet Al 
Bareed, Ar-Ram, Al Issawiyyah, Salah Eddeen Street, Sultan Suleiman 
Street and Az Zahara Street.  Various Palestinian institutions and 
political factions are cited as condemning the aggression and 
calling for the Palestinian people to unite and overcome their 
disagreements at this difficult time.  In East Jerusalem, a general 
commercial strike was observed in response to a call by the Fatah 
movement in the city. 
 
According to Al Quds, the Hamas leadership has demanded that Arab 
countries sever all relations with Israel and has asked Egypt to 
open its Rafah border with Gaza as a "practical" response to the 
Israeli offensive.  Hamas is quoted as declaring that "the 
aggression will not weaken the Palestinian people, but rather will 
reinforce their steadfastness and pride."  The Hamas statement added 
that "the Palestinian people will not accept only statements of 
condemnation from Arab and Islamic regimes, when what we need are 
practical steps and measures to end the aggression." Meanwhile, 
Khaled Mishal, the head of Hamas' political bureau, reportedly 
called for a new Intifada and the resumption of "suicide attacks" 
inside Israel.  Ismail Haniyeh, the leader of Hamas in Gaza, 
reiterated in a televised speech on Saturday that the "Israeli 
aggression will not force Hamas movement to give in, even if Israel 
annihilates Gaza totally."  He added that, "this ugly massacre will 
not stop the expansion of the resistance and we will continue to 
confront this arrogant occupation and its policies of deception." 
 
Al Quds and Al Ayyam report that Syrian President Bashar Al Assad, 
the current president of the Arab League, called for an emergency 
Arab summit to take place as soon as possible, while Qatar 
officially requested that the Arab League convene an emergency Arab 
 
JERUSALEM 00002294  003 OF 004 
 
 
Summit in Doha on Friday, January 2, 2009.  Egypt reportedly 
expressed reservations, and said that during the meeting of Arab 
Foreign Ministers scheduled to take place on December 28 in Cairo, 
the necessity for such a summit would be discussed. 
 
Saturday, December 27 
 
Al Quds and Al Hayat Al Jadeeda report that two young girls were 
killed, and a third seriously wounded, in a mysterious explosion in 
the Atattra neighborhood in the north of the Gaza Strip.  The papers 
note there was conflicting news about the nature of the explosion, 
with some residents speculating that a locally made Palestinian 
rocket might have hit the family's house by mistake.  Israeli army 
sources are quoted as denying any involvement in the incident.  The 
papers also report that Hamzeh Tayseer Shaheen, a reporter 
affiliated with an independent news agency, died of injuries 
sustained three weeks earlier in an Israeli airstrike. 
 
Al Ayyam and Al Hayat Al Jadeeda report that Hamas militants 
continued to fire rounds of rockets into Israeli territory, despite 
Israeli warnings that it would retaliate militarily.  As Israel 
conducted maneuvers near the Gazan border and prepared for a 
military operation in Gaza, it opened three crossing points on 
Saturday to permit the entry of food and fuel. Egypt is reported as 
boosting its security measures along its border with Gaza, fearing a 
mass exodus of Palestinians towards the Egyptian border in the event 
of an Israeli attack. 
 
Al Quds and Al Ayyam note that Israel will launch its 2008 census 
survey on December 28, and will include residences in East 
Jerusalem. According to the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics, 
the purpose of the survey is to compile a full and true picture of 
people's living conditions, demographic characteristics, and 
socio-economic conditions. The papers also report that the new mayor 
of Jerusalem has established a special office to handle East 
Jerusalem affairs, under the direction of Yaqir Segev, who heads the 
media for the Settler's Council in the West Bank. 
 
All three dailies report that scores of Palestinians were injured 
when Israeli forces dispersed peaceful anti-wall protests in the 
villages of Bil'in, Ni'lin, Al Ma'sara, and Jayyous. In Ni'lin, 
dozens of settlers gathered at a military checkpoint located at the 
entrance of the village, while soldiers fired rubber bullets and 
tear gas against protestors. 
 
Friday, December 26 
 
Al Quds and Al Hayat Al Jadeeda lead with Israeli threats against 
Hamas in Gaza.  Israeli Foreign Minister Livni is quoted as 
threatening to "silence" Hamas rockets. The Arab League's Assistant 
Secretary General, Mohamad Sbaih, is quoted responding to Livni's 
statements, saying that Israel offered nothing to the Palestinian 
Authority, and instead continued its settlement activities, its 
incursions into West Bank cities, and its "siege" of Gaza. Al Ayyam, 
citing Al Arabiya TV, quotes Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert as 
saying that he was giving the Palestinians in Gaza one last chance 
to pressure Hamas to stop firing rockets on Israel.  The papers 
report on Egypt's efforts to reach a ceasefire agreement between 
Hamas and Israel. 
 
All papers devote front page coverage to the sentencing of Ahmed 
Saadat, the Secretary General of the Popular Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine, to thirty years of prison by an Israeli 
court. President Abbas is quoted as condemning the sentence as 
 
JERUSALEM 00002294  004 OF 004 
 
 
"unacceptable and unjustified." 
 
Thursday, December 25 
 
All papers lead with the killing of six Palestinians in Israeli 
strikes on Gaza on Wednesday, December 24, as Palestinian militants 
fired dozens of projectiles into Israeli territory.  The papers cite 
Israeli TV Channel 2 revealing that the Israeli military had 
received the "green light" to launch an offensive in Gaza. 
 
Al Ayyam and Al Quds cite a recent report by the UN Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs showing a sharp qualitative and 
quantitative increase in Israeli settler attacks against 
Palestinians, especially children and the elderly, in the West 
Bank. 
 
All the dailies run front page coverage of the death of Juma' 
Ismail, a member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine who was serving a life term in an Israeli prison. 
President Abbas is quoted demanding an international investigation 
into his death, allegedly due to "medical negligence." 
 
The Al Quds economic page reports on a workshop held at the 
Bethlehem Chamber of Commerce on December 24 to discuss USAID 
private sector development projects. The head of the USAID 
delegation highlighted USAID's efforts to create new jobs in the 
Palestinian private sector. 
 
------------ 
BLOCK QUOTES: 
----------------------- 
 
1)  An Al Quds editorial entitled "A shame stigma for the 
international community" (12/29) comments on the Israeli offensive 
in Gaza: " It is a stigma of shame on the forehead of the 
international community, the Quartet and the Arab and Muslim 
leaders, who don't make a serious move to stop the [Israeli] 
aggression and to side with our people in Gaza. They are the same 
leaders who believed that it was possible to make peace with Israel, 
so they proposed the Arab peace initiative, which Israel ignored.... 
As the Arab silence goes on, the credibility of America, Europe and 
the Arab regimes collapses, and it becomes evident that what is 
required is to have a wretched Palestinian people incapable of 
saying "no" to anyone trying to violate their rights and dignity." 
 
 
2) Talal Okal opines in Al Ayyam under the title, "A rational view 
despite the dreadfulness of the massacre" (12/29): "The 
international stand colludes with what is being done by Israel, 
which prepared for its ugly aggression with a public relations 
campaign, as [international] calls are limited to the logic of 
appealing for a ceasefire between Israel and the Palestinians, as if 
the matter related to equally strong parties.  The American stand 
was, as usual, the worst of all, as Condoleezza Rice condemned the 
Gaza-based Hamas bombing of Israel, without making any criticism 
against Israel.... The bet of the Palestinian citizens is to 
consider this aggression an incentive towards making [internal 
national] dialogue and ending internal divisions; otherwise, the 
Palestinian situation as well as the Palestinian cause will suffer 
more dangers." 
 
WALLES