08MADRID1351
SPAIN: IPR PIRACY GETTING MORE ATTENTION
Mon Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXRO2600
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHMD #1351/01 3571629
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221629Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5815
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA 3726
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MADRID 001351 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/WE, EEB/TPP/IPE, EEB/CIP 
STATE PASS USTR DWEINER 
USDOC FOR 4212/DCALVERT 
USDOC ALSO FOR PTO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD KCRM KIPR SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN: IPR PIRACY GETTING MORE ATTENTION 
 
REF: A. MADRID 1346 
     ¶B. MADRID 1318 
     ¶C. MADRID 1194 
     ¶D. MADRID 1150 
 
MADRID 00001351  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1.  (SBU) In addition to IPR-related developments reported in 
ref A, the Ministry of Culture recently unveiled a new IPR 
enforcement manual, prepared in concert with law enforcement 
agencies and rights-holders' organizations.  Meanwhile, the 
country's largest copyright management society has come under 
fire for its aggressive and allegedly deceptive  practices in 
enforcing its members' rights.  Recent GOS actions and 
declarations concerning internet piracy have attracted 
widespread media and public attention and prompted a small 
demonstration by anti-regulation internet users December 20. 
The amount of recent activity on the internet piracy front 
appears to reflect growing expectations that some sort of 
regulatory change is in the offing.  End Summary. 
 
IPR ENFORCEMENT MANUAL UNVEILED 
 
¶2.  (U) On December 11, Ministry of Culture Director General 
for Policy and Cultural Industries Guillermo Corral Van Damme 
unveiled a Manual of Best Practices for the Pursuit of Crimes 
Against Intellectual Property.  Coordinated by the Culture 
Ministry, the Manual includes input from the Interior and 
Justice Ministries, the Prosecutor General's Office 
(Fiscalia), the National Police, Guardia Civil, Judicial 
Council, Tax Authority, the Federation of Provinces and 
Municipalities, and copyright management entities.  The 
Manual provides background on the phenomena of IPR and piracy 
in Spain and provides statistics and charts on enforcement 
actions.  It also provides a series of guidelines on how to 
investigate complaints, obtain and preserve evidence, and 
bring offenders to justice.  While it refers to "crimes 
against intellectual property," the Manual is devoted 
specifically to copyrighted cultural content, without 
reference to patent or trademark protection.  It addresses 
"top manta" - the sale of pirated or counterfeit merchandise 
on sidewalks and in informal street markets, concealed under 
blankets - as well as digital piracy. 
 
¶3.  (U) In addition to DG Corral, Jose Antonio Robles 
Garrido, Chief Inspector of the IPR Crimes unit of the 
National Police; Joaquin Delgado Martin of the Central 
Secretariat of the National Judicial Conference; and Jose 
Luis Perez Quintero of the investigations and anti-fraud 
department of the Music Producers of Spain (PROMUSICAE) spoke 
at the launch of the Manual.  In his remarks, Corral said the 
Manual presents the most common piracy problems, with 
suggested and recommended solutions to those problems and 
especially ways to coordinate among all affected and 
interested parties, from owners, rights-holders, and 
intermediaries to technical experts, police, prosecutors, and 
judges. 
 
¶4.  (U) Perez of PROMUSICAE expressed appreciation on behalf 
of rights-holders for the government's work in preparing the 
Manual and its efforts to improve protection. He noted with 
satisfaction that the Manual stipulates that peer-to-peer 
(P2P) file-sharing and downloading without permission of the 
rights-holder of the material always constitutes some sort of 
infringing activity.  The Manual specifically lists, as a 
legitimate investigative practice, a police agent's 
registering on-line with a false identity in order to gather 
evidence of unauthorized P2P file-sharing. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment: The Fiscalia's Circular 1 of May 5, 2006 
on Crimes Against Intellectual and Industrial Property in 
Light of the Reform of Organic Law 15/2003 states that 
alleged IPR infringers are subject to criminal prosecution 
only when they act "with a profit motive and to the detriment 
of a third party," a provision which many internet users and 
law enforcement officials have read as essentially 
decriminalizing P2P downloads.  Rights-holders complain that 
one consequence of the Circular's language is a reluctance on 
the part of police and prosecutors to act against 
unauthorized P2P activity.  Furthermore, numerous judges have 
rejected criminal complaints involving P2P file-sharing on 
the grounds of no established profit motive.  The GOS has 
thus far shown little interest in amending or clarifying the 
 
MADRID 00001351  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Circular, arguing that it is legally correct and leaves open 
to rights-holders the option of civil litigation when 
criminal prosecution fails.  While the Manual does not 
correct or even contradict the Circular, rights-holders hope 
its unambiguous characterization of unauthorized P2P 
downloads as always infringing may spur authorities to pursue 
such behavior more vigorously, and judges to punish offenders 
more often.  End Comment. 
 
COPYRIGHT MANAGEMENT SOCIETY CRITICIZED 
 
¶6.  (SBU) According to Clara Mapelli, Ministry of Culture 
Deputy Director General for Intellectual Property, the 
Ministry plans to undertake a campaign to improve the public 
image of copyright management societies.  These societies, 
which collect royalties on behalf of artists, entertainers, 
and other creators and producers, are widely perceived as 
rent-seeking social parasites.  Many ordinary Spaniards 
resent them for the "private copy levy" ("canon digital") on 
blank recording media and recording and playing devices, 
which emerged briefly as an issue in national elections 
earlier this year. 
 
¶7.  (U) The largest copyright management society, the General 
Society of Authors and Publishers (SGAE), has some 91,000 
members and reported revenues in 2007 of approximately 380 
million euros.  SGAE has come under critical media attention 
recently for an incident in late 2007 in which the society 
allegedly paid an undercover detective to crash and 
surreptitiously video-record a private wedding party in 
Sevilla to gather evidence that the organizers were having 
copyrighted music performed without having paid the required 
fees.  This led in turn to an expensive judgment against SGAE 
for violation of the newlyweds' privacy rights, and to a 
series of articles in major media, led by daily of record "El 
Pais," aiming to expose SGAE's aggressive enforcement 
practices. 
 
¶8.  (U) At the unveiling of the Best Practices Manual, DG 
Corral was asked whether SGAE's methods of enforcing its 
members' rights constituted the sort of good practice the 
Manual strove to encourage. He replied that enforcement of 
the law is the sole competence of duly constituted 
authorities, and that while private entities like SGAE may 
provide the authorities with information and ask for their 
help in protecting their rights, they may not take the law 
into their own hands.  Culture Minister Molina, likewise 
queried about SGAE at his press breakfast (ref A), noted that 
it is a legitimately established and well-respected entity 
with a long history, and which is entitled to defend its 
members' interests, so long as it conforms to the law in so 
doing; otherwise, he averred, it may expose itself to legal 
problems. 
 
SPOTLIGHT ON DIGITAL PIRACY AND POSSIBLE REMEDIES 
 
¶9.  (U) A series of recent GOS actions and statements (see 
refs A-B) - e.g., the launch of the Ministry of Culture's 
public awareness campaign; Culture Minister Cesar Antonio 
Molina's announcement that new anti-piracy regulations may be 
coming soon; and Minister of Industry, Tourism, and Trade 
Miguel Sebastian's remarks at the late November digital 
content conference (FICOD) on the importance of IPR 
protection - have generated increased media attention to the 
internet piracy issue and possible remedies.  Following its 
critical expose of SGAE's activities, El Pais published an 
IPR-related news article or op-ed piece every day during the 
week of December 15.  Contributors included Jose Manuel 
Tourne of the Federation for the Protection of Intellectual 
Property (FAP), laying out the rights-holders' perspective; 
Miguel Perez Subias, president of the Internet Users' 
Association, arguing for total legalization of P2P activity; 
Jesus Nunez Banegas of the Information and Communications 
Technology Business Association (AETIC), warning of the 
complications and perils implicit in graduated response 
regimes; Javier Ribas of business law firm Landwell-PWC, 
outlining legal underpinnings of a graduated response system; 
and Secretary of State for Telecommunications and the 
Information Society Francisco Ros Peran, reiterating the 
government's position that Internet Service Providers (ISPs) 
and rights-holders need to reach a mutually acceptable 
agreement that recognizes the competing rights and 
responsibilities of the different stake-holders.  On December 
21, El Pais published an inverview in which Didier Lombard, 
worldwide president of France Telecom - which operates in 
 
MADRID 00001351  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Spain under the name "Orange," one of the four members of the 
ISP association Redtel - expressed support for the 
implementation in Spain of a graduated response regime 
similar to one currently contemplated in legislation under 
consideration by France's parliament. 
 
¶10.  (U) On November 20, a group estimated at about 30 
"cyber-activists" held a brief demonstration outside the 
Madrid headquarters of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party 
(PSOE - ruling party) in favor of free, legal P2P downloads. 
The demonstrators set up two computers on which they 
downloaded copyrighted material.  Activists unfurled banners 
and waved signs with such messages as "Digital culture should 
be free" and (playing on the Ministry of Culture campaign 
slogan, "If you're legal, you're all right") "Be legal: 
Create, copy, share, modify."  The demonstrators' choice of 
the party headquarters was reportedly a reaction to the 
possibility of a more vigorous government response to 
internet piracy. 
 
COMMENT 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Fellow members of the Anti-Piracy Coalition 
recognize that the copyrights management societies' bad 
public image sometimes hurts rights-holders' efforts to 
secure better IPR enforcement.  According to Jose Manuel 
Tourne, the election-related flap earlier this year over the 
digital canon - in which SGAE and similar organizations were 
portrayed as heavies - made the societies nervous about 
possibly losing significant revenues and thus reluctant to 
press the government too hard to amend the Fiscalia's 
Circular.  The most recent spate of bad publicity involving 
SGAE could potentially damage the rights-holders' cause in 
the court of public opinion and strengthen the hand of the 
telecoms and the internet users' associations.  At the same 
time, the lively debate in the pages of Spain's largest 
circulation daily newspaper and the demonstration may be seen 
as signs of expectations that some sort of regulatory change 
is in the offing.  End Comment. 
AGUIRRE