08NAIROBI2718
SOMALIA - Somaliland: "Terror Attacks Will Not Deter Us"
Thu Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO8554
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2718/01 3391511
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041511Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7811
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 3117
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NAIROBI 002718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID/EA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PNAT SOCI ECON SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - Somaliland: "Terror Attacks Will Not Deter Us" 
 
REF: A) Nairobi 2158  B) 11/28 Email to AF/RSA 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On December 3, Somaliland Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Abdullahi Mohamed Duale and Minister of Planning Ali Ibrahim 
Mohamed told us that despite the recent terror attacks, Somaliland 
will not veer from its democratic path.  Ministers Duale and Mohamed 
said that Somaliland authorities have initiated a thorough 
investigation and they believe al-Shabaab is responsible for the 
October 29 coordinated terror attacks in Hargeisa.  The ministers 
expressed sincere appreciation for the United States' support in the 
wake of the bombings and proposed counter-terrorism initiatives for 
us to fund.  They also lauded the USG-funded development programs 
that have been instrumental in Somaliland's democratic reforms. 
They invited proactive engagement on the upcoming presidential 
elections and asked for our support of the African Union's 
assessment mission related to Somaliland recognition.  The ministers 
also asked for U.S. assistance in countering President Yusuf's 
alleged recent efforts from Puntland to reignite conflict with 
Somaliland over their disputed shared border.  An aide memoire (text 
in paragraph 12) underscored their support for the Djibouti process 
and commitment to combating piracy.  End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
We Remain on 
our Democratic Path 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The December 3 meeting began with Somaliland Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Abdullahi Mohamed Duale and Minister of Planning Ali 
Ibrahim Mohamed graciously thanking the USG for its continued 
support and collaboration.  Duale noted with appreciation the 
September visit of mission officials to Hargeisa (Ref A) and 
extended an invitation for us to return as soon as possible.  The 
ministers strongly emphasized that despite the October 29 terror 
attacks, Somaliland remains committed to its constitution and the 
democratic process outlined therein.  He said that no matter the 
challenges, all Somalilanders are committed to "the democratic 
program" and the upcoming elections. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Foreign Minister proclaimed, "We will not let 
al-Shabaab and the ICU win - we will show them that despite their 
efforts, we remain committed to peace."  He underscored the pride 
that all citizens have in the constitution they drafted, passed 
through referendum, and embraced.  He noted with concern "the 
influence of a religious and ideological war that is converting our 
young people into something we do not recognize." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Duale told us that after the bombing, the voter 
registration process had to be temporarily suspended but that as of 
December 1, the process was moving forward.  The ministers 
appreciated the work of the USG-funded organizations collaborating 
on the electoral process.  Somaliland President Riyale had made a 
show of his early registration to encourage people to get out and 
register.  He concluded by reiterating that the attack of October 29 
made Somaliland stronger and more resilient in its commitment to 
defend its constitution. 
 
-------------------------- 
Anti-Terrorism and 
Security Assistance Needed 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Foreign Minister confirmed that the Somaliland 
authorities have taken a number of measures to ensure a thorough 
investigation into the October 29 bombings.  He said that while the 
investigation is still ongoing, at this stage they have clear 
evidence that the coordinated bombings were al-Shabaab sponsored. 
The ministers said that they hope to see more U.S.-Somaliland 
collaboration in the security sector, in particular addressing high 
priority needs in intelligence training and cooperation, training of 
security forces, logistical support and capacity building.  Duale 
said that the government worked hard on the proposal submitted to 
the USG (Ref B) and they look forward to a decision about proposed 
projects. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The ministers told us that in order to avert another 
attack, the government is taking a series of measures: (1) improving 
Somaliland's counter-terror laws; (2) strengthening the Ministry of 
 
NAIROBI 00002718  002 OF 003 
 
 
Religious Affairs and establishing a Religious Council to encourage 
moderate and culturally-appropriate expression of Islamic faith in 
schools and mosques; (3) reforming and strengthening the national 
security institutions; and (4) empowering community/neighborhood 
watch networks, including the introduction of a hot line for 
anonymous tips about suspicious activity. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) They asked us to influence the UN to shift Somaliland back 
to Phase III security status.  (Note: Following the bombing, the UN 
pulled out its staff and identified Somaliland as a "Phase IV" 
country, limiting the type of UN engagement allowed.) The UN 
security reclassification impacts Somaliland's reconstruction and 
development plan and limits international election observation, 
thereby rewarding terrorism, they explained. 
 
---------------- 
Looking Forward 
- to Recognition 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The ministers requested a meeting with the new U.S. 
administration to revive recognition negotiations begun with 
then-A/S for Africa Susan Rice. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) They noted a recent assessment mission by the African 
Union (AU) Special Envoy to Somalia that they regarded as the next 
step following the 2005 AU Commission report of Somaliland.  They 
were encouraged by the AU finally paying more attention to the case 
of Somaliland and said that what is most needed is a visit by AU 
member states which would be the arbiter on any decision regarding 
recognition.  They asked us to closely review the upcoming AU report 
and for the USG to encourage the AU to make progress on the case for 
Somaliland recognition.  We noted that any US decision on 
recognition would follow a decision by the AU member states and 
noted that Somaliland's performance in the upcoming elections would 
be an important component in the case for recognition. 
 
------------------------- 
Problems Loom - 
Including President Yusuf 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) As they did during our September visit to Hargeisa, the 
ministers noted the increasing burden of the internally-displaced 
persons from southern Somalia on the economy.  They made the case 
for much greater engagement on the humanitarian front and told us 
the government has made it easier for NGOs to operate in Somaliland. 
 Minister Mohamed noted that after a concerted effort, a NGO law for 
local NGOs was now complete and awaiting approval in parliament.  He 
acknowledged the important role that USG-funded partners played in 
this process.  They asked that USAID consider expanding its support 
to include tangible programs that will impact livelihoods and 
support economic growth.  The ministers told us that the pressure of 
persons from the South could lead to increased tensions as people 
compete for limited resources and opportunities. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The ministers acknowledged the support of the Somaliland 
government for the Djibouti process, and flagged their immediate 
concern with President Yusuf's presence in Garowe.  They suggested 
that the TFG president was inciting conflict by encouraging a 
Puntland offensive in the Sool/Sanaag region.  The Somaliland 
ministers asked for our assistance in engaging Yusuf on this issue, 
agreeing that the last thing that Puntland or Somaliland needs is 
increased insecurity in the border areas. 
 
¶12.  (U) At the meeting, the ministers provided us an aide memoire 
with their most important points.  Begin Text: 
 
Government of Somaliland Aide Memoire, November 2008 
 
-- Somaliland has been the victim of the most serious terrorist 
attacks ever seen in the Horn of Africa. The authorities are making 
good progress in their investigations. We believe the bombings to be 
the work of al-Shabaab. 
 
-- Putting the Somaliland issue to one side while focusing on 
Somalia to the south never has been a satisfactory policy. It is now 
clear that such a policy could lead to the end of the successful 
 
NAIROBI 00002718  003 OF 003 
 
 
Somaliland state and the end of Somaliland's peace and stability. 
The Somaliland state and our peace and stability are under attack 
from the same forces who are spoiling the political process in 
Somalia. In order to survive, Somaliland needs engagement and 
support from the international community. . 
 
-- The Government of Somaliland wishes to see progress in the 
political process in Somalia and welcomes the Djibouti agreement. 
But this process will not come to a successful conclusion or be 
complete as long as it fails to resolve the issue of Somaliland's 
status. 
Somaliland is ready to talk to any government in Mogadishu that is 
in a position to resolve the issue of the status of Somaliland. But 
at the same time Somaliland cannot be held hostage to the lack of 
political progress and peace in the south; not if the political 
progress and peace that Somaliland has achieved is going to be 
sustained in the face of determined attack. 
 
-- We expect that the AU will take forward its engagement on 
Somaliland and are awaiting the recommendations of the AU special 
envoy on Somalia who visited Hargeisa recently. 
 
-- Planning for Somaliland's second Presidential elections in March 
2009 is going ahead, although security concerns following the 
bombings have caused a suspension of the internationally organised 
voter registration process. 
 
-- The government of Somaliland has a very strong record combating 
piracy and preventing pirates operating from Somaliland's coast. We 
continue to offer our facilities and cooperation to the 
international community in its efforts to combat piracy. 
RANNEBERGER