08NAIROBI2900
Somalia - Violent Uprising Against Al-Shabaab
Wed Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO7859
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2900/01 3661210
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 311210Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8102
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 002900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MARR MOPS PTER SO
SUBJECT: Somalia - Violent Uprising Against Al-Shabaab 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Since December 27, local residents and militias, 
loosely led by Ahlu Sunna wal Jama'a (ASWJ), a group of moderate 
Islamic scholars, have clashed with al-Shabaab in response to 
al-Shabaab takeovers of central Somali towns and the subsequent 
desecration of graves in central Somalia.  ASWJ reports that they 
have ousted al-Shabaab from several towns and are enjoying popular 
support throughout Somalia.  Post is in contact with the 
Nairobi-based members of an ASWJ-affiliated organization.  End 
summary. 
 
------------ 
Nexus of 
the Clashes 
------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) Since December 27, militias loyal to the moderate Islamic 
group Ahlu Sunna wal Jama'a (ASWJ), with support from local 
residents, have reportedly clashed with al-Shabaab militia in towns 
in the central Somali region of Galgudud.  Residents were reportedly 
in part reacting to the December 6 and 7 al-Shabaab capture of the 
towns of Guriel and Dusamareb. Embassy contacts recount that ASWJ 
and local clan militia were meeting in the town of Heraale (Galgadud 
region) when al-Shabaab militia seized control of Guriel and 
Dusamareb. Al-Shabaab's unprovoked attacks on the local 
administrations, coupled with desecrations of places of pilgrimage 
and the tombs of revered Sufi clerics, appeared to have catalyzed 
ASWJ counterattacks. Among the most scandalous of the grave 
desecrations was that of the tomb of Sheikh Samatar, a 
well-respected cleric and founder of the Samataria Sufi sect.  On 
several occasions al-Shabaab militia also disrupted ASWJ "hatra" 
rituals, which involve song and poetry, terming them "un-islamic". 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) In response, ASWJ mobilized militias and, with support from 
local residents from across the clan spectrum, engaged al-Shabaab in 
a series of battles.  (Note: The Ayr are the predominant clan in the 
area, but minority subclans including the Sa'ad, Saleebaan, 
Murasade, Marehan and Majerteen sided against al-Shabaab as well.) 
According to Embassy contacts, al-Shabaab forces retreated to 
Galinsoor, near Galkayo.  While preparing a counterattack, the 
al-Shabaab militias were besieged by Sa'ad militias from Galkayo, 
who killed eight al-Shabaab militia members and seized two of their 
"technicals" (battle wagons).  Ethiopian forces based at the border 
town of Balambale reportedly deployed to the outskirts of Guriel on 
December 29, forcing a further al-Shabaab retreat.  Several days of 
heavy fighting, with at least 30 deaths and dozens of wounded, have 
reportedly forced al-Shabaab to withdraw. 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to sources in Somalia, these most recent clashes 
in the central region are part of a broader attempt by various 
groups in Somalia to gain control of territory in advance of the 
pending Ethiopian withdrawal.  However, these most recent clashes 
may also be evidence of increasing resentment of al-Shabaab. 
 
¶5. (SBU) On December 28, an al-Shabaab spokesman Mukhtar Robow, 
seemingly at pains to explain why his group was overpowered in the 
clashes, alleged to the media that there were only a few al-Shabaab 
militia left in Guriel when ASWJ attacked.  Robow claimed that the 
majority of al-Shabaab forces were involved in mediation efforts 
between warring communities outside the town and were not able to 
defend themselves against attack.  Robow further claimed that it was 
an Ethiopian-organized group, not ASWJ, which had attacked 
al-Shabaab. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Sheikh Abdirashid Maalim, coordinator of the Somali 
Traditional Scholars (SOTIS), an ASWJ offshoot with representation 
in Nairobi, told us that ASWJ's patience with al-Shabaab was wearing 
thin, and they had felt compelled to stop the desecration of revered 
religious monuments.  In a December 31 meeting with us, he termed 
the current clashes "a defensive war."  Sheikh Abdirashid said ASWJ 
have remained a non-political and nonviolent spiritual body through 
centuries of existence in Somalia.  Al-Shabaab evidently viewed 
ASWJ's deep roots in Somalia as a threat, he thought. Referring to 
clashes in central region, Sheikh Abdirashid told us the Somali 
civilians in Mogadishu, Gedo Region, and Lower Shabelle, under ASWJ 
leadership, had organized themselves in reaction to the continued 
desecration of shrines and graves in Somalia.  Abdirashid believed 
that the current popular uprising was the beginning of a wider 
revolution against al-Shabaab's "corrupt" view of Islam and its 
oppressive tendencies. 
 
¶7. (SBU) ASWJ leadership from "dariiqas", or parishes, across 
Somalia and eastern Ethiopia (Ahmediya, Salihiya, Qadiriya and 
 
NAIROBI 00002900  002 OF 002 
 
 
Samataria) met in Mogadishu on December 27.  Under the acting 
chairmanship of Sheikh Abdulqadir Samow, who is also ASWJ's 
spokesman, the group discussed the al-Shabaab threat at length and 
resolved to revolt. They also drafted a document outlining the 
group's view of the current situation in Somalia and seeking 
international support. 
 
-------------------- 
Somali Islamic Front 
-------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Another group involved in the current clashes is the Somali 
Islamic Front (SIF), a purist Salafi organization and an offshoot of 
former al-Itihad al-Islami (AIAI) and also known as Jabhal Islamia. 
Members of the SIF have spoken out in support of al-Shabaab during 
the recent clashes.  According to Embassy contacts, SIF is allied 
with al-Shabaab in its opposition to ASWJ but, unlike al-Shabaab, 
has shown respect for local administrations and is opposed to 
infighting among "resistant" groups.  SIF has attempted to mediate 
between al-Shabaab and the two factions of the Alliance for the 
Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) in an effort to forestall infighting. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Clerics allied to the SIF have openly condemned the killing 
of Somalis and aid workers.  In a statement carried by Somali 
websites, SIF said "while opposed to all un-Islamic heresies, we are 
not a party to the current campaign of destroying and desecrating 
tombs of the dead.  The Front believes in a more methodical process 
of eliminating heresies, through education and building social 
awareness.  The Front denies any involvement in the ongoing 
destruction of tombs." In an apparent reference to ASWJ, SIF 
described one side as fighting a proxy war for the "enemy." 
 
-------------------------- 
Post Interaction with ASWJ 
-------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Post has met with SOTIS, the ASWJ offshoot.  SOTIS has 
requested USG cooperation with and support for its campaign against 
al-Shabaab.  The group plans to submit to us in the next week a plan 
for future activities.  SOTIS hopes to establish "bases" in 
Mogadishu, Gedo Region, and central Somalia, from which they can 
continue ASWJ's work. 
 
RANNEBERGER