08PARIS2317
SANCTIONS ON EU PRODUCTS DUE TO HORMONE-BEEF BAN
Tue Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO3491
OO RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHFR #2317/01 3581307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231307Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5127
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002317 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR USTR WILLIAM BUSIS AND AUSTR JAMES MURPHY 
USDA/FAS FOR OA/YOST/JACKSON/ROSADO; 
OCRA/HALE/NENON; 
ONA/RIEMENSCHNEIDER/YOUNG 
OSTA/MACKE 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR FR
SUBJECT: SANCTIONS ON EU PRODUCTS DUE TO HORMONE-BEEF BAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and Action Request:  Embassy Paris recommends 
modification of proposed list of French exports targeted under 
revised sanctions.  Country Team believes that, to be effective, 
sanctions need to target major corporate interests with political 
clout.  Sanctions that target artisanal products tend to rally 
popular and political support for the small farmers impacted against 
the USG.  Products currently proposed for targeting, including 
Roquefort cheese, truffles and foie gras, are luxury items with 
relatively inelastic demand.  As such, much of the retaliation's 
cost actually falls on U.S. consumers who purchase these items 
regardless of price.  Embassy proposes an alternative list of 
products that will have greater economic impact on significant 
French exporters. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Embassy Paris supports aggressive retaliation against 
WTO-illegal trade barriers maintained by the European Union.  France 
is one of the main culprits in fostering protectionism in 
agriculture, especially by means of non-science based import 
restrictions.  Embassy has documented GOF efforts to promote an 
EU-wide system of agricultural standards based on "societal 
preferences" as determined by appointed experts or elected 
officials.  This initiative is intended to modify both scientific 
evaluation and consumer preference as determined in the 
marketplace. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In order to be effective, Embassy has argued that USG 
retaliation needs to target those French interests which can exert 
influence on GOF decisionmakers.  France is Europe's largest 
agricultural producer and exporter and both the legislature and the 
executive are focused on agricultural interests.  However, the food 
culture of France is also highly attuned to the uniqueness and 
cultural importance of specific products, usually produced in an 
artisanal fashion in a distinct geographic region.  France as a 
nation will die in a ditch before compromising on such products. 
The current proposed retaliation list targets one export category - 
feed grains - of real economic interest with no cultural 
constituency.  Mineral and aerated water, which appears in Annex II 
of the Federal Register Notice, would also be an effective target 
because it would marshal the corporate giants (see para 8E below) to 
pressure the French government to change its position. However the 
list also targets three products high in public sympathy: Roquefort 
cheese, foie gras, and truffles. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Roquefort cheese has been subject to a 100 percent duty 
since the beginning of the current case.  The cheese is produced 
from sheep milk by a handful of cooperatives and independent farmers 
in one of France's relatively poorer and more isolated regions.  The 
sheep industry in general is under considerable pressure since sheep 
are raised in marginal grazing regions, and shepherds tend to be the 
least well off members of France's agricultural sector.  In fact, 
this sector was recently recognized as one of the few "economically 
endangered" sectors warranting special treatment during the 
wide-ranging review of EU ag policy conducted under the French EU 
presidency.  Agricultural Minister Michel Barnier, who pushed for 
this recognition, is from a mountainous region and is extremely 
sympathetic to the shepherds' plight.  Further, French farm activist 
Jose Bove comes from the Roquefort producing region.  While he is 
the most militant activist against USG agriculture interests, he 
also has very considerable public sympathy in France.  The initial 
imposition of the Roquefort duty led to Bove's destruction of a 
McDonalds, helping him burnish his image as a protector of artisanal 
French agriculture against what is perceived as the American 
industrial agricultural model. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Despite the difficulties of the ovine sector, Roquefort 
cheese is generally acknowledged to be the king of the world's blue 
cheeses.  Despite the 100 percent duty, American imports of 
Roquefort grew by 37 percent in 2007.  While increasing this duty to 
300 percent would certainly cut down U.S. demand, we suspect that 
the cheese will continue to be imported and the cost of the sanction 
will continue to be borne by American consumers rather than French 
exporters. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Foie gras is a similar product.  While most French foie 
gras is processed and exported by a handful of large firms, the 
ducks and geese are raised by small farmers from a number of 
France's most scenic regions.  This is not a large scale 
agro-industrial product.  We also note that the largest foie gras 
exporter, Euralis, has been one of the most vocal advocates in favor 
of biotech corn. 
 
¶7. (SBU) This brings us to truffles.  Truffles are an exclusively 
artisanal product gathered by peasants combing the oak groves with 
 
PARIS 00002317  002 OF 002 
 
 
their truffle hounds.  The price of premium black truffles is 
extraordinary, and the product itself symbolizes luxury.  U.S. 
Customs data indicate only a few kilos worth of imports in 2007, 
making this a totally symbolic gesture.  For those few Americans who 
consume truffles, more expensive is probably better.  As a result, 
we forecast that taxing truffles will have minimal impact on exports 
with American consumers absorbing the cost of the sanction. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Embassy has identified a series of significant French 
agricultural exports which have little public, patriotic or symbolic 
importance but which represent substantial revenues for major firms 
as follows: 
 
¶A.   Wheat gluten:  HS Code 11090090. France is the largest supplier 
(followed by the Netherlands) with few industrial suppliers, 
including Roquette and Amylum. 2006 value: USD26.6 million 
 
¶B.  Enzymes:  HS Code 35079070. France is the fourth largest 
supplier. Several large companies supply this market. Many enzymes 
are co-products of wheat starch and wheat gluten industry.  2006 
value: USD24.5 million 
 
¶C. Vegetable saps and extracts:   HS Code 130219. France is third 
largest supplier after China and India, due to its strong food 
processing industry.  2006 value: USD29.1 million 
 
¶D. Food preparations, Food Preparations Not Elsewhere Specified or 
Included, Not Canned Or Frozen:  HS code 2106909998. France is 
second largest supplier after Canada.  2006 value: USD41.2 million 
 
¶E. Mineral and aerated waters:  HS code 220110. France is largest 
supplier to the US. The two major mineral water companies are Swiss 
Nestl and French Danone.  2006 value: USD81.4 million. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Embassy requests Washington agencies modify proposed list 
of sanctions on French products with respect to Roquefort cheese, 
Prepared or preserved liver, and Truffles.  Embassy recommends that 
future retaliation against France include consideration of products 
listed in para 8 above.  Embassy recognizes that the current 
retaliation must be based on items listed in the Federal Register 
notice and recommends that Washington target Mixed feed or mixed 
feed ingredients used in animal feeding; and, if possible, Mineral 
and aerated waters. 
 
 
PEKALA