08PRETORIA2730
South Africa: Minerals and Energy Newsletter "THE ASSAY" -
Thu Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO9419
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHSA #2730/01 3530953
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180953Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6762
INFO RUCPDC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0892
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 0773
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1652
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0903
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0508
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0734
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1484
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 0210
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 PRETORIA 002730 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID 
STATE PLEASE PASS USGS 
DEPT FOR AF/S, EEB/ESC AND CBA 
DOE FOR SPERL AND PERSON 
DOC FOR ITA/DIEMOND 
 
E.O.   12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG EMIN EINV EIND ETRD ELAB KHIV SF
SUBJECT: South Africa: Minerals and Energy Newsletter "THE ASSAY" - 
Issue 13, November, 2008 
 
This cable is not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Introduction:  The purpose of this newsletter, initiated in 
January 2004, is to highlight minerals and energy developments in 
South Africa.  This includes trade and investment as well as supply. 
 South Africa hosts world-class deposits of gold, diamonds, platinum 
group metals, chromium, zinc, titanium, vanadium, iron, manganese, 
antimony, vermiculite, zircon, alumino-silicates, fluorspar and 
phosphate rock, and is a major exporter of steam coal.  South Africa 
is also a leading producer and exporter of ferroalloys of chromium, 
vanadium, and manganese.  The information contained in the 
newsletters is based on public sources and does not reflect the 
views of the United States Government.  End introduction. 
 
-------- 
HOT NEWS 
-------- 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Eskom Postpones Nuclear Reactor Project 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) State power utility Eskom announced its decision not to 
proceed with a second nuclear power plant.  Department of Public 
Enterprises Director General Portia Molefe said the SAG remained 
committed to nuclear power to reduce carbon emissions and insure 
energy security.  Eskom made the decision on December 5, following a 
number of delays during the year.  Eskom said it would not proceed 
with procurement of the proposed investment in the Nuclear-1 project 
due to the huge capital investment required.  The proposed Nuclear-1 
project would have been the country's second pressurized water 
reactor (PWR) plant, after the first and only Koeberg Power Station 
in the Western Cape.  Eskom has terminated the tender process, which 
designated two bidders, the EPR Consortium led by Areva of France 
and the N-Powerment Consortium led by Westinghouse of the USA.  It 
appears that the SAG will now play a greater role in advancing its 
nuclear power program and is seeking a technology partner, who would 
assist with developing and financing nuclear projects.  It is not 
clear what effect this decision will have on development of the 
Pebble Bed Modular Reactor technology. 
 
--------------------------------- 
New Oil Discovery Offshore Angola 
--------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Oil has been discovered in deep waters off the Angola coast 
by Italy's oil and gas major Eni and Angola's state oil company 
Sonangol.  The discovery well Ngoma-1 is located about 350 
kilometers offshore Luanda and was drilled in 1,421 meters of water 
to a total vertical depth of 3,383 meters.  The well encountered an 
oil column of 127 meters in high permeability Miocene sands Eni said 
in a statement.  The statement said pumping tests were positive and 
confirmed the high mineral potential of Block 15/06.  The discovery 
well is located close to the recently discovered Sangos field. 
Other exploration wells are to follow to prove up the oil potential 
and to achieve synergies for the development of the western area of 
Qand to achieve synergies for the development of the western area of 
the block, according to Eni.  Eni is the operator and holds a 35% 
stake in the block.  Sonangol E.P. is the concessionaire and other 
stakeholders include France's Total with 15% and Brazil's Petrobras 
International Braspetro with 5%.  Eni said it considers Angola to be 
a strategic country for its future production growth and signed a 
memorandum of understanding with Sonangol on broad economic, 
industrial, and social cooperation in August.  Angola's potential 
oil production is around 2 million barrels per day. 
 
-------- 
DIAMONDS 
-------- 
 
--------------------------- 
Still a Girl's Best Friend? 
 
PRETORIA 00002730  002 OF 006 
 
 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The downturn of the financial markets has seen a rapid 
withdrawal of mine development funds, particularly in developing 
countries such as the DRC, Angola, and Zambia, but also in South 
Africa where a number of new and expansion projects have been put on 
hold.  De Beers Chairman Nicky Oppenheimer has stated that it is too 
early to gauge the effect of the economic downturn on gem sales. 
However, the latest analysis of the polished diamond market by the 
International Diamond Exchange (IDEX), derived from lower tender 
prices reported by a number of rough producers including 
BHP-Billiton, projects lower prices and sales for diamond jewelry in 
all size and quality categories, with no end to this trend in sight. 
 This will determine what happens in the rough markets supplied by 
De Beers and its competitors.  De Beers has already sold off 
marginal mines such as Koffiefontein and Cullinan, and is 
negotiating the sale of its Namaqualand and Tanzania mines, while 
struggling to bring its Snap Lake (Canada) and Voerspoed (South 
Africa) mines into production.  Miners with operations in South 
Africa and projects in the DRC and Angola will have to use their 
locally generated cash flows to fund their African projects as it is 
unlikely that funding will be available for greenfield developments 
in the region until stability returns to financial markets.  This 
will impact economic development in the region. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Proposed Boost for Jewelry Sector 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) SA Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator (SADPMR) CEO Louis 
Selekane has proposed establishing an Industrial Development Zone 
(IDZ) near OR Tambo International Airport to encourage local and 
international investment and skills in the jewelry trade.  Selekane 
says the jewelry industry would operate better in a free trade zone, 
free from the usual bureaucratic constraints.  He pointed to Dubai 
and India, which have used free trade zones to develop their 
respective industries.  Both Selekane and Jewelry Council of SA CEO 
Lourens Mar agree that the establishment of an IDZ at OR Tambo 
airport would bring in more rough diamonds from the rest of Africa 
and, together with another IDZ at the Rand Refinery (gold and 
silver) east of Johannesburg, would encourage further development of 
locally manufactured jewelry. 
 
¶6. (SBU) To further boost the regional jewelry industry, the 
Gemological Institute of America (GIA) plans to open a laboratory in 
Gaborone (Botswana) by the end of 2008.  The GIA also plans to start 
educational classes on site in the first quarter of 2009.  Botswana 
was the world's top diamond-producer in value terms in 2007, earning 
about $3 billion in diamond revenues.  It ranked second in volume of 
diamonds produced at 33.64 million carats.  GIA Laboratory and 
Research Senior VP Tom Moses said that the GIA has hired more than 
20 local staff who will be offered scholarships, education and 
Q20 local staff who will be offered scholarships, education and 
training.  He said GIA reports would help add value to the 
high-quality diamonds being mined and cut in Botswana. 
 
------ 
SKILLS 
------ 
 
------------------------------------- 
Threat to Recognition of SA Engineers 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The SAG is proposing to introduce legislation to regulate 
"built environment professionals," such as engineers, architects and 
project managers.  The purpose of the legislation is to have a 
single (government) body to register and control the activities and 
continuing education of "built" professionals, which would replace 
the existing statutory body, the Engineering Council of SA (ECSA). 
It would, presumably, also legislate the activities of member 
societies such as the SA Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (SAIMM). 
 Government claims that the current system of "peer review" (PR) is 
 
PRETORIA 00002730  003 OF 006 
 
 
blocking transformation (the process of including previously 
disadvantaged people in the main-stream economy) of the sector by 
preventing newly graduated black engineers with little practical 
experience from being certified by ECSA as Professional Engineers. 
ECSA maintains that the PR system is there to protect the public and 
is universally accepted as a prerequisite for international 
recognition of professional qualifications.  ECSA claims the new 
legislation would allow the minister to exempt companies and 
individuals from the PR process and would effectively disqualify 
South African engineers from international accreditation.  This 
would, in turn, lead to prospective engineers moving overseas to get 
accreditation, to a further loss of skills, and a decline in 
enrollment at local engineering universities.  The SAG maintains 
that the registration process would be unchanged and that the PR 
system (without using the words "peer review") would remain intact 
in the legislation.  It says that those opposing the legislation are 
trying to maintain the status quo and retard transformation.  The 
SAG has since withdrawn the proposed legislation "for further study 
and consultation". 
 
------ 
ENERGY 
------ 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Sasol Seeks Own Resources for GTL Projects 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) South African petrochemical producer Sasol and Malaysia's 
state oil company Petronas have announced a joint venture to 
undertake oil and gas exploration in offshore Mozambique.  Drilling 
commenced in early October with Sasol Petroleum International (SPI) 
the operator and holding a 50% share in the JV.  Petronas Carigali 
Mozambique E&P holds 35%, and Mozambique's national oil company, 
Empresa Nacional De Hidrocarbonetos De Mozambique (ENH), has 15%. 
Sasol already operates the on-shore Pande and Temane gas fields, has 
other holdings onshore, and has access to some offshore leases in 
Mozambique.  Petronas has a proven track record of offshore oil and 
gas developments in conditions similar to those found in Mozambique. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) In recent months SPI has acquired assets in Australia, 
Mozambique, Gabon, and Papua New Guinea.  Analysts note a shift in 
Sasol's strategic emphasis towards the acquisition of natural gas 
reserves for its downstream gas-to-liquids (GTL) and coal-to-liquids 
processing.  This could indicate an end to the Sasol-Chevron joint 
venture, formed in 2000 for the purpose of combining Chevron's 
access to gas reserves with Sasol's technology to convert stranded 
gas to liquid fuels.  The venture has failed to deliver many 
opportunities for GTL and Chevron is whittling down its stake in 
their Nigerian joint venture.  Sasol's first commercial GTL plant 
was developed in partnership with Qatar Petroleum, rather than 
Chevron.  Sasol has a three-year capital expenditure program of $700 
million, which probably includes a "war chest" for upstream 
Qmillion, which probably includes a "war chest" for upstream 
acquisition for more gas resources for GTL projects in various parts 
of the world. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Prequalifiers for Eskom's IPP Program 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Eskom released the names of the 23 national and 
international developers that it had unconditionally pre-qualified 
to produce electricity under the multi-site base-load independent 
power producer (IPP) program.  Eskom Demand-Side Management General 
Manager Andrew Etzinger confirmed that the bids predominately 
featured conventional coal technologies.  He noted that developers 
would submit detailed plant design and environment mitigation steps 
during the next round of the process.  There was also one liquefied 
natural gas plant, a liquefied petroleum plant, one hydro power 
plant, and one solar plant under consideration.   Eskom said it 
required between 2,100 and 4,500 MW of electricity under the 
 
PRETORIA 00002730  004 OF 006 
 
 
program, with a minimum individual project capacity of 200 MW.  The 
pre-qualified developers listed include a mix of French, Chinese, 
Indian, and other companies, but no U.S. firms.  Requests for 
proposals are to be issued at the end of November, final bids will 
close in May 2009, and deals will be concluded in the first quarter 
of 2010. 
 
------ 
MINING 
------ 
 
--------------------------- 
Outlook Mixed for SA Mining 
--------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The SAG has proposed massive investment in electricity 
supply and in road, rail, port, and pipeline infrastructure to 
increase mining output capacities.  It has also provided a grant of 
some $450 million over three years to increase the number of dams 
and water supply systems to mines, including supply to 23 platinum 
mines on the eastern limb of the platinum-rich Bushveld Complex. 
National Treasury said in its Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement 
that the government was injecting $6 billion (at a R/$ exchange rate 
of 10:1) into Eskom, but the electricity provider needed a total of 
$34 billion over the next five years, which will have to come from 
financial markets.  This amount might be difficult to raise since 
Moody's Investors Service downgraded Eskom in August to a Baa2, the 
second-lowest investment grade.  This is likely to impede Eskom's 
ability to raise capital even though the SAG has said it would 
guarantee that debt. 
 
¶12. (SBU) South African mineral production in the first eight months 
of 2008 was down nearly 9% year-on-year and export volumes stagnated 
because of electricity shortages, mine safety issues, and 
transportation limitations and inefficiencies.  However, export 
earnings in rand for the period were 33.7% higher than in the same 
period of 2007, due to then higher commodity prices and a weaker 
rand.  The Treasury said it was optimistic about continued strong 
mineral demand from Asia because growth had been less affected in 
the Far East than in Europe and North America.  However, there were 
some negative issues confronting the South African economy, which 
included financial volatility, exchange rate turbulence, and the 
uncertain economic and political situation. 
 
--------------------------- 
Gold Production "in Crisis" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Gold production is "in crisis" and a gold price of $900 
-$1,000 per ounce is needed to arrest the downward trend, according 
to AngloGold Ashanti CEO Mark Cutifani.  (Note: the gold price was 
$820 on December 12.  End Note.)  Cutifani said the world has seen a 
global decline in gold production over the past seven years and this 
could continue at up to 5% a year for the next five years.  South 
African production had declined 20-30% in the last five years, and 
grades were continuing to diminish in opencast mines around the 
world.  However, declining production would result in gold's 
fundamentals improving, he said.  The industry was not investing 
enough in future production and there were also increasing cost 
Qenough in future production and there were also increasing cost 
pressures on those with deeper operations and increasing strip 
ratios.  Production has also been set back by the current financial 
crisis. 
 
¶14. (SBU) The price of gold in the last month or two had done better 
than all of the other commodities Cutifani said, but expansionary 
investment in production was much less than for other minerals.  He 
said the quarter ending September had seen gold trading in a range 
from $988 to $736 per ounce and had subsequently even dipped below 
$700 per ounce.  However, the rand weakening to as much as R11 to 
the dollar had seen South African mines receiving record rand prices 
for their product.  For the same quarter, AngloGold Ashanti produced 
1.265 million ounces (up 1%) and 346,000 pounds of uranium (up 7%) 
 
PRETORIA 00002730  005 OF 006 
 
 
at a total cash cost of $486 per ounce of gold, which was one of the 
lowest in the industry and is projected to decrease to $460 per 
ounce in the fourth quarter.  Cutifani said South African operations 
continued to perform steadily, using 92.4% of historic power supply, 
while operating at 100% capacity. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Titanium Mining in the "National Interest" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶15. (SBU) The Eastern Cape Xolobeni titanium sand project was given 
a mining license by Minister of Minerals and Energy Buyelwa Sonjica 
in September after easing aside comments by the Department of 
Environment and Tourism (DEAT) in favor of "the national interest". 
Titanium has been identified by the SAG as a strategic commodity 
that will be the basis of a new industrial sector for South Africa: 
mining to metal and manufacturing.  The initial license covers the 
Kwanyana block, which contains some 139-million tons of 
titanium-bearing minerals and represents about 30% of the original 
area applied for.  The remaining areas will be held under a 
prospecting right, valid until 2010 and extendable until converted 
to mining rights.  However, the Department of Minerals and Energy 
(DME) has stated that it is not yet possible to determine whether 
further licenses will be granted, as the areas are still under 
consideration for environmental concerns about developments in the 
sand dune zones. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The Xolobeni project will be a dry mining operation and 
its annual production is expected to yield some 250,000 tons of 
ilmenite, 19,000 tons of rutile, 15,000 tons of leucoxene (all 
titanium-containing minerals), and 15,000 tons of zircon over an 
expected life of about 22 years. The project will cost an estimated 
$200 million to implement and will include access roads to the site 
and mining area, water supply and pipelines, power reticulation and 
power supply to the area, a wet separation plant, a tailings storage 
facility, and a dry minerals separation plant.  The mining operation 
will be located 30 km south of Port Edward in the Eastern Cape and 
the smelter near Mbizana, some 40 km north of the mining site. 
(Comment.  The anti-mining lobby has submitted another appeal 
against mining the dunes, which may further delay the project.  The 
fact that the operation will generate some 400 jobs and pump 
millions of dollars into the region, which is one of the poorest in 
the country, has failed to impress the lobby.  Information 
confirming whether mining is, in fact, taking place currently and 
whether the environmental management plan has been approved is not 
available.  End Comment.) 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Further Ferro-Chromium Production Cuts 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) The joint venture between the world's leading ferro-chrome 
producer Xstrata Alloys and Merafe Resources announced on December 1 
that it had suspended production at another five ferrochromium 
Qthat it had suspended production at another five ferrochromium 
furnaces.  This represents a cut of approximately 406,000 tons of 
annual capacity and follows the shutdown of six furnaces with a 
capacity of 500,000 tons earlier in November. Total capacity 
closures will amount to 906,000 tons or 52% of annual operating 
capacity.  Xstrata said the furnaces would remain closed until the 
market improves, but no lay-offs are planned for permanent 
employees, enabling a quick return to full capacity when market 
conditions allow. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Samancor Cuts Manganese Production 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) The world's largest diversified mining company 
BHP-Billiton announced on December 2 that due to weak market 
conditions it was temporarily reducing manganese production at its 
60%-owned Samancor operations at Hotazel in the Northern Cape 
Province; Anglo American owns the other 40%.  The cuts in output 
 
PRETORIA 00002730  006 OF 006 
 
 
will be balanced between GEMCO in Australia and Hotazel and will 
reduce ore production by 21% (1.5 million tons) in 2009.  Samancor's 
current total annual ore output capacity is 7.0 million tons.  The 
company expects to reduce alloy production at its ferro-manganese 
plants at TEMCO (Australia) and Metalloys (South Africa) by 170,000 
tons from a current output capacity of 725,000 tons.  Furnace 
re-builds will be brought forward at both facilities, and certain 
furnaces will not be re-started until market conditions improve. 
 
¶19. (SBU) This situation contrasts markedly with that prevailing in 
the earlier part of the year when record output was achieved from 
these same mines.  BHP increased its manganese production in the 
quarter ended September 30 to 1,830,000 tons of manganese 
metal-equivalent, which was a 27% increase over the quarter ended 
September 2007, despite using 10% less power.  Manganese alloy 
production was also up 10% at 203,000 tons over the 2007 quarter. 
This was the "payback" on BHP Manganese President Peter Beaven's 
investment of $100 million to expand the Hotazel mines and to import 
large diesel generator sets to boost power supply.  BHP is also 
expanding its cogeneration manganese alloy facility south of 
Johannesburg.  South Africa holds some 80% of the world's manganese 
resources and is the second biggest producer and exporter of 
ferro-manganese metal and manganese ore.  Beavan said he expected 
volatility and uncertainty to continue in the short term, but was 
confident that ongoing industrialization and urbanization of China 
would continue to drive longer-term demand for manganese. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
BHP Billiton's $1.4 billion Coal Investments 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) BHP-Billiton is developing two steam-coal mining projects 
in South Africa with a combined value of $1.4 billion for production 
in 2009 and 2010.  These are the $450 million Klipspruit project, 
which is more than 50% completed, and the larger $975 million 
Douglas-Middleburg project.  BHP South African CEO Marius Kloppers 
said that Klipspruit would ramp up to 3.9 million tons of coal per 
year, made up of 1.8 million tons for export and 2.1 million tons 
for domestic power generation by power utility Eskom.  The 
Douglas-Middelburg Optimization project would ultimately produce 
18.5 million tons a year, of which 10 million tons would be for 
export and 8.5 million tons for the local power-generation market. 
BHP already supplies coal to three Eskom power stations in 
Mpumalanga province. 
 
-------------------------- 
Zambian Copper under Threat 
--------------------------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) The current financial crisis will adversely affect demand 
for Zambian copper and hurt the flow of foreign direct investment, 
the Zambian Central Bank has warned.  Zambia Financial Markets 
Director Richard Chembe addressed a workshop in Zambia and said a 
prolonged financial crisis would affect demand for copper among 
Qprolonged financial crisis would affect demand for copper among 
major consumers like China and lead to a stagnation of growth in the 
copper mining industry and a reduction in the country's foreign 
direct investment and exchange earnings.  The Zambia Chamber of 
Mines also painted a bleak outlook for the Zambian mining industry 
during and after the current financial problems.  Chamber President 
Nathan Chishimba said the majority of mining companies relied 
heavily on foreign capital to provide the bulk of capital for 
exploration, pre-development operations, and overall mine 
development. Mid-tier exploration companies funded more than half of 
the ongoing exploration.  Chishimba said the GRZ was watching 
developments with a view to quick intervention to save the economy 
and particularly the mining sector should the knock-on effects of 
the financial crisis lead to a slump in long-term investment in the 
mining industry. 
 
BOST