08STATE129529
TALKING POINTS FOR UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON KUWAITI
Wed Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9529 3450032
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 100025Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 4088
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 2970
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT IMMEDIATE 5064UNCLAS STATE 129529 
 
SIPDIS 
USUN FOR GERMAIN AND KUJAWINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: TALKING POINTS FOR UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON KUWAITI 
PROPERTY AND MISSING PERSONS, DECEMBER 10 
 
1.(U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 2. 
 
2.(U) USUN is instructed to draw from the following talking 
points during the December 10 consultations on the 
Secretary-General's December 4 report on the repatriation or 
return of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their 
remains and the return of all Kuwaiti property, including 
archives, seized by the former regime in Iraq. 
 
3.(U) Begin points: 
 
-- I would like to begin today by thanking Ambassador Tarasov 
for his work regarding the repatriation or return of all 
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains and the 
return of all Kuwaiti property, including archives, seized by 
the former Iraqi regime.  I am heartened by both his 
diligence and his compassion and I remain confident in his 
ability to facilitate the resolution of the difficult and 
outstanding issues that remain with us today. 
 
-- Today, I would like to discuss four points on the 
developments and progress achieved during the reporting 
period. 
 
-- First, allow me to commend the Iraqi government for 
welcoming Ambassador Tarasov in his capacity as High-Level 
Coordinator, the first visit by a Coordinator since the fall 
of the Saddam Hussein regime.  I also wish to commend both 
the Iraqi and Kuwaiti governments for their cooperation in 
resolving the fate of missing persons and the work of 
identifying human remains.  We extend our condolences to the 
families of all those who are still missing and those who 
have been identified.  In light of the markedly improved 
security situation in Iraq, I am hopeful that search and 
assessment operations will increase in the future, as will 
the pace of exhumation activities at sites identified as 
containing the remains of Kuwaiti POW's.  Visits to burial 
sites in Iraq are of paramount importance, as is the 
cooperation of witnesses and local residents.  I suggest that 
every effort be made to reach out to these individuals; their 
cooperation will be critical to achieving a successful 
conclusion. 
 
-- Second, I wish to note the helpful offer of technical and 
capacity building assistance that has been offered by UNAMI 
in regard to exhumation activities.  We look forward to 
seeing this project come to fruition. 
 
-- Third, I regret that the case of our own missing Navy 
pilot, Captain Michael S. Speicher, has not been 
resolved.  The United States continues to investigate the 
loss of Captain Speicher, who has been missing from action in 
Iraq since January 17, 1991.  The government and people of 
the United States share a common bond and a lasting 
commitment with other nations and families seeking answers to 
the fate of their missing personnel.  Efforts to 
conclusively determine the circumstances or fate of Captain 
Speicher have not yet been successful and the 
United States desires all efforts possible to be taken until 
he is recovered and returned to his family and loved 
ones.  We look forward to the resolution of this case and are 
grateful for the cooperation of the Kuwaiti and Iraqi 
governments in this regard. 
 
-- Finally, I am disappointed by the lack of progress made in 
the retrieval of Kuwaiti national archives and am 
particularly disappointed that, despite the Iraqi 
government's discovery and promise to return hundreds of 
Kuwaiti radio and television tape recordings, this has not 
yet occurred.  I urge the governments of Iraq and Kuwait to 
coordinate the transfer expeditiously, utilizing the good 
offices of the Coordinator as necessary. 
RICE