08TOKYO3458
PART 2 OF 2 -- U.S., JAPAN REACH AD REF GUAM
Fri Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXRO0359
OO RUEHFK RUEHKSO RUEHNH
DE RUEHKO #3458/01 3540549
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 190549Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9602
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 2934
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 7305
RUEHNH/AMCONSUL NAHA 3901
RUEHOK/AMCONSUL OSAKA KOBE 5335
RUEHFK/AMCONSUL FUKUOKA 1544
RUEHKSO/AMCONSUL SAPPORO 2110
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 7231
RUHBABA/CG III MEF CAMP COURTNEY JA
RUHBANB/CG MCB CAMP BUTLER JA
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/COMMARCORBASESJAPAN CAMP BUTLER JA
RUHEHMS/COMMARCORBASESPAC CAMP H M SMITH HI
RUHPSAA/COMMARFORPAC
RUYNAAC/COMNAVFORJAPAN YOKOSUKA JA
RHHMHBA/COMPACFLT PEARL HARBOR HI
RHOVVKG/COMSEVENTHFLT
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF INTERIOR WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUHBANB/OKINAWA AREA FLD OFC US FORCES JAPAN CP BUTLER JA
RUENAAA/SECNAV WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/TREASURY DEPT WASHDC
RHMFISS/USFJC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 07 TOKYO 003458 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOD FOR OSD/APSA SHIVERS/SEDNEY/HILL; DEPT OF NAVY FOR 
SECNAV WINTER, ASN PENN, DASN BIDDICK; DON PASS TO JGPO FOR 
BICE/HICKS; NSC FOR WILDER; PACOM FOR J00/J01/J4/J5; USFJ 
FOR J00/J01/J4/J5 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2018 
TAGS: MARR PREL PGOV JA
SUBJECT: PART 2 OF 2 -- U.S., JAPAN REACH AD REF GUAM 
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 128612 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J. Thomas Schieffer; Reasons: 1.4 (b/d) 
 
Please see Tokyo 03457 for part 1 of this cable. 
 
¶14.  (C)  Given this ambiguity and concern that the numbers 
8,000/9,000 cited in public documents continues to be 
misunderstood and misconstrued, the U.S. side pushed to use 
the phrase ""and associated dependents"" in place of ""and their 
approximately 9,000 dependents.""  The Japanese side objected 
strongly to this approach.  Japanese negotiators registered 
frustration with over two years of U.S. inability to provide 
more detailed data on the actual number of dependents 
associated with the AIP units that will relocate to Guam, and 
voiced suspicion that the U.S. intends to hold on to 
excessive housing in Okinawa and force Tokyo to build more 
housing in Guam than is required.  The U.S. side explained 
that the focus is on the units and capabilities that will 
move to Guam, and that regardless of the actual manning of 
those units, the U.S. remains committed to relocating those 
units to Guam.  All dependents associated with those units 
will also relocate.  The actual number may be 8,000 by the 
time of relocation, but most likely will be less than the 
full authorized manning.  Likewise, the remaining forces on 
Okinawa may be 10,000, but most likely will be less than the 
full authorized manning.  The Japanese side agreed to this 
basic concept, but stressed it fully expects that the 
facilities and areas associated with the capabilities that 
move to Guam will be accounted for in the subsequent 
consolidation efforts.  The U.S. side did not commit to such 
a direct linkage between specific units relocating to Guam 
and consolidation and land returns.  Both sides agreed that 
the issue of actual versus notional numbers as well as 
implications for consolidation and land return require 
greater focus in the near-term.  However, because the U.S. is 
not able to provide any additional level of clarity on the 
transfer personnel and their associated dependents, 
highlighting changes in the number of personnel in the IA 
would create significant risk for the Japanese government. 
Japanese negotiators said that any effort by the U.S. side to 
change the referenced numbers without providing more detailed 
personnel data would be a ""deal breaker."" 
 
¶15.  (C)  Scope of Funding: In earlier drafts, the IA's scope 
included not only Japan's cash contributions, but also 
Japanese funding commitments for housing and utilities via 
equity participation and loans.  However, bilateral 
discussions on implementing the Special Purpose Entities 
(SPE) that will execute Japan's funding commitments for 
housing and utilities remain preliminary and may ultimately 
be resolved in the SPE Implementing Guidance and Operating 
Agreements (vice an International Agreement) that will be 
executed by the SPE participants.  Although the negotiators 
agreed to remove housing and utilities from the scope of the 
agreement, there was sufficient discussion to identify key 
 
TOKYO 00003458  002 OF 007 
 
 
areas to be addressed bilaterally to ensure the smooth 
implementation of housing and utility programs in the future: 
 (1) the two sides have different understandings of Japan's 
obligated ratio of equity to loans; and (2) the MOD insists 
it can provide preferential treatment to Japanese companies 
competing for housing and utility contracts under the SPE, 
but the U.S. side seeks a level-playing field for U.S. 
companies.  (Note: the issue of the meaning of 
""recoverability"" was not discussed as part of the IA 
negotiations, but is also a known area of disagreement.) 
 
¶16.  (C)  Guam versus Commonwealth of Northern Marianas 
Islands (CNMI): The U.S. proposed using language to reference 
the CNMI (rather than the more limiting Guam) in Article 1. 
The U.S. made the point that there may be projects that 
Japan's cash contributions may fund that support training 
facilities in the CNMI.  Japanese negotiators expressed 
concern that at no time in the program management discussions 
has the U.S. side identified any projects off Guam and 
elsewhere in CNMI, so they would not be able to explain this 
expanded scope to Diet members.  As a compromise, the two 
sides agreed to remove Japan's proposed language in Article 1 
that specified that Japan's cash contributions would be for 
facilities ""on Guam.""  The final language in Article 1 does 
not state where facilities to support the Relocation will be 
built.  As such, that language does not preclude cooperation 
in the CNMI, but does not explicitly identify cooperation 
outside of Guam as part of the scope.  In a pull aside, 
Embassy of Japan Political First Secretary Masaaki Kanai 
confirmed that Japan's domestic law governing realignment 
implementation could potentially be reinterpreted or revised 
to allow cooperation in the CNMI. 
 
¶17.  (C)  Japanese Obligation to Address Shortfalls: 
Responding to proposed U.S. language, the Japanese side 
agreed to language that obligates it to take action to 
address funding shortfalls when appropriate.  However, this 
language was moved to the Implementing Guidelines (3.f.) 
instead of the International Agreement. 
 
--------- 
Article 2 
--------- 
 
¶18.  (C)  The purpose of Article 2 is to highlight U.S. 
obligations.  Like the Government of Japan obligations in 
Article 1, the U.S. obligations are subject to caveats, 
highlighted later in Article 9.  Additionally, the Ministry 
of Finance (MOF) remained concerned that, despite Article 2 
obligations, the U.S. would not move to Guam even if the FRF 
had been completed and the Guam facilities were ready to 
receive the U.S. Marines Corps personnel.  The MOF requested, 
and received, an oral statement from the U.S. negotiator that 
""Once the FRF and required facilities and infrastructure on 
Guam are complete, the U.S. shall complete the Relocation."" 
The MOF accepted this statement as a quid pro quo for 
 
TOKYO 00003458  003 OF 007 
 
 
dropping its insistence on special tax exemptions for Japan's 
cash contributions. 
 
--------- 
Article 3 
--------- 
 
¶19.  (C)  The purpose of Article 3 is to document the clear 
linkage between the FRF and Guam program.  The Japanese side 
originally pressed to eliminate all references to the FRF. 
When the U.S. insisted on FRF linkages, Japanese negotiators 
tried to get the U.S. to introduce new language committing 
the U.S. to cooperate for the FRF's completion.  The U.S. 
side did not accept the Japanese language, stressing that an 
overstatement of the role the U.S. plays in the FRF could 
create confusion in the context of the lawsuit ""Center for 
Biological Diversity v. Gates,"" where the clear Japanese 
government lead in finalizing the FRF is a key tenet of the 
U.S. defense.  Moreover, a strong obligation by the U.S. to 
cooperate toward the completion of the FRF could be construed 
as an opening to renegotiate the location of the runway to 
satisfy Okinawa Governor Nakaima's political requests. 
However, the U.S. side accepted the reference to ""close 
cooperation with the Government of the United States of 
America"" in the final language since this formulation 
maintained the Japanese government as the lead actor for 
completing the FRF.  The inclusion of Article 3, as well as 
the specific language of Article 3, required Prime Minister 
Taro Aso's personal approval. 
 
--------- 
Article 4 
--------- 
 
¶20.  (C)  The purpose of this Article is to assure the 
Japanese government that the USG would not use Japanese cash 
contributions for anything other than the original purpose. 
 
--------- 
Article 5 
--------- 
 
¶21.  (C)  The purpose of Article 5 is to capture U.S. efforts 
to maintain a level playing field for Japanese companies 
competing for contracts funded by Japan's cash contributions. 
 In early discussions, the U.S. proposed including the caveat 
""in accordance with applicable laws and regulations"" to make 
clear that the USG cannot guarantee equal treatment should 
the U.S. Congress pass new laws that undermine the existing 
arrangements.  However, the U.S. side reminded Japanese 
negotiators of the number of actions the U.S. side has taken 
since May 2006 to create a framework for equal treatment and 
to explain the political importance of equal treatment to key 
Congressional members and staffers.  The Japanese side 
insisted that if the U.S. retained the caveat ""in accordance 
with applicable laws and regulations,"" the Japanese 
 
TOKYO 00003458  004 OF 007 
 
 
government, at the highest levels, would not support the 
agreement and would, at a minimum, insist on a statement in 
Article 1 that Japanese funding is subject to equal treatment 
by the United States.  The U.S. negotiators reminded the 
Japanese side that the U.S. never guaranteed Japan a level 
playing field, but only committed to make ""best efforts."" 
 
¶22.  (C)  Given the critical importance to Japan 
domestically, the U.S. agreed to remove the caveat ""in 
accordance with applicable laws and regulations"" from Article 
5 after making a clear statement that even without an 
explicit statement, all U.S. actions will be undertaken in 
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.  Removal of 
this caveat does not change the fact that the U.S. will only 
act in accordance with laws and regulations.  Japanese 
negotiators explicitly stated that they understood that it is 
natural that all countries can only act in accordance with 
their laws and regulations.  However, they also said that 
should the U.S. fail to maintain equal treatment of Japanese 
companies, the Japanese government will cease funding under 
this International Agreement.  The U.S. side restated that it 
has not agreed that equal treatment is a prerequisite for 
Japan's cash contribution, but took note of the high 
importance the Japanese side placed on equal treatment and 
agreed to, as has been the case since May 2006, make best 
efforts to maintain equal treatment.  The U.S. side added 
that should the Japanese side choose to cease its 
contributions, the U.S. would no longer be obligated to 
complete the facilities in Guam or relocate from Okinawa to 
Guam, per Articles 2 and 9. 
 
--------- 
Article 6 
--------- 
 
¶23.  (C)  The purpose of Article 6 is to give more authority 
to the Implementing Guidance, which was drafted in parallel 
with the IA, and which will be signed by MOD and DOD program 
leads subsequent to the IA's entry into force.  The IG goes 
into greater detail on implementation, especially ensuring 
sufficiently flexible use of funds for program management. 
The Japanese side pressed for indirect references to the IG 
to avoid Diet attention.  The U.S. side made clear that we 
would share the draft IG with Congress and that the IA and IG 
constitute a complete package. 
 
--------- 
Article 7 
--------- 
 
¶24.  (C)  The purpose of Article 7 is to lay out key 
characteristics of the funding mechanism, although most 
details are further outlined in the IG.  Para 2 clarifies 
that Japan's contribution will be measured in constant US 
Fiscal Year 2008 dollars by laying out a discount 
methodology, and characterizes the index that will be used; 
 
TOKYO 00003458  005 OF 007 
 
 
separately the Japanese agreed to the U.S.-proposed 
Engineering News Building Cost Index.  U.S. negotiators 
pressed the Japanese side to commit explicitly to transfer 
funds annually within 60 days of Diet authorization. 
Instead, they decided as an effectively equivalent solution, 
the combination of a Foreign Minister statement at the time 
the IA is signed committing to exchange notes as soon as 
possible each year to facilitate timely transfer, along with 
the MOD's commitment to transfer funds within 30 days of the 
annual exchange of notes, as referenced in paragraph 3 of the 
IG. 
 
--------- 
Article 8 
--------- 
 
¶25.  (C)  The purpose of Article 8 is to address Japanese 
concerns that the U.S. will make unilateral force structure 
decisions (e.g., in the context of BRAC) that affect the 
Japanese-funded facilities.  During May 2006 Roadmap 
discussions, the U.S. told the Japanese government that the 
USG cannot make any commitments about the long-term presence 
of U.S. forces in Guam.  The language in this Article does 
not commit the USG to anything more than the consultations 
that would arise in due course among allies. 
 
--------- 
Article 9 
--------- 
 
¶26.  (C)  The purpose of Article 9 is to lay out the 
disclaimers that both the Government of Japan and USG have 
for their commitments in Articles 1 and 2 respectively. 
Paragraph 1 is Japan's disclaimer that it will not fund the 
program unless the U.S. also takes necessary measures.  The 
real focus of this disclaimer is to hedge against the risk 
Japan is taking of ""going first"" on funding.  If the Japanese 
government transfers funds to the USG in 2009 prior to 
Congressional action to pass the U.S. FY 2010 MILCON budget 
for Guam, and Congress subsequently does not pass the Guam 
budget, the Japanese intends to ask for its unused funds to 
be returned, consistent with Article 7.  The caveats in 
paragraph 2 capture the key conditions for U.S. funding and 
actions to complete the Relocation.  As is necessary in an 
executive agreement, the U.S. includes the caveat ""subject to 
the availability of funds for the Relocation.""  Moreover, the 
U.S. clearly links the U.S. Guam actions to progress on the 
FRF, as well as Japan's financial contributions ""as 
stipulated in the Roadmap"" (which refers not only to cash 
contribution, but also funding for housing and utilities, for 
a total USD 6.09 billion commitment). 
 
---------- 
Article 10 
---------- 
 
 
TOKYO 00003458  006 OF 007 
 
 
¶27.  (C)  The purpose of Article 10 is to include generic 
consultation language that Japan requires in all 
International Agreements. 
 
---------- 
Article 11 
---------- 
 
¶28.  (C)  The purpose of Article 11 is to clarify the 
mechanism and timeline for bringing this agreement into force. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Exchange of Notes (EON) and Annex 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶29.  (C)  The purpose of the EON is to initiate the JFY 2009 
funds transfer.  There will be annual EONs to reflect 
projects and budget associated with the program.  Language in 
para 1 makes clear that the funds will be provided in JFY 
¶2009.  This reflects Japan's retreat from earlier positions 
that it needed to either use incremental funding or split 
funding.  The Annex of the EON updates the clarification of 
each project.  By grouping the design projects into a single 
""project"" for the purposes of the EON, the Japanese 
government gives the U.S. program managers more flexibility 
in implementation.  By breaking up the Utilities and Site 
Improvements (U&SI) project into three discrete projects, the 
U.S. will need to exercise additional coordination with the 
Japanese side to adjust funds between projects.  However, MOD 
implementation lead Marui made clear that he will be 
authorized to assent to such funding adjustments and pledged 
his full cooperation in accommodating flexible movement of 
funds among projects as necessary.  He cautioned, however, 
that insistence by the USG that the US&I projects be grouped 
together would be a ""deal breaker."" 
 
----------------- 
Negotiating Teams 
----------------- 
 
¶30.  (SBU) 
 
U.S. 
---- 
 
Suzanne Basalla, Senior Country Director for Japan, Office of 
the Secretary of Defense (OSD) (lead) 
Raymond Greene, Chief, Political-Military Affairs, U.S. 
Embassy Tokyo 
Lt. Col. Marc Czaja, Country Director for Japan, OSD 
David Bice, Executive Director, Joint Guam Program Office 
(JGPO) 
Lynn Hicks, Senior Program Manager, JGPO 
Matthew Gagelin, Legal Counsel, JGPO 
CAPT Rame Hemstreet, Deputy Commander for Operations, 
Headquarters, Naval Facilities Engineering Command 
 
TOKYO 00003458  007 OF 007 
 
 
CAPT Lou Cariello, Operations Officer, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Pacific 
Wayne Wisniewski, Senior Counsel, Headquarters, Naval 
Facilities Engineering Command 
Craig Haas, Chief, Realignment Implementation (J57), U.S. 
Forces Japan (USFJ) 
Kent Morioka, J57, USFJ 
Col. Clark Metz, Director, Marine Corps Pacific Posture 
Program Office (observer) 
 
Japan 
----- 
 
Kazuhiro Suzuki, Director, Japan-U.S. Security Treaty 
Division Director, MOFA (IA lead) 
Hiroshi Marui, Deputy Director General for Realignment, MOD 
(IG lead) 
Junji Shimada, Director, Treaties Division, MOFA 
Tomoaki Ishigaki, Principal Deputy Director, Japan-U.S. 
Security Treaty Division Director, MOFA 
Masamitsu Nagano, Deputy Director, Japan-U.S. Security Treaty 
Division Director, MOFA 
Katsunori Sugahara, Deputy Director, Japan-U.S. Security 
Treaty Division Director, MOFA 
Satoru Yatsuka, Deputy Director, Treaties Division, MOFA 
Masaaki Kanai, First Secretary, Embassy of Japan to the 
United States 
Makoto Igusa, Principal Deputy Director, Office of the DDG 
for Realignment, MOD 
Yukinori Nishimae, Deputy Director, Office of the DDG for 
Realignment, MOD 
Takahiro Araki, Deputy Director, U.S.-Japan Defense 
Cooperation Division, MOD 
ZUMWALT