03ANKARA4777
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004777 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JULY 29, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
The Third Formula - Milliyet 
Pentagon Has Asked Ankara for a Division for Iraq - Sabah 
Troop Formula for Iraq: "Has to be a State Decision" 
Turkish Presence in Northern Iraq Depends on Barzani-Turkiye 
Kurdish Army in Northern Iraq - Aksam 
US State Department: 30 Countries Will Send Troops To Iraq - 
Sabah 
`US and Kurdish Troops have Joint Exercises in Northern Iraq 
- Milliyet 
Standard & Poors Raises Turkey's Credit Rating - Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
FM Gul: `The US Wants Us'-Radikal 
15,000 Troops to Iraq-Cumhuriyet 
FM Gul: A New Motion is Necessary for Troop Deployment-Yeni 
Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Turkish troops for Iraqi peacekeeping:  All papers report 
that at yesterday's  Council of  Ministers meeting reviewed 
FM Gul's US visit and the troop request by the US for Iraq. 
At the meeting, the council agreed that the troop deployment 
issue should be a State decision.  The consultation process 
will begin with a three-way `summit' including the PM, the 
Chief of General Staff and the President.  "Hurriyet" 
reports that FM Gul stressed the necessity of a 
parliamentary motion for the troop deployment, and said that 
the government has decided to send a motion to parliament 
`without rushing' and after informing the public about the 
issue.   "Milliyet" Washington Correspondent Yasemin Congar 
draws attention to three formulas considered by the US to 
facilitate a Turkish decision for sending troops to Iraq. 
One alternative is to ensure NATO support for the 
stabilization force.  A second alternative is based on the 
`Polish formula,' which guarantees NATO logistical support 
for Turkish troops.  A third formula is an invitation to 
Turkish troops by the interim Iraqi council.  "Sabah" 
reports the US State Department announcement listing the 30 
countries that have agreed to send troops to Iraq. 
 
 
Joint Exercise Confusion: "Milliyet" cites conflicting 
reports regarding joint exercises by the US and Turkey near 
the Turkish-Iraqi border.  Although no denial has come from 
FM Gul or the TGS, Barzani's special forces commander Aziz 
Veysi stated that the joint exercises in Northern Iraq were 
in fact carried out by US and Kurdish troops.  Veysi 
insisted that the conflicting reports stemmed from the AP 
correspondent's mixing up of the words `Turkish' and 
`Kurdish.'  According to Veysi, no Turkish troops 
participated in  the exercises. 
 
 
Standard & Poors:  "Hurriyet" reports that the international 
credit rating institution Standard & Poors has upgraded 
Turkey's credit rating from `B minus' to `B.'  While 
upgrading Turkey's rating, S&P sent a message to the AKP 
urging the Government not to engage in an `election economy' 
that could increase Turkey's debt problem. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"Democratic messages" 
Cengiz Candar argued in the mass appeal DB-Tercuman (7/29): 
"Gul's message for `civilianizing' politics in Turkey will 
undoubtedly find support in the Pentagon, the main 
administrative institution of U.S. politics. .  Gul has made 
it clear that Turkish troops will leave Northern Iraq if the 
PKK/KADEK presence is eliminated.  He also stressed that the 
Northern Iraq issue will be taken away from the TGS and put 
under the authority of the civilian government. .  Adopting 
Gul's pledges in Washington as a government policy will 
serve the democratization agenda of the AKP. .  It is ironic 
that the leadership of the `social democratic' CHP is 
opposing this attempt to civilianize politics in Turkey. . 
CHP is increasingly going back to the days when it was 
defined as a `party of the state.' .  Not only the 
Americans, but those with a democratic sensitivity in 
Turkey, are increasingly adopting a negative view of the 
CHP." 
 
 
"What's changed in the view of the Americans?" 
Sedat Ergin wrote in the mass appeal Hurriyet (7/29): "U.S. 
officials are gradually realizing that staying at odds with 
Turkey will not serve their interest.  Hawks like Rumsfeld 
have started moving closer to Powell, who has made a 
considerable effort to prevent a break in ties.  The United 
States, determined to wipe out the terrorist threat after 
9/11, cannot push Turkey aside. .  Although a bit too late, 
the Washington Administration realized that it had gone too 
far in the Suleymaniye event.  Washington had to open its 
eyes to the growing anti-American sentiment in Turkey.  The 
Gul visit has shown that the U.S. has acknowledged that its 
long-term interests will not allow the break in ties with 
Turkey to continue.  The same is true from the AKP view of 
Washington.  Despite all the negativity that has been 
experienced, the sides saw that they have no other option 
but to hold each other's hand and move forward." 
 
 
DEUTSCH