03ANKARA4230
TURKEY DEMANDS IMMEDIATE RELEASE OF ITS SPECIAL
Fri Jul 04 00:00:00 +0200 2003
SECRET
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 004230 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/04/2013 
TAGS: MOPS PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: TURKEY DEMANDS IMMEDIATE RELEASE OF ITS SPECIAL 
FORCES PERSONNEL IN NORTHERN IRAQ 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Acting Undersecretary of MFA Baki Ilkin convoked DCM 
the evening of July 4th to formally protest the reported 
arrest by US forces of Turkish Special Forces (SF) in 
Sulaimaniyah, Iraq.  According to Ilkin, at approximately 
14:30 July 4, Turkish SF reported that 150 US troops arrived 
at the Turkish SF Headquarters in Sulaimaniyah to search the 
facility. From that point communications from the Turkish SF 
to their superiors were blocked.  An eyewitness outside the 
facility apparently informed the SF that the building was 
searched, indeed ransacked, that a Turkish flag in the SF 
unit commander's office was torn down, and that the 13 
Turkish SF were taken away in shackles.  Shortly thereafter, 
the Iraqi Turkomen Front office in Sulaimaniyah was also 
visited by US soldiers and the Turkomen were arrested.  They 
were taken away hooded, shackled, and handcuffed. 
Communication with the outside eyewitness was broken at that 
point as well. In addition, the Turkomen radio station in 
Sulaimaniyah was taken off the air. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ilkin reported that both groups had been taken to a 
prison in Kirkuk.  He added that there were unconfirmed 
reports of further moves against Turkish SF in Iraq and 
expressed the hope that these reports were not true.  Ilkin 
said the way that the Turks had been treated was deplorable, 
equivalent to the treatment of Saddam's Fedayeen, and 
certainly not a way to treat an Ally.  He said that the Turks 
didn't know who decided to take such an action and, while 
they didn't know whether the fact was relevant, they 
understood that Col Mayville of the 101st Airborne Division, 
with whom they have experienced previous difficulties, was in 
Sulaimaniyah on July 4.  Ilkin noted that the GOT had 
previously complained about the attitude and actions of Col 
Mayville.  The GOT suspects that such an action could have 
been taken on July 4 because communications with authorities 
and between Ankara and Washington would have been hampered by 
the holiday.  Ilkin noted intercepts of communications in the 
Kirkuk-Sulaimaniyah area with individuals stating that 
"Kirkuk has been liberated today." (Comment: with the 
implication that this confirmed an anti-Turkish intent.) 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ilkin said that this action was already leaking to the 
press (we have not been able to confirm) and that President 
Sezer and PM Erdogan had been informed.  If the questions 
were not immediately dealt with, this incident would have 
significant negative repercussions on the US-Turkish 
relationship that both sides had been working to put back on 
firmer ground. He said the Turkish Government requests swift 
action to resolve the incident including: 
-- immediate release of those detained 
-- a full investigation of the incident 
-- identification of those responsible for the decision and 
appropriate action 
-- share of the results of the investigation with the GOT. 
¶5. (C) Comment: Embassy learned of this alleged incident mid 
afternoon July 4 from TGS and MFA sources. Through military 
and civilian channels (EUCOM, CENTCOM, State, OCPA Baghdad) 
we tried to confirm any relevant activity.  It took some 6-7 
hours before we were able to confirm the incident, and 
Ambassador Pearson informed U/S Ilkin (just prior to the 
convocation) that we had taken 23 presumed civilians, since 
they neither ID cards nor uniforms, in custody. 
¶6. (C) Action Requested: Given the potential serious 
consequences to our relationship, we need to resolve this 
incident as quickly as humanly possible.  We request a 
response with as much specificity as possible for the GOT by 
OOB Ankara time July 5.  We need to tell the Turks very 
quickly, in the most concrete, convincing terms possible, why 
we have taken this step.  We should provide the briefing in 
whatever channels would be most appropriate given the 
sensitivity and classification of the information. 
PEARSON