03HARARE1372
MEDIA REPORT PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO AFRICA;
Tue Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

080941Z Jul 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PDPA FOR DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REPORT PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO AFRICA; 
HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   The June 29 edition of the government-controlled 
      weekly "The Sunday Mail" devoted considerable space to 
      articles talking about the forth-coming historic visit to 
      Africa by United States President George W. Bush and 
      Secretary of State Colin Powell's op-ed in the New York 
      Times on Zimbabwe.  Excerpts follow: 
 
  ¶2.   Under headline "Bush in no position to talk democracy, 
      says top U. S. writer" the paper carried the following 
      article (adapted from Michael Moore's latest book entitled 
      `Stupid White Men') by Munyaradzi Huni, Political Editor, 
      on page one: 
 
      "United States President Mr. George W. Bush is a 
      threat to American national security and a `Thief-in- 
      Chief' who should not lecture the world about 
      democracy and human rights, says a leading American 
      writer, Mr. Michael Moore.  He says there is nothing 
      sadder than seeing other leaders of the world trying 
      to `mimic the leaders of our country,' as their main 
      preoccupation is to exploit the poor countries.  On 
      the other hand, political commentators and diplomats 
      from Southern Africa have warned Mr. Bush that he 
      will be met with a baptism of fire during his visit 
      to Africa next week if he tries to lecture to `us 
      things like democracy and human rights that he is 
      wantonly violating in his country. . . .'" 
 
  ¶3.   Under headline "Two great liars of our time" the same 
      paper carried another article (based in part on Moore's 
      book) on page 9 by Munyaradzi Huni: 
 
      "One of America's most respected writers, Michael 
      Moore, in his latest book entitled `Stupid White 
      Men" that is selling like hot cakes all over the 
      world, describes U. S. President George W. Bush as 
      `a drunk, a thief, a possible felon, an unconvicted 
      deserter and a crybaby.'  If Moore had gone a step 
      further to tell the world that Mr. Bush is also a 
      bully and an unrepentant liar, then he would have 
      become the first person to give the correct 
      description of the U. S. leader.  But still his 
      description ranks among the best so far. . .Mr. Bush 
      and Mr. (Tony) Blair have manufactured lots of lies 
      against Zimbabwe and it's now like an obsession as 
      they dream about regime change in the country, but 
      just like all lies, they will work only for a short 
      time. . .Like typical bullies, Mr. Bush and Mr. 
      Blair's lies are all about trying to promote and 
      protect U. S. and UK interests at all costs and 
      using whatever means necessary.  No wonder why they 
      ignored the U. N. as they invaded Iraq. . . ." 
 
  ¶4.   Under headline "an overwhelmed house Negro" the 
      government-controlled weekly "The Sunday Mail' 
      (06/29) carried the following propaganda articles 
      under the scornful phantom chitchat column  "Under 
      the Surface": 
 
      "An overwhelmed House Negro": "U. S. Secretary of 
      State Colin Powell is really behaving like an over- 
      fed House Negro as many have always thought he is. 
      He is one hell of an unashamed sell-out - a true 
      Uncle Tom who has been overwhelmed by events.  Last 
      week he decided to show his boss, George W. Bush, 
      how good he is in following instructions, even 
      stupid ones, when he wrote a shameful article in the 
      New York Times attacking the Zimbabwean 
      government. . . ." 
 
      "The victory that never was": ". . .America and 
      Britain thought Saddam (Hussein) was one big 
      fool. . .But news from Iraq will tell you that 
      Saddam is no fool at all.  Like a true war 
      strategist, Saddam retreated after realizing that 
      America and Britain were coming with `weapons of 
      mass destruction.'  He let their soldiers take over 
      Baghdad and, like true fools, Bush and Blair 
      celebrated.  To them the war was over.  But not for 
      Saddam.  The war was just starting.  Now American 
      and British soldiers in Iraq are under siege.  They 
      are dying on a daily basis.  We are not celebrating 
      death here, but then Bush and Blair were celebrating 
      as they massacred thousands of innocent Iraqis, 
      including journalists they had accredited to cover 
      the war as if it was some football match. . . ." 
 
      "Winner of the Week: George W. Bush:" "U. S. 
      President W. George W. Bush is really taking things 
      too far. . .How can Bush try to preach democracy, 
      human rights, good governance and the rule of law 
      when we all know that he is the first culprit to 
      break all these concepts?  Just look at what he has 
      done in Afghanistan and Iraq and just look at how 
      bad his government is treating Arabs.  Even for 
      South African leader Nelson Mandela has had enough 
      of Bush's nonsense and he has refused to meet the U. 
      ¶S. leader on his first visit to Africa.  The bully 
      is getting thick-headed with every passing day, but 
      the good thing is that the more his head gets bigger 
      and thicker, the more enemies he is creating for 
      himself and all American citizens.  Who else would 
      take Under the Surface's award this week?" 
 
SULLIVAN