07DAMASCUS1193
DEMOCRATIC REFORM STRATEGY SYRIA - 2007
Sun Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
SECRET
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXRO8768
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDM #1193/01 3571352
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 231352Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4480
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0636
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0321S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 DAMASCUS 001193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PARIS FOR JORDAN; LONDON FOR TSOU 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL SY IS
SUBJECT: DEMOCRATIC REFORM STRATEGY SYRIA - 2007 
 
 
Classified By: CDA Todd Holmstrom for reasons 1.4 b and d 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Since the development of Post,s 2005 
democratic reform strategy there has been a substantial and 
on-going government crackdown on what little democratic 
reform had been taking place.  Many of the democratic 
reformers and human rights advocates who were key Embassy 
contacts in 2005 are now in prison.  Many who are or were 
involved in political opposition, human rights, and/or civil 
society development have been banned from leaving the 
country, thereby making external training problematic for 
many of the most promising reformers.  In addition, the 
Syrian Arab Republic government (SARG) makes it all but 
impossible for local NGOs, opposition parties and individual 
reformers to receive funding from non-Syrian sources. 
Finally, international NGOs that aim to engage in any 
political activity are forbidden from operating in the 
country. 
 
¶2. (C) Given Syria,s restrictive political environment, Post 
advocates: 1) supporting political prisoners and dissidents 
and helping their families; 2) helping political opposition 
and civil society to spread their message and develop 
internally; and 3) providing assistance to Syrian opposition 
contacts outside the country who have the trust of opposition 
leaders inside the country.  Post believes it can effectively 
support Washington,s objectives by serving as a platform of 
communication and as a resource of information about 
activities and direction of the internal opposition.  End 
Summary. 
 
PRIORITY ONE:  SUPPORT FOR POLITICAL PRISONERS, OTHER 
DISSIDENTS AND THEIR FAMILIES 
 
¶3. (C) Since 2005, a number of high profile political 
reformers, human rights defenders and civil society activists 
were arrested, tried and sentenced to lengthy prison terms: 
Kamal Labwani for 12 years; Anwar al-Bunni for five years; 
and Michel Kilo for three years.  In addition, the government 
prevented many connected to the political reform movement, 
human rights organizations or civil society from traveling 
abroad: Riad Seif who requires medical attention not 
available in Syria or Haithem al-Maleh whose wife is ill in 
the U.S. 
 
¶4. (C) Both the White House and the State Department have 
issued numerous public statements condemning both the 
politically based trials and the harsh sentences for regime 
critics.  Post has worked closely with like-minded embassies 
in Damascus to coordinate public statements and share 
information.  Some visiting CODELS broached the subject of 
political detainees in the meetings with President Asad and 
other SARG officials. 
 
¶5. (C) Yet, a consistent refrain of Post,s opposition 
contacts is that the Embassy and USG should do more to 
support the opposition.  Of particular concern are the 
families of prisoners of conscience who have no other means 
to support themselves.  Unofficially, there are approximately 
100 to 150 individuals who need some sort of assistance.  In 
many cases, when the primary bread winner is sent to prison, 
the spouses are also forced out of jobs by the security 
services, who also work to isolate them from society at large 
so far as ensuring the children are shunned from school. 
XXXXXXXXXXXX. 
 
¶6. (C) Strategies for Post support for prisoners of 
conscience, their families and their movements: 
 
-- Department adopts a more public posture calling for SARG 
release of political prisoners. 
 
-- Closely monitor/report on political repression cases, and 
suggest press guidance highlighting the abuses. 
 
-- Use the U.S. annual human rights report on Syria as a 
point of discussion for programming with civil society 
activists, journalists, and academics. 
 
-- Use high-level visits, including CODELS, to urge SARG to 
 
DAMASCUS 00001193  002 OF 004 
 
 
release political prisoners as a demonstration of the 
government,s desire to improve bilateral relations and as a 
way to enhance its image. 
 
-- Post is developing a detailed list of the family members 
of prisoners of conscience that lists the types of assistance 
they need/want. 
 
-- Use of DRL,s Human Rights Defenders Fund and MEPI funds 
to support, through international NGOs (possibly Freedom 
House), the families of prisoners of conscience. 
 
¶7. (C) Resource Needs:  Initially, Post plans to depend 
largely on DRL,s Human Rights Defenders Fund.  Eventually, 
Post envisions working with MEPI to develop specifically 
tailored programs as Post develops a more sophisticated 
understanding of how best to assist family members of 
political prisoners. 
 
PRIORITY TWO: ENCOURAGE SYRIA-BASED HUMAN RIGHTS NGOS, 
OPPOSITION MOVEMENTS AND YOUNG JOURNALISTS TO USE MASS 
COMMUNICATIONS MORE EFFECTIVELY 
 
¶8. (C) The Syrian government tightly controls all media and 
maintains ownership of most news outlets in Syria. The 
government has allowed the founding of some semi-independent 
publications, which are privately owned by regime allies. 
Journalists are harassed by the security services and 
sometimes jailed for publication of news or opinion offensive 
to the regime.  Satellite television is available almost 
everywhere in the country and is relatively unregulated. 
However, locally-based correspondents for Arab media 
(al-Sharq al-Awsat, al-Hayat, al-Jazeera, al-Arabiya) refrain 
from running stories critical of the Syrian regime. 
Self-censorship and knowing where the government's red-lines 
are job survival skills for all journalists operating in 
Syria.  The internet is rapidly growing as a source of 
information for Syrians, although websites are monitored and 
some are periodically blocked. 
 
¶9. (C) In 2006, the Ministry of Information completed 
drafting a new Publications Law.  Early hopes that the draft 
law would be quickly ratified and adopted have now evaporated 
as the Ministry has yet to pass the draft law to the 
People,s Assembly for debate.  Local observers do not expect 
the draft law to be passed anytime soon. 
 
¶10. (C) The Embassy,s priority is to encourage and support 
local human rights NGOs and opposition movements (such as the 
recently formed National Council) to circulate their message 
both inside the country and out.  Internal and external 
pressure on the regime will increase as more people know the 
truth about the methods it employs to stay in power. 
 
¶11. (C) It is equally important that Syrian journalists and 
those interested in journalism receive the requisite skills 
to produce high quality media products that will allow them 
to disseminate their viewpoints as effectively as possible. 
As such, journalist trainings and exchanges remain vitally 
important. 
 
¶12.  (C) Strategies for Support: 
 
-- Encourage reputable Syrian reporters by allowing them 
access to embassy staff in PAS-monitored backgrounders and 
including them in representational events. 
 
-- Continue to send journalists to the US through IVPs and 
other Embassy sponsored exchanges to better understand the 
roles and responsibilities of journalists in a free media. 
 
-- Support journalist training and capacity building 
workshops, especially in the area of &new8, i.e. 
electronic, media. 
 
-- Identify and facilitate budding sites of a free press 
here, such as websites and periodicals with investigative 
news, and develop creative strategies, with input from NDI, 
IRI, NED, Freedom House, Internews and others, to identify 
ways to fund these future pillars of a free press. 
 
-- Provide training for journalists in human rights reporting. 
 
DAMASCUS 00001193  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
-- Assist local NGOs with translating and printing their 
publications, statements, websites and pamphlets. 
 
-- Support the proposed European office of the Damascus 
Declaration,s National Council, which will be used as a 
platform to spread their message. 
 
-- Assist the Damascus Declaration,s National Council to 
broadcast a news show on Syria once or twice a week on 
satellite television. 
 
-- Encourage al-Hurra to focus on the human rights situation 
in the Middle East with one or two hours of programming per 
week ) some of which could include the situation in Syria. 
 
-- Provide technical advice on and/or directly host 
opposition/human rights websites. 
 
-- PD section to increase scope and depth of its contacts 
among local journalists with an eye to send more for 
training/exchanges. 
 
-- Encourage NSC/Commerce to apply greater flexibility to the 
review of export licenses under U.S. sanctions to allow, 
where possible and where it serves U.S. interests, for the 
more rapid spread of the internet in Syria. 
 
¶13. (C) Resource Needs:  PD is already undertaking some 
journalist training; additional training could build on these 
programs.  MEPI funds are already supporting websites and 
could be expanded.  We should also give consideration to the 
National Council's request for funding for satellite 
broadcasts.  Washington could explore supporting the use of 
American satellite TV programs that provide truthful, 
accurate information about the regime.  Other strategies 
proposed can be undertaken at post with existing staffing and 
assets.  MEPI small grants funds could be used to assist 
local NGOs with translating and printing. 
 
PRIORITY THREE:  AID THE DEVELOPMENT OF A ROBUST CIVIL 
SOCIETY 
 
¶14. (C) The SARG allows a very few licensed, non-political 
civil society organizations to operate.  The SARG carefully 
funds and controls these organizations. Independent NGO's are 
not authorized to operate in the country and have been 
increasingly policed and shut down since 2005 including the 
2006 closing of AMIDEAST, which had successfully operated in 
Syria for 27 years.  Additionally, The SARG has completely 
closed a number of civil society organizations that focused 
on reform and human rights.  Security services routinely 
disrupt the meetings of human rights organizations, harass 
their leaders and prevent their members from leaving the 
country. 
 
¶15. (C) Post,s priority is to provide opportunities for 
civil society organizations to develop themselves internally 
and cultivate their relations with other civil society 
organizations both within Syria and abroad.  One possible 
area of focus is the legal sector where the ABA is already 
actively exploring some programs. 
 
¶16. (C) Strategies for Assistance: 
 
-- Using MEPI to enhance existing English programs, 
increasing, for example, the micro-scholarship program to two 
years for each participant for up to 20 at the American 
Language Center, subject to availability of additional 
funding.  Other English language schools could also be used 
to provide language instruction. 
 
-- MEPI funding for additional training (including English) 
at private schools in Damascus. 
 
-- Expand the number of IV's available to Syrians who can 
travel in the field of democratization and related fields. 
 
-- Identify and approach non-traditional partners (i.e. 
churches) who may be able to provide cover for civil society 
development projects, such as NGO training. 
 
 
DAMASCUS 00001193  004 OF 004 
 
 
-- Develop on associations of western-trained lawyers, 
possibly through the ABA. 
 
-- Through the ABA, create training programs for Syrian 
lawyers focusing on legal advocacy and legal drafting. 
 
-- Create a forum for people-to-people discussion of the 
issue with legal scholars speaking on respect for human 
rights in different legal systems. 
 
-- Embassy hosts monthly DVCs where some local human rights 
activists could communicate with U.S. or regional 
counterparts. 
 
-- Develop medium and long term relationships with NGOs 
working in areas that are not sensitive to the regime such as 
the environment or health. 
 
-- Help local NGOs and other civil society organizations 
improve computer literacy among their members. 
 
¶17. (C) Resource Needs:  MEPI and/or DRL funds will provide 
an ideal source for enhanced funding for civil society/NGO 
activity. There will be a critical need for flexibility and 
creativity in identifying funding programs, sources of 
funding and ways to deliver these resources to groups.  One 
option, for both civil society and human rights activists, is 
to identify recipients for cash "prizes," awarded by 
recognized foundations and private organizations in the U.S. 
or Europe. 
 
¶18. (C) EVALUATING THE CONSEQUENCES AND PROSPECTS FOR 
SUCCESS:  In the wake of the ongoing crackdown, and the 
current tense regional environment, the SARG remains wary of 
USG intentions toward the regime.  The SARG is unlikely to 
allow many of these suggested programming initiatives to go 
forward, and can be expected to block the more ambitious 
ones, either directly or by threatening potential 
participants.  Conversely, the lack of USG programming and 
financial support to political dissidents, human rights 
activists, and civil society organizers has led some in the 
opposition to question whether the U.S. is truly committed to 
democracy in Syria. 
 
¶19.  (S) One way to increase the pressure for democratization 
in Syria is to strongly encourage any official visitors to 
Syria to reiterate the U.S. commitment to democracy and human 
rights. This assumes the SARG would grant the officials visas 
-- which is by no means guaranteed.  Visiting CODELs could be 
persuaded to raise internal reform, as they often receive 
much higher access to the regime than Executive Branch 
officials.  In addition, a visit by the Assistant Secretary 
for Democracy Rights and Labor, for example, could help us 
advance our democratization agenda by focusing public 
attention on our support for human rights and civil society. 
 
¶20. (C) In Syrian, however, ratcheting up U.S. and 
international attention to Syria's human rights record will 
likely result in a negative response by the SARG against 
those we support.  Post might also experience increased SARG 
interference in its programming, and efforts to further 
restrict contacts with organizations and individuals. 
Indeed, the SARG,s closure of AMIDEAST in 2006 serves as a 
reminder of how far the regime can and will go to curtail 
Post,s operations.  Finally, existing PD programs are 
vulnerable to SARG disruption.  Future PD programs will be 
vulnerable to government disruption especially as the profile 
of Post,s support of political reform rises. 
 
¶21. (S) It remains imperative to focus on the &doable.8  In 
that regard, we must seek to identify how to respond 
positively to the requests of Syrian advocates of reform for 
political and material support by partnering with other 
countries and international organizations.  At some point, 
the USG needs to decide how to overcome SARG barriers to USG 
funding of Syrian groups, activists and their families.  The 
issue of providing direct support remains the most difficult 
obstacle and is a constant refrain of civil society contacts 
who complain the U.S. is not doing enough. 
HOLMSTROM