09DAMASCUS252
CODEL LYNCH MEETS ASAD, MUALLIM
Mon Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Damascus
P 061302Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6208
INFO ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 
AMCONSUL ISTANBUL PRIORITY 
AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 
AMCONSUL MUMBAI PRIORITY 
NSC WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L DAMASCUS 000252 
 
 
NSC FOR SHAPIRO, LONDON FOR TSOU, PARIS FOR WALLER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2019 
TAGS: PREL PTER KPAL KWBG IS SY
SUBJECT: CODEL LYNCH MEETS ASAD, MUALLIM 
 
Classified By: Charge' d'Affaires Maura Connelly for reasons 1.5 
(b & d). 
 
1.(C) Summary:  CODEL Lynch met President Bashar al-Asad, 
Foreign Minister Walid al-Muallim and Presidential Advisor 
Bouthaina Sha'ban on Sunday, April 5.  Asad asked for 
increased U.S. engagement with Syria and outlined an overlap 
in U.S. and Syrian interests in the region -- particularly in 
Iraq, where he said both countries sought peace and 
stability.  On the issue of foreign fighters, Asad claimed 
the U.S. had failed to follow up on Syria's willingness to 
cooperate on border security, then suggested that the foreign 
fighters had moved their base of operations from Syria to 
"chaotic" Lebanon, and later compared the Syria-Iraq border 
situation to that on the U.S.-Mexican border.  In the end, 
Asad declared that the only way to stop foreign fighters was 
to disrupt their logistical support, and that border measures 
would not succeed unless political stability were achieved 
within Iraq.  On the Golan track, Asad suggested that the 
issues were "not complex," and said talks hinged on the will 
of Israeli leaders to return occupied lands and on U.S. 
willingness to facilitate negotiations.  The Gaza situation 
was more complex, Asad said.  He chided the U.S. for its 
unwillingness to engage Hamas, and suggested the U.S. follow 
Syria's example of "political pragmatism" in this regard. 
Asad said he saw no point in reconstruction of Gaza without a 
lasting truce, which could only be predicated on a complete 
lifting of the Israeli embargo.  Palestinian reconciliation 
was a precondition for the peace process, he said. 
 
2.(C) Asad claimed that the global spread of terrorism and 
militant ideology was a greater threat than the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction, and pointed to Pakistan as a 
particular source of worry for the SARG.  When pressed on 
WMD, Asad assessed that "no one would use them," with Muallim 
adding that the U.S. should stop arming Israel if it wished 
to defuse the Middle East arms race.  Asad offered himself as 
an honest broker and peacemaker, and -- portraying Syria as 
an island of stability and secularism in a sea of regional 
conflict -- insisted that his true aim was to improve the 
quality of life of the Syrian people through increased 
economic opportunity.  He portrayed regional political issues 
as a distraction from this goal.  Regarding the possibility 
of a new Embassy compound, Muallim jumped in to "clarify" 
that there are three possible sites for the NEC, and that the 
DCS campus was not/not one of them.  End summary. 
 
3.(U) Representative Stephen Lynch (D-MA), Co-Chair of the 
Task Force on Terrorism and Proliferation Financing, House 
Financial Services Committee and the Committee on Oversight 
and Government Reform, and Representative Robert Inglis 
(R-SC), member of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs and 
the House Science & Technology Committee, met President 
Bashar al-Asad, Foreign Minister Walid al-Muallim, and 
Presidential Advisor Bouthaina Sha'ban on Sunday, April 5. 
 
-------------------------------- 
ASAD WANTS MORE DIALOGUE WITH U.S. 
-------------------------------- 
 
4.(C) Lynch opened the meeting by noting the Obama 
Administration's emphasis on engagement as a means to tackle 
tough issues, and expressed his own hope that the U.S. and 
Syria would begin this "serious work."  Asad responded that 
Syria was "ready to cooperate," and cited the Syrian-Turkish 
relationship as a model for cooperation.  He said U.S. and 
Syrian interests overlapped in many areas, though "our points 
of view differ."  Asad opined that the "human condition is to 
disagree," but that this should not stop parties from trying 
to solve political problems.  Asad suggested that further 
Syrian-U.S. dialogue should first focus on issues "where we 
agree," and subsequently move on to areas where U.S. and 
Syrian positions diverged. 
 
5.(C) Asad pressed the U.S. to speed up its engagement with 
Syria.  "We have had only one dialog, with (A A/S) Feltman," 
Asad complained.  "We need more."  He stressed that the U.S. 
must move quickly, for "what we talk about today will not be 
viable next month."  Asad also professed to be a regional 
honest broker:  "When we say no, it means no; when we say 
yes, it means yes.  We are respected for this." 
 
------------------------- 
IRAQ AND FOREIGN FIGHTERS 
------------------------- 
 
6.(C) U.S. and Syrian interests were aligned, Asad said, in 
that both countries sought regional peace and stability. 
Where we differ, he explained, is in our "perceptions and in 
our cultural approaches," particularly with regard to Iraq. 
Making the case that Syria's overriding regional concern was 
the spread of instability from across the border, Asad 
exclaimed that "a curse in Iraq is a curse in Syria, 
regardless of the status of U.S. forces there." 
 
7.(C) Lynch told Asad that he had visited the Iraqi city of 
Al-Qa'im, along the border with Syria, and that the flow of 
foreign fighters across this and other border locations 
continued to undermine stability in Iraq.  Asad claimed Syria 
had been trying to hold a dialogue on security issues with 
the USG since 2004, but that the USG had failed to follow up 
while, at the same time, it portrayed Syria as the 
uncooperative party.  "It was a game," Asad stated.  He then 
raised the September 2008 "suicide bombing" in Damascus as 
evidence that Syria faced a serious terrorist threat and 
therefore had an undeniable interest in countering foreign 
fighters.  Finally, Asad referred to problems along the 
U.S.-Mexican border as evidence that border patrols, alone, 
did not solve problems.  Lynch countered that, in his 
opinion, problems along the U.S.-Mexican border did not 
compare to those along the Syria-Iraq border, particularly 
with regard to smuggling and terrorism. 
 
8.(C) Asad replied that the Syrian-Turkish border was more 
problematic, in historical terms, than Syria's border with 
either Lebanon or Iraq.  Yet this same Turkish border had a 
relatively light troop presence, he said.  "The Turkish 
border is the most controlled border, because we control it 
from inside, politically, not with armaments."  For al-Qaeda 
"sleeper cells" in Syria, he continued, crossing the Iraqi 
border was the "easiest part" of their effort.  The U.S. and 
Syria should aim to disrupt terrorist networks within Syria 
and Iraq by disrupting their logistical support, Asad said. 
Lynch responded that "a more thorough and constant 
commitment" was needed to fight the flow of terrorists across 
the Syrian-Iraqi border.  Asad countered that political 
stability inside Iraq would do more to stop the flow of 
foreign fighters than any tightening of border controls. 
"This is where we can help," claimed Asad. 
 
------------------------------------ 
LEBANON NOW BASE OF FOREIGN FIGHTERS 
------------------------------------ 
 
9.(C) Asad said that he and Iraqi PM Nuri al-Maliki had 
discussed the foreign fighter issue at the recent summit, and 
that Maliki had said that foreign fighters were moving to 
northern Lebanon.  "This is because there is now chaos in 
Lebanon, and this chaos is fertile soil to grow terror," Asad 
explained.  Asad also claimed that Iraqi officials were now 
saying that those who still seek to infiltrate Iraq through 
the Syrian border are al-Qaeda-affiliated Iraqis, and not 
"foreign" fighters.  On Syrian-Lebanon relations, Asad curtly 
noted that Syria had opened an embassy in Lebanon, and 
Lebanon had followed suit in Damascus.  Asad added he had 
appointed an ambassador who would arrive in Beirut "in two 
months' time." 
 
----- 
GOLAN 
----- 
 
10.(C) Inglis asked Asad how Syria and other states in the 
region defined Israeli "occupation," and what effect this had 
on peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian 
Authority, and between Israel and Syria.  Asad replied that 
"occupation is occupation -- what the U.S. does in Iraq is no 
different from what Israel does in Golan, except that the 
U.S. isn't building homes there."  Asad reiterated the Golan 
issue was "not complex" -- Syria recognized Israel "in their 
land, just not in ours."  He said that forward movement on 
the Golan track "is about the will of the Israeli leaders and 
the role that the U.S. can play," and could be "solved 
politically." 
 
-------------- 
GAZA AND HAMAS 
-------------- 
 
11.(C) The Gaza track, and the position of Hamas, was more 
complex, Asad said.  Calling on the U.S. to engage and 
"encourage" Hamas, Asad stated that "negative pressure 
produces a weak and artificial product."  Hamas had been 
democratically elected in a process observed and verified by 
former President Carter himself, Asad argued.  He pointed to 
Syria's "political pragmatism" in allowing Hamas leaders to 
reside in Syria, despite what Asad termed as Syria's 
"long-term problem with the Muslim Brotherhood."  He asserted 
that Hamas leaders' exposure to Syrian political culture had 
softened their militantcy. 
 
12.(C) On the current Gaza situation, Asad called for an 
"urgent truce" and an across-the-board lifting of the Israeli 
embargo, and warned that the ongoing humanitarian crisis was 
giving militant Islamists a foothold in the region. 
Concerning reconstruction, Asad said that he favored 
establishment of an independent authority to disburse funds. 
He claimed that Syria and Qatar had managed to fund 
non-partisan reconstruction projects in Lebanon, and 
suggested that Palestinian reconstruction might be modeled on 
this example.  Asad questioned, however, whether there was a 
point in undertaking a reconstruction effort before peace was 
achieved, as anything re-built would surely be "destroyed 
again" without a lasting truce.  Asad said he supported 
immediate, humanitarian aid to assist the Palestinian people 
in the interim. 
 
13.(C) Palestinian reconciliation was a precondition for 
moving the peace process forward, Asad said, stressing 
Syria's "pragmatism" vis-a-vis Hamas.  The Palestinian track 
was important to the Golan track, and "this is why we are 
involved with Hamas."  He added that "isolation does not 
work."  Asad questioned U.S. thinking on Hamas's refusal to 
recognize Israel.  "We (the Syrian government) do not 
recognize Israel verbally, but when we sign an agreement with 
them, we recognize them formally.  We don't have to say it -- 
it is a form of informal recognition.  You cannot expect more 
of Hamas, because -- politically -- it does not work."  He 
also claimed that the USG had missed an important opportunity 
in 2006 when it failed to recognize the significance of 
Khaled Mesha'al's acceptance of the 1967 line.  "This was 
recognition (by Mesha'al) of the two-state solution, and the 
U.S. did not seize it," he said. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PROLIFERATION OF WMD ... AND IDEOLOGY 
-------------------------------------- 
 
14.(C) Inglis asked Asad how the U.S. and other countries 
could bring a sense of stability to the Middle East, so that 
the drive of individual states to possess weapons of mass 
destruction (WMDs) is reduced.  Asad replied that the 
proliferation of terrorist ideology is as dangerous, if not 
more dangerous, than the proliferation of WMD.  "Terrorism 
spreads today like information spreads across the Internet," 
Asad said.  At several points during the conversation, Asad 
asserted that the spread of militant Islam in Pakistan 
threatened the entire world and was a particular worry for 
Syria.  He said the U.S. needed to understand that terrorists 
do not respond to force.  "If people think they are going to 
die, they have nothing to lose," Asad said.  "They become 
fearless.  They think, 'I can do what I want with my body.' 
You must analyze and understand this ideology," he lectured. 
Softening, Asad praised President Obama's recent remarks to 
the Iranian people, in particular his having "wished the 
Iranians a 'happy feast'." He told CODEL members that they 
"must understand how much good this did." 
 
15.(C) When pressed on the issue of WMD, Asad stated that, 
"in practical terms, no one would use them, because it would 
destroy everything."  This doomsday scenario would provide 
sufficient deterrent, he maintained.  Asad asserted that the 
key to reducing the sense of threat in the region "lies with 
those who hold occupied land," adding, "We do not (occupy 
others' land)."  Muallim interjected that the "U.S. must stop 
arming Israel" if it wished to defuse current tensions, and 
said the current U.S. approach in the Middle East was "like 
trying to talk to Pakistan without considering India." 
 
------------------------ 
PROSPERITY THROUGH PEACE 
------------------------ 
 
16.(C) Questioned directly about Syria's objectives, both 
domestically and regionally, Asad replied that above all, he 
was working for economic growth and an improved standard of 
living for the Syrian people.  These aims, he said, could 
only be achieved by building peace in the region and fighting 
extremism.  Without regional peace, Asad warned, the next 
generation of Arabs "would know only desperation."  Referring 
to Hamas, Hizbollah and others, Asad said "these 
organizations we have in Syria are a result of a no war, no 
peace situation" in the region.  Portraying Syria as an 
island of stability and secularism in a sea of regional 
conflict, Asad said U.S. actions in Iraq had "complicated" 
his country's efforts to achieve their peaceful ambitions. 
 
17.(C) Regarding the current state of the Syrian economy, 
Asad joked that many Syrians were "thanking their incompetent 
government" for an economic system so backward that it 
remained relatively untouched by the global financial crisis. 
 "We cannot stay isolated, however," Asad said, and pointed 
to the launching of the Damascus Stock Exchange as one small 
step toward economic reform. 
 
-------------------- 
NEW EMBASSY COMPOUND 
-------------------- 
 
18.(C) CODEL members raised the issue of the new Embassy 
compound.  "If we are to make a commitment" to engage Syria, 
Lynch explained, "we need to know that you are going to pave 
the way for a safe and reliable situation for our people." 
Asad assured the CODEL that his government wanted to help the 
USG in securing a location for a new chancery, and that the 
SARG had abandoned its original idea of grouping diplomatic 
compounds together in a distant suburb of Damascus.  Asad 
said he knew a State Department team had recently visited 
Damascus to examine possible locations for a new Embassy 
compound.  Muallim quickly jumped in to state that there were 
three possible sites for a new Embassy compound, and that 
"the school is not one of them -- it would be impossible." 
Muallim then addressed Asad directly, explaining to the 
President that the Embassy would have to work through his 
Ministry with Damascus municipal officials to ensure that any 
new construction "fits with the municipal plan." 
 
19.(U) Charge' d'Affaires Maura Connelly accompanied CODEL 
members to this meeting, as did several congressional staff 
and econoff. 
 
¶20. (U) CODEL Lynch authorized release of this cable. 
 
 
CONNELLY