09TOKYO317
SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY CLINTON'S VISIT TO TOKYO
Tue Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKO #0317/01 0410716
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 100716Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0682
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING IMMEDIATE 7669
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL IMMEDIATE 3689
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA IMMEDIATE 4410
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/USFJ  IMMEDIATES E C R E T TOKYO 000317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV OVIP JA
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY CLINTON'S VISIT TO TOKYO 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires, a.i., James P. Zumwalt per 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1. (S) Madam Secretary, Welcome to Tokyo.  Prime Minister 
Aso, Foreign Minister Nakasone and Defense Minister Hamada 
are eager to see you to discuss our new Administration's 
foreign policy and ways to improve our global and regional 
partnership.  That your first stop on your first overseas 
trip is Japan serves as a concrete reminder to Japan's 
leadership and public of the importance of our bilateral 
relationship.  Currently, issue #1 for Japan is the global 
economic downturn compounded by a confused domestic political 
situation.  Although Japanese banks and financial 
institutions had little sub-prime market exposure, the 
country's GDP saw a drop of 9 to 12 percent in the last 
quarter of 2008.  The economic outlook is gloomy with 
expectations of deflation, rising unemployment, and continued 
drops in demand for Japanese exports.  Companies such as 
Toyota and Sony are recording operating losses, paring 
employment rolls and extending factory holidays. 
 
¶2. (S) Fear about Japan's economic well-being, combined with 
its hamstrung political system have exacerbated 
dissatisfaction with Prime Minister Taro Aso's leadership, 
resulting in a growing public sense that it may be time to 
turn over government to the opposition Democratic Party of 
Japan (DPJ).  In a dramatic shift, polls show voters 
increasingly consider opposition leader Ichiro Ozawa to be a 
more suitable PM than Aso.  That said, only Aso can dissolve 
the Diet and call an election, and many believe that he may 
do so after passing his budget this spring.   Others suggest 
he will try to hold on until September when the Diet's 
current term expires. 
 
¶3. (S) Unfortunately, the political situation and an 
increased focus on domestic issues limit Japan's ability to 
help resolve global problems.  Many believe Japan missed a 
chance as G8 chair to play a greater role in responding to 
the global economic crisis, despite its pledge of $100 
billion to the IMF as a credit facility and $2 billion to the 
World Bank to launch a fund to help stabilize financial 
institutions in developing countries.  At home, Japan's 
response to the global economic slowdown has been short on 
effective measures to stimulate domestic demand and business 
and consumer confidence. 
 
¶4. (S) Furthermore, after much political wrangling, the Diet 
only recently passed legislation extending Japan's refueling 
activities in the Indian Ocean in support of Operation 
Enduring Freedom.  Japan continues to consider new 
legislation to respond to Somali piracy, and its ongoing 
deliberations contrast with China's relatively quick decision 
to dispatch ships to the region.  In December, Japan's Air 
Self-Defense Forces ended operations in Iraq.  Japan remains 
a top donor for Iraqi reconstruction but Japan can do more. 
We hope that you'll underline the international community's 
expectations that Japan play a strong role in Iraqi and 
Afghan reconstruction, as well as in combating piracy. 
 
¶5. (S) Your interlocutors will want your thoughts on the new 
Administration's views of the bilateral relationship.  In 
particular, they will be eager to hear that our new 
Administration will not take steps to strengthen the 
U.S.-China relationship at the expense of the alliance with 
Japan.  Notably, polls show Japanese are becoming more 
concerned about the state of the bilateral relationship, 
partly reflecting uncertainty about our China policy, as well 
as disappointment with our decision to delist North Korea as 
state sponsor of terrorism. 
 
¶6. (S) Your counterparts will want to discuss the Six Party 
process.  Many are highly focused on denuclearization 
including the importance of sampling as part of a written 
verification protocol.  They remain skeptical the North 
Koreans will ever commit to verification measures in writing. 
 While most Japanese recognize the importance of DPRK 
denuclearization to Japan's security, they nonetheless remain 
highly emotional about abductions.  A statement from you on 
our continued commitment to achieving progress on DPRK 
issues, including both denuclearization and abductions, would 
be welcome. 
 
¶7. (S) Our bilateral security ties remain robust and in this 
area we have good news:  our two countries recently reached 
an International Agreement on the realignment of U.S. Forces, 
which you and Foreign Minister Nakasone will sign.  This 
agreement, scheduled for Diet vote in March, will commit 
Japan to completing the relocation of Futenma Marine Corps 
Air Station on Okinawa and providing funds for USMC-related 
facilities on Guam.  Japanese officials believe the 
agreement, and the allotment of over $900 million in 
realignment funding during the next fiscal year, will 
buttress Japan's commitment to the May 1, 2006, Alliance 
Transformation Agreement even if there is a change in 
government here. 
 
¶8. (S) In addition, Japan now hosts a forward-deployed 
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, our missile defense 
cooperation is moving forward quickly and we are increasing 
bilateral planning coordination and intelligence sharing. 
While pacifism remains deeply ingrained in Japan, there is a 
new consensus among the public and opinion makers -- due in 
part to the DPRK threat and the PRC's growing power 
projection capabilities -- that the U.S.-Japan Alliance and 
U.S. bases in Japan are vital to Japan's national security. 
For example, the main opposition DPJ, while taking issue with 
some of the details of our basing arrangements, maintains as 
a basic policy platform the centrality of the alliance to 
Japan's security policy.  We recommend that you inform your 
interlocutors we intend to hold an early 2 2 (Foreign and 
Defense Ministers) meeting given the importance of the 
Alliance. 
 
¶9. (S) Japanese leaders will want your thoughts on the 
Administration's stimulus package, the auto bailout, and any 
other responses to the global economic crisis.  Japanese 
officials -) and the public -) have questions about the 
future course of U.S. trade policy.  They are concerned about 
a rise in protectionism and possible ""Buy America"" provisions 
in the draft stimulus packages.  You may be asked about plans 
for the April G-20 Economic Summit.  Our back-to-back years 
hosting APEC (Japan in 2010, the United States in 2011) will 
offer opportunities to promote policies to further trade 
liberalization and regional economic growth and prosperity. 
 
¶10. (S) Your visit is an opportunity to thank Japan for their 
help in addressing climate change/energy issues, coordinating 
on development and disaster assistance, and joint measures to 
combat communicable and emerging diseases such as HIV-AIDS 
and avian influenza.  You may wish to urge Japan to continue 
its work with the United States in the UNFCCC negotiations on 
a post-Kyoto framework and to promote close U.S.-Japan 
cooperation on climate change science. 
 
¶11. (S) A quick reference list of issues follows.  Embassy 
Tokyo looks forward to seeing you soon. 
 
-- U.S.-Japan alliance:  Our alliance is the cornerstone of 
U.S. policy in Northeast Asia, and essential for preserving 
peace and stability throughout the region.  Force 
transformation spelled out in the Defense Policy Review 
Initiative (DPRI) will help sustain Japanese public support 
for the alliance and will strengthen alliance capabilities. 
Both countries are preparing the first set of major fiscal 
expenditures for projects on Okinawa and Guam.  It is crucial 
that we implement our agreed upon plans without change. 
 
-- Climate Change:  Japan has been a leader in the Major 
Economies process and sees itself as a bridge between the 
U.S. and EU on climate change.  While Prime Minister Aso has 
said he will announce a mid-term target for greenhouse gas 
reduction by this June, Japan has been pushing a bottom-up, 
sectoral approach to determining national greenhouse gas 
reduction goals, as opposed to the top-down, cap-and-trade 
policies promoted by the EU.  Japan wants the United States, 
and the emerging market economies including China and India 
to be integral parts of any new global climate change 
agreements. 
 
-- Six-Party Talks:  While Japan shared with the United 
States disappointment at the outcome of the recent round of 
Beijing talks, the Japanese were extremely pleased with 
U.S.-Japan-ROK coordination.  Japan remains firm in its 
refusal to provide energy assistance to the DPRK absent 
progress on the abductions issue.  The DPRK's August 2008 
pledge to open a reinvestigation into the abductions remains 
unfulfilled, in spite of a Japanese promise to reciprocate by 
partially easing its unilateral sanctions. 
 
-- Iraq:  With $1.5 billion in grants, up to $3.5 billion in 
concessionary loans, and $6 billion in debt relief, Japan is 
the second-largest contributor to Iraqi reconstruction. 
Japan's Air Self-Defense Forces had deployed 200 personnel 
and three C-130 aircraft in Kuwait to transport cargo and 
personnel in Iraq; they returned home in December 2008. 
 
 
-- Afghanistan:  In December 2008, Japan passed legislation 
to extend by one year the refueling operation in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom.  Japan is working more closely 
with the PRTs and has assigned a full-time liaison officer to 
NATO's office in Kabul.  Japan is the third highest bilateral 
contributor (behind the U.S. and UK) to Afghanistan, with 
$1.4 billion pledged since 2002.  Japan has included an 
additional $300 million in its latest supplemental budget to 
support the 2009 Afghan elections and other security 
programs.  It has also funded the upgrade of the Self-Defense 
Force's expeditionary capabilities in anticipation of a 
future political decision to deploy forces to ISAF.  Japan's 
most visible endeavor in Afghanistan is the construction of a 
114-kilometer stretch of the southern ring road.  This 
project, originally scheduled for completion in 2005, has 
been beset by delays stemming from Japan's security concerns. 
 We have been pressing them to complete the road and have 
also been asking the Japanese to consider other ways to 
support Afghanistan that are politically and constitutionally 
feasible. 
 
-- China:  Former Prime Minister Fukuda worked hard to 
improve relations with China, but his sudden resignation in 
September 2008 -- and the subsequent political uncertainty ) 
has led to a slow-down in progress on bilateral issues such 
as food safety and an agreement on joint development of East 
China Sea resources.  In a positive development, both China 
and Japan have been successful in defusing, for the time 
being, the sharp conflicts over history that damaged relation 
in the Koizumi years.  While Japanese acknowledge that good 
U.S.-China relations are in Japan's interest, they also fear 
that the United States will discount Japan's interests in 
pursuit of more robust relations with China. 
 
-- South Korea:  Although the Takeshima/Tokdo territorial 
dispute remains an irritant, both sides have expressed a 
desire to build a Japan-ROK relationship that is ""different 
from the relationship up until now,"" including through 
high-level shuttle diplomacy. 
 
-- Burma:  Japan has scaled back its aid to Burma, but has 
not imposed economic sanctions, although it discourages 
companies from investing in Burma.  Japan could do more, but 
fears driving Burma closer to China. 
 
-- Middle East Peace Process:  Japan is moving forward with 
its ""Corridor for Peace and Prosperity"" initiative that will 
establish an agro-industrial park in the West Bank, and 
pledged $150 million in project assistance at the December 
2007 Paris donors' conference.  Last August, Japan resumed 
direct assistance to the PA, contributing $20 million.  Japan 
has urged Israel and Hamas to adopt an immediate ceasefire. 
 
-- Iran:  Japan is implementing UNSCRs 1737, 1747 and 1803. 
Japan is among Iran's top export markets (mostly oil) and is 
Iran's 10th largest supplier of machinery and manufactured 
goods.  A great deal of Japan-Iran trade is covered by 
government guaranteed short-term credits.  Still, since April 
2006, the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) has 
ceased issuing Iran new long-term export credits and Japan 
has promised to begin closing outstanding long-term credits. 
 
-- Beef:  Japan remains closed to U.S. beef and beef products 
from animals older than 20 months of age. We continue to 
insist Japan allow full market access for U.S. product based 
on World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) guidelines and 
science.  Once our largest export market for beef, Japan now 
imports less than 25 percent of pre-2004 levels.  Japanese 
interlocutors will look to see how hard the new 
Administration will press on this issue. 
 
-- UN Reform:  Japan continues to call for an expansion of 
the UN Security Council to allow for its permanent membership 
(its two-year term as a non-permanent member began January 
1).  The United States believes that Japan is well-qualified 
to become a permanent member and Japan's candidacy is the 
only one we have specifically supported. 
 
-- Nonproliferation:  While Japan's delegations are perhaps 
not always as vocal in international non-proliferation fora 
as we would like, Japan is generally supportive of U.S. 
non-proliferation efforts, and, in part due to its history, 
holds a firm, legalistic line on proliferation issues.  Japan 
is active in the IAEA (Japan's nominee is one of the leading 
candidates to replace Director General El Baradei), supports 
the IAEA's Additional Protocol for all states, and has 
generally sided with the U.S. in the ongoing IAEA 
investigations of Iran and Syria.  Regionally Japan has taken 
a leadership role through its involvement in the Asian 
Senior-level Talks on Non-Proliferation (ASTOP).  Japan has 
been responsive to UNSC resolutions calling for sanctions on 
known proliferators, but has generally refrained from acting 
on US-initiated sanctions efforts that do not originate in 
the UNSC. 
 
-- Child Pornography:  Public opinion has responded 
positively to Ambassador Schieffer's public campaign to 
encourage Japan to criminalize the possession of child 
pornography, which remains legal in Japan and Russia alone 
among the G8 member countries.  We hope that a law 
criminalizing possession will be passed in the next Diet 
session. 
 
-- Hague Convention on Parental Child Abductions:  We and our 
Canadian and EU colleagues continue to press Japan to accede 
to the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International 
Child Abduction.  However, our Japanese interlocutors remain 
insistent that bureaucratic, legal and cultural barriers make 
near-term progress difficult. 
ZUMWALT