09TOKYO2277
A/S CAMPBELL'S SEPTEMBER 18 MEETING WITH VICE
Tue Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXRO1243
OO RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHKO #2277/01 2772349
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 042349Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6518
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/USFJ  IMMEDIATE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 TOKYO 002277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL JA
SUBJECT: A/S CAMPBELL'S SEPTEMBER 18 MEETING WITH VICE 
FOREIGN MINISTER YABUNAKA 
 
TOKYO 00002277  001.2 OF 009 
 
 
Classified By: DCM James P. Zumwalt per reasons 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a September 18 meeting with Vice Foreign 
Minister Mitoji Yabunaka, Assistant Secretary Kurt Campbell 
stressed the importance of close U.S.-Japan consultations as 
the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) settled into its role as 
the ruling party.  Close high-level U.S.-Japan engagement 
during this time will ensure the success of both President 
Obama's November visit to Japan as well as next year's 50th 
anniversary of the U.S.-Japan security alliance. A/S Campbell 
stressed the U.S was committed to maintaining smooth 
U.S-Japan relations. 
 
¶2. (C) Summary, cont'd: Touching on Foreign Minister Okada's 
plan to investigate the so-called ""secret"" nuclear agreement 
between the U.S. and Japan, A/S Campbell reiterated that the 
U.S. had released all relevant documents and did not plan to 
comment further. He cautioned that focusing on the issue 
could have operational implications for U.S. forces.  Turning 
to regional issues, A/S Campbell said that the purpose of any 
U.S.-DPRK bilateral meeting would be to facilitate North 
Korea's return to the Six Party Talks.  That said, the U.S. 
will continue to implement UNSCR 1874 and was encouraged by 
other countries' enforcement actions.  The U.S. planned to 
begin a more active engagement with Burma and would look for 
Japan's support in maintaining pressure on the regime, A/S 
Campbell said.  Keeping in mind the President's November 
visit, A/S Campbell said it was essential that Japan's new 
government be willing to make new commitments (e.g., 
cooperation on Iran, Afghanistan/Pakistan) even as the new 
government reconsiders past policies.  Yabunaka agreed that 
the U.S. and Japan must remain focused on the bigger picture, 
suggesting that areas such as climate change would provide 
new opportunities for cooperation.  End Summary. 
 
 
--------------------------- 
Managing Japan's Transition 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Focusing on Japan's political transition with new 
Prime Minister Hatoyama and the former opposition Democratic 
Party of Japan (DPJ) taking power, A/S Campbell said the U.S. 
would publicly demonstrate its confidence in the new 
government and express strong support during Japan's 
political transition.  Publicly, the U.S. would express 
support for the tenets of the DPJ platform (e.g., a more 
independent Japanese foreign policy, strong relations with 
China).  At the same time, the U.S. would be intensely 
focused on reading signals from the new administration.  He 
added that over next several weeks, the U.S. would be engaged 
in a series of high-level interactions with Japan, including 
the President's meeting with PM Hatoyama on the margins of 
UNGA, and the upcoming visits to Japan by Deputy Secretary 
Steinberg, Secretary of Defense Gates, and Assistant 
Secretary of Defense Gregson.  These sessions are aimed at 
listening to the views of the new administration and 
providing our own feedback.  Above all, these intensive 
consultations during this time of unprecedented political 
change in Japan aim to ensure that President Obama's November 
visit to Japan is a success and that the stage is properly 
set for next year's 50th anniversary of the U.S.-Japan 
security alliance. 
 
¶4. (C) A/S Campbell continued that during this transition 
period, the U.S. fully expected to hear a wide range of views 
expressed by different DPJ voices as well as the media on a 
host of bilateral and international issues.  In addition, 
numerous DPJ visitors to Washington have presumed to speak 
for the DPJ.  A/C Campbell said he had no doubt that the 
U.S-Japan relationship would be taxed by some of the 
proposals that the DPJ had put forth but that the burden of 
managing these challenges successfully would fall on career 
diplomats and that all must rise to the occasion. 
 
¶5. (C) VFM Yabunaka agreed that the current transition was a 
critical moment that must be managed carefully.  He observed 
that while Japan is unquestionably one of the leading 
economic and political powers in the world, domestically 
there is a sense in some quarters that Japan has not been 
treated equally and as such, the DPJ had found political 
traction on this issue.  When President Obama and PM Hatoyama 
meet in New York, Yabunaka said it would be important that 
that the two leaders reaffirm the basic foundations of the 
U.S.-Japan relationship (e.g., Japan as the ""cornerstone"" of 
U.S. policy in Asia) while also being able to deal with 
potentially thorny bilateral issues.  It was important, he 
added, to build the confidence of both the Prime Minister and 
 
TOKYO 00002277  002.2 OF 009 
 
 
the Foreign Minister. 
 
--------------- 
Nuclear History 
--------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Turning to Foreign Minister Okada's interest in 
investigating the so-called ""secret"" agreements between the 
U.S. and Japan, A/S Campbell said that the U.S. had already 
released the relevant documents through Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) requests and that there would be 
little the U.S. could add to what was already available 
publicly.  While MOFA would conduct its own document search, 
A/S Campbell said it would be best if the U.S. did not 
comment.  He stressed that the U.S. did not want this issue 
to create a situation that would require the U.S. to respond 
in a way unhelpful to the alliance.   Yabunaka said that 
Okada had expressed confidence in MOFA by allowing it to 
conduct the document search rather than bring in a third 
party.  Although an outside group would review the documents 
later, it was a positive sign that MOFA would be involved, he 
said.  Reviewing the historical issues was simply a matter of 
analysis, Yabunaka said the true challenge would be the 
implications for the present and those would have to be 
carefully managed. 
 
 
----------- 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶7. (C)  A/S Campbell reviewed Ambassadors Bosworth and Kim's 
recent consultations with Japan, China, South Korea, and 
Russia regarding North Korea and the Six Party Talks, saying 
there was general consensus that any diplomacy with North 
Korea must be seen in the context of the Six Party Talks and 
reaffirm that a nuclear North Korea is unacceptable.  That 
said, A/S Campbell noted interlocutors expressed concerns 
about what could be achieved with North Korea.  If 
Ambassadors Bosworth and Kim would meet bilaterally with 
North Korean officials, these meetings would be focused on 
urging North Korea to return to the Six Party Talks.  In 
addition, the U.S. remained committed to full and transparent 
implementation of UNSCR 1874, A/S Campbell said, noting that 
some countries were taking action to implement the 
resolution.  Yabunaka expressed appreciation for continued 
close coordination on North Korea, particularly on UNSCR 
1874, and expressed GOJ support for the U.S. approach. 
 
----- 
Burma 
----- 
 
¶8. (C) On Burma, A/S Campbell said the U.S. would begin to 
engage more with the regime there, while also maintaining 
sanctions.  In adopting this new approach, the U.S. had 
concluded that the previous isolation strategy had failed and 
that the U.S needed to ""get into the game.""  Coincident with 
North Korea having recently lost some of its Middle East 
clients owing to the impact of UNSCR 1874, North Korea-Burma 
military cooperation had increased.  In this regard, the U.S. 
needed Japan's assistance in maintaining pressure on Burma, 
he said. 
 
----------- 
POTUS Visit 
----------- 
 
¶9. (C) A successful visit to Japan by President Obama this 
fall was essential, A/S Campbell stressed.  The U.S. 
understood that the new government represented a departure 
from the previous government in many respects.  Nimble 
diplomacy by both sides would be necessary.  For example, the 
U.S. would be seeking further Japanese cooperation on Iran 
and a possible new commitment on development assistance to 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. In this context, it was important 
that the GOJ be responsive and not simply be saying ""no."" 
 
¶10. (C) Yabunaka agreed that the U.S. and Japan must stay 
focused on the ""big picture"" and not get too immersed in the 
minor details of individual bilateral issues.  He noted that 
PM Hatoyama had proposed a 25 percent reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions below 1990 levels and that policy presumably 
would move forward.  Since U.S. and Japanese climate change 
technology was the most advanced in the world, this could 
present an opportunity for cooperation.  With respect to 
Afghanistan, Yabunaka was non-committal, but said the GOJ 
 
TOKYO 00002277  003.2 OF 009 
 
 
would do what it could. 
 
¶11. (U) Assistant Secretary Campbell cleared this cable. 
ROOS 
 
TOKYO 00002277  004 OF 009 
 
 
YOMIURI (Page 4) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Foreign Minister Okada, meeting the press yesterday, clarified his 
intention to prompt cabinet ministers to consult on the issue of 
relocating the U.S. Marine Corps' Futenma Air Station in Ginowan, 
Okinawa Prefecture. 
 
""The question is how we should address this issue in the cabinet,"" 
Okada said. ""I will discuss this matter with the chief cabinet 
secretary, and then I'd like to reach a decision as early as 
possible."" 
 
7) Defense Minister Kitazawa eyes review of Futenma and Marines 
 
ASAHI (Page 4) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
At a news conference yesterday, Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa 
referred to the review of the plan to relocate the U.S. Marine 
Corps' Futenma Air Station in Okinawa. He also indicated the need to 
review the stationing of the U.S. Marines in Okinawa. ""We would like 
to thoroughly look into whether there were any other alternative 
options,"" he said, ""including the reasons why the U.S. Marines have 
hunkered down in Okinawa until now."" 
 
Meanwhile, in a news conference yesterday Foreign Minister Katsuya 
Okada described Kitazawa's plan to discuss the relocation issue with 
Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama and himself before the end of the week 
as ""too early."" Okada expressed a plan to discuss the matter with 
Chief Cabinet Secretary Hirofumi Hirano first. Okada also complained 
about Kitazawa's statement expressing difficulty moving (Futenma) 
out of the prefecture or outside the country. 
 
8) Japan, ROK foreign ministers agree on strengthening cooperation 
in dealing with North Korea 
 
NIKKEI (Page 2) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada met with South Korean Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade Yu Myung-hwan at the Foreign Ministry's 
Iikura Guest House in Tokyo on the evening of September 29. The two 
ministers agreed on strengthening cooperation in dealing with North 
Korea's development of nuclear arms. They also affirmed that North 
Korea should be persuaded to return to the Six-Party Talks at an 
early date. This meeting was meant to lay the groundwork for the 
next Japan-ROK summit meeting. It is believed that they also fixed 
the schedule of the summit. 
 
Regarding the situation in North Korea, Okada said, ""We would like 
to ascertain if (North Korea) is indeed taking concrete action and 
move cautiously,"" indicating that Japan will closely watch the 
DPRK's next moves for the time being. Yu agreed with him. At an 
earlier news conference, Yu pointed out that ""there might be some 
developments in U.S.-DPRK talks,"" but added ""we have no intention to 
make the first move."" 
 
Yu said the purpose of his meeting with Okada was ""to build a 
personal relationship of trust."" The two ministers did not go into 
details of specific issues, but there were clearly several issues on 
which their governments' positions differ. 
 
TOKYO 00002277  005 OF 009 
 
 
 
9) EU seeks MSDF protection of UN World Food Programme ships in 
Somalia, may become Japan's contribution after end of refueling 
mission 
 
TOKYO SHIMBUN (Top play) (Abridged) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Shigeru Handa, editorial staff member 
 
It was learned that the Ministry of Defense (MOD), which currently 
deploys escort ships in waters off Somalia for anti-piracy 
operations, received a request from the European Union (EU) in July 
for the protection of UN World Food Programme (WFP) ships. There is 
now a proposal to use escort ships to protect WFP ships after they 
are withdrawn from the Indian Ocean when the authorization of the 
refueling mission expires in January 2010. 
 
The Maritime Self-Defense Forces (MSDF) has been asked by the EU to 
cooperate in anti-piracy operations. A third contingent consisting 
of two escort ships will depart Japan in October. The MSDF is now 
increasingly seen as the mainstay in the anti-piracy mission. 
 
Before the recent House of Representatives election, the Democratic 
Party of Japan (DPJ) had asserted that anti-piracy operations should 
be the duty of the Japan Coast Guard (JCG). However, it eventually 
backed off from this position, stating in its election manifesto 
that anti-piracy operations ""will be implemented through appropriate 
procedures."" After taking office, Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa 
voiced his support for the continuation of the MSDF's anti-piracy 
mission because ""this is being appreciated internationally."" 
 
While the EU request came before Kitazawa became defense minister, 
senior MSDF officers believe that ""it will be easy to obtain the new 
administration's approval"" on cooperation with the WFP humanitarian 
aid. 
 
Actually, the MSDF has drafted meticulous anti-piracy plans ""geared 
toward the new administration."" One of them makes use of the P-3C 
surveillance aircraft. 
 
It had anticipated that ""patrol planes will be acceptable to the DPJ 
administration since they merely spot pirate ships and provide 
information, and this does not involve the use of weapons,"" and so 
P-3Cs were dispatched under the previous administration. 
 
Germany, France, and Spain have dispatched one patrol plane each to 
Somalia. While the MSDF is the last to send such aircraft, it now 
has the highest number with two in operation. The P-3Cs also 
complement the operations of the U.S. forces, which have no aircraft 
to spare for reconnaissance in the inland areas of Africa for 
anti-piracy purposes. This actually serves the dual purpose of both 
supporting the U.S. and making international contributions. 
 
If anti-piracy plans are left in the hands of the SDF, they will 
obviously come up with proposals they favor. Unless policy is made 
across the vertical boundaries of the MOD and the Ministry of Land, 
Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism (MLIT), it will not be 
possible to use the JCG for anti-piracy operations. Even the Liberal 
Democratic Party admitted that the JCG should be primarily 
responsible for this task. 
 
 
TOKYO 00002277  006 OF 009 
 
 
10) Foreign minister: Introduction of unified currency in East Asian 
Community difficult 
 
NIKKEI (Page 2) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada indicated yesterday that it would be 
difficult to introduce a unified currency in the envisioned East 
Asian Community, as the European Community (EU) has done. This 
concept is designed to promote economic cooperation and prepare a 
unified security system in the region. Okada said in a press 
conference: ""It is impossible for countries with different political 
systems to share a single currency and restrict their sovereignty."" 
 
11) Iranian ambassador refutes Okada statement on new uranium 
enrichment plant 
 
NIKKEI (Page 8) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Iranian Ambassador to Japan Seyed Abbas Araghchi yesterday released 
a report refuting Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada's earlier comment 
on Iran's new uranium enrichment facility. On Sept. 26, Okada 
expressed his regret over the revelation that Iran constructed a new 
facility to enrich uranium ""without reporting it to the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)."" 
 
In the report intended for the Japanese media, Araghchi emphasized 
that it is required under the IAEA Convention for a report to be 
made to the IAEA six months before nuclear-related materials are 
brought into the plant. He insisted that the construction of the new 
site does not constitute a breach of the Convention, noting that 
""basically, no centrifuges or nuclear-related materials have been 
brought in"" to the facility. 
 
12) Coordination underway for extra Diet session to run about one 
month 
 
NIKKEI (Page 2) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
The government yesterday began coordination with the ruling parties 
on a plan to convene an extraordinary session of the Diet after 
Upper House by-elections on Oct. 25. The length of the term of the 
session will likely about one month until Dec. 4. The government 
intends to pass such bills as one to abolish the health insurance 
system for people aged 75 and older, as well as another to abolish 
the Services and Supports for Persons with Disabilities Law. Those 
bills were included in the manifestos (campaign pledges) of the 
three ruling parties - the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), the 
Social Democratic Party, and the People's New Party. 
 
Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Yorihisa Matsuno on Sept. 29 sounded 
out DPJ Diet Affairs Committee Chairman Kenji Yamaoka on when to 
convene the extra session. Taking Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama's 
diplomatic schedule into consideration, the government is now 
coordinating a plan to convene the session after the Upper House 
by-elections. Placing priority on the compilation of the budget for 
fiscal 2010 by the end of the year, the government plans to minimize 
the number of bills to be enacted during the extra session. 
 
13) Oshima picked as new LDP secretary general 
 
TOKYO 00002277  007 OF 009 
 
 
 
ASAHI (Page 1) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) President Sadakazu Tanigaki, 64, 
appointed former LDP Diet Affairs Committee Chairman Tadamori 
Oshima, 63, as the LDP's new secretary general; former Policy 
Research Council Deputy Chairman Ryotaro Tanose, 65, as chairman of 
the party's General Council; and former agriculture minister Shigeru 
Ishiba, 52, as chairman of the party's Policy Research Council. 
Tanigaki offered no executive post to the Machimura faction, the 
largest in the LDP, implying his stance of eliminating factional 
influence.  His appointments reflected consideration for intraparty 
balance and dispersing rewards. 
 
Oshima served as chairman of the Diet Affairs Committee after the 
2007 House of Councillors election in which the Upper House fell 
into then opposition hands, while the House of Representatives was 
controlled by the then ruling coalition. Although he belongs to the 
Koumura faction, he does not bear the stamp of factional politics. 
He has close relations with Nobutaka Machimura, Toshihiro Nikai, and 
Bunmei Ibuki, who head their own factions. 
 
Tanose, an aide to former LDP Secretary General Taku Yamasaki, was 
in charge of Tanigaki's campaign for the latest presidential 
election. Ishiba had announced his support for Tanigaki in the 
presidency. 
 
Tanigaki picked his confidant, former health minister Jiro Kawasaki, 
61, as chairman of the Diet Affairs Committee.  Upper House Chairman 
Hidehisa Otsuji, 68, will be retained in his post. 
 
The post of Election Strategy Council chairman, now vacant, will be 
downgraded to Election Strategy Bureau chief. 
Three new LDP executives 
 
Secretary General 
Tadamori Oshima (63) 
Lowe House Aomori No. 3 district, 9th term (Komura faction) 
 
General Council Chairman 
Ryotaro Tanose (65) 
Lower  House Nara No. 4 district, 6th term (Yamasaki faction) 
 
Policy Research Council Chairman 
Shigeru Ishiba (52) 
Lower House Tottori No. 1 district, 8th term (Nukaga faction) 
 
14) U.S. made contact with DPJ before the general election 
 
ASAHI (Page 4) (Abridged slightly) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Haruko Kagenishi 
 
Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada revealed in a news conference 
yesterday that the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) sent its staffers 
to the United States in mid-August, before the (Aug. 30) general 
election, and exchanged views (with the U.S. side) in response to an 
informal request from the U.S. government. Okada explained that he 
thinks the U.S. side made the request in anticipation of a change of 
government (in Japan). He expressed the view that the U.S. 
 
TOKYO 00002277  008 OF 009 
 
 
government was in a hurry to make contact with the DPJ prior to the 
change of government. 
 
A Policy Research Committee executive responsible for foreign policy 
was dispatched to the United States. He was accompanied by Okada's 
policy secretary. They stayed in the United States for about one 
week. Okada stopped short of revealing whom they met in the United 
States. 
 
15) Transport minister eyes development of Japan's own manned 
rocket 
 
YOMIURI (Page 2) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Land, Infrastructure, Transport, & Tourism Minister Seiji Maehara, 
who is also in charge of space development, indicated yesterday that 
the ministry would study plans to develop a manned rocket. He said: 
""Japan also should develop its capability to launch manned 
spacecraft on its own."" It was the first time for a minister in 
charge of space development to refer to development of Japan's own 
manned spacecraft. 
 
When astronaut Koichi Wakata visited Maehara, he said: ""In order for 
Japan to contribute to the world, Japan should have the capability 
to launch manned spacecraft independently and have manned 
spacecraft."" In response, Maehara made the above remark. The 
transport minister further said: ""How can we launch a manned rocket? 
Now we have a major goal."" 
 
The government's panel on exploration of the moon plans to compile a 
report on the propriety of manned space activity probably by June of 
next year. 
 
16) MOFA opens press conference to all media companies: Foreign 
Ministry immediately put this decision into practice 
 
MAINICHI (Page 26) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
At a press conference on Sept. 29 Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada 
said that he had decided in principle to open Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MOFA) press conferences to all media companies. He 
translated this idea into action, starting with one held on the same 
day. As a result, it was attended by some 30 foreign correspondents 
who do not belong to the Japan National Press Club. 
 
Okada had made a similar announcement at a press conference on the 
18th. However, he has been putting off implementing the plan in 
order to consult with the Press Club. He said, ""It's been a while 
since I held the previous conference (on the 18th). I have 
personally decided to open my press conferences to all media 
companies."" Eligible for this scheme are members of The Japan 
Newspaper Publishers & Editors Association, The National Association 
of Commercial Broadcasters in Japan, The Japan Magazine Publishers 
Association, The Internet News Association of Japan, The Foreign 
Correspondents' Club of Japan, and holders of a foreign 
correspondents' registration certificate, free lancers and so on. 
Those who want to attend MOFA press conferences need to register in 
advance on the MOFA website. 
 
17) Internal affairs and communications minister to look into 
 
TOKYO 00002277  009 OF 009 
 
 
telecommunications policy, including reorganization of NTT: Working 
committee to be set up next month 
 
YOMIURI (Page 11) (Full) 
September 30, 2009 
 
Internal Affairs and Communications Minister Haraguchi told 
reporters after a cabinet meeting on Sept. 29 that he would launch a 
working committee tasked with looking into the current information 
and telecommunications policies, including a possibility of 
reorganizing the NTT Group. The envisaged panel, to be launched in 
October, will directly report to the minister. It will consist of 
experts from the private sector. Key issues it will deal with will 
include the introduction of competition rules that cater to changes 
in the environment surrounding the information and 
telecommunications industry, including the dissemination of cell 
phones and the Internet, and how to strengthen Japan's international 
competitiveness. 
 
In June 2006 the government and ruling parties in power agreed to 
resume discussion on the reorganization of the NTT Group in 2010 or 
beyond. Haraguchi announced a policy of setting up a new venue for a 
revision of the issue, nullifying the previous government's 
agreement. 
 
Haraguchi on the 29th indicated his intention to look into the 
matter in a broad-based manner, including a revision of the 
organization of NTT and an overview of the competition policy before 
the power transfer, saying, ""I have no intention of designating any 
specific areas as sacred areas."" 
 
ROOS