03SANAA2496
SANAA AMERICAN CORNER PROJECT PROPOSAL
Tue Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 002496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/G/IR BARBARA CONATY AND NEA/PD JESSICA DAVIES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL YM KSEP OEXC
SUBJECT: SANAA AMERICAN CORNER PROJECT PROPOSAL 
 
¶1.  Post requests funding to establish American Corner 
partnerships with six public institutions in Yemen. 
Institutions include Dhamar University, Hodeidah University, 
Sana'a University, Aden University, Taiz University and the 
Sana'a Public Library.  John Balian, PAO, is the designated 
point of contact for the program and will provide oversight in 
developing the partnership in conjunction with the APAO. 
 
¶2.  Post is targeting these six institutions as a means of 
promoting MPP goals by increasing knowledge of the English 
language, American society, culture, politics and economics 
and by expanding the reach of Embassy programs into rural 
Yemen.  The overwhelming majority of Yemenis have little or no 
knowledge of American culture, history, politics, etc. 
although Yemenis that we meet as we travel around Yemen 
express a genuine interest in opportunities to learn more 
about the United States.  Yemenis are hungry for knowledge and 
post is targeting areas in Yemen that do not normally receive 
development or educational aid.  Institutions are listed in 
order of preference. 
 
¶3.  Dhamar University is located approximately two hours by 
car from the capital Sana'a and serves as the primary 
educational facility for about two dozen tribal areas.  The 
University's president, who is a US alumnus, has been working 
to expand the size and outreach of the university so that it 
can affect the lives of youths living in this largely 
agricultural area.  A new library/computer center has been 
built and is waiting to be fitted with computer equipment, 
furnishings and books.  The President of the University is 
enthusiastic about using the currently empty space for an 
American Corner. 
 
¶4. Dhamar University Budget: 
 
25 Computer stations          $50,000 
Electronic Resources            10,000 
Books                      40,000 
 
Total                         $100,000 
 
¶5.  Sana'a Public Library is the only national public library 
in Yemen and it has been inadequately funded for many years. 
The library previously had one computer dating from around 
1985 and Post recently donated five computers to help the 
library transfer its card catalogue to the computer.  The 
library director will open up space in the library's main 
building for the American Corner collection so that it may 
serve as a useful reference for researchers and the general 
Yemeni population.  Many researchers, students and members of 
the general public use the public library as a reference 
source as the university libraries, even in the capital city, 
are inadequate. 
 
¶6.  Sana'a Public Library Budget: 
 
25 Computer stations          $50,000 
Electronic Resources            10,000 
Books                      40,000 
 
Total                         $100,000 
 
¶7.  Even though Hodeidah University is a relatively new 
institution, it has succeeded in serving the entire western 
region of Yemen and the American Corner project will provide a 
unique opportunity for their students, staff and faculty 
members.  Previously, Post had not had a great deal of direct 
contact with the university due to its location far from the 
capital.  However, since initial contact, post has been 
developing new ways to work in conjunction with this 
university.  Post believes that this university will continue 
to provide an ideal outlet for reaching young people in this 
Red Sea region of Yemen.  The staff at the university will 
work closely with post to coordinate and run the American 
Corner smoothly and successfully. 
 
¶8.  Hodeidah University Budget: 
 
25 Computer stations          $50,000 
Electronic Resources            10,000 
Books                      40,000 
 
Total                         $100,000 
 
¶9. Taiz University is located approximately four hours by car 
from the capital Sana'a and has a student body of around 
35,000.  The American Corner project at Taiz University will 
not only be made available to the university's large student 
body but also to various institutions working in Taiz 
conducting research and development work.  This is the largest 
university in central Yemen. 
 
¶10.  Taiz University Budget 
 
15 Computer stations          $30,000 
Electronic Resources            10,000 
Books                      35,000 
 
Total                         $75,000 
 
¶11.  Aden University reaches students in the south of Yemen 
and continues to rely largely on staff trained in the former 
Soviet Union.  Western influence into the teaching staff, 
materials and curriculum of Aden University is relatively new. 
The university is anxious to provide additional information 
regarding American and the West to its staff and students. 
 
¶12.  Aden University Budget: 
 
15 Computer stations          $30,000 
Electronic Resources            10,000 
Books                      35,000 
 
Total                         $75,000 
 
¶13.  Although Sana'a University is located in the capital of 
Sana'a it, like all Yemeni universities, has been inadequately 
funded and has not been able to keep up with modern technology 
and resources.  Many individuals who graduate from the 
university with a major in English lack the language ability 
to communicate effectively and know little to nothing of 
American culture, history, politics, etc. as most universities 
teach British English literature and use resources previously 
donated by the British.  There is little to no American 
influence.  The university administration is enthusiastic 
about introducing American materials into university studies 
and making such information available to university students. 
 
¶14.  Sana'a University Budget: 
 
15 Computer stations          $30,000 
Electronic Resources            10,000 
Books                      35,000 
 
Total                         $75,000 
 
¶15.  Easch of the institutions Post has selected as a  partner 
in an American Corner project affords the means for Post to 
reach out to a younger audience, to provide knowledge and 
information to the remote rural areas of Yemen and to engage 
the widest audience possible.  Computers and electronic 
resources comprise a large portion of each request.  Post's 
MPP has focused on providing internet and computer resources 
to the rural areas of Yemen.  This component of the American 
Corner project would complement a current post project of 
providing internet classrooms to secondary schools throughout 
Yemen. 
 
HULL