05SANAA2451
MEDIA REACTION ON AL MOAYAD'S SENTENCING IN U.S.
Sun Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281055Z Aug 05UNCLAS SANAA 002451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD, NEA/RA, DS/OP/NEA AND 
S/CT 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KMDR PHUM PTER KISL YM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON AL MOAYAD'S SENTENCING IN U.S. 
FEDERAL COURT TO 75 YEARS IN PRISON. 
 
 
NEA/PPD FOR AFERNANDEZ 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  There is increasing public reaction in Yemen to 
the July sentencing of Al-Moayad to 75 years in prison by a 
U.S. federal court for providing material support to 
terrorism.  Although there is less attention devoted by 
government media to the case, independent and party- 
affiliated newspapers continue to address it and to cover 
public activities held in solidarity with Al Moayad.  A 
rising criticism of the U.S. court system appears in the 
local media, chiefly in opposition and independent papers 
and papers affiliated with opposition parties.  Overall, the 
sentencing of Al-Moayad is viewed by Yemeni media as 
evidence of a lack of justice in the U.S. judicial system 
with many predicting that the sentencing will further 
inflame anti-U.S. sentiment in Yemen.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  Independent papers and those affiliated with opposition 
parties reported on a major gathering of sheikhs, 
dignitaries, and seniors of Al-Moayad's Khawlan tribe and on 
their statement calling for the immediate release of Al- 
Moayad and asking President Saleh to put Al Moayad's case at 
the top of his agenda for his November visit to Washington. 
The newly established independent weekly Annida (08/04) 
accused the Government of not working hard enough for Al- 
Moayad's release saying:  "Had the regime been more serious 
about the Al-Moayad case, Al-Moayad would have been released 
a long time ago."  The English language independent Yemen 
Times, a biweekly, published an opinion piece entitled, "For 
the Love of Israel," which argued that the trial of Sheikh 
Al-Moayad "has proven once again that...the United States is 
now also the official lynch man for the Zionist state. 
...Originally, starting as a case of anti-terrorism post 
9/11, the case, based on relatively weak allegations of 
aiding Hamas, ended ultimately as no more than another free 
service to Israel." 
 
¶3. Opposition media, including Al Sahwa Net (www.alsahwa- 
yemen.net), website of major opposition Islah party, and 
other news websites, highlighted (8/01) a statement released 
jointly by political parties and some civil society 
organizations condemning the sentencing of Sheikh Al Moayad 
in a statement which stated that the case, "will inflame 
anti-US sentiments."  Pro-opposition newspapers commented 
that the verdict "has exposed" the U.S. Administration's 
"claims about the independence of its judicial system." 
"The verdict was based on preconceived assumptions magnified 
by post-9/11 sentiments," according to the independent 
weekly Annas (circulation 15,000; 8/01). 
 
¶4.  Independent newspapers carried a statement by Yemeni 
clerics urging President Saleh to work diligently so the 
U.S. releases Sheikh Al-Moayad and his associate; moreover, 
they urged all political forces, leaders, and Yemeni civil 
society organizations to continue advocating, "until their 
demands are met," for their release and return. 
 
KRAJESKI