05SANAA2986
AMBASSADOR VISITS PORT CITY OF ADEN
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 002986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON KMPI KPAO YM DEMOCRATIC REFORM ECON COM
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR VISITS PORT CITY OF ADEN 
 
REF: SANAA 2961 
 
¶1.  Summary: On October 2, Ambassador visited Aden to meet 
with local government, business and civil society 
representatives.  Local council members, the Chamber of 
Commerce, and NGOs shared their experiences in strengthening 
democracy, improving the business climate, and creating local 
solutions to challenges facing the vibrant port city.  The 
Ambassador also met with the local UNHCR director to become 
better acquainted with how the organization is dealing with 
an ever-increasing number of refugees from the Horn of 
Africa.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Aden Councils: Developing Local Government 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Ambassador met with Deputy Governor Abdul Karim Shaef, 
who also serves as the Secretary General for Local Councils, 
to discuss the importance of local government in supporting 
democratic development.  The Ambassador said the USG supports 
local councils and their efforts to improve security and 
encourage economic growth.  He stressed that the onus is on 
local government to create a favorable climate to attract 
investment. 
 
¶3. Shaef said the 2001 local council elections were 
successful, although there were many difficulties starting 
this system from scratch and securing the necessary funding. 
"Now the relationship with the central government is strong," 
he continued, and local councils manage their own budgets and 
oversee infrastructure projects.  Shaef also described a 
project with the World Bank to develop the seaport and 
airport in order to create jobs and develop tourism. He 
expressed concern that a lack of economic opportunities will 
lead to civil unrest and recruitment by extremist elements. 
 
¶4.  Following the meeting with Shaef, the Ambassador met with 
twenty local council members representing all major political 
parties to gather perspectives on elections, 
decentralization, public finance, and the economic future of 
the port.  Council members demonstrated great pride in their 
close relationship with constituents and the responsibilities 
that entails.  Members felt their effectiveness was impeded, 
however, by a lack of fiscal autonomy and their reliance on 
allocations from the Ministry of Finance to fund operations 
and projects.  Council members asked for help making 
connections with American local government leaders, so they 
could learn from America's democratic experience.  Ambassador 
said the exchange of information and expertise with their 
American counterparts would be very valuable.  He stressed 
that democracy cannot succeed without strong local 
governments to secure political freedoms and encourage 
economic development. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Chamber of Commerce: Bring American Companies Back! 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5.  Ambassador visited the Aden Chamber of Commerce to meet 
with local business leaders and stress the importance of a 
thriving private sector in creating a secure and prosperous 
Aden.  He called on business leaders to work with local 
councils to help create conditions friendly for business. 
Business leaders were enthusiastic about forming 
relationships with American companies and chambers of 
commerce, noting that an American trade delegation had not 
visited Aden since 1973.  The Ambassador encouraged the 
Chamber of Commerce to work with post to develop 
relationships with American companies and educate them on 
potential investment opportunities. 
 
------------------------------------ 
UNHCR: Providing for Somali Refugees 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Local UNHCR representative Theophilus Vodounou described 
the current refugee situation and the organization's efforts 
to assist the thousands of new refugees who arrive each year. 
 Vodounou said most refugees arriving in Yemen are young 
males fleeing poor economic conditions in Somalia and 
Ethiopia.  They typically pay armed Somali smugglers $10 - 
$20 dollars to ferry them in unsafe boats from Bossaso, 
Somalia to the Bir-Ali coast, located 510 km from Aden. UNHCR 
provides food and medical attention at the nearby Mayfa 
Reception Center, and then transports them to Kharaz refugee 
camp outside of Aden.  The refugee camp's population is 7,525 
and growing, but Vodounou said most chose to leave the camp 
and seek employment elsewhere in Yemen or other countries on 
the Arabian Peninsula.  UNHCR currently has 74,864 registered 
refugees, the vast majority of which are from Somalia. 
Vodounou estimated that twice the registered number have 
entered Yemen illegally within the last ten years. 
 
¶7.  Vodounou also described efforts to improve living 
conditions in the Aden suburb of Basateen, which is home to 
14,000 refugees.  Living conditions are poor, as the 
population has expanded well beyond what the current 
infrastructure can handle.  According to Vodounou, the 
central government views the area as a haven for criminals 
and would like to move the residents to the Kharaz camp. 
Local authorities, however, are cooperating with UNHCR to 
improve basic services, like sanitation, and provide economic 
opportunities to residents.  Vodounou thanked the USG for 
providing a new water tank to Basateen residents. 
 
-------------- 
Women's Groups 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  Ambassador and Mrs. Krajeski also met with several NGOs 
providing valuable services to the women and children of 
Aden.  At the Women's Shelter House, Executive Director Afra 
Hariri described the shelter's efforts to provide a safe 
haven for battered women.  The shelter provides legal 
support, housing, medical care, and job training to victims 
of violence.  Hariri said that without support from the 
shelter, the only organization of its kind in Yemen, these 
women are vulnerable to being trafficked into prostitution. 
Hariri can currently only house six women, but hopes to 
expand the facilities in Aden, as well as creating similar 
shelters in Taiz, Hodeida, and Mukalla. 
 
¶9.  Mrs. Krajeski met with Fatima Muraisi, local council 
member and Chairperson of the Yemeni Woman's Union (YWU) Aden 
Branch.  YWU, a nominally independent NGO that maintains a 
strong relationship with the government, focuses on providing 
legal support to female prisoners, conducting health 
awareness campaigns, and improving female literacy. 
 
¶10.  The Ambassador's wife also toured two facilities that 
received USG assistance, including a secondary school for 
girls and a school for blind children.  At the girls' school, 
she observed students using the e-Learning Center created 
with funds from the Middle East Partnership Initiative 
(MEPI).  The successful center provides a vibrant learning 
environment and encourages young girls to seek additional 
educational opportunities.  The elementary school for blind 
children, which educates 20 students and prepares them for 
reintegration into normal classrooms, expressed appreciation 
for USG support for much needed renovations. 
 
------------------------ 
Public Diplomacy Success 
------------------------ 
 
¶11.  All news outlets reported on Ambassador Krajeski's visit 
to Aden.  Many summary articles carried photos and positive 
reports about his meetings.  Aden-based independently daily 
Al Ayyam carried an in-depth interview on October 6 (reftel). 
 
Krajeski