05SANAA2453
MEDIA REACTION ON THE ISRAELI PULLOUT FROM THE GAZA
Sun Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 002453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD, NEA/RA, DS/OP/NEA AND 
S/CT 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KMDR PHUM PTER KISL YM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON THE ISRAELI PULLOUT FROM THE GAZA 
STRIP 
 
NEA/PPD FOR AFERNANDEZ 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Israeli withdrawal from Gaza, called 
the "liberation of Gaza" by many, received widespread 
coverage in all media.  Most newspapers ran factual 
accounts.  Official papers, however, including government 
daily Al Thawra (circulation 40,000), highlighted the 
official view that withdrawal is a step forward in 
establishing peace in the region, but assumed bad intentions 
on the part of Israel with respect to both the West Bank and 
Jerusalem.  Officials of various political parties and party- 
affiliated media outlets saw withdrawal as evidence of the 
effectiveness of resistance and called for continued 
resistance until the remainder of "the occupied territories 
are liberated."  Politicians and commentators generally 
welcomed the withdrawal, but depicted it as a victory for 
the "legitimate" force of resistance.  Most of the credit 
for the withdrawal has been attributed to Hamas's attacks, 
"which drove the occupiers out of Gaza."  End Summary 
 
¶2.  (U) Media outlets most frequently referred to "the 
liberation of Gaza" when reporting on it commenced on August 
¶15.  Government media outlets, including Al Thawra (08/16), 
Yemen State TV (08/15), and the Saba News Agency (the most 
frequently used news source for all Yemeni media) (08/15), 
reported President Ali Abdullah Saleh's telephone 
conversation with Palestinian President Abbas, and his 
congratulating Abbas and hoping that withdrawal would be "a 
step forward in the course of a full Israeli withdrawal from 
all occupied Palestinian and Arab territories." 
 
¶3.  (U) In an editorial published August 16, Al Thawra 
opined that the Gaza withdrawal can be seen both as the 
result of pressures exerted by Palestinian resistance and of 
the economic burden of maintaining and protecting Israeli 
settlements in Gaza more than it can be viewed as an 
indicator of Israeli interest in peace.  Headlines of news 
and opinion in some government newspapers read: 
"Purification of Gaza from the filth of occupation;" "A new 
proof from Gaza:  Israel withdraws only under (the pressure 
of) resistance;" and, "If only withdrawal doesn't turn out 
to be a trap!" 
 
¶4.  (U) Opposition newspapers and the website (www. Alsahwa- 
yemen.net)of Al Sahwa (08/18), site of the main opposition 
Islah party, and weekly Al Wahdawi (08/17), mouthpiece of 
the opposition Nasserite party (circulation 12,000), 
welcomed the withdrawal and portrayed it as a meager victory 
for resistance after "four decades of occupation."  All 
media urged the Palestinians "to carry on the path of 
resistance that deprives Israel of the sense of security 
until all other territories are liberated."  Opposition 
media underscored the reactions of Palestinians in Yemen 
including those of the office directors of the Hamas and 
Fatah resistance, who argue in favor of resistance as an 
effective way of securing freedom. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) COMMENT:  The Yemeni man in the streets is heavily 
influenced by the portrayal of the withdrawal offered by the 
Palestinian Authority, Hamas, and the preachers in local 
mosques.  Generally, the prevailing impression is resistance 
brought about the withdrawal; however, there is skepticism 
about Israel's long-term intention and many voice their 
suspicions that Israel might reoccupy Gaza, "devour" the 
rest of the West Bank and Jerusalem, or execute a plan to 
"purge the intifada."  In sum, the view that withdrawal came 
about as the result of resistance has strengthened the 
belief that resistance must be supported and should 
continue.  End comment. 
 
KRAJESKI