07SANAA2054
FORUM FOR THE FUTURE UPDATE: MEETING AT THE MFA
Tue Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0019
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #2054/01 3101239
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061239Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8348UNCLAS SANAA 002054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PGOV PHUM YM
SUBJECT: FORUM FOR THE FUTURE UPDATE: MEETING AT THE MFA 
 
 
1.(U) Summary: The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Abu Bakr 
al-Qirbi, summoned G-8, Spanish and Dutch ambassadors, and 
the head of the Civil Society Coalition for a November 5 
meeting at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) to discuss 
the upcoming Forum for the Future.  Al-Qirbi urged the 
ambassadors to ask their capitals to pressure the Egyptians 
to change their Sharm al-Sheykh conference dates, as this 
remained a scheduling conflict for the Forum.  Al-Qirbi could 
not confirm President Saleh's participation in the Forum, but 
mentioned that the President may want to use the opportunity 
to meet with some foreign ministers.  Al-Qirbi asked the 
Ambassador if Secretary Rice might find time during the Forum 
to brief ministerial colleagues on the status of the 
Arab-Israeli peace process.  The location change from Aden to 
Sanaa for the Parallel Civil Society Forum was confirmed by 
the head of the Civil Society Coalition, who solicited 
financial support from the ambassadors for the event. 
Al-Qirbi announced the MFA would provide equipment for a 
business center for the Parallel Forum.  End Summary 
 
2.(U) The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Abu Bakr al-Qirbi, 
summoned G-8, Spanish and Dutch ambassadors, and the head of 
the Civil Society Coalition for a November 5 meeting at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to discuss the upcoming Forum for 
the Future.  Deputy Foreign Minister Mohyaldeen al-Dhabbi, 
who was also present at the meeting, updated the delegation 
on Forum logistics by announcing that a website has been 
established for registration purposes and that the number of 
delegates to be allowed inside the meeting room was limited 
to one (minister) plus six (staff), noting that badges would 
not carry photo identification and would therefore be 
transferable. 
 
3.(U) In response to the Ambassador's query on whether the 
scheduling conflict with the Sharm al-Sheykh conference had 
been resolved, al-Qirbi replied that it had not and that, 
despite the ROYG's efforts, the Egyptians refuse to change 
their conference dates.  Al-Qirbi said that the ROYG was 
still attempting to persuade the Egyptian government to 
change its dates, or at the least, begin the conference the 
evening of December 5 to allow flight time between Sanaa and 
Cairo for the ministers.  Al-Qirbi urged the ambassadors to 
ask their capitals to pressure the Egyptians to change their 
conference dates, as he was concerned about the participation 
of Arab foreign ministers at the Forum due to the date 
conflict.  (Note: The Ambassador said that we already had 
raised this with the Egyptian Embassy in Washington.  End 
Note) 
 
4.(U) When asked by the Ambassador if President Saleh planned 
to participate in the Forum, al-Qirbi answered that at 
previous forums, the prime ministers of the host country, and 
not the president, had taken part, adding that President 
Saleh may still be at his winter residence in Aden when the 
Forum convenes.  Nevertheless, he said the President may want 
to use the opportunity to meet with some foreign ministers. 
Al-Qirbi subsequently asked the Ambassador if Secretary of 
State Rice might find time during the Forum to brief 
ministerial colleagues on the status of the Arab-Israeli 
peace process.  The Ambassador replied that he understood the 
traditional time and place for such an informal discussion 
was the ministerial dinner, but assured al-Qirbi that the 
request would be passed to Washington. 
 
5.(U) To conclude the meeting, Ezzadine al-Asbahi from the 
Human Rights Information and Training Center, and head of the 
Civil Society Coalition, presented a brief on the Parallel 
Forum.  Al-Asbahi confirmed the attendance of 220 civil 
society representatives from G-8 and BMENA countries and 
noted that the Parallel Forum would be moved to Sanaa, from 
Aden.  Al-Asbahi thanked the USG, with specific mention of 
the Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI), for its 
financial support of the Parallel Forum.  He stated that the 
Civil Society Coalition needs additional funding, however, 
and asked the ambassadors to make the Parallel Forum a true 
G-8 initiative through broad financial support from all the 
donors, not just the Americans.  The Ambassador reiterated 
al-Asbahi's words and asked that the remaining financial 
burden be distributed among the G-8 to ensure that the 
Parallel Forum does not merely receive support from the USG. 
The ambassadors gave no reply.  Al-Qirbi asked that they 
consider al-Asbahi's request and provide a response to the 
Ministry in a week's time.  Al-Qirbi announced the MFA would 
provide equipment for a business center for the Parallel 
Forum. 
 
6.(SBU) Comment:  Considering the somber reactions of the 
G-8, Spanish, and Dutch ambassadors, it is unlikely that the 
Parallel Forum will receive additional funding from other 
donors.  Al-Asbahi, however, is reaching out to prominent 
Yemeni businessmen in an effort to make the civil society 
Forum not strictly a USG and MFA initiative.  Regarding the 
issue of the President's participation in the Forum, 
al-Qirbi's efforts to play down expectations notwithstanding, 
we can hardly believe Saleh will absent himself from an event 
that will allow him to showcase Yemen's - and his own - close 
and fruitful relations with the world's major powers, 
especially the US.  End Comment 
SECHE