09QUITO937
Ecuador: Yasuni-ITT Initiative Still Searching for its First
Fri Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0937/01 3101939
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 061939Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0300
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0015
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITOC O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 000937 
 
SIPDIS 
LIMA FOR REO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/11/06 
TAGS: EPET PREL SENV ECON EC GM UK SP
SUBJECT: Ecuador: Yasuni-ITT Initiative Still Searching for its First 
Major Donor 
 
REF: QUITO 657; QUITO 2...




id: 233681
date: 11/6/2009 19:39
refid: 09QUITO937
origin: Embassy Quito
classification: CONFIDENTIAL
destination: 09QUITO204|09QUITO657
header:
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0937/01 3101939
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 061939Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0300
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0015
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO


----------------- header ends ----------------

C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 000937 
 
SIPDIS 
LIMA FOR REO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/11/06 
TAGS: EPET PREL SENV ECON EC GM UK SP
SUBJECT: Ecuador: Yasuni-ITT Initiative Still Searching for its First 
Major Donor 
 
REF: QUITO 657; QUITO 204 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Heather Hodges, Ambassador, State; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
------------ 
 
Summary 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
¶1. (C) Despite Ecuadorean President Correa's frequent claims to be 
raising funding among European nations for Ecuador's Yasuni-ITT 
rainforest/oil conservation initiative (Ref A), the reality is that 
the Europeans are so far skeptical.  During an October 27 
conference at Chatham House in London, President Correa once again 
announced that Germany had agreed to provide US$50 million a year 
over 13 years for the initiative, and the GoE has also highlighted 
Spanish government support in recent public announcements.  The 
German and Spanish Embassies in Quito clarified to Econoff October 
28 that the GoE has grossly overstated their governments' support 
for the initiative.  Although both Germany and Spain have expressed 
interest in the proposal, and financed small feasibility studies, 
the Embassy representatives commented that Ecuador had not provided 
sufficient details and had not been able to credibly explain what 
would happen if a future Ecuadorean government began to drill in 
Yasuni-ITT.  The U.K. has flatly refused to fund the initiative. 
An Ecuadorean delegation will pitch the project to OES November 12. 
End Summary. 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
An interesting plan in principle 
 
 ---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (C) Following on the heels of Ecuadorean President Correa's 
speech at London's Chatham House on October 27, in which he 
repeated that Germany had pledged US$50 million to the Yasuni 
project over 13 years, Econoff spoke with Raymond Dequin, the 
Political/Economic Counselor at the German Embassy in Quito. 
According to Dequin, the German government has not promised any 
support for the Yasuni-ITT initiative (Ref A) beyond US$300,000 for 
feasibility studies.  Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Falconi visited 
Berlin in June 2009, where he met and discussed this project with 
Erich Stather, a State Secretary in Germany's Ministry of Economic 
Cooperation.  Dequin indicated that Stather might have appeared 
overly positive on Yasuni.  However, after Ecuador's Ambassador to 
Berlin began to shop the US$50 million/year story to the press and 
to supporters, Dequin said Stather wrote a letter to Minister 
Falconi clarifying that he had never agreed to any financial 
support, that the project proposal still needed work, did not mesh 
with current emissions trading schemes, and lacked sufficient and 
credible guarantees.  The German Embassy in Quito also recently 
released a statement to journalists clarifying that Germany had not 
yet given any concrete funding assurances.  Dequin was clear that 
while support for the idea behind the initiative exists in the 
German Bundestag and government, the plan is simply underdeveloped. 
 
 
 
¶3. (C) Dequin believes the main flaw is that the plan does not 
offer sufficiently strong guarantees to prevent future Ecuadorean 
governments from abandoning the plan and pumping oil from the 
Yasuni field.  The proposal currently states that funds supporting 
the project, gathered via donations or through the sale of "Yasuni 
Guarantee Certificates", would go into an internationally monitored 
trust fund that would invest in renewable energy projects in 
Ecuador.  The interest from these investments would be used to 
support increased national energy efficiency, reforestation, 
protection of national parks, and "social development."  Should a 
future government decide to pump oil, the trust fund would 
supposedly return the contributions to donors.  According to 
Dequin, Roque Sevilla, the former Quito Mayor who is the President 
of the Yasuni-ITT Commission and who briefed western diplomats on 
the project in March 2009 (Ref b), told him that the investments of 
the trust fund -- wind, hydro, and thermal alternative energy 
 
projects, for example -- would be the ultimate guarantee to donors. 
No one with whom Econoff spoke believed it credible that a future 
Ecuadorean government that decided to renege on the Yasuni 
guarantee would turn over energy plants financed with Yasuni money 
to disgruntled foreign donors.  This lack of a credible guarantee 
was echoed by the Spanish and the British. 
 
 
 
---------------------------- 
 
More details needed 
 
---------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) Javier de la Cal, responsible for Yasuni-ITT for the Quito 
branch of Spain's international development agency, AECID, echoed 
the questions raised by Germany's Dequin.  He also stated that 
Spain had yet to pledge any amount of money for support beyond 
approximately US$200,000 for feasibility studies.  The lack of 
details on project guarantees, how the money would actually be 
spent, and the Yasuni initiative's non-compliance with the Kyoto 
Accords all prevented Spain from announcing any concrete long-term 
support.  However, de la Cal also stated that the idea behind 
Yasuni enjoyed support within the Spanish Government --  it just 
was not realistic as currently put together. 
 
 
 
-------------------------- 
 
Brits not interested 
 
-------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (C) Econoff asked Christopher Poole, First Secretary at the U.K. 
Embassy, if President Correa had received any indication of support 
from the U.K. government during his trip.  Poole said that 
Ecuadorean officials were told that the U.K. would not support the 
Yasuni-ITT initiative, as it was not in line with the U.K.'s energy 
security policy, although other environmental cooperation was 
certainly a possibility.  Poole expressed little belief that the 
Ecuadorean government would find sufficient support for the 
Yasuni-ITT initiative as it currently exists, and speculated that 
it was likely that the Correa government would soon tire of 
soliciting donors and would begin to make preparations to exploit 
the oil in Yasuni. 
 
 
 
------------- 
 
Comment 
 
------------- 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ecuador is known as a "serial defaulter" on international 
obligations, and the Yasuni- ITT initiative appears to suffer from 
the lack of trust that foreign governments have in the Correa 
administration and future Ecuadorean governments' ability or 
willingness to comply with their commitments.  Should the GoE 
somehow come up with convincing guarantees, and align the plan with 
Kyoto or its successors, it might find some international support, 
as its cash for carbon sequestration ideal is fully consistent with 
negotiations and current projects under the UN's Reducing Emissions 
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries 
(REDD) program.  The GoE's best course may be to aggressively seek 
to have oil reserves included in the REDD-based carbon trading 
mechanisms to be negotiated in Copenhagen.  The GoE has announced 
that it will continue to lobby for support for the project in 
capitals abroad; Roque Sevilla and Yolanda Kakabadse (the former 
Ecuadorian environmental minister who will take over as president 
of WWF International in January 2010)  have a meeting with OES in 
the Department on November 12, at the working level, to pitch the 
project.  (The Department of Energy refused a meeting; a number of 
meetings are scheduled with House and Senate committees.) 
Ecuador's former Foreign Minister Francisco Carrion, who returned 
 
to government in February 2009 to support the Yasuni-ITT 
initiative, was recently appointed as Ecuador's Ambassador to the 
UN, responsible for continued evangelization and finding concrete 
ways to implement the proposal.  However, lacking the improvements 
cited above, and a deeply detailed blueprint, possible donor 
governments will continue to make soothing noises while keeping 
their money close.  End Comment. 
HODGES 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================