05BAGHDAD3482
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - AUGUST 25, 2005
Fri Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003482 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - AUGUST 25, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of Iraqi websites on August 25, 2005. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.  "The Iraqi Constitution . . . The Downfall of the US 
Reform Project" (Editorial by Fehed Al-Naser, 8/25) 
¶B.  "A Hasty Constitution . . . A Disgrace for a Great 
Nation"  (Editorial Sameer Ubaid, 8/25) 
¶C.  "Iraqi Draft Constitution . . . and the Incomplete 
Birth"  (Editorial by Hamza Al-Shamkh, 8/25) 
¶D. "The Suggested Constitution and the Challenges" 
(Editorial by Yousif Fadhil, 8/25) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
¶A.  "The Iraqi Constitution . . . The Downfall of the US 
Reform Project" 
(Editorial by Fehed Al-Naser, Modern Discussion Web-Site, 
( 
) 
 
"The American President George Bush expressed great joy on 
the occasion of completing the Iraqi draft constitution. 
His happiness also reflects an admission that the American 
Middle East project for political reform, the termination of 
tyrannical regimes, of granting freedoms, setting up 
democracies, and acknowledging human rights has faced a 
severe setback.  We will all realize that the broad hopes of 
the United States government's promotion of the era of 
freedom and human rights in Iraq is facing a crisis as soon 
as we take the first look at the Iraqi draft constitution . 
. . The announced draft constitution was nothing more than a 
bomb project.  It is a warning of complicated political 
affairs full of ethnic and sectarian wars with uncalculated 
consequences.  It was written to serve the interests of 
particular sides and they are explicitly expressing their 
ethnic and sectarian ambitions.  By placing the name of 
Saddam and his fascist party in the draft's introduction, 
these sides are sending out a message to Iraqis that they 
should accept this document in return for their salvation 
from the former dictatorship's suppression . . . The Iraqi 
constitution, if approved, will be a very harsh lesson for 
the administration of the United States.  It will witness 
its visions of modern personal and civil freedoms being 
replaced by the rights of sects, ethnicities, and tribes. 
It is a document that recognizes human beings by their 
ethnic and sectarian backgrounds and not by accomplishments, 
ideas, and participation in building society . . . We can 
forget about our hopes for our state being ruled by law. 
We need to reconcile ourselves to the fact that our state 
will be ruled by ethnic and sectarian authorities and aging 
tribal traditions that deform our societal relations, and 
create huge obstacles for freedom of political and 
intellectual activities . . . Anyone who wants a free and 
prosperous future for Iraq should say no to this 
constitution." 
 
¶B.  "A Hasty Constitution . . . A Disgrace for a Great 
Nation" 
 (Editorial Sameer Ubaid, Iraq 4 All News Web-Site, 
() 
 
"The issue will not withstand further debate, compliments, 
or hiding, you either vote in favor of President Bush, Tel- 
Aviv, and Tehran's constitution, or you reject in favor of a 
united Iraq. The current constitution is similar to a United 
State fast food meal and it isn't worthy of respect.  It is 
suitable for the era of occupation, where the administrative 
law was considered a Qu'ran coming down from the Israeli 
Noah Fieldman, with prophets named Bush junior, Bremmer, 
Negroponte, Khalilzad, and Satterfield . . . The new, 
hastily drafted constitution; written according to President 
Bush's orders, and under the supervision of Khalilzad and 
Satterfield, failed to meet Iraqis' ambitions even by five 
percent.  It only met some of the Kurds' ambitions for 
separation, but at the expense of Arabic Iraqi people . . . 
We can summarize the constitution by saying it pleased the 
Kurds, displeased Shiites, and wasted Sunnis . . . Provided 
the document, drafted in a purely Zionist manner was 
approved, the south will belong to the Iranians and those 
supporting them, the north will go to the Kurdish elite, 
while the west will become another Somalia with no resources 
and a very fragile economy.  From an American point of view, 
Iraq is a candidate to become the new Chechnya by attracting 
extremists . . . What took place during the constitutional 
discussions was nothing more than an American stage play. 
Because the constitution was drafted before the war on Iraq; 
today's discussions are only part of the play performed to 
the world . . . For the first time in history, a foreign 
Ambassador (Khalilzad) and his assistant (Satterfield), 
played the role of monitor and inspector for an independent 
nation's constitution . . . Has there ever been a situation 
where a nation's constitution was drafted within days and 
submitted to Parliament eight minutes before deadline. 
Won't this movie of fantasy and disrespect ever come to an 
end in Iraq?  And who will tell Khalilzad and Satterfield 
that enough is enough? . . . There should be an uprising of 
the people to drive the occupation forces out of our 
country.  They should also fire the failed politicians, and 
call for Iraq to be left to honorable Iraqis from all 
backgrounds who know how to put together the best political, 
government, and constitutional combination . . . At the end 
. those who wish to vote in favor of such a constitution, 
please send a greeting to the Zionists, and present Iraq to 
Iran on a golden plate." 
 
¶C.  "Iraqi Draft Constitution . . . and the Incomplete 
Birth" 
(Editorial by Hamza Al-Shamkh, Al-Badeal Al-Democrati (The 
Democratic Alternative) Web-Site, 
() 
 
"Many politicians are making statements to local and foreign 
media outlets about the absence of deep differences that 
could prevent the completion of the Iraqi constitution draft 
on time . . . But unfortunately, these statements don't 
reflect what is actually going on.   There are many 
differences and disagreements among the different components 
of the Iraqi people. This is quite natural taking into 
consideration the variety of religions, doctrines, 
ethnicities, and political parties that are involved . . . 
After the expiration of the second deadline the draft was 
submitted to the National Assembly.  Unfortunately, it 
wasn't finished.  This was due to the unresolved differences 
between the participants.  So, they agreed upon another 
three-day extension . . . Postponements and extensions are 
useless if the parties involved refuse to compromise . . . 
Everyone should have the unity of Iraq and its people as 
their primary goal.   This should not be done by media 
statements, but by having the courage and the resolve to 
come to an agreement.   This agreement needs to be something 
that keeps the entire sectarian, political, and intellectual 
trends on the front burner.  Without this agreement the 
draft constitution will not see the light of day, nor will 
it be submitted to a referendum by mid-October . . . So we 
have the right to ask all concerned parties, will these 
three days witness a miracle and will you present a final 
draft to the National Assembly.  Or will we witness another 
round of struggles that take us back to square one." 
 
¶D. "The Suggested Constitution and the Challenges" 
(Editorial by Yousif Fadhil, 
http://www.nahrain.com/d/news/05/08/25/nhr082 5a.html) 
 
"I smiled as I watched the scenes of joy coming from all 
over Iraq when the draft constitution was finished.  Then I 
read draft constitution and heard the plans of the Sunni 
faction and Sadr movement and saw the demonstrations in 
Kirkuk and other regions.  I went to the Iraqi websites and 
read the statements from American president George Bush and 
other American politicians talking about the possibility of 
dividing Iraq into three small states! . . I then asked 
myself what stance should I take on this constitution?   I 
have seen Kurds place demands on the constitution.  I have 
heard the Shiites concerns addressed and province's demands 
for the fair distribution of the oil wealth and a non- 
centralized rule met . . . But our concerns will remain as 
long as the intensions of the political parties are not 
good.   Is there a way to overcome bad intentions?  This is 
the biggest challenge Iraq will face.   Iraq's progress and 
prosperity will depend on good intension and good intensions 
are the sole guarantee for our economic and political unity 
. . . I'm an Arab and I suppose I have rights so why do I 
consider them a gift?  These rights that the Kurds, the 
Turkmen, the Persians, and the Keldo-Assyrians enjoy are a 
natural and civilized part of what it means to be an Iraqi. 
Yes they are all included in the constitution however 
practical implementation takes time.   The people need to be 
educated about these rights in order to have them be shaped 
in the community.   If we can achieve this then we have 
succeed in writing our constitution . . . Writing a 
constitution isn't hard, it is the implementation of its 
principles that is difficult to do.  Iraq had permanent 
constitution but our leader paid no attention to it.  The 
peak of these violations took place under Saddam Hussein's 
rule.  As I said before if federalism or non-central rule 
doesn't include good intentions with the correct 
implementation all of this effort will not achieve anything 
. . . It's worth mentioning that there is still a chance to 
change the constitution if we find any problems in it." 
 
 
 
Khalilzad