05BRASILIA2316
BRAZIL: UPDATE FOR WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR
Mon Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 002316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOL/ILAB FOR TINA CARTER 
DRL/IL FOR LAUREN HOLT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PHUM SOCI BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: UPDATE FOR WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR 
REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 143552 
 
¶1. Post provides the following in response to reftel's 
request for information to update the Worst Forms of Child 
Labor Report: 
 
¶2. The GOB administers a number of programs and projects to 
combat child labor and related issues in Brazil.  The GOB 
will implement the following anti-child labor programs from 
2004-2007. 
 
-- Future Worker's School (Escola do Futuro Trabalhador): 
This awareness raising campaign, sponsored by the Ministry of 
Labor and Employment (MTE), is designed to teach basic labor 
rights to low-income elementary and high schools students. 
 
-- Child Labor Mapping System:  The Ministry of Labor (MTE) 
developed a system to monitor child labor practices 
throughout the country.  The Special Group to Combat Child 
Labor and Protect Adolescent Workers (GECTIPA) is responsible 
for updating the system.  GECTIPA exist all 26 Brazilian 
states and works under the auspices of the "delegacias do 
trabalho," police offices that handle labor issues. 
Delagacias do trabalho receive and investigate labor abuse 
allegations. 
 
-- Labor Inspections:  The MTE conducts labor inspections 
throughout Brazil to eradicate slave labor.  Between January 
and August of this year, labor inspectors freed over 2,464 
workers.  Post does not know what percentage of freed slave 
laborers were children or adolescents. 
 
-- GOB Awareness Campaigns:  The Ministry of Justice and the 
Ministry of Social Development will develop awareness raising 
campaigns in coordination with NGOs and international 
organizations such as the ILO to combat child labor. 
 
-- Program on the Eradication of Child Labor (PETI): PETI 
provides stipends to low income families who have removed 
underage children from the work force and placed them into 
school.  The stipends are designed to help alleviate 
financial difficulties that stem from the loss of the child's 
income. 
 
-- National Commission to Eradicate Child Labor (CONAETI): 
CONATEI is coordinated by the MTE and includes a number of 
ministries and organizations.  It oversees the implementation 
of ILO Conventions 138 and 182, and manages the PETI program. 
 
-- Ministry of Social Development (MDS): MDS has developed an 
after school program to assist low-income elementary and high 
school students.  The program provides educational 
assistance, sport instruction, and art-related activities. 
 
-- School stipend program (Bolsa Escola):  The Bolsa Escola 
program provides stipends to low-income mothers to ensure 
that children and adolescents do not leave school to enter 
the work force. 
 
Legislation Changes 
------------------- 
¶3. On March 1 2005, the Brazilian Senate approved three bills 
proposed by the Parliamentary Investigation Commission (CPI) 
to combat child labor and the sexual exploitation of children 
and adolescents. 
 
¶4. A new amendment to the Children and Adolescent's Act plans 
to close down any lodging facility that accommodates 
unaccompanied children and adolescents.  The Senate also 
approved a number of changes pertaining to sexual offenses 
against minors and the mentally ill.  The proposed changes 
must be approved by the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies before 
they become enforceable law. 
 
DANILOVICH