05MUSCAT1272
MEDIA REACTION: THE NEW IRAQI CONSTITUTION
Mon Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Muscat
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MUSCAT 001272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ARPI, NEA/PPD, NEA/P, INR/R/MR 
 
LONDON FOR TSOU 
PARIS FOR ZEYA 
USCENTCOM FOR PLUSH 
FOREIGN PRESS CENTER FOR ASILAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO KMDR OIIP IZ MU
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: THE NEW IRAQI CONSTITUTION 
 
---------------------------- 
Drafting Through Differences 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶1. The privately owned Arabic daily "Al-Watan" featured an 
editorial on August 10 entitled "Issues Blocking Efforts for 
Drafting Iraqi Constitution": 
 
"There are many difficult issues and complicated questions facing 
the drafting committee of the new Iraqi constitution. 
Conflicting political powers, representatives of religious 
organizations/groups, and social activists are divided about the 
fundamental elements in the proposed constitution.  These issues 
include the role of federalism, the Kurdistan border, and the use 
of Islamic law as the supreme law in interpreting all law and 
legislation governing Iraq.  The Kurds support the idea of a 
federal system and demand expansion of the Kurdistan border to 
include the city of Kirkuk.  Arab Sunnis refuse the notion of 
federalism, and Shiites object to the expansion of the Kurdish 
border.  Faced with these and many other competing interests, the 
drafting committee has an enormous task ahead of them." 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
Post-Constitution Stability In Iraq 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. "Al-Watan" published on August 14 an editorial entitled 
"Hanging Question": 
 
"As the Iraqi drafting committee approaches the final edits to 
the new Iraqi constitution, existing political powers in Baghdad 
become more irate that their demands regarding the safety and 
security of Iraq have not been sufficiently covered by the 
document.  Many have expressed deep concern that current 
conflicts in Iraq threaten to tear apart Iraqi unity and will 
increase the rate of violence.  Also in a time when American and 
British troops are suffering heavy losses, there is fear that 
these forces will begin leaving Iraq in droves.  There is little 
confidence that the new Iraqi army will be able to preserve 
stability and protect the Iraqi people from armed militia and 
rebel groups such as 'Bader' and 'Bashmarkah.'" 
 
--------------------------------- 
New Constitution, New Opportunity 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Murtadha Hasan Ali, a member of the State Council, wrote an op- 
ed in government-owned Arabic daily "Oman" on August 15, entitled 
"The Iraqi Constitution: An Historic Opportunity for Iraqi 
leaders": 
 
"Iraq is passing through a period of time that can be 
characterized as a historical opportunity, especially for those 
who currently control the fate of Iraq.  If Iraqi leaders invest 
properly in this opportunity and successfully form a modern 
constitution, it will usher in an era of increased compromise and 
peace, and a reduction of violence.  On the other hand, if there 
are any delays or disagreements regarding the constitution, then 
more violence and an increased movement toward violence as a 
means of control will surely be adopted." 
 
BALTIMORE