05NAIROBI3169
A/S NEWMAN AND SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE MEET SPLM
Thu Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS NAIROBI 003169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS EAIR SU KE
SUBJECT: A/S NEWMAN AND SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE MEET SPLM 
LEADERSHIP IN NEW SITE 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY. On August 3, A/S Newman and Special 
Representative Winter traveled to New Site, South Sudan, to 
offer their condolences over the death of John Garang and to 
meet with new SPLM Chairman Salva Kiir. Kiir briefed Newman 
and Winter on the sequence of events surrounding Garang's 
death and the SPLM's plans for a funeral. Newman shared the 
U.S.' full support for the SPLM and the peace process, asking 
what the U.S. could do to help. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Kiir described in detail the timeline leading to 
Garang's death and the subsequent recovery of the bodies. He 
said that SPLA troops in the New Kush training area reported 
hearing a thud that is believed to  have been the helicopter 
hitting a mountain. The SPLM moved quickly to gather its 
leadership in New Site, quickly electing Kiir the new 
Chairman, nominating him to be 1st Vice President of the 
Government of New Unity and President of the Government of 
South Sudan. 
 
¶3. (U) Kiir proceeded to describe the SPLM's plans for 
Garang's funeral. He said there had been some initial 
disagreement between Garang's family and the leadership about 
whether the funeral should be in Garang's hometown (Bor) or 
not. They finally agreed that the funeral will take place in 
Juba on August 6. Before the funeral, Garang's remains will 
travel around the South. Kiir said they would go to Kurmuk, 
Kauda, Rumbek, Yei, Bor and Panyagor before arriving in Juba. 
(Note: Subsequent conversations revealed that the exact route 
and timing are still being worked out. End Note.) 
 
¶4. (U) A/S Newman told Kiir they had traveled to New Site to 
offer their condolences, express the U.S.' continued support 
of the people of Sudan and the CPA, and to let the SPLM know 
that the U.S. stands ready to assist in any way possible. 
Newman acknowledged Kiir and the SPLM's statements calling 
for a continuation of Garang's vision and said the U.S. was 
publicly urging all parties to stay committed to the CPA and 
not to use this tragedy for personal or political gain. She 
reminded Kiir that the U.S. expected him to get involved in 
resolving the Darfur crisis. She also raised the issues of 
the investigation into the crash, how to recognize Garang 
around the world and how to proceed with the CPA and in 
Darfur. 
 
¶5. (U) Special Representative Winter shared his personal 
connection to Garang and the SPLM, saying he was looking 
forward to spending more time in south Sudan in his new job. 
He praised the SPLM for having done everything right in 
responding to the tragedy. He emphasized that despite the 
great loss, the partnership between the U.S. and the SPLM 
continues. 
 
¶6. (U) Kiir responded that the SPLM was going to start over 
on implementing the CPA as if nothing had been done, but 
remained committed to implementing it as quickly as possible. 
He made it clear that the SPLM would like international help 
with the investigation into the crash, saying the team should 
consist of experts from the U.S., UK, Uganda, Kenya, Sudan 
and the UN, with Russians brought in by Uganda because the 
helicopter was Russian-built. 
 
¶7. A/S Newman and Special Representative Winter have cleared 
this cable. 
BELLAMY