05QUITO1818
PALACIO REVIEWS HIS FIRST 100 DAYS
Fri Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 001818 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: PALACIO REVIEWS HIS FIRST 100 DAYS 
 
REF: A. QUITO 1803 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 1787 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Highlighting his proposed reform package 
as the means to realize his vision for Ecuador in the year 
2020, President Palacio made his fourth televised address to 
the nation on August 2.  Domestic themes and the president's 
beloved universal health care scheme dominated the speech. 
On the international front, he reiterated his commitment to 
protect national sovereignty as the cornerstone of his 
foreign policy; he highlighted the GOE's intention to make 
combating trafficking in persons a top priority (Reftel A). 
Intended to generate support for his government's reform 
agenda, the speech failed to receive widespread media 
coverage.  End summary. 
 
Long on Vision, Short on Substance 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) In a bid to shore up support after recent polls 
revealed dips in his popularity and credibility (from roughly 
60% on taking office to 37% at 100 days), President Palacio 
addressed the nation on August 2 to review his first 100 days 
in office.  His televised speech was preceded by scenes of 
protesters marching in the streets and police repression in 
the days leading up to Gutierrez' removal from office.  These 
images were immediately followed by a straight-faced Palacio 
declaring that he had put an end to the turmoil that had 
characterized the former president's rule and that he was 
moving forward with his pledge to rebuild the country. 
 
¶3.  (U) Palacio touched on a wide range of themes during the 
30-minute broadcast.  Much of the speech dealt with his 
reform proposals and efforts to generate a national dialogue 
for change through the drafting of a popular referendum to be 
held December 11.  Accusing Congress of refusing to "cure the 
sick," he indirectly criticized Congress for returning his 
reform proposal last week.  On the economy, he cited 
increasing production as the basis of his economic program, 
with an emphasis on increasing social services.  Regarding 
his foreign policy, Palacio gave his usual pitch about the 
importance of a country's dignity and sovereignty.  He 
avoided mention of recent setbacks with the international 
financial institutions, linkages with Venezuela, or the 
possible return of ex-president Gutierrez (Reftel B). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Palacio's speech was an attempt to address growing 
disenchantment over the slow pace of promised reforms. 
However, the long-winded late-night speech failed to inspire, 
and was given short shrift by most major media, reinforcing 
the impression of an inexpert government increasingly adrift. 
 The indirect blame of Congress only compounded damage to 
already strained relations. 
MEMMOTT