05TAIPEI3370
MEDIA REACTION: IRAN NUCLEAR PROGRAM
Fri Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003370 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAN NUCLEAR PROGRAM 
 
¶1. Summary: As the major Chinese-language Taipei 
dailies August 12 continued to provide extensive 
coverage of the water supply situation in Taoyuan and 
incoming Typhoon Sanvu, the centrist "China Times" 
carried news stories about Taiwan's military buildup 
and cross-Strait transportation on its front page.  The 
"China Times" ran a banner headline on its front page 
that read: "[Squadrons of] Taiwan's indigenous cruise 
missiles will be formed."  A second news story on the 
newspapers' front page was topped with the headline: 
"Minister of Communications and Transportation: both 
sides of the Taiwan Strait have reached a consensus 
regarding [cross-Strait] charter and cargo flights." 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest 
daily, however, printed a wire service story on its 
page two, quoting the U.K.-based "Financial Times" as 
saying that "The United States will monitor closely the 
Chinese companies listed in the U.S. capital market." 
The newspaper also carried a news story on that page 
that quoted the Nobel-Prize winner for economics in 
2004, Edward Prescott, as saying China's economic 
growth will hardly persist as its productivity is much 
lower than that of Taiwan, the United States and Japan. 
 
¶2. Most Chinese-language newspapers editorialized on 
the water supply problem in Taiwan August 12, but a 
"China Times" column commented on the Iran nuclear 
program.  According to the commentary, problems 
associated with Iran's nuclear program cannot be 
resolved if relations between the United States and 
Iran are not improved first.  End summary. 
 
"Resolution to Iran's Nuclear Program" 
 
The "International Outlook" column of the centrist, pro- 
status quo "China Times" [circulation: 500,000] wrote 
(8/12): 
 
". Iran's nuclear program is in essence a matter 
concerning the conflict between the United States and 
Iran.  The European Union (EU) is tasked with the 
responsibility of mediating and negotiating with Iran 
on the frontlines, while the United States just hides 
behind the EU and provides random comments.  This 
situation is similar to the nuclear problem on the 
Korean peninsula; namely, the United States is using 
the `Six Party Talks' to deal with North Korea, but 
deep down, it is still a matter concerning the conflict 
between Washington and Pyongyang. . 
 
"Pyongyang used to rely on Russia to maintain its 
security.  In the aftermath of the Cold War, Russia 
turned its back on North Korea and no longer took 
charge of the latter's security.  In the meantime, 
Washington did not [seize the opportunity to] befriend 
Pyongyang; instead, it suppressed North Korea all the 
more, to the extent that it almost tried to put it to 
death.  For Pyongyang, the only way to maintain and 
sustain its regime at that time was to develop nuclear 
weapons.  To put it simply, North Korea will never give 
up its nuclear program unless it gets assurances about 
its national security in the post-Cold War era. . 
 
"The situation is similar in Iran.  Iran's economic 
situation is much better than that of North Korea 
because it possesses oil resources.  But the 
suffocating situation it experiences in international 
politics is no better than that of North Korea's.  The 
suffocation comes from Washington's attempt to blockade 
Iran entirely, which has also sparked Iranian loathing 
toward the United States.  When rumors had it in the 
international community that the United States would 
invade Iran following its war in Iraq, Iran felt the 
need more desperately to develop nuclear weapons to 
defend itself.  When Washington decided not to end its 
suppression of Iran and showed the possibility of 
invading it anytime, could Iran safeguard itself just 
by relying on the EU's commitments?  Can the EU really 
stop the United States if the latter wants to invade 
Iran? .  Judged from this perspective, the problem 
concerning Iran's nuclear program can hardly be 
resolved if the relationship between the United States 
and Iran are not improved." 
 
PAAL