03HARARE2000
Zimbabwe HIV and AIDS Education Messages at
Thu Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 002000 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/FO AND OES DAS CHOW 
NSC FOR DWORKIN, JFRAZER 
USAID/W FOR GH/AA, ANNE PETERSON 
AFR/SA, MARJORIE COPSON, DCHA A/A WINTER 
AFR/SD, HOPE SUKIN 
GH/OHA, ROXANA ROGERS, CHARLENE BROWN 
PRETORIA FOR CROWLEY 
ROME PLEASE PASS TO FODAG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KHIV TSPL OSCI TBIO KSCA US ZI
SUBJECT:  Zimbabwe HIV and AIDS Education Messages at 
Food Distribution Points 
 
¶1. Summary:  Zimbabwe is facing both a food security 
crisis and the HIV and AIDS pandemic.  Rural food 
distribution points provide an opportunity to save 
lives in terms of combatting hunger and fighting 
HIV/AIDS.  USAID has just launched a new program 
working with local communities to capitalize on the 
current food distribution efforts by simultaneously 
providing HIV and AIDS information, education and 
communication messages. 
 
¶2. The Launch: On September 23 the Ambassador, Joseph G. 
Sullivan, USAID Director, Paul Weisenfeld, and CDC 
Director, Shannon Hadder, launched a unique HIV and 
AIDS education program in the rural District of 
Gwanda North.  This program responds to the two 
humanitarian crises confronting Zimbabwe: the 
devastating HIV and AIDS epidemic, and food 
insecurity that is affecting 5.5 million Zimbabweans. 
The program launch received favourable publicity in 
the local press, including the state-owned media. 
 
¶3. Program Rationale:  Roughly 70% of Zimbabwe's 11.6 
million (8.1 million) people live in rural areas.  Of 
them, between 5-10% watch TV regularly and 20-35% 
listen to the radio regularly.  Reaching people who 
live in rural areas, however, with information on 
HIV/AIDS or with behavior-change messages is 
difficult to do in a cost-effective manner (e.g., 
through the use of mass media).  Therefore, other 
channels of communication are essential. 
 
¶4. Food distribution points (FDPs) are places where 
large numbers of rural people congregate to receive 
food aid.  There are an estimated 1,700 FDPs across 
57 districts in Zimbabwe.  Food is distributed by the 
World Food Programme (WFP) and NGOs about once a 
month through these FDPs.  Each FDP caters to roughly 
1,000-4,000 registered families.  Approximately 80% 
of the people waiting to receive food on behalf of 
their families are women who often wait for hours 
before food distribution begins, thereby providing an 
excellent opportunity to conduct HIV prevention 
education. 
 
¶5. Program Activities:  Various interventions are being 
used to inform, educate and counsel the rural 
audience.  Interpersonal communication and 
"edutainment" activities involve group sessions, 
local drama group performances, contests, 
competitions and quizzes offering prizes, T-shirts 
and caps; and handing out leaflets and brochures to 
disseminate HIV/AIDS prevention messages.  Outdoor 
media includes messages painted on walls and animal- 
drawn carts; posters, banners, buntings and food 
bags; and mobile vans and bikes for communicating 
branded as well as generic HIV/AIDS prevention 
messages.   In addition, plans are underway to 
provide HIV/AIDS-related services, such as mobile 
family planning, and voluntary counseling and HIV 
testing (VCT).  Finally, condoms are being supplied 
to shops around the FDPs, but not at the FDPs. 
 
¶6. Program's Messages:  The program presents "balanced 
messaging" as a strategy, given the profile of the 
target audience.  The program is comprised of a mix 
of generic and brand messaging.  Generic messages are 
based on the "ABC's" theme: Abstinence; Be faithful; 
and Correct and Consistent condom use.  Whereas, 
branded messages advertise the social marketing 
products.  In addition, leaflets and brochures on VCT 
and general sexual health, as well as other printed 
materials in English and the vernacular, are being 
distributed. 
 
¶7. Program's Sustainability:  Because food distribution 
is unlikely to continue indefinitely, this new 
program is designed to be acceptable to and 
implemented by the local people in order to remain 
ongoing and sustainable.  The educational sessions at 
FDPs are done entirely by trained village 
representatives selected from each village.  Trained 
supervisors are selected to oversee the activities of 
the village representatives.  Training focuses on 
both messages and communication techniques designed 
to make the sessions interesting yet informative. 
 
¶8. Next Steps:  This pilot program will be supported in 
three districts until the end of the year with 
ongoing monitoring as well as a knowledge, attitudes 
and perceptions study.  A final evaluation will be 
undertaken before the end of 2003.  A "lessons 
learned" workshop will be implemented to disseminate 
results with stakeholders.  If this pilot program has 
the intended impact, the program will be expanded 
nationwide, subject to the availability of USAID and 
other donor funds.  SULLIVAN