02ANKARA7942
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 007942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                    ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Gen. Ozkok: U.S. need not worry - Hurriyet 
Erdogan, Baykal hand in hand for EU - Sabah 
Elections boost markets' morale - Turkiye 
Erdogan: We'll benefit from Yilmaz's EU experience - Vatan 
AKP vows to abolish `financial year zero' - Milliyet 
Stock markets hit record high - Aksam 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Erdogan's first gaffe - Cumhuriyet 
U.S. Administration congratulates AKP - Radikal 
Erdogan: No puppet Prime Minister - Radikal 
General Ozkok: Election outcome will of nation - Yeni Safak 
Erdogan vows to fight poverty, corruption - Yeni Safak 
AJC cautious on AKP, will wait-and-see - Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Business community says `Gul' -- Dunya 
AKP's priority trade, agriculture, transport, tourism - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Erdogan: Papers report that the AKP party administration has 
authorized Erdogan to name a candidate for Prime Minister. 
All papers believe that Abdullah Gul, a moderate supported 
by the West, is the favorite candidate.  A survey of 500 
businessmen conducted by the economic daily "Dunya" shows 
that 40 percent wanted Gul as Prime Minister.  Erdogan is 
expected to present President Sezer with a list of five 
candidates tomorrow.  Papers quote AKP sources as claiming 
that the new Prime Minister would only stay in office for 60 
days, as the ban on Erdogan will be removed in January 2003. 
Some reports claim Erdogan will consider party balances by 
including in the cabinet a mixture of Islamist figures and 
names close to center-right.  An AKP delegation led by 
Erdogan will tour European capitals to lobby for Turkey's EU 
drive, reports note. 
 
 
Markets: Papers report interest rates drop by 10 points, 
accompanied by a record increase in stock markets.  Dailies 
speculate that AKP will receive a genuine vote of confidence 
from the markets when AKP works out a compromise with the 
IMF in the fourth review work and the 2003 budget, and 
achieves a breakthrough in talks with the EU.  Ali Coskun, 
the AKP official responsible for the economy, said that the 
IMF wants an end to `financial year zero' implementation, 
which Coskun sees as a controversial regulation that has 
chased domestic money abroad.  Coskun added that in talks 
with the IMF, AKP would put the emphasis on social aspects 
of the program.  Tax rates will be reduced, and the state 
will be restructured with authority on the economy under one 
minister, Coskun said. 
 
 
Cyprus: Dailies expect the UN to present to Cypriots on the 
island a new peace plan next week, and urge for a resolution 
before the Copenhagen Summit in December.  "Hurriyet" claims 
that President Bush is supporting the new initiative. 
Thomas Weston is expected in Ankara this weekend.  Speaking 
to a Greek TV channel, Erdogan said his party supported the 
Belgian model for Cyprus.  Greek Foreign Minister Papandreou 
said Greece favored the Belgian model as well, with Cyprus 
having a united international representation with prevailing 
EU resolutions.  "Cumhuriyet" characterized Erdogan's Cyprus 
remarks as a `gaffe' because he made reference to 
`communities' on the island instead of two separate 
`states.'  Outgoing Foreign Minister Gurel denounced 
Erdogan's remarks as an `example of ignorance' which came at 
a time Turkey was striving for recognition of the Turkish 
Cypriot state.  MFA has urgently decided to brief Erdogan on 
foreign policy matters to prevent further gaffes, 
"Cumhuriyet" notes.  Papers report Athens as welcoming 
Erdogan replacing Ecevit, who was a hard-liner on Cyprus 
issue. 
 
 
Ambassador Pearson on polls, U.S.-Turkey ties: Dailies 
report U.S. Ambassador to Ankara Robert Pearson voicing U.S. 
support for the cabinet to be formed by AKP.  Appearing on 
NTV on Tuesday, Ambassador Pearson congratulated AKP on its 
election victory, and vowed continued U.S. backing for 
Turkey's democratization effort, economic reforms and EU 
drive.  Pearson said he expected no change in U.S.-Turkey 
relations under the new AKP government.  He also emphasized 
the U.S. expectation for strong Turkish support regarding 
problems with Iraq. 
 
 
General Ozkok in U.S.: Papers and broadcasters report that 
TGS Chief General Ozkok was received at the highest level at 
the Pentagon, State Department and the White House, and met 
with Powell, Rice and Cheney.  "Hurriyet" says General Ozkok 
eased concerns of the U.S. Administration by welcoming the 
AKP election victory as an indication of the Turkish 
nation's will, and assuring that Washington should not worry 
about the new situation in Turkey.  Ozkok is also quoted as 
saying that Turkey prefers a non-military solution to the 
Iraqi problem. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Turkish Elections 
 
 
"Closure of an era" 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mass appeal Hurriyet (11/6): "The 
great victory of the AKP, and its stance helped the Turkish 
public opinion to forget about the past era.  We are 
discussing about future easily now.  Yet shaping Turkey's 
future requires a clear description and understanding the 
past.  What we have just put behind us, with the result of 
election, was the era of corruption economy, favoritism as 
well as abusing economy for personal interests.  The Turkish 
people has simply wiped out that during November 3 
elections." 
 
 
"Doesn't have to be like me; ruling the country decently is 
enough" 
Fatih Altayli comments in mass appeal Hurriyet (11/6): 
"There are some pre-conceived ideas or judgements about the 
AKP and its leader Erdogan.  Turkey should get rid of this 
spirit particularly now as the country is going toward a new 
era.  Otherwise, the members of the AKP will feel themselves 
`different' and `alienated' while they are about to start 
ruling the country. . What matters is that Turkey deserves 
to have good rulers, not necessarily the people that I can 
see parallel lifestyles with mine." 
 
 
"A good start" 
Sami kohen wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (11/6): "The 
messages coming from Brussels show that the EU has opened a 
`credit account' for the AKP.  The EU is willing to 
cooperate with the AKP government.  It clearly indicates 
that remarks by Erdogan on Turkey's EU commitment were 
encouraging enough for the EU.  Yet it is also clear that 
the EU will wait a little while to see the actual 
implementation of the obligations in Turkey.  That means the 
upcoming Copenhagen summit will not give Turkey a clear and 
precise date for the negotiations.  This has nothing to do 
with the AKP government, because the same stance was the 
fact for the previous government as well.  . If Turkey works 
diligently, June 2003 might be a more realistic time to 
expect a date from EU for negotiations."