02ANKARA8132
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                    ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
30 hot days for Cyprus - Hurriyet 
Swiss model for Cyprus - Aksam 
Land for Greek Cypriots, autonomy for Turks - Vatan 
Bargaining on Iraq with CIA delegation - Milliyet 
CIA delegation lands in Ankara - Aksam 
Erdogan: We will use authority given by the nation - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Erdogan-Sezer polemic - Radikal 
Toward `solution' in Cyprus - Radikal 
Annan plan brings territorial advantage to Greek Cypriots - 
Yeni Safak 
World eyes on Baghdad - Cumhuriyet 
Iraq reacts negatively to UN resolution - Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
AKP: We will encourage production - Dunya 
Central Bank urges no concession on economic program - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus: All dailies carry details of the UN-sponsored peace 
plan for Cyprus.  If the Greek and Turkish sides reach a 
compromise before the EU Copenhagen Summit on December 12, 
the agreement for a new Cyprus Constitution will be taken to 
referendum in both Cypriot zones in the island in March.  In 
that case, a united Cyprus would sign agreement for EU 
accession on April 16.  A senior MFA official reportedly 
said Ankara would not hurry to react to the draft, which he 
saw as `long and confusing.'  The AKP official responsible 
for foreign policy, retired ambassador Yasar Yakis, voiced 
the suspicion that the plan was earlier presented to the 
Greek Cypriots for some `adjustments.'  The envisioned 
Cyprus state would have a single international identity, but 
would be composed of two autonomous Cyprus states.  The 
island would be demilitarized, and paramilitary units would 
be abolished.  "Cumhuriyet" says the plan contained points 
close to the Turkish thesis.  "Radikal" reports a positive 
first reaction from both Cypriot leaders. 
 
 
Iraq: Papers say that despite angry reaction from the Iraqi 
parliament, Baghdad is expected to accept UNSC resolution 
¶1441.  Dailies report National Security Advisor Rice saying 
U.S. would show `zero tolerance' to Iraq.  Andrew Card of 
the White House reportedly said if Baghdad violated UNSC 
resolutions, the U.S. would not necessarily seek permission 
from the UN to take military action.  Meanwhile, papers 
report Northern Iraqi Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) 
leader Talabani's visit to Ankara before the November 22 
Iraqi opposition meeting in Brussels.  Talabani, scheduled 
to meet with MFA and TGS, may pay a courtesy visit to AKP 
leader Erdogan as well, reports say.  Papers claim that MFA 
and TGS have warned AKP and CHP to refrain from receiving 
Talabani. 
Erdogan: AKP leader Erdogan responded to President Sezer's 
remarks that the Constitution could not be amended merely to 
meet the specific needs of an individual by saying that AKP 
was tasked by the people to represent the national will, and 
that AKP would not share that authority with others.  AKP is 
not seeking to politicize laws, Erdogan said.  Mainstream 
media believe Erdogan has hardened his stance.  However, 
reaction from President Sezer and CHP leader Baykal has 
forced Erdogan to look for solutions other than 
constitutional change, papers note.  With a minor 
constitutional change, AKP will hold by-elections within 
three months after the opening of parliament, thus paving 
the way for Erdogan to become prime minister.  AKP 
persistence in seeking constitutional changes might 
encourage radical elements in the party to propose further 
amendments on controversial issues like the headscarf ban 
and religious schools, papers comment. 
 
 
CIA delegation in Ankara: A 25-member CIA delegation, led by 
the agency's deputy director John McLaughlin, arrived in 
Ankara Monday evening, papers report.  McLaughlin is 
expected to discuss the Iraq problem and the fight against 
terrorism with the TGS, MFA and Turkish intelligence (MIT), 
reports say.  McLaughlin will try to convince Turkey to 
allow the use of Northern Iraqi peshmerges in the Iraqi 
operation.  Ankara is concerned that the Northern Iraqi KDP 
and PUK might extract concessions from the U.S. if 
peshmerges are included in Washington's Iraq plans.  The 
groups will be given military training and arms, and might 
pose a threat for Turkey in the future, dailies note. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
a) UN Resolution on Iraq 
b) US-Turkey Relations 
 
 
 
 
"The UN resolution will also topple Saddam" 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mass appeal Hurriyet (11/10): "The UN 
resolution not only establishes a mechanism for serious 
control over weapons of mass destruction, but also, and more 
importantly, paves the way for a regime change in Iraq 
without the need of war.  With the help of this resolution, 
the Iraqi opposition will now be able to make its presence 
felt. . Looking at the resolution's rhetoric, one can 
conclude that the authority provided to the inspectors is 
strong enough to shake Saddam Hussein's dictatorship. . 
Baghdad is obliged to comply fully with the UN resolution or 
else pay the consequences of a U.S. military action.  Under 
these strict conditions and obligations, Iraq must 
cooperate.  Let's not forget that the UN resolution has 
Syrian approval as well.  What happens if the Baghdad regime 
chooses not to comply?  It will not make much difference for 
the fate of Saddam's regime anyway." 
 
 
"The US and AKP" 
New York correspondent for mass appeal Sabah, Asli 
Aydintasbas wrote (11/12): "On the eve of a possible Iraq 
operation, the AKP election victory is very much of interest 
to Washington.  AKP has gained huge importance for the US in 
this regard. AKP was not the best alternative for the US, 
but Washington is relieved by recent soft messages by AKP 
leader Erdogan and other party officials.  . Prior to the 
election, AKP had sent some messages to Washington in order 
to reassure the US administration on its stance on Iraq, 
willingness to cooperate with the IMF, willingness to become 
part of the EU, and willingness to work for a solution on 
Cyprus.  . Iraq, Cyprus, and EU membership will be the major 
issues in US-Turkish relations in the immediate future.  US 
officials welcome the positive messages by AKP on these 
important issues following the party's election victory. 
Uncertainty about who is to be the Prime Minister of Turkey, 
concerns about the Islamic roots of AKP, and speculation 
about possible tension between the AKP and the military are 
now of secondary importance for the US. . It appears that 
the nature of relations between the AKP and the US 
administration will be shaped significantly by developments 
in Iraq."