09STOCKHOLM802
ONDCP DIRECTOR KERLIKOWSKE'S STOCKHOLM VISIT
Tue Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Stockholm
VZCZCXRO6916
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHSM #0802/01 3630621
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 290621Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM
TO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/THE WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5024
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STOCKHOLM 000802 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHSR PLS PASS TO ONDCP CHRISTINE KOURTIDES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL KCRM AF SW
SUBJECT:  ONDCP DIRECTOR KERLIKOWSKE'S STOCKHOLM VISIT 
 
STOCKHOLM 00000802  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) 
Director  R. Gil Kerlikowske on 8 December met with Stockholm County 
Police Commissioner Carin Gotblad, the Youth Chapter of the 
Stockholm Police Narcotic Division, Minister of Public Health Maria 
Larsson, and World Forum Against Drugs (WFAD)President Sven-Olov 
Carlsson and Board Member Per Johansson. During his meetings, 
Director Kerlikowske was briefed on the work of the Youth Chapter 
and GOS drug control policy.  Director Kerlikowske explained that 
despite expectations among some, the Obama administration will not 
usher in a period of liberal drug policy, but hopes to introduce a 
more sophisticated and thoughtful discussion about the complex 
problem posed by drugs.  Director Kerlikowske also provided an 
interview to Swedish Radio in which he thanked Sweden for its 
efforts in Afghanistan and highlighted the common threats from drug 
cultivation and smuggling of drugs from Afghanistan.  End Summary. 
 
 
Youth Chapter of Stockholm Police Narcotics Division 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Stockholm County Police Commissioner Carin Gotblad briefly 
met with Director Kerlikowske before members of the Youth Chapter of 
the Stockholm Police Narcotic Division presented their unique and 
integrated approach to combating drugs among young people (under 25) 
in Sweden. The Youth Chapter employs a method that includes close 
partnership with social services and a Juvenile Clinic for young 
drug abusers, which focuses on detection and treatment as well as 
parent involvement. Members of the Youth Chapter also reported on 
developing new methods to prevent ordering drugs, including 
prescription drugs, via the internet and the use of internet based 
social networks as an important investigation tool.  The 
participants also discussed laws governing police investigations, 
such as the Swedish police's right to conduct house searches or 
confiscate and "empty" a cell phone without a court order. Swedish 
policemen also do not face restrictions on crossing jurisdictions 
due to the centralized nature of the police system. 
 
 
Meeting with Minister of Public Health Maria Larsson 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Minister of Health Maria Larsson explained that although 
the national drug strategy originates from her ministry, the drug 
portfolio is shared with the ministries of Justice, Culture (schools 
and sports) and Finance (Customs).  Minster Larsson stressed that 
Swedish drug policy aims to foster social attitudes that make drug 
use a socially unacceptable behavior and noted wide public and 
political support for prevention and treatment efforts in Sweden. 
The government's strategy focuses on prevention and treatment 
efforts, rather than supply and demand reduction, with decentralized 
implementation on the level of Swedish municipalities. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In response to a question about the process of formulating 
a new national drug strategy, as the current one ends in 2010, the 
Minister informed Director Kerlikowske that the ministry initially 
seeks input from all the relevant stakeholders across Sweden, 
including NGOs. Emphasis is given to assessing the effectiveness of 
various methods to combat drug abuse in drafting the national 
strategy. Programs are pilot tested and, if effective, are 
implemented on a wider scale. The long-term 5 year strategy is 
complemented by annual reports that evaluate the progress during the 
previous year and set out steps for the following year to achieve 
the goals of the long-term strategy. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Minister Larsson and Director Kerlikowske also exchanged 
views on and experiences with pilot programs that focus on health 
care practitioners. They agreed that doctors have an important role 
to play in reducing substance abuse. Minister Larsson argued that 
health practitioners must have the knowledge to link diseases to 
substance abuse and the tools to allow them to consult patients on 
substance abuse. She noted the role of doctors is especially 
important as "Swedes listen to doctors," but acknowledged that it is 
hard to reeducate physicians, who are used to treating patients with 
medications, to focus more on prevention. Minister Larsson said 
these programs mostly focus on tobacco and alcohol abuse and have 
been most successful in reduced alcohol use among pregnant women. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In response to a question, Director Kerlikowske reflected 
on the current status of marijuana for medical use in the U.S. and 
noted that the legalization of marijuana for medical use has not 
been unproblematic and has had unexpected side effects, such as 
erosion of the quality of life in neighborhoods.  The Director and 
Minister Larsson agreed that legalization of drugs and the creation 
of open areas for drug use or injection rooms (as in Olso or 
Vancouver) are not the answer to reducing drug use and can create 
more problems than they solve. Minister Larsson noted disagreements 
among her Nordic counterparts about support for such initiatives and 
 
STOCKHOLM 00000802  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
stated that it is Swedish policy to avoid creating pockets of drug 
use. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) During their exchange, Director Kerlikowske noted the 
President's national drug control strategy would be released in 
February 2010 and that the Administration was seeking to address the 
problem of drug control from both a public health and public safety 
approach. He also confirmed legalization of marijuana held no place 
in the new strategy, and remarked that the USG looked forward to 
collaborating with Sweden to reduce drug use, including at the CND 
in March 2010. As Minister Larsson had just returned from a meeting 
on steroid abuse, there was also a brief discussion on the dangers 
and prevalence of steroid abuse. At the close of the meeting, 
Director Kerlikowske mentioned his serious concerns about 
prescription drug abuse and the Obama Administration's renewed 
emphasis on drug abuse prevention. 
 
 
World Forum Against Drugs 
------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) On 8 December, Director had a lunch meeting with WFAD 
President Sven-Olov and Board Member Per Johansson. During lunch, 
Director Kerlikowske learned about efforts by Swedish NGOs to 
prevent and reduce drug use and plans by WFAD to hold the second 
World Forum Against Drugs from May 24-25 2010. The Director was also 
informed that GOS agreed to fund the conference and was invited by 
WFAD to give a keynote address. WFAD also invited the Queen (they 
believe she may be not available but will likely sponsor the 
conference) and UNODC Director Costa. Cannabis research, drug trends 
in sub-Saharan Africa, and the impact of adult drug abuse on 
children are the 2010 conference themes. Also mentioned was the 
newly launched WFAD Web site at www.wfad.se. Among other entries, it 
includes a holiday reminder to parents, teens, and families about 
the dangers of drug abuse from Director Kerlikowske. 
 
 
Interview with Swedish Radio 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) On December 9, Director Kerlikowske provided an interview to 
Swedish Radio that mainly focused on the drug policy in Afghanistan. 
When asked if he agreed with Ambassador Holbrooke's recent statement 
that the previous drug policy in Afghanistan is one of the most 
ineffective ones in decades, Director Kerlikowske agreed that 
eradication had not been successful. Director Kerlikowske also 
stressed the importance of enabling the host country to deal with 
the drug situation on its own, stressing that corruption and 
government involvement in drug trafficking are highly problematic. 
Director Kerlikowske concluded with commending Sweden for its work 
to fight drugs domestically and internationally, including Swedish 
efforts in Afghanistan, and noted that whether the drugs end up in 
Europe or in the U.S., it is a joint fight. 
 
¶10.  (U) This cable has been cleared by ONDCP. 
 
BARZUN