09AITTAIPEI4
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Fri Jan 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0004/01 0020941
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020941Z JAN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0644
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8828
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0288UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused January 
1-2 news coverage on the New Year Eve's celebration in Taiwan and 
around the world; on Chinese President Hu Jintao's delivering of the 
"Six Points" of China's Taiwan policy; and on a court ruling on the 
embezzlement scandal involving the Rebar Asia Pacific Group, the 
highest-figure financial crime in Taiwan's history. 
 
¶2. Most editorials and commentaries addressed Hu's "Six Points" 
toward Taiwan.  All local newspapers expressed their great concern 
about Hu's call to open political dialogue and urged the Ma 
Ying-jeou administration to deal carefully with Hu's request.  An 
editorial and a news analysis in the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" both cast their doubts on the "Six Points," alleging that Hu 
and Taiwan's Ma Ying-jeou administration were collaborating to 
achieve the goal of Taiwan's ultimate unification with China.  An 
editorial in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" commented on Hu's 
talks as a show of goodwill.  The editorial said, however, that 
China's insistence on sticking to the 'one-China' principle would 
ultimately generate anxiety for China in its dealing with the Taiwan 
issue.  An editorial in the pro-unification "United Daily News" said 
that cross-Strait negotiations must still be based on economic and 
trade issues first.  Another op-ed written in the "United Daily 
News" said Hu's talks, which will form China's Taiwan policy for now 
through the end of Hu's and Ma's terms in 2012, had actually set a 
timeline necessitating that cross-Strait political and military 
dialogue be conducted within the next three years.  The centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" editorial said Hu had made direct 
responses to Ma.  As a result, the editorial urged the Ma 
administration to get ready for more thorny cross-Strait 
negotiations in the near future.  An editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" expressed optimism 
about cross-Strait relations but said a peace accord is a long shot 
compared with the more urgent issue of Taiwan's bid for observer 
status in the World Health Assembly (WHA).  An editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" responded to Hu's 
talks, saying that Taiwan's future must be decided by the Taiwan 
people.  End summary. 
 
A) "Hu and Ma Separated by Sea but Singing Together; the Taiwan 
People Should Notice that They Might Be Conquered" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (1/1): 
 
"... China's united front harps on the same string without new 
ideas.  [Chinese President] Hu Jintao's discussion [on December 31, 
2008 regarding his Taiwan policy] still lacked anything which could 
appeal to people of Taiwan.  However, ever since [Taiwan's 
President] Ma Ying-jeou led the Blue camp back to power [since May 
20, 2008], [the Ma Administration] has only been incompetent in 
governance and known only how to tilt one-sidedly toward China. 
What [the Ma administration] expected everyday was for China to 
'show leniency' and 'give leniency.'  Hu's 'Six Points' on Taiwan 
policy were just what Ma hoped for, which will definitely expedite 
Ma's walk along the roadmap of ultimate unification [with China]. 
..." 
 
B) "China's Taiwan Plot; the KMT Is Willing to Be the Pawn" 
 
Reporter Peng Hsien-chun wrote a news analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (1/1): 
 
"... The so-called 'peaceful development' in [Chinese President] Hu 
Jintao's 'Six Points' is actually a euphemism for 'unification with 
the motherland.'  Hu's so-called 'positive change' in the Taiwan 
situation undoubtedly meant the KMT's return to power.  China will 
easily carry out its plot for Taiwan.  The KMT obviously was only a 
tool and a pawn of China. ..." 
 
C) "The Softness and Hardness in Hu Jintao's Talks" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (1/1): 
 
"... What was worth noticing was that [Chinese President] Hu Jintao 
regarded the of-yet unrealized unification between both sides of the 
Taiwan Strait not as 'the split in territory and sovereignty,' but 
rather the 'political confrontation' left by the civil war, which 
did not change the fact that the mainland and Taiwan belonged to one 
China.  This manner of speaking displayed only minor differences 
with [Taiwan President] Ma Ying-jeou's views on cross-Strait 
relations and was sort of an echo and support to Ma.  Even more 
important was that because [the current situation across the Taiwan 
Strait] was not the split of sovereignty and territory, cross-Strait 
issues were not a cause to invoke China's 'Anti-Secession Law.'  As 
a result, it would be unnecessary to use force [against Taiwan] 
according to the law.  Such a manner of speaking was for the ears of 
internal figures in China, especially the hawks in the People's 
Liberation Army.  It was believed that such a statement will make 
 
the Ma administration, which has eagerly pushed a cross-Strait peace 
agreement, feel encouraged. 
 
"In terms of the contents, Hu made positive responses to the 
diplomatic truce, international participation, economic cooperation 
and the military mutual confidence building mechanism which Ma was 
most concerned about.  [This level of response] was never been seen 
in the past years.  It showed that China had chosen to support Ma's 
policy and tried to give Ma a chance to be elected for a second 
term.  However, because [China] stuck the 'one-China' principle [in 
the Six Points], the schedule [that China has in mind] will be 
significantly impeded.  China is likely to become apprehensive [for 
the following reason].  Ma could not accept China's one-China 
principle because of [Taiwan's] internal misgivings.  [Under such 
circumstance,] neither side of the Taiwan Strait could achieve 
significant breakthroughs in every aspect, which will not help Ma 
win a second term in 2012.  However, if China yields to Ma too much, 
once the DPP returns to power after Ma leaves office, China will 
lose too much.  It is believed that China must be extremely anxious 
about its decision.  Hu's loosening of policy [toward Taiwan] while 
still grasping on to the one-China principle is a manifestation of 
such anxiety. ..." 
 
D) "CECA: Cross-Strait Relations Should Develop Based on the Main 
Shaft of Economy and Trade" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (1/2): 
 
"... Taipei should express its welcome to [Chinese President] Hu 
Jintao's 'Six Points.'  However, with many incentives [among Hu's 
'Six Points'], Taiwan did not have much room for nave and wishful 
thinking.  The most moderate method was to start from the 
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA), over which both 
sides [of the Taiwan Strait] have the least disagreement, and build 
economic cooperation comprehensively across the Taiwan Strait. 
After the mode of interaction between both sides takes shape 
gradually, based on the main axle of economy and trade, [the 
development of] cross-Strait relations could gradually expand to the 
domains of foreign affairs and military.  Only if CECA connects 
Taiwan with the Asia-Pacific region or with ASEAN, or only if Taiwan 
participates in the activities of the World Health Organization 
(WHO) under appropriate arrangements can the Taiwan people believe 
that 'the military and security mutual confidence measures' are more 
 than just a piece of paper.  [Hu's] so-called 'respect for the 
Taiwan-centric consciousness' will be [regarded by the Taiwan people 
as] as more than just positive rhetoric. ..." 
 
E) "The Time of All-Dimensional Negotiations between both Sides of 
the Taiwan Strait Has Come" 
 
Alexander Huang, an assistant professor at the Graduate Institute of 
International Affairs and Strategic Studies at Tamkang University, 
opined in the pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] (1/1): 
 
"... President Ma Ying-jeou's calls for diplomatic truce and mutual 
confidence building between militaries finally received a response 
from Chinese President Hu Jintao yesterday.  [Hu's response] will 
not only catalyze negotiations between Taiwan's Straits Exchange 
Foundation (SEF) and China's Association for Relations across the 
Taiwan Strait (ARATS) this year, but also set the negotiations on 
political and military issues, which are more challenging, on a 
timeline [for action] within the next three years.  [Hu's response] 
prompted both sides of the Taiwan Strait to expedite preparations to 
negotiate on issues concerning sovereignty. ..." 
 
F) "The Ma Ying-jeou Administration Must Respond to Hu Jintao's 'Six 
Points' with Caution" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 220,000] 
editorialized (1/1): 
 
"... It was expected that [now] cross-Strait relations will enter 
into a year with of so-called rigorous tests.  After all, all 
non-political issues, including the launching of direct links, 
tourism, investment, finance, and education, etc., have been 
resolved in the last year.  The next issues will be the ones most 
complicated and hard to resolve, such as the definition of 
cross-Strait relations and international participation....Hu's 'Six 
Points' were the equivalent of making a preliminary announcement. 
The opposition DPP must be prepared in combat-readiness.  [We 
expect] that the Ma administration must respond to [Hu's 'Six 
Points'] with the most cautious attitude." 
 
G) "Springtime in Cross-Strait Ties" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (1/2): 
 
 
"... There is more to [Chinese President] Hu [Jintao]'s olive 
branch.  He called for cross-strait negotiations on ending 
hostilities and concluding a peace agreement.  Peace and prosperity 
are the be-all, end-all for the economic and political development 
of both sides.  The mainland's 'peaceful rise' to the forefront of 
the world's powers would not have been possible without peace and 
stability.   For Taiwan, its future is irrevocably intertwined with 
the mainland, its largest market and lifeline of its export-driven 
economy.  A cross-strait peace accord is important, though it is a 
long shot compared to the WHA issue. ... 
 
H) "Taiwan's People Must Respond to Hu's Cant" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (1/2): 
 
"... We do approve of the affirmation by the Office of the President 
that 'Taiwan is a pluralistic and democratic society and the people 
have different viewpoints on Taiwan's future path' and that 'we must 
respect different political advocations and political statements.' 
 
"But this response is far from sufficient. 
 
"A democratically elected government of the 23 million Taiwan people 
must not merely acknowledge that the existence of the right of free 
speech but should have resolutely and clearly upheld the democratic 
principle, which Ma himself vowed to honor, that only Taiwan's 23 
million people have the right to decide our future and should have 
rejected Hu's racialist and anti-democratic presumptions that the 
Taiwan people 'belong to the Chinese race - nation' and that Taiwan 
'belongs to 'one China.' ..." 
 
YOUNG