09ANKARA61
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6690
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0061/01 0141501
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141501Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8456
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9408
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5235
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3518
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7060
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6918
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3502
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 14, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
CHP Leader Baykal: "The Ergenekon Investigation Has Lost its 
Reliability" 
 
Media outlets report government and opposition leaders continued 
lashing out at each other regarding the latest developments 
regarding the controversial Ergenekon investigation.  Addressing his 
ruling AKP group in the parliament yesterday, Prime Minister Erdogan 
accused the opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal, a critic of the 
Ergenekon investigation, of "defending the mafia and organized 
crime."  Erdogan said his government "has no doubts about the 
legitimacy of the Ergenekon investigation," and he called on the CHP 
opposition to "let justice do its duties."  Erdogan drew attention 
to the grenades and other weapons unearthed in recent digs in 
Ankara, and stressed that plans for a bloody coup massacre had been 
foiled by the Ergenekon investigation.  He added the recent 
revelations in Ergenekon investigation were "just a beginning," and 
that more was to come. 
 
In his party group meeting, Baykal responded to the PM, saying 
Erdogan was not in a position to criticize the CHP.  Baykal said the 
latest detentions "undermined the legitimacy of the Ergenekon 
investigation." 
 
Baykal noted that, following the last wave of detentions last week, 
the military General Staff (TGS) chief Ilker Basbug met with Erdogan 
and President Abdullah Gul.  Three days later, the retired generals 
and the former head of the Higher Education Board (YOK) were 
released.  "If you had strong evidence," Baykal asked Erdogan, "Why 
did you release them?"  Baykal likened the Ergenekon investigation 
to the Reichstag fire which Hitler used as an opportunity to move in 
against the Communists. 
 
Opposition MHP leader Devlet Bahceli has also stressed the 
importance of ensuring fair trials in the Ergenekon investigation, 
saying that the "legal process should not be manipulated for 
political goals."  Bahceli warned against "those who plan to sweep 
to power via undemocratic means." 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the Ergenekon suspects had compiled 
personal information about top judicial and state officials such as 
the Prime Minister, the Parliament Speaker, the Foreign Minister, 
the Interior Minister, cabinet members and bureaucrats. 
Papers report the TGS said in a statement on its webpage an 
investigation had been initiated against Ergenekon suspect Lt. Col. 
Mustafa Donmez after police found arms in his summer house in 
Sapanca near Istanbul. 
 
A Moment of Silence for Gaza 
 
Media outlets today mix their international coverage of the crisis 
in Gaza with the domestic angle regarding an order from the Minister 
of Education Huseyin Celik which directed 15 million Turkish 
students in primary and secondary schools to observe a moment of 
silence at 11:00 am yesterday for the people of Gaza. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says "psychologists note it is not 
healthy to force Turkish students into feeling the trauma associated 
with the crisis in Gaza."  Mainstream Aksam carries the front-page 
headline, "Rage in the Schools," next to a photo of Turkish 
schoolchildren holding a Palestinian flag and reading poems during 
the moment of silence.  Mainstream Sabah reports some school 
children shouted "Damn Israel" immediately following the moment of 
silence. 
 
Papers report Prime Minister Erdogan told his party group meeting 
his government had never supported anti-Semitism.  On charges that 
his criticism of Israel had been strong, Erdogan said it "cannot be 
stronger than the phosphate bombs used by Israel in Gaza." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000061  002 OF 004 
 
 
Columnists with secularist mainstream papers are not happy with this 
development.  Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet, "The AKP 
government has pursued a strongly pro-Hamas approach throughout this 
current Gaza conflict.  That slant is not only isolating Turkey from 
the Western community, but it is also provoking dangerous 
anti-Semitism in Turkey."  Ruhat Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan, 
"In addition to the government's big mistake in favoring Hamas, now 
school kids are being used for political purposes.  Turkey's 
education minister is forgetting his identity as a statesman." 
Haluk Sahin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal, "Planting the 
seeds of hate in schoolchildren is a serious mistake and that kind 
of silent protest in schools is only seen in totalitarian regimes, 
like North Korea and Iran." Hikmet Bila wrote in leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet, "The Education Minister has made a crucial mistake. It 
is one thing to feel sympathy for Palestinians, but it is another to 
cause trauma to our school children."  Sami Kohen wrote in 
mainstream Milliyet: "The Turkish government has preferred to engage 
and focus on the Syria-Hamas angle in the Middle East. Hamas only 
trusts Turkey, not Egypt.  Ankara hopes to work on details between 
Hamas and Damascus which will contribute healing divisions and 
finalize a ceasefire agreement."  Meanwhile, Nazif Gurdogan of 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes, "Edward Said coined the term 
'asymmetric war' when referring to the brute force of the Israeli 
military against Palestinians who are only able to throw stones at 
Israel," and Gurdogan says, "Everyone must throw stones at Israel 
the same way they would throw stones at Satan," because, "an 
asymmetric war can be stopped with stones." Columnist Abdulhamit 
Bilici is more moderate in Islamist-oriented Zaman when he says, "It 
is important to have contacts with Hamas in Turkey's efforts to heal 
the divisions between Palestinians," but "it's important to note 
that Turkey does not support Hamas.  It's necessary that we not 
forget our 400-year historical experience in Gaza." 
 
In a related story, mainstream Hurriyet reports, "Hamas Accepts 
Turkish Troops," as potential peacekeepers in Gaza.  Mainstream 
Sabah reports, "Hamas Says 'Yes' to a Ceasefire, With One 
Condition," and that condition is "the use of Turkish peacekeeping 
forces in Gaza."  Mainstream Vatan reports an unidentified Hamas 
official who said, "Only Turkish troops will be considered for the 
role of international peacekeepers in Gaza." 
 
A Photo from the front page of today's mainstream Aksam depicting 
Turkish schoolchildren observing a moment of silence, collecting 
donations, and reading poems as signs of solidarity with 
Palestinians in Gaza. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Israel-Gaza 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet, "The AKP government has 
pursued a strongly pro-Hamas approach throughout this current Gaza 
conflict.  That slant is not only isolating Turkey from the Western 
community but it is also provoking dangerous anti-Semitism in 
Turkey." 
 
Ruhat Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan, "In addition to the 
government's big mistake in favoring Hamas, now school kids are 
being used for political purposes.  Turkey's education minister is 
forgetting his identity as a statesman." 
 
Haluk Sahin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal, "Planting the 
seeds of hate in schoolchildren is a serious mistake and that kind 
of silent protest in schools is only seen in totalitarian regimes, 
like North Korea and Iran." 
 
Hikmet Bila wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet, "The education 
minister has made a crucial mistake. It is one thing to feel 
sympathy for Palestinians, but it is another to cause trauma to our 
school children." 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet, "The Turkish government has 
 
ANKARA 00000061  003 OF 004 
 
 
preferred to engage and focus on the Syria-Hamas angle in the Middle 
East. First of all, Hamas only trusts Turkey, not Egypt.  Ankara 
hopes to work on details between Hamas and Damascus which will 
contribute healing divisions and finalizing a ceasefire agreement." 
 
 
Nazif Gurdogan wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak, "Edward Said 
coined the term 'asymmetric war' when referring to the brute force 
of the Israeli military against Palestinians who are only able to 
throw stones at Israel.  Everyone must throw stones at Israel the 
same way they would throw stones at Satan, because, an asymmetric 
war can be stopped with stones." 
 
Abdulhamit Bilici wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman, "It is important 
for Turkey to have contacts with Hamas regarding Turkey's efforts to 
heal the divisions between Palestinians, but it's important to note 
that Turkey is not behind Hamas as a supporter.  It's necessary that 
we not forget our 400-year historical experience in Gaza." 
 
Hillary Clinton's Confirmation Hearings 
 
Media outlets note the attention Hillary Clinton paid to issues such 
as Armenian genocide claims and Cyprus in her confirmation hearings 
yesterday.  Liberal Radikal notes Clinton seeks to "use smart power" 
in U.S. diplomacy.  Mainstream Milliyet's headline notes Clinton 
"Will Look at the Armenian Problem."  Mainstream Hurriyet points 
out, "There Will Be a New Approach to Iran."  Mainstream Sabah 
writes Clinton "Will Closely Examine Issues Such as Cyprus." 
 
The EU Supports Nabucco Project despite the Global Economic Crisis 
 
Mainstream dailies Sabah and Milliyet report that Russia's recent 
natural gas cuts have propelled the Nabucco pipeline project into 
action.  Backed by the European Commission to reduce dependence on 
Russian gas, the Nabucco project has so far proved slow-moving with 
the necessary approvals and agreements between the countries 
concerned still to be signed.  Nabucco Project Director Reinhard 
Mitschek said that "a Nabucco summit will take place in Budapest 
from January 26 to 27, and will bring together the ministers and the 
heads of governments from Austria, Bulgaria, Germany, Hungary, 
Romania and Turkey, in order to boost to the project." 
 
The State Cuts Support to Organization Supporting Women's Shelters 
 
Mainstream Sabah reports that State Minister for Women's and 
Children's Affairs, Nimet Cubukcu, announced that the government 
will not renew its cooperation agreement with the "Mor Cati 
Foundation" (Purple Roof).  The Mor Cati foundation offers shelter 
to battered women and their children.  Minister Cubukcu said, "women 
and children who flee their homes because of domestic violence will 
be supported by state's social service institutions." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
Domestic 
 
- On Friday, UNSYG Ban Ki-Moon will pay a visit to Turkey as part of 
a regional tour seeking a ceasefire in Gaza. 
- An IMF delegation, headed by Turkey desk chief Rachel van Elkan, 
is holding talks in Ankara.  All calculations in talks with the IMF 
are based on the assumption that the Turkish economy will grow by 
less than 1 percent in 2009. 
- Eleven doctors are taken into custody over irregularities in the 
procurement of medication in the southeastern city of Siirt. 
- 56,700 workers lost their jobs in the industrial hub of Bursa in 
¶2008. 
 
World 
 
- 11 PKK suspects are sentenced to between 18 months and 5 years in 
prison in France for staging Molotov cocktail attacks on Turkish 
 
ANKARA 00000061  004 OF 004 
 
 
bars and cultural centers in southern France. 
- A Turkish-owned tanker vessel seized by Somali pirates off Yemen 
in November was released yesterday. 
- Greek Cypriot leader Christofias sees no progress in talks with 
the Turkish Cypriots, adding Turks aimed at the establishment of a 
confederation, and not a federation on the island. 
- Gazprom says it has restarted gas exports to the EU, but Ukraine 
refused to open its transit pipeline network at the last minute "for 
technical reasons." 
 
JEFFREY