09ANKARA146
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8177
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0146/01 0291526
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291526Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8621
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9439
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5310
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3570
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7085
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6943
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3529
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 29, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Q Babacan: 'Without Turkey, Israel's Presence in the Region Will Not 
Be Easy' 
Q Davos, "The Pessimistic Summit" (Cumhuriyet) 
Q European Parliament Addresses Kurdish Issue: It's Time for A 
Change in Turkey 
Q Obama Pleased with Kurdish Broadcasting on TRT-6 
Q Local Elections in Iraq Set for January 31 
Q Iran Gives Obama a 60-Year Old Bill (Radikal) 
 
Babacan: 'Without Turkey, Israel's Presence in the Region Will Not 
Be Easy' 
"There is no change or shift in our position regarding Gaza," 
Foreign Minister Ali Babacan said in an interview televised by NTV 
from Davos.  Media outlets report Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, who 
is in Davos for World Economic Forum (WEF) summit, told NTV, 
"Without Turkey's support, Israel's presence in the region will not 
be that easy."  Babacan also emphasized that Turkey and Israel have 
"strategic ties."  Babacan criticized comments that Turkey's 
position on Gaza could cause tensions with the Jewish lobby in the 
U.S., saying Turkey's criticism of Israel's operations was "based on 
principles."  He noted Turkey stays "at an equal distance from all 
Palestinian groups."  Babacan added the strong criticism launched at 
Israel by the Turkish government was "natural," and recalled that 
Turkey did the same during the Russia-Georgia conflict last summer. 
"There cannot be an armed solution," stressed Babacan. "This is 
valid for both Palestinians and Israelis. Diplomacy and dialogue 
must be the main instruments." Babacan asked, "Who gained from the 
conflict in Gaza?  Is Hamas eradicated?  Who controls Gaza?" and 
added Hamas must continue its path as a political movement.  When 
asked if his statements had come too late, Babacan said, "Why is 
Turkey a mediator? Turkey is trusted by all parties involved. Our 
stance was not favored by some in the short run. There was a game 
and some remained silent. Just as we tell Israel, we tell the 
Palestinians to resort to political mechanisms at the negotiating 
table, not to violence." 
 
Davos, "The Pessimistic Summit" (Cumhuriyet) 
Media outlets cover the shifting climate in Davos and the impact it 
will have on Turkey's economy.  Mainstream Milliyet comments on the 
overall mood in Davos by saying, "The world's CEO's trust in the 
markets is at their lowest levels ever."  Mainstream Sabah reports, 
"The Winds in Davos Come Not from Firms, But from The Public," as 
"the millions of unemployed overshadow the event."   Sabah also 
notes Russia President Putin's comments in the headline, "Putin Says 
the Crisis Resembled a Perfect Storm and Suggested Cooperation with 
China."    Regarding the domestic impact of the Davos meeting on 
Turkey, mainstream Vatan carries the banner headline, "A Startling 
Prediction from Davos," as "Turkey, Russia, and the Ukraine are 
expected to experience dangerous financial and economic problems 
this year."  However, mainstream Milliyet reports World Economic 
Forum Chair Klaus Schwab more optimistically predicted, "Turkey 
could emerge stronger from the financial crisis." 
 
Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Zaman focuses on Turkish Prime Minister 
Erdogan's comments criticizing the IMF's approach to negotiations 
for a new loan with Turkey in, "Turkey Is Opposed to the IMF's New 
Conditions on the Table."  Economic daily Referans reports, "Erdogan 
refuses to approve a deal with the IMF despite the concessions made 
by IMF officials."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "The Prime Minister 
Sends a Message to the IMF in Davos:  We Could Get Sensitive If the 
IMF Comes to the Table With New Demands Everyday." 
Conservative-nationalist Turkiye reports, "Prime Minister Erdogan 
Accuses the IMF of Not Abiding by the Rules." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-IMF Negotiations 
Can Atakli wrote in mainstream Vatan: "PM Erdogan wants to see those 
in the private sector who do not support the AKP suffer from the 
current crisis.  Therefore, he is doing his best to delay an 
 
ANKARA 00000146  002 OF 003 
 
 
agreement with IMF.  His ultimate goal is to weaken the secular 
private sector while empowering the pro-government private sector 
via help from state-controlled bids." 
 
Gungor Uras wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "PM Erdogan's mind is set 
on timing the IMF agreement with local elections.  Erdogan will 
likely settle on an agreement close to the March elections in order 
to use it as a propaganda tool to demonstrate the success of his 
economic policy." 
 
Erdal Saglam wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Prime Minister Erdogan 
is deliberately prolonging a deal with IMF until the local elections 
in March.  On the other hand, he is making false accusations against 
the IMF as if the IMF delegation is not flexible." 
 
 
European Parliament Addresses Kurdish Issue: It's Time for A Change 
in Turkey 
Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet report that the European Parliament 
concluded a conference entitled "Turkey, the EU, and Kurds" in 
Brussels.  The theme of the conference was "It is time for a change 
in Turkey," in a reference to Turkey's policies toward the Kurdish 
minority who mostly live in Turkey's east and southeast.  Speaking 
at the conference, DTP leader Ahmet Turk said "measures for 
upholding the rights of the Kurds will end the fighting (i.e. with 
the PKK).  The Kurds seek an administration that will permit them to 
express themselves in social, political, economic and cultural 
fields.  Within the framework of Turkish integrity, the Kurds also 
seek constitutional guarantees for recognition of their cultural 
identity and their right to education in their mother tongue." 
Former DTP deputy Leyla Zana said "The Kurdish issue should be 
solved within the framework of international legal norms.  Kurdish 
language TV broadcasts (on TRT-6) are a positive approach, but that 
alone is not sufficient to solve problems."  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir said, "The government 
doesn't transfer sufficient public resources to the East and 
Southeast where Kurds are the majority.  The government encourages 
the construction of factories in the West and police stations in the 
East." 
 
Obama Pleased with Kurdish Broadcasting on TRT-6 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "Sources close to Obama indicate the 
Obama administration is very happy with TRT's Kurdish broadcasting 
initiative," and call it "a very positive step to boost democracy," 
while, "the Obama administration would welcome any new steps toward 
democratization." Milliyet reports that according to the circles 
close to the Obama Administration, Washington is evaluating Kurdish 
language TV broadcasts as a positive, democratic step. 
 
Local Elections in Iraq Set for January 31 
Media outlets report that on January 31, Iraq will hold local 
elections in all provinces except the Kurdish provinces of Erbil, 
Suleymaniye and Dohuk, as well as the city of Kirkuk.  More than 
14,000 candidates from over 400 political formations and parties 
will compete in the Iraqi elections.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports the Iraqi Turkmen Front (ITF) said it will participate in 
the elections in the areas where there is a considerable Turkmen 
majority -- namely Talafar, Mosul, Tuzhurmatu, Diyala, Baghdad and 
Kut.  Turkey's Embassy in Baghdad said 26 Turkish observers will 
monitor the elections, reports Zaman. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraqi Elections 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The situation in Iraq is not 
the same as it was in 2005.  This time, Sunnis are not boycotting 
local elections; on the contrary, Sunnis are trying hard to elect 
better political representatives.  In addition, Shiites are no 
longer acting out of sectarian concerns.  These elections prove that 
there is now tangible hope for progress toward a unified Iraq." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000146  003 OF 003 
 
 
Iran Gives Obama a 60-Year Old Bill (Radikal) 
Flashy headlines indicate surprise, and a little amusement, in 
response to Iranian President Ahmadinejad's demand for an apology 
from President Obama for America's actions over the last sixty 
years.  Leftist Taraf headlines, "Iran Is Expecting an Apology from 
the U.S.!" and reports, "Iran has broken its silence" to the Obama 
administration as "Ahmadinejad is pleased the U.S. is changing its 
foreign policy but wants an apology from Washington for all the 
wrongs it has committed against Iran."  Mainstream Sabah headlines, 
"Iran Tells the U.S. 'Apologize to Us!'"  Liberal Radikal reports, 
"Obama Gets a Bill for 60 Years," and quotes Ahmadinejad's demand in 
the headline, "Apologize for Crimes Like the Iran-Iraq War and the 
Coup."  In a departure from the general coverage of the issue by the 
media, Fikret Ertan of Islamist-oriented Zaman comments, "President 
Obama may talk with Iran, but it will be hard to end all of 
(America's) covert activities against Iran." 
 
Iran Wants to Use Trabzon Port for Trade with EU (Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Iran wants to use the port of 
Trabzon in Turkey's Black Sea region as a "base" to increase trade 
with EU member countries.  Ankara was positive to an Iranian 
proposal to use the port of Trabzon to meet the demands of the 
provinces of east Azerbaijan, Erdebil, Gilan and Zencan.  Trade 
between the two countries could amount to USD 50 million once the 
Trabzon port is used effectively.  Tehran also proposed to not use 
U.S. Dollar in bilateral trade with Turkey, and use Turkish Lira or 
Iranian Riyal instead, reports Cumhuriyet 
 
TV News: CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A survey conducted by A&G polling company predicts the AKP will 
win 41.8 percent and the CHP 30.4 percent of votes in the Istanbul 
municipality elections at the end of March. 
 
- The Bakirkoy prosecutor has launched an investigation against 
Atilla Olgac, a Turkish actor who admitted on a TV talk show last 
week that he killed ten Greek Cypriot prisoners of war during 
Turkish operations in Cyprus in 1974. 
 
- Members of the Turkish-U.S. Friendship Group in the parliament 
will hold talks in Atlanta and Washington D.C. January 29-February 
¶6. 
 
International News 
 
- Turkish and Greek Cyprus leaders come together for the 17th round 
of talks to discuss property issues in the bid for the reunification 
of the divided island. 
 
- Georgia and Azerbaijan express concern about the negative impact 
of the Nabucco project on their interests at a teleconference held 
in Moscow. 
 
- French police arrest four suspects for painting a swastika on a 
synagogue in the city of Lille. 
 
JEFFREY