09ANKARA28
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2287
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0028/01 0081421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081421Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8407
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9396
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5206
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3500
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7048
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6906
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3489
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 8, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The Tenth Wave of Ergenekon Detentions 
All papers give extensive front page coverage to yesterday's new 
detentions related to the Ergenekon case.  Mainstream Sabah's 
headline reads "Tsunami in Ergenekon," mainstream Hurriyet's 
headline reads "Another Ergenekon Wave and Its Aftershocks," and 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet criticizes the operation as an 
attempt by the AKP to squelch political opposition in "A Revenge 
Operation."  All papers report that simultaneous operations staged 
yesterday constituted the 10th wave of detentions in the Ergenekon 
case.  Sabah reports that a total of 38 people were detained in six 
provinces upon the demand of Istanbul prosecutor Zekeriya Oz. 
Milliyet notes that this is the first wave of Ergenekon-related 
detentions that hit the judicial system.  Former Secretary General 
of National Security Council General Tuncer Kilinc, former General 
Staff Judicial Adviser General Erdal Senel and former chairman of 
Higher Education Board (YOK) Kemal Guruz are among the detainees. 
Liberal Radikal reports that the police searched the residence of 
the Honorary Chief Public Prosecutor Sabih Kanadoglu but did not 
detain him.  Former Mayor of Istanbul and the founder of the ISTEK 
foundation, Bedrettin Dalan, was the target of the Istanbul leg of 
the operation.  Foundation buildings belonging to Dalan, who is 
currently in the US, were searched by the police and his son was 
detained.  Papers note that, following the detentions, the Chief of 
Turkish General Staff General Ilker Basbug met with his commanders 
for six hours to assess the situation.  The Court of Appeals decided 
to hold a meeting today to discuss the developments.  Hurriyet and 
Cumhuriyet report that main opposition party CHP leader Deniz Baykal 
reacted to the operations strongly and said "this is a revenge 
operation" and "it is politically motivated.  The Ergenekon 
operation is now an operation against those who dare to criticize 
the AKP." 
 
Umur Talu writes in mainstream Sabah: "We cannot accuse the 
Ergenekon detainees at this point.  They are only suspects, and we 
should wait for the trial process before judging them.  However in 
the meantime, the independence of the judiciary remains a valid 
concern." 
 
Ismet Berkan writes in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "On one level, 
there is a serious component to this ongoing investigation.  On 
another level, there is also a serious attempt to gather up 
political opponents into the basket." 
 
Murat Yetkin writes in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "This Ergenekon 
investigation began as a clean-up operation against the deep state 
structure.  But now the Ergenekon operation looks like a witch hunt 
for the AKP's political opponents. The arrests of major public 
figures are exposed without even indicting them." 
 
Oktay Eksi writes in mainstream Hurriyet: "We would like to believe 
that the operation targets deep state elements, but seeing the 
former Higher Education Board President and the former Yargitay 
President detained indicates state-sponsored terror." 
 
Derya Sazak writes in mainstream Milliyet:  "If the goal of this 
case is to uncover Gladio/Deep State, this case must come to a 
speedy conclusion.  Otherwise, the operation will end up looking 
like an operation by a police state." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu writes in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "There were 
two failed attempts by army commanders to topple the government in 
2003-04, and their organizational scheme continues today.  There are 
groups that seek to topple the government through rallies, protests 
and other acts, and the ongoing Ergenekon operation is targeting 
them." 
 
Nazli Ilicak writes in mainstream Sabah: "Organizers of pro-secular 
rallies dreamed of toppling the government. Therefore seeing famous 
 
ANKARA 00000028  002 OF 003 
 
 
figures in the list is no surprise at all." 
 
Tamer Korkmaz writes in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak:  "The Turkish 
deep state links to the deep state in Washington.  The ongoing 
operation in Turkey is, in a way, an attempt to root out the 
Washington-based scheme." 
 
Natural Gas Crisis Favors Nabucco 
Cumhuriyet reports that Russia's decision to cut off the natural gas 
flow to Europe through the western line has strengthened Turkey's 
hand.  Based on comments from the Western press, the report 
emphasizes that many countries would support the Nabucco project as 
a alternative source of natural gas during the Nabucco summit 
scheduled to take place in Budapest on January 26 and 27. 
 
Weapons Silenced for Three Hours in Gaza. (Hurriyet) 
Media outlets warn of an impending second front with Lebanon, while 
expressing distrust of Israel's move toward a ceasefire.  Liberal 
Radikal reports, "Hezbollah is ready for war," as "Hezbollah Leader 
Hasan Nasrallah threatens to open up a second front in the war," 
with "tens of thousands of Lebanese who are ready to fight." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman echoes the same thing in "Nasrallah Sends a 
Second Front Message to Israel."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
criticizes the Egyptian-French ceasefire initiative in, "Diplomacy 
Comes Very Late," as "Israel continues to broaden its attack." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports Israel, "Says 'Yes' to a 
Ceasefire," but "The Massacre Continues."  Leftist Taraf reports, "A 
Break Comes Only after 670 Deaths."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "A 
Three-Hour Break for the Massacre."  Meanwhile, mainstream Hurriyet 
reports, "Hamas uses tunnels in order to smuggle weapons in from 
Egypt," which "pose an obstacle to any ceasefire plans."  Mainstream 
Milliyet reports, "There is hope for the ceasefire," but notes, 
"Children in Gaza suffered trauma under the first intifada," and 
"experts now fear this generation will also suffer trauma and become 
more aggressive." 
 
In related stories, media outlets charge that Europe and Turkey are 
experiencing a resurgence in anti-Semitism.  Milliyet reports "In 
Europe, the Enemies of the Jews Are Increasing in Number," and 
notes, "Since the Israeli incursion into Gaza, attacks have 
increased against synagogues and Jewish targets in the UK, France, 
and Belgium."  Islamist-oriented Zaman also reports, "Israel's 
Bloody Attacks in Gaza Raise Tensions in Europe," as "tensions 
between Muslims and Jews are on the rise," and "thousands have 
filled the streets with some protests supporting Israel and some 
protests supporting Gaza."  The front page of liberal Radikal 
carries the headline, "Turkey's Shameless Racism," next to a photo 
of Turks with a placard that reads, "No Jews or Armenians Allowed," 
and another one that reads, "Dogs Are Free to Enter." 
 
 
Iran Representative Visits Ankara to Shore Up Opposition to U.S., 
Israel.  Liberal Radikal reports Iran wants to "form an alliance to 
put pressure on the U.S. and Israel."  According to Radikal, Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad sent Iran's High Council of National Security 
General Secretary Said Celili to Ankara for a meeting with President 
Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan.  Yesterday, they met for two hours, 
where Celili suggested to Erdogan, "Let's work with the Arabs who 
are behind us in order to come down hard on Israel and the U.S." 
because "there is no unity in the Arab world on this issue and it 
makes us uncomfortable."  Meanwhile, Radikal reports President Gul 
said, "There is a new American administration that is coming to 
Washington and we hope they will take a more active role in the 
conflict between Palestine and Israel." 
 
Editorial Opinion on Gaza Operations 
 
Akif Emre wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "At this stage, any 
peacekeeping force in Gaza would be an American project with the 
goal of limiting Iranian influence through Hamas and ensuring the 
 
ANKARA 00000028  003 OF 003 
 
 
protection of Israel.  Turkey should never become a part of this 
plot." 
 
Mehmet Y. Yilmaz wrote in Hurriyet: "Prime Minister Erdogan's 
strongly harsh rhetoric against Israel has nothing to do with 
victims of Gaza operation.  He deliberately delivers a political 
message to the anti-semitic roots in his party." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Ergenekon suspects taken into custody in Sivas allegedly were 
plotting the assassination of an Armenian activist in the city. 
 
- A Court rejects a request for the release of jailed Ergenekon 
suspect Hursit Tolon. 
 
-  PM Erdogan issues messages for unity at a Muharrem dinner with 
Alevis. 
 
- Somali pirates release a Turkish cargo ship hijacked in October 
after its owners paid a ransom. 
 
- An IMF delegation comes to Turkey for talks on a stand by 
agreement. 
 
International News 
 
-  An anonymous Middle Eastern Diplomat says Turkey is going to 
undertake the task of establishing a multinational peacekeeping 
force in Gaza. 
 
-  Hamas spokesman Ghazi Hamad said he is optimistic that a cease 
fire would be reached within this week or early next week. 
 
- French President Sarkozy speaks on the phone to Turkish PM Erdogan 
to discuss the conditions for temporary cease fire declaration in 
the Middle East. 
 
JEFFREY