09BUENOSAIRES66
ARGENTINA: CENTRAL BANK PRESIDENT DEFENDS
Wed Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0066/01 0211923
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 211923Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2893
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L BUENOS AIRES 000066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2029 
TAGS: ECON EFIN AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: CENTRAL BANK PRESIDENT DEFENDS 
INSTITUTIONAL INDEPENDENCE 
 
REF: A. '08 BUENOS AIRES 1491 
     ¶B. '08 BUENOS AIRES 1389 
     ¶C. '08 BUENOS AIRES 1398 
 
Classified By: Amb. E.A. Wayne.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Central Bank (BCRA) President Martin Redrado 
emphasized his success maintaining relative market confidence 
in the Argentine Peso in the face of four major financial 
crises since August 2007.  In a January 16 meeting with 
Ambassador, he discounted market expectations of a large 
depreciation this year, arguing that the fate of the Peso 
depends on numerous factors, including Dollar and Euro 
values, global interest rates, and commodity prices.  Redrado 
lamented that the GoA had left it to the BCRA to explain the 
ramifications of the new and controversial capital 
repatriation law to skeptical U.S. and Financial Action Task 
Force (FATF) officials, but assured that the law's 
implementing regulations will require domestic banks to 
adhere to international anti-money laundering and 
counter-terrorism finance requirements.  Redrado disagreed 
with market assessments that the GoA has undermined the 
BCRA's independence, arguing that the market has 
misinterpreted recent changes to the BCRAs charter to allow 
increased GoA borrowing from the BCRA as well as the BCRA's 
direct intervention in banks' currency trading operations to 
limit dollar sales and bolster the peso, which most observers 
believe is done on orders from GoA leadership.  While the 
reality appears to be that the BCRA policy is increasingly 
influenced by the GoA, Post's financial sector contacts still 
largely support Redrado and want him to stay in the job. 
Ambassador also noted that Treasury will soon be ready to 
sign an agreement with the BCRA and GoA on establishing a 
technical assistance project in the area of terrorism 
finance.  Regarding the G-20 process, Redrado said he and his 
team would do their best to assure a serious and productive 
Argentine participation in preparations for the April 
meetings.   End Summary 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ambassador met with Central Bank (BCRA) President 
Martin Redrado and BCRA Deputy General Manager of Economy and 
Finance Pedro Rabasa January 16 to review Argentina's 
economic outlook, new capital repatriation law, and the 
status of the Treasury OTA technical assistance project, and 
Argentine thinking on the upcoming April G-20 meeting. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Redrado: Managed Float Proves its Value 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Redrado called himself well satisfied with BCRA 
performance over the past two years in maintaining market 
confidence in the Peso in the face of four notable crises: 
August 2007 market turmoil at the start of the sub-prime 
crisis; deposit outflows during the  March ) July 2008 GoA 
confrontation with the agricultural sector over the GoA's 
efforts to impose higher and variable export tariffs; the 
flight to quality following the September 2008 Lehman 
Brothers bankruptcy; and the November 2008 deposit outflows 
that followed the GoA's announcement of its intent to 
nationalize private pension funds.  The BCRA's ability to 
navigate these extraordinary challenges, Redrado said, 
demonstrates the effectiveness of its broad monetary policy 
and its managed peso float.  Despite media speculation, 
constraints on BCRA actions don't come from the Casa Rosada 
(Pink House ) seat of Executive power, equivalent to the 
White House), Redrado emphasized, but rather from Argentina's 
""mental dollarization"" which has required the BCRA to boost 
domestic interest rates to staunch capital flight and retain 
local currency deposits.  ""We didn't invent the managed float 
concept,"" Redrado concluded, ""but we have proven its 
effectiveness."" 
 
¶4. (SBU) Redrado discounted any pre-set value or margin for 
devaluation of the peso in 2009 (Futures markets currently 
put the peso's value at roughly 3.8 - 4.0 pesos/dollar at 
year-end 2009.)  Rather, the value of the Peso over the 
coming year will be determined by a host of market variables, 
including the Dollar/Euro cross-exchange rate, global 
interest rates, and the price of soy.  ""Tell me where these 
variables will stand at year-end 2009 and then I'll project a 
value of the peso for you,"" Redrado concluded. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Ensuring FATF-Consistent Capital Repatriation Law 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. (C) Redrado acknowledged that the BCRA had navigated a 
""difficult operating environment"" in 2008, and said he 
expected to confront more convulsions (""cimbronazos"") like 
the market's skeptical response to the GoA's capital 
repatriation law.  ""But, what doesn't kill you makes you 
stronger,"" Redrado joked.  He lamented that few GoA officials 
understand how to talk to markets and said that it was left 
to his BCRA team to explain to Treasury Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes Danny 
Glazier that the new capital repatriation law would be 
regulated and managed in ways consistent with FATF anti-money 
laundering mandates.  The BCRA is actively involved in 
drafting the law's implementing regulations, he said, and the 
BCRA has inserted ""know your customer"" language into (still 
in draft) regulations that will ensure repatriated capital is 
only flowed from international banks and to domestic banks 
that fully comply with FATF suspicious transaction protocols. 
 (Comment:  Though their body language, both central bank 
officials indicated they did not expect this legislation to 
prompt a large amount of capital to rush back into 
Argentina.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
BCRA Sustaining Private Bank Profits, Liquidity 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The BCRA has successfully managed its reserve 
positions, buying and selling dollars ""anti-cyclically"" to 
moderate volatility in the peso, Redrado said.  Beyond 
managing the peso exchange rate and the inter-bank rate to 
limit the withdrawal of deposits from spooked savers, the 
BCRA has demonstrated to banks that it is truly a 
lender-of-last-resort, using BCRA financial instruments to 
inject needed liquidity into the private banking system. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The BCRA has sustained good working relations with 
Argentine private sector banks, Redrado said, demonstrating 
the BCRA's concern for private banks' need to both attract a 
stable deposit base and maintain bottom line profitability. 
Implicitly acknowledging significant central bank 
intervention in private bank foreign exchange trading during 
the last three months of 2008, Redrado said that, while 
private bank trading desks have an interest in ""generating 
volatility"" in order to create profitable trading and 
arbitrage opportunities, their corporate and consumer lending 
colleagues benefit from the kind of BCRA-managed currency 
stability that generates reliable deposit flows.  As a 
result, BCRA had ""talked to"" the likes of Citibank to 
""explain8 the need for foreign exchange trading prudence. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Post Comment: Beginning early November 2008 the BCRA 
assigned monitors to oversee banks' currency trading desks 
and various GoA regulatory agencies sent inspectors to both 
banks and exchange houses, with the purpose of using moral 
suasion and threats of tax audits to limit currency trading 
and deposit withdrawals.  This tactic succeeded in preventing 
institutional depositors from dollarizing their accounts, and 
the resulting stabilization of deposit levels appears to have 
reassured retail depositors.  While capital outflow 
continues, it is contained, and the BCRA has not been forced 
to continue large scale dollar sales to strengthen the peso 
and prevent deposit outflows.  Based on Post's financial 
sector contacts, Redrado is correct in saying that bankers 
generally support these measures, even if they do not say so 
publicly. End Comment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
2009 Budget: BCRA Charter Change ""Misunderstood"" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Ambassador asked about provisions of the 2009 
budget law (Ref B) that market analysts -- including Goldman 
Sachs -- had reported as eroding central bank independence by 
allowing an expanded share of central bank reserves to be 
lent to the GoA Treasury.  Redrado called this a 
mis-interpretation and explained that the 2002 revision of 
the BCRA charter limits general central bank short-term 
lending to the Treasury to 12% of the monetary base and 
limits lending to the Treasury for payment of IFI debt 
obligations to 10% of the previous 12 months' tax revenues. 
The 2009 budget law, he clarified, simply allows such funds 
 
to be used to satisfy general GoA foreign currency 
obligations rather than restricting their use to IFIs. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The change maintains the original spirit of the 
2002 BCRA charter, Redrado said.  The original law was 
drafted in a period where IFIs credits represented a more 
significant percentage of government funding, he said.  Under 
the revised charter, BCRA funds can be used, he said, to 
repay Boden 2012s that will mature in August 2009.  In any 
case, Redrado clarified, the change will be money-supply 
neutral.  (This exchange has no monetary effect because the 
GoA will pay dollar-denominated bonds using dollars borrowed 
from the central bank, but these transactions will not 
increase the amount of pesos in circulation.  If the central 
bank subsequently purchases these dollars back using pesos, 
it would need to sterilize the increase in the money supply 
by issuing debt instruments to mop up the extra pesos.) 
 
------------------------ 
2009 Challenges for BCRA 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. (SBU) Redrado called his primary concern in the coming 
year increasing unemployment and upcoming union salary 
negotiations. (Recent media reports have projected 2009 
inflation in the 15-18% range and have noted that GoA 
officials hope to limit salary increases to the 12-13% 
range.)  He acknowledged that the GoA's 7.2% ""official"" 
measure of 2008 inflation had little street credibility and 
that teamster union boss Hugo Moyano's statement that he 
would develop salary demands using a ""housewives"" inflation 
index augured for a new round of significant union salary 
increases that would further stoke inflationary expectations. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Another challenge to be addressed in 2009 will be 
Argentine industry's need to access longer term financing. 
Argentina needs some type of long term bank on the model of 
Brazil's BNDES, Redrado said. He discounted using GoA 
second-story bank BICE for this end (Ref C), but suggested 
that the GoA was already addressing this issue by auctioning 
subsidized social security (ANSES) funds to commercial banks 
who promise to on-lend them longer term at competitive rates. 
 ""Private banks will take the credit risk, while ANSES takes 
the liquidity risk,"" Redrado said. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Treasury OTA Technical Assistance Project 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Ambassador noted that Treasury recently approved 
funding for the technical assistance project focused on 
terrorism financing with the central bank and GoA regulatory 
agencies.  The next step will be to coordinate with the 
Central Bank and Justice Ministry on the Terms of Reference 
and finalize the Work Plan.  Redrado agreed that a signing 
ceremony to highlight bilateral cooperation in this area 
would be appropriate and send welcome signals of bilateral 
cooperation to the incoming Obama administration. 
 
---------------- 
G-20 Preparation 
---------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Ambassador noted that this sources (U.S. and other 
G-7) indicated that Argentina's tone and substance at the 
first G-20 Summit in Washington had been quite distinct from 
the other 19, and that there could be a missed opportunity 
for Argentina if a more constructive approach was not evident 
in preparation for the April G-20 Summit.  Redrado said he 
agreed fully on the need for a serious approach to this next 
opportunity to play a role in reshaping global financial 
practices and institutions.  He said that he and his BCRA 
team would focus on playing a constructive role in the 
preparations process and in agreeing on documents with 
specifics for the next Summit.  That would provide the base 
for more focused discussions among leaders, he suggested. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶15. (C) Redrado repeated his standard defense of an Argentine 
central bank management that few local market players regard 
as truly independent.  He acknowledged, however, that his 
room for maneuver has been constrained by the Kirchner 
administration's penchant for announcing new economic 
 
initiatives with minimal consultation with the broader 
economic team, including the BCRA.  ""We are condemned by our 
history and our reputation for improvisation,"" Redrado said. 
In fact, GoA encroachment into the BCRA's area of authority 
over the last six months has been extensive.  In addition to 
the 2009 budget bill's alteration of the BCRA charter to 
allow use of reserves to pay bilateral debts, the GoA also 
unilaterally announced in September 2008 its intention to use 
official reserves to pay Paris Club debts.  It is accepted 
wisdom in the banking sector that the BCRA's direct 
intervention in currency trading markets in support of the 
peso is being conducted on direct orders from Nestor 
Kirchner, who reportedly opposed allowing the peso to 
depreciate.  Despite his reduced independence, local bankers 
say they respect Redrado's skill at navigating the complex 
circumstances he faces.  These same bankers frequently tell 
us that Redrado is the only Argentine official who 
understands their concerns and assert that the financial 
sector would be much worse off without him in charge at the 
central bank. 
WAYNE