09HONGKONG124
2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT, HONG KONG
Tue Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO0270
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #0124/01 0200651
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200651Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6687
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPCIM/CIM NTDB WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 HONG KONG 000124 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND EEB/IFD/OIA, STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON OPIC KTTB USTR HK
SUBJECT: 2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT, HONG KONG 
 
REF: 08 STATE 123907 
 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶1. Hong Kong pursues a free market philosophy, and the government 
interferes minimally in the economy.  The Hong Kong Government 
welcomes foreign investment, neither offering special incentives nor 
imposing dis-incentives for foreign investors.  Hong Kong's 
well-established rule of law is applied consistently and without 
discrimination.  There is no distinction in law or practice between 
investments by foreign-controlled companies and those controlled by 
local interests.  Hong Kong is a member of the World Trade 
Organization in its own right and a separate customs territory. 
Hong Kong is a duty free port, except for a small number of tariffs 
on products such as cigarettes and alcohol.  There are no quotas or 
dumping laws. 
 
¶2.  Foreign firms and individuals are allowed freely to incorporate 
their operations in Hong Kong, register branches of foreign 
operations, and set up representative offices without encountering 
discrimination or undue regulation.  There is no restriction on the 
ownership of such operations.  Company directors are not required to 
be citizens of, or resident in, Hong Kong.  Reporting requirements 
are straightforward and not onerous. 
 
¶3.  Hong Kong's extensive body of commercial and company law 
generally follows that of the United Kingdom, including the common 
law and rules of equity.  Most statutory law is made locally.  The 
local court system provides for effective enforcement of contracts, 
dispute settlement, and protection of rights.  Formalities are 
minimal in company incorporation and business registration.  Foreign 
and domestic companies register under the same rules and are subject 
to the same set of business regulations. 
 
¶4.  The Hong Kong Government's InvestHK encourages inward investment 
as a means of introducing new or improved products, processes, 
designs and management techniques. U.S. and other foreign firms can 
participate in government financed and subsidized research and 
development programs on a national treatment basis. 
 
¶5.  Capital gains are not taxed, nor are there withholding taxes on 
dividends and royalties. Profits can be freely converted and 
remitted.  Foreign-owned and Hong Kong-owned firms are taxed at the 
same rate, 16.5 percent of profits in 2008-2009.  No preferential or 
discriminatory export and import policies affect foreign investors. 
Domestic industries receive no direct subsidies. 
 
¶6.  Foreign investments face no disincentives, such as quotas, 
bonds, deposits, or other similar regulations.  The Hong Kong Code 
on Takeovers and Mergers (1981) sets out general principles for 
acceptable standards of commercial behavior. 
 
¶7.  According to Hong Kong Government statistics, 3,882 regional 
operations of overseas companies were registered in Hong Kong in 
¶2008.  The U.S. has the largest number of regional headquarters and 
offices in Hong Kong (923 companies), followed by Japan (732 
companies) and the United Kingdom (353 companies).  The major lines 
of business of the regional headquarters include wholesale/retail, 
import/export, finance and banking, manufacturing, and transport and 
related services. 
 
¶8.  The Hong Kong Government owns all land, granting long-term 
leases without transferring title.  Local and foreign leaseholders 
are treated equally.  The Government plays a significant role in the 
housing market: about 50 percent of homes in Hong Kong are rented 
from the Government or purchased with government assistance at 
below-market rates. 
 
¶9.  With few exceptions, the Hong Kong Government does not attempt 
to limit the activities of foreign investors either in specified 
projects or sectors.  Foreign investment in Hong Kong flows freely 
into the industrial sector as well as into services, franchises, 
restaurants, the entertainment industry, and the ownership of 
property, both residential and commercial.  The telecommunications 
services market has been fully liberalized since January 1, 2003. 
 
¶10.  The exceptions to the Hong Kong Government's open foreign 
investment policy are: 
 
--Broadcasting - Voting control of free-to-air television stations 
by non-residents is limited to 49 percent.  There are also residency 
requirements for the directors of broadcasting companies. 
 
--Legal Services - Foreign lawyers are able to practice foreign and 
international law in Hong Kong.  Foreign lawyers can apply to take 
the Hong Kong Bar Examination and, if successful, practice Hong Kong 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  002 OF 011 
 
 
law.  Foreign law firms may not hire local lawyers to advise on Hong 
Kong law, but may themselves become "local" firms after satisfying 
certain residency and other requirements.  They may thereafter hire 
local attorneys, but must do so on a 1:1 basis with the foreign 
lawyers.  They also can form associations with local law firms. 
 
¶11.  Hong Kong has a free trade agreement with mainland China, 
referred to as CEPA, or the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement. 
 CEPA provides tariff-free export to mainland China of Hong 
Kong-origin goods and preferential access for specific services 
sectors.  The agreement was originally implemented at the beginning 
of 2004 and has been expanded four times.  When the third phase was 
implemented at the beginning of 2006, all Hong Kong-origin products 
became eligible for tariff-free access to mainland China.  The 
fourth and fifth phases, announced in July 2007 and July 2008 
respectively, expanded access for service providers.   Service 
providers in 40 sectors (e.g., logistics, distribution) now enjoy 
preferential treatment on the Mainland.  U.S. and other foreign 
firms with a significant presence in Hong Kong are eligible to take 
advantage of CEPA concessions to enter the mainland market. 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Conversion and inward or outward transfer of funds for any 
purpose are not restricted.  The Hong Kong dollar is a freely 
convertible currency that, since late 1983, has been linked via a de 
facto currency board to the U.S. Dollar at an exchange rate that is 
allowed to fluctuate in a narrow band between HKD7.75 - HKD7.85 = 
US$ 1.  There is no allocation of foreign exchange. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶13.  The U.S. Consulate General is not aware of any expropriation 
actions in the recent past. Expropriation of private property may 
occur if it is clearly in the public interest, but only for 
well-defined purposes such as implementation of public works 
projects.  If this is the case, expropriations are to be conducted 
through negotiations, in a non-discriminatory manner in accordance 
with established principles of international law.  Due process and 
transparency are to be observed.  Investors in and lenders to 
expropriated entities are to receive prompt, adequate, and effective 
compensation.  Property may be acquired under the State Land 
Resumption Ordinance, the Land Acquisition Ordinance, the Mass 
Transit Railway (Land Resumption and Related Provisions) Ordinance 
or the Roads Ordinance.  These ordinances provide for payment of 
compensation.  If agreement cannot be reached on the amount payable, 
either party can refer the claim to the Land Tribunal. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
¶14.  The U.S. Consulate General is not aware of any investor-state 
disputes in recent years involving U.S. or other foreign investors 
or contractors and the Hong Kong Government. The Hong Kong 
Department of Justice is also not aware of any such disputes. 
Private investment disputes are normally handled in the courts or 
via private negotiation. Alternatively, disputes may be referred to 
the Hong Kong International Arbitration Center. 
 
¶15.  The Hong Kong Government accepts international arbitration of 
investment disputes between itself and investors.  Following 
reversion to Chinese sovereignty on July 1, 1997, Hong Kong applies 
provisions of the International Center for the Settlement of 
Investment Disputes (ICSID), known as the Washington Convention, and 
the New York Convention of 1958 on the Recognition and Enforcement 
of Foreign Arbitral Awards. Hong Kong has also adopted the United 
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) model law 
for international commercial arbitration. 
 
¶16.  Hong Kong and mainland China signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding in June 1999 on an arrangement parallel to the New 
York Convention for the reciprocal enforcement of arbitral awards, 
since the New York Convention, being an international agreement, is 
no longer applicable to the enforcement of arbitral awards between 
Hong Kong and mainland China. 
 
¶17.  Hong Kong's legal system is firmly based on the rule of law and 
the independence of the judiciary.  Courts of justice in Hong Kong 
include the Court of Final Appeal, the High Court (composed of the 
Court of Appeal and the Court of First Instance), the District 
Court, the Magistrate's Courts, the Coroner's Court, and the 
Juvenile Court.  There are also a Lands Tribunal, Labor Tribunal, 
and other statutory tribunals. 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  003 OF 011 
 
 
 
Performance Requirements and Incentives 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Consistent with its non-interventionist economic philosophy, 
Hong Kong imposes no export performance or local content 
requirements as a condition for establishing, maintaining or 
expanding a foreign investment.  Hong Kong offers no special 
privileges to attract foreign investment.  There are no requirements 
that Hong Kong residents own shares, that foreign equity be reduced 
over time, or that technology be transferred on certain terms. 
 
¶19.  All of Hong Kong is a duty-free zone.  Subject to 
non-discriminatory application of excise taxes and restricted entry 
in some sectors, as noted above, local and foreign firms are free to 
take advantage of investment opportunities as they arise. 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶20.  Hong Kong law and regulations provide for the right of foreign 
and domestic private entities to establish, own and dispose of 
interests of business enterprises.  Foreign investors are allowed, 
except for the sectors noted above, to engage in all lawful forms of 
remunerative activity.  The Hong Kong Government does not generally 
engage directly in business activity via public enterprises. 
Business privileges, franchises and land development rights are 
granted on the basis of competitive equality. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------- 
 
¶21.  Hong Kong's commercial and company laws provide for effective 
enforcement of contracts and protection of corporate rights.  Hong 
Kong has filed its notice of compliance with the trade-related 
intellectual property (TRIPs)requirements of the World Trade 
Organization.  The Intellectual Property Department, which includes 
the Trademarks and Patents Registries, is the focal point for the 
development of Hong Kong's intellectual property regime.  The 
Customs and Excise Department is the principal enforcement agency 
for intellectual property rights (IPR).  Hong Kong has acceded to 
the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, the 
Bern Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 
and the Geneva and Paris Universal Copyright Conventions.  Hong Kong 
also continues to participate in the World Intellectual Property 
Organization, as part of mainland China's delegation. 
 
¶22.  The Hong Kong Government devotes significant attention and 
resources to IPR enforcement.  Implementation of laws passed in 
recent years, including aggressive raids at the retail level, has 
significantly reduced illegal production and retail sales of 
copyright and trademark protected products.  The Hong Kong courts 
have imposed longer jail terms for violations of Hong Kong's 
copyright ordinance.  The Hong Kong Government has conducted public 
education efforts to encourage respect for intellectual property 
rights.  Nevertheless, pirated and counterfeit products remain 
available at the retail level throughout Hong Kong. 
 
¶23.  In addition, end-use piracy of software and textbooks, the 
rapid growth of peer-to-peer downloading via the Internet, and the 
illicit importation and transshipment of pirated and counterfeit 
goods, including optical discs, pharmaceutical products and 
name-brand handbags and apparel from mainland China and elsewhere in 
the region, are continuing problems.  Hong Kong authorities have 
taken steps to address these problems by: continued monitoring of 
suspect shipments at points of entry; establishing a task force to 
monitor and crack down on peer-to-peer (P2P) piracy over the 
Internet in December 2004; prosecuting software end-use piracy, and 
reviewing ways to strengthen copyright protection in the digital 
environment.  An additional vulnerability is that health authorities 
continue to permit the registration of generic drugs for marketing 
without regard to whether these products infringe on valid patents. 
Despite extensive consultations with industry, no progress has been 
made on closing this loophole. 
 
¶24.  The Copyright Ordinance protects any original copyright work 
created or published by any person anywhere in the world.  The 
government enacted amendments to the Copyright Ordinance in July 
¶2007.  In particular, two new provisions create a criminal offence 
against the copying and distribution of infringing copies of printed 
works in business and a separate civil liability against the act of 
circumventing technological protection measures.  These provisions 
became effective in July 2008. 
 
¶25.  The Copyright Ordinance amendments provide for rental rights 
for sound recordings, computer programs, films and comic books.  The 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  004 OF 011 
 
 
amended ordinance provides for enhanced penalty provisions against 
copyright piracy and additional legal tools to facilitate 
enforcement.  It decriminalizes parallel imports of copyrighted 
products 15 months after their release anywhere in the world, but 
maintains civil penalties.  It retains the existing scope of the law 
defining an offence as possession of an infringing copy of computer 
programs, movies, TV dramas, musical recordings (including visual 
and sound recordings) for use in business.  This criminal liability 
applies equally to individuals and business organizations.  The 
possession of an infringing copy of other categories of works for 
use in one's business will not attract criminal liability but may 
incur civil liability.  In addition, in 2008 the Hong Kong 
Government established a tripartite forum -- composed of copyright 
owners, online service providers and content users -- to create a 
voluntary framework governing IPR protection in the digital realm. 
 
 
¶26.  The Patent Ordinance allows for granting of an independent 
patent in Hong Kong based on the patents granted by the UK and the 
Chinese Patent Offices.  The patent granted in Hong Kong is 
independent and capable of being tested for validity, rectified, 
amended, revoked and enforced in Hong Kong courts. 
 
The Registered Design Ordinance is modeled on the EU design 
registration system, with certain modifications.  To be registered, 
a design must be new.  The system requires no substantive 
examination.  Protection is for an initial period of five years, and 
may be extended for four periods of five years each, up to a maximum 
of 25 years. 
 
¶27.  Hong Kong's trademark law is TRIPS-compatible and allows for 
registration of trademarks relating to services.  All trademark 
registrations originally filed in Hong Kong are valid for seven 
years and renewable for 14-year periods.  Proprietors of trademarks 
registered elsewhere must apply anew and satisfy all requirements of 
Hong Kong law. When evidence of use is required, such use must have 
been in Hong Kong. 
 
¶28.  Hong Kong has no specific ordinance to cover trade secrets. 
Under the Trade Description Ordinance, however, the Government has 
the duty to protect information being disclosed to other parties. 
The Trade Description Ordinance prohibits false trade descriptions, 
forged trademarks and misstatements in respect of goods supplied in 
the course of trade. 
 
Transparency of Regulatory System 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶29.  Hong Kong's body of law and regulation recognizes the value of 
competition in economic endeavor.  Tax, labor, health and safety and 
other laws and policies avoid distortions or impediments to the 
efficient mobilization and allocation of investment.  Bureaucratic 
procedures and "red tape" are held to a minimum and are equally 
transparent to local and foreign investors.  Hong Kong does not have 
an anti-trust law.  Hong Kong has, however, set up a Competition 
Policy Review Committee that issued recommendations in June 2006. 
These recommendations included a call for legislation to regulate 
price-fixing, bid-rigging, market allocation, sales and production 
quotas, joint boycotts, unfair or discriminatory standards and the 
abuse of dominant market position.  The government held a public 
consultation period, which ended on February 5, 2007. 
 
¶30.  The government plans to provide the details of its proposed 
competition policy legislation for public discussion and scrutiny, 
before introducing the bill in the 2008-09 legislative session. 
Currently, only the telecommunications and, to a lesser degree, the 
broadcasting sectors have competition regulations in place.  Certain 
sectors of the economy are dominated by monopolies or cartels, not 
all of which are regulated by the Hong Kong Government.  These 
entities do not discriminate against U.S. goods or services, but 
they can use their market position to block effective competition. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶31.  There are no impediments to the free flow of financial 
resources.  Non-interventionist economic policies, complete freedom 
of capital movement and a well-understood regulatory and legal 
environment have greatly facilitated Hong Kong's role as a regional 
and international financial center.  Hong Kong has one of the most 
active foreign exchange markets in Asia. 
 
¶32.  Hong Kong has a three-tier system of deposit-taking 
institutions: licensed banks, restricted license banks, and 
deposit-taking companies.  Only licensed banks can offer current 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  005 OF 011 
 
 
(checking) or savings accounts.  At the end of 2008, Hong Kong had 
145 licensed banks, 27 restricted licensed banks, 28 deposit-taking 
institutions, and 71 representative offices.  The Hong Kong & 
Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) is Hong Kong's largest banking 
group.  With its majority-owned subsidiary Hang Seng Bank, and 188 
branches, the group controls more than 29.1 percent of Hong Kong 
dollar deposits.  The Bank of China (Hong Kong) is the 
second-largest banking group (217 branches), and controls 13.5 
percent of Hong Kong dollar deposits.  Thirty-five American 
"authorized financial institutions" operate in Hong Kong.  U.S. 
banks licensed in Hong Kong are listed in Chapter 7 - U.S. Banks and 
Local Correspondent Banks.  Most banks in Hong Kong maintain U.S. 
correspondent relationships. 
 
¶33.  Hong Kong's five largest banks, in terms of total assets 
(2007), are as follows: 
 
Rank Institution    Total Assets (US$ Billion) 
 
1 Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corp (HSBC) 506.7 
 
2 Bank of China (Hong Kong)    136.9 
 
3 Hang Seng Bank Ltd.      95.6 
 
4 Standard Charter Bank, Hong Kong Branch  61.8 
 
5 Bank of East Asia, Ltd.     50.5 
 
      Sources: Companies' annual reports 
 
¶34.  Credit in Hong Kong is allocated strictly on market terms and 
is available to foreign investors on a non-discriminatory basis. 
The private sector has access to the full spectrum of credit 
instruments as provided by Hong Kong's banking and financial system. 
 Legal, regulatory, and accounting systems are transparent and 
consistent with international norms.  The Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority (HKMA) functions as a de facto central bank.  It is 
responsible for maintaining the stability of the banking system and 
managing the Exchange Fund backing Hong Kong's currency.  The HKMA, 
with the assistance of the banking sector, has upgraded Hong Kong's 
financial market infrastructure.  Real Time Gross Settlement helps 
minimize risks in the payment system and brings Hong Kong in line 
with international standards. 
 
¶35.  The Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation (HKMC) promotes the 
development of the secondary mortgage market in Hong Kong.  The HKMC 
is 100 percent owned by the Government through the Exchange Fund. 
The HKMC purchases residential mortgage loans for its own retained 
portfolio and also repackages mortgages into mortgage-backed 
securities for sale.  In August 2008 (the latest figures available), 
the HKMC's outstanding amount of debt totaled US$ 5.1 billion. 
 
¶36.  On September 26, 2006, a Deposit Protection Scheme (DPS) began 
operations.   Depositors are now protected up to a maximum of 
HK$100,000 (US$12,820) per bank.   As a result of the global 
financial crisis in late 2008, the Hong Kong Government announced 
the use of the Exchange Fund to guarantee the repayment of all 
customer deposits in Hong Kong-dollars and foreign-currency held 
with licensed banks, restricted license banks, and deposit-taking 
companies, including Hong Kong branches of overseas institutions. 
The measure will remain in force until the end of 2010. The DPS Fund 
(funded by contributions paid by member banks) amounted to US$42.1 
million at the end of March 2008, and is expected to reach the 
target amount of US$ 166.7 million by 2010.  While Hong Kong 
requires locally licensed banks to participate, 
overseas-incorporated banks may apply for an exemption if a 
comparable scheme in their home jurisdiction covers deposits taken 
in by its Hong Kong branches. 
 
¶37.  In 2004, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) and Dun & 
Bradstreet (HK) Ltd. (D&B) jointly launched a Commercial Credit 
Reference Agency (CCRA) to collate information about the 
indebtedness and credit history of small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) and make such information available to members of 
the Hong Kong Association of Banks (HKAB) and the Hong Kong 
Association of Deposit Taking Companies. 
 
¶38.  Under the Insurance Companies Ordinance, insurance companies 
are authorized by the Insurance Authority to transact business in 
Hong Kong.  Hong Kong has the highest number of authorized insurance 
companies in Asia.  As of December 2008, there were 175 authorized 
companies.  Of these, 83 were foreign companies from 21 countries, 
and 2 were mainland Chinese enterprises.  A number of the world's 
top insurance companies in terms of assets have branch offices or 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  006 OF 011 
 
 
subsidiaries in Hong Kong. 
 
¶39.  Hong Kong's total market capitalization fell by 50 percent 
during 2008 to US$1.3 trillion, with 1,087 listed firms as of 
year-end 2008.  Despite the sharp drop, Hong Kong's stock exchange 
still ranked third in Asia after Tokyo and Shanghai, and seventh in 
the world in terms of capitalization.  Hong Kong Exchanges and 
Clearing Limited (HKEx), a listed company, operates the stock and 
futures exchanges.  The Securities and Futures Commission, an 
independent statutory body outside the civil service, has licensing 
and supervisory powers to ensure the integrity of markets and 
protection of investors. 
 
¶40.  In April 2003, the Government implemented a major modernization 
of the legal framework for Hong Kong's securities market designed to 
upgrade transparency and corporate governance, boost regulators' 
enforcement powers, and improve investor protections.  To enhance 
market competitiveness, HKEx in the same month removed the rule on 
minimum brokerage commission rates for stock and futures 
transactions. 
 
¶41.  No discriminatory legal constraints exist for foreign 
securities firms establishing in Hong Kong via branching, 
acquisition, or subsidiaries.  In practice, foreign firms typically 
establish in Hong Kong as subsidiaries.  Rules governing operations 
are the same, irrespective of ownership.  Portfolio investment 
decisions are left to the private sector.  No laws or regulations 
specifically authorize private firms to adopt articles of 
incorporation/association that limit or prohibit foreign investment, 
participation, or control. 
 
¶42.  The stock exchange plays a significant role in raising capital 
for Chinese state-owned enterprises.  Chinese state enterprises 
raise equity (through the issuance of so-called "H" shares) in Hong 
Kong provided they meet Hong Kong regulatory and accounting 
requirements.  These "H" shares are denominated in Renminbi, but 
must be purchased in Hong Kong Dollars.   In 2008, a total of 150 
Chinese enterprises had "H" share listings on the stock exchange, 
with market capitalization of US$ 350.2 billion. 
 
¶43.  Hong Kong has made a concerted effort to develop a local debt 
market with the Exchange Fund bills and notes program.  Maturities 
now extend to ten years.  Hong Kong Dollar debt (public and private) 
has increased gradually, from US$ 3.46 billion at the end of 1989 to 
US$ 98 billion by the end of 2007, and declined to US$92.0 billion 
by September 2008.  Regional infrastructure financing requirements 
and increasing investor demand are projected to stimulate further 
development of the local debt market.  In May 2004, for the first 
time, Hong Kong issued bonds securitizing the revenues from 
Government tunnels and bridges.  In June 2004, the governmental Hong 
Kong Mortgage Corporation established a US$ 2.6 billion retail bond 
program.  In July 2004, the Hong Kong Government issued its first 
sovereign bonds totaling US$ 2.6 billion to raise cash for its 
public works program. 
 
¶44.  The Hong Kong Government requires workers nd employers to 
contribute to retirement funds uder the Mandatory Provident Fund 
(MPF) scheme.  Contributions are expected to channel US$ 3-4 billion 
per year into various investment vehicles.  By the end of September 
2008, the net asset values of MPF funds amounted to US$28.7 billion. 
Like other investments, the performance of MPF funds has also been 
affected by recent global economic turmoil. 
 
¶45.  The Exchange Fund Investment Limited (EFIL), established by the 
Government to dispose of the stock portfolio it purchased during the 
Asian Financial Crisis, completed its operations in January 2003. 
EFIL disposed of the stocks in the form of a mutual fund, the 
Tracker Fund of Hong Kong (TraHK).  The Government decided to retain 
a portion of the stocks (worth about US$ 410 million) as a long-term 
investment.  The HKMA is responsible for the management of these 
stocks.  TraHK is traded on the stock exchange. 
 
Political Violence 
------------------ 
 
¶46.  Hong Kong is politically stable.  Demonstrations are almost 
always peaceful.  The U.S. Consulate General is not aware of any 
recent incidents involving politically motivated damage to projects 
or installations. 
 
Corruption 
---------- 
 
¶47.  Hong Kong has an excellent track record in combating 
corruption.  U.S. firms have not identified corruption as an 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  007 OF 011 
 
 
obstacle to foreign direct investment.  The Independent Commission 
Against Corruption (ICAC) is responsible for combating corruption. 
The ICAC is independent of the public service and the ICAC 
Commissioner is responsible directly to the Chief Executive.  A 
bribe to a foreign official is a criminal act, as is the giving or 
accepting of bribes, for both private individuals and government 
employees. Penalties are stiff.  For example, a civil servant who 
solicits or accepts any advantage without special permission of the 
Government can receive one year's imprisonment and a HK$100,000 fine 
if convicted.  Individuals in both the private and public sector can 
receive up to seven years imprisonment and a HK$500,000 fine for 
offering, soliciting or accepting a benefit for performance or 
non-performance of an official duty. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------- 
 
¶48.  Hong Kong is negotiating a series of bilateral investment 
agreements -- the Hong Kong Government calls them "Investment 
Promotion and Protection Agreements" -- with major foreign 
investors.  To date, Hong Kong has signed agreements with Australia, 
Austria, Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union, Denmark, France, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand and the United Kingdom. The Hong Kong 
Government has initialed agreements with Canada and Vietnam.  It is 
negotiating an agreement with Singapore.  All such agreements are 
based on a model text approved by mainland China through the 
Sino-British Joint Liaison Group.  The United States and Hong Kong 
held talks on a bilateral investment agreement in the late 1990s, 
but certain differences could not be resolved and negotiations were 
suspended. U.S. firms, however, are generally not at a competitive 
or legal disadvantage, since Hong Kong's market is open and its 
legal system impartial. 
 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶49.  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) coverage is not 
available in Hong Kong.  Hong Kong is a member of the World Bank 
Group's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). 
 
Labor 
----- 
 
¶50.  In the 1980s and much of the 1990s, Hong Kong's unemployment 
rate hovered around two percent.  Reflecting structural changes in 
the local economy and weak global economic conditions, the 
unemployment rate rose to a record level of 8.3 percent in May 2003. 
 The job market has improved gradually since then, with the 
unemployment rate standing at 3.4 percent by the end of 2007.  With 
the adverse effect of the financial turmoil of late 2008 and early 
2009, Hong Kong's unemployment rate rose to 4.1 percent by the end 
of December 2008. The Employees Retraining Board provides skills 
retraining for local employees to cope with ongoing structural 
change in the economy. 
 
¶51.  To address a shortage of highly skilled technical and financial 
professionals, the Hong Kong Government has made efforts to attract 
qualified foreign and mainland Chinese workers.  As of July 2003, 
conditions for admitting mainland Chinese for employment were eased 
and aligned with those applicable to foreign nationals. 
 
¶52.  In 2007, membership in Hong Kong's 731 registered unions 
totaled 686,371, a participation rate of about 21.1 percent.  Hong 
Kong has implemented 41 conventions of the International Labor 
Organization in full and 18 others with modifications. 
 
¶53.  Local law provides for the right of association and the right 
of workers to establish and join organizations of their own 
choosing.  The government does not discourage or impede the 
formation of unions.  Workers who allege discrimination against 
unions have the right to have their cases heard by the Labor 
Relations Tribunal.  Although legislation does not prohibit strikes, 
in practice most workers must sign employment contracts that state 
that walking off the job is a breach of contract and can lead to 
summary dismissal. Collective bargaining is legal in Hong Kong, but 
there is no obligation on employers to engage in it.  In practice, 
collective bargaining is not widely used.  For more information on 
labor regulations in Hong Kong, please check the following website: 
http://www.labour.gov.hk/eng/legislat/content A.htm  (click on 
Chapter 57 "Employment Ordinance"). 
 
Foreign-Trade Zones/Free Ports 
------------------------------ 
 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  008 OF 011 
 
 
¶54.  Hong Kong is a free port without foreign trade zones.  Hong 
Kong's modern and efficient infrastructure supports Hong Kong's role 
as a trade entrepot and regional financial and services center. 
Rapid growth has placed severe demands on that infrastructure, 
giving rise to plans for major new investments, particularly in 
transportation and shipping facilities, over the next few years. 
Significant elements include a planned expansion of container 
terminal facilities, additional roadway and railway networks, major 
residential/commercial developments, community facilities, 
environmental protection projects, and redevelopment of the old 
KaiTak Airport   The Hong Kong Government is planning to spend over 
USD 13 billion in the next decade on redeveloping the old Kai-Tak 
Airport into a modern green zone that contains government offices, 
public housing, commercial centers and cruise terminals. 
 
¶55.  Airport: During the twelve months ending November 2008, Hong 
Kong's international airport at Chek Lap Kok handled daily an 
average of 828 flights, 133,726 passengers, and more than 10,197 
tons of cargo.  Seventy-nine international airlines operated some 
5,500 scheduled flights per week between Hong Kong and 150 cities 
around the world.  Hong Kong is a major gateway to mainland China. 
There are direct flights from Hong Kong to nearly forty Mainland 
cities. The demand for services to mainland China is growing.  The 
Hong Kong airport is in the world's top ranks in terms of passenger 
and cargo throughput. 
 
¶56.  With 24-hour operations, two all-weather runways, an ability to 
cater to all types of commercial aircraft, and high-speed transport 
links from the terminal to the city, the airport is well positioned 
to meet Hong Kong's aviation needs in the coming decades. 
 
¶57.  The airport has a multi-modal marine cargo terminal that 
provides vessel services between various ports in the Pearl River 
Delta and the airport.  To strengthen Hong Kong's position as the 
economic gateway of mainland China and Asia and to boost revenues, 
the Airport Authority (AA) has built "SkyCity", which includes a 
world-class exhibition center, Asia World-Expo; SkyPlaza, an office 
and retail complex; SkyPier, a cross-boundary ferry terminal; and a 
nine-hole golf course.  In September 2008, Cathay Pacific Airways 
started to build the airport's third cargo terminal under a 20-year 
franchise agreement with the AA.  Cathay Pacific will invest USD 615 
million into the facility, which will occupy 10 hectares in the 
airport's cargo area.  The new terminal was initially expected to be 
completed by the second half of 2011, but in January 2009, Cathay 
announced it would delay completion for up to two years in response 
to falling cargo traffic resulting from the global economic 
slowdown.  When complete, the facility will have a handling capacity 
of 2.6 million tons. 
 
¶58.  The organization responsible for safety oversight, the Civil 
Aviation Department, plans to introduce satellite-based 
Communications, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management 
(CNS/ATM) Systems.  The new equipment will enhance flight safety and 
efficiency as well as maintain Hong Kong's status as a center of 
international and regional aviation.  The project will take 15 
years. 
 
¶59.  Shipping and Port Activities: Hong Kong enjoys one of the best 
natural deep-water ports on the Chinese coast.  With continued high 
economic growth and industrialization in mainland China, the 
development of deep-water ports at Yantian and Gaolan in southern 
China should complement Hong Kong's facilities over the medium term. 
 Over the longer term, the Hong Kong port will face increased 
competition from those ports and from Shanghai, which are improving 
their service efficiency. 
 
¶60.  Hong Kong's container port is one of the world's busiest.  In 
the first eleven months of 2008, Hong Kong's nine privately-operated 
container terminals and mid-stream operators handled 22.51 million 
twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) of cargo.  Some 80 international 
shipping lines are providing over 460 container liner services per 
week connecting to over 500 destinations worldwide. 
 
¶61.  Hong Kong's container terminals handling capacity is 18 million 
twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) a year, which will be able to 
cope with the forecast growth in demand to the end of this decade. 
The container terminals handle about 73 percent of the port's total 
throughput.  The river trade terminal, mid-stream operators and 
other facilities handle the remaining 27 percent.  The Hong Kong 
Government commissioned a study on "Hong Kong Port - Master Plan 
2020" to formulate a competitive, sustainable strategy and master 
plan for Hong Kong's port development, including the location of a 
new container terminal and related infrastructure, for the coming 
twenty years.  The study has been presented to industry and the 
Legislative Council for consultation.  Taking into account the 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  009 OF 011 
 
 
comments received, the Government is working out an action plan to 
implement the recommendations of the study.  In particular, the 
Government commissioned consultants to work out the optimal timing 
for the construction of Container Terminal 10 and to conduct an 
ecology study on Northwest Lantau Island to decide whether it is 
environmentally suitable for development of a container terminal. 
 
¶62.  In 2008, the Government concluded that an extensive reclamation 
is required for the site at Northwest Lantau Island, which may 
affect the ecological environment.  The government has identified an 
alternative site at Southwest Tsing Yi Island and will undertake a 
feasibility study.  Although this site will require the relocation 
of the existing oil depot, it can achieve synergy with the container 
terminals in Kwai Chung and Tsing Yi. 
 
¶63.  Roads and Railroads: Hong Kong's roads have one of the highest 
vehicle densities in the world.  In September 2008, 575,000 licensed 
vehicles navigated about 2,034 kilometers of roads, or 282 vehicles 
per kilometer of road.  This high density, combined with difficult 
terrain and high density building development, poses a constant 
challenge to transport planning, road construction and maintenance. 
To cope with worsening traffic congestion, largely due to the rapid 
growth in the number of private cars, the Highways Department has 
launched an extensive road construction program. The Highways 
Department has budgeted US$ 5.4 billion for road projects between 
2005/2006 and 2010/2011.  Hong Kong will also build a bridge from 
the Western tip of Lantau Island to Macau and Zhuhai, paving the way 
for accelerated development of the Western Pearl River Delta region. 
 
 
¶64.  Historically, two railway corporations managed Hong Kong's 
metro and rail systems: the Mass Transit Railway Corporation (MTRC) 
and the Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation (KCRC).  The two railway 
companies merged on December 2, 2007.  The integrated system is 
operated and managed by MTRC, including nine lines of railway 
network with a total length of over 200 kilometers. 
 
¶65.  Hong Kong is working on a massive expansion of its rail system. 
 Investment in Hong Kong's domestic and cross-boundary rail networks 
in the next decade is expected to exceed in scale the US$ 20 billion 
spent on the transportation facilities associated with the airport. 
Most of the projects involve linking existing lines or creating 
extensions to new points of interest.  In his 2007-08 Policy 
Address, Chief Executive Donald Tsang announced that Hong Kong will 
push ahead with ten large-scale infrastructure projects, of which 
three are rail networks including the South Island Line (an 
extension of seven-kilometer rail to the South Island), the Sha Tin 
to Central Link (connecting Northeast New Territories and Hong Kong 
Island via East Kowloon), and the Guangzhou-Shenzhen-Hong Kong 
Express Rail Link (a high-speed national rail network of 12,000 
kilometers linking up major cities, with maximum train speeds of 200 
to 300 kilometers per hour). 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
------------------------------------ 
 
Stock of Inward Foreign Direct Investment by Major Investor Country/ 
Territory, as at end of 2007. 
 
Country   US$ Billion % Share of Total 
China 479.2 60.8 
Netherlands 68.0 8.6 
British Virgin Islands 50.7 6.4 
Bermuda  43.0 5.5 
United States 35.7 4.5 
Japan 21.1 2.7 
United Kingdom  17.2 2.2 
Singapore 13.5 1.7 
Cayman Islands 11.6 1.5 
Taiwan 5.1 0.6 
Others 42.9 5.4 
TOTAL 788.1 100.0 
 
Source: Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 
Note 1: Excluding inward direct investment from offshore financial 
centers, which were originally from Hong Kong. 
Note 2: US$1 = HK$7.8 
Note 3: Total does not sum due to rounding. 
 
 
Table 2: Stock of Inward Foreign Direct Investment by Major Economic 
Activity, as of end of 2007. 
 
Activity                           US$ Billion % of Total 
Investment holdings, real estate 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  010 OF 011 
 
 
and various business services 513.6 65.2 
Banks and deposit-tasking companies 84.0 10.7 
Wholesale, retail, import/export trades 80.8 10.3 
Transport and related services 31.6 4.0 
Financial institutions (non-banks) 24.8 3.1 
Construction  13.7 1.7 
Insurance  11.4 1.4 
Manufacturing 8.9 1.1 
Communications 5.0 0.6 
Restaurants and hotels 2.4 0.3 
Other activities 11.8 1.6 
TOTAL 788.0 100.0 
 
Source: Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 
Note 1: Excluding inward direct investment from offshore financial 
centers, which were originally from Hong Kong. 
 
Table 3: Stock of Outward Foreign Direct Investment by Major 
Resident Country/ Territory, as at end of 2007. 
 
Country   US$ Billion % Share of Total 
China 438.9 70.6 
British Virgin Islands 104.0 16.7 
Bermuda 10.9 1.8 
United Kingdom 9.4 1.5 
Singapore 7.3 1.2 
Liberia 5.3 0.8 
Thailand 4.9 0.8 
Malaysia 4.4 0.7 
United States 3.9 0.6 
Cayman Islands 3.7 0.6 
Others 29.0 4.7 
TOTAL 621.7 100.0 
 
Source:  Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 
 
Note 1: Excluding outward direct investment of offshore financial 
centers which were channeled back to Hong Kong. 
Note 2: Total does not sum due to rounding. 
 
Table 4: Stock of Outward Foreign Direct Investment by Major 
Economic Activity, as of end of 2007. 
 
Activity US$ Billion % of Total 
Investment holdings, real estate 
 and various business services 448.4 72.1 
Wholesale, retail, import/export trades 60.5 9.7 
Banks and deposit-taking companies  30.0 4.8 
Manufacturing 22.4 3.6 
Transport and related services  15.5 2.5 
Financial institutions (non-banks) 7.0 1.1 
Restaurants and hotels 6.5 1.0 
Insurance 6.3 1.0 
Communications 2.7 0.4 
Construction 2.5 0.4 
Other activities 19.9 3.2 
TOTAL 621.7 100.0 
 
Source: Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 
Note 1: Excluding outward direct investment of offshore financial 
centers that were channeled back to Hong Kong. 
Note 2: Total does not sum due to rounding. 
 
Table 5: Amount and Growth of U.S. Investment in Hong Kong in 
2003-2007, in US$ Billions. 
 
Year  Amount Percent Change 
2003  36.4 -9.7 
2004  32.7 -10.2 
2005  36.4 11.3 
2006  41.0 12.6 
2007  47.4 15.6 
 
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic analysis, 
U.S. Direct Investment Position Abroad on a Historical Cost Basis. 
 
Note 1: The U.S. Department of Commerce estimates the total U.S. 
direct investment position in Hong Kong at historical cost (the book 
value of U.S. direct investors' equity in, and net outstanding loans 
to, their foreign affiliates). 
Note 2: U.S. Department of Commerce statistics differ from HKG 
statistics.  Per Table 1 above, the latter indicates total U.S. 
investments of US$ 35.7 billion at year-end 2007. 
Note 3: Preliminary figures for 2007. 
 
 
HONG KONG 00000124  011 OF 011 
 
 
 
Table 6: Hong Kong's Pledged and Actual Direct Investment in 
mainland China in US$ Billions and Percent Share of Total Investment 
in mainland China. 
 
Year Amount Pledged Invested % Share of Total 
2001 20.7 16.7 35.7 
2002 25.2 17.9 33.9 
2003 40.7 17.7 33.1 
2004 50.1 19.0 31.3 
2005 N.A. 18.0 29.8 
2006 N.A. 20.2 32.1 
2007 N.A. 27.7 37.1 
1978-2007 N.A. 307.5 40.4 
 
Source:  PRC Ministry of Commerce. 
Note: PRC Ministry of Commerce stopped reporting the pledged foreign 
investment figures in December 2005. 
 
Major Foreign Investor Firms: 
 
United States: American International Group, AT&T, Bank of America, 
Caltex, Citigroup, Coca-Cola, Compaq Computer, Dell, Disney, 
ExxonMobil, Federal Express, Goldman Sachs, IBM, Isagenix Worldwide 
LLC, JP Morgan Chase, Kodak, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, 
Motorola, Pacific Waste Management, Pepsi. 
 
Japan: C. Itoh, Citizen Watches, Daido Concrete, Hitachi, Jusco, 
Kadokawa Intercontinental Publishing (Asia), Mitsubishi, NEC, 
Nishimatsu, Nomura, Olympus, Uny. 
 
United Kingdom: HSBC, Inchcape Pacific, Jardine Matheson, Lloyds, P 
& O Shipping, Standard Chartered Bank, Swire Pacific Group. 
 
Continental Europe: Asea Brown Boveri, Bachy-Soletanches, Banque 
Indosuez, Banque National de Paris, Bouygues/Dragages, Carlsberg, 
Cartier, Chanel, Christian Dior, Electrolux, Ericsson, Heraeus, Hong 
Kong Petrochemicals (Italian/Korean/Chinese joint venture), Lotto 
Sport Italia, Philips, Refratechnik, Remy, Siemens, Tetrapak. 
 
Mainland China: Bank of China (Hong Kong), Beijing Enterprises, 
China Construction Bank Corporation, China Everbright, China 
Investment and Trust Corporation (CITIC), China Life Insurance, 
China Merchants, China Mobile, China National Offshore Oil 
Corporation (CNOOC), China National Petroleum Corporation, China 
Ocean Shipping Co (COSCO), China Overseas Construction, China 
Resources, China Travel Services, China Unicom, Guangdong 
Enterprises, Lenovo Group, Petro China, Shanghai Industrial, Yue Xiu 
Enterprises, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (Asia). 
 
Asia: Allahabad Bank, C.P. Pokphand, First Pacific Group, LG, Lippo 
Group, News Corp., Park View Properties, Pioneer, San Miguel 
Brewery, Shangri-la/Kerry Trading, Sime Darby, UTI Bank. 
 
Web Resources 
------------- 
 
Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department: 
http://www.censtatd.gov.hk 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority: http://www.info.gov.hk/hkma/ 
Independent Commission Against Corruption: http://www.icac.org.hk/