09MERIDA30
2009 YUCATAN OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Merida
R 301122Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL MERIDA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4738
INFO ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY MEXICO 
AMCONSUL MERIDAQ080UNCLAS MERIDA 000030 
 
 
STATE FOR DS/OSAC AND DS/IP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC MX
SUBJECT: 2009 YUCATAN OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 
 
REF: 08 STATE 168473 
 
¶1. (U) Overall Crime and Safety Situation: 
 
Crime Threats 
The Yucatan Peninsula has not suffered the same level of 
escalating violence seen in other parts of Mexico. However in 
2008 there were some high profile criminal acts that served as a 
reminder that the Yucatan is part of the nationwide 
narco-conflict underway in Mexico. There is no evidence that 
indicates that criminals specifically target American citizens. 
Criminals select victims based on appearance, vulnerability, and 
inattentiveness. 
 
There have been a number of rapes reported in Cancun and other 
resort areas.  Many of these have occurred at night or in the 
early morning.  Attacks have also occurred on deserted beaches 
and in hotel rooms.  Acquaintance rape is a serious problem.  In 
other cases, hotel workers, taxi drivers, and security personnel 
have been implicated. 
 
See the information at travel.state.gov regarding Spring Break 
in Mexico if you are considering visiting Mexican resort areas 
during February through March when thousands of US college 
students traditionally arrive in those areas.  Additional 
information designed specifically for traveling students is 
available at studentsabroad.state.gov. 
 
Kidnapping, including the kidnapping of non-Mexicans, continues 
at alarming rates.  So-called express kidnappings, an attempt to 
get quick cash in exchange for the release of an individual, 
have occurred in almost all the large cities in Mexico and 
appear to target not only the wealthy, but also the middle 
class.  U.S. businesses with offices in Mexico or concerned U.S. 
citizens may contact the U.S. Embassy or any U.S. consulate to 
discuss precautions they should take. 
 
Kidnapping in Mexico has become a lucrative business, whether it 
be an actual kidnapping or a virtual kidnapping.  A common scam 
throughout Mexico is telephone kidnapping with a similar 
methodology.  The virtual kidnapping calls typically include a 
distraught voice immediately after the phone is answered that 
serves as a ploy to elicit information about a potential victim. 
The caller then uses this knowledge to demand ransom for the 
release of the supposed victim.  In the event of such a call 
stay calm since the vast majority of the calls are hoaxes; do 
not reveal any personal information; try to speak with the 
victim to corroborate identity; and contact the local police as 
well as the Embassy or nearest Consulate. 
 
¶B.      Safety 
Standards of security, safety, and supervision may not reach 
those expected in the United States.  This has contributed to 
deaths of U.S. citizens in automobile accidents, after falls 
from balconies or into open ditches, by drowning in the ocean as 
well as in hotel pools, and in water-sports mishaps, among 
others. 
 
Over 3 million U.S. citizens travel to Cancun and other Mexican 
beach resorts each year, including as many as 120,000 during 
"spring break" season, which normally begins in mid-February and 
runs about two months.  Excessive alcohol consumption, 
especially by U.S. citizens under the legal U.S. drinking age, 
is a significant problem.  The legal drinking age in Mexico is 
18, but it is not uniformly enforced.  Alcohol is implicated in 
the majority of arrests, violent crimes, accidents and deaths 
suffered by U.S. citizen tourists. 
 
In recent years, moped rentals have become very widespread in 
Cancun and Cozumel, and the number of serious moped accidents 
has risen accordingly.  Most operators carry no insurance and do 
not conduct safety checks.  The U.S. Embassy recommends avoiding 
operators who do not provide a helmet with the rental.  Some 
operators have been known to demand fees many times in excess of 
damages caused to the vehicles, even if renters have purchased 
insurance in advance.  Vacationers at other beach resorts have 
encountered similar problems after accidents involving rented 
jet-skis.  There have been cases of mobs gathering to prevent 
tourists from departing the scene and to intimidate them into 
paying exorbitant damage claims. 
 
Visitors should be aware of their surroundings at all times, 
even when in areas generally considered safe.  Women traveling 
alone are especially vulnerable and should exercise caution, 
particularly at night.  Victims, who are almost always 
unaccompanied, have been raped, robbed of personal property, or 
abducted and then held while their credit cards were used at 
various businesses and Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs).  U.S. 
citizens should be very cautious in general when using ATMs in 
Mexico.  If an ATM must be used, it should be accessed only 
during the business day at large protected facilities 
(preferably inside commercial establishments, rather than at 
glass-enclosed, highly visible ATMs on streets).  U.S. and 
 
Mexican citizens are sometimes accosted on the street and forced 
to withdraw money from their accounts using their ATM cards. 
 
Armed street crime is a serious problem in all of the major 
cities.  Some bars and nightclubs, especially in resort cities 
such as Cancun, can be havens for drug dealers and petty 
criminals.  Some establishments may contaminate or drug drinks 
to gain control over the patron. 
 
One of the better recommendations for avoiding being the victim 
of a crime at tourist destinations is employing the "buddy 
system", traveling with a trusted individual. Be cognizant of 
your consumption of alcohol. Most vehicular accidents and 
incidents of crime affecting U.S. citizens involve the excess 
consumption alcohol. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Political Violence 
 
Civil Unrest 
No major incidents of civil unrest have been reported within the 
last 12 months. 
 
¶B.      Demonstrations 
Americans and American interests have not been the target of 
major demonstrations. Within the last 12 months only one protest 
has occurred at the U.S. Consulate in Merida. 
 
The Mexican Constitution prohibits political activities by 
foreigners, and such actions may result in detention and/or 
deportation.  Travelers should avoid political demonstrations 
and other activities that might be deemed political by the 
Mexican authorities.  Even demonstrations intended to be 
peaceful can turn confrontational and escalate into violence. 
U.S. citizens are urged to avoid the areas of demonstrations, 
and to exercise caution if in the vicinity of any protests. 
 
¶C.      International Terrorism 
There is no evidence to support that Islamic Radical Groups are 
operating in the Yucatan Peninsula. The Yucatan is widely 
reported to be a trafficking route for Caribbean immigrants, and 
these same trafficking routes could be exploited by 
international terrorist groups. 
 
¶3. (U) Post Specific Concerns 
 
Hurricanes 
From June to November, the Peninsula may experience strong winds 
and rains as a result of hurricanes in the Gulf or along the 
Pacific Coast. The state of Quintana Roo tends to suffer the 
greatest effects from Atlantic hurricanes, however storms have 
been known to cause flooding and disruption of utility services 
throughout the Yucatan. 
 
Travelers are advised to keep abreast of developing weather 
conditions during the hurricane season and to avoid the paths of 
storms when possible. It is prudent to leave a detailed 
itinerary, including local contact information and expected 
time-date of return with a friend or family member. 
 
¶B.      Drugs and Narcoterrorism 
Mexico is well known for its illegal drug trade and the 
corruption the industry fosters. The Yucatan peninsula is 
strategically close to narcotic smuggling routes of Central 
America and parts of the Caribbean. Most of the violent crimes 
reported over the last 12 months is the result of various 
narco-trafficking groups fighting for control of these smuggling 
routes. 
 
¶4. (U) Police Responses 
 
Police corruption and involvement in criminal activity occurs in 
the Yucatan as it does in most parts of Mexico. Low apprehension 
and conviction rates of criminals contribute to Mexico's high 
crime rate.  Corruption, along with fear of reprisals from 
criminal elements, leads most to believe that many crimes go 
unreported. 
 
U.S. citizens are advised to cooperate with police if stopped 
and questioned. If involved in a traffic accident or victimized 
by crime, one may be asked to accompany the investigating 
officer to a local police station to file a report. A complaint 
must be filed in the area where the crime occurred. Attempting 
to file a complaint once one has returned to the U.S. can be a 
difficult and time consuming process. U.S. citizen victims of 
crime in Mexico are encouraged to report the incident to the 
nearest police headquarters and to the nearest U.S. consular 
office. 
 
 
The Mexican police emergency number is 066. Reported times for 
the arrival of emergency services varies. 
 
¶5. (U) Medical Emergencies: 
 
Health Concerns 
Persons visiting the Yucatan should take normal tourist 
precautions with regard to drinking water, eating fresh fruits, 
vegetables and salads. 
 
Health insurance is an important consideration while traveling 
in the Yucatan. Travelers are responsible for ensuring that they 
have adequate health insurance while traveling throughout Mexico. 
 
¶B.      Other Health Information 
Useful information on medical emergencies abroad is provided in 
the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs brochure, " 
Medical Information for Americans Traveling Abroad" available 
via the Consular Affairs web page at HYPERLINK 
"http://www.travel.state.gov/"http://www.trav el.state.gov 
 
 
Additional health information can be found at the CDC 
international Traveler's hotline - 888-232-6384 or 800 232-4636 
or HYPERLINK "http://www.cdc.gov/"http://www.cdc.gov 
 . 
 
International health insurance that provides coverage to the 
Yucatan can be easily obtained from private companies. Private 
air ambulance services are also available for injuries or 
illnesses best treated in the U.S. 
 
The RSO Office Merida does not endorse any specific private 
insurance or air ambulance company. The following list is for 
information purposes only: 
 
For international treatment and medical insurance: 
AEA International (206) 340-6000 
 
Air ambulances the service the Yucatan: 
Air Compassion 1-866-270-9198 or 001- 883-270-9198 
Advanced Air Ambulance 800-633-3590 or 305-232-7700 
AirMD Air Ambulance Services 800-282-6878 or 1-727-530-7972 
Air Ambulance Professionals 800-752-4195 or 954-491-0555 
Air Response 800-631-6565 or 303-858-9967 
Critical Air Medical 800-247-8326 or 619-571-0482 
 
An additional list of companies that provide international air 
ambulance services can be found at HYPERLINK 
"http://travel.state.gov/travel/cis_pa_tw/cis /cis_1470.html" \\l 
"companies"http://travel.state.gov/travel/cis _pa_tw/cis/cis 
_1470.html#companies. 
 
¶6. (U) Precautions While Traveling: 
 
Traveling by Automobile 
Road conditions in the Yucatan Peninsula are different than 
those encountered in the United States.  Extra care should be 
exercised when passing a vehicle or being passed.  Non-toll 
roads between major cities can be narrow and vary in conditions. 
 Toll roads are generally wider and better maintained.  Drivers 
should beware of unmarked speed bumps in populated areas. 
Driving at night outside of major cities is not advisable due to 
the lack of adequate street lighting. 
 
Criminal assaults occur on highways throughout Mexico; travelers 
should exercise extreme caution at all times, avoid traveling at 
night, and may wish to use toll ("cuota") roads rather than the 
less secure "free" ("libre") roads whenever possible. 
 
Motor vehicle accidents are the leading cause of death of U.S. 
citizens in Mexico.  Motorists should exercise special caution 
on the heavily-traveled expressway south of Cancun, particularly 
between Playa del Carmen and Tulum, where the road narrows from 
4 divided lanes to two-way traffic on a narrow and 
poorly-maintained road. 
 
U.S. citizens are advised to cooperate with official checkpoints 
when traveling on Mexican highways. 
 
Prior to road travel ensure your vehicle is in good working 
condition and that fluids are at the correct level. When 
traveling long distances, it is best to travel in tandem with 
another vehicle.  Ensure that there is enough fuel to reach 
larger cities or towns, as some smaller communities may not have 
service stations. 
 
The following items are recommended for road trips: 
Cellular phone and charger 
Spare tire 
Portable gas can with funnel 
Potable water 
Non-perishable food items 
 
First aid kit 
Jumper cables 
Flares / reflectors 
Tool kit 
Spare key 
 
¶B.      Protecting Your Vehicle 
Do not leave valuables or items such as laptops, ipods and 
expensive sunglasses in plain view and unattended in your vehicle.  Avoid leaving your auto on the street. When possible park your 
vehicle inside residential compounds or parking areas with 
attendants. 
 
¶7. (U) Precautions at Your Residence 
 
Be cautious of unannounced maintenance, utility, or municipal 
service personnel asking for entry into your residence. Ask for 
proper identification and verify the person's identity before 
allowing access. 
 
When hiring domestic help, vet the person to the greatest extent 
you can. Ensure they are briefed on not volunteering information 
to unidentified callers and not allowing individuals into your 
home without proper authorization. Though you may have great 
trust in your house staff, it is best to maintain good control 
over keys that lead into your living area. 
 
¶8. (U) Personal Security Practices 
 
¶A. Daily Habits 
Vary your times and routes to and from work, school, or 
activities. Do not become time and place predictable. 
 
Maintain a low personal profile; it is best to avoid activities 
that draw attention. Avoid wearing ostentatious jewelry or 
clothing that may bring unwanted attention. 
 
Be alert to surveillance. Criminals, even petty thieves, are 
known to watch the activities of their victims before they 
commit a robbery or assault. 
 
Advise colleagues and family of your daily plans and ensure they 
know how to reach you. 
 
¶B. General Security 
 
Always be aware of your surroundings.  Report all suspicious 
activity to the proper authorities. 
 
In traffic, always attempt to leave space in which to maneuver. 
Always leave yourself an exit.  Be prepared to take evasive 
action at any time. 
 
Avoid choke points in travel. Be wary of diversions. 
 
Whenever possible, do not have a set day for shopping, errands 
and personal needs.  Be unpredictable. 
 
Never give out your personal information such as family member 
and household staff names, addresses and telephone numbers in an 
open setting. 
 
Ensure all of your family members are briefed on security 
measures. 
 
¶C.      Security Companies 
There are numerous private security companies available in the 
Yucatan Peninsula and through out Mexico. The RSO Office Merida 
does not endorse any specific private security company. The 
following list is for information purposes only: 
 
ADT Security Services 
Kroll 
Control Risk 
Wakenhut 
Intercon Security Services 
Protigi 
Vance International Mexico 
 
¶9. (U) Other Relevant Information 
 
Mexico country code: 52 
Merida city code: 99 
 
U.S. Consulate Merida 
Calle 60 No. 338-K x 29 y 31 
Col. Alcala Martin Merida, Yucatan, Mexico 97050 
(011) (52) (999) 942-5700 (dialing from the U.S.) 
(01) (999) 942-5700 (dialing from within Mexico) 
942-5700 (dialing from within Merida) 
E-mail: meridacons@state.gov 
 
Consular Agency Cancun 
Plaza Caracol II, 3er Piso No. 320-323 
Km 8.5 Blvd. Kuculkan, 
Zona Hotelera Cancun, Quintana Roo, Mexico 77500 
(011)(52)(1)(998) 845-4364 (dialing from the U.S.) 
(044)(998) 845-4364 (dialing from within Cancun) 
(045)(998) 845-4364 (dialing from elsewhere in Mexico) 
E-mail: cancunagency@gmail.com 
Consular Agency Cozumel 
Villa Mar Mall in the Main Plaza, Locale # 8 
Parque Juarez - Av. Juarez y 5th Av. Nte. 
Cozumel, Quintana Roo, Mexico 77600 
(011)(52)(1)(987) 876-0624 (dialing from the U.S.) 
(044)(987) 876-0624 (dialing from within Cozumel) 
(045)(987) 876-0624 (dialing from elsewhere in Mexico) 
E-mail: usgov@cozumel.net or usca@cozumel.net 
 
Consular Agency Playa del Carmen 
"The Palapa" Calle 1 Sur, Entre 15 Av. Y 20 Av. 
Playa del Carmen, Quintana Roo, Mexico 77710 
(011)(52)(1)(984) 807-8355 (dialing from the U.S.) 
(044)(984) 807-8355 (dialing from within Playa) 
(045)(984) 807-8355 (dialing from elsewhere in Mexico) 
E-Mail: playausca@hotmail.com 
 
Police Emergency: 066 
 
¶10. (U) OSAC Mexico Country Council: 
 
The Department of State supports an active OSAC Council, with a 
membership of 80 companies. For more information on OSAC and 
future OSAC events, contact Ms. Janet Salgado at 5080-2000, ext. 
¶4918. For more information on OSAC in the Yucatan, contact the 
Regional Security Office Merida (011) (52) (999) 942-5719 or 
OSAC's Regional Coordinator for the Western Hemisphere or visit 
the council on line at HYPERLINK 
"http://www.osac.gov/"http://www.OSAC.gov  
. 
MARTIN