09PRAGUE45
CZECH EU PRESIDENCY: COMMENTS ON UPCOMING JANUARY
Fri Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Prague
VZCZCXRO3857
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHPG #0045/01 0231657
ZNR UUUCC ZZH
P 231657Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRAGUE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1031
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBW/AMEMBASSY BELGRADE 0008
RUEHPOD/AMEMBASSY PODGORICA 0001
RUEHPS/AMEMBASSY PRISTINA 0053
RUEHSQ/AMEMBASSY SKOPJE 0193
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0719
RUEHVB/AMEMBASSY ZAGREB 0315UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRAGUE 000045 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/ERA WLUCAS, EUR/CE FOR ATRATENSEK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EUN EZ EG PGOV PREL ZI SO SU AF BO
SUBJECT: CZECH EU PRESIDENCY: COMMENTS ON UPCOMING JANUARY 
GAERC 
 
REF: A. PRAGUE DAILY - JANUARY 23 
     ¶B. BRUSSELS 79 
     ¶C. CARNIE-BOWLES E-MAIL DATED 1.20.09 
     ¶D. STATE 4297 
 
PRAGUE 00000045  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On January 21 emboff spoke with Magdalena 
Janesova of the Czech MFA Department of Common Foreign and 
Security Policy in advance of the January 26-27 EU General 
Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC).  Of note were 
her comments on: Gaza, the Balkans, Sudan, Zimbabwe, Belarus, 
Ukraine and Guantanamo.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
EU Engagement on Gaza 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Janesova noted with some surprise that we had points 
on so many topics, but yet none related to the current 
situation in Gaza.  She noted that the EU FMs are focusing 
intensely on this subject and referenced the January 21 
dinner the Czechs hosted for the EU 27 with Israeli FM Livni 
in Brussels.  While the EU reiterated the importance of 
opening border crossings to allow for humanitarian aid to 
enter Gaza, Livni apparently made no promises.  She has also 
apparently made no move to accept the EU offer to augment the 
EU Rafah border monitoring mission, which the EU believes 
would help to address the issue of smuggling.  Both Janesova 
and Deputy Director Katerina Sequensova, who joined for this 
portion of the discussion, spoke with extreme skepticism 
about the EU offer of a border mission, given the lack of 
enthusiasm from Israel and Egypt.  They also cited comments 
by Robert Cooper of the European Council Secretariat who has 
apparently noted that such a monitoring missions faces 
serious handicaps; communication with all of the relevant 
parties is problematic, especially as the EU does not 
directly communicate with Hamas.  The EU, and the Czechs in 
particular, are also looking to what more can be done to 
address the humanitarian crisis and they are working in 
cooperation with the Egyptians on a conference, likely to be 
held in Cairo around February 15.  Janesova also highlighted 
the EU FMs are meeting with their Egyptian, Jordanian, 
Palestinian Authority and Norweigian counterparts on the 
evening of January 26 in Brussels (Note: Earlier in the week 
Turkey was announced as one of the invited participants at 
this dinner although Janesova did not mention Turkey as one 
of the scheduled participants during her discussion with 
Emboff on January 21.  End Note). 
 
---------- 
The Western Balkans - Kosovo, Bosnia, Serbia, Croatia, 
Macedonia and Montenegro 
---------- 
¶3. (SBU) According to Janesova, the Western Balkans will be 
dropped from next week's GAERC agenda and instead the Czechs 
will "work the corridors" before putting this back on the 
agenda.  (Note: It appears that part of this decision stems 
from Dutch intransigence on EU enlargement while things 
remain unresolved on the Lisbon Treaty, Slovene concerns 
about Croatia, and Greek issues with Macedonia.  End Note.) 
Nonetheless, Janesova offered several insights related to the 
region. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Kosovo: In response to our query about the EULEX 
operational capability, she noted that things have been 
moving a bit slower than they would like.  Her sense was that 
EULEX was likely to reach full operational capability only 
around the end of March.  The Czechs agree that customs, 
courts and police remain key issues.  Janesova indicated that 
they are paying particular attention to recognition (or lack 
thereof) of Kosovo customs stamps by Serbia.  She 
acknowledged A/S Fried's emphasis on the need for 
institutionalized coordination between the key organizations 
in Pristina made during the Political Director's meeting as 
well as the fact that Robert Cooper of the European Council 
Secretariat planned to look into improving this, particularly 
as it relates to ICR Feith and EULEX HOM de Kermabon.  She 
mused aloud that perhaps the EU member states should request 
joint reports of conditions on the ground from the 
Secretariat as both Feith and de Kermabon report up the same 
chain of command there. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Serbia: Janesova commented that the EU PSC 
 
PRAGUE 00000045  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Ambassadors agreed to establish a two person office in 
Belgrade.  While the mandate is apparently still being 
fleshed out, the Czechs apparently would like to see this 
office staffed by people with technical expertise.  On the 
issue of the Serbian Stabilization and Association Agreement, 
the Czechs note the Dutch remain steadfast on the need for 
Serbian compliance with the ICTY before they will support any 
further movement on the SAA. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Bosnia: Janesova noted that with the upcoming PIC 
scheduled for early March, the EU believes that it is 
important to move toward closing the Office of the High 
Representative and that the Council Secretariat continues to 
work on the mandate for the EU Special Representative.  The 
Czechs believe that continuing the OHR will not help the 
current situation.  Signaling that the EU may view things 
slightly differently than the U.S. in this sphere, Janesova 
commented that many of the "five plus two" objectives and 
conditions are very much open to interpretation, questioning 
what exactly constitutes "internal stability," or "resolving 
the status of Brcko district." 
 
¶7. (SBU) Croatia: Janesova noted that there are three Slovene 
issues on the table hampering progress on Croatian accession. 
 She noted that there remains an unresolved border concern 
related to a Slovene seaside port which falls within the 
territorial waters of Croatia.  There are also issues related 
to Ljubljana Bank.  Apparently after this bank was 
nationalized, problems remained regarding the accounts of 
Croatian nationals.  Janesova noted that the Slovenes thus 
have blocked discussion of the Croatian accession chapter 
related to the free flow of capital.  Third, there is a 
concern related to the nuclear power plant in Slovenia. 
Apparently there are disagreements between the Croatians and 
Slovenes regarding how nuclear waste disposal will be paid 
for and handled. 
 
¶8. (U) Montenegro and Macedonia: With respect to Macedonia, 
Janesova noted that the EU is in an awkward position with the 
lack of flexibility from either Macedonia or Greece on the 
name issue as well as upcoming March elections in Macedonia. 
With respect to Montenegro, Janesova noted that once again it 
has been the Dutch that have been especially difficult 
holding up movement on all enlargement issues. 
 
---------- 
Africa - Sudan and Zimbabwe 
---------- 
¶9. (SBU) On our points related to Sudan and Darfur, the 
Czechs expressed concern about the work remaining on the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.  The Czechs also believe that 
much of this will require pragmatism on behalf of the 
international community as President Bashir's involvement 
will very likely be required if any progress is to be made. 
The Czechs also thanked us for referencing the U.S.-EU 
mission to eastern Chad from January 25-31.  As they were 
unaware of the details of this mission, they asked us to 
please pass along additional details, especially related to 
who was representing the EU on this mission.  Janesova noted 
that the EU would be renewing its restrictive measures on 
Zimbabwe and adding additional measures.  In the upcoming 
GAERC statement they are also planning to call for a fact 
finding mission related to trade in illicit diamonds.  The 
Czechs also flagged their interest in our point related to a 
possible future UNSC resolution on Zimbabwe.  They would 
welcome additional information of what we would press for in 
terms of the substance of such a resolution. 
 
---------- 
Ukraine and Belarus 
---------- 
¶10. (SBU) The EU has its troika with Belarus at the Foreign 
Ministerial level on January 27.  At this time they plan to 
discuss EU-Belarus relations (to include human rights and 
democracy concerns), regional issues related to Moldova, 
Russia and Ukraine, and economic/energy topics.  With respect 
to the EU-Eastern Partnership Summit in May, Janesova stated 
that the EU reviews the restrictions in place against Belarus 
in April, and that any potential invitation to Lukashenka to 
the summit would likely not be issued until after the 
restrictions are reviewed and there is an indication that the 
Belarus government has made progress on key reforms.  On the 
 
PRAGUE 00000045  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Ukraine, Janesova noted that they will have a troika 
discussion on February 5 and they will also discuss three key 
topics: gas (lessons learned and the way forward), the 
concept of the Eastern Partnership and the EU-Ukraine 
relationship, which very much flows from the second topic. 
 
---------- 
Guantanamo 
---------- 
¶11. (SBU) The Czechs expressed pleasure with the first 
comments of the Obama administration as well as the executive 
orders related to Guantanamo.  They commented that the 
Foreign Minister's discussions would be done during the 
informal luncheon and that the EU was not planning to issue 
any statements on this, other than the January 22 statement 
welcoming the signing of the executive orders.  With respect 
to possible visits to the U.S. by Commissioner Barrot or 
Czech Minister of Interior Langer to discuss Guantanamo 
(reftels B and C), the Czech MFA officials checked with the 
Czech MOI security policy department on January 20, which was 
unaware of such a trip.  (Note: Emboffs also checked with MOI 
contacts who indicated that as of now a visit by Czech 
Minister Langer was "more of an intention than a coherent 
plan." End Note.) 
Thompson-Jones