09SANAA84
OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT FOR YEMEN
Wed Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
R 141438Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0969UNCLAS SANAA 000084 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/OSAC AND DS/IP/NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC APER AMGT YM KCRM
SUBJECT: OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT FOR YEMEN 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
The following is the annual OSAC Crime/Safety report for the 
year ending December 31, 2008. 
 
¶1.  OVERALL CRIME AND SAFETY SITUATION:  Yemen is a poor, 
developing country.  The central government has control over 
the major cities and towns, while traditional tribal powers 
control the outlying areas.  Tourists and expatriates run the 
greatest risk of encountering criminal elements in those 
areas.  This lack of central control in certain areas has 
allowed Yemen to be used as a transit point for Islamic 
extremists and weapons.  However, non-terrorist-related 
violent crimes against foreigners are rare.  Land disputes 
are common even in Sanaa, and frequently evolve into 
exchanges of gunfire within urban areas.  Kidnappings are 
also a persistent problem throughout Yemen.  Yemeni society, 
on the whole, does not express an anti-American sentiment. 
 
¶2.  POLITICAL VIOLENCE:  Political violence is prevalent, 
usually occurring during demonstrations when the Yemeni 
government over-asserts its authority.  Demonstrations in the 
past year have not targeted U.S. Government facilities or 
U.S. business interests. 
 
There is a large anti-government group in northern Yemen, 
known as the Al-Houthi rebels.  In June, there were 
escalating battles between Al-Houthi rebels and ROYG forces a 
few kilometers outside of Sana'a.  Currently, a cease fire 
exists between the ROYG and the Al-Houthis, but there 
continues to be tensions between the two forces which could 
again ignite into a wider conflict. 
 
In the south, there are tensions over what is perceived as 
unequal treatment between northerners and southerners. 
Protests are common and, at times, end with violent action on 
the part of the ROYG, which can spur additional violence from 
demonstrators. 
 
¶3.  POST-SPECIFIC CONCERNS:  The consular information sheet 
for Yemen provides a good overview of the crime and safety 
situation in Yemen.  Yemen is in an earthquake zone and 
flooding can be a problem in the rainy season. Caution should 
be exercised when traveling in "wadis" (dry river beds), as 
they are subject to flash floods.  In October 2008, a massive 
flood affected areas throughout eastern Yemen, killing 
hundreds and displacing tens of thousands.  Yemen's emergency 
fire capabilities are marginal.  There is no "911" for 
emergency services.  Road travel is one of the most dangerous 
aspects of Yemen.  The lack of safe driving habits, traffic 
regulations, and poor state of repair of the vehicles on the 
road create a difficult environment. 
 
2008 saw a significant increase in terrorist-related 
activity; westerners are warned to use caution when traveling 
in Yemen.  Throughout the months of March to June both 
Sana'a, and Yemen as a whole, experienced several terrorist 
attacks.  In September, one of the worst terrorist attacks in 
Yemen in over a decade occurred at the US Embassy, and 
resulted in the death of eighteen people.   Al-Qaeda in Yemen 
has claimed responsibility for many of the attacks, and 
continues to remain a formidable presence. 
 
Kidnappings are a persistent problem throughout Yemen.  In 
mid-December, armed tribesmen attempted to kidnap a British 
diplomat in the Bait Bous area of Sanaa. One day later, three 
German nationals were kidnapped in that same vicinity and 
later released. In a tribal area, three South African 
nationals were also kidnapped and later released.  The 
motivation behind the kidnappings appears to be disagreements 
with the ROYG or financial disputes with western companies 
operating in the tribal areas. 
 
¶4.  POLICE RESPONSE:  Police in Yemen are poorly equipped, 
paid, and trained.  Local police will assist victims of crime 
but may ask for a gratuity for the service.  When a foreigner 
is involved in an accident, it is best advised to remain on 
scene.  In the event of serious injuries, efforts should be 
made to get the victim to a hospital and wait for the police 
and victim's family to arrive.  Leaving the scene of an 
accident, especially if there are injuries, can lead to 
demands of retribution and payment to the victim's family. 
In the event of a serious problem involving a criminal 
incident or accident, the U.S. Embassy can be contacted at 
755-2000 or 755-2170 (after hours).  Visitors to Yemen should 
register with the Embassy Consular Section so that their 
whereabouts are known in case of an emergency. 
Foreign businesses, including locally-based American firms, 
follow local customs and deal with tribal leaders and ROYG 
ministries to facilitate operational and personal security. 
 
¶5.  MEDICAL EMERGENCIES:  The major hotels (Movenpick, Sheba, 
and Sheraton) have English-speaking operators who can assist 
in an emergency.  Major hospitals located in Sana'a are: 
 
Modern German Hospital, tel: 608-888; University of Science 
and Technology Hospital, tel: 471-122; and Saudi German 
Hospital, tel: 313-333 or 329-885/6. 
 
For further information, the U.S. Embassy Regional Medical 
Office can be contacted at tel: 967-1-755-2160. 
 
¶6.  TIPS ON HOW TO AVOID BECOMING A VICTIM: It is recommended 
that visitors read the latest State Department Travel Warning 
announcement and check with the Embassy Regional Security 
Office for the latest threat/security-related information. 
Do not display large amounts of cash in public or wear 
expensive jewelry. Dress conservatively. Refrain from walking 
in sparsely-populated areas with poor lighting.  While 
driving, always keep the windows up and doors locked.  The 
markets and shopping areas have a few pick-pockets.  Be aware 
of your surroundings and carry belongings in a fanny pack or 
shoulder bag.  Do not leave items in your vehicle that could 
invite theft.  Avoid sight-seeing events that involve police, 
security forces, or violence.  Travelers are advised against 
casual travel to rural areas.  Travel is particularly 
dangerous in the tribal areas north and east of Sanaa, close 
to the border with Saudi Arabia.  Armed tribesmen in those 
areas have kidnapped a number of foreigners in attempts to 
resolve disputes with the Yemeni government. 
 
¶7.  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:  U.S. Embassy Sana'a tel: 
967-1-755-2000 or 967-1-755-2170 (after hours).  In the event 
of an after-hours emergency, the Embassy Duty Officer may be 
reached through the numbers provided. 
 
 
SECHE