09TELAVIV260
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0260/01 0301202
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301202Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0288
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4936
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1533
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5382
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5740
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4969
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3428
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5758
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2594
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0807
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9523
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7020
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 1966
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6026
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8056
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0854
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1294
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000260 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
HaQaretz quoted decision-makers in Jerusalem as saying that Israel 
would continue to launch pinpoint strikes against Hamas and other 
Palestinian militant organizations in Gaza.  Yesterday Israeli 
aircraft wounded 10 Palestinians in the attempted killing of a Hamas 
operative in southern Gaza.  Palestinian militants launched two 
Qassam rockets and one mortar round into Israel, resulting in no 
casualties or damage.  HaQaretz reported that Hizbullah, meanwhile, 
has vowed to strike Israeli targets, and that on Wednesday Cypriot 
authorities detained an Iranian arms ship that Israel believes may 
have been en route to Hizbullah. 
 
All media highlighted a diplomatic incident yesterday at the World 
Economic Forum in Davos: Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan stormed off 
the stage after verbally sparring with President Shimon Peres over 
the recent fighting in Gaza. Erdogan was angry after being cut off 
by a panel moderator after listening to an impassioned monologue by 
Peres defending Israel's recent 22-day offensive against Hamas in 
Gaza.  Erdogan declared to Peres: "You are killing people."  A 
finger-pointing Peres told Erdogan that he would have done the same 
if rockets had been falling on Istanbul.  Israel Radio quoted 
diplomatic sources in Ankara as saying that there likely wonQt be 
direct consequences to the incident, but that the Jewish lobby in 
Washington may stop preventing the characterization by the U.S. of 
the 1915 killing of Armenians by Turkey as Qgenocide.Q  The radio 
also said that the row may spark a comparison between Hamas and the 
PKK as well as help Erdogan in the upcoming Turkish elections. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the U.S. expressed concern for the 
civilian casualties on both sides in the conflict in the Gaza Strip 
and called to provide humanitarian aid for Gazan residents and 
assist in the region's relief. U.S. Ambassador to the UN Susan Rice 
was quoted as saying at a UN Security Council meeting that 
Washington expected Israel to stand by its commitment to inquire 
whether it abided by international law in the course of the 
fighting.  That said, Rice stressed that many accusations had been 
launched against Israel with no intention other than to inflame 
public opinion. She added that Hamas had violated international law 
by firing rockets on civilian towns in Israel. She said that Hamas 
members also hid in civilian facilities in order to protect 
themselves. Rice noted that the Obama administration was taking a 
new approach to the UN and did not automatically suspect it of 
fostering hostility toward Israel.  Leading media reported that 
yesterday the UN launched an emergency appeal for $613 million to 
help Palestinians recover from IsraelQs offensive. 
 
Israel Radio reported that 60 Democratic members of the US House of 
Representatives called on Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to 
allow emergency support for the UN's agency for refugees in Gaza, 
UNRWA, so that it will be able to begin providing relief after the 
destruction caused by the fighting.  The Congress members are also 
requesting that Israel allow Palestinians who were badly injured in 
the course of the fighting to receive medical treatment in the PA or 
Jordan. 
 
HaQaretz and other media quoted Likud Chairman Benjamin Netanyahu as 
saying yesterday that he would not be bound by PM Olmert's 
commitments to evacuate West Bank settlements and withdraw from the 
territories. 
 
All media reported that yesterday a Spanish judge decided to open a 
probe of seven former top security officials -- including then 
defense minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer, IAF commander Dan Halutz, and 
Shin Bet  head Avi Dichter-- for alleged war crimes in the 2002 
bombing in Gaza that killed top Hamas terrorist Salah Shehadeh as 
well as 14 other people.   The media cited IsraelQs anger over the 
decision, and reported that it is considering appealing the move. 
In another development, HaQaretz reported that Israeli leftists have 
begun drawing up a Qblacklist of army officers involved in the 
recent operation in Gaza, in response to the military censorQs 
decision to ban the publication of their names, pictures, or other 
indentifying details. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that 300,00 Jews now live in the West 
Bank, a 50,000 increase during OlmertQs tenure. 
 
All media reported that Pope Benedict XVIQs decision to reinstate 
four ultra-conservative clerics has sparked a conflict with IsraelQs 
Chief Rabbinate and other institutions.  Two of those bishops have 
denied the Holocaust. 
Maariv presented the results of a TNS/Teleseker poll on voting 
intentions for the Knesset elections (In brackets: Maariv's January 
23 poll): 
QIf elections were held today, for which party would you vote? 
Likud: 28 (28): Kadima: 23 (24); Labor: 17 (16); Yisrael Beiteinu: 
16 (16);  Shas: 10 (9); Meretz: 6 (6); United Torah Judaism: 5 (6); 
National Religious Party-Jewish Home: 4 (4): Arab parties: 8 (11); 
National Union: 3 (2); 70.3% percent of respondents declared their 
intention to vote. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe cited the results of a Shvakim-Panorama survey 
claiming that Likud leads Kadima  by 9 Knesset seats: 
:Likud: 29: Kadima: 20; Labor: 16; Yisrael Beiteinu: 16;  Shas: 11; 
United Torah Judaism: 7; Meretz: 4); National Religious Party-Jewish 
Home: 3): Arab parties: 9; National Union: 3. 
 
Several media reported that many United Torah Judaism voters are 
shifting to Shas. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Europe correspondent Nadav Eyal wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: QObama is not seeking long, interminable processes such as 
the Roadmap.  He doesnQt believe in conflict management, but in 
agreements and a resolution mechanism. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Shimon Shiffer and others wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: QIt was said yesterday 
in Gaza that the cancellation of Barak's trip to the United States 
was another indication that Israel was preparing for a massive 
reprisal, but that George Mitchell's presence in the region had 
caused a delay. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (1/30): QAlthough diplomatic sources said 
it was clear the new Obama administration would stand by [President 
BushQs 2004] letter [to Ariel Sharon], this did not mean that the 
United StatesQ recognition of changing realities on the ground meant 
it accepted Israel's interpretation of this. 
Jerrold Kessel and Pierre Kochendler, Jerusalem-based reporters and 
documentary filmmakers, wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz: Q[President Obama should] act now, by speaking out now, 
definitely in advance of the February 10 Israeli elections.  It's 
time for plain speaking from friends. 
 
HaQaretz editorialized: QIt is not possible to demand that the 
Palestinians demonstrate transparency in their battle against the 
infrastructure of terror while at the same time throwing sand in the 
world's eyes over the deepening of the occupation's 
infrastructure. 
 
Shmuel Rosner wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv: QObamaQs 
entourage swears that he is not seeking a row with Netanyahu. 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized: 
QInstead of President ObamaQs envoy presenting an outline of 
negotiations, the Israeli Prime Minister is presenting one of its 
own.  The U.S. administration will therefore likely embrace this 
outline as its own. 
 
Europe correspondent Nadav Eyal and reporter Amir Buhbut wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv: Q[A] letter [that President Obama 
will send the Iranian leadership] is the direct outcome of a series 
of positive declarations on both sides over the past two months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.   QNo Nonsense 
 
Europe correspondent Nadav Eyal wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (1/30): QMitchell wonQt try to do to the Palestinians and 
Israel what he did in Northern Ireland.  However, his nomination is 
the new administrationQs key message: Obama is not seeking long, 
interminable processes such as the Roadmap.  He doesnQt believe in 
conflict management, but in agreements and a resolution mechanism. 
Obama is not exactly a person consumed by doubts about himself.... 
[Mitchell] is not one of BushQs rotating generals, but the real 
thing Q the Qreal McCoy,Q as they say in America. He doesnQt 
empathize with Hamas.  Judging from his comments two years ago, he 
has no intention of breaking the line of Hamas-boycotting, unless it 
recognizes IsraelQs right to exist. 
 
II. QOlmert: Disproportionate Response to Hamas's Actions in Gaza 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Shimon Shiffer and others wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (1/30): QFollowing the 
attack in which an IDF soldier was killed Tuesday and the firing of 
two Qassam rockets in the past couple of days, Prime Minister Ehud 
Olmert supports a harsh and disproportionate response.  The Prime 
Minister believes that Israel must respond disproportionately to 
every incident of fire from the Gaza Strip as well as to every Hamas 
attempt at arms smuggling.  Hamas fears Israel's response and its 
organization's leaders have since returned to their hideouts. 
Yesterday the Prime Minister summoned the Foreign and Defense 
Ministers to discuss Israel's response to the attack and to the 
renewed smuggling and Qassam rocket fire.  Behind closed doors 
Olmert said that Israel must not find itself getting into a war of 
attrition with Hamas.  QIf necessary, the military will embark on a 
new campaign in Gaza,Q he said.   Gaza is hearing these voices and 
getting the hint, and a war atmosphere has again descended on the 
city.  Sources in Gaza said yesterday that Hamas leaders took 
seriously the threats of Shaul Mofaz who warned that as long as 
Gilad Shalit had not been returned, neither would Hamas leaders see 
the light of day.  It was said yesterday in Gaza that the 
cancellation of Barak's trip to the United States was another 
indication that Israel was preparing for a massive reprisal, but 
that George Mitchell's presence in the region had caused a delay. 
 
  QThe U.S. and Israel Diverge on the Interpretation of BushQs 2004 
Letter to Sharon 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (1/30): QAlthough diplomatic sources said 
it was clear the new Obama administration would stand by [President 
BushQs 2004] letter [to Ariel Sharon], this did not mean that the 
United StatesQ recognition of changing realities on the ground meant 
it accepted Israel's interpretation of this to mean Washington would 
back the annexation of the large settlement blocs -- something the 
U.S. has never explicitly said.  This topic is likely to come up on 
Friday morning when Mitchell meets Likud head Benjamin Netanyahu, 
who is expected to present Mitchell with a view of the diplomatic 
process significantly different from the one that Olmert 
presented. 
 
IV.    QNew Rules of Engagement 
 
Jerrold Kessel and Pierre Kochendler, Jerusalem-based reporters and 
documentary filmmakers, wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (1/30): QThe Qtwo-state solutionQ is, in boxing 
terminology, about to be counted out, some say.  More and more 
people maintain there's already been a count of Q10 and you're out. 
 Acknowledging the urgency, President Barack Obama has been as good 
as his word, letting not a single day pass before taking action to 
demonstrate that the United States is reengaged to avert the 
knockout.  But is it enough?  It isn't.  Obama needs to establish 
new rules of engagement.  In dispatching George Mitchell as his 
special envoy to the region, the president said in an interview with 
the Al Arabiya network, he expects him to Qstart by listening, 
because ultimately we cannot tell the Israelis or the Palestinians 
what's best for them -- they're going to have to make some 
decisions.Q  Yes, Obama can tell them. In fact, he should. Act now, 
by speaking out now, definitely in advance of the February 10 
Israeli elections. It's time for plain speaking from friends. The 
war in Gaza has reaffirmed the legitimacy of Israel's acting to 
establish its deterrence. [But] Israel must be ready to commit to 
ending the occupation. Some will see this kind of Washington 
message as unwarranted interference in the elections.  It is not: 
It's not telling Israelis for whom to vote.  Nor is it pressure. 
Before they decide the direction they want their country to go and 
their place in the region, it's simply letting Israelis know that 
this is where the U.S. has decided to stand -- this is its direction 
and its place in the region. 
 
 
¶V.  QLike Two Hedgehogs Making Love 
 
Shmuel Rosner wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv (1/30): Q[In 
the nineties], the Americans fiercely endeavored to get rid of 
Netanyahu.  This didnQt bring much good. The Obama administration 
wants to be wiser than ClintonQs.  During the election campaign the 
president was caught making unnecessary statements Q he said that a 
Qpro-LikudQ approach was not needed to be a friend of Israel Q but 
he quickly regretted his words. ObamaQs entourage swears that he is 
not seeking a row with Netanyahu.  He hopes that the bitter 
experience from the nineties has been useful to both sides: this 
time Netanyahu will be more careful about keeping good relations 
with the administration.  Obama will not try to prove that he is 
stronger Q at least not at the beginning. 
 
VI.   QStop the Deceit and Whitewashing 
 
HaQaretz editorialized (1/30): QAlmost four years after attorney 
Talia Sasson published a report exposing the cooperation, by 
commission and omission, of successive Israeli governments in the 
establishment of dozens of settlement outposts, an internal defense 
document reveals that even settlements deemed legal by Israel are in 
part, and sometimes in large part, effectively illegal outposts. 
The Defense Ministry's database documents illegal construction in 
more than 30 settlements, including  veteran [ones].... This is not 
another report by Peace Now or another investigative report by the 
media. It is an official document, drafted by a retired senior 
officer, Baruch Spiegel, on orders from former defense minister 
Shaul Mofaz. It casts a heavy shadow over Israel's pro-peace 
statements, while raising questions about its official position that 
the Quse Israel makes of land for the settlements accords with all 
the rules and norms of international law.  Privately-owned land has 
not been expropriated for the sake of establishing the 
settlementsQ.... It is not possible to demand that the Palestinians 
demonstrate transparency in their battle against the infrastructure 
of terror while at the same time throwing sand in the world's eyes 
over the deepening of the occupation's infrastructure. Or in the 
words of U.S. envoy George Mitchell's report from May 2001: The kind 
of security cooperation desired by the GOI [Government of Israel] 
cannot for long coexist with settlement activity. 
 
VII.  QUnbinding Commitments 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (1/30): 
QA recurring, malignant phenomenon is again invading IsraelQs 
diplomatic world: The outgoing Prime Minister is presenting an 
official American envoy Q this time, George Mitchell Q his 
governmentQs commitment to a permanent-status agreement as part of 
the negotiations. The problem created by the QOlmert legacyQ for 
the next government is not so much in the pledge that he gave. 
After all, no government decision approved this shelf agreement, 
neither did the Knesset.  But what Olmert did was to make life 
easier for the Americans.  Instead of President ObamaQs envoy 
presenting an outline of negotiations, the Israeli Prime Minister is 
presenting one of its own.  The U.S. administration will therefore 
likely embrace this outline as its own. 
 
VIII. QObamaQs New Friend: Ahmadinejad 
Europe correspondent Nadav Eyal and reporter Amir Buhbut wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv (1/30): QSenior Obama administration 
officials have drafted a letter that the President is supposed to 
send to the Iranian leadership, in a first attempt to thaw taut 
relations between Washington and Tehran.  It is still unclear at 
this time whether the recipient of the letter will be spiritual 
leader Ali Khamenei or President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. The letter is 
the direct outcome of a series of positive declarations on both 
sides over the past two months. [This being said], a senior Israeli 
defense source said yesterday regarding the location of an Iranian 
ship suspected of carrying weapons for Hamas.  QThe Americans are 
monitoring the ship, but since it travels under the flag of Cyprus, 
it cannot be stopped and searched.  The IraniansQ very willingness 
and ability to transfer weaponry to Hamas is evidence of the level 
of sanctions that were imposed on Iran. 
 
CUNNINGHAM