09USUNNEWYORK19
UNSC: COUNCIL SUPPORTS SYG TRAVEL TO REGION; URGES
Tue Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO6037
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0019 0132133
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 132133Z JAN 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5632
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000019 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KWBG KPAL UNSC IS EG TU
SUBJECT: UNSC: COUNCIL SUPPORTS SYG TRAVEL TO REGION; URGES 
IMPLEMENTATION OF UNSCR 1860 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In closed-door consultations with the 
Security Council on January 13, the Secretary-General briefed 
the Council on the goals of his upcoming trip to the region. 
He stressed it was time for the violence to stop and called 
for a durable cease-fire and the implementation of UNSCR 
¶1860.  Council members were unanimously supportive of the 
Secretary-General's travel and his efforts to promptly and 
effectively implement UNSCR 1860.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In closed-door consultations with the Security 
Council on January 13 just prior to his departure that 
afternoon for the region, the Secretary-General outlined the 
goals of his travel.  He stressed that it was time for the 
violence to stop.  He explained that he had held a press 
conference the previous day to send that message to leaders 
in the region before his meetings with them.  He said that at 
each stop he would repeat the call for a durable cease-fire 
and the need for the implementation of UNSCR 1860 and the 
delivery of humanitarian assistance.  He said he would 
encourage the diplomatic efforts amongst the concerned 
parties and stress the need for an end to the rocket attacks 
and to Israeli military action, followed by an Israeli 
withdrawal.  The Secretary-General underlined the 
humanitarian crisis and the need to protect civilians.  He 
called for international humanitarian law to be scrupulously 
observed and said there would be a UN investigation of the 
attacks on a UN convoy and a UN school.  He also said a UN 
humanitarian assessment mission would be deployed as soon as 
it was safe to do so and that the UN would lead the 
international reconstruction effort.  He promised to brief 
the Council after his return from the region on January 20. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Council members in their statements were 
unanimously supportive of the Secretary-General's travel and 
his efforts to effectively and promptly implement UNSCR 1860. 
 Most delegations called on both parties to cease fighting. 
Many delegations specifically voiced support for the 
implementation of a monitoring mechanism, including Turkey 
which offered to participate in such a monitoring mission. 
Ambassador Khalilzad, in his statement, applauded the 
continuing efforts of the Egyptian and French governments to 
effect an immediate, durable, and sustainable cease-fire.  He 
thanked UNRWA, ICRC, and other humanitarian agencies for 
their actions in Gaza and urged real-time, ground-level 
coordination between them and Israeli combatant commanders to 
ensure that relief work can be carried out safely.  He 
stressed that, in the aftermath of the crisis, the 
international community must be prepared to adopt an 
intensive reconstruction initiative, perhaps through a donors 
conference, to complement the efforts of the PA in Gaza. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Libyan DPR's remarks were extremely supportive 
of the Secretary-General, welcoming his visit to convince 
both parties to end the fighting.  The UK Perm Rep, in 
response to the Secretary-General's statement that the lack 
of implementation of UNSCR 1860 negatively impacted upon the 
credibility of the Security Council, said it is "not the 
credibility of the Security Council that is at stake but the 
international standing of the parties."  He also highlighted 
the need for an end to arms smuggling and previewed a role 
for the UN.  He called on the Secretary-General to highlight, 
during his trip, the crucial work of UN employees in Gaza and 
asked the Secretary-General to come back with ideas on how to 
reconstruct Gaza.  The French Perm Rep referred to a January 
15 Ministerial-level follow-up meeting to the December 2007 
Paris conference that will involve France, Norway, the 
European Commission, and Quartet Representative Tony Blair 
and which will now likely focus more on post-Gaza conflict 
reconstruction. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Austrian Perm Rep welcomed the 
Secretary-General's statements on international humanitarian 
law but pressed the Secretary-General to be more explicit in 
his meetings on the need for its respect and said Austria was 
ready to examine broadening the EU mission at the crossings. 
He also hailed the Secretary-General's planned stop in 
Damascus, saying the Syrians could play a more active role. 
The Mexican Perm Rep also called for respect for 
international humanitarian law and lamented the absence of 
any mention of it in UNSCR 1860.  The Turkish Perm Rep 
welcomed the Secretary-General's visit, including his stop in 
Turkey, and said the Prime Minister's Special Representative 
is in the region trying to assist Egypt in bringing the 
parties to talks.  The Japanese DPR also expressed full 
support for the Secretary-General's trip and noted the 
present of Special Envoy Arima in the region.  The Chinese 
Perm Rep also noted the visit to the region of the Chinese 
Special Envoy who would like to "join international efforts 
towards a lasting solution." 
Khalilzad