09WARSAW59
POLAND: INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 2009
Tue Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
R 200759Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7625
INFO EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
USDOC WASHDC
CIMS NTDB WASHDC
AMCONSUL KRAKOWUNCLAS WARSAW 000059 
 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIQ EFIN ETRD OPIC USTR KTDB PL
SUBJECT: POLAND: INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 2009 
 
REF: 07 STATE 158802 
 
Poland's economy continues to grow at a pace well above EU averages 
and remains an attractive, relatively low-cost destination for 
investors seeking access not only to the European Union (EU) but to 
a dynamic local market as well.  Integration into the EU has been a 
gradual process.  The developments in the Polish economy in 
2004-2008 were influenced to a large extent by institutional and 
regulatory reforms undertaken in the years prior to accession on May 
1, 2004.  Adoption of EU legislation allowed Poland to reform the 
way in which its economy is regulated and restrict government 
intervention in the private sector.  Changes in areas such as 
financial markets, company and competition law, accounting, and 
intellectual property rights have created a better environment for 
business.  Euro adoption, expected over the next few years, will 
further the integration process. 
 
----------------------------------- 
A.1. Openness to Foreign Investment 
----------------------------------- 
 
General Attitude:  Foreign capital has played an important role in 
the transformation and development of the modern Polish market 
economy.  Since 1990, Poland has attracted more than $120 billion in 
foreign direct investment (FDI), principally from Western Europe and 
the United States.  Poland recorded record levels of FDI inflows 
over the last three years.  Investors are attracted by the country's 
economic potential, its young and well-educated work force, and its 
proximity to major markets. Poland grew by an average of 5.3% for 
2005-2008 and while Poland will not escape the global downturn, 
growth projections continue well above EU averages.  Poland's 
accession to the EU is perceived by many firms to have reduced 
Poland's country and investment risks and Poland has announced plans 
to join the Euro area common currency.  EU membership also resulted 
in an influx of billions of Euros in new financial resources such as 
structural funds and the Cohesion Fund, which can be used to support 
investments in transport infrastructure, environmental protection, 
and introduction of new production technologies. 
 
Foreign companies generally enjoy unrestricted access to the Polish 
market.  However, Polish law limits foreign ownership of companies 
in selected strategic sectors, and limits foreign acquisition of 
real estate, especially agricultural land. 
 
Public attitudes towards foreign investment are good, although 
specific cases of foreign investment have become controversial.  For 
example, major retail discount chains continue to be criticized for 
driving smaller Polish-owned shops out of business.  Legislation was 
enacted in 2007 to limit larger retail developments but the law was 
struck down as unconstitutional in 2008. 
 
In recent years, Poland has introduced reforms to improve the 
climate for foreign and domestic investment.  In 2006-2008, 
telecommunication regulations were relaxed, the foreign exchange law 
was simplified, and the overall tax burden was reduced slightly by 
lowering disability insurance contributions.  Work to improve the 
bankruptcy law and the administration of real estate registers 
continued. 
 
Simplification of VAT regulations progressed in 2008. As of December 
1, 2008 the basic VAT reimbursement period is reduced to 60 days 
(from the previous 180 days).  Other amendments have been made to 
conform to European Union standards. Reductions in personal income 
tax rates, originally planned for 2007, become effective in 2009. 
Starting January 2009, two personal income tax (PIT) rates apply in 
Poland: 18% and 32%.  This replaces and on average reduces the 19%, 
30% and 40 rates % in force until the end of 2008. Moreover, the 
government has managed to pass through the parliament pension reform 
which, as of January 1,Q009, dramatically reduces the number of 
people entitled to early retirement. 
 
Major Laws and Regulations:  The basic legal framework for 
establishing and operating companies in Poland, and in particular 
companies with foreign investors, is found in the Commercial 
Companies Code, which entered into force in January 2001, and the 
Law on Freedom of Economic Activity, which entered into force on 
July 2, 2004.  Also relevant is the Act on European Economic 
Interest Grouping and the European Company of March 4, 2005, which 
allows a "European Company" to move its registered office from one 
EU state to another without losing legal personality. 
 
With few exceptions, foreign investors are guaranteed national 
treatment.  Companies that did not have any subsidiary established 
in an EU country before May 1, 2004, but that conduct, or plan to 
commence business operations in Poland must observe all EU 
regulations, and may not be able to benefit from all privileges to 
which EU companies are entitled. An example of an American company 
which may not benefit from such privileges is Dell Corp.  DELL plans 
to build a second factory in Poland while the European Commission is 
checking whether Dell is eligible for public aid from the Polish 
government. The procedure should be completed in April or May 2009. 
 
Under the 2000 Commercial Companies Code as amended, companies can 
be established as joint-stock companies, limited liability 
companies, limited joint-stock partnerships, professional 
partnerships, registered partnerships, and limited partnerships. 
All of these corporate forms are available to a foreign investor, 
provided the investor comes from a member state of the EU or the 
European Free Trade Area (EFTA), or has the right of permanent 
residence in Poland and is based in a country offering reciprocity 
for Polish enterprises.  The United States offers such reciprocity. 
If the above conditions are not met, the investor may establish only 
a limited partnership, a limited joint-stock partnership, a limited 
liability company, a joint-stock company or purchase shares of such 
entities. 
 
According to the Law on the National Court Register of October 1997, 
all companies, commercial partnerships, and sole proprietorships 
must be registered in the Register of Entrepreneurs, a part of the 
National Court Register managed by district courts.  The Register of 
Entrepreneurs is open to the public.  Post is unaware of any laws or 
regulations specifically authorizing private firms to adopt articles 
of incorporation or association which limit or prohibit foreign 
investment, participation or control. 
 
Under the Law on Freedom of Economic Activity, branch offices are 
registered in the National Court Register under the name of the 
foreign investor, with the notation "branch in Poland."  A branch 
office can perform any activity within the scope of business of the 
parent foreign investor that established the branch.  In contrast, 
representative offices must limit their activities to promotion and 
advertising for the parent foreign investor.  Representative offices 
are registered in a special log kept by the Minister of Economy. 
The law specifies certain situations in which registration may be 
refused (e.g., if required documents are not submitted on time or on 
national security grounds). 
 
Screening and Licensing:  Poland does not have any general screening 
mechanism for entry and establishment of businesses by foreign 
firms.  Authorization requirements and foreign equity limits do 
exist for a limited number of sectors, such as broadcasting and air 
transport.  The Law on Freedom of Economic Activity requires a 
permit from the Treasury Ministry for certain major capital 
transactions (i.e., to establish a company when an enterprise owned 
wholly or partially by a legal resident is contributed in-kind to a 
company with foreign ownership.)  A permit from the Treasury 
Ministry is also required to lease assets to or from a state-owned 
enterprise.  Licenses and concessions for defense production and 
management of seaports are granted on the basis of national 
treatment for investors from OECD countries. 
 
Polish law limits non-Polish ownership to 49% of a company's capital 
shares in the air transport and the radio and television 
broadcasting sectors.  This requirement does not apply to EU 
investors.  Waivers of these requirements are not available. 
Furthermore, in the insurance sector at least two members of 
management boards must know Polish.  In the broadcasting sector, the 
number of Polish citizens on supervisory and management boards must 
be higher than the number of foreigners. 
 
All investors must obtain governmental concessions, licenses or 
permits to engage in certain activities.  Sectors in which 
concessions are required include broadcasting, aviation, energy, 
weapons, mining, and private security services. In 2008, the minimum 
validity for concessions was extended from two to five years. 
Regarding licenses and permits, some examples are: 
 
-- The Polish Financial Supervision Authority (KNF) grants 
authorization to operate insurance companies and investment funds, 
and grants licenses for brokerage and banking activities; 
-- The National Broadcasting Council issues radio and television 
broadcasting licenses; 
-- The Economy Ministry issues permits for wholesale trade in 
alcohol, and wholesale and processing of precious stones and 
metals; 
-- The Health Ministry authorizes permits for the pharmaceutical and 
medical materials sectors; 
-- The Transport Ministry provides licenses for air, road and rail 
transport, and for mail services. Recent legislation removed the 
requirement for a concession to construct highways or express roads 
in an effort to facilitate development of this sector. 
 
-- The Interior Ministry licenses the defense industry and security 
services; 
-- Local governments provide permits for buses and taxis, waste 
disposal, pharmacies, and extraction of minerals. 
 
The June 2004 Law on Freedom of Economic Activity introduced 
"regulated activity," which allows for engagement in certain 
activities on the basis of an entry into the regulated activity 
register. For example: 
 
-- Telecom, postal and courier services 
-- Manufacturing of tobacco products, manufacturing and bottling of 
alcohol and wine. 
 
Other regulated activities can be found in the Law. In an effort to 
remove barriers to doing business, the government announced its 
intention to amend the Law on Freedom of Economic Activity, removing 
requirements for permits and concessions and replacing them with 
entries in the regulated activity register.  In April, 2009 a "one 
window" option for business registration should be available.  Also 
an e-platform with records of all economic activity entities 
(Centralna Ewidencja i Informacja o Dzialalnosci Gospodarczej) is 
scheduled to launch in July, 2011. 
 
As part of the continuing efforts to harmonize Polish law with 
European Union requirements, a new Polish Classification of Economic 
Activities ("2007 PKD") came into effect on January 1, 2008. All 
businesses established after this date will use the 2007 PKD. 
Existing businesses, however, will have until December 31, 2009 to 
update all filings in which their business activities are specified 
through the use of PKD numbers. 
 
Sale of agricultural land to foreigners has long been a sensitive 
issue.  Since EU accession, citizens of the EU-27, as well as 
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, generally do not need permission 
to purchase real estate, or to acquire or receive shares in a 
company owning real estate in Poland.  There are two exceptions: 
acquisition of agricultural real estate, where Poland was granted 
consent to introduce a transition period, lasting until 2016, with 
respect to unrestricted acquisition of agricultural real estate by 
foreigners (with certain exceptions); and acquisition of "second 
homes" (i.e., a house that is not a place of permanent residence) 
where a transition period, lasting until 2009, was introduced. 
Citizens from countries other than the EU-27, Iceland, Liechtenstein 
and Norway are allowed to own an apartment, 0.4 hectares (4,000 
square meters) of urban land, or up to one hectare of agricultural 
land without a permit.  Better classes of agricultural land require 
approval even by the Minister of Agriculture for legal transfer. 
Such land is not available to foreign ownership. 
 
Citizens from countries other than the EU-27, Iceland, Liechtenstein 
and Norway still must obtain a permit from the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Administration (with the consent of the Defense and 
Agriculture Ministries), pursuant to the Act on Acquisition of Real 
Estate by Foreigners.  A foreign business intending to buy real 
estate in Poland may apply for a provisional permit from the 
Ministry of Interior and Administration, which is valid for up to 
six months, during which time the company is expected to assemble 
documents demonstrating it is a viable business.  Permits may be 
refused for reasons of social policy or public security. 
 
A second form of land title is the perpetual lease, under which the 
lease holder generally controls the property for 40 to 99 years, and 
which can be extended for up to 99 additional years.  Such a 
perpetual tenant has the right to dispose of its interest in the 
land by sale, gift, or bequest.  Companies report that procedures to 
acquire real estate are transparent and that the process is not 
burdensome. 
 
Privatization Program:  The pace of privatization slowed in the last 
few years.  Many of the more attractive government-owned companies 
have already been sold, while those remaining are frequently in 
financial difficulty or are otherwise politically sensitive.  These 
include state-owned companies in the coal, electric power, gas, 
chemical, and defense industries.  Employees and trade unions in the 
remaining state-owned companies, observing growing competition from 
the private sector, are increasingly skeptical about the 
government's ability to ensure a safe future.  In general, employees 
and trade unions are becoming less distrustful of private investors, 
whose involvement in a company is often seen as a change for the 
better. 
 
With relatively few exceptions, in major privatizations the Polish 
government has invited foreign investors to compete for a strategic 
interest.  In general, bidding criteria have been clear and the 
process has been transparent.  Some commentators have expressed 
concern about the level of foreign ownership of the Polish economy, 
especially in the banking sector, where foreign-controlled banks 
hold around 80% of assets.  The government announced its ambition to 
privatize the Warsaw Stock Exchange, energy sector companies and 
Polish Airways LOT, but few concrete steps have been undertaken. 
 
Discrimination against Foreign Investors:  Generally, foreign 
investors receive similar treatment to domestic investors, both at 
the time of initial investment and after an investment has been 
made.  In the past there were complaints about discrimination in 
public procurement contracts resulting from provisions in 
legislation favoring domestic firms.  Since May 2004, all public 
authorities must apply the Public Procurement Law of January 2004, 
as amended by the November 2007 consolidated Act on Public 
Procurement, when selecting suppliers and service providers in 
public contracts.  Under this law, a joint venture between foreign 
and domestic firms qualifies as "domestic" for procurement 
considerations.  On joining the EU, Poland acceded to the WTO 
Government Procurement Agreement. 
 
Innovative pharmaceuticals is a sector in which companies 
consistently complain of discrimination.  Meaningful access to the 
Polish pharmaceuticals market often hinges on whether a drug appears 
on the government's reimbursement list, since doctors most often 
prescribe drugs from the list.  Purchases from it are subsidized by 
the Polish National Health Fund, making them more affordable for 
patients.   Despite legislative reforms in 2007, the process by 
which the Ministry of Health adds new products to the reimbursement 
list remains nontransparent and slow. 
 
Moreover, in 2008 the Ministry of Health adopted a practice of 
requesting recommendations on reimbursement applications from the 
Health Technology Assessment Agency.  Pharmaceuticals companies 
contend that this has decreased transparency and increased the delay 
in acting on reimbursement applications.  Inability to add new 
products to the reimbursement list has seriously undermined U.S. and 
international innovative drug producers" market position in favor of 
the Polish generics industry.   The EU is currently investigating 
whether the Polish reimbursement process is in compliance with the 
EU's Transparency Directive. 
 
Furthermore, the Polish government has also taken other steps that 
according to the U.S. innovative pharmaceutical industry have had 
disproportionate impact on foreign companies.   First, in July 2006, 
the Polish government instituted a 13% across-the-board price cut on 
all imported pharmaceutical products.  In response to complaints 
that this measure was discriminatory, in November 2007 the Polish 
government cut the prices paid to domestic producers to reflect a 
13% reduction in the value of imported inputs. The European 
Commission continues to investigate the consistency of the price 
reductions with EU rules.  Second, in late 2008, the Ministry of 
Health promulgated regulations restricting advertising of 
pharmaceutical products and the time and place for sales calls on 
medical professionals.   The impact of these new marketing 
restrictions remains unclear.  However, they could serve to further 
erode U.S. market share. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A.2. Conversion and Transfer Policies 
------------------------------------- 
 
Foreign exchange is widely available through commercial banks as 
well as exchange offices.  Payments and remittances in convertible 
currency may be made and received through a bank authorized to 
engage in foreign exchange transactions, and most banks have such 
authorization.  Foreign investors have not complained of any 
significant difficulties or delays in remitting investment returns 
such as dividends, return of capital, interest and principal on 
private foreign debt, lease payments, royalties, or management 
fees. 
 
Amendments to the Civil Code and the Foreign Exchange Law from 
October 2008 lift the requirement for most payments between 
residents in Poland to be made in Polish zloty.  Foreign currencies 
can freely be used for settling accounts.  The amendments become 
effective on January 24, 2009 (Journal of Laws 2008 no.228 item 
1506). 
 
Poland provides full IMF Article VIII convertibility for current 
transactions.  The October 1, 2002 Polish Foreign Exchange Law, as 
amended, fully conforms to the OECD Codes of Liberalization of 
Capital Movements and Current Invisible Operations. 
 
The Foreign Exchange Law distinguishes between residents and 
non-residents.  It defines residents as natural persons whose center 
of vital (economic or personal) interests is in Poland or 
individuals who spend more than 183 days in a tax (calendar) year in 
the country; companies having their registered office in Poland; and 
branches, representative offices and enterprises created by 
non-residents within the territory of Poland. Poland's ability to 
tax this income, however, may be limited by the provisions of an 
applicable tax treaty. Under the Law, non-residents include: natural 
persons with foreign residence; companies seated outside Poland; and 
branches, representative offices and enterprises created by 
residents outside the territory of Poland. 
 
Countries that are members of the European Economic Area (EEA) and 
OECD are accorded the same treatment as countries that are members 
of the EU. In general, foreign exchange transactions with the EU, 
OECD and EEA countries are not restricted. 
 
The Foreign Exchange Law also distinguishes between (i) countries 
that are members of the EU, EEA or OECD, and (ii) other "third" 
countries. A number of transactions/payments -- particularly those 
with third countries -- require individual foreign exchange permits 
issued by the president of the National Bank of Poland (NBP).  Such 
permits are issued upon request unless doing so would be contrary to 
the public interest or Poland's international obligations.  Also, a 
general foreign exchange permit regulation specifies some exceptions 
to the permit requirement, particularly for business relations with 
countries with whom Poland has signed a bilateral investment treaty 
(BIT). 
 
Except in cases where a permit is required (which are limited), a 
foreigner may convert or transfer currency to make payments abroad 
for goods or services and also may transfer abroad his share of 
after-tax profit due from operations in Poland.  Capital brought 
into Poland by foreign investors may be freely withdrawn from Poland 
in instances of liquidation, expropriation, or decrease in capital 
share.  Full repatriation of profits and dividend payments is 
allowed without obtaining a permit.  However, a Polish company 
(including a Polish subsidiary of a foreign company) must file and 
pay withholding taxes with the Polish tax authorities on any 
distributable dividends unless a double taxation treaty is in 
effect.  There is a double taxation treaty with the United States. 
An exporter may open foreign exchange accounts in the currency it 
chooses. 
 
Foreign exchange regulations require some information to be reported 
to the NBP, which includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
 
- residents purchasing or selling goods or services to non-residents 
must submit data concerning down payment for the sale, and data 
concerning payment. 
 
- companies with a registered office in Poland  in which a 
non-resident has at least a 10% capital share, as well as branches 
of foreign companies, should submit an annual report concerning the 
foreign capital they possess. 
 
- residents having a 10% capital share of a company with its 
registered office abroad, or residents having a branch with its 
registered office abroad, should submit an annual report concerning 
the capital they possess abroad. 
 
- residents acquiring or selling real estate worth over EUR 10,000 
to or from a non-resident must submit information concerning 
performance of the agreement. 
 
- residents incurring or accommodating a non-resident with a loan or 
a credit of a value equal to or exceeding EUR 10,000 must submit 
information concerning the loan agreement and its performance. 
 
- residents having bank accounts abroad must submit information 
concerning the opening and operating of such accounts. 
 
Poland does not prohibit remittance through a legal parallel market, 
including one utilizing convertible negotiable instruments (such as 
dollar-denominated Polish bonds in lieu of immediate payment in 
dollars).  As a practical matter, however, such payment methods are 
rarely, if ever, used. 
 
----------------------------------- 
A.3. Expropriation and Compensation 
----------------------------------- 
 
Article 21 of the Polish Constitution states, "expropriation is 
admissible only for public purposes and upon equitable 
compensation."  The Law on Land Management and Expropriation of Real 
Estate provides that property may be expropriated only in accordance 
with statutory provisions such as those concerning construction of 
public works, national security considerations or other specified 
cases of public interest.  Full compensation at market value must be 
paid for the expropriated property.  Post is unaware of any cases of 
expropriation since 1990.  Building new major highways in Poland 
could involve some expropriation of land. 
 
----------------------- 
A.4. Dispute Settlement 
----------------------- 
 
Some investment disputes have arisen in the last few years. Often 
they have involved state-owned enterprises, difficulties obtaining 
required permits, or government actions in sectors subject to heavy 
regulation. 
 
Among the disputes: 
 
-- In November 2007, an international arbitral panel ruled against 
Poland in a dispute with the Dutch financial group, Eureko, 
regarding the purchase of a majority stake in the leading Polish 
insurer, PZU. 
 
-- A power plant, in which a U.S. company invested EUR 30 million, 
has been closed since 2006 due to failure by the Polish government 
to enforce tariffs set by the Polish regulator.  The U.S. investor 
has been unable to divest itself from this now-bankrupt enterprise. 
 
-- A dispute in which local authorities repeatedly denied permits 
for a real estate development was resolved when newly-elected 
officials issued the permits. 
 
The sale of state-owned enterprises, the government's move towards 
full adoption of EU regulations, and the passage of legislation more 
clearly defining the role of the state in economic activity should 
all lead to a reduction in investment disputes. 
 
Like the "civil" French and German legal systems, the Polish legal 
system is code-based and prosecutorial.  The judiciary acts 
independently.  The Polish judicial system generally upholds the 
sanctity of contracts.  Monetary judgments are usually made in local 
currency.  Generally, foreign firms are wary of the slow and 
over-burdened Polish court system, preferring to rely on other means 
to defend their rights.  Contracts involving foreign parties 
frequently include a clause specifying disputes will be resolved in 
a third-country court or through offshore arbitration. 
 
A permanent arbitration tribunal to settle disputes arising from 
international commercial activities operates through the Polish 
Chamber of Commerce.  There are a number of arbitration bodies 
associated with chambers representing various sectors of the 
economy, employers" confederations or local chambers of commerce. 
It is also possible to appoint ad hoc conciliatory tribunals to 
settle a particular dispute. 
 
Decisions by an arbitration body are not automatically enforceable 
in Poland.  They must be confirmed by a Polish court.  Under the 
Polish Civil Code, judgments of foreign courts are accepted and 
enforced by local courts.  Poland is party to four international 
agreements on dispute resolution, with the Ministry of Finance 
acting as the government's representative: 
 
¶1.  The 1923 Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses 
¶2.  The 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement 
of International Arbitration Awards 
¶3.  The 1961 Geneva European Convention on International Trade 
Arbitration 
¶4.  The 1972 Moscow Convention on Arbitration Resolution of Civil 
Law Disputes in Economic and Scientific Cooperation 
 
Poland is not a member of the Washington Convention on the 
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of 
Other States. 
 
The Bankruptcy Law of February 28, 2003 became effective on October 
1, 2003.  Declarations of bankruptcy may be filed either by a 
company's creditors or its governing bodies (i.e., its Board of 
Directors or another body, depending on the corporate form of the 
debtor).  Creditors of an insolvent company must file a claim in 
writing.  The Creditors Preliminary Assembly has the right to 
decide, at the initial stage of the bankruptcy process, whether a 
work-out agreement is possible, or whether assets of a bankrupt 
company should be liquidated.  Liabilities are repaid in the 
following order:  cost of legal proceedings; employee remuneration; 
liabilities to the State and Social Security Fund (ZUS) secured by a 
mortgage or pledge; other liabilities secured by mortgages or 
pledges; other taxes and other public liabilities; other 
liabilities.  The Mortgage Banking Act of 1997 and the Law on 
Registered Pledges and Pledge Registry of 1997 protect qualified 
mortgagors and secured creditors against subsequent tax liens and 
other secured and unsecured claims. 
 
A new institution in Polish law, consumer bankruptcy, will appear in 
the first months of 2009. The Consumer Bankruptcy Act of December 
2008 allows for debtors (natural persons) who have fallen into a 
state of insolvency through no fault of their own to exit the debt 
spiral.  The new regulation will benefit not only natural persons, 
but also entrepreneurs who are the creditors of insolvent debtors. 
An individual's ability to invoke this bankruptcy is limited to once 
every ten years. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
A.5. Performance Requirements and Incentives 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Poland has not notified the WTO of any measures it maintains that 
are inconsistent with its obligations under the TRIMS Agreement. 
 
Performance Requirements:  Poland generally does not impose 
performance requirements for establishing or maintaining an 
investment.  However, in previous privatizations of certain large 
companies the government and the purchasers negotiated terms that 
included performance requirements. 
 
Investment Incentives: In April 2002, the Polish Parliament passed a 
law addressing financial support for investments.  In line with this 
law a company investing in Poland, whether foreign or Polish, may 
receive assistance from the Polish government.  In June 2005, the 
Council of Ministers adopted a document outlining the system of 
financial support for major investment projects of special 
importance to the Polish economy.  These incentives are subject to 
relevant EU requirements and have on occasion been found 
non-compliant by EU authorities. 
 
A number of incentives are potentially available to foreign 
investors in Poland: 
 
- Income tax and real estate tax exemption in Special Economic Zones 
(SEZ); 
 
- Investment grants of up to 50% (70% for small- or medium-sized 
enterprises) of investment costs; 
 
- Employment grants of up to EUR 5,000 per new employee; 
 
- Grants for research and development; 
 
- Grants for other activities, such as environmental protection, 
training, logistics or creating renewable energy sources; 
 
- Sales of government-owned "brownfield" and "greenfield" locations 
at attractive prices; 
 
- Potential partial forgiveness of commercial debt owed to a 
state-owned bank incurred for the acquisition of technology; and 
 
- Varying incentives related to acquiring or developing new 
technology. 
 
Regulations on special economic zones (SEZ) and on public assistance 
to entrepreneurs provide the basis for exemptions from income tax or 
other incentives.  These were reviewed as Poland negotiated its 
entry into the EU, and EU norms on the allowable level of public 
assistance to private companies apply.  Since April 2005, shared 
services centers providing accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping 
services, as well as call centers, may be located in SEZs. 
 
In 2007, changes to tax exemption limits were introduced as a result 
of changes in the classification of Polish regions for public aid 
purposes.  According to the 2007-2011 map of regional aid, the 
maximum admissible amount of regional aid in Poland is: 
 
- Warsaw                           30% 
- Mazovia region (through 2010) 40% and 30% from 2011 
- Pomerania, West Pomerania        40% 
  Upper and Lower Silesia, 
  and Wielkopolska region 
- Other regions of Poland          50% 
 
For small- and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) the maximum aid amount 
is increased by an additional 15 percentage points. The maximum 
amount of aid in the automotive sector may be subject to a special 
cap. Also, there is a special formula applied for calculating the 
admissible amount of aid for investment projects where qualifying 
expenditures exceed EUR 50 million. 
 
Large investments considered crucial for the Polish economy may 
qualify for the Multi-Annual Support Program. This program usually 
combines different types of aid, e.g. employment grants, exemptions 
from corporate income tax in SEZs and the possibility of a 
preferential purchase price for land owned by the government. 
 
The level of tax or other investment incentives is based on the 
relative prosperity of the region where the investment is made, the 
size of the investment, the number of jobs created, and the sector 
of the economy involved.  Strategic investors may obtain an 
exemption from or reduction in real estate tax, as well as 
additional local incentives.  All such exemptions must be negotiated 
with local authorities. 
 
Foreign Participation in Government Financed Research:  Foreign 
companies have not participated in government-funded research and 
development projects, managed by the Committee for Scientific 
Research.  Nonetheless, there is no proscription against such 
participation with the exception of biotechnology.  According to 
current law, private companies cannot conduct research with public 
institutions in the area of agricultural biotechnology. 
 
Visa and Work Permit Requirements:  Foreign investors can and do 
bring personnel to Poland. Falling unemployment and shortages of 
labor in some sectors of the Polish economy intensify inflows of 
foreign workers to Poland. 
 
As of January 17, 2007 all EU citizens, including workers from newly 
admitted Romania and Bulgaria, are free to work in Poland without 
first obtaining a work permit.  In addition Poland has opened its 
labor market to workers from member countries of EFTA. 
 
As of February 1, 2008, citizens from neighbor countries with 
Poland, i.e. Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia, can undertake temporary 
work (up to six months per year) without a permit.  This is a pilot 
program, which will run until December 31, 2009.  If the effects are 
judged to be positive, the Ministry of Labor may extend the period 
of its validity. 
 
U.S. citizens continue to be subject to Poland's work and residency 
permit regulations, unless they have otherwise established permanent 
residency in Poland or elsewhere in the EU.  Poland's visa and work 
permit regulations offer the possibility for non-EU/EFTA citizens to 
live and work in Poland under certain conditions.  However, in 
practice, foreign firms and persons have experienced difficulty in 
obtaining both visas and work permits.  Poland requires an applicant 
to receive his or her visa in his or her home country, rather than 
in Poland or in neighboring countries.  This procedure is often 
burdensome.  Work permits are issued by local authorities, which 
vary greatly in the speed and willingness with which they issue 
permits. 
 
Temporary employment agencies often encounter problems when 
employing non-EU or EFTA citizens in Poland, because of varying 
interpretations of ambiguous legislation and regulations.  The Act 
on the Promotion of Employment and Labor Market Institutions allows 
employment agencies to obtain work permits for foreigners seeking 
work on a temporary basis in Poland.  In practice, a number of 
provincial employment offices are reluctant to issue work permits 
for such persons.  In order to employ such a person, permission must 
be granted by the appropriate provincial authority overseeing the 
official address of that company.  According to some officials in 
provincial employment offices, foreigners can not be temporary 
employees and employment agencies can not employ foreigners as the 
place of work must correspond to the address of the company.  Other 
officials have different interpretations of the same regulations. 
For this reason, employers using employment agencies should 
stipulate the address of both the agency and the precise location of 
an applicant's place of work. 
 
Discriminatory or Preferential Export/Import Policies:  The 
government supports exporters through export credit guarantees from 
a state-owned insurance entity (KUKE).  KUKE provides credit 
guarantees for all firms registered in Poland (including foreign 
firms and firms with foreign capital).  State-owned Bank 
Gospodarstwa Krajowego (BGK), on the basis of an agreement signed in 
2002 with the Ministry of Finance, on subsidies of interest and 
export credits makes it easier for exporters to obtain cheaper 
credit to finance exports. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
A.6. Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
Domestic and foreign private entities have a general right freely to 
establish, acquire or dispose of a business, and to engage in almost 
all forms of lawful economic activities.  Participation of 
foreigners is restricted in the broadcasting and air transportation 
sectors, while foreign ownership of other than a small amount of 
real estate property requires a government permit. 
 
The Civil Code, as amended, regulates property rights among 
individuals or legal entities.  Civil Code regulations are based on 
the principles of equality of all parties regardless of their 
ownership status, equivalency of obligations, discretion, protection 
of private ownership, and freedom of contracts. 
 
The private sector is estimated to employ over two-thirds of 
Poland's labor force and to produce over 75% of GDP.  State-owned 
entities still dominate some sectors, most notably coal, chemicals, 
and utilities.  The same standards are generally applied to both 
private and public companies with respect to access to markets, 
credit and other business operations, such as licenses and supplies. 
 Officials at various levels of government occasionally exercise 
their discretionary authority to assist state-owned enterprises. 
For example, tax authorities have not pressed some large, troubled 
state-owned enterprises to pay taxes, to avoid forcing those 
enterprises into bankruptcy.  Nevertheless, in line with EU 
standards governing competition, the commercial code that took 
effect in 2001 established a more level playing field.  Since EU 
accession, government activity favoring state-owned firms has 
received careful scrutiny from Brussels. 
 
---------------------------------- 
A.7. Protection of Property Rights 
---------------------------------- 
 
Poland has a non-discriminatory legal system accessible to foreign 
investors that protects and facilitates acquisition and disposition 
of all property rights, including land, buildings and mortgages. 
Many investors -- foreign and domestic -- complain that the judicial 
system is extremely slow.  Foreign investors often voice concern 
about frequent or unexpected changes in laws and regulations.  The 
Polish government continues to work on Civil Code amendments. 
 
As regards real property, the 1997 Mortgage Banking Act provided 
that a recorded mortgage by a licensed mortgage bank takes priority 
over subsequent tax liens and other secured and unsecured claims. 
Outstanding residential mortgage debt grew rapidly from 2005 - 2008. 
However, In comparison to most Western countries the mortgage market 
in Poland is still relatively small; well below 15% of GDP. 
 
As regards chattels and personal property, the 1997 Law on 
Registered Pledges and Pledge Registry provided protections for 
secured creditors, and established a new registry system.  Creditors 
may place liens on assets and rights, both in the present and 
future. 
 
Poland ratified the WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty on 
October 21, 2003, and the WIPO Copyright Treaty on March 23, 2004. 
Piracy of intellectual property still remains a problem in Poland. 
To comply with its obligations to the EU and under the WTO TRIPS 
Agreement, in 2000 Poland adopted comprehensive legislation 
governing intellectual property rights.  Upon EU accession, the 
Minister of Culture issued a regulation mandating creation of a 
register of information concerning optical disk production and 
identification codes.  In May 2007, the Parliament updated 
regulations governing patents, trademarks, and other industrial 
property. After these changes, the length of protection afforded to 
proprietary research test data submitted by pharmaceutical companies 
now matches EU standards.  In May 2007, the Parliament closed a 
loophole that had blocked prosecution of downstream sellers of 
pirated goods.  The Ministry of Culture heads an inter-agency group 
that produces an annual strategy for improving respect for 
intellectual property rights in Poland.  Nevertheless, internet 
piracy remains a problem.  Other challenges are lack of a lack of 
competition among entities responsible for collecting and 
distributing royalties for use of intellectual property. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
A.8. Transparency of Regulatory System 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Regulatory unpredictability and high levels of administrative red 
tape are recurring complaints of investors.  Foreign and domestic 
investors must comply with a variety of laws concerning taxation, 
labor practices, health and safety, and the environment.  Complaints 
about these laws, especially the tax system, center on the lack of 
clarity and often-draconian penalties for minor errors.  Under the 
Law on Freedom of Economic Activity, inspections are fewer and 
shorter, and binding tax interpretations are available. 
Establishment of the Central Anti-Corruption Office (CBA) in 2006 
increased the number of institutions authorized to perform 
inspections in companies.  However, the CBA is entitled to perform 
inspections of companies only in cases where the Treasury's interest 
is linked with a business interest (e.g. cases where a government 
official carries out economic activity, or government officials make 
decisions in such areas as privatization, public tenders, licensing, 
exemptions, quotas, or guarantees favoring certain firms or 
persons).  The government is working on a complex reform package 
aimed at streamlining bureaucratic hurdles, such as procuring the 
licenses and permits required to open a business.  Although similar 
reform efforts in the past have failed to win parliamentary 
approval, the Tusk government managed to introduce amendments to a 
number of business related regulations in such areas as foreign 
exchange, taxes, public procurement, consumer bankruptcy, making the 
environment for entrepreneurs friendlier. 
 
Revisions to the corporate tax code, which started in 1999 improved 
transparency and lowered rates.  Since 2004, the corporate income 
tax (CIT) rate has been 19%.  Amendments to the Act on Corporate Tax 
passed in 2006 and 2008 include changes to definitions of a small 
tax payer and a foreign company and extend the catalogue of tax 
deductible costs.  A tax payer is considered small for the purpose 
of tax on products and services when income including VAT does not 
exceed EUR 800,000 (around $1 million) in the preceding year (note: 
the Ministry of Finance has prepared a bill amending the PIT and CIT 
Laws, which will increase the income limit of a small tax payer to 
EUR 1.2 million (USD 1.6 million). This amendment, which should come 
into force in the first months of 2009, will unify PIT and CIT 
regulations with VAT regulations and will comply with the limit 
applied in the Law on Accountancy.  The definition of a foreign 
company was modified using the OECD model. The list of tax 
deductible costs was expanded to include e.g., the costs of canceled 
(discontinued) investments. 
 
Proposed laws and regulations are published in draft form for public 
comment, but in practice the period allotted for public 
consultations tends to be limited. 
 
Standards-setting Organizations:  Government agencies set industry 
standards.  These agencies are not required to consult with domestic 
or foreign firms when establishing standards, but usually do so. 
Domestic firms tend to have more influence than foreign firms in the 
consultation process. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
A.9. Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
Capital Markets:  Poland's policies facilitate the free flow of 
financial resources.  Banks can and do lend to foreign and domestic 
companies.  Companies can and do borrow abroad and issue commercial 
paper.  Poland has healthy equity markets. 
 
Equity markets include the Warsaw Stock Exchange (WSE); the "New 
Connect" trading platform; the Central Table of Offers ("CeTO"), an 
over-the-counter market; and the Electronic Treasury Securities 
Market, which operates on a basis similar to NASDAQ. 
 
The regulatory framework for operations on the capital markets is 
contained in the 1997 Law on Public Trading and Securities, as 
amended.  Since September 19, 2006, the Financial Supervision 
Commission has performed the regulatory tasks formerly performed by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
 
A modern trading system (Warset) was launched on the WSE in 2000, 
and is based on a similar system used by the Paris bourse.  The 
system enables direct cooperation with other stock exchanges in 
Europe.  Since the opening of the WSE in 1991: 
 
- The number of listed joint stock companies has increased from five 
to over 374 in late 2008. 
- Capitalization has grown from $142 million in 1991 to over $150 
billion in 2008 (around 40% of GDP compared to 80% in 2007). 
 
In 2008, 33 companies, representing various sectors of Polish 
industry, were floated on the main floor, compared with 81 in 2007. 
Additionally, 85 companies entered the alternative trading platform 
"New Connect," which started its operations in 2007.  The number of 
foreign companies listed on the WSE increased from 23 in 2007 to 25 
in 2008.  Countries represented include:  the Czech Republic, 
Hungary, Austria, Ukraine and Italy. 
 
The government elected in October 2007 announced plans to partially 
privatize the WSE in 2008.  While they have not yet followed 
through, according to the latest plans, the Treasury could sell up 
to 73.82% of shares and keep 25% plus one share.  The Treasury 
Ministry would welcome "one of the leading global markets" as a 
potential investor. Stock exchanges in New York and Europe as well 
as consortia consisting of financial investors and strategic 
investors show interest in buying the WSE shares.  The Treasury 
Ministry expects completion of the privatization process of the WSE 
in 2011-2012 
 
The New Connect trading platform was launched on August 30, 2007. 
New Connect is dedicated to small- and medium-size companies with 
high growth potential. The new exchange has less restrictive listing 
and capitalization requirements.  The WSE expects that companies 
initially listed on New Connect will grow and "graduate" to being 
listed on the WSE. 
 
The May 27, 2004 Act on Investment Funds allows for open-end, 
closed-end, mixed investment funds, and the development of 
securitization instruments in Poland.  In general, no special 
restrictions apply to foreign investors purchasing Polish 
securities.  However, corporate bonds are infrequently traded, and 
therefore can be difficult for foreign investors to buy.  Investment 
funds are a rapidly growing segment of Poland's capital markets. 
 
Venture capital activity is conducted by investment funds, 
consulting companies, investment banks, special funds belonging to 
financial corporations, companies in the IT sector, and individuals. 
 Many participants in this area are foreign companies or companies 
with a foreign shareholder that have funds and experience in this 
type of activity on the domestic market.  Many companies established 
by venture capital funds operate in the IT and media sectors.  In 
2006 and 2007, the biggest increase in such investment was in the 
consumer goods sector. 
 
Credit Allocation:  Credit allocation is on market terms.  The 
government, however, maintains some programs offering below-market 
rate loans to certain domestic groups, such as farmers and 
homeowners. 
 
Access:  Foreign investors and domestic investors have equal access 
to the Polish financial markets. Private Polish investment is 
financed from retained earnings and credits, while foreign 
investment is mainly direct investment, using funds obtained outside 
of Poland.   Polish firms raise capital both in Poland and in other 
countries. 
 
Legal, Regulatory and Accounting Systems:  Polish accounting 
standards do not differ significantly from international standards. 
In cases where there is no national accounting standard, the 
appropriate International Accounting Standards may be applied.  As 
of January 1, 2008, all banks are obliged to follow the principles 
of the New Capital Agreement Basel II.  These regulations increase 
sensitivity to risk and should lead to improved performance in the 
banking sector.  Poland is in the process of harmonizing legal, 
regulatory and accounting systems with those in the EU.  The major 
international accounting firms provide services in Poland and are 
familiar with U.S., EU and Polish accounting standards. 
 
Portfolio Investment:  The Polish regulatory system fosters and 
supervises the portfolio investment market.  Both foreign and 
domestic investors may place funds in demand and time deposits, 
stocks, bonds, futures and derivatives.  The stock and Treasury bill 
markets are fairly liquid, but many other investments, such as 
Treasury bonds, are not. 
 
The Polish Securities and Exchange Commission had a reputation as a 
strong regulator of the stock market.  In September 2006, a 
Financial Supervision Commission was established, which assumed the 
duties of the Polish Securities and Exchange Commission. Since 
assuming those duties, the Financial Supervision Commission has 
maintained the reputation established by the Polish Securities and 
Exchange Commission. 
 
Banking System: The banking sector is dominated by ten large banks. 
Of these, two are controlled by the Treasury Ministry, while the 
remaining eight are subsidiaries, controlled by foreign commercial 
institutions.  The Polish banking system is considered one of the 
best regulated and supervised in Central and Eastern Europe and 
weathered the global financial crisis of 2008 better than many in 
the region.  At the end of September 2008, the banking sector had 
total estimated assets of over $380 billion.  Fast development of 
small and medium-size banks reduced concentration in the banking 
sector.  The share of the ten biggest banks in the sector's assets 
fell to 63% from 65%, and in credits to 59% from 59.5%.  The 
Financial Supervisory Authority reported that, at the end of 
September 2008, among commercial banks, non-performing assets in the 
portfolio of corporate sector assets decreased to 5.6% from 6.9%, 
while in the case of the household sector there was a drop from 4.1% 
to 3.5%.  After the first nine months of 2008, 4.4% were 
non-performing, compared with 5.2% at the end of 2007.  The decrease 
however was the effect of fast growth of total liabilities.  The 
impact on these numbers of the global financial crisis is not yet 
clear. 
 
Cross-shareholding:  Cross-shareholding arrangements are rare and 
play a minor role in the Polish economy. 
 
Hostile Takeovers:  Neither the government nor private firms have 
taken measures to prevent hostile takeovers by foreign or domestic 
firms.  Hostile takeover attempts are still rare. 
 
------------------------ 
A.10. Political Violence 
------------------------ 
 
Poland is a politically stable country.  There have been no 
confirmed incidents of politically motivated violence toward foreign 
investment projects in recent years.  Poland has neither belligerent 
neighbors nor insurgent groups.  The Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC) provides political risk insurance for Poland but 
is not frequently used as competitive private sector financing and 
insurance is readily available. 
 
---------------- 
A.11. Corruption 
---------------- 
 
Poland has laws, regulations and penalties aimed at combating 
corruption.  Nevertheless, corruption is widely recognized as a 
continuing problem and a restraint on economic growth and 
development.  In 2008, Transparency International ranked Poland 58th 
among 180 countries (with 1st place being least corrupt and 180th 
most corrupt).  In 2007, Poland was ranked 61st among 180 countries. 
 
OECD Anti-Bribery Convention:  Poland ratified the OECD Convention 
on Combating Bribery in 2000.  Implementing legislation became 
effective February 3, 2001. 
 
Cases of Corruption:  Reports of alleged corruption most frequently 
appear in connection with government contracting and the issuance of 
a regulation or permit that benefits a particular company. 
Allegations of corruption by customs and border guard officials, tax 
authorities, and local government officials are common, although 
decreasing.  If such corruption is proven, it is usually punished. 
Businesses report that Polish officials have asked for political 
campaign contributions in return for favorable treatment.  Overall, 
U.S. firms have found that maintaining policies of full compliance 
with the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act is effective in building 
a reputation for good corporate governance and that doing so is not 
an impediment to profitable operations in Poland. 
 
One of the chief tools in preventing corruption is a transparent 
system of government procurement by open tender at all levels of 
government.  A 1997 law restricts economic activity for those 
holding public positions.  This law prevents a public official from 
engaging in business activities where he or she would have a 
conflict of interest while he or she is an official and for one year 
thereafter.  The law applies to parliamentarians, government 
officials, and local officials.  On July 1, 2003, new penal code 
regulations combating corruption came into force.  These amendments 
include:  no punishment for those from whom bribes are extracted 
when they inform police about this fact; a broader definition of a 
public official; and seizure of assets if an accused person does not 
prove they derive from a legal source. 
 
Seriousness of Government Efforts To Combat Corruption:  On June 9, 
2006, the Polish parliament established a Central Anti-Corruption 
Office (CBA).  Establishment of the CBA, with its focus on penal 
repercussions, was a key part of the government's anti-corruption 
drive.  Some businessmen report that corruption - especially in the 
area of public procurement - markedly declined following the 
implementation of the CBA. 
 
Bribery of a Domestic Official:  Bribery and abuse of public office 
are crimes under the Polish Criminal Code.  Penalties include 
imprisonment from six months to 12 years, and forfeiture of items 
derived from an offense. 
 
Bribery of a Foreign Official:  Legislation implementing the OECD 
Convention classifies the payment of a bribe to a foreign official 
as a criminal offense, the same as if it were a bribe to a Polish 
official. 
 
Enforcement Agencies:  The CBA, which answers directly to the office 
of the Prime Minister, is the primary law enforcement agency 
responsible for investigating public corruption. It coordinates 
anticorruption activities with other public institutions, such as 
the police and the internal security services (particularly the 
Polish Internal Security Agency (ABW)).  The Justice Ministry and 
the police are responsible for enforcing Poland's anti-corruption 
criminal laws.  The Finance Ministry administers tax collection and 
is responsible for denying the tax deductibility of bribes. 
 
Convictions:  Post is unaware of any case in which a foreign 
investor or major government official has been found guilty of 
corruption, although a number of investigations commenced in recent 
years are ongoing. 
 
"Watchdog" Organizations:  Several NGOs, including a Polish chapter 
of Transparency International as well as several business groups, 
including the American Chamber of Commerce have launched campaigns 
to increase public awareness. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A.12. Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------------- 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements:  As of the end of 2008, Poland had 
ratified 60 bilateral investment agreements:  Albania (1993); 
Argentina (1992); Australia (1992); Austria (1989); Azerbaijan 
(1999); Bangladesh (1999); Belgium and Luxembourg (1991); Belarus 
(1993); Bulgaria (1995); Canada (1990); Chile (2000); China (1989); 
Croatia (1995); Cyprus (1993); the Czech Republic (1994); Denmark 
(1990); Egypt (1998); Estonia (1993); Finland (1998); France (1990); 
Germany (1990); Greece (1995); Hungary (1995); India (1997); 
Indonesia (1993); Iran (2001; although they support international 
sanctions regimes); Israel (1992); Italy (1993); Jordan; Kazakhstan 
(1995); Kuwait (1993); Latvia (1993); Lithuania (1993); Macedonia 
(1997); Malaysia (1994); Moldova (1995); Mongolia (1996); Morocco 
(1995); the Netherlands (1994); Norway (1990); Portugal (1993); 
Romania (1995); Serbia and Montenegro (1997); Singapore (1993); 
Slovenia (2000); Slovakia (1996); South Korea (1990); Spain (1993); 
Sweden (1990); Switzerland (1990); Thailand (1993); Tunisia (1993); 
Turkey (1994); Ukraine (1993); United Arab Emirates (1994); the 
United Kingdom (1988); the United States (1994); Uruguay (1994); 
Uzbekistan (1995); Vietnam (1994). 
 
Agreements with the United States:  The United States and Poland 
signed a Treaty Concerning Business and Economic Relations in 1990; 
it entered into force in 1994 for an initial period of ten years. 
The Treaty grants U.S. investors domestic privileges and provides 
for international arbitration in the case of investment disputes. 
In 1974, the United States and Poland signed a double taxation 
treaty.  Prior to accession to the EU Poland reviewed its agreements 
with third countries for their compatibility with EU law.  In June 
2004, Poland completed the necessary amendments to bring the 
bilateral U.S.-Polish economic treaty into compliance with EU 
regulations.  Ratification of the amended bilateral treaty on 
business and economic relations took place in October 2004.  The 
U.S.-Poland "Totalization Agreement" signed on April 2, 2008 will 
become effective on March 1, 2009.  The Agreement stops dual 
taxation, opens the door for payments to suspended beneficiaries 
(i.e., Polish widows) and allows transfer of benefit eligibility. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
A.13. OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
OPIC:  The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) provides 
political risk insurance for U.S. companies investing in Poland 
against political violence, expropriation, and inconvertibility of 
local currency.  OPIC offers medium- and long-term financing in 
Poland through its direct loan and guarantee programs.  Direct loans 
are reserved for U.S. businesses or cooperatives.  Loan guarantees 
are issued to U.S. lending institutions. 
 
MIGA:  The World Bank's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
also provides investment insurance similar to OPIC's for investments 
in Poland. 
 
Foreign Exchange:  Poland maintains full convertibility of the 
zloty, apart from a few restrictions on short-term capital 
movements.  Foreign currency is freely available from the banking 
system.  At the height of the global financial crisis, short-term 
foreign currency lending, particularly interbank-lending, slowed 
following tightening by parent institutions (Poland's banking sector 
is dominated by subsidiaries of large European banks).  However, the 
government and Central Bank took some measures (similar to other 
major economy responses) to provide short-term liquidity and the 
problem has since eased.  Since March 2000, Poland has maintained a 
freely floating exchange rate regime.  As a requirement of EU 
membership, Poland must enter the European Exchange Rate Mechanism 
(ERM2).  The Polish government set an aggressive timetable for Euro 
convergence, although the recent global financial crisis and 
political hurdles may push that target back somewhat.  Most 
observers believe Poland will eventually meet the Maastricht 
requirements and overcome domestic political hurdles to 
Euro-adoption, although most believe this will not happen before 
¶2013. 
 
----------- 
A.14. Labor 
----------- 
 
Poland has a well-educated, skilled labor force.  Productivity 
remains below western standards but is rising rapidly and unit costs 
are competitive.  At the end of November 2008, the average gross 
wage in Poland was $1140 per month.  In the first nine months of 
2008 wages measured in zlotys increased by 10.5% compared with the 
corresponding period of 2007. 
 
Poland's economy employed over 13 million people at the end of 2007, 
with 9.1% registered as unemployed at the end of November 2008. 
(Note: Some of the registered unemployed actually work in the 
unofficial, gray economy.  Unemployment would be lower if measured 
using the standardized EU methodology).  While unemployment dropped 
in all provinces in 2008, the rate of decline varied substantially 
from one region to another.  At the end of November 2008, the lowest 
levels of unemployment were in major urban areas. 
 
Polish workers are usually eager to work for foreign companies, and 
have taken advantage of opportunities for employment in Great 
Britain, Ireland and Scandinavia. Since Poland joined the EU, an 
estimated one million Poles have sought work in Western Europe. 
This trend slowed or stopped in late 2008 as employment 
opportunities in Western Europe worsened.  Overall, employment in 
the public sector continues to shrink as the private sector grows. 
Employment has expanded in service industries such as information 
technology, hotels and restaurants, and the retail trade.  The 
state-owned sector still employs about a quarter of the work force, 
although employment in fields such as coal mining, steel, and energy 
is declining. 
 
Most aspects of employee-employer relations are governed by the 1996 
Labor Code, which outlines employee and employer rights in all 
sectors, both public and private, and has been gradually revised in 
order to adapt to EU standards.  The Polish government also adheres 
to the International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention protecting 
worker rights. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
A.15. Foreign Trade Zones/ Free Trade Zones 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Foreign-owned firms have the same investment opportunities as do 
Polish firms to benefit from foreign trade zones (FTZs), free ports, 
and special economic zones.  The operation of FTZs in Poland is 
regulated by the 2004 Customs Law.  Duty free zones can be 
established by the Minister of Finance, in cooperation with the 
Minister of Economy.  They are managed by authorities designated by 
the Ministers - typically provincial governors who issue the 
operating permit for a given zone. 
 
Most activity in FTZs involves storage, packaging and repackaging. 
In 2008, there were seven FTZs: Gliwice, near Poland's southern 
border; Terespol, near Poland's eastern border; Mszczonow, near 
Warsaw; Warsaw's Okecie International Airport (duty-free retail 
trade within the airport); Szczecin; Swinoujscie; and Gdansk. 
Duty-free shops are available only for travelers departing to non-EU 
countries. 
 
There are also seven bonded warehouses:  Gdynia (sea port); 
Krakow-Balice (airport); Wroclaw-Strachowice airport); 
Katowice-Pyrzowice (airport); Gdansk-Trojmiasto(airport); 
Lodz(airport); and Braniewo (near Olsztyn). 
 
Bonded warehouses and customs and storage facilities are operated 
pursuant to permission issued by the customs authorities, and can be 
operated by commercial companies.  Bonded warehouses can be open to 
the general public, while a private warehouse is reserved for 
warehousing of goods by the warehouse keeper.  The authorization to 
operate such a customs warehouse can be issued only to persons 
established in the EU. 
 
When products are re-exported, customs duties are either partially 
or fully reimbursed to the importer (depending on how long the 
goods were in Poland).  Reimbursement is made within 12 months of 
the date of customs clearance. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
A.16. Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Investment Trends:  In recent years Polish foreign assets and 
liabilities grew systematically as Poland's financial market 
continues to integrate into international markets.  Factors driving 
foreign direct investment included:  EU accession, Poland's 
continuing export success, low corporate tax rates, and increasingly 
effective promotion of investment opportunities and benefits. 
Foreign companies also choose to invest in Poland because of a large 
and growing domestic market, availability of skilled workers, 
competitive labor costs, and proximity of major markets (especially 
the EU and Russia). 
 
Since 2004, reinvested profits are the main component of direct 
foreign investments in Poland.  In 2007, they amounted to $7.7 
billion, representing almost 40% of FDI inflows and 50% higher than 
¶2006.  Privatization of large companies plays a marginal role in 
total FDI.  In 2005, the phenomenon of "capital in transition" 
appeared in Poland; in a reporting year, inflow of foreign funds 
that increase the equity of foreign direct investment companies is 
reported, and then these funds are invested in branches or companies 
being established outside Poland. In 2007 capital inflows related to 
the purchase of shares or assets in kind remained stable and 
accounted for less than 20% of total FDI, whereas in 2000 they had 
accounted for 90% of total FDI. 
 
Polish Investment Abroad:  Poland is a net capital importer. 
Compared to the quantity of foreign capital invested in Poland, 
Poland's foreign investments are still small, but grew rapidly over 
the last three years.  According to data from the National Bank of 
Poland, through the end of 2007 Polish firms invested $4.7 billion 
abroad.  In December 2006, PKN Orlen acquired the Mazeikiu refinery 
in Lithuania for $2 billion, Poland's largest foreign investment to 
date.  Most significant in 2008, were oil and gas exploration 
investments by Poland's Petrolinvest in Kazahkstan.  Other leading 
destinations for Polish investment are: Switzerland (19.6%) 
Luxembourg (11.5%), Lithuania (10.4%), Netherlands (8.1%), Ukraine 
(8.04%), Germany (6.3%) and Czech Republic (5.1%).  About 68.5% of 
Poland's foreign investments are connected with the services sector; 
other investments are in manufacturing (18.8%), and financial 
services (4.3%). 
 
Levels of Foreign Direct Investment:  According to the NBP, in 2007 
FDI inflows to Poland reached $22.63 billion (5.3% of GDP).  FDI in 
2008 is projected to exceed $13.5 billion.  At the end of 2007, 
Poland's cumulative FDI totaled $141.1 billion, equivalent to almost 
35% of GDP.  Since 1998, FDI has been most stable in such sectors as 
manufacturing (29.8%) and trade (13%).  In 2007, FDI in real estate 
was a major item, accounting for 9.6% of total FDI.   According to 
NBP data, U.S. firms account for over $10.1 billion of the total 
$141.1 billion FDI at the end of 2007.  Some investments by U.S. 
firms are undercounted in reporting because they are attributed to 
other countries if they are made through third countries such as a 
US subsidiary in Brussels.  After adjusting for this, Post believes 
a more accurate figure would be around $15 billion.  Poland's 
accession to the EU in 2004 had a positive effect on FDI in Poland. 
 
According to Polish official statistics, the U.S. is the fifth 
largest investor in Poland in terms of the volume of capital 
invested.  Investors from OECD countries accounted for 88% of the 
cumulative value of investment from 1993 to 2007.  EU states 
accounted for over 80%.  Poland remains an attractive destination 
for American investors, whose share of cumulative FDI in Poland 
reached over 7% in 2007.  In 2007 the largest foreign investors were 
companies from Germany ($3.9 billion), followed by France ($2.43 
billion), Netherlands ($2.37 billion), Belgium and Luxemburg ($ 1.81 
billion), Austria ($1.23 billion), U.S. ($1.13 billion) and Sweden 
($1.11 billion).  In 2007, the three biggest investors in Poland 
were: Dell ($272 million), Indesit ($105 million) and Toshiba ($58 
million). 
 
The manufacturing sector remains the most popular sector for foreign 
investors in Poland.  From 1990 to 2007, this sector accounted for 
over 30% of accumulated inflows, mainly in transport equipment, food 
stuffs and beverages, wood, paper and paper services, the chemical 
industry and the metals sector.  The automotive sector received most 
of the investment - $7.8 billion (17.4% of capital inflow to the 
manufacturing sector).  The second most attractive sector for 
foreign investors was financial services (almost 17% of accumulated 
inflows from 1990 to 2007), followed by the trade and repairs sector 
(around 16%).  Those three sectors attracted over 60% of total FDI. 
In recent years foreign firms created a considerable number of 
service centers in Poland including back office operations.  In 
2007, over $10 million was invested in that area compared to over $2 
million in 2004.  There are over 150 service centers established by 
foreign companies in Poland. 
 
Moreover around 50 research and development centers (with Intel, 
Motorola, ABB, IBM SAS Institute, Nokia and Oracle leading the way) 
were established by foreign investors in recent years, creating 
thousands of jobs. 
 
PAIiIZ, the Polish Investment Agency, expects 2008 to be almost as 
good as 2007 for FDI. The main investors in 2008 were companies from 
the United States and Europe. The main sectors of interest were 
electronics, business process off shoring (BPO) and the automotive 
industry. 
 
Note: PAIiIZ stopped publishing FDI data in 2006.  The government of 
Poland now uses National Bank of Poland statistics which do not 
directly correspond to PAIiIZ data.  Data in this report are no 
longer directly comparable to previous editions of the Investment 
Climate Statement for Poland. 
 
Cumulative FDI, by industry (Through Dec 2007) 
 
(Note: Tables and data have been removed for cable formatting.  They 
were included in an emailed version and are available upon request 
from Tom Palaia TPalaia@State.gov.) 
 
ASHE#