06AITTAIPEI3564
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0021
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3564/01 2910908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180908Z OCT 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2642
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5793
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7008UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies shifted their 
focus October 18 from covering all political issues to a business 
scandal involving a major holding company; the KMT-CCP Cross-Strait 
Agricultural Forum held in Boao October 17-18; and the year-end 
Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral races.  Given an announcement by People 
First Party Chairman James Soong Tuesday that he will run for mayor 
of Taipei as a "non-partisan" candidate, the pro-unification "United 
Daily News" front-paged the results of its latest survey, which 
showed that the approval rating for KMT candidate Hau Lung-pin 
dropped from 50 percent in early September to 34 percent.  The same 
poll also finds that DPP candidate Frank Hsieh has an approval 
rating of fourteen percent; Soong has nine percent; independent 
Legislator Li Ao has five percent; and Taiwan Solidarity Union 
candidate Clara Chou has one percent. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times,"Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, discussed AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young's comment on 
James Soong on the Double Ten National Day.  The article criticized 
the "Oust Bian" campaign for failing to practice what it preached, 
namely, observing propriety and showing respect for other people. 
An editorial in the pro-status quo "China Times" applauded the KMT's 
recent decision to return to the middle course and pull its battle 
front back to the Legislative Yuan.  End summary. 
 
A) "Red-shirt Army Acting Rudely; United States Unhappy about It" 
 
Columnist Paul Lin said in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] (10/18): 
 
"The red-clad army made disturbances at the Double Ten National Day 
ceremony and even pounded on the cars of foreign dignitaries. 
American Institute in Taiwan Taipei Director Stephen Young, when 
questioned by a reporter, said "Shouldn't everybody behave with 
manners?"  The disturbances at national celebrations were an act 
showing no manners, not only to President Chen and the invited 
dignitaries but also to the citizens of the Republic of China.  The 
slogan used by the red-shirt army in an attempt to oust Bian is 
'propriety, righteousness, integrity, and a sense of shame.'  The 
rude behaviors of the red-shirt army indicated that they failed to 
observe propriety, and failing to practice what one preaches is the 
biggest irony. ... 
 
"In addition to pointing out the unreasonableness of the 
disturbances, Young also picked on James Soong.  Young said '[You] 
should go and ask James Soong and his party [why they did it].'  Why 
single out Soong?  The answer is very simple: because Soong was the 
one who led his party members to raise disturbances.  It was a 
deliberate disturbance; he not only announced it beforehand but also 
had a red suit tailor-made in advance, spending a lot of money on 
it.  Of course, Young has to know that Soong is the person that is 
most firmly opposed to [U.S.] arms deals in the Blue camp.  This is 
not just about his attitude toward the United States, but also about 
whether he has the determination to defend Taiwan's security. 
 
"Pan-Blue political figures were reportedly 'sick' of Young's 
remarks.  Actually, it is those pro-Communist, anti-American people 
who should feel sick of his remarks.  For one thing, Soong, who as 
Young pointed out is the chairman of the People First Party, and 
those who acted along with Soong were 'unwilling followers.'  Does 
the KMT need to count itself in? ...  Of course, Young is clearly 
aware of Taiwan's political situation.  [He knows that] Ma Ying-jeou 
was hijacked by Soong to sacrifice [U.S.] arms deals because of the 
KMT's [ill-gotten] party assets.  Now is a test for Ma to see 
whether he is pro-U.S. or pro-Communist; whether he wants to defend 
universal values of democracy and rule of law or whether he wants to 
give up democracy and rule of law because of the KMT party assets. 
..." 
 
B) "KMT Should Return to Opposition Line of Middle Course" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (10/18): 
 
"... Ma Ying-jeou's decision to pull the battle front back to the 
congress and await the indictment of the [Presidential Office's] 
state affairs fund case is of course a relatively pragmatic 
decision.  Without adequate judicial support, [the KMT] will not be 
able to impose sufficient political pressure on the Green 
legislators and make them change their positions. ...  The KMT 
singled out the Control Yuan nominees bill and major arms 
procurements bill, both of which have actually been stalled [in the 
Legislative Yuan] for one or two years.  [Due to the stall,] the 
former bill has resulted in the Control Yuan's ceasing to function 
for a long time, while the latter has resulted in complaints from 
Taiwan's longtime ally, the United States, which, when showing 
displeasure with the Bian administration, also had some 
misunderstanding with the opposition party. ... 
 
"Protests can of course be a strategy, but if the strategy does more 
damage to oneself than to others, it is certain that the strategy 
must be adjusted.  Gentleness does not mean concession, and the 
middle course can also be something one persists in.  If such 
persistence can maintain a glimpse of hope and purity for Taiwan 
society in the current political upheavals, it is a right choice, 
and one should not feel afraid even when there is political or 
election pressure." 
 
YOUNG