06ANKARA5902
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (SEP 2006)
Thu Oct 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7398
RR RUEHDBU
DE RUEHAK #5902/01 2851446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121446Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9353
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RULSJGA/COMDT COGUARD WASHDC
RUEAORC/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUCNEXC/EXPORT CONTROL AND RELATED BORDER SECURITY
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005902 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, JFEENEY, NJOHANSON 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DSILLIMAN, BHUNT 
DOE/NNSA- TPERRY, LPARKER, EDESCHLER 
CBP/INA- RWATTS, JGOUGE 
DOC FOR TCURTIN 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM PREL TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (SEP 2006) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
¶1.      Summary:   U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) conducted a Port 
Security/Port Vulnerability Training for 19 Turkish Port 
Authority, Customs, Coast Guard and Maritime Ministry 
officials at the Port of Izmir; initial coordination was 
started for an upcoming orientation visit to the United 
States for representatives of Turkish Customs; and continued 
progress was made on the Internal Control Program (ICP). 
Finally, EXBS Advisor continued to utilized various 
opportunities to further explain the importance of 
ratification of the U.S.- Turkish NP Cooperation Agreement, 
and the positive impact that the EXBS program can have in 
Turkey. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)           Sep 15 - EXBS Advisor met with Customs 
Enforcement Deputy Director General Mehmet Guzel to discuss 
recent Turkish Customs activities.  EXBS Advisor provided 
Guzel with an evaluation of the Targeting and Risk Management 
Workshop which was completed in Mersin.  Guzel stated that he 
had received several positive reports from the Mersin 
Regional Director and other customs officials that the 
workshop was very beneficial to all who attended.  Guzel 
added that he would appreciate the same type of program for 
land border locations and possibly other ports.  Finally, 
Guzel requested information on the possibility of a Turkish 
Customs delegation traveling to the U.S. during the next two 
months for an orientation visit to Custom HQ and field 
locations.  EXBS Advisor stated that this should be possible; 
however he would need to coordinate with U.S. Customs 
concerning actual visit locations and program. 
 
2)          Sep 18- EXBS Advisor and visiting USCG team met 
with Port of Izmir Regional Director, Deputy Director, port 
officials and other senior staff members.  USCG team provided 
an overview of the Port Security/Port Vulnerability Training 
that was being conducted.  Izmir Port officials provided an 
overview briefing of the port along with expected areas of 
expansion of the port.  Following the briefings, a tour of 
the commercial port facilities was conducted.  USCG team was 
able to observe the overall physical security of the port, 
off loading of cargo, the movement of trucks, and the 
checking of incoming and outgoing trucks and passenger 
vehicles.  Turkish Port officials were very open and willing 
to discuss their operation and exchange experiences.  USCG 
team found Turkish port operations well within traditionally 
accepted international standards with no significant areas of 
major concern. 
 
3)           Sep 19 - EXBS Advisor met with Undersecretariat 
of Foreign Trade (UFT) Agreements Department Head Ziya 
Demirduzen to review the progress of the ICP project, to 
evaluate the translation of the EU control list and to 
discuss possible other areas of cooperation. Demirduzen 
informed EXBS Advisor that UFT has been in contact with the 
contractor, Docuart, and submitted their final review on Sept 
¶13. The program appears to be working properly and there are 
only minor corrections needed in some of the documents. 
Demirduzen added that the review of the translated control 
list is being accomplished with the assistance of the 
Istanbul Mineral and Metals Association, Turkish Atomic 
Energy Authority and the Ministry of Defense.  Each agency 
has been requested to have comments submitted to UFT no later 
than Oct 16. EXBS Advisor informed Demirduzen that planning 
for the next stages of the ICP program, including instructor 
training and an Industry-Government Forum, needs to continue; 
however due to the delay in the review of the translated 
control list it is now suggested that the instructor training 
take place in early November and the IG Forum in early 
December.  Demirduzen agreed that this could be possible, but 
would need to check with his Director General before 
committing to these time frames. 
 
 
ANKARA 00005902  002 OF 003 
 
 
4)          Sep 20 - EXBS Advisor met with MFA Energy, Water 
and Environment Issues Head of Department Gulsum Erkul to 
discuss the involvement of Turkish Atomic Energy Authority in 
upcoming International Nuclear Smuggling Work Group and 
provide initial information concerning upcoming request for 
additional cooperation in combating nuclear smuggling.  Erkul 
informed EXBS Advisor that she was the main focal point of 
international cooperation with issues involving TAEK and 
appreciated being included in communication with TAEK that 
could have international implications.  EXBS Advisor stressed 
that we consider Turkey a partner in this fight and that any 
information that is obtained by TAEK conducting these tests 
would be shared with GOT. 
 
EXBS Advisor met with Customs Enforcement Deputy Director 
General Mehmet Guzel to further discuss the proposed 
orientation visit by Turkish Customs officials to the United 
States.  Guzel informed EXBS Advisor that he was impressed 
with the proposed initial schedule for the orientation visit. 
 Guzel added that one of the key points on which Turkish 
officials would like information was planning for the future. 
  Guzel continued that there is a belief that Turkish Customs 
will be going through changes in the near future with the 
addition of technology and personnel.  Because of this, they 
would like to learn more about how U.S. Customs plans for the 
future and prepares for changes in policies, practices and 
procedures. 
 
5)         Sep 26 - EXBS Advisor met with Dr. Kemal Kaya, 
Advisor to the Turkish Grand National Assembly Speaker Arinc. 
 EXBS Advisor outlined the NP Agreement for Kaya and 
requested assistance in moving the Agreement through 
Parliament for ratification.  Kaya reviewed the normal 
procedure by which Agreements are ratified; he also checked 
on the status of the Agreement.  Kaya informed EXBS Advisor 
that the Agreement was number 3 on the list of items for the 
general agenda.  This is a good position as the fall session 
opens, since it is rare for non-agenda items to be brought to 
the floor of Parliament early in the session.  Kaya would 
expect ratification of the Agreement within the first two 
weeks of the next session, which opens October 2. 
 
6)         Sep 27 - EXBS Advisor met with Turkish National 
Police Organized Crime Section Chief Mehmet Ali Keskinkilic. 
EXBS Advisor informed Keskinkilic about the U.S. proposals 
for increased cooperation between Turkey and the US in the 
area of combating nuclear smuggling, including the offer of 
discussion or workshops between law enforcement experts in 
these areas.  Keskinkilic stated that he did not believe that 
there is a significant amount of actual smuggling of nuclear 
material in Turkey at this time.  EXBS Advisor informed 
Keskinkilic that, while there might not be a significat 
amount now, these discussions would assist n preparing 
Turkish officials should the smugglers begin to try to work 
through Turkey.  Keskinkilic agree that this would be a good 
prgram for the TNP's new terrorism task force and that he 
would present the information to his leadership. 
 
7)        Sep 29 - EXBS Advisor met with Customs Enforcement 
Deputy Director General Mehmet Guzel to further discuss the 
proposed orientation visit by Turkish Customs officials to 
the United States.  EXBS Advisor presented the latest 
proposed schedule which factored in changes due to travel and 
holidays.  Guzel informed EXBS Advisor that he just returned 
from a meeting in Kiev, Ukraine concerning joint cooperation 
between Black Sea countries to stop smuggling on the Black 
Sea.  This initiative is different from the Black Sea 
Harmony/Black Sea Force that is being coordinated by the 
militaries of some of the Black Sea littoral countries and 
focuses more on cooperation between the customs services of 
each country.  It has been proposed that the main command 
center for this new initiative be located in Ukraine, either 
Kiev or Odessa.  Guzel added that there are many details that 
need to be worked out, but this initial four day meeting did 
have attendees from all six littoral countries. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: 
 
 
ANKARA 00005902  003 OF 003 
 
 
1)        Sep 17- 23 - US Coast Guard (USCG) conducted a Port 
Physical Security/Port Vulnerability Course at the Port of 
Izmir, Turkey.  The goal of the training was to enhance the 
officers knowledge and abilities to enhance the physical 
security of the port and to identify possible future areas of 
vulnerability to the safety and security of the port.  During 
the week, 18 Turkish officials from 6 Turkish Ports, Turkish 
Customs, Coast Guard and Maritime Ministry actively 
participated in all course activities and field exercises at 
the port.  Student and instructor feedback was positive. 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: None 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Nov 11-21 - Overview visit of Turkish Customs 
Officials to United States. 
 
¶B.         Nov 28-30 (proposed)- ICP Instructor Training in 
Ankara. 
 
¶C.         Dec 18-19 (proposed)- Industry - Government Forum 
in Istanbul. 
 
¶D.         Dec/Jan (proposed)- INECP nuclear industry 
outreach workshop to be conducted. 
 
¶E.         Jan/Feb (proposed)- First CIT Pilot Course 
conducted by Turkish instructors with assistance by INECP 
personnel. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON