06ANKARA6073
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5772
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6073/01 2931354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201354Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9554
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7535
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1498
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1254
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5522
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5240
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1904
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 006073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2006 
 
 
Ralston-Baser Attend Conference in Istanbul 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others report Turkish and American special envoys for countering 
the PKK, retired generals Edip Baser and Joseph Ralston participated 
Thursday in a conference held by Turkey's Eurasia Strategic Studies 
Center (ASAM) in Istanbul.  Baser said Turkey was running out of 
patience with the failure of Iraq and the US to halt the PKK attacks 
from northern Iraq into Turkey, stressing that military operations 
could come on the agenda.  'Logistic and financial support going to 
the PKK in northern Iraq must be cut, the PKK's communication 
channels and human resources abroad must be disrupted, and the 
terrorist organization must be forced to lay down its arms,' Baser 
maintained.  Responding to a question, Baser said the PKK in 
northern Iraq was gaining a considerable amount of revenues from 
border fees, which made a second border crossing between the two 
countries necessary. 
 
In his speech, General Ralston challenged 'some rumors' with regard 
to the role of the US, such as Americans were not doing anything 
against the PKK, by saying that the US considered the PKK as illegal 
since 1997.  He noted that the US was exerting efforts to cut 
logistic and financial support to the organization.  Ralston 
underlined that in US foreign policy, the PKK is a terrorist 
organization, not a tool.  Regarding another 'rumor' that the US was 
using the PKK to take revenge for Turks' Mach 2003 rejection of the 
deployment of US troops through Turkey into northern Iraq, Ralston 
said Americans found Turkey help invaluable and were using the 
Incirlik Airbase to support democracy in Iraq, that Turkey and the 
US are NATO allies, and that the US is supporting Turkey's 
membership to the EU.  Ralston asked for the patience of the Turkish 
nation.  Asked after his address whether there are maps in the US 
showing a restructured Middle East, Ralston said the US Defense 
Department did not support such maps as the one published in the 
private publication Armed Forces Journal.  On the controversy 
concerning the Mahmur camp, General Ralston said Turkey, Iraq and 
the UN need to agree on this issue, adding such an agreement has not 
been made yet.  Ralston also noted that the US would send a team to 
Europe in the coming weeks in an effort to cut the flow of funds to 
the PKK. 
 
State Department Hosts 'Iftar' 
Zaman devotes its entire page 16 to a State Department Iftar hosted 
by Undersecretaries Nicholas Burns and Karen Hughes because 
Secretary Rice was on a tour of Asia.  In a positive and 
 
SIPDIS 
straightforward tone, the paper's Washington reporter Ali Aslan 
quotes Burns as telling the guests that the principal problem in the 
Islamic world today has been 'the conflict between extremity and 
tolerance.'  Hughes is also lauded in the report for citing a verse 
of the Koran to the effect that 'The Night of Power [when the Koran 
was revealed] is holier than a thousand months.'  Hughes also 
emphasized the leadership traits of the Prophet Muhammad's wife 
Hatice and daughter Ayse.  The report also recounts an anecdote how 
a meeting with a Turkish woman in Germany inspired U/S/ Hughes to 
launch her 'Citizens' Dialogue' project. 
 
Baykal Slams Baydemir Remarks at Kurdish Conference 
All papers quote the main opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal as 
saying 'Terrorists in the mountains and some politicians in the 
cities work for the same political cause,' in criticism of a 
statement made by the Kurdish-majority city Diyarbakir's Mayor Osman 
Baydemir to a Kurdish conference held in Brussels under the auspices 
of the European Parliament earlier this week.  Baydemir had called 
on Ankara to share with local administrations the oil reserves and 
hydro-energy resources in southeastern Turkey. 
 
Reports into Controversial Killing Investigated 
Radikal reports prosecutors have opened a legal probe into human 
rights reports on the September 5 killing by security forces of a 
nine-year-old Kurdish girl, Mizgin Ozbek, while she was riding in a 
car with two outlawed PKK militants.  Acting on a complaint by the 
 
ANKARA 00006073  002 OF 004 
 
 
Turkish jandarma, prosecutors questioned human rights organizations 
IHD and Mazlum-Der as well as Batman Bar and two local dailies for 
preparing a report on the incident that could be in violation of 
Article 301.  The complaint by the jandarma was that the reports 
'insulted the identity of security forces' and interfered with the 
official investigation into the killing of the girl and the two 
militants.  Radikal criticizes the fact that those responsible for 
the killing were not investigated whereas reports on the incident 
were prosecuted. 
 
Armenian Turks Not Happy with Foundations Bill 
Sabah, Radikal and Yeni Safak report the Patriarch of the Armenians 
in Turkey, Mesrob II, complained that the non-Muslim foundations 
bill is not compatible with the principle of constitutional 
equality, warning that it will not solve their problems if it is 
passed.  In a letter to Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc, Prime 
Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, 
Mesrob II said 'We feel sorry to be considered as foreigners in 
accordance with the principle of reciprocity, and no one consulted 
us regarding our views.  We, naturally, ask the parliament to solve 
our problems since we are the nationals of this country.' 
 
Broadcasting Watchdog Calls for a Ban on French Films 
All papers report Turkey's state broadcasting watchdog RTUK has 
recommended a boycott of French-made programs and movies in protest 
of the French Parliament's adoption of a bill making the denial the 
genocide of Armenians at the hand of Ottoman-Turkish troops in early 
20th century a crime.  In a statement issued Wednesday, the RTUK 
said Turkish television and radio stations should avoid airing 
French-made programs until France drops the Armenian genocide bill. 
 
 
Babacan Meets Bakoyannis in Athens 
All papers report that on Thursday, Turkey's chief EU negotiator Ali 
Babacan, after meeting with Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis, 
told a press conference that 'Ankara's January proposal concerning 
opening Turkish ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and 
planes is still on the table.'  'Following the April 26, 2004 twin 
referenda in Cyprus, the EU decided to lift sanctions on Turkish 
Cyprus, and Turkey clearly stated that it will not make any 
unilateral attempt.  Greek Cypriot products are already allowed into 
Turkey, the limitations are about vehicles.  We can open our ports 
and airports, but first, the isolation of north Cyprus must be 
ended,' Babacan said.  On Turkeys' EU process, Babacan said the 
reality necessitates that 'a train crash' on Turkey's path to EU 
membership not happen.  He noted Bakoyannis reiterated Athens' 
support to Turkey's EU drive.  'It will take time for Turkey to go 
through a reform in mindsets,' stressed Babacan, adding 'Political 
reforms are easy on paper, but the implementation becomes difficult 
sometimes.' 
 
New ' Formula' to Save Cargill 
The economic/political Dunya reports an interim formula has been 
found to save from closure the US food giant Cargill's corn 
processing facilities in the Bursa province, by extending an earlier 
amnesty for those using agricultural areas for other purposes. 
Turkish Glucose Producers' Organization welcomed the decision, 
saying Cargill accounted for 55 percent of the 550,000 tons of 
market, stressing that the domestic sectors of chocolate, candies 
and soft drinks would enter into a crisis and turn to imports if 
Cargill was closed. 
 
Editorial Commentary on North Korea, Iraq 
 
Sami Kohen commented in the mainstream Milliyet (10/20):  "There was 
only one encouraging voice, from Iran, about North Korean nuclear 
testing, and this is not surprising.  Tehran considers itself in the 
same league with the North Korean regime, and Kim Jong-Il's defiance 
to the world comes as good encouragement for the Iranian regime's 
Ahmedinejad.  When it comes to sanctions, Iran and North Korea 
 
ANKARA 00006073  003 OF 004 
 
 
present different pictures as the former is an oil-rich country 
while the latter is absolutely poor and living in despair. 
However, sanctions are very unlikely to make an impact on both given 
the nature of dictatorial regimes.  The truth is that the 
international community has limited capability to force North Korea 
or Iran to give up on their nuclear program.  Using military force 
against them will be as dangerous as their capacity to possess 
atomic weapons.  Consensus and dialogue through diplomacy seem to be 
the only option.  Given the current situation, the danger continues 
to be a fact for everyone, regardless of the distances to and from 
these countries." 
 
Kamuran Ozbir wrote in the nationalist Ortadogu (10/20):  "The North 
Korean regime plans to use its nuclear program as a bargaining card 
in order to start direct negotiations with the US.  However, North 
Korea has already killed this bargaining card by conducting a 
nuclear test that led to a greater isolation for the regime.  The UN 
is incapable of imposing certain sanctions, and it can even pave the 
way for a military option in the end.  Even China might be forced to 
be harsh on North Korea.  In any case, there is still a possibility 
of North Korea being more extreme and taking more radical steps. 
This possibility should always be kept in mind by the super 
powers." 
 
Haluk Ulman opined in the economic-politic Dunya (10/20): "The Bush 
administration created a unique situation in Iraq with the current 
picture even worse than the pre-occupation period.  Americans cannot 
find a proper civilian regime to transfer authority or cannot work 
through a proper security system so that they can leave the country. 
 Chaos and anarchy are the indispensables of Iraq.  There's a 
dilemma for President Bush.  Pulling out American forces from Iraq 
will pose a serious blow to the credibility and prestige of the US. 
Moreover, a US pullout will create more chaos in Iraq that will be 
even worse than before, including a strong possibility of a divided 
Iraq and a strong ranian influence.  The US has already started t 
think about 'the way out' from the Iraq problm.  At this point, the 
upcoming report by the Iraq Working Group headed by James baker will 
be very important to watch for." 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV (8 a.m.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal lashed out at DYP leader Mehmet 
Agar inviting the PKK to join politics, saying an amnesty would only 
be possible if secessionist aspirations are abandoned and terrorism 
is destroyed. 
 
- The EU Commission draft report warns no discussions would be 
opened under social policy and employment chapters unless Turkey 
removes restrictions on collective bargaining and strike rights. 
 
- The Turkish Prime Minister's Office said Thursday that Turkey has 
sent to Palestine USD 1 million worth of flour, sugar, rice and 
lentils.  The office said the aid will be conveyed to the 
Palestinian people through the UN Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in Israel. 
 
International News 
 
- Le Nouvel Observateur writes the French Foreign Ministry is 
preparing to open an office in northern Iraq in January in an effort 
to assist French businessmen in their dealings in the region. 
 
- A poll commissioned by the BBC shows that 29 percent of people in 
25 countries around the globe support the use of torture in prisons 
under certain circumstances whereas 59 percent oppose. 
 
 
ANKARA 00006073  004 OF 004 
 
 
- Sixty-two Greek Cypriots have applied to a Turkish Cyprus 
commission demanding a return or compensation of their assets left 
in the north, marking an increase in applications for resolving 
property disputes. 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON