06DAMASCUS5095
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iran, Syria/Spain, Peace
Sun Oct 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #5095/01 3021550
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291550Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2206
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6334
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4140
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2728
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7327
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1346
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4708
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0923
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7059UNCLAS DAMASCUS 005095 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iran, Syria/Spain, Peace 
Process, Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian Territories (10/27-29) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers reported that President Asad received a 
letter from Iranian President Ahmadinejad conveyed by visiting 
Iranian Foreign Minister Manuchehr Mottaki.  The letter focused on 
regional developments, mainly in Iraq and the Palestinian 
territories.  President Asad and Minister Mottaki reviewed bilateral 
relations. Papers also reported a meeting in Damascus between Minister 
of Information Dr. Mohsen Bilal and a delegation of Spanish 
journalists  who came to Syria to acquaint themselves with political, 
economic and social life in Syria and covey what they learn to their 
audiences abroad. 
Papers also featured an article by British Conservative MP Richard 
Spring published in the British daily "The Guardian" on October 27 
saying that peace in the Middle East couldn't be achieved without 
Syria's participation.  Spring called for working with Syria to 
achieve peace in the Middle East, insisting this is the only way out 
of the current situation. 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a letter from President Ahmadinejad of Iran 
on the regional situation and reviews bilateral relations and 
consultations between Syria and Iran with Iranian Foreign Minister 
Mottaki" (Government-owned Tishreen, 10/29) 
 
"During a meeting with a delegation of foreign media journalists in 
Damascus Information Minister Dr. Mohsen Bilal reiterates that the 
US Greater Middle East Project is a dream that cannot be achieved" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/29) 
 
"International report unveils that Israel used uranium in its latest 
aggression against Lebanon.  The UNIFIL Commander calls upon Javier 
Solana, European Union Foreign Policy Chief, to stop Israeli 
violations of Lebanese airspace.  Hizbollah renews its call for 
changing the government" (Government-owned Tishreen, 10/29) 
 
"After Israel threats to reoccupy the Salah Eddin crossing, Egypt 
deploys its forces along the borders with Rafah.  Calm in Gaza after 
renewal of agreement between Fateh and Hamas" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 10/29) 
 
"A US analyst:  The Bush Administration is facing pressures to reach 
understanding with Syria for its strategic importance" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/29) 
 
"Voices from Europe and Spain propagandize for a new peace 
conference on the Middle East.  The European Parliament:  Syria is a 
big country that must be respected.  A British Conservative MP, 
Richard Spring, confirms that peace in the Middle East can't be 
achieved without Syria's participation" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
10/29) 
"Repercussions of Berri initiative:  Lebanese parties:  The 
government's policies diminish the legitimacy of its continuation" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/28) 
"The UN criticizes US law on combating terrorism" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 10/28) 
"The Palestinian resistance imposes its conditions.  Israel accepts 
prisoner swap for releasing Shalit" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
10/28) 
"Author of the book, 'The Grand Transformation,' says:  French 
diplomacy during Chirac's reign is catastrophic" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 10/27) 
"A French intelligence officer:  the Mossad assassinated Al-Hariri" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/27) 
"Eight US soldiers killed in Iraq subsequent to Bush's statements on 
changing strategies in Iraq" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/27) 
"An international petition with 107 signatures of international 
organizations and associations condemns Israeli and US crimes " 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/27) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------- 
"The Olmert-Lieberman Government" 
--------------------------------- 
Adnan Ali, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(10/27):  "Israeli statements and leaks regarding the Golan Heights 
and chances of reviving peace negotiations with Syria indicate major 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers reported that President Asad received a 
letter from Iranian President Ahmadinejad conveyed by visiting 
Iranian Foreign Minister Manuchehr Mottaki.  The letter focused on 
regional developments, mainly in Iraq and the Palestinian 
territories.  President Asad and Minister Mottaki reviewed bilateral 
relations. 
Papers also reported a meeting in Damascus between Minister of 
Information Dr. Mohsen Bilal and a delegation of Spanish journalists 
 who came to Syria to acquaint themselves with political, economic 
and social life in Syria and covey what they learn to their 
audiences abroad. 
Papers also featured an article by British Conservative MP Richard 
Spring published in the British daily "The Guardian" on October 27 
saying that peace in the Middle East couldn't be achieved without 
Syria's participation.  Spring called for working with Syria to 
achieve peace in the Middle East, insisting this is the only way out 
of the current situation. 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
confusion among Israeli military and political leaders. 
"The military leaders, some of whom have drawn conclusions from the 
recent war in Lebanon, say that it is in Israel's interest to sign a 
peace agreement with Syria, even if the price is the return of the 
entire Golan, because peace with Syria without the Golan, they 
believe, is better for Israel than the Golan without peace.... 
"Some politicians share this opinion, but not all of them dare to 
say it publicly because they do not want to be upstaged by the 
rightists or their rivals, including Defense Minister Amir Peretz, 
who, through his decision to stay in the government, despite the 
inclusion of mentally retarded Avigdor Liberman in it, preferred to 
defend his political future instead of continuing the deception 
about his true positions toward the peace process." 
"A few but increasing voices refuse to listen to the hallucinations 
of Ehud Olmert and his gang in the Kadima Party and his other 
extremist partners about the need for Israel to keep the Golan 
forever.  But these people find no opportunity to expand and impose 
themselves, not only because the domestic Israeli policy has been 
intensively mobilized against peace in the past few years, but also 
because the guardians in Washington have not yet allowed Israel to 
deal seriously with the issue of peace, especially on the Syrian 
track...." 
------------------------------------- 
"Consequences of an Erroneous Policy" 
------------------------------------- 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (10/28):  "Washington's wrong and unfair policy in 
Iraq led the United States to a crisis with disastrous results for 
the United States and the Iraqi people, worse than the results of 
the Vietnam War.... 
"Donald Rumsfeld's recent statement that the Iraqi crisis cannot be 
resolved by military force is an admission that the policy of force, 
preemptive war, creative instability, and the restructuring of the 
Middle East in a way that serves American and Israeli interests is 
wrong.  It proves that the only way out of the crisis of the Iraqi 
war and its destructive impact on US interests, its prestige, and 
its ethical reputation, lies in reversing the adventurous policy and 
removing its tragic repercussions, primarily ending the occupation 
of Iraq." 
------------------------------------ 
"Between Resistance and Squandering" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(10/25):  "Israelis continue to violate Resolution 1701 and provoke 
Lebanon under the eyes and ears of the international peacekeeping 
force, UNIFIL, and the whole world.... 
 
"The international community is unable to curb Israel's aggression 
and departure from international law because of US support of 
Israel.... 
 
"It is not strange for the Bush administration to support Israel's 
terrorism because this administration itself practices terrorism and 
aggression, not only in Afghanistan and Iraq, but also against all 
countries and peoples that have rebelled and announced their 
 
 
Papers also reported a meeting in Damascus between Minister of 
Information Dr. Mohsen Bilal and a delegation of Spanish journalists 
 who came to Syria to acquaint themselves with political, economic 
and social life in Syria and covey what they learn to their 
audiences abroad. 
Papers also featured an article by British Conservative MP Richard 
Spring published in the British daily "The Guardian" on October 27 
saying that peace in the Middle East couldn't be achieved without 
Syria's participation.  Spring called for working with Syria to 
achieve peace in the Middle East, insisting this is the only way out 
of the current situation. 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
rejection of the US policy of domination and looting.... 
 
"If the international decision is controlled by the US decision, 
what is the justification of Arab laxity at a time when 
Palestinians, Iraqis, and Lebanese are being slaughtered by American 
and Israeli hands? 
 
"What is the justification for a Lebanese team that trades in the 
slogans of sovereignty and independence but remains totally silent 
toward Israeli violations of Lebanon's territory and airspace in 
broad daylight...?  We are not surprised by the position of this 
Lebanese team.  We do not think that those who treacherously stab 
the resistance in the back, threaten it day and night, and call for 
disarming and abolishing it, are sincere when they talk about 
sovereignty, independence, and the truth. These people form one of 
the sides of the alliance that is hostile to Lebanon, Arabism, and 
independence.  Independence is protected by the sons of the 
resisting homeland, not by those who throw themselves in the laps of 
ambassadors, consuls, and high commissioners and who draw strength 
from foreigners against their compatriots...." 
 
Corbin