06KABUL5235
PRT Farah: Iranian Assistance Plans for Farah Province
Sun Oct 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3147
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #5235/01 3020318
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290318Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3773
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE 0317
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3176
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 6627
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3311
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KABUL 005235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/FO, SA/A, S/CR, 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
USNATO FOR AMBASSADOR NULAND 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 
 
REL TO NATO/ISAF/AUS/NZ 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID ASEC PREL AF IR
SUBJECT: PRT Farah: Iranian Assistance Plans for Farah Province 
 
REF:  Kabul 3090 
 
KABUL 00005235  001.3 OF 004 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Iran has traditionally taken an interest in western 
Afghanistan as an important sphere of influence and, historically, 
Iranians have regarded part of western Afghanistan as an extension 
of Iranian territory.  Recent Iranian negotiations with Farah 
provincial government officials show the extent of Iran's continuing 
interest across its border and its desire to extend inroads to Farah 
Province. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Former Farah Provincial Governor Isatullah Wasifi traveled 
to Iran and, just before his recall to Kabul August 20, welcomed a 
delegation from Iran in August to discuss details of previous 
meetings and even more comprehensive agreements (see texts below). 
The Iranian delegation, which included several engineers, departed 
Farah August 12 after promising Wasifi to soon start a new 
vocational school (on land near the PRT compound) and repairs on and 
supplies for a clinic or construction of a new provincial hospital. 
They also endorsed providing Farah Province with an electrical grid 
which should, Wasifi said, bring electricity to most districts. 
After the visit, Wasifi confirmed Iranian plans to build a new legal 
border crossing, probably at Mile 78 (which Wasifi said the Foreign 
Ministry had approved) and pave a road from that crossing to Farah 
City.  A legal border in Farah would shorten the route from 
southeastern Iran to the Ring Road and on to Kandahar and Kabul from 
the current distance through Herat Province.  It would also divert 
much revenue now collected by officials in Herat to Farah. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Background on the Meetings:  In July, then-Deputy Governor 
Haji Juma Khan Ghamkhor indicated that no practical steps had been 
put forward for implementation of the agreements made between the 
two governments in January (see below) regarding some rehabilitation 
activities in Farah.  The agreements are mainly in two phases -- the 
first phase was accomplished when then-Governor Wasifi traveled to 
Iran and the second phase refers to agreements obtained at a more 
senior level during President Karzai's trip to Iran in May.  The 
Iranian delegation trip to Farah in August seemed to seal the deals. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Farah Provincial officials received a letter from Iranian 
officials inviting them to attend a meeting on August 2 at the 
Afghan-Iranian border to discuss implementation of a number of these 
agreements.  Talks primarily focused on the following: paving the 
road from Mile 78 (where there would be a new legal border crossing 
established) to Farah City (135 km), providing electrical power 
through 132 KW power to Farah, extending a gas pipeline from Iran, 
constructing a vocational school at a total cost of one million 
dollars, and constructing an equipped health clinic.  There is still 
no clear date for when these projects and other important projects 
agreed upon at the presidential level would be started.  Officials 
expect an increase in Iranian presence once the projects are 
launched. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Background Documents - January 2006 (obtained by PRT Farah) 
(Unofficial Translations) 
 
¶A.  General Protocol: 
 
Signed agreements between (former) Afghan Provincial Governor 
Isatullah Wasifi and Governor of Southern Khorasan (Iran) Said Solat 
Mortazawai: 
 
The following is a formal protocol between South Khorasan  Province 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Farah Province of Afghanistan. 
 
In accordance with an official invitation issued by Mr. Mortise, 
Governor of Southern Khorasan, Mr. Isatullah Wasifi, Governor of 
Farah and his delegation of nine people including Heads of the 
Departments of Economy, Agriculture and Education spent one week in 
the Islamic Republic of Iran.  Dated 29-9-1384 (Afghan Calendar) 
 
This trip was divided into two parts.  The first portion was an 
 
KABUL 00005235  002.3 OF 004 
 
 
unofficial trip by Governor Wasifi to the City of Mashad.  The 
second portion was official during which Governor Wasifi visited the 
city of Birjand, in the center of southern Khorasan Province.  The 
Farah delegation met with Iranian officials in four official 
meetings.  They also visited the Departments of Education, 
Economics, Agriculture, and Culture in Birjand and the city of 
Sarbesha.  The delegation toured the international border between 
Afghanistan and Iran between Mile 73 and Mile 75 and saw a small 
shopping center.  During the visit to the border, Governor Wasifi 
spoke with Afghans and Iranians. 
Due to the large size of the delegation, the principal commission 
was broken into two subgroups to discuss 1) Economics and 
Agriculture and 2) Culture and Education.  Each group met three 
times.  The results are included in the appendix of this protocol 
and it was signed by commission members.  The purpose of the trip 
was to analyze the potential of each province to work together in 
accordance to each government's policies. 
 
General cooperation discussed: 
Customs and border security 
Roads 
Education cooperation including higher education 
Economic and mine projects 
Agriculture and irrigation projects 
Electric power 
Medical facilities and treatment 
Culture and arts projects 
 
Iran insists on cooperation between border patrols against narcotics 
trafficking, smuggling, and security to improve progress between 
Farah and Iran. 
 
Both Governors agreed to discuss all issues and supporting material 
with their respective central governments to enable them to 
cooperate according to legal statutes.  Finally, both governors are 
ready to implement actions to rebuild Farah as soon as possible. 
Signed by: 
Governor of South Khorasan      Governor of Farah 
Said Solat Mortazawai  Isatullah Wasifi 
 
¶B.  Economic Commission Protocol: 
 
The following are meeting notes of discussions between South 
Khorasan Province of Iran and Farah Province of Afghanistan: 
 
In a meeting on (month) 10 (year) 84 (day) 4 of the Economic 
Commission delegates of Farah Province of Afghanistan and Birjand 
City South Khorasan of Iran discussed these items with the 
anticipation of action after formal agreement between countries is 
concluded: 
 
The Farah's governor's request to build a road and open a customs 
station on Mile 75 or Dukohana Road will be honored.  A border 
control point along Mile 73 was nominated in a previous 
international agreement and Iranian officials insist the issue be 
revisited by Afghanistan's central government for final 
adjudication. 
 
Building a 132 kilowatt power plant and transferring the electricity 
to Farah 
Building four medical clinics in Farah 
Digging 100 wells in Farah 
Building 100 kilometers of village roads (unspecified name listed: 
Shosa) 
Building of a fuel and shopping center in Farah 
A scholarship program will be created to send 100 Afghan students 
(in four groups) to South Khorasan to learn animal husbandry and 
agricultural farming in the year 85.  Participants will attend the 
Jihad Agricultural Research and Education Center in South Khorasan. 
The GOA will provide names of those to be trained. 
 
Creation of an Agriculture Research Center on 50 hectares of farm 
 
KABUL 00005235  003.3 OF 004 
 
 
land in a suburb of Farah City by Iranians after Afghans send 
proposals to them. 
Farah will extend an invitation to Iranian professionals from the 
Jihad Agriculture and Irrigation Center in South Khorasan to visit 
Farah and conduct analysis and research. 
Iran will provide water and electricity to a shopping center on the 
Afghan side of the border.  This will be accomplished after a formal 
request for service has been made through the Iranian Ministry of 
Power by shopping center authorities. 
 
Creation and rehabilitation of forests in Farah by Iran. 
Private Iranian investors will build a cement factory in Farah. 
Farah must first request and receive permission to sell the cement 
in Farah. 
 
The Department of Economics and Mining of South Khorasan agrees to 
research and study mining in Farah if agreed upon by the Afghan 
central government. 
 
Birjand municipality agrees to complete a road project of 20 km of 
pavement inside the City of Farah.  This will be accomplished after 
Farah provides an official request. 
A formal invitation was extended by the Mayor of Farah to the Mayor 
of Birjand to analyze the needs of Farah and provide professional 
advice.  If accepted they will collaborate on unspecified projects. 
 
An economic and trade exposition will be requested from the Mayor of 
Farah and conditions agreed upon. 
Farah and Birjand agree to create a combined business committee to 
increase cooperation and solve mutual problems.  The committee will 
include the provincial Economic Department chairmen and will hold a 
meeting every six months. 
 
Farah and South Khorasan agree to further discussions regarding 
importation taxes from shopping centers along the border. 
Farah and Berjand agree to improve communications and conduct 
professional analysis of this agreement. 
 
Signed by: 
Mohammad Gamphor      Base Solaimany 
Deputy Governor of Farah     Deputy of XXX (unreadable) 
 
¶C.  Culture and Education Protocol 
 
This is a synopsis of the discussions of the Culture and Education 
Commission which met from 3-5pm for two days during the Governor of 
Farah's trip to Berjand.  The group consisted of representatives 
from the Province of South Khorasan, Islamic Republic of Iran, and 
Farah Province of Afghanistan. Dated 5-10-84. 
 
Commission participants: 
From Iran: 
Mr. Mohammad Baqer Kamelay (Head of Culture and Head of Education 
Departments of South Khorasan,) 
Mr. Qasem Qanbarey (Head of TV and Radio Department of South 
Khorasan Province) 
Hussain Afzaleyan (Head of Culture and Islamic Education, South 
Khorasan Province) 
Korosh Rosta (Deputy of Free Islamic College in Berjand) 
 
From Afghanistan: 
¶1.  Haji Juma Ghamkhor (Deputy Governor of Farah) 
¶2.  Mr. Atiqulla (Head of Education Department) 
¶3.  Mr. Mokthar Raheb Zakeray (Farah Administrative Officer) 
 
Items of Discussion: 
Whatever Afghanistan requests, Iranians are prepared to help. 
1) Education materials i.e. computers to create a positive 
educational environment 
2) Transportation for students 
3) Creation of vocational training center 
4) Scholarship for Farah high school students to attend South 
 
KABUL 00005235  004.3 OF 004 
 
 
Khorasan Provincial College 
5) Training programs for school teachers 
6) A scholarship program for higher education 
7) Radio and television equipment 
8) Press equipment 
9) (Number skipped) 
10) Medicine and medical equipment for clinics and hospitals 
 
The Khorasan delegation accepted Farah's requests and is ready to 
offer help in these areas: 
Afghan students will be accepted in medicine, religion, teaching, 
and art programs 
Khorasan will send teachers to Farah 
Khorasan will write and print school books for Farah 
Create film and TV serials for Farah TV after discussion with radio 
and TV of Iran. 
They will send scientific papers from South Khorasan to Farah. 
Ready to cooperate with news between the two provinces 
Ready to show culture and art cooperation between the two provinces. 
 
Also send some reference books for research and cultural center 
regarding education and history. 
They will create a group of people to learn about Afghanistan from 
Berjand College. 
 
Signed by: 
Articula       Mr. Mohammed Baqer Kamelay 
Department of Education, Farah Head of Education and Culture 
Department, South Khorasan Province 
 
End text of agreements. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment:  With Farah's lack of economic opportunities and 
the drought so negatively affecting most farmers in this 
agricultural province, more and more men are traveling to Iran for 
work and more are taking their families with them to stay there. 
There are fewer refugee returns now, as Afghan families remain in 
Iran to survive economically.  Iranians do not live in Farah's towns 
and villages; there is nothing for them here.  None of these 
projects has been developed beyond the pledge stage.  Whether this 
lack of visible activity is due to Wasifi's departure from Farah is 
unknown.  A new governor arrived in Farah on October 8, and it 
remains to be seen what actions he will take to follow-up on 
Wasifi's agreements with the Iranians. 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment continued:  Iran's assistance overtures are not 
unwelcome here.  The agreements highlight Farah Province's 
development needs -- Farah Province suffers from a lack of attention 
from the GOA and has not been a focus province for foreign donors. 
Iranian attention and prospective willingness to spend money for 
long-term development projects to improve the quality of life for 
Farah residents, even though Iranian influence will increase, are 
not to be ignored or dismissed.  The dilemma is whether the U.S. 
ISAF PRT, seeing the need particularly for more roads and an 
electrical grid, should spend time and money on any of these 
development requirements.  U.S. PRT civil-military affairs (CMOC) in 
Herat would like to consider an electric grid (USD 6-8 million) or 
possible road work, but due to the Iranian "commitments" have not 
put in the time or effort.  Such U.S. projects would likely compete 
with, rather than complement, what the Iranians intend to do.  PRT 
CMOC is therefore hesitant to begin such projects.  End Comment. 
 
NEUMANN