06KINGSTON2150
JAMAICA: OPPOSITION PARTY'S ORIENTATION ON KEY
Tue Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #2150/01 3042029
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 312029Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3840
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0452
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA PRIORITY 0063
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM J7 MIAMI FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L KINGSTON 002150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (RANDALL BUDDEN, BRIAN NICHOLS) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2016 
TAGS: PREL ECON EFIN EINV PGOV PINR PTER SOCI CPAS
KCOR, JM, XL, XK 
SUBJECT: JAMAICA: OPPOSITION PARTY'S ORIENTATION ON KEY 
ISSUES;             EARLY NATIONAL ELECTIONS? 
 
REF: KINGSTON 2020 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Brenda L. Johnson, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
--------------------------------- 
Summary and Conclusion 
--------------------------------- 
 
1.(C)   Across a broad spectrum of issues - from Venezuela 
and Cuba to trade liberalization, market-driven development, 
anti-corruption efforts, and Iraq - the orientation of the 
Opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) remains more consonant 
with U.S. policies than that of the ruling People's National 
Party (PNP).  The JLP's popular appeal may soon be put to the 
test: its Leader Bruce Golding says he expects Prime Minister 
Portia Simpson Miller to call national elections before 
Christmas. 
End Summary and Conclusion. 
 
Venezuela and CARICOM 
----------------------------------- 
 
2.(C)   Deputy Chief of Mission (DCM) and Poloff met 
privately on the morning of Oct. 30 with Leader of the 
Opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) Bruce Golding, Party 
Chairman Karl Samuda, and Leader of Opposition Business 
Senator Anthony Johnson.  Golding began by inquiring about 
the ongoing contest between Venezuela and Guatemala for a 
seat on the UNSC, and asked whether a compromise candidate 
might emerge to break the deadlock.  DCM observed that, while 
the U.S. was not overtly attempting to engineer any 
particular outcome, it was no secret that Washington opposed 
Venezuela's gaining a seat.  Golding then stated flatly that 
he had disagreed with the position taken by the Government of 
Jamaica (GoJ) from the beginning; instead of backing 
Venezuela, CARICOM should have looked for a compromise 
candidate.  He would prefer that CARICOM "distance ourselves" 
from the anti-U.S. position of Chavez.  While Jamaica and 
Venezuela historically had enjoyed close relations, Chavez 
was a different matter; he was "not convinced" that CARICOM's 
close relations with Chavez would not have a "negative 
impact" on relations with the U.S.  DCM observed that, in 
light of the serious issues with which the UNSC would be 
dealing--from nuclear proliferation to international 
terrorism and Darfur--CARICOM's position was a 
disappointment.   If Venezuela were to gain a seat on the 
UNSC, while it would not have veto power, it nevertheless 
could disrupt business and prevent formation of consensus in 
the deliberations of important committees. 
 
Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative (WHTI) 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
3.(SBU)  Golding then pointed out that, in some quarters, the 
USG's recent requirement that U.S. citizens visiting the 
Caribbean hold valid passports had been interpreted as a 
result of the region's "dalliance with Chavez."  DCM assured 
him that the eleventh-hour exemption granted by Congress to 
facilitate travel across U.S. land borders and on cruise 
ships had had nothing to do with Venezuela.  In response to 
Golding's and Samuda's assertions that the U.S. passport 
requirement would cause serious damage to Caribbean tourism, 
DCM noted that: 
 
-- the most recent GoJ study had found that approx. 90 
percent of current U.S. visitors to Jamaica held valid 
passports (post will provide a copy to Golding and Samuda); 
 
-- overall U.S. passport issuances had accelerated 
significantly in recent years, and passports were valid for a 
full ten years; 
 
-- by requiring travelers to have passports, the U.S. was 
merely bringing itself into line with accepted international 
practice; 
 
-- post-9/11, aviation security was on the cutting edge of 
the global counter-terrorism effort, and any reprieve from 
the passport requirement for international air travelers 
would be only temporary--the requirement definitely would 
take effect. 
 
Golding then derided the GoJ's efforts to prepare for the new 
 
passport requirement as "dilatory": there had been no program 
to ready the tourism industry. 
 
Counter-terrorism, APIS, and Security 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
4.(SBU)  Samuda then asked how the U.S. viewed the threat of 
terrorism in the Caribbean.  DCM confirmed that Washington 
was very much aware of the threat, and noted that Secretary 
Chertoff recently had signed the Advance Passenger 
Information System (APIS) Agreement with CARICOM countries in 
Port-of-Spain.  The U.S. and Jamaica would continue their 
traditional close cooperation in law enforcement, security, 
and counter-narcotics. 
 
International Trade 
-------------------------- 
 
5.(U)  Turning to international trade, Samuda expressed deep 
pessimism over the Doha Round, and claimed that U.S. and EU 
agricultural subsidies were "holding us back."  DCM noted 
that the respective positions of the U.S. and EU differed 
substantially: Washington's most recent proposals for mutual 
reductions of agricultural subsidies had been quite 
reasonable, but unfortunately the EU had been unwilling to 
accept them.  Reductions must be equitable to overcome 
resistance from domestic agricultural lobbies.  In response 
to Samuda's inquiry regarding the status of FTAA, DCM 
acknowledged that, for the moment, progress was "on hold"; 
nevertheless, the U.S. continued to pursue liberalization at 
the global, regional, and bilateral levels. 
 
Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.(U)   Golding and Samuda said that Jamaica and the 
Caribbean had "suffered" because of Washington,s "shift of 
emphasis" toward other regions since the 1980s.  DCM replied 
that the shift had not been away from the Caribbean, but 
rather toward assistance in which recipient countries took 
more direct responsibility for setting and achieving concrete 
socio-economic results.  Under the Millennium Challenge 
Account (MCA) program, recipient countries had to meet 
specific criteria.  Jamaica currently was under consideration 
as an MCA threshold country; more progress was needed in 
anti-corruption, law enforcement, and immunization efforts. 
The Embassy would continue to work closely with Jamaica in 
these areas;  DCM offered to provide more information 
concerning MCC. 
 
Remittances, U.S. Immigration, and Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
7.(U)  Johnson then observed that, in recent years, 
remittances from North America and Europe had become a major 
factor in Jamaica,s economy, but that they were being used 
primarily to pay for consumption of imported goods.  The 
country enjoyed unprecedented reserves of foreign exchange, 
but they were not being used productively; a future JLP 
Government would explore ways to use remittances to enhance 
productivity.  He asked for information on projects or 
programs in other regional countries in this regard; DCM said 
we would pass this request on to Washington.  Samuda then 
inquired concerning plans for construction of a wall along 
the U.S.-Mexican border.  DCM noted that at several points 
along the border barriers already were in place; 
consideration of an additional barrier was simply part of a 
larger ongoing national debate over immigration reform. 
Golding then asked whether Iraq had become "an albatross" for 
the U.S. and U.K.: how much legitimacy did the current Iraqi 
Government enjoy?  DCM replied: "more than any previous Iraqi 
Government, since it had been freely elected by a 60% 
margin;" the situation in Iraq was extremely difficult, but 
not hopeless.  (Comment:  Golding and Samuda left the 
distinct impression of genuine sympathy with coalition forces 
in Iraq; theirs were voices of concern, rather than 
criticism.  End Comment.) 
 
Early National Elections? 
---------------------------------- 
 
8.(SBU)  Golding concluded by observing that Prime Minister 
Portia Simpson Miller's intentions with respect to the timing 
of national elections (which must be held before October, 
2007) were difficult to read: "on again, off again, now 
apparently on again."  ((Note: at a JLP rally the evening 
before, he had enjoined the Party faithful: "Do not allow 
yourselves to be deceived or deluded into believing that, 
because of Trafigura (Reftel) the elections will be put off 
until sometime next year....I confidently expect that when I 
deliver my Christmas message this year I will be doing so 
from Jamaica House as Prime Minister of Jamaica."  End 
Note.))  Golding did not elaborate as to why he now believed 
that elections were imminent. 
Johnson