06SAOPAULO1054
EXPORTS, POPULISM AND OLD ALLIES: A TRIP TO PARANA
Mon Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO7110
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #1054/01 2751818
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021818Z OCT 06
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5851
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 6906
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3153
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 7481
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 2788
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 2475
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 3045
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SAO PAULO 001054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC; WHA/PD 
NSC FOR FEARS 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/OLAC 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EAGR ETRD EWWT EINV SCUL KPAO BR
SUBJECT: EXPORTS, POPULISM AND OLD ALLIES: A TRIP TO PARANA 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY.  On a recent trip to the state of Parana just 
southwest of Sao Paulo, Consul General helped launch a Commerce 
Department initiative at the Port of Paranagua, which, according to 
Port officials and the state's governor, is being revitalized into a 
dynamic commercial sea link for southern Brazil.  Local authorities, 
however, question the efficacy of the State's investments in the 
publicly-owned and operated port facilities, and lament the 
ramifications of the governor's three-year old ban on the transport 
of genetically modified organisms (GMO) through the state.  The 
Consul General also met with business representatives and government 
officials in Parana's capital, Curitiba, a city respected worldwide 
for its visionary urban planning and mass transit system, and an 
apparent magnet for foreign investment.  He also addressed the 
state's most important industrial association in conjunction with an 
event highlighting investment opportunities in the United States. 
In addition to business activities and press interviews, the Consul 
General toured a rainforest preservation project, a museum dedicated 
to the Brazilian soldiers who fought alongside U.S. troops in Italy 
during World War II, and a Brazil-U.S. bi-national center.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
PORT OF PARANAGUA: NEW GATEWAY, OR WASTED OPPORTUNITY? 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Consul General (CG) recently made his first official visit 
to the state of Parana, which borders Sao Paulo state to the 
southwest.  As part of the trip, the CG signed a Network with the 
United States of America (NUSA) cooperative agreement with Dr. 
Eduardo Requiao de Mello e Silva, the Superintendent of the Ports of 
Paranagua and Antonina, whereby information about business 
opportunities and partnerships between U.S. and Brazilian firms may 
be more readily exchanged.  Designed and implemented by the U.S. 
Commercial Service (USCS), there are now 47 NUSA agreements in 
effect throughout Brazil. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Administration of the Ports of Paranagua and Antonina 
(APPA) boasts that the Port of Paranagua, now publicly owned and 
operated, is the largest solid bulk port in Latin America and dates 
back to 1872.  The Parana State Government has invested $75 million 
in the port in recent years, claiming that under previous 
administrations, the port had faced "inefficiency, non-operation, 
and losses."  Slick marketing materials are obviously aimed at 
international firms, including brochures and a promotional video 
done in English.  The APPA promotes Paranagua as a modernized port 
that maximizes efficiencies such as 24/7 operations, new heavy-duty 
asphalt for the approach-road, and separate truck entrances and 
weighing facilities based on cargo type (dry bulk, wood, or 
refrigerated).  The APPA claims the port is in a "rebound" phase, 
having experienced a 100 percent increase in truck traffic between 
2004 and 2005, with 3,000 trucks bringing grain to port each day 
during peak harvest time. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  But a tour of the port showed modest improvements, such 
as new concrete and updated design features to better regulate 
vehicle-flow, while much of the touted renovation and expansion of 
the port is still under construction.  Further, subsequent meetings 
with local officials suggested a more troubled side to the port's 
recent history.  Paranagua Mayor Jose Baka Filho was a civil 
engineer specializing in port construction before he ran for public 
office.  A member of the Democratic Labor Party (PDT), Baka Filho 
barely hides his disdain for and distrust of the state's governor, 
Roberto Requiao, of the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB). 
According to Baka Filho, the port is being mismanaged due to general 
incompetence, and most of the improvements cited by the Port 
Superintendent and the governor -- who are brothers and part of a 
wider Requiao nepotism network -- were either begun under the 
previous administration or have yet to materialize.  The Mayor 
admitted that "some new asphalt has been laid here and there," but 
he largely dismissed the cited expansion projects, like new workers' 
facilities and a new petroleum storage and transfer bunker, 
describing them as "paralyzed" by construction delays.  He also said 
that a special tax assessed only on port communities -- rather than 
general state funds -- funded much of the recent work on the port, 
and that public tenders for many project never materialized. 
 
SAO PAULO 00001054  002 OF 006 
 
 
Furthermore, Mayor Baka Filho charged that Paranagua's economy has 
been severely weakened in recent years by a reduction in grain 
shipments leaving the port.  He rallied the local business community 
to deliver the same message, and representatives of the Paranagua 
Association of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (ACIAP) reiterated 
the mayor's charge that the local economy has suffered under the 
policies of the current state government. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The drop in grain shipments from Paranagua is attributed 
to the governor's policies against genetically modified organisms 
(GMO).  Parana Governor Roberto Requiao is a firebrand populist 
known for wearing blue jeans to formal events and for freely and 
vociferously expressing his left-leaning views.  In 2003, he 
declared his state GMO-free.  With the aid of his brother, the Port 
Superintendent, the Governor banned the transportation of 
GMO-commodities through his state, including exports leaving from 
the Port of Paranagua, the leading port for grain exports in Brazil 
at that time.  Paranagua officials now complain bitterly that this 
policy has caused the volume of shipping to drop precipitously as 
growers from other states and from Paraguay adjusted to the 
transportation ban by sending their grain exports (mostly soy) to 
ports in the neighboring states of Santa Catarina and Sao Paulo. 
Since the ban took effect, the Port of Santos in Sao Paulo state has 
surpassed the Port of Paranagua as Brazil's leading export terminal 
for soybeans. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Local government officials and businessmen of the small 
city argue that the diversion of grain trucks has led to reduced tax 
revenue for the port communities and increased unemployment among 
stevedores and unskilled laborers who work on the docks and at 
related industries.  Business representatives said that 80 percent 
of the local economy is connected to the port, and when pressed, 
neither Paranagua's mayor nor its business leaders could marshal 
ideas for near-to-mid term alternative economic drivers.  (NOTE: 
Governor Requiao recently signaled he will loosen his policy against 
the use and transport of GMO-enhanced grains in Parana, in part due 
to several court rulings declaring the ban illegal, and likely in 
part due to the economic consequences noted by his critics.  It is 
also worth noting that Requiao must run in a second-round election 
race as a result of the October 1 nationwide elections.  He received 
38.9 percent of the votes cast, well shy of the majority required to 
secure a victory in the first round of elections under Brazilian 
law.  His closest competitor, Osmar Dias of the PDT, received 35.08 
percent, and the two will face off in second-round elections on 
October 29.  END NOTE) 
 
---------------------------- 
CURITIBA CONTINUES TO THRIVE 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) Curitiba, the Parana state capital, is world renown as a 
model of urban planning and mass transportation.  Unlike Sao Paulo, 
its sprawling neighbor to the east, Curitiba has a well-defined 
central downtown area that includes a pedestrian mall extending 
several blocks through the heart of a retail shopping, services and 
hotel district.  Curitiba also managed to preserve more of the 
distinctive, Portuguese-influenced architecture represented by the 
colonial era homes that once belonged to the coffee barons and 
plantation owners of the region; today, restaurants, banks and real 
estate agents make their offices in the well-preserved structures. 
Central state and municipal government offices, including those of 
the governor and the mayor, are located in a compact government zone 
near the city center, and the city is zoned to reduce population 
density as neighborhoods develop farther from major transportation 
arteries.  Curitiba also boasts several large and well-maintained 
parks with world-class cultural centers. 
 
¶8.  (U) Perhaps the most noteworthy characteristic of Curitiba is 
its mass transit system, called the Integrated Transportation Net. 
Realizing that a rail or subway system would be prohibitively 
expensive to construct late in the city's development, city planners 
in the 1970s and 80s instead built an extensive single-fare bus 
system that maximizes efficiency at every turn, including its 
now-famous elevated, tubular bus stops.  Studied closely by urban 
planners around the globe, Curitiba's bus system has been used as a 
 
SAO PAULO 00001054  003 OF 006 
 
 
model for transportation systems in Bogota, Panama City and Los 
Angeles, among other cities. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Mayor of Curitiba, Carlos Alberto Richa, said that of 
the thousands of international visitors that contact his office each 
year, most are interested in studying the city's methods of managing 
environmental issues, transit, and urban planning.  Mayor Richa 
added, however, that he is also trying to expand the city's image as 
a business center primed for international investment.  Large 
international companies like Volkswagen, Volvo and Kraft Foods have 
substantial operations in the Curitiba environs, and the city's 
industrial zone looks like many suburban American business parks, 
with wide boulevards and well-trimmed lawns leading to corporate 
headquarters and modern factories.  The mayor noted that HSBC Bank 
is considering a software project in Curitiba that would produce 
4,000 jobs if realized.  Mayor Richa, who is the Parana state 
coordinator for the Social Democratic Party of Brazil (PSDB) and a 
political rival of the state's governor, is also proud of his city's 
reputation as having the best quality schools and health care in 
Brazil.  Anecdotal evidence supports the mayor's contention that 
Curitiba is poised to continue thriving in an environment rich in 
foreign investment: Europeans and Americans dominated the guest list 
of the hotel and conference center at which we stayed, and the owner 
of the transport service we hired told us, in English, that most of 
his clients are foreign executives (primarily Europeans but also 
Americans) shuttling between businesses and government offices. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
BRAZILIAN EXECUTIVES MOVE UP IN MULTINATIONALS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶10.  (SBU) While in Curitiba, the CG attended a business lunch 
organized by corporate lawyer and long-time political insider Joao 
Casillo.  Along with the colorful and storied state legislator 
Rafael Greca (PMDB), who was once mayor of Curitiba and later served 
as federal Minister of Sport and Tourism under President Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso, Casillo hosted executives from a dozen U.S.-based 
corporations doing business in the region, including American Axle 
and Manufacturing (AAM), Phillip Morris, and Becton, Dickinson and 
Company.  Casillo noted that only a few years ago the attendees of 
such a meeting would mostly be American expatriates filling 
executive-level jobs in Brazil.  By contrast, at our meeting only 
two Americans were present in a room full of Brazilian-born managers 
and executives.  Casillo and Greca attributed this trend to the fact 
that well-educated and motivated Brazilians have been climbing the 
corporate ladders of multinationals over the years and now, after 
having done well in management positions overseas, these officers 
are returning to the executive suites in Brazil in posts including 
Chief Financial Officer, Managing Director and Chief Executive 
Officer.  The mood was good and optimistic among these 
businesspeople of Curitiba. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
INDUSTRIAL VIEW ON GSP, CHAVEZ, AND GEORGIA 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Another highlight of the CG's trip to Parana was a speech 
on business opportunities in the United States delivered at the 
Federated Industries of Parana State (FIEP).  FIEP is the most 
important industrial association of Parana, and it is based in an 
impressive, sprawling campus with several buildings housing offices, 
meeting rooms, teaching and training facilities, an auditorium and a 
helipad.  The State of Georgia and PNC Bank of Pennsylvania 
sponsored the event to draw attention to opportunities for Brazilian 
and international businesses based in Parana to use cities like 
Atlanta and Savannah as gateways to U.S. markets.  Some 100 
businesspeople attended the session, which was covered by the press. 
 FIEP representatives inquired into whether the organization could 
reach a more formal agreement with the Commerce Department regarding 
direct ties between FIEP and the USG.  Commercial Officer discussed 
options and a plan for follow-up meetings. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  In a private meeting with the CG, FIEP President Rodrigo 
da Rocha Loures said that Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez is 
politicizing the MERCOSUR economic block and attempting to win 
 
SAO PAULO 00001054  004 OF 006 
 
 
regional support through populist rhetoric and "paternal" spending. 
He noted, however, that "capitalism naturally counters paternalism" 
and the corruption that often accompanies it, and opined that 
Chavez' influence in South America will ultimately be limited. 
Rocha Loures, who founded the processed foods company Nutrimental 
with current operations throughout Brazil, also took pains to 
explain why Brazil still needs access to the General System of 
Preferences (GSP) soon to expire.  He said he understands that the 
purpose of GSP benefits was to help developing countries achieve a 
competitive level of industrialization and sustainability on 
international markets, but he insisted that, with some 4 million 
young people unemployed without hope of finding good jobs and the 
twin problems of chronic crime and social inequities, Brazil has not 
yet turned the corner from being a developing nation and could 
easily slip into economic stagnation without the trade opportunities 
afforded by the GSP. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
PUBLIC DIPLOMACY: EXCHANGE OPPORTUNITIES ABOUND 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶13.  (U) The Consul General conducted numerous press interviews and 
participated in several photo ops for print and broadcast news 
outlets while in Parana.  The trip received fairly extensive 
statewide press coverage, particularly from the perspective of 
U.S.-Parana business development. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The CG visited the Inter Americano bi-national center in 
Curitiba with the CONGEN's Public Affairs Officer (PAO).  Inter 
Americano is a relatively large bi-national center with five 
locations offering English classes, a United States-focused research 
library, and preparation courses for American college and graduate 
school exams.  But the center suffered a dramatic decline in 
enrollment between 2000 and 2004.  This decline in community 
interest was probably due largely to the same conditions that marked 
a worldwide decline in international student travel to the United 
States since 9/11; fear of travel and frustration with new rules 
governing visas for foreign students.  But we believe the loss of 
enrollment at Inter Americano might be also be attributed to 
inaction by its static, aging Board of Directors.  With this visit 
we hoped to re-invigorate the center's programming by offering 
encouragement to the young and energetic staff and by focusing 
attention on innovative program areas that show promise.  We note 
that enrollment has stabilized and even increased slightly since 
2004, and several new programs are showing significant public 
interest, such as partnerships with local businesses and 
governmental agencies and internship opportunities coordinated by 
Inter American.  Inter American also coordinates the applications 
from Parana State for the Embassy's very successful Youth 
Ambassadors Program, which sends 25 young Brazilians, mostly from 
rural or disadvantaged areas, to the United States on two-week 
cultural exchanges.  The Embassy has received over 2000 applications 
for each cycle of the program, which are judged on a number of 
merit-based criteria.  A significant number of qualified candidates 
were noted from Parana state, and three of these students were 
chosen to participate in different years.  The CG met with these 
students at Inter Americano, as well with as a teacher who 
participated in a similar exchange program, and discussed their 
experiences and plans for the future. 
 
¶15.  (U) The CG also met with the administrators of the Advanced 
Institute of Business Administration and Economics associated with 
the Getulio Vargas Foundation (ISAE/FGV).  This prestigious 
institution provides executive MBA degrees and other business 
certificates largely to working students, most of whom are sponsored 
by their employers.  ISAE/FGV has had exchange programs with U.S. 
business schools and continues to work closely with the Consulate, 
and its current curriculum features courses in ethics and corporate 
social responsibility. 
 
----------------------- 
ALMOST FORGOTTEN HEROES 
----------------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) Brazil's contribution to the Allied effort in World War II 
 
SAO PAULO 00001054  005 OF 006 
 
 
is often misunderstood, or simply overlooked.  In addition to 
providing raw materials and strategic air and naval bases in South 
America, Brazil sent 25,000 troops to Italy as the Brazilian 
Expeditionary Force (FEB), which was attached to the U.S. Fifth Army 
commanded by General Mark Clark.  In the winter of 1944-45, the 
Brazilian division, known as the "Smoking Snakes" for their 
distinctive emblem, fought a series of brutal but ultimately 
successful battles to capture a ridge that came to be known as Monte 
Castello, and FEB forces helped push the Allied advance through 
Italy to the French border in the spring of 1945.  But the FEB was 
quickly disbanded upon its return to Brazil, and over the next four 
decades the veterans that fought in Italy were all but forgotten; 
they were even denied health and pension benefits afforded to 
subsequent military retirees who never served in combat. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) But since 1946, FEB veterans from Parana have maintained 
the Expeditionary Museum in Curitiba.  The CG met with a curator and 
a group of war veterans at the museum, who retraced the battles they 
fought alongside the U.S. 10th Mountain Division in the Italian Alps 
using wall-maps and dioramas.  The veterans also showed a wide range 
of artifacts, armaments, uniforms, documents and photographs from 
the War, including period photos of themselves that hang on the 
walls of the museum.  The museum is well-maintained in an attractive 
setting near the heart of Curitiba, and it houses a small but 
impressive array of authentic equipment including an aircraft, 
battle tank, and several artillery pieces.  A curator said that 
American scholars sometimes conduct research using original 
documents from the museum's collection.  The museum demonstrates a 
particularly strong historical tie between Brazil and the United 
States, one in which the two nations fought side by side against a 
common enemy for a common cause.  The CG and PAO discussed with the 
veterans possible partnerships that could be developed with the 
museum via the Mission.  One idea would be to help connect the 
museum to veterans groups in the U.S., particularly of the 10th 
Mountain Division. 
 
------------------ 
RAINFOREST RESPITE 
------------------ 
 
¶18.  (U) Parana is a state of striking environmental beauty, from 
rolling farmland in the central and northeast regions of the state, 
to the near-vertical, rainforest mountain range that looms high over 
the southern coast and was referred to as "The Wall" by early 
European explorers who dreamt of finding a passage to the interior. 
While forests of the tall, prehistoric-looking Aruacaria fir trees 
have been all but cleared for farmland from much of inland Parana, 
part of the ancient Mata Atlantica rainforest has been preserved 
along the state's coastline.  The CG toured a portion of the Mata 
Atlantica with Dr. Paulo de Tarso Pires, an environmental law 
professor at the Federal University of Parana, and the director of a 
rainforest conservation project run by the Parana State Department 
of the Environment.  The Consulate's Public Diplomacy section has 
sponsored many exchange and speaker programs in association with 
Parana governmental, university and non-governmental environmental 
advocates.  Tarso Pires himself is a past participant in the 
International Visitor's Program (IVP), and on this trip he 
introduced us to a number of budding young conservationists who are 
following his lead in developing sustainable biodiversity 
conservation programs. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
COMMENT: CURITIBA CONTINUES TO IMPRESS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶19.  (SBU) Parana represents an important industrial and 
agricultural region, with state exports to the United States 
totaling almost $1.5 billion and U.S. imports reaching $470 million. 
 Politically, party loyalties of voters give way to the cult of 
personality, as we met important state and local leaders from a 
number of political parties each apparently able to hold on to a 
loyal base by means of very different and specific public personas 
and personal accomplishments.  The governor's port revitalization 
plan may boost the state's importance as a trading hub, but 
regardless of the port's efficiency, distribution capacity puts a 
 
SAO PAULO 00001054  006 OF 006 
 
 
natural limit on growth.  Paranagua is linked to Curitiba and the 
rest of Brazil by a single rail line that slices through the steep 
and rugged mountains ringing the port, and which was an engineering 
marvel when built a century ago.  The newer adjacent highway also 
follows a steep and curvy path through the mountains, and is plagued 
by frequent thick fog that envelopes the passes and makes truck 
traffic slow, difficult and sometimes dangerous even in the daytime. 
 But Curitiba continues to impress visitors and attract 
international business interest.  Thus, if the state government does 
improve the image and utility of the Port of Paranagua, and the city 
government boosts Curitiba's draw as a center for modern industrial 
production, Parana may increase its market share of Brazil's import 
and export business and of its foreign direct investment and enhance 
its reputation even further as one of Brazil's most comfortable 
places to live.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶20.  (U)  This cable was coordinated/cleared by Embassy Brasilia. 
 
MCMCULLEN