08BRUSSELS1793
BOSNIA AND OPERATION ALTHEA: OHR LAJCAK ADDRESSES
Wed Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USEU Brussels
VZCZCXRO0441
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBS #1793/01 3311622
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261622Z NOV 08
FM USEU BRUSSELS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFITT/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 001793 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS EUN BK AF
SUBJECT: BOSNIA AND OPERATION ALTHEA: OHR LAJCAK ADDRESSES 
NAC-PSC 
 
REF: A. A) USNATO 0403 
     ¶B. B) BRUSSELS 1781 
 
This is a joint USEU-USNATO report. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY: At the November 24 joint meeting of 
NATO,s North Atlantic Council and the EU,s Political and 
Security Committee, HR Javier Solana said he thought 5-plus-2 
could be met by mid-2009.  Acknowledging the positive 
momentum engendered by the Solana-Rehn paper on Bosnia and 
the November 8 Prud Agreement, High Representative Miroslav 
Lajcak nonetheless said more progress was needed before an 
OHR-EUSR transition can take place. Lajcak welcomed continued 
NATO engagement.  The NATO SecGen asked for continued close 
coordination between NATO and EUFOR, particularly as the 
latter transitions. Fourteen delegations responded in an 
unusually lively exchange for a NAC-PSC meeting.  All seemed 
to support the continued strong involvement of the 
international community, the 5   2 formula, the eventual move 
to a strengthened EUSR once the situation warrants, the 
transition of EUFOR when political conditions allow, a 
continued NATO presence, the Berlin Plus agreements as a 
basis for NATO-EU cooperation, the important message that 
neither the EU nor NATO are disengaging, and that continued 
close cooperation will be an essential element for future 
success.   Delegates did not take the opportunity provided by 
the United States to discuss support for the Afghan National 
Security Forces.  END SUMMARY 
 
---------------------------------- 
Looking toward a transition 
---------------------------- 
 
2..  (SBU)  EU High Representative Javier Solana, flanked by 
French PSC Ambassador Christine Roger, chaired the meeting. 
In his opening remarks he said that although not much had 
changed since last month,s NAC-PSC meeting (ref A), it was 
important to keep the issue on the EU-NATO agenda, because 
Bosnia risks regressing, despite broad public support for 
continuing its Euro-Atlantic integration.  Solana mentioned 
positive developments, including his joint report with EU 
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn (EU,s Policy in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina: The Way Ahead, dated 31 Oct 08) and the 8 
November Prud Agreement among the three main Bosnia parties 
(ref B).  Turning to the transition of the OHR to a 
strengthened EUSR, Solana said it would be based on BiH,s 
fulfillment of the 5 objectives and 2 conditions (5   2 
formula) of the Peace Implementation Council, which he said 
could take place in mid-2009, with the help of the 
international community. Regarding Operation ALTHEA, Solana 
acknowledged its success, saying he expects it will 
transition to a non-executive training operation, depending 
on the next PIC meeting in March 2009.  Nonetheless, 
preparations for the transition are currently underway and 
those include consultations within the EU,s Committee of 
Contributors. 
------------------------------ 
Deteriorating political situation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Solana gave the floor to High Representative 
Miroslav Lajcak, who described the political situation as 
difficult, despite progress on Euro-Atlantic integration. 
Lajcak observed that negative political rhetoric is 
undermining inter-ethnic trust, and slowing the pace of 5   2 
reform and progress on BiH,s European partnership 
priorities.  Lajcak noted some positive signs including the 8 
November Prud Agreement dealing with constitutional reform, 
the population census, and the OHR work plan which reassigns 
state and defense property ownership.  He suggested that 
implementation of this agreement might have the potential to 
break the deadlock In this respect, he stressed the need for 
continued international community pressure and political 
engagement to sustain the process. 
 
-------------------------------- 
But positive movement possible 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Ambassador Lajcak said completing the OHR work 
plan is a priority.  The Peace Implementation Council (PIC) 
in Brussels on November 19 noted some progress on key issues, 
including Brcko and state and defense property, but more is 
required*especially on Brcko*before a decision can be taken 
on the OHR-EUSR transition.  He noted the GAERC,s positive 
support on November 10 in Brussels identifying the 
Solana-Rehn paper as the basis of a new EU strategy and 
noting that the Solana-Rehn effort in conjunction with strong 
 
BRUSSELS 00001793  002 OF 004 
 
 
European Commission and international support led to the 8 
November agreement.  Lajcak said expectations are now high. 
Lajcak welcomed strong and continued NATO engagement.  He 
said that the prospect of NATO membership provides positive 
leverage.  He considers the flexible approach of NATO 
Headquarters in Sarajevo to be well suited to the nature of 
the BiH government structure.  He lauded the UNSC,s 
extension of the EUFOR mandate for another year as proof of 
necessary engagement by the international community. 
 
---------------------------- 
Close cooperation essential 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer spoke 
next.  He confirmed that NATO remains pre-occupied with the 
Balkans, and assesses the current political situation as 
damaging to the country,s prospects.  He noted the Deputy 
NATO Secretary General,s recent visit to BiH and his message 
that the parties to turn their words into actions.  The 
SecGen noted that BiH will have its first Individual 
Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) evaluation by NATO in February 
2009 regarding progress toward membership.  On defense reform 
de Hoop Scheffer said that BiH sees the transition to 
centralized state structures as the end of the process, but 
that NATO sees it as the first step.  NATO will look for 
measurable progress in key areas.  Regarding the 8 November 
Prud Agreement, the SecGen warned that despite justifiable 
optimism, we should remain cautious.  He noted the good 
cooperation between NHQ Sarajevo and EUFOR and the excellent 
relations between the respective commanders.  While stressing 
respect for the autonomy of both organizations, he noted that 
the EUFOR transition may affect NATO,s presence in BiH; 
therefore, he asked that we have close cooperation during the 
transition in all venues including in the Committee of 
Contributors. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
A lively and animated exchange of the same view 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  During the discussion period on Bosnia, the 
following 14 delegations took the floor:  the Czech Republic, 
the United States, Sweden, Norway, Belgium, Hungary, 
Slovenia, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Greece, Estonia, 
Bulgaria, and Turkey.  All the interventions seemed to 
support the continued strong involvement of the international 
community, the 5   2 formula, the eventual move to a 
strengthened EUSR once the situation warrants, the transition 
of EUFOR when political conditions allow, a continued NATO 
presence, the Berlin Plus agreements as a basis for NATO-EU 
cooperation, and that continued close cooperation will be an 
essential element for future success. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  In addition to these main points, national 
delegations made the following points: The incoming EU 
presidency, the Czech Republic, expressed full support for 
the work of OHR and noted that the 8 November agreement was a 
direct result of international pressure.  He promised the 
Czech EU presidency would continue in this way.  EUFOR, he 
said, should remain intact until the change from the OHR to a 
strengthened EUSR was successfully completed, at which time 
NATO and the EU should discuss the transition together.  He 
expressed support for maintaining Berlin Plus.  He asked that 
the NAC-PSC continue to be kept up to date.  The way ahead, 
he said, should be a well coordinated and even integrated 
approach. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Speaking for the United States, Ambassador 
Silverberg stressed the importance of full implementation of 
the 5   2 formula &with integrity8 as a precondition to 
replacing OHR with a EUSR.  She also advocated a 
constitutional amendment with respect to Brcko,s status.  To 
these points she added U.S. support for and willingness to 
participate in the new office of the EUSR, the need for 
carrots and sticks at the disposal of the strengthened EUSR, 
and the need to reinforce the message to all concerned that 
the EU and NATO are not disengaging from Bosnia. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Sweden emphasized the need to ensure local 
willingness and responsibility and said the &push-pull8 
factor of EU and NATO needs to be strengthened.  The Swedish 
representative cautioned against letting BiH be a drag on 
regional progress.  With respect to EUFOR, he said Sweden 
supports Option 3 (reconfiguring EUFOR) when political 
conditions permit.  Norway noted that by acting in unison we 
have caught the players attention and we should keep up the 
pressure which is directly attached to the prospects for 
 
BRUSSELS 00001793  003 OF 004 
 
 
Euro-Atlantic integration.  We should use this leverage 
wisely, he said, and with increased circumspection.  We must 
tell the parties to deliver on reforms, the Norwegian 
representative said, if they want to move Euro-Atlantic 
integration forward.  He said that BiH must build the 
administrative capacity to do the job, both in Sarajevo and 
Brussels. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The Belgian NATO ambassador, after noting the more 
lively atmosphere of this meeting, put forward two questions: 
 First, he asked what affect the proposed international 
community changes will have on the actors in BiH? Secondly, 
what are the pluses and minuses of Serbia,s role, if they 
can play a role?  Hungary took the floor next supporting the 
other ambassadors, interventions and stressing the need to 
use our NATO-EU instruments &in hand8 while emphasizing the 
regional perspective as well.  He said his country favors 
Option 3 for EUFOR and will keep its military in BiH for as 
long as it takes.  Hungary hopes to play a role in the new 
configuration, he said.  Slovenia, supporting the other 
speakers as well, focused on training of the BiH military as 
an important aspect of continued close NATO-EU cooperation 
with Bosnians.  The German ambassador said he fully shared 
Ambassador Lajcak,s views and the transition based on the 5 
  2 formula; however, until then, an adequate EUFOR presence 
should be guaranteed.  He urged that capacity building and 
training be the focus for continued close cooperation with 
NATO and other non-EU troop contributors.  He hoped this 
would be done within the context of a new EUSR mandate, 
&which should be a robust one.8  Italy then spoke 
supporting continuation of EUFOR to support the OHR, 
supporting a new mission based on Berlin Plus, and applauding 
that the preparations for the new mission are already 
underway.  He announced that Italy will take command of EUFOR 
from 1 December.  The Netherlands said there were glimpses of 
hope but that political refusal to cooperate still remained, 
asking Ambassador Lajcak &What can we do?8  The Dutch 
representative also asked about cooperation with the ICTY and 
for Ambassador Lajcak,s recommendations on where and how to 
improve? 
¶11.  (SBU)  Greece identified Euro-Atlantic integration as a 
shared, even the exclusive, tool of NATO and the EU.  He 
hoped for a careful study of Operation ALTHEA in March 09 
saying that all the options should remain open and that a 
decision should be based on the situation at that time. 
Estonia urged that we prepare and manage the reconfiguration 
with thorough NATO-EU discussions and that we should have 
real results from our talks.  He urged that we should 
coordinate and then take joint political steps toward the 
actors and the public in BiH in order to speak with one voice 
and to reinvigorate the process.  Bulgaria then noted the 
very useful discussion while supporting the incoming Czech 
presidency,s announcement of their continued commitment to 
this process.  The Bulgarian ambassador stressed that 
&acting together with determination is our ultimate 
executive power.8 Bulgaria,s commitment to EUFOR is 
steadfast and the Bulgarian military will stay as long as it 
is needed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Turkey: &This is the type of meeting we,d like to see8 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  The Turkish ambassador to NATO was the last to 
intervene.  After thanking all the speakers and the French EU 
presidency for a successful meeting, he said that he hoped 
there would be more frequent meetings, &which is our 
expectation.8  He said we should remain cautious and we 
should listen to those who did not participate in the 8 
November agreement, in particular the PDP, which prefers, in 
effect, the status quo.  Stability is not yet irreversible; 
therefore, we must keep the security situation under close 
scrutiny and keep the assets available to react if necessary. 
 Turkey is committed to BiH,s Euro-Atlantic aspirations and 
to its territorial integrity.  The stakes are high, he said, 
because of everything the international community has already 
invested.  On the future of EUFOR Operation ALTHEA, he hoped 
for more intensified and substantial coordination in NATO-EU 
relations and in the Committee of Contributors in full 
conformity with the philosophy of the comprehensive approach 
and the &contractual obligations8 in the agreed framework. 
Finally, he noted the day,s excellent NAC-PSC meeting 
saying, &This is the type of meeting we,d like to see.8 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Inclusivity, Dialogue and Compromise 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
BRUSSELS 00001793  004 OF 004 
 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Ambassador Lajcak then responded to the questions 
put to him by the ambassadors.  He said he,s working to 
narrow the scope for maneuver of the factions so as to 
minimize opportunities for disagreement.  He noted that there 
are currently enough votes in the parliament to support 
action on state and defense property and on the population 
census.  &Inclusivity, dialogue, and compromise8 at the 
local political level is to be encouraged, he said.  The PIC 
plan is clear. &It is our priority,8 he said.  The 
international community has been discussing the transition 
for three years so the Bosnians know sooner or later it will 
happen.  He said we now have a work plan based on qualitative 
progress and not on an end date.  Serbia, he said, supports 
Bosnia,s territorial integrity, and has worked to decrease 
the impact of political maneuvering by the Republika Srpska. 
He said the ICTY encountered no Bosnian obstacles to its 
activities and would so report to the UNSC in two weeks.  He 
concluded his remarks by offering to return any time for 
further discussions and noted the PIC Steering Board in March 
09 as an important milestone.  The NATO Secretary General 
told Ambassador Lajcak that he has NATO,s full support. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Any interest in Any Other Business? 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Under Any Other Business, Ambassador Volker took 
the floor to express his appreciation for the discussion and 
to update those present on key priorities in Afghanistan. 
First, he noted the JCMB,s September call for increased 
support to the Afghan National Security Forces, and in 
particular for an increase in financial support and in the 
number of trainers for the Afghan National Army.  He said we 
need to have the Afghans in the lead to be successful. 
Ambassador Volker said that the Afghan National Police are 
critical to our long-term success in securing the path 
forward, and, while noting the contributions in this regard 
from the EU, he said the increased support in this area is 
urgently needed.  Finally, on civilian reconstruction and 
development, he said that it needs to be well integrated with 
military efforts in order to provide a sustainable path 
forward.  No one else took the floor on this or any other 
business. 
 
SILVERBERG 
.