08BRUSSELS1431
GAERC OUTLINES EU OBSERVER MISSION AND AID TO
Mon Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USEU Brussels
P 151810Z SEP 08
FM USEU BRUSSELS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATEWASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 001431 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EUN RU GG SO ZI YI BO
SUBJECT: GAERC OUTLINES EU OBSERVER MISSION AND AID TO 
GEORGIA 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Meeting in Brussels September 15, EU Foreign 
Ministers formally established an independent civilian 
monitoring mission of at least 200 in Georgia, to be deployed 
by October 1. They designated Pierre Morel as EU Special 
Representative for the crisis in Georgia.  Welcoming the the 
Commission's proposal to mobilize 500 million Euros in aid to 
Georgia for the period 2008-2010, the Ministers called upon 
the Commission to prepare a donors' conference to take place 
in October (date TBD) in Brussels.  International discussions 
planned for Geneva will be held shortly after the October 15 
date originally set, due to a conflict with the European 
Council meeting that day. The Council decided to postpone 
extending EU sanctions against Zimbabwean officials.  On 
Somalia, the Council reaffirmed its willingness to continue 
the EU's engagement, to include approving a strategic 
military option for a possible EU naval operation.  Despite a 
positive readout from ICTY Chief Prosecutor Brammertz on his 
recent trip to Serbia, consensus could not be reached on the 
question of whether to unfreeze the Stabilization and 
Association Agreement with Serbia.  While welcoming the 
release of political prisoners in Belarus, the Commission 
said that reengagement would not be considered until after 
the September 28 elections.   End Summary. 
 
Post-Conflict Georgia 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) EU Foreign Ministers, meeting as the General Affairs 
and External Relations Council (GAERC) on September 15, 
formally established an independent civilian ESDP monitoring 
mission in Georgia.  In accordance with the arrangements set 
out in the agreement of September 8 and in close coordination 
with the OSCE and UN, the European Union Monitoring Mission 
(EUMM) will be deployed by October 1.  According to a 
simultaneous EU ESDP press release from the Council, the main 
objectives of EUMM will be to "contribute to stability 
throughout Georgia and the surrounding region," while in the 
short term, EUMM will seek "to contribute to the 
stabilization of the situation in accordance with the 
six-point agreement and subsequent implementing measures." 
The Council's objective is to reach a European presence of 
"at least 200 monitors by October 1."  (French FM Kouchner 
told the press afterwards that more than 200 monitors have 
already been identified.)  With an expected initial mission 
duration of 12 months, 31 million Euros have been allocated 
for the mission.  According to the Council Conclusions, the 
EUMM deployment is to replace Russian troops in zones 
adjacent to Abkhazia and South Ossetia by October 1.  Within 
ten days of that date, Russian troops are to withdraw to 
lines held prior to the outbreak of hostilities. 
 
¶3. (U) In addition to the monitoring mission, the Commission 
announced a 500 million Euro aid program for the period 
2008-2010 to assist Georgia with its post-conflict rebuilding 
efforts.  Referring to the "stabilization and growth 
package," External Relations/European Neighborhood Policy 
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said at the post-GAERC press 
conference that the package includes the continuation of the 
normal program for Georgia, assistance for displaced people, 
reconstruction, economic recovery, macro-financial stability 
plus new infrastructure, especially in the energy sector. 
Also envisaged is a donors' conference for Georgian 
reconstruction and economic recovery, to be organized by the 
Commission "next month in Brussels."  The GAERC encouraged 
member states to prepare significant financial contributions 
as well for this conference.  It also welcomed the 
Commission's work to accelerate visa facilitation and 
readmission, and its efforts toward establishing free trade 
with Georgia. (See para 9 for more on what FM Kouchner had to 
say about Georgia.) 
 
Piracy off Somalia 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) FMs approved a strategic military option for a 
possible EU naval operation to combat piracy off the Somali 
coast, saying they "would like to see the current planning 
work press ahead."  The FMs also approved establishment "in 
the next few days" of a coordination unit in Brussels to 
support surveillance and protection activities carried out by 
some member states in the waters off Somalia, to be known as 
EU NAVCO.  In addition to the anti-piracy provisions, Council 
Conclusions on Somalia approved at the GAERC included 
language welcoming the official signing of the Djibouti peace 
agreement by the Transitional Federal Government and the 
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia.  The EU pledged 
support for the agreement's implementation, as well as 
support for capacity-building of the Somali police.  At the 
post-GAERC press conference, FM Kouchner said that, while it 
is hard to catch pirates in the act, piracy was becoming a 
well-organized industry requiring a well-organized response. 
 
Zimbabwe Sanctions Decision Postponed 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) After a briefing by Commissioner Louis Michel on the 
power-sharing agreement just reached between President Mugabe 
and opposition leader Tsvangirai, the foreign ministers 
postponed adding 10-12 additional names to the list of 
Zimbabweans subject to financial and travel sanctions 
approved by the PSC and COREPER last week.  Prior to the 
GAERC, Solana said he was confident the agreement would open 
"a new page" for Zimbabwe.  At the post-GAERC press 
conference, FM Kouchner said, "power sharing is what we 
wanted, and we were right."  While acknowledging that 
Zimbabwe's political problems largely remained to be solved, 
Kouchner said the "French Presidency" will soon visit 
Zimbabwe. 
 
Serbia 
------ 
 
¶6. (U) On Serbia, French FM Kouchner reported at the 
post-GAERC press conference that ICTY Chief Prosecutor 
Brammertz had briefed the Council on his September 10-11 
visit to Belgrade, providing "his opinion as a lawyer and 
chief prosecutor, not a political opinion."  While Kouchner 
said that Brammertz had reported "much progress in Serbian 
administration" and that a large majority of FMs had been in 
favor of unfreezing the SAA, a consensus could not be 
reached.  EU Enlargement Commissioner Rehn praised the French 
Presidency for its continued commitment to the issue while 
the Council was focused on other areas, adding "I trust the 
Serbian government will continue to pursue cooperation with 
the EU on a sustained basis."  Saying that the Commission's 
view was rather well known and that the Commission felt the 
arrest of Karadzic should be recognized by starting the 
implementation of the trade provisions of the SAA, Rehn went 
on to say that the issue "was in the hands of the member 
states."  Rehn welcomed ratification of SAA by the Serbian 
Parliament, saying "I would like to encourage Serbia to start 
implementing its obligations under the SAA," going on to say 
that this could help Serbia achieve its goal of attaining 
candidate status in 2009.  Reiterating that he had been in 
favor of unfreezing, Kouchner hinted of possible moves on the 
fringes of UNGA. 
 
Belarus 
------- 
 
¶7. (U) While welcoming the release of political prisoners in 
Belarus, FMs remained concerned about "other major aspects of 
the human rights situation."  Contingent on the conduct of 
credible elections September 28, the Council said that it 
stood ready to reconsider existing "restrictive measures" and 
to take "positive and concrete" steps leading to a 
step-by-step reengagement with Belarus. 
 
Other Topics Discussed 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) FMs called upon Bulgaria and Romania to intensify 
their efforts under the Cooperation and Verification 
Mechanism, highlighting among other things the importance of 
"an impartial, independent and effective administrative and 
judicial system."  In response to Ecuador's invitation, FMs 
decided to dispatch an election observation mission under MEP 
Ribeiro e Castro to observe the September 28 constitutional 
referendum.  With regard to the annual report on the European 
Community's Development and External Assistance Policies and 
their implementation, the Council welcomed improvements in 
the report, encouraged the Commission to continue its efforts 
to make the report a tool to assist political decision 
making, and reaffirmed the EU's commitment to contribute to 
poverty eradication efforts. 
 
More on Georgia at the Press Conference 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) Speaking at the post-GAERC press conference, FM 
Kouchner said that there was "total unity" on the day's 
Council Conclusions.  While the mediation process has not 
been perfect, he admitted, Russian troops did not march on 
Tbilisi, a timetable has been established, and Russian troops 
have abandoned checkpoints outside Poti, as agreed.  In 
announcing that more than the minimum 200 EUMM observers have 
been identified, Kouchner said they were "crucial" to ensure 
the further withdrawal of Russian troops.  Kouchner was 
reportedly somewhat ambiguous in his comments, however, about 
the extent to which the EUMM would be independent of the 
UNOMIG and OSCE missions. When asked how he envisioned the 
EUMM entering Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Kouchner responded, 
"By not being pessimistic!"  He continued that nothing has 
been said or done to accept any faits accomplis; however, he 
said referring to the Russians, it takes two to tango. 
Kouchner said the mandate of EUSR Pierre Morel (septel) was 
yet to be defined. Noting that the Council Conclusions 
support the idea of an international inquiry into the 
conflict, Kouchner said this provision was discussed at the 
September 6 Gymnich. 
 
MURRAY