08ANKARA43
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7904
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0043/01 0091500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091500Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4878
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8598
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3722
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2588
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6344
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6169
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2752
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 9, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Bush and Gul Meet at the White House 
All papers report on yesterday's meeting between President Bush and 
President Abdullah Gul the White House.  In a joint press 
availability after the meeting, Bush described Turkey as "a 
strategic partner of the United States," noting, "the PKK is our 
common enemy.  It's an enemy to Turkey, it's an enemy to Iraq and 
it's an enemy to all people who want to live in peace.  The US, 
along with Turkey, is confronting these folks."  Bush praised Turkey 
as a "model for democracy" in the Muslim world and said it should be 
admitted to the EU as a "bridge" to the Islamic world.  He 
underscored that Turkey's EU membership was "in the interest of 
peace."  Bush also said they discussed securing energy resources as 
well as Middle East matters. 
 
Gul told reporters that Turkey and the US are "longstanding allies" 
and that the two countries share "a common vision."  He emphasized, 
" relations between the US and Turkey have regional and global 
impact.  Our ties will continue to contribute to the growth of 
peace, stability and prosperity around the world." Gul noted his 
meeting with Bush focused on energy issues, the Middle East peace 
plan, Iraq, and the Balkans. 
 
In a separate press event after his meeting with Bush, Gul told 
reporters that the sides are mutually satisfied in the cooperation 
against the "common enemy" PKK.  Responding to questions, Gul said 
"the US bears a responsibility in fighting an organization included 
in the US terror list and combating terror activities in a country 
under US control."  Gul told reporters the US was not pressing 
Turkey to seek a political settlement concerning the PKK question. 
"I saw that they trust Turkey.  They know that the PKK is the sole 
target of the Turkish operations," said Gul. 
 
Mainstream and conservative alike, most dailies comment Turkey-US 
ties are warming up.  Mainstream Milliyet sees President Bush's 
remarks against the PKK as one of the most important results of the 
meeting.  Mainstream Vatan quotes Turkish officials as saying the 
Bush-Gul meeting has been the "least stressful" and satisfactory 
bilateral meeting in recent years.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
writes Bush said they had "constructive" talks with Gul "like two 
friends."  Vatan says the US put no pressure on Turkey to give 
something in exchange for support in the fight against the PKK, but 
suggested that speeding up social and cultural changes would 
contribute to the solution of the problem.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet sees Gul's recent statement that Turkey's aid to Iraq 
would increase ten-fold after the PKK is taken out of the country as 
an indication of ongoing bargaining between the sides.  Liberal 
Radikal reports that before the meeting, White House spokeswoman 
Dana Perino briefed reporters President Bush would tell President 
Gul that there is an opportunity to work on a "long-term political 
solution" with Iraq, including the people in the Kurdish region, 
President Talabani, and Prime Minister al-Maliki.  Perino noted the 
goal was to work out a long-term settlement. 
 
Meanwhile, President Gul had breakfast with Secretary Rice earlier 
in the day before coming together with Vice President Dick Cheney to 
discuss energy pipelines, the Kirkuk issue and the future of Iraqi 
oil.  US sources told Yeni Safak that Cheney communicated US 
concerns regarding the natural gas deal signed between Turkey and 
Iran. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Gul Visit to the US 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan (1/9):  "The meeting between 
President Gul and President Bush demonstrated that bilateral ties 
are being restored.  The Gul-Bush summit was stress-free because 
neither side complained or made demands.  While the overall picture 
looks good, it is too early to be overly optimistic.  First of all, 
the Bush Administration's time has expired and the US has entered 
into elections psychology.  The new president, who is likely to be 
 
ANKARA 00000043  002 OF 003 
 
 
Democratic Senator Obama, will make serious changes to the Bush 
administration's policies.  There are still fundamental differences 
of opinion between Ankara and Washington, particularly concerning 
the Middle East.  Even though the Bush Administration works closely 
with Gul and the AKP, the administration does not necessarily trust 
them.  There is a continuing rumor about 'Washington's push for a 
political solution to the PKK problem' in exchange for American 
intelligence support for military operations.  Finally, we can talk 
about a thawing of relations in an atmosphere of spring, but we 
should wait longer and work more to see flowers blossom." 
 
Mustafa Karaalioglu wrote in mainstream Star (1/9): "The Bush-Gul 
meeting shows there is a bridge of trust between the two countries; 
now the two countries pay attention to each other and listen to each 
other.  Even the PKK issue has turned into a means to restore trust 
and cooperation.  President Bush clearly expressed Washington's 
strong stance on the fight against PKK.  It is also very important 
that Bush and Gul met right before President Bush's trip to the 
Middle East.  This is a new era of quality bilateral ties, which 
will be the best legacy for an expiring Bush administration." 
 
Sedat Ergin observed in mainstream Milliyet (1/9): "The Gul-Bush 
meeting was positive and the outcome can be observed as follows: 
-- The cooperation against the PKK will continue with full speed. 
President Bush repeated his commitment to fight against the PKK.  It 
appears this meeting will further isolate the PKK in the 
international arena. 
-- President Bush emphasized religion by characterizing Turkey as a 
"fantastic" country where democracy and Islam co-exist.  Bush also 
stressed that Turkey was a bridge between Europe and the Islamic 
world. 
-- Washington, in principle, warmly welcomed Gul's effort to engage 
the UN in a comprehensive solution to the Cyprus problem.  All sides 
will wait for the elections in February in southern Cyprus before 
taking any steps. 
-- The Turkish side was very pleased when the US ensured that the 
Kirkuk referendum was postponed for at least six months and 
predicted the process might not occur in 2008 either. 
-- It was striking to hear Bush say he could not believe Europeans 
cannot understand Turkey's importance concerning energy.  Bush also 
reiterated his strong support for Turkey's EU membership.  The 
Turkish side hopes Bush will speak with Sarkozy and Merkel in favor 
of Turkey's membership. 
-- The energy issue will weigh heavier than before in 
Turkish-American relations. 
-- Following the Erdogan-Bush meeting on November 5 and the change 
in Washington's stance concerning the PKK, bilateral ties have 
improved.  The rough years from 2003-2007 in bilateral relations are 
now in the past. 
 
'Diyarbakir Bomber' Captured 
All papers report twenty-three year old Erdal Polat was charged for 
his role in the January 3 car bomb attack in Diyarbakir.  Polat 
served five months in prison for inciting PKK propaganda in 2002. 
After his release, Polat received two years of bomb training in the 
PKK camps in northern Iraq.  Diyarbakir police also detained six 
others suspected of involvement in the explosion. 
 
Meanwhile, the death toll in the bomb attack rose to six on Tuesday 
after another student died from injuries suffered in the blast. 
 
AKP Can't Agree on Changes to Article 301 
Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan, Taraf, Radikal and others:  Papers report 
that the AKP Administration failed to agree on amendments to the 
Turkish Penal Code's Article 301.  The party has decided that the 
draft should be discussed further.  Because of this disagreement, 
the draft is now scheduled to go to the parliament next week. 
Liberal Radikal reports that Deputy PM Cemil Cicek insisted that 
filing a lawsuit based on the article should be possible with the 
permission of a special commission instead of the Justice Minister. 
 
ANKARA 00000043  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
Mainstream Sabah and Milliyet report MHP chairman Devlet Bahceli's 
comments that his party is completely against any amendment to 
Article 301. 
 
PM Erdogan Criticizes DTP's Stance 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Aksam, Milliyet, Radikal, Zaman, Yeni Safak: 
Addressing his party in parliament yesterday, PM Erdogan harshly 
criticized the mainly Kurdish party DTP for its refusal to denounce 
the PKK terrorist organization.  Erdogan asked, "Why can't you take 
a clear stance against terrorism?"  Condemning the bomb attack in 
Diyarbakir last week, Erdogan said "no social issue and no reason 
can justify terrorism.  The only legitimate means to solve this 
issue is politics.  Those who approve terrorism as an instrument 
become an accomplice to terrorism's violent actions." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Turkish General Staff (TGS) announced Tuesday that 640 kg of 
ammonium nitrate was seized in a shelter in the eastern province of 
Van.  Four primers, 10 meters of fuse, two dynamite slabs, one 
Kannas-type sniper, one Kalashnikov rifle, and 30 kg of heroin were 
also seized. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will contact Iranian President Ahmadinejad 
to ask him to resume the natural gas supply for Turkey. 
 
- Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan said the headscarf issue was a 
big social problem that must be resolved. 
 
International News 
 
- The OECD Working Group on Bribery announced it had serious 
concerns about Turkey's implementation of the OECD Anti-Bribery 
Convention.  Turkey, a party to the convention since 2000, had yet 
to implement key elements of the agreement, the group said. 
 
- The regional Kurdish administration in northern Iraq signed two 
new petroleum deals, including one with Turkish company Jinel Enjil, 
despite the objections of Baghdad. 
 
- Greek Cypriots have decided to delay oil exploration in the 
Eastern Mediterranean until the presidential elections in February. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY