08BEIJING217
JANUARY 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SENIOR
Tue Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7618
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0217/01 0221038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221038Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4533
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1654
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3265
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4234UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000217 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH TW GM IR UK
SUBJECT: JANUARY 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SENIOR 
DIALOGUE, ISRAELPALESTINE PEACE PROCESS, IRAN, DPRK 
 
REFUGEES, MYANMAR 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 22 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- At the Senior Dialogue last week, Vice Foreign 
Minister Dai and Deputy Secretary Negroponte exchanged 
ideas on the international situation and how to ensure 
the long-term stable development of bilateral 
relations and cooperation on regional and 
international issues. 
 
-- China always supports the Middle East peace process 
and hopes Palestine and Israel will take this 
opportunity to have serious negotiations over the 
status of Palestine. 
 
-- China hopes for a "comprehensive and proper" 
solution to the Iran nuclear issue achieved through 
strictly diplomatic means. 
 
-- China considers DPRK citizens that have crossed 
into China to be motivated by financial gain and are 
thus illegal migrants. 
 
-- Germany highly values its relations with China and 
supports the one China policy and does not support 
Tibetan or Taiwanese independence. 
 
-- The PRC encourages the international community to 
be objective in their dealings with Myanmar and feels 
sanctions would not be helpful. 
 
-- Promoting "comprehensive cooperation" with Pakistan 
continues to be the PRC's established policy and China 
is working to further deepen that strategic 
partnership. 
 
Senior Dialogue 
--------------- 
 
¶2. On January 17-18, Vice Foreign Minister Dai Bingguo 
and Deputy Secretary Negroponte exchanged ideas on the 
international situation and how to ensure the long- 
term stable development of bilateral relations and 
cooperation on regional and international issues. 
This is the fifth Senior Dialogue and has become an 
important platform for strategic communications 
between China and the United States, Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Jiang Yu said.  The two leaders agreed 
that in 2008, they will implement the "major 
consensuses" from their discussions.  Whether the 
title "Strategic Dialogue" or "Senior Dialogue" is 
used is not relevant, all that is important is the 
continued commitment to coordinate international 
affairs and properly handle sensitive issues. 
 
Israel and Palestine 
-------------------- 
 
¶3. In response to a press query if China was 
considering taking a more active role in the Israel- 
Palestine peace process, Jiang said China hopes the 
"relevant nations" will take measures to improve the 
humanitarian situation in Gaza.  China always supports 
the Middle East peace process and hopes Palestine and 
Israel will take this opportunity to have serious 
negotiations over the status of Palestine.  The PRC 
hopes Palestine and Israel will adhere to the Roadmap 
and UN resolution of land-for-peace and achieve 
peaceful coexistence. 
 
Iran Nuclear Issue 
------------------ 
 
¶4. The P5 + 1 Foreign Ministers will meet today in 
Germany to formulate a strategy to solve the Iran 
nuclear issue.  China hopes for a "comprehensive and 
proper" solution achieved through strictly diplomatic 
means.  When asked if the PRC has plans to propose a 
P5 + 2 mechanism which brings Iran directly into the 
negotiations, Jiang said she had no information 
regarding such a proposal.  When pressed for details 
on the PRC's position going into today's P5 + 1 
negotiations, the spokesperson said Foreign Minister 
Yang will expound on China's principles and position 
and that journalists should pay attention to his 
remarks.  When asked if the PRC will support an 
additional sanction on Iran over the nuclear issue, 
Jiang replied, "I have already told you China's 
position on this matter. " 
 
BEIJING 00000217  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶5. Saeed Jalili, the Secretary of Iran's Supreme 
National Security Council, visited China last week and 
met with several Chinese leaders.  The spokesperson 
did not elaborate on the details of these meetings, 
but merely reiterated the PRC commitment to a 
diplomatic settlement of the issue and called for an 
early resumption of talks with Iran. 
 
DPRK Refugees in China 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. The PRC position regarding DPRK migrants remains 
consistent and clear: China considers DPRK citizens 
that have crossed into China to be motivated by 
financial gain and are thus illegal migrants.  China 
will deal with them in accordance with international 
and domestic law as well as humanitarian principles. 
 
Sino-German Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. In response to a question about China's 
relationship with Germany, Jiang said that the two 
countries have made many efforts in the past four 
months to overcome difficulties in the relationship. 
Jiang noted that Germany highly values its relations 
with China and supports the one China policy and does 
not support Tibetan or Taiwanese independence.  Jiang 
expressed hope that Germany would continue to work 
with China on the principle of mutual respect, 
equality and noninterference. 
 
Myanmar 
------- 
 
¶8. When asked about Myanmar Deputy Foreign Minister U 
Maung Myint's meeting with Chinese State Councilor 
Tang Jiaxun on January 21, Jiang Yu confirmed that the 
special envoy had delivered a briefing on the 
situation in that country to Tang.  Jiang also stated 
that China and Myanmar will continue their cooperation 
based on equality and mutual benefit.  China supports 
the continued stability, democratization and 
development of Myanmar.  Jiang encouraged the 
international community to be objective in their 
dealings with Myanmar and said that sanctions are not 
helpful.  China also supports the UN Secretary General 
and his envoy and hopes that an early date is set for 
the latter's visit to the country. 
 
Pakistan or India? 
------------------ 
 
¶9.  When asked if Prime Minister Singh's recent visit 
to China indicated a change in PRC policy towards 
Pakistan, Jiang responded that China and India are two 
significant developing countries and their good 
relationship as neighbors is important to both.  It is 
in everyone's interest for China and India to enhance 
their cooperation.  Pakistan is China's strategic 
partner.  To promote "comprehensive cooperation" with 
Pakistan continues to be the PRC's established policy 
and China is working to further deepen that strategic 
partnership.  As a neighbor of both countries, China 
supports improved relations between Pakistan and India. 
 
RANDT