08BEIJING165
JANUARY 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, SENIOR DIALOGUE,
Thu Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4826
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0165/01 0171117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171117Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4471
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1652
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3259UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH TW GM IR UK
 
SUBJECT: JANUARY 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, SENIOR DIALOGUE, 
TAIWAN, SINO-GERMAN RELATIONS, UK PM BROWN VISIT, ACTIVIST HU JIA 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 17 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- Iran Chief Nuclear Negotiator Saeed Jalili is visiting Beijing 
January 17-18 for meetings with Chinese officials. 
 
-- During Senior Dialogue meetings this week, China will exchange 
views on important issues of bilateral interest with the United 
States.  The U.S.-China relationship is one of the most important 
bilateral relationships in the world. 
 
-- China hopes the United States will make "a firmer opposition" to 
the "Taiwan independence movement" and "separatist activity," 
including Taiwan's "independence referendum." 
 
-- China values its bilateral relationship with Germany and hopes 
that relationship will move forward on the basis of 
"non-interference and mutual respect." 
 
-- China highly values the visit this week of U.K. Prime Minister 
Brown, who is traveling to Beijing for meetings to discuss trade 
issues, environmental protection and sustainable development. 
 
-- China is a "country of law" and handles human rights cases such 
as Hu Jia's in accordance with law. 
 
Iran Nuclear Issue 
------------------ 
 
¶2. At the January 17 regular MFA press briefing, in response to a 
question asking whether China will back tougher sanctions against 
Iran, the spokesperson said that Iran Chief Nuclear Negotiator Saeed 
Jalili is visiting Beijing January 17-18 for meetings with State 
Councilor Tang Jiaxuan and Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi.  China and 
Iran will exchange views "on bilateral relations and the Iran 
nuclear issue."  China's position on Iran is "consistent," the 
spokesperson said.  "We hope Iran will abide by UN resolutions and 
demonstrate flexibility in working with the international 
community."  The spokesperson said that the international community 
should resolve the Iran issue peacefully through negotiation, and 
added that China hopes the international community will intensify 
diplomatic efforts to promote "early resolution" of this issue. 
 
Senior Dialogue 
--------------- 
 
¶3. The spokesperson said Chinese leaders are holding high-level 
meetings with Deputy Secretary Negroponte this week in Beijing and 
Guizhou, where the Senior Dialogue will take place.  In meetings 
yesterday, China said that it views the U.S.-China bilateral 
relationship as "the most, one of the most important bilateral 
relationships" in the world.  This week, the two countries will 
continue to "exchange views on important issues of interest," to 
strengthen bilateral cooperation in "handling all issues."  Strong, 
stable relations between the United States and China serve the 
interests of both countries and the world. 
 
Taiwan 
------ 
 
¶4. In response to a question asking whether China in meetings with 
Deputy Secretary Negroponte had requested the United States to take 
specific action concerning the upcoming "independence referendum" in 
Taiwan, the spokesperson said that Foreign Minister Yang told the 
Deputy Secretary that "a firmer opposition" to the "Taiwan 
independence movement" and "separatist activity," including the 
referendum, is of great significance to the bilateral relationship 
as well as to peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait.  China 
applauds the United States' reiteration of its adherence to its one 
China policy and opposition to the "independence referendum." 
 
¶5. In response to a question about whether China expects countries 
to seek permission before ships transit the Taiwan Strait, the 
spokesperson said only that China will continue to handle port calls 
in Hong Kong "according to the principle of sovereignty."  China 
hopes the United States will honor its commitments vis-`-vis its one 
China policy and act with prudence to safeguard peace in the Taiwan 
Strait.  Asked about reports of an incident between the USS Kitty 
Hawk and Chinese ships during the Kitty Hawk's recent sailing 
through the Taiwan Strait, the spokesperson said she was "not aware 
of the reports." 
 
Sino-German Relations; U.K. PM Brown's Visit 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. In response to a question about China's reaction to German 
Chancellor Merkel's recent statement affirming the value Germany 
places on its relationship with China, the spokesperson said that 
China "values the Chancellor's remarks" and hopes the two countries 
can "handle" the bilateral relationship from a "long-term and 
 
BEIJING 00000165  002 OF 002 
 
 
strategic perspective."  In an oblique criticism of Chancellor 
Merkel's 2007 meeting with the Dalai Lama in Germany, the 
spokesperson said the Sino-German relationship should move forward 
on the basis of "non-interference and mutual respect." 
 
¶7. Questioned as to whether China will ask visiting U.K. Prime 
Minister Brown not to meet with the Dalai Lama later this year, the 
spokesperson said she could not anticipate the exact issues that 
will come up during Brown's meetings with Chinese leaders.  China 
highly values Prime Minister Brown's visit, which will cover trade 
issues, environmental protection, sustainable development and other 
issues. 
 
Human Rights: Hu Jia and Zhao Ziyang Anniversary 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8. Asked about reports that the U.S. Government has raised rights 
activist Hu Jia's case with Chinese officials, the spokesperson said 
that China handles cases such as Hu Jia's according to law.  Some 
countries, she said, are trying to interfere with China's internal 
affairs using human rights as a pretext.  She said China is 
"seriously delivering its obligations on human rights."  Asked about 
harassment of citizens wishing to observe the anniversary of Zhao 
Ziyang's death, the spokesperson said "civilian activities should 
abide by law." 
 
RANDT