08CASABLANCA281
CASABLANCA REFORMERS FOCUS ON EDUCATION, PARLIAMENT,
Tue Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0281/01 0291114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291114Z JAN 08
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7949
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2954
RUEHBP/AMEMBASSY BAMAKO 0251
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0842
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY 0026
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0271
RUEHLC/AMEMBASSY LIBREVILLE 0044
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0334
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3766
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2311
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8198
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 2074
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0618
RUEHYD/AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 0084UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000281 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG AND NEA/PI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV ECON SOCI MO
SUBJECT: CASABLANCA REFORMERS FOCUS ON EDUCATION, PARLIAMENT, 
CONSTITUTION 
 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please handle 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: At a reform advocates' luncheon for visiting DAS 
Kent Patton and Tunis MEPI Director Peter Mulrean on January 16, 2008 
in Casablanca, discussion focused on three types of reform: 
educational, parliamentary and constitutional.  The discussion 
preceded a letter calling for the defense of civil liberties, signed 
by elite Moroccans to solicit support for tolerance and an end to 
hatred and violence.  The letter reflects the mood of Morocco's 
reformers and therefore adds texture to the conversation at the 
luncheon, where participants called for reform of Morocco's sub-par 
educational system, as well as of Parliament, which suffers from 
numerous problems, including a lack of qualified MPs.  In addition, 
the group held that there would be no significant progress without 
constitutional reform, though the political will for this is lacking. 
 Optimistic about Morocco's prospects in spite of the challenges, 
participants encouraged USG support for resolving the Western Sahara 
conflict and reforming Morocco's political system.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
CALL FOR DEFENSE OF CIVIL LIBERTIES 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) On January 16, a reform advocates' lunch held for visiting NEA 
DAS Kent Patton and Tunis-based Middle East Partnership Initiative 
(MEPI) Director Peter Mulrean generated dynamic conversation about 
the way forward for a democratic Morocco.  A few days later, a letter 
entitled "Call for the Defense of Civil Liberties" appeared in the 
January 19-25 issue of the French-language weekly Telquel.  The 
letter, signed by 128 artists, journalists, academics, businessmen 
and civil society actors, laments a disturbing rise in intolerance 
against so-called "deviants," often in the name of religion and 
virtue.  It outlines seven points vital to the protection of civil 
liberties, including guarding against hate-mongers and respecting the 
preferences, beliefs, opinions and life choices of others.  The 
letter, which was signed by one of our lunch guests, indicates the 
degree to which elite Moroccans are concerned about their country's 
capacity to embrace democratic ideals.  Lunch guests suggested 
several reforms they deem necessary to move Morocco forward. 
 
----------------- 
SUB-PAR EDUCATION 
----------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The need to reform Morocco's educational system was one 
point on which all reform advocates agreed, for numerous reasons. 
First, Moroccan schools are considered sub-par.  To illustrate this 
point, Ali Belhaj, a political activist, Member of Parliament (MP) 
and President of the NGO Maroc 2020, cited a study showing that while 
95 percent of Moroccans send their children to public school, the 
same percentage would opt for private school, given the choice. 
Second, the drop-out rate for students is extremely high.  Though 
primary school is compulsory, many students fall by the wayside by 
the time they reach high school.  One lunch guest estimated that as 
many as 25 percent drop out before their first year of high school. 
Another projected that as many as four million children are not in 
school.  In a country where about 50 percent of the population is 
under the age of 20, this is a significant problem. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In addition to widespread dissatisfaction and a high 
drop-out rate, the educational system also suffers from a lack of 
foresight or planning.  Professor Mohamed El Amine Moumine, Director 
of American Studies at Hassan II University, explained the disconnect 
he sees between the skills students are taught and the demands of 
Morocco's growing economy.  He believes the former should be designed 
with the latter in mind.  Another participant added that teachers are 
not properly trained.  As an example, she recalled that teachers 
received no education in how to teach using classical Arabic when it 
replaced French as the language of instruction in public schools. 
 
¶5. (SBU) While the Moroccan educational system's problems are 
formidable, Belhaj advised that the country does not need money to 
reform it.  Education is already a high priority and there are funds 
to support it - 25 percent of Morocco's budget currently goes to 
education.  Instead, he said, "We need your help for political 
 
reform." 
 
------------------------ 
PROBLEMS WITH PARLIAMENT 
------------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) Reform advocates talked in depth about what they view as 
problems in the 325-seat Parliament.  Several guests agreed that 
while some MPs are qualified and competent, many are not.  Those who 
would be qualified to serve often are not interested in doing so 
since they are well-off and content with the status quo.  The lack of 
enough willing and able participants in political life contributes to 
another problem: MPs often hold multiple offices, preventing them 
from giving their full attention to their work in Parliament. 
Mohamed Sajid came up as a prime example, as he is not only the Mayor 
of Casablanca, but also an MP from southern Morocco's Taroudant 
region.  Lunch guests were quick to defend Sajid's good reputation 
and noted that his administrative experience as mayor may well 
improve his abilities in Parliament.  Nonetheless, the feeling 
remained that Morocco would do well to follow France's model and 
prohibit politicians from holding multiple offices simultaneously. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Compounding the problem of ill-qualified representatives and 
those who wear multiple hats is the fact that Parliamentarians have 
no staff.  Belhaj recounted a conversation with a French MP who 
expressed shock at Morocco's system and swore he could get nothing 
done without his staff.  In Morocco, some MPs use the resources of 
their personal businesses to attend to parliamentary matters, but not 
everyone has this option.  Lunch guests agreed that a budget is 
needed for MPs to staff bona-fide offices. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The group discussed not only Parliament's personnel issues, 
but also the inefficient way in which the body conducts business. 
Bouthayna Iraqui-Houssaini, President of the Association of Women 
Entrepreneurs of Morocco (AFEM) and a newly-elected Parliamentarian, 
described with incredulity the scenario at parliamentary meetings. 
Not only is there no agenda and no notion of limiting the time spent 
discussing various topics, but her colleagues sit idle for hours, 
doing little more than reading the paper.  Coming from a private 
sector background, Iraqui-Houssaini is dumbfounded by the lack of an 
organized and professional ethic in Parliament. 
 
---------------------------- 
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM NEEDED 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Without exception, every guest agreed that with no 
constitutional reform, significant advances in Morocco are not 
possible.  However, according to Abdelmalek Kettani, a local 
businessman and President of the NGO Alternatives, some MPs may not 
be ready for such change.  All concurred that political will remains 
an issue when it comes to constitutional reform.  According to 
Iraqui-Houssaini, the old guard clings to the old ways and is not 
eager to see the status quo upset.  In addition, the constitution is 
currently written to make it impossible for one party to win a clear 
majority in Parliament.  "When you have a mosaic of parties in the 
government, they will never be able to reach the kind of consensus 
needed to make real change," Kettani said. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The group also agreed that without buy-in from the palace, 
constitutional reform would never be achieved.  When asked if the 
palace was ready for such reform, Kettani answered with an 
authoritative 'yes.'  Others confirmed Kettani's assessment and 
claimed that the King wants reform but understands that it will take 
time.  "The King is a good listener," claimed Belhaj.  Other guests 
backed him up, saying that ideas and proposals percolate up to the 
King, where they often get repackaged as royal initiatives.  For the 
moment, they accept this system, since at least it means that some 
reforms go through. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Without a doubt, the guests agreed that constitutional 
reform was high on everyone's agenda and that a transparent system of 
power sharing was an essential element for Morocco's future growth. 
Kettani, however, was adamant in his belief that until the Western 
Sahara issue is resolved, there will be no constitutional reform in 
Morocco.  He claimed that the Sahara issue will always take 
 
precedence and urged the USG to continue its help on this front. 
 
------------------------ 
WHO'S AFRAID OF THE PJD? 
------------------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) When discussion turned to the subject of Morocco's widely 
popular Islamic Party of Justice and Development (PJD), the reaction 
of the reformers was unified.  All agreed that the party was 
organized, dedicated and well-run.  One guest stated that since the 
PJD garnered the most popular votes in the 2007 parliamentary 
elections, its chance of winning numerous offices throughout the 
country in the 2009 municipal elections was great.  "Give them a 
chance," Belhaj stated, "let's see what they can do."  Kettani 
followed up by citing the case of Islamic Turkish Prime Minister, 
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, as an example of what could happen if the PJD 
does well in 2009.  "Erdogan," he said "was elected Mayor of 
Istanbul, did a great job, and is now an extremely popular Islamic 
Prime Minister in a secular country."  None of the guests registered 
concern about the PJD's popularity and indeed seemed to welcome the 
party as part of the truly democratic system all would like to see in 
Morocco. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Comment:  This group of elite and farsighted reform 
advocates spoke with feeling about Morocco's shortcomings and the 
need for change.  Iraqui-Houssaini explained that she began to get 
involved in politics when she realized that her children might leave 
and never return if Morocco remained the same.  As this comment and 
the lunch debate indicated, a cadre of smart, engaged individuals is 
committed to institutional and constitutional reform.   They are 
optimistic that it can happen, but only as part of a long-term 
process that requires broader buy-in from their countrymen.  End 
Comment. 
 
GREENE