08DAKAR2437
SENEGAL'S INFLUENTIAL MOURIDE LEADER DIES
Tue Jan 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO2600
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #2437/01 0010003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 010003Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9807
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 002437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL, INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS ECON KDEM KISL SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL'S INFLUENTIAL MOURIDE LEADER DIES 
 
REF: DAKAR 1352 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The extremely influential leader of 
the powerful Mouride brotherhood, Serigne Saliou 
Mbacke, died on Friday evening after 17 years in 
charge.  He was 92 and the last surviving son of 
Mouride founder Cheikh Amadou Bamba.  He has been 
succeeded as Khalife-General by his nephew Serigne 
Bara Mbacke who at 82 is Bamba?s oldest surviving 
grandson. End Summary 
 
The End of an Era 
----------------- 
¶2. (SBU) With the death of Saliou Mbacke, the fifth 
Khalife-General of the Mourides, Senegal has lost one 
of its most influential and revered personalities.  By 
all accounts a humble man, Saliou Mbakce wielded 
enormous influence in this conservative nation where 
the Mouride brotherhood can count on an estimated 45 
percent of the population being adherents.  Part of 
the mystique of Saliou Mbacke stemmed from the fact 
that he was the last surviving son of Mouride founder 
Cheikh Amadou Bamba and thus with the succession of 
Bara Mbacke the era of the grandsons has begun. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Upon hearing of Saliou Mbacke's death 
President Abdoulaye Wade officially declared three 
days of mourning and was one of the first to go to the 
Mouride capital of Touba to offer his condolences to 
the family.  President Wade was often photographed 
conferring with, but sitting physically below, Saliou 
Mbacke and these oft printed images have been the 
source of some angst amongst the Tidjane and other 
religious groups who have felt that the President 
favored the Mourides to the detriment of the group's 
normally apolitical stance.  Wade was accompanied to 
Touba by a large delegation of senior government 
officials, including ministers, and also by his son, 
Karim, who in the past year has also been conspicuous 
in paying his respects to the Khalife. 
 
The New Grand-Father on the Block 
--------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Bara Mbacke is known to be genial, worldly 
and out-going and will likely be a sharp contrast to 
Saliou Mbacke who seldom left his home and, by the end 
of his life, spoke in barely audible whispers 
preferring to focus on agricultural issues rather than 
dispensing religious or even political guidance.  Bara 
Mbacke is the son of Serigne Fallou Mbacke, second 
Khalife-General of the Mourides.  He has four wives, 
twenty-plus children, speaks French, and even dabbled 
in boxing when he was a young man.  Bara Mbacke is 
not a classical marabout, who are generally educated 
in the pure Sufi model of meditation and who almost 
never leave Senegal.  While he studied the Koran in 
Touba, he is well-traveled and has visited the U.S. 
However, in order to create balance in the 
brotherhood Bara has chosen to work closely with his 
successor, Cheikh Maty Leye Mbacke, who will 
complement him as he is a practitioner of the more 
traditional meditative style of Sufism that is much 
appreciated by Mourides disciples.  (Note:  Unlike 
the Tidjanes, the Mourides succession is well 
established and, from now on, will be based on Amadou 
Bamba's current eldest grandson remaining next in 
line.  End note.) 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Bara brings a wealth of leadership 
experience as at age 82, he has observed the 
leadership styles of five previous Khalifes 
(including his own father).  Unlike Saliou, who tried 
to accommodate everybody, but was isolated by the 
influence of a considerable entourage, Bara is known 
to be personally well-informed and directly open to 
those who seek to confer with him.  At the same time, 
a younger brother of Bara told Embassy that he will 
continue the works of his predecessor, especially his 
projects to build roads and a sanitation system in 
the city of Touba as well as his projects in 
agriculture and youth education. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶6.  (SBU) Saliou leaves behind an impressive legacy of 
expanding the Mourides membership and influence in 
Senegal and overseas via the vast network of 
Senegalese Mourides traders.  Saliou will also long be 
admired for reinforcing the key Mourides tenets of 
hard work, honesty, non-violence, and tolerance.  Bara 
 
DAKAR 00002437  002 OF 002 
 
 
Mbacke has assumed not only the mantle of arguably 
Senegal?s most important spiritual leader, but also 
the head of an economic empire that ties together 
millions of followers in networks of small and large 
businesses, and likely receives hundreds of millions 
of dollars in contributions from the faithful.  Though 
we don't expect the new Khalife-General to become 
overtly political, his education and international 
experience will come into play as politicians from 
President Wade down seek to gain his favor. 
 
PIAZZA