08DAKAR114
2007 Country Reports on Terrorism: Senegal
Tue Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXYZ0008
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDK #0114 0291123
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291123Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9939UNCLAS DAKAR 000114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/CT, AF/W, AF/RSA, AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC EFIN KDRM KHLS AEMR SG
SUBJECT: 2007 Country Reports on Terrorism: Senegal 
 
¶1.  The following narrative is Posts submission for the 2007 Country 
Terrorism Report (CTR): 
 
Senegal 
 
The Government of Senegal cooperated with the Untied States in 
identifying terrorist groups operating in Senegal.  More work 
remained to be done, however, to develop first responder services, 
to facilitate the quick sharing of information between agencies, and 
to control porous borders where police and security services are 
undermanned and ill-equipped to prevent illicit cross-border 
trafficking.  The Government of Senegal affirmed its commitment to 
the United States government-assisted efforts to augment its border 
security. 
 
Senegal continues to enhance its ability to combat terrorism, 
prosecute terror suspects, and respond to emergencies.  Despite 
advances, however, Senegal lacked specific counterterrorism 
legislation and current laws made it difficult to prosecute terror 
suspects.  As participants in the Trans-Saharan Counterterrorism 
Partnership, more than 318 Senegalese government officials 
participated in ATA programs.  Senegalese military officials 
attended a counterterrorism seminar in Rabat and attended the Chiefs 
of Defense and Directors of Military Intelligence conferences.  The 
Defense International Institute of Legal Studies, the Department of 
Justice, the U.S. Treasury's Office Technical Assistance, and the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) gave separate 
seminars on the legal aspects of fighting terrorism. 
 
Senegal did not provide safe haven for terrorists or terrorist 
organizations.  However, five Mauritanians who claim to be members 
of Al-Qaeda and who were allegedly involved in the December 24, 2007 
murder of four French tourists in Aleg, Mauritania successfully 
traveled through Senegal before being captured in a hotel in 
Guinea-Bissau by Bissau-Guinean police aided by French authorities 
on January 12.  The Mauritanians were able to cross four Senegalese 
borders without being stopped by Senegalese authorities.  This event 
demonstrates Senegal's porous borders and lack of capacity to 
effectively identify and combat terrorist threats and the need for 
further training.  Moreover, it is suspected that Hezbollah uses the 
Lebanese community Senegal as a source of financing. 
SMITH