08NDJAMENA39
CLAMPDOWN ON CHAD'S INDEPENDENT VOICES AS SUDAN
Fri Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO6182
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0039/01 0181408
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181408Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6017
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CD SU
SUBJECT: CLAMPDOWN ON CHAD'S INDEPENDENT VOICES AS SUDAN 
TAKES CENTER STAGE 
 
REF: NDJAMENA 18 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Government of Chad is ratchetting up 
hostility against Sudan and displaying less tolerance for 
criticism.  Human rights activists have noted a deterioration 
in the overall human rights situation: targets of the 
clampdown include radio and print journalists, a human rights 
activist and individuals suspected of collusion with rebels. 
End Summary. 
 
Vive le President and down with Sudan 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In tandem with the January 6 and 7 aerial bombing 
against Chadian rebel targets in Sudanese territory (reftel), 
the Government of Chad has launched a blitz of public 
statements denouncing Sudanese aggression.  At the 
well-attended opening of the World Bank seminar on Chad's 
Poverty Reduction Strategy on January 9, Prime Minister 
Kassire compared President Bechir to the notorious 19th 
century war-lord Rabah and accused him of being a modern day 
slave-trader.  The Government has also orchestrated a series 
of rallies for members of civil society and students to 
demonstrate popular support for President Deby and to 
denounce the actions of the "mercenaries" recruited by Sudan 
to overthrow the regime.   A third rally is planned for the 
coming weekend.  The events have been peaceful, with reports 
that a small stipend is offered to encourage participants to 
attend.  On January 11, members of the diplomatic corps and 
about 400 of the Chadian "who's who" were summoned to the 
Presidency to greet the President on the occasion of the New 
Year.  In his address, President Deby summarized his 
administration's accomplishments in the economic and social 
realm and accused President Bechir of trying to destroy Chad. 
 The President spoke standing up, but was visibly fatigued 
and appeared to have some difficulty reading the text. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Against these efforts to drum up support for the 
President's actions against Sudan, the government's tolerance 
for criticism appears to be diminishing.  In mid-December, 
Notre Temps Director Benoudjita Nodjikimo was detained for an 
editorial in which he accused President Deby of human rights 
abuses during the Habre regime. He was released but will face 
charges.  According to Jacqueline Moudeina of the Association 
Tchadienne pour la Promotion et la Defense des Droits de 
l'Homme (ATPDH), Nodjikimo was tortured during his detention. 
 Moudeina confided to PolOff that Nodjikimo and his family 
might need to leave the country and requested USG assistance 
with visas.  On January 17, police raided the studio of 
independent radio "FM Liberte," taking the Director into 
custody and closing down the station.  FM Liberte may have 
crossed the line in airing interviews with students returning 
from a government-organized rally in which the students asked 
the President to stop the war and complained that they were 
tired of the fighting. FM Liberte is a current recipient of 
U.S. Embassy Democracy and Human Rights grants for human 
rights broadcasts. 
 
¶4. (SBU) On January 9, the government detained Deuzoumbe 
Daniel, President of the prominent human rights association 
"Human Rights Without Borders" for 24 hours.  Human Rights 
Without Borders had issued a press release calling attention 
to the apparent disappearance of senior Ministry of Finance 
official, Rozi Mamy, on December 31.  According to rumors in 
N'Djamena, Mamy (who resurfaced some 10 ays later) may have 
fallen under suspicion for pssing satellite phone cards to a 
relative in therebellion; Deuzombe's press release intimated 
that he had been detained for implicating members of the 
President's family in a corruption scheme.  In a meeting with 
DCM and PolOff prior to being summoned to the police station, 
Deuzombe had called attention to the government's efforts to 
clamp down on freedom of expression by using intimidation and 
threats against human rights organizations and journalists. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The aftermath of violent clashes between rebels and 
government forces in November/December 2007 and its impact on 
civil and political liberties is still being assessed. 
Deuzombe has attempted to follow up on rumors of executions 
of prisoners in N'Djamena but reported to DCM and PolOff that 
he had nothing concrete.  Both the ICRC and Deuzombe had 
heard rumors of battlefield executions, but could not confirm 
any names. The ICRC Country Director commented to DCM on 
January 11 that the lack of information might be the result 
of both sides having committed summary executions, and 
therefore neither side being eager to come forward and 
denounce the acts.  His delegate in the border town of Adre 
had reported that the bodies of some young men found outside 
of town might be the result of army sweeps of suspected rebel 
sympathizers.  Both Human Rights Without Borders and the 
 
NDJAMENA 00000039  002 OF 002 
 
 
International Red Cross are keeping an eye on the situation 
of the Sultan of Dar Tama who - along with some seven other 
Guereda authorities -- had been relieved of his duties and 
spirited to N'Djamena, presumably on suspicion of having 
collaborated with FUC rebels in the November/December 
fighting.  The Sultan and his colleague are believed to be 
unharmed, but have not been released or charged. 
 
Comment: 
 
¶6. (SBU) Many Chadians see the bellicose words as a 
smoke-screen for what is essentially an inter-family dispute 
that has its roots in Chad and will end in Chad.  While the 
tactics being used against the media, human rights 
organizations and suspected rebels are not new or unusual, 
the President's exclusive focus on striking back at the 
rebels will clearly dominate government actions and decisions 
for the near future. 
NIGRO