08TELAVIV39
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0039/01 0071218
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071218Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4872
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3220
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9881
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3418
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3989
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3244
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1396
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3983
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0830
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1304
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7864
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5336
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0248
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4376
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6320
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8773
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
President Bush Visits the Mideast, Jan. 8-16 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Last night Channel 2-TV broadcasted an interview with President 
Bush, who emphasized his support for Israel, and said that he could 
not predict that an Israeli-Palestinian agreement would be finalized 
by the end of this year.  He was quoted as saying: "There'll be an 
agreement on what a [Palestinian] state would look like, in my 
judgment. I am not going to try to force the issue because of my own 
timetable, but I do believe that Prime Minister Olmert and President 
Abbas do want to get this done." 
 
On Sunday, The Jerusalem Post reported, based on President Bush's 
weekly radio address, that he will work with Middle East allies to 
develop a security plan to counter Iran during his visit. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Yediot reported that today, under orders from 
the political echelon, the IDF will begin reducing its activities in 
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, ahead of President Bush's arrival 
on Wednesday.  The decision to scale back operations was made by 
Defense Minister Ehud Barak.  All media reported that five 
Palestinians were killed and five IDF soldiers were wounded during 
an IDF incursion into the central Gaza Strip, focusing on the Bureij 
refugee camp.  The media reported that the IDF conducted a raid in 
Nablus during the weekend. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted GOI officials as saying on Sunday that 
both Israel and the PA are trying to create a "positive atmosphere" 
before the arrival of President Bush.  According to the officials, 
FM Tzipi Livni is scheduled to meet Palestinian negotiator Ahmed 
Qurei on Monday for the fourth time since the Annapolis conference 
to try to hammer out a framework for negotiations.  This meeting is 
expected to be followed by another meeting on Tuesday, between PM 
Olmert and PA President Mahmoud Abbas.  On Sunday Ha'aretz reported 
that Israelis and Palestinians will negotiate the core issues in a 
special committee to be headed by Livni and Qurei.  Leading media 
quoted Strategic Affairs Minister Avigdor Lieberman, the Chairman of 
Yisrael Beiteinu, as saying that his party will leave the government 
if negotiations touch the core issues. 
 
 
 
Ha'aretz reported that PM Ehud Olmert plans to assure President Bush 
this week that he is committed to dismantling illegal settler 
outposts.  The government, however, is refusing to publish a 
database containing full details about the settlements and outposts. 
 In response to a High Court of Justice petition on the matter, the 
Defense Ministry has argued that publication would harm state 
security and Israel's foreign relations.  Maariv reported that 
right-wing activists are expected to populate a new Jewish 
neighborhood in East Jerusalem ahead of President Bush's visit. 
Speaking on Israel Radio today, MK Tzachi Hanegbi (Kadima), the 
Chairman of the Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee said 
that Israel will dismantle the outposts when the Palestinians abide 
by their commitments. 
 
On Sunday Maariv reported that Ofer Dekel, PM Olmert's chief 
negotiator for the release of the kidnapped soldiers, has met a 
number of times with jailed Fatah/Tanzim leader Marwan Barghouti. 
Today Yediot cited a denial of the story by Olmert's bureau. 
 
All media underscored speculations ahead of the January 30 
publication of the final Winograd report.  Israel TV quoted a member 
of the Winograd Commission as saying that the report would be "fire 
and brimstone."  Yediot leads this morning with a report about 
secretive cooperation between Likud Chairman Binyamin Netanyahu and 
 
SIPDIS 
Uzi Dayan, a former director of the National Security Council who 
made a failed bid to be elected to the Knesset in 2006.  According 
to the report, Dayan, who has been coordinating the reservists 
protest against PM Olmert over his role in the Second Lebanon War, 
is actually working closely in conjunction with Netanyahu in order 
to further their joint political goals.  Speaking on Israel Radio 
this morning, Dayan characterized the report as spin.  Maariv and 
The Jerusalem Post reported that members of Kadima and the Labor 
Party are working toward setting up an alternative government headed 
by Tzipi Livni that would be in power through 2010. 
 
Major media reported that on Sunday Al-Qaida called on its 
supporters to welcome President Bush with bombs, not with flowers. 
 
Ha'aretz cited the Shin Bet as saying that Palestinian security 
forces have arrested more than 250 Hamas operatives in the West Bank 
over the past month. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Defense Minister Ehud Barak will lay out for 
President Bush the differences in interpretation regarding Iran's 
nuclear program between the Israeli security establishment and U.S. 
 
intelligence branches. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that senior Likud sources have accused 
PM Ehud Olmert of intervening to prevent President Bush from meeting 
with opposition leader Binyamin Netanyahu when the President comes 
to Israel.  The newspaper quoted Netanyahu as saying: "It would be 
right if the President would take the time to listen to someone who 
represents more than half the people in Israel, who oppose the 
Annapolis process."  The newspaper quoted a Kadima source as saying: 
"At the White House they think [Netanyahu] is a liar, because of his 
behavior when he was prime minister."  The Jerusalem Post reported 
that Likud officials expressed outrage that the only person Bush 
will meet with on the trip who opposes the Annapolis diplomatic 
process is former PM Ariel Sharon's son, Gilad Sharon, whom Bush 
requested to meet in order to discuss the agricultural expertise he 
has gained running the Sharon family ranch.  The Jerusalem Post 
quoted MK Arieh Eldad (National Union-National Religious Party) as 
saying that Israelis living in the West Bank should ignore the law 
and continue to build in their communities in a show of civil 
disobedience to the government-ordered construction freeze. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Israel National Police has decided to 
postpone the move of the Samaria and Judea (Shai) [i.e., West Bank] 
District Police to its new headquarters in the controversial E-1 
area, which links Jerusalem with the West Bank settlement of Ma'aleh 
Adumim.  The police denied that the delay was linked to President 
Bush's visit 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Republican presidential hopeful Rep. Ron Paul (Tex.) 
as saying in Nashua, N.H., on Sunday that Israel can get by without 
U.S. aid. 
 
Yediot reported that Egyptian parliamentarians are demanding the 
establishment of a commission of investigation on war crimes 
allegedly carried out by Israel following the discovery of a mass 
grave in Eilat in which bodies, allegedly of Arab soldiers, were 
found.  On Sunday Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that a study that 
was published in Cairo claims to have exposed the danger to the area 
at large posed by the radioactivity given off by Israel's nuclear 
weapons arsenal. 
 
Yediot quoted former FBI agent Sibyl Edmunds as saying in an 
interview with the British weekly Sunday Times that corrupt 
high-ranking U.S. officials have helped unstable regimes such as 
Pakistan obtain nuclear technologies, and that they turned a blind 
eye to moles in the service of Israel and Turkey. 
 
Maariv reported that during the past year over 50,000 surfers of the 
internet from Arab countries have entered the citizens' counseling 
service on the website of Israel's Welfare Ministry (in Arabic). 
Maariv said that Saudi surfers were interested in driving lessons. 
 
All media reported that the Tel Aviv Stock Market experienced losses 
on Sunday (index changes ranged from -2.5% to -4.5%).  The media 
said that the trend echoes the situation on Wall Street. 
 
Ha'aretz presented the results of Tel Aviv University's Peace Index 
poll conducted among Jewish Israelis on January 1-2, 2008: 
 
An overwhelming majority (81 percent) of the Jewish public (compared 
to a minority of 11.5 percent who are opposed) currently support or 
strongly support escalating the policy of targeted killings of those 
who fire Qassam rockets or their dispatchers.  This is despite the 
responsible organizations' threat to react to the assassinations 
with terror attacks.  Some 61 percent (vs. 31.5 percent) also oppose 
Israel reaching understandings with Hamas on stopping the rocket 
fire in return for stopping the targeted killings and military 
operations in Gaza. 
Compared to this hard-line stance regarding Hamas and Gaza, the 
attitude toward the Abbas-headed PA seems less hostile.  A small 
majority (51 percent vs. 43 percent) of the Jewish public think 
Israel should uphold its undertakings at the Annapolis conference on 
a settlement freeze, and a slightly larger majority (53 percent vs. 
37 percent) think it should meet its obligations to the PA on 
evacuating the illegal outposts.  Furthermore, there is considerable 
recognition of the Palestinians' rights to the territories that were 
transferred to the PA in the Oslo framework. 
In response to the question, "If the Winograd report includes harsh 
criticism of PM Ehud Olmert's functioning during the Second Lebanon 
War, would you support or oppose a demand that he resign from his 
post, even if the commission does not make personal 
recommendations?" 61 percent said that they would want Olmert to 
resign, with only 20 percent saying they would not. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
President Bush Visits the Mideast, Jan. 8-16: 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The question remains whether the President's 
support will convince skeptical Israelis that the Annapolis summit 
and the peace process can achieve any substantial goals." 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in Ha'aretz: 
"Why is Israel negotiating with Washington and not with the 
Palestinian Authority?  After all, these issues cannot be 
implemented without Palestinian consent." 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in Ha'aretz: "The Middle 
East has only moved further away from peace during Bush's tenure.... 
Only here is he accorded honor and glory." 
 
Conservative columnist Nadav Shragai wrote in Ha'aretz in a mock 
letter by Ehud Olmert "as mayor of Jerusalem" to President Bush: 
"Division will expose some 200,000 Jews, who live a mere few dozen 
or few hundred meters from Arab neighborhoods, to ... terror, to ... 
fire, just as happened in [the neighborhood of] Gilo." 
 
Contributor Yitzhak Klein wrote in the nationalist, Orthodox Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe: "[Washington] is part of the problem and not of the 
solution." 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Friend to Olmert Indeed" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (1/6): "Unlike his predecessor Bill Clinton 
who came to Israel four times during his presidency, Bush was here 
just once, when he was governor of Texas two years before he was 
elected president.  In addition, press conferences with visiting 
Israeli prime ministers Ehud Olmert and Ariel Sharon, were kept 
short, and he does not count any Israelis among his inner circle of 
friends.  Ahead of his visit, Bush gave two interviews to the 
Israeli press -- to ... Yediot Aharonot -- and ... Channel 2-TV. 
Choosing the most popular television station and most widely-read 
newspaper shows the U.S. administration wants to reach the largest 
target audience.  In the interviews, Bush's main message addressed 
Israeli politics.  'I trust him,' he said of Olmert.  'He's a man of 
vision and I believe and like him, and I think he's a strong man.' 
Few Israelis will say such things of Olmert.... To Olmert, Bush's 
visit is a congenial event in which the President will arrive, 
express his friendship and leave without putting forth policies 
uncomfortable to Israel.  But the question remains whether the 
President's support will convince skeptical Israelis that the 
Annapolis summit and the peace process can achieve any substantial 
goals." 
 
II.  "There's a Partner, and he's American" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in Ha'aretz 
(1/6): "'Israel is asking the U.S. to agree to limitations on the 
sovereignty of the future Palestinian state, including its complete 
demilitarization, the freedom for Israel to fly in Palestinian 
airspace, and concealed Israeli supervision of the border crossings 
of the Palestinian state,' as Aluf Benn [of Ha'aretz] reported last 
week.  In particular, if and when there are negotiations, Israel 
wants to be able to continue to operate in the territories without 
restrictions while the talks are being held.  It is possible, of 
course, to argue that these demands result from a serious Israeli 
internalization of the new reality in which a Palestinian state will 
arise, and that to seal the deal there remains only the question of 
the airspace and Shin Bet officials sitting behind one-way glass at 
the border crossing.  But there is a sneaking suspicion that this 
conclusion is unfounded.  Because why is Israel negotiating with 
Washington and not with the Palestinian Authority?  After all, these 
issues cannot be implemented without Palestinian consent.  It seems 
Israel seeks conditions that will become the permanent policy of the 
U.S., regardless of who its president may be.." 
 
III.  "Iran, then Annapolis" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (1/7): 
"Every which way. U.S. President George W. Bush is trying to send a 
signal, as he heads to the region this week, that he is with Israel 
and with the Arab states that feel threatened by Iran.... Judging 
from the travel schedules of Bush and his secretary of state, the 
top U.S. priority is Annapolis, not Iran.  This is backwards, and 
until these priorities are reversed, no amount of hand-holding will 
assuage the concerns of Israel and the more moderate Arab states.... 
This, indeed, is the grand bargain that Bush should propose to Arab 
states: a serious U.S. sanctions campaign -- backed by a Bush visit 
to Europe -- to isolate Iran in exchange for greater Arab gestures 
toward normalization with Israel.  Such a deal would help the U.S. 
convince Europe to impose tougher sanctions, help the Palestinian 
Authority against Hamas and increase American prestige , and it 
could help turn the tide of inevitability away from the Iranian 
bomb.  Bush should make clear: Annapolis depends on isolating Iran, 
so anyone who says they want Annapolis to work -- as have Europe and 
 
the Arab states -- needs to join in dramatically tightening the 
screws on Tehran." 
 
IV.  "A Hostile President" 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in Ha'aretz (1/6): "This is 
all we got from Bush: a more entrenched and brutal occupation with 
the open, or tacit, encouragement of the U.S.; a green light for 
another superfluous war in Lebanon; a Hamas government in Gaza, 
which the U.S., and consequently the rest of the world, is 
boycotting -- a measure that has only led to the starvation of Gaza, 
while failing to weaken Hamas; and U.S. authorization for the 
'settlement blocs.'  The Middle East has only moved further away 
from peace during Bush's tenure.... This is the man who is coming to 
us this week.  History will yet judge him for his actions and his 
failures.  The world feels enmity toward him and even the U.S. is 
already sick and tired of him.  Only here is he accorded honor and 
glory." 
 
¶V.  "Mr. President, Would You Divide New York?"" 
 
Conservative columnist Nadav Shragai wrote in Ha'aretz in a mock 
letter by Ehud Olmert "as mayor of Jerusalem" to President Bush 
(1/7): "'Mr. President, do you know what happened in Jerusalem the 
last time it was divided, in 1948?  About one quarter of its Jews 
left -- more than 25,000 people!  They weren't willing to live in 
border neighborhoods and be exposed to rifle and machine-gun 
fire.... Division will expose some 200,000 Jews, who live a mere few 
dozen or few hundred meters from Arab neighborhoods, to ... terror, 
to ... fire, just as happened in [the neighborhood of] Gilo.... 
Would any other country in the world give up the right to pray at 
its holiest site, the Temple Mount, as Israel has done, out of 
respect for members of another faith who also pray at that site? 
And in exchange -- look at how the Palestinians 'respect' our holy 
sites: Joseph's Tomb, Rachel's Tomb ... Mr. President, I am 
admittedly only a mayor, but what I said to then prime minister 
Barak in 2000, I am saying now to you, and to Prime Minister Olmert: 
'It's dangerous. It is irresponsible.  Life in this city will become 
hell, for Jews and Arabs alike.'  Please explain this to the Prime 
Minister of Israel.'" 
 
VI.  "Needless Imposition" 
 
Contributor Yitzhak Klein wrote in the nationalist, Orthodox Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe (1/7): "Washington does not understand [Israel's] 
condition ; thus, perhaps because of lack of knowledge, it is part 
 
of the problem and not of the solution.  But this can also be said 
of many Israelis.... Something indeed happened after the Second 
Lebanon War: the general public no longer  believes in those who try 
to impose [enslavement]; it no longer trusts them [the Americans]. 
From here to the desire to free ourselves -- the road is still long. 
 But when the myth of the 'rapists' [a paraphrase on a remark 
allegedly made by Ha'aretz editor David Landau that 'Israel wants to 
be raped'] is debunked, the liberation from their [the Americans'] 
burden will surely come.  This is only a matter of time and 
consciousness." 
 
MORENO