08TELAVIV157
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0157/01 0181200
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 181200Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5053
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3283
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9942
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3490
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4050
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3308
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1464
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4045
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0891
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1365
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7925
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5397
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0309
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4437
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6381
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8873
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The media continued to highlight the situation in Gaza and the 
western Negev.  On Thursday Palestinians around 40 Qassam rockets 
and two mortar shells at Israel and the IDF killed at least five 
Palestinians.  This morning Israel Radio reported that IDF troops 
killed Ahmed Sanakra, a senior Fatah (Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades) 
militant in Nablus.  Yediot and Israel Radio reported that last 
night PM Ehud Olmert toured Sderot.  Israel Radio quoted him as 
saying that, should rocket attacks against Israel go on, Israel will 
want to hit back, but that it will have to exercise caution to avoid 
harming innocents.  Leading media reported that Olmert has 
instructed the army to intensify targeted killings and the 
stranglehold of the Strip.  Israel Radio reported that on Thursday 
Defense Minister Ehud Barak gave instructions to close the crossings 
into the Gaza Strip.  He earlier ordered to continue the policy of 
restricting fuel supply to the Gaza Strip.  He also asked for 
260,000 shekels (around $69,500) for protecting Sderot and other 
communities in the region. 
 
Ha'aretz cited the belief of Palestinian sources that Hamas would 
continue the rocket barrages, in an attempt to force Israel into a 
cease-fire.  Hamas, they were quoted as saying, believes that its 
previous, lower level of rocket and mortar fire allowed the IDF to 
operate freely in Gaza without Israel paying a serious price. 
Moreover, the sources cited Hamas's calculation that Israel wants to 
avoid a major ground operation in Gaza, and that therefore, it will 
have no choice but to call a truce if heavy rocket fire.  Hamas is 
currently refraining from firing rockets on Ashkelon lest that 
reverse Israel's opposition to a major incursion, the sources added. 
However, Ha'aretz reported that Hamas officials declined to confirm 
that the recent escalation represents a new policy. 
 
Ha'aretz (Hebrew Ed.), Maariv, and The Jerusalem Post led with 
Second Lebanon War-related developments.  Leading media wrote that 
the Winograd Commission has reportedly decided not to take an overly 
harsh tone with PM Olmert in its final report following a heated 
internal debate.  Channel 2-TV reported last night that commission 
member Yehezkel Dror demanded a tough stance, which would "place a 
loaded gun on Olmert's table" and force him to resign.  On Thursday 
the Ynet Internet site quoted a commission member (perhaps Dror) as 
saying that the report would have a "dramatic, decisive" impact, "up 
to and including a replacement of the government."  The Jerusalem 
Post and Maariv focused on parents of soldiers who fell during the 
war.  The Jerusalem Post quoted members of the Bereaved Parents 
Forum as saying on Thursday that such parents are planning to block 
roads and stage mass protests and hunger strikes from January 31, 
the day after the Winograd Commission publishes its final report on 
the war, until PM Olmert "goes home." 
 
Leading media reported that following Israel's test-firing of a 
dual-stage missile on Thursday -- which some media said was of the 
long-range Jericho-4 type -- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 
told Al Jazeera-TV: "The Zionist regime ... would not dare attack 
Iran.  The Iranian response would make them regret it, and they know 
this." 
 
Major media cited Radio Sawa or a PA official as saying that PA 
Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas threatened to resign and put an 
end to the negotiations with Israel if it continues the escalation 
in the Gaza Strip.  Israel Radio quoted a source in Abbas's bureau 
as saying that Abbas told Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice that 
there is no use in negotiations if the Israeli offensive goes on. 
The radio quoted the source as saying that Secretary Rice asked 
Abbas to continue and that she promised to pressure the GOI to stop 
its raids and construction in the settlements.  Media reported that 
the PA has addressed the international community through Jordan and 
Egypt to try to stop the Israeli raids.  Nabil Amro, media advisor 
to Abbas, was quoted as saying in an interview with the 
Arabic-language Kull Al Arab that Fatah wishes to open a new page 
with Hamas, as the Israeli aggression against Gaza will make the 
negotiations worthless, with no results.  Palestinian Resistance 
Committees (PRC) spokesman Abu Mujahed was quoted as saying in an 
interview with the Arabic-language Assennara that the PRC will deal 
a painful blow to Israel and that it now shares aims with Hamas and 
Fatah. 
 
Israel Radio reported that FM Tzipi Livni, who is currently visiting 
Moscow, warned that nuclear fuel that Russia is delivering the 
Bushehr nuclear reactor might be used for military applications. 
She added that she expects countries around the world to transform 
their words into actions and not to let Tehran acquire nuclear 
weapons.  The Jerusalem Post reported that Livni denounced the 
combination of Iran's "destructive ideology" -- which she said "is 
 
not connected to Israel, but to deep extremist foundations" -- with 
attempts to obtain nuclear weapons.   Ha'aretz reported that several 
drafters of the National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) will attend 
next week Herzliya Conference to discuss the scenario of a 
multi-nuclear region. 
 
Israel Radio reported that a solution to the strike of Israeli 
universities' senior lecturers is apparently close, thanks to an 
outline devised by Histadrut Labor Federation Secretary-General Ofer 
Eini. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that FM Livni has demanded that her ministry redo 
its public relations plan for 2008 -- which puts "branding Israel" 
as its top priority -- because the original ignores Israel's 
negotiations with the PA.  However, these talks are the focus of a 
separate diplomatic plan the ministry is currently preparing. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Ron Prosor, Israel's new Ambassador to the 
UK, is applying a proactive PR policy, seeking out the "lion's den 
to get Israel's message across." 
 
Ha'aretz (English Ed.) quoted Peter Joseph, chairman of the New-York 
based organization Israel Policy Forum, as saying that the "silent 
majority" of American Jews are eager to end the Arab-Israeli 
conflict and bring about a two-state solution, despite voices within 
the community that suggest otherwise. 
 
Maariv quoted Abu Obeideh, the commander of the military branch of 
Hamas, as saying on Thursday in an interview with the 
Arabic-language Israeli radio Al-Shams that Hamas does not intend to 
harm Gilad Shalit. 
 
Leading media reported that around a month ago Israeli security 
forces arrested five Islamic Jihad militants who planned to place a 
bomb on railroad tracks between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. 
 
Maariv reported that the Judean Desert portion of the West Bank 
security fence will not be erected, following concerns over its 
environmental impact. 
 
The media reported that on Thursday the Tel Aviv District Court 
sentenced an Israeli army psychiatrist convicted of endangering 
national security to five years in prison and two years suspended 
sentence.  David Shamir, a major in the IDF reserves, accepted a 
plea bargain last week in which he admitted to contact with a 
foreign agent and of possessing information with the intent of 
harming national security.  Shamir tried to pass to Iran, Hamas, and 
the Russians classified information which he acquired during his 
reserve duty.  The judges termed Shamir's conduct in the matter 
"bizarre, enigmatic, and wholly disconnected from reality." 
 
The media reported that a District Court judge ordered the release 
of seven 13- to 14-year-old girls who had refused to identify 
themselves.  The state prosecution had said it would not advocate 
their release.  The girls were arrested 23 days ago at the settler 
outpost of Givat Ha'Or near the settlement of Beit El and charged 
with illegal gathering in a closed military zone. 
 
Ha'aretz (English Ed.) reported that Grammy Award-winning musician 
Miri Ben-Ari, an Israeli "hip hop violinist" best known for her 
collaborations with artists Kanye West and Jay Z, was awarded the 
first annual Martin Luther King, Jr. Israel Award for her work in 
bringing together African-American and Jewish communities closer 
together through music.  Tuesday's event at the Prime Minister's 
residence was sponsored by the Fellowship of Israel and Black 
America (FIBA), an initiative aiming to nurture and develop ties 
between the two communities.  President Shimon Peres and the Rev. 
Kenneth Flowers, an African-American pastor from the Detroit area, 
also received the award. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Columnist Calev Ben-David wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post: "Given the speed at which the situation is 
deteriorating, [the] day [set by President Bush for a peace 
agreement] may be much too late." 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Paz-Melamed commented in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv: " Barak's intentions are definitely good, but even 
he, the experienced and sophisticated man, has forgotten that the 
settlers eat him for breakfast." 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Fear of Netanyahu has struck 
the political establishment.... [It] is justified." 
 
Very liberal columnist Meron Benvenisti, deputy mayor of Jerusalem 
from 1971 to 1978, wrote in Ha'aretz: "Olmert is wringing every last 
drop out of people's desire for peace and will unashamedly exploit 
the weakness of the Palestinians." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Dimming of the 'Vision Track'" 
 
Columnist Calev Ben-David wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (1/18): "When Bush expressed confidence that a 
final-status agreement could be reached in just a year's time, the 
immediate reactions among analysts was that the deadline was 
unrealistic because it was set too soon.  Now given the speed at 
which the situation is deteriorating, that day may be much too 
late.... The Americans may well have to start considering some of 
the more out-of-the-box proposals that have been suggested -- such 
as the introduction of the international force into Gaza -- rather 
than wait for an eventual 'vision of democracy' that may never 
materialize.... [President Bush's] next trip here ... is not 
scheduled until May, just in time to join in Israel's 60th 
anniversary celebrations.  But if there are many more weeks [such as 
the past one] before then, it is hard to say who in the government 
here Bush will have to officially mark that event with -- and just 
what exactly there will be to celebrate in terms of a post-Annapolis 
peace process off to a shaky start." 
 
 
 
II.  "Barak at the Settlers' Service" 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Paz-Melamed commented in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv (1/18): "Barak's intentions are definitely good, 
but even he, the experienced and sophisticated man, has forgotten 
that the settlers eat him for breakfast.  Based on a Shin Bet report 
according to which settlement removal will this time be more violent 
than Amona's [in 2006], the Defense Minister decided for the 
umpteenth time to improve the law breakers' condition and to sign an 
agreement with them.... During the past seven years countless 
agreements have been reached with the settlers to voluntarily remove 
unauthorized outposts.  But now the party seems over.  Olmert has 
decided that he is going to give a real chance to a peace agreement 
with the Palestinians.  For this he needs his defense minister.... 
But his defense minister is very angry.  His talks and agreements 
[with the settlers] have been torpedoed.  He is mad at Olmert rather 
than at the settlers.... But the situation is quite the opposite! 
Barak was elected to represent his voters' worldview.  Free gifts at 
the expense of the state to those who trespassed into and stole 
Palestinian land in the territories, are not included in this 
worldview." 
 
III.  "Fear of Netanyahu" 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (1/18): "It is not his acrobatic 
abilities that are saving Olmert from falling -- the rescuer is 
opposition leader Binyamin Netanyahu.  Fear of Netanyahu has struck 
the political establishment, and the weekly surveys only reinforce 
it: Anyone who doesn't want Olmert will get Netanyahu, and there is 
great panic.... The fear of Netanyahu is justified.  The very 
thought that he will soon return makes one shudder.  They are 
afraid, the politicians, as are many ordinary citizens.  But fear 
itself is not recommended over the long term, because fear is a 
disease and not a cure.  Olmert and Defense Minister Ehud Barak are 
the ones responsible for this situation, because they were unable to 
convince people that they are not Netanyahu:  The three are too 
similar in the eyes of the general public, so why not prefer the 
original to his clones?  To embark on a war unknowingly and flee 
responsibility, to expand settlements rather than evacuate them, to 
conduct useless negotiations, to harm the poor and help the rich, to 
reopen the Ministry for Religious Affairs, to humiliate teachers and 
professors, to increase the burden on students, and harass the 
judges in Jerusalem -- to do all this Netanyahu is sufficient and 
his successors are superfluous.  For the purposes of an inferior 
personal example as well, Netanyahu will do." 
 
IV.  "The March of Cynics" 
 
Very liberal columnist Meron Benvenisti, deputy mayor of Jerusalem 
from 1971 to 1978, wrote in Ha'aretz (1/18): "Olmert's cynicism is 
astonishing.  He says bombastic things about how he was 'elected 
with a broad diplomatic agenda, wants to bring about an agreement 
and intends to realize his vision'.... He is intentionally blurring 
the difference between a theoretical 'shelf agreement' and an 
agreement for which there is a commitment to implement it.  Since he 
will never arrive at the first, there is no need to worry about the 
implementation of the second.  Olmert is wringing every last drop 
out of people's desire for peace and will unashamedly exploit the 
weakness of the Palestinians, who have to conduct peace 
negotiations, ostensibly, when scores of them are being killed by 
the Israeli army.  All means are justified to survive politically -- 
all three cynics [Bush, Olmert, and Abbas] need each other in order 
 
to survive." 
 
JONES