08TORONTO13
Canadian Capital Markets Update - Free Trade in Securities
Fri Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO0053
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0013/01 0111511
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111511Z JAN 08
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2309
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0038
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0029
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 0008
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0016
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON 0002UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TORONTO 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR MELLE, MENDENHALL, CHANDLER 
DEPT PASS SEC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EINV PGOV PREL CA
SUBJECT: Canadian Capital Markets Update - Free Trade in Securities 
and Toronto Montreal Exchange Merger 
 
REF: (A) 07 Toronto 375 (notal) (B) 07 Toronto 160 (notal) 
 
(C) 07 Toronto 372 (notal) 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified -- protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Canadian market and regulatory officials applaud 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) deliberations to allow 
U.S. investors to trade directly on foreign exchanges that have 
regulations in line with U.S. securities regulations.  Free trade in 
securities has been a priority issue under the Security and 
Prosperity Partnership (SPP).  Canadian market analysts believe 
mutual recognition of securities regulations would enable U.S. 
investors to directly access the Canadian market and would encourage 
foreign issuers to list on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX), the 
world's seventh largest exchange by market capitalization (almost 
US$2 trillion).  Market watchers are optimistic that the proposed 
merger of the TSX and the Montreal Exchange (MX) will increase 
cooperation among Canadian regulatory jurisdictions, effectively 
moving Canada closer to a common domestic securities regulation. 
The TSX/MX merger seems on track and awaits approvals from TSX and 
MX shareholders, Ontario and Quebec regulators, the Canadian 
Competition Bureau, and the SEC.  Canadian securities regulators are 
highly motivated and would make good partners for the SEC to ensure 
a successful transition to mutual recognition of securities 
regulation across the US/Canada border.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Mutual Recognition in Securities 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) More than a dozen large U.S. brokerages, such as Merrill 
Lynch, currently allow U.S. investors to buy Canadian stocks through 
a Canadian office or partner, but existing cross-border investment 
rules are a costly barrier for small investors and securities firms. 
 Canadians were pleased that the SEC is considering changing its 
approach to regulating U.S. investors' trading on foreign stock 
exchanges in order to keep pace with U.S. investors who are 
increasing their international investments as the U.S. dollar falls. 
 Converging international accounting standards and securities 
regulation principles, and closer ties among exchanges in different 
countries, may have made the concept of mutual recognition more 
palatable to regulators.  The NYSE's purchase of Euronext last year 
to form NYSE Euronext Inc would be another beneficiary if U.S. 
investors can more easily trade international securities.  Canadian 
officials realize that as yet no date has been set for commission 
consideration of the proposed rule change, which SEC Chairman Cox 
previewed in a December 19th speech at Columbia University. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Canadian analysts believe the TSX would win mutual 
recognition approval from the SEC under the new rules, though 
investor demand for quick access to European markets and concerns 
about dealing with Canada's multiple securities regulators could put 
Canada farther down the list for mutual recognition by the SEC than 
some other regulatory jurisdictions.  If the rules change, the TSX 
expects to gain more U.S. investors, which would increase the 
exchange's trading volumes and fee revenue.  Mutual recognition 
could also make it easier to persuade global companies (especially 
in the commodities sector) to list shares on the TSX.  Mutual 
recognition of securities regulations also could help Canadian 
"snowbird" investors who winter in the U.S. to avoid technical 
violations of U.S. securities laws when they trade Canadian-listed 
securities while residing in the U.S. 
 
---------------- 
TSX -- MX Merger 
 
SIPDIS 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Market watchers are optimistic that the proposed merger 
between the TSX and the Montreal Exchange (MX), Canada's leading 
derivatives exchange (ref (B)), will be approved, creating a new 
Toronto-based market entity called the "TMX Group."  A TSX contact 
told us that the announced February departure of TSX CEO Richard 
Nesbitt will not slow the deal.  Under the terms of the C$1.3 
billion deal, the TSX Group will indirectly acquire all of the MX's 
outstanding common shares.  On November 29, the TSX Group was valued 
at around C$3.5 billion and Montreal Exchange Inc. was valued at 
about C$1.1 billion on the TSX.  The Ontario Securities Commission 
(OSC) will oversee the new Toronto-based TMX entity, while the 
derivatives piece of the business, still based in Montreal, will be 
overseen by Quebec's Autorit des marchs financiers (AMF). 
 
TORONTO 00000013  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Financial sector analysts reportedly see Nesbitt's 
departure as opening the way for Luc Bertrand, the Ontario-born 
francophone head of the MX, currently slated to be deputy of the 
combined exchange, to instead be named CEO.  Analysts speculate that 
naming Bertrand to the CEO job might also allay Quebec political 
concerns about the deal.  Bertrand's previous experience with the 
Boston Options Exchange could also help the combined exchange expand 
its business south of the border.  The TSX/MX merger still requires 
approvals from TSX shareholders; a quorum of MX shareholders (a 
special MX shareholder meeting is scheduled for mid-February); the 
OSC; the AMF, which plans to hold two days of hearings in late 
February or early March; the Canadian federal Competition Bureau; 
and the SEC. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Single Securities Regulator Update 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Critics point to Canada's fragmented capital regulatory 
system, separated by provincial and territorial boundaries (ref 
(B)), as a continuing barrier to "free trade" in securities, and 
European, Canadian, and U.S. media have speculated that European 
jurisdictions may receive SEC mutual recognition approval before 
Canada does.  An OSC contact explained to us that the mutual 
recognition initiative, while led by Ontario in partnership with 
Quebec, is actually a Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA) 
initiative.  The contact said the 13 provincial and territorial 
members of the CSA ((ref (B)) are very supportive of the efforts 
needed to position Canada for mutual recognition.  The consolidation 
of the Canadian market through the TSX/MX merger is expected to 
increase cooperation between Canadian regulatory jurisdictions, 
which the OSC believes may move Canada closer to common securities 
regulation (reftels). 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  Our OSC contact said OSC believes the SEC is 
likely to test the waters first with jurisdictions whose regulatory 
structure are most comparable to the United States.  Given the 
sectoral niche markets of North America -- large caps on the NYSE, 
tech stocks on the NASDAQ, energy and mining stocks on the TSX, and 
small-micro caps on the TSX Venture Exchange in Calgary - some here 
believe it would make sense to "streamline" North American markets 
by easing cross-border securities trading before focusing on Europe. 
 Canadian market operators and regulators recognize the value of 
easing cross-border securities trade restrictions and hope Canada 
will be one of the initial jurisdictions slated for mutual 
recognition, although they recognize that the SEC has offered no 
details as to timing or likely market priority when it actually 
moves to ease the rules regarding U.S. trades on foreign exchanges. 
Canadian securities regulators are highly motivated and would make 
good partners for the SEC to ensure a successful transition to 
mutual recognition of securities regulation across the U.S.-Canada 
border. END COMMENT. 
 
NAY