05ANKARA1777
TIP IN TURKEY: Interior Ministry reports details on
Mon Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001777 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: Interior Ministry reports details on 
recent TIP investigations 
 
 
¶1. (U) During a March 3 meeting with Mehmet Terzioglu, the 
  Interior Ministry's Head of the Department for 
  Foreigners, Borders, and Asylum, we requested information 
  on the following trafficking in persons cases appearing 
  recently in the Turkish media.  The response received is 
  provided below, translated by local FSN employees. 
 
¶2. (U) BEGIN TEXT:We received information that a Kyrgyz 
citizen woman named Aida and a man kept some foreign women 
by force at Eminonu Guvenlik Street, Senturkler Apartment, 
No: 45, Kumkapi, Istanbul and in the evenings these women 
were sold to men. An operation was carried out on March 12, 
¶2005.  As a result, the following happened: 
 
Saneddin Vural, who was born in Mus in 1971 to the couple 
Suleyman/Sabriye; 
Olena Kut, who was born in the Ukraine in 1977 but later 
assumed Turkish citizenship and was registered in Kastamonu; 
Olga Konuk, who is a Russian citizen but registered in 
Hatay; 
Dinara Amankulova, who was born in Kyrgyzstan in 1975 were 
found in the apartment. 
 
Amankulova stated that there were other Kyrgyz women working 
for a woman called Aida.  Following this information Kyrgyz 
citizens: 
Nurgul Tokonbaeva; 
Roza Raeva; 
Zinagol Toichieva were captured. 
 
During meetings later with Amankulova, it was learned that 
Aida moved to another address about 10-15 days ago.  She 
said that she could show the address (apartment).  It was 
determined that this address was Cakiraga District, Abdullah 
Cavus Street, next to Saglam Hotel.  At this address we 
captured the following: 
Gulanda Sasykbaeva, who is a Kyrgyz citizen; 
Gulzada Musabeeva, who is a Kyrgyz citizen; 
Dina Joroeva, who was born in 1984 and is a Kyrgyz citizen 
and who is also known as Aida. 
 
Among these people, we found out that the victims were: 
Dinara Amankulova; 
Nazgul Tokonbaeva; 
Roza Raeva; 
Zinagol Toichieva. 
 
In their testimony they stated that they were sent to 
Istanbul from Kyrgyzstan by Aygul, the older sister of Dina 
Joroeva, to serve as nannies and for cleaning houses. 
 
They also stated that they were forced into human 
trafficking by Dina Joroeva, Fahriye Bilic, Burhan Topuz, 
Gulanda Sasykbaeva and Ferhat, Ilyas, Mahabbat (whose full 
names not known), as well as by police officers Ali Satirli 
and Ali Toprak. 
 
They filed complaints against those people and sued them. 
 
Gulzada Musabeeva said that she came to our country for 
being involved in prostitution voluntarily, that she wanted 
to earn money, and that she was not complaining or suing 
anyone.  Upon this development: 
 
Dina Joroeva and Gulanda Sasykbaeva were arrested for being 
involved in international human trafficking (TPC Article 
201/b) and policeman from Eminonu Police Station Ali Toprak 
was arrested for assisting international human trafficking. 
They were put in jail. 
 
Operations are underway in order to capture Fahriye Bilici, 
police officer from Eminonu Police Station Ali Satirli, 
Burhan Topuz, and Ferhat, Ilyas and Mahabbat (whose full 
names are not known). 
 
Operations are underway for Gulzada Musabeeva, who came to 
Turkey voluntarily for prostitution, to leave our country. 
 
Dinara Amankulova, Nazgul Tokonbaeva, Reza Raeva and Zinagol 
Toichieva, who are the victims of human trafficking, were 
taken under protection and necessary operations are underway 
for putting them in the shelter in Istanbul. 
 
-------------------------- 
 
Upon information that Uzbek citizen Umurzakovna and Nargiza 
Osmanova, born to Nazire in Taskent in 1980 were involved in 
human trafficking, we arrested six people. 
 
We learned that the victim was forced into prostitution 
earlier in Antalya and later was sold (to someone) in 
Mersin.  Ozmanova, accompanied by officials, was sent to 
Antalya. 
 
Following operations in Antalya, we found out the following: 
 
A criminal gang that calls itself "Empire of Paradise" was 
deceiving women coming from abroad to Turkey and forcing 
them into prostitution.  If women resisted, then they were 
threatening them that they would be shot.  They forced the 
women into working by using torture.  The gang took away the 
passports of these women. 
 
In coordination with the TNP HQs, the Antalya and Mersin 
police jointly conducted an operation on January 3, 2005 and 
the following happened: 
 
Seventeen of the 25 people involved in the gang were 
detained.  Four were already in jail for other crimes.  The 
remaining four were at large and are still being searched 
for. 
 
In the searches at the four places used as brothels by these 
people and during the searches on their bodies, we found: 
- Three pistols of different caliber and brand; 
- Twenty-one cartridges for these pistols; 
- A knife; 
- Note pads on which they wrote down their daily revenue; 
- Two passports that belong to the two foreign women. 
 
During the operation, the following foreign women who were 
victims and were kept by force were rescued: 
Nargiza Yusupova, who is a Turkmenistan citizen; 
Olena Lidvinenko, who is a Ukrainian citizen; 
Tatyana Marchyk, who is a Ukrainian citizen. 
 
As a result of judicial works on these people, eleven of 
them were arrested and seven were set free to be tried on 
release. 
 
The victims were put in the shelter in Istanbul on January 
13, 2005. 
 
Tatyana Marchyk on February 4, and Nargiza Yusupova on 
February 18 were sent to their countries safely through 
cooperation with IOM. 
 
Olena Lidvinenko and Nargiza Yakupova are currently still in 
the shelter and their needs are met there. 
 
The Antalya Heavy Penal Court Number 1 at a session on March 
1, 2005, ruled for the continuation of the arrest status of 
the eleven suspects.  The court also ruled for the search to 
continue to capture the fugitive suspects.  It adjourned the 
case. END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN