05HALIFAX65
PORT SECURITY:  PROPOSED CHANGES IN HALIFAX GENERATE
Fri Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT ASEC PTER KCRM ETRD CA
SUBJECT: PORT SECURITY:  PROPOSED CHANGES IN HALIFAX GENERATE 
CONTROVERSY 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Press reports that the Port of Halifax is planning 
significant reductions in the number of police assigned to 
security have generated significant local controversy, with 
politicians including the Mayor and a federal Senator denouncing 
the proposal.  While it is correct that the port is 
re-negotiating its contract with Halifax Regional Police (HRP) 
and is seeking changes in the policing services HRP provides, it 
appears that the press got a part of the story but not all of 
it.  We remain convinced that management at the port definitely 
"gets it" when it comes to security and is seeking to spend its 
security money more efficiently, not cut it back. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  CG had a long discussion with Port of Halifax VP for 
Security George Malec the day the story about security cutbacks 
broke in the local press.  Malec was emphatic that, far from 
reducing security, the port had spent millions over the last 
three years and was not planning to cut the amount spent 
annually for police protection.  He made the following points: 
 
--  Halifax is the only port in Canada that has armed police 
with arrest powers on the premises at all times.  Other ports 
use contract security services. 
 
--  The port is renegotiating its contract with the HRP.  The 
previous contract negotiated three years ago had nine officers 
working on shifts to provide 24 hour coverage. 
 
--  The port pays around C$1 million/year for this coverage, and 
is growing unsatisfied with the people who were being assigned 
to it by the HRP.  "Not always the most aggressive police 
officers in town," is how Malec diplomatically put it.  The port 
is determined in the new contract to move away from the 
"cops-riding-in-cars- eating-donuts-at-all-hours" model to one 
that is more focused on possible security vulnerabilities. 
 
--  In the last three years the port has spent about C$5 million 
on improved physical security including fencing, sensors and 
cameras, all of which are now monitored centrally.  As a result 
there is reduced need for police vehicle patrols.  In addition 
the port bought a high-tech, fast patrol boat that they have 
given to the police department and want to see used for more 
aggressive patrolling on the water. 
 
--  The port will continue to have armed police dockside when 
cruise ships call. 
 
--  An eight member Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
intelligence/undercover team is now housed at the port. 
Relations with the Halifax Police port detachment and the RCMP 
have apparently not been particularly good.  Improving the 
working relationship is one goal of the new contract with HRP. 
 
--  The port will continue to spend around C$1million/year on 
its policing contract, but will be spending the money 
differently (and it hopes more effectively).  For example, the 
port intends to get the police out of their cars and have them 
posted at the truck gates checking driver ID and documents for 
every container leaving.  This will make Halifax the only port 
in the country with police officers with arrest powers at the 
gates whenever they are open. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Malec was also critical of the allocation of federal 
government money for port security.  Of the more than C$20 
million announced about a year ago for improved security, 
Halifax has received to date C$220,000, despite spending 
millions on improvements directly related to security. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  We and other USG officials who have met 
with senior port management have been very impressed with the 
"no-nonsense" attitude toward security that pervades the 
organization's culture.  Port management clearly understands the 
multiple negative implications of a significant security breach 
and has sought every opportunity to cooperate with USG efforts 
to improve security for containers that pass through the port, 
as well as for the primarily American cruise ship passengers who 
arrive every summer.  We are confident that the port's efforts 
are well-conceived and well-focused.  END COMMENT. 
 
HILL