05ISTANBUL470
DELIVERY OF NOTE REQUESTING OBSERVER STATUS TO THE
Mon Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000470 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECIN ETTC KFPC KTIA TU XG
SUBJECT: DELIVERY OF NOTE REQUESTING OBSERVER STATUS TO THE 
BLACK SEA ECONOMIC COOPERATION COUNCIL (BSEC) 
 
REF: A. STATE 43828 
 
     ¶B. ANKARA 398 
     ¶C. STATE 4274 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
This message was coordinated with Embassy Ankara. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Post delivered diplomatic note contained in ref A 
para 5 to the International Secretariat of the Black Sea 
Economic Cooperation Council on Wednesday, March 23.  In P/E 
Chief's meeting later that day with the organization's 
Secretary General, Ambassador Tedo Japaridze, his three 
 
SIPDIS 
deputies, and the organization's legal advisor, Japaridze us 
he welcomed the U.S. application and promised that it will be 
given speedy consideration.  He and his staff confirmed the 
procedure outlined in ref A, para 4, noting that the U.S. 
application had already been circulated to the capitals of 
BSEC members.  He encouraged the United States to undertake 
its own bilateral demarches in hose capitals in support of 
its application.  Headded that the timing is fortuitous, in 
that the pplication can be addressed at an upcoming meeting 
of Senior Officials on April 20, and then by the 
organization's Counci itself.  He confirmed tha Cunil 
apprval mut be by a consensus of all emes.  nce 
granted, observer status is valid fr two years, after which 
it must be renewed by te Council. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Japaridze and his colleagus did note one potential 
complicating factor, thugh he was at pains to characterize 
it as a techicality that should be overcome witout 
ifficut.  He explained that whilethere re currently a 
number of observ 
s, incluing Egypt, Poland, Germany and 
France, the Council has not approved any new applications for 
observer status since 2002.  At that time, he said, the 
Council was faced with a large number of applications, and 
decided that "clear criteria" should be established by which 
they could be judged.  (BSEC rules currently state only that 
an observer should make a "practical and valuable" 
contribution to the organization's work.)  In the intervening 
three years, no progress in establishing such criteria has 
been registered, and consequently nine applications for 
observer status are currently pending.  Japaridze noted that 
it is up to the council's chair to initiate the work to 
establish the criteria (Greece's term will end in May; it 
will be followed by Moldova, Romania, Russia and Turkey, each 
serving consecutive six month terms), but that there is no 
indication of a "readiness to do so" at the present time. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Japaridze predicted that the U.S. application will 
be a catalyst that will either break the logjam or lead to a 
political decision to grant the U.S. observer status and 
thereby "jump the queue."  Such a decision was taken in the 
past for France, and BSEC has also taken the political 
decision to continue to renew the status of its existing 
observers. 
ARNETT