05LIMA1344
U) DRUG TRAFFICKING AND DRUG MARKETS IN PERU
Mon Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 LIMA 001344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2030 
TAGS: PINR SNAR PE EXIM
SUBJECT: (U) DRUG TRAFFICKING AND DRUG MARKETS IN PERU 
(C-CN5-00090) 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 34029 
     ¶B. LIMA 1171 
     ¶C. 04 ...

id: 29245
date: 3/21/2005 16:18
refid: 05LIMA1344
origin: Embassy Lima
classification: SECRET//NOFORN
destination: 03LIMA5174|04LIMA5755|05LIMA1171|05SECSTATE34029
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 LIMA 001344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2030 
TAGS: PINR SNAR PE EXIM
SUBJECT: (U) DRUG TRAFFICKING AND DRUG MARKETS IN PERU 
(C-CN5-00090) 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 34029 
     ¶B. LIMA 1171 
     ¶C. 04 LIMA 5755 
     ¶D. 03 LIMA 5174 
 
Classified By: Polcouns Alexander Margulies.  Reason:  1.4(c). 
 
¶1.  (U)  The responses in this cable reference the questions 
posed in Ref A. 
 
¶A.  (S)  Describe cocaine trafficking organizations in Peru? 
Do they typically specialize in one drug activity?  What is 
their average size?  How are they structured?  Are they 
vertically or horizontally integrated? 
 
--  Until the mid-1990s, Peruvian and Colombian traffickers 
generally shipped multi-ton quantities of cocaine base via 
air directly from the jungle labs of Peru's coca leaf source 
zones to Colombia for conversion to cocaine HCL.  The 
combination of air interdiction, law enforcement efforts, and 
the enormous expansion of coca leaf production in Colombia 
led to a reduction in coca leaf production in Peru.  The 
successful air interdiction also prompted Peruvian 
traffickers to begin processing cocaine base into cocaine HCL 
and to develop new markets (Brazil).  Peruvian traffickers 
also reached out to Mexican drug trafficking organizations to 
bypass the Colombian intermediaries.  In recent years, the 
success of Plan Colombia eradication has increased the demand 
for Peruvian cocaine production.  Since the mid-1990s, 
Mexican trafficking organizations have transported multi-ton 
quantities of Peruvian cocaine to Mexico by maritime routes, 
with the U.S. and other countries as final destinations. 
Most of these organizations have been identified as Mexican 
Consolidated Priority Organization Target List (CPOT) 
operating independently of Colombian trafficking 
organizations. 
 
--  Cocaine trafficking organizations in Peru are 
decentralized and operate in a horizontal manner.  They 
appear to be primarily based on clan or family ties. 
Narcotraffickers have their agents purchase coca leaf and 
base from individual farmers (cocaleros) or cocalero clans. 
We are seeing a greater production of cocaine base in small 
Peruvian mom-and-pop operations.  Narcotrafficking groups 
exist in a horizontal network, and traffickers seeking 
product for export will often purchase cocaine HCL from other 
groups in order to amass the desired quantity for shipment. 
No one cocaine trafficking group dominates the trade from the 
coca field to the export platform. 
 
--  The Oscar Rodriguez Gomez organization in Ayacucho offers 
a good example of how a clan narcotrafficking organization is 
structured and operates.  Rodriguez has a history of 
providing cocaine HCL and base from the Apurimac-Ene River 
Valley (VRAE) region to Colombian and Ecuadoran buyers.  He 
utilizes family members to conduct all important facets of 
his operation from the acquisition of precursor chemicals to 
the oversight of the laboratory used to convert cocaine base 
into HCL, as well as transporting funds into Peru and 
exporting the finished product out of the country.  Not all 
of the people employed by Rodriguez are family members.  He 
also retains an attorney to conduct the organization's money 
laundering activities through "straw" purchases of properties 
and businesses. 
 
--  Opium trafficking appears to be based on clan or 
family-based organizations, with no dominant group.  Opium 
poppy cultivation, the production of opium latex and 
morphine, is primarily concentrated in the north-central part 
of Peru, with some poppy cultivation also reported in the 
Huallaga valley (a coca source zone).  There is no/no 
evidence of a strong linkage between opium and cocaine 
producers in Peru. 
 
¶B.  (S)  Who are the major cocaine traffickers in Peru?  What 
are their nationalities?  How large are their organizations? 
 
--  Fernando Zevallos Gonzalez, who was named a a Drug 
Kingpin last June, has long been the major drug 
trafficker/money launderer of Peruvian nationality (RefD). 
Other significant traffickers in the Peruvian context include 
Oscar Rodriguez Gomez, Napoleon Zamora-Melgarejo 
(Peruvian-based), Manuel Rivera-Niebla (Mexican-based), and 
Miguel Arevalo-Ramirez (Peruvian, Mexican, U.S.-based). 
Additional information related to investigations of these 
traffickers should be sought from DEA HQ.  There do not 
appear to be any large-scale trafficking organizations on the 
scale of the Colombian cartels.  Rather there exists a 
horizontal web of traffickers who deal with each other, and 
who are available for recruitment by Mexican and Colombian 
organizations to assemble cocaine HCL and cocaine base for 
export. 
 
¶C.  (S)  What role to Colombian and Mexican cocaine 
traffickers play in Peru's drug trade?  At what point do 
Mexican and Colombian traffickers establish ownership over 
Peruvian or Bolivian cocaine?  How often do they finance 
cocaine loads up front?  How do they pay for the services of 
Peruvian drug groups? 
 
--  Colombian and Mexican cocaine traffickers create the 
demand for cocaine HCL and base in Peru.  The Colombians 
appear to be more willing to advance money for cocaine 
deliveries, or to pay once the cocaine is delivered within 
Peru, whilst the Mexicans seem to prefer to pay once the 
cocaine is delivered to Mexico.  The arrest of several 
Mexican traffickers in recent major drug busts indicates that 
the Mexican organizations are involved in preparing the 
cocaine for shipment from Peru to Mexico. 
 
¶D.  (S)  How is cocaine base brokered in Peru?  Are there 
cocaine base markets similar to in Colombia? 
 
--  As described above, cocaine base is either produced by 
the narcotrafficking organizations themselves, or 
increasingly, is bought directly from cocaleros who establish 
maceration pits on their farms.  Cocaine base and cocaine HCL 
is commonly bought and sold between trafficking 
organizations.  There are also anecdotal reports of cocaine 
base being used as currency in coca growing areas. 
 
¶E.  (S)  How much cocaine base is processed into finished 
cocaine in Peru and how much is transported to other 
countries for processing?  How much cocaine base is 
transported directly to Mexico or Colombia for further 
processing? 
 
--  Whereas through the early 1990s Peru mostly exported 
cocaine base to Colombia, in recent years traffickers began 
producting cocaine HCL in Peru for export to Mexico and 
Europe by maritime routes, and to Colombia, Bolivia and 
Brazil by land and riverine routes.  The following chart of 
Peruvian National Police seizures illustrates this shift: 
 
 
--          Seizures of Cocaine HCL and Base in Metric Tons 
               2002     2003     2004     2005(Jan-March) 
 
HCL             3.2      3.25     7.11     4.48 
 
Base            8.4      3.76     5.76     0.5 
 
The extent to which the cocaine HCL being exported requires 
further processing is unknown at this time, but DEA will be 
addressing this issue in its "Breakthrough Study," which is 
scheduled to commence in August. 
 
¶F.  (S)  What trends characterize prices for cocaine base and 
cocaine HCL in Peru? 
 
--  While the price for cocaine base and HCL appears to be 
rising recently, there are no steady long-term trends 
concerning the price for cocaine base and cocaine HCL in 
Peru.  The price depends upon a number of factors and can 
vary region-by-region:  the price for coca leaf in Bolivia 
and Peru; the price for precursor chemicals; the overall 
demand for cocaine base and HCL in the particular region; law 
enforcement efforts in the area; and the amount being 
purchased at one time.  We have seen prices in regions vary 
by up to 50 percent from one month to the next.  The general 
price range in Peru is from $1000-1500 for a kilo of HCL. 
 
¶G.  (S)  How do drug groups in Peru launder their funds? 
Where do they keep or invest their illicit income? 
 
--  The Zevallos organization laundered funds through its 
now-defunct airline, Aero Continente.  That and other 
narcotrafficking organizations also employ various other 
means to launder funds, including bulk money smuggling; the 
hundreds of poorly regulated casinos in Lima and other 
Peruvian cities; and investment in tangible assets such as 
properties, businesses and conveyances.  Peruvian coca 
growers and traffickers occupy the low-profit 
production/processing end of the business, while Mexicans and 
Colombians reap most of the profits from the higher-value 
transport and wholesaling of the drugs to/in the U.S., Europe 
and Brazil.  Consequently, the profits earned by Peruvian 
traffickers is often small enough to launder without danger 
of it appearing on law enforcement agencies' radar screens. 
The de facto dollarization of Peru's economy, as well as its 
largely informal nature, also facilitates the laundering of 
narcotrafficking proceeds.  (See Post's INCSR submission on 
Financial Crimes and Money Laundering in Ref C for additional 
information on money laundering). 
STRUBLE 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================