05QUITO592
ECUADOR,S NEW ENVIRONMENTAL MINISTER MORE
Tue Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 000592 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL EC SEVN
SUBJECT: ECUADOR,S NEW ENVIRONMENTAL MINISTER MORE 
POLITICAL THAN ENVIRONMENTAL 
 
REF: QUITO 0540 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  President Gutierrez named Juan Carlos 
Camacho as the new Minister of the Environment on February 
24, replacing the beleaguered Fabian Valdivieso.  Camacho has 
no real environmental experience and was given the position 
to assuage the block of independent congressmen who hold the 
balance in Congress.  Camacho is a political operator who is 
working for fishing interests in the Galapagos in order to 
secure their vote for the President.  He has also promised to 
take action on renewing the contract of a Swiss firm that was 
monitoring illegal logging in Ecuador.  At two different 
meetings (Reftel), President Gutierrez called for a balanced, 
sustainable solution to the Galapagos crisis.  While we are 
optimistic about the President,s words, we are wary of 
Camacho,s alliances with the fishing sector.  End Summary. 
 
-------------- 
Bio Says A Lot 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Juan Carlos Camacho is more than anything a 
politician.  He was twice a congressional representative for 
Bolivar province ) first for the Concentracion de Fuerzas 
Populares (CFP) from 1988 to 1990, and then for the Izquierda 
Democratica (ID), from 1992 to 1994.  During his second term, 
he left the ID and became an independent. 
 
¶3. (U) In October 1994, then-legislators Simon Bustamante and 
Rafael Cuesta accused Camacho of being &the briefcase man8 
for the independents, implying that he was dispersing the 
cash used to buy the votes of independent congressmen. 
Camacho denies these allegations. 
 
¶4. (U) Camacho has no environmental experience except that, 
as he put it in a post-nomination interview, he &has planted 
trees with his own hands8 and &has a clear notion of what 
clean air is.8 
 
-------------------------- 
Courtesy Call Reveals More 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The DCM and USAID Director paid a courtesy call to 
Camacho on March 8.  The DCM congratulated Camacho on his new 
position and said the Embassy stood ready to help him conquer 
some of the many difficult problems he will confront. 
Galapagos was the Embassy,s top environmental concern and we 
were encouraged by the President,s recent attention to the 
Galapagos crisis and call for a 30-day plan to resolve it 
(Reftel).  The DCM delivered our baseline message to Camacho 
-) that the Galapagos crisis is Ecuador,s to solve and that 
the international community wants to help Ecuador achieve its 
goals.  The DCM also urged Camacho to quickly address park 
management instability, monitoring and enforcement in the 
marine reserve, income-generating alternatives for fishermen 
and illegal immigration. 
 
¶6. (U) Camacho said he understood the need for action in the 
Galapagos and that he would take action, unlike his 
predecessor, who he admitted did not like to make decisions. 
Camacho would like to reform the Galapagos Special Law in 
order to stabilize and depoliticize the Galapagos National 
Park (GNP) Directorship.  He rejected the DCM,s suggestion 
(as per the UNDP/IDB/USAID consultants hired to analyze this 
problem) that it could be done by presidential decree. 
Camacho admitted that there is a lot of politics surrounding 
the Galapagos, suggesting that he too was involved.  He said 
he would meet with the Ministers of Tourism and Government 
soon, to reach a unified position on the Galapagos.  He also 
said that violent demonstrations in the Galapagos need to 
stop.  They damage the image of the islands and serve no one. 
 
¶7. (U) The USAID Director noted the USG,s $10 million 
investment in the Galapagos.  He also agreed with Camacho 
that dialogue is important among the players, and to that end 
the fishing sector needs to rejoin the Junta de Manejo 
Participativo (JMP - a Galapagos planning and advisory board 
comprised of the conservation, tourism, government and 
fishing sector representatives).  The fishing sector walked 
away from the JMP years ago citing conservation as the 
exclusive goal of the body.  Camacho accepted the invitation 
from the USAID Director for a full briefing on USAID programs. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The USAID Director also raised concern about the 
GOE,s failure to renew its contract with the Swiss firm SGS. 
 SGS was given a contract in 1999 to monitor illegal logging 
in Ecuador.  In 2003, bowing to pressure from powerful 
logging interest, the offices of SGS were closed and its 
contract allowed to expire.  The parties resolved outstanding 
legal problems and the GOE agreed to renew SGS,s contract. 
However, the GOE now claims it lacks the finances to renew 
the contract.  Though, we believe the problem is more the 
lack of political will than finances. 
 
¶9. (U) The DCM emphasized the extensive international 
interest in the Galapagos.  The Ambassador has been there on 
numerous occasions; several US Senators (notably Dodd and 
McCain) have been there, as has former President Jimmy 
Carter.  The previous Minister of the Environment had visited 
the Carter Center to lay the groundwork for an international 
forum.  We stood ready to work with Camacho in that regard, 
the DCM added. 
---------------------------------------- 
Meeting with Donors Confirms Our Opinion 
---------------------------------------- 
¶10. (U) Acting on the President,s orders (Reftel), Camacho 
convoked a meeting of donors.  He started the meeting by 
saying that we must avoid any future strikes in the 
Galapagos, but added that the fishermen in the Galapagos have 
threatened to demonstrate if the sea cucumber season remains 
closed this month (March) without a viable income-generating 
alternative for them.  The fishermen are pushing for 
long-line fishing as the desired alternative, otherwise come 
March 20 they will take to the streets. 
 
¶11. (U) The Spanish representative spoke eloquently about the 
problems in the Galapagos ) institutional instability, the 
need for sustainable development, illegal immigration ) but 
said that harvesting sea cucumbers and long-line fishing were 
certainly not the answer.  The other donors said that they 
wholeheartedly agreed with this assessment and noted that the 
March 20 strike date left little time for finding a lasting 
solution.  The Interamerican Development Bank (IDB) 
representative suggested that the GOE put the artesenal fish 
processing centers they funded, which are fully constructed, 
into production.  This could be done quickly and the products 
could be sold to tourists.  Others tossed out medium-term 
ideas for fishing alternatives.  One idea was to auction 
fishing permits to sport-fishing operators for tourists.  The 
permits would be limited in number, but tradeable.  Others 
spoke of raising park entrance fees and putting the proceeds 
in a fund to establish fishermen in other occupations.  The 
donors suggested that we get all the players together (to 
include fishing and tourism sector representatives) to 
brainstorm and agree on specific measures. 
 
¶12. (U) Though he listened, Camacho made no commitments, 
emphasizing that he is still in the learning process.  He 
added that his predecessor did not leave good files on the 
Galapagos and that there was no one to advise him.  He 
requested that Fundacion Natura and the Charles Darwin 
Foundation comment on fishing alternative proposals presented 
to the President during his trip to the Galapagos. 
 
¶13. (U) Despite his professed steep learning curve, Camacho 
was prepared enough to present a proposal.  As the meeting 
ended, he circulated his own proposed presidential decree 
that would require all tourists who visit the Galapagos to 
spend at least one night on land, would open the marine 
reserve to sport fishing, and (in an apparent jab at tourism 
magnate Roque Sevilla) would prohibit the use of submarines, 
or any kind of submersible naval vessel in the marine reserve 
(Sevilla wants to offer submarine tours in the Galapagos). 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) The appointment of Camacho portends of further 
political expediency in the Galapagos.  Camacho is aligned 
with the independent vote, and is rumored to owe his 
appointment to (former PSC) Independent diputado San Martin, 
who led the effort to dismantle the forestry control system. 
He and Vinicio Andrade, the pro-fishing diputado from the 
Galapagos, whose vote the President has courted, have also 
laid out a clear agenda in support of fishing interests in 
the Galapagos. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Camacho,s proposed presidential decree lacks 
balance, feasibility and ultimately will only minimally 
benefit fishermen.  Our task will be to educate and guide 
Camacho toward more sustainable alternatives.  The 
President,s recent focus on Galapagos and public 
pronouncements give us cause for hope, but we need to see 
concrete actions.  The Ambassador will also sign a joint 
communiqu to the MFA asking that the SGS issue be resolved 
as soon as possible, as the treatment SGS received does not 
bode well for other environmental NGOs operating in Ecuador. 
KENNEY