05SANAA478
DENGUE FEVER OUTBREAK IN YEMEN
Sun Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 000478 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE - PLEASE PASS TO CDC. AMMAN - PLEASE PASS TO JOCK 
WHITTLESLEY. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO AMED YM
SUBJECT: DENGUE FEVER OUTBREAK IN YEMEN 
 
REF: MARCH 3 EMAIL FROM CDC CLARK TO SANAA RMO HOFER 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See para. 5. 
 
¶2.  A dengue fever outbreak has afflicted the port cities of 
Hodeidah and Mokha on the western coast of Yemen and the 
surrounding coastal area beginning mid-January.  Exact 
numbers are difficult to ascertain, and governmental, press, 
and WHO estimates of the number of cases vary.  According to 
English language weekly "The Yemen Times," the Ministry of 
Public Health and Population and the World Health 
Organization (WHO) both denied reports that 30 people have 
died in Hodeidah.  World Health Organization Yemen 
representative Dr. Hashim al-Zein, who visited Hodeidah March 
1, told the press most suspected cases occurred in or around 
the city, which is susceptible to ship born diseases from the 
Horn of Africa.  Post is trying to contact the WHO 
representative for more information. 
 
¶3. With no specific treatment for dengue infection, any 
outbreak of this mosquito-borne disease is a serious 
international public health concern.  According to the WHO, 
dengue fever is usually a severe, flu-like illness that 
affects infants, young children and adults, causing death in 
5 percent of those treated.  Without proper treatment, the 
fatality rate of the potential complication, dengue 
hemorrhagic fever, can exceed 20 percent.  Yemen's health 
services network does not have adequate resources to mount a 
mosquito eradication campaign, nor the resources to 
systematically identify and treat suspected cases when they 
occur. 
 
¶4. USAID Sanaa Senior Health Advisor Dr. Ahmed Attieg 
believes the outbreak began in late December or early January 
in the Zabid District, north of the Port of Mokha on the Red 
Sea.  The Central Laboratory in Sanaa reported on March 5 
that of 113 samples taken from suspected Dengue cases, 72 
were found positive for the disease and 7 are confirmed dead. 
 Regional Medical Officer (RMO) discussed the outbreak with 
Deputy Minister of Health Dr. Abbas Al-Motawakel, who 
believes there are between 42 to 49 cases of dengue fever in 
the Hodeidah region.  RMO contacted Center for Disease 
Control (CDC) Dengue Branch Chief on March 2.  CDC was only 
able to confirm two cases of dengue fever in Hodeidah. 
 
¶5. Post requests guidance from CDC on cost-effective ways to 
address the dengue fever issue.  RMO recommends Mission 
personnel avoid traveling to the Hodeidah region until better 
estimates on the scale of the outbreak are available.  If 
travel is unavoidable, personnel should take mosquito bite 
avoidance precautions, such as applying bug repellent.  Post 
plans to issue a warden's message to alert the American 
community. 
 
¶6. Post's POCs are: 
 
Jules Kim Johnson, Economic and Commercial Officer 
US Embassy, Sanaa, Yemen 
Tel:  011-967-1-755-2252 
Email: JohnsonJK@state.gov 
 
Dr. Curt Hofer, Regional Medical Officer 
US Embassy, Sanaa, Yemen 
Tel:  011-967-1-755-2000 
Email: HoferC@state.gov 
Khoury