05TELAVIV1267
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 001267 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Lebanon 
 
¶3.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz cited the IDF's expectation that the PA will 
act soon to replace the senior echelon in the PA's 
security services in the West Bank.  The newspaper 
quoted a senior Israeli military source as saying that 
PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas is not making personnel 
changes in the leadership of the West Bank security 
services demonstrates a lack of seriousness in the PA's 
part in fighting terrorist networks in the region.  The 
source was quoted as saying that Abbas has ousted many 
of the top brass in the security services in the Gaza 
Strip, bringing about a real improvement in the 
security situation.  Maariv led with "real" arrests of 
Islamic Jihad activists by the PA in recent days, 
following Friday's suicide bombing in Tel Aviv. 
 
All media stressed the uncovering of Qassam rockets 
near Jenin on Wednesday.  Yediot bannered: "Qassam Near 
Afula."  Israel Radio reported that a booby-trapped car 
exploded next to IDF troops in Nablus last night. 
There were no casualties. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the Likud Central Committee 
is expected to vote massively in favor of the 
compromise formula shaped by Minister-Without-Portfolio 
and committee chairman Tzachi Hanegbi, which requires a 
national referendum on disengagement. 
 
Leading media quoted Disengagement Administration head 
Yonatan Bassi as saying Wednesday that 66 (or 63, 
depending on the sources) settler families from the 
Gaza Strip have already concluded a compensation and 
evacuation agreement with his administration, although 
hundreds more families are now negotiating.  Leading 
media (main story in Jerusalem Post) reported that Vice 
Premier Shimon Peres and PA Civilian Affairs Minister 
Muhammad Dahlan met Wednesday and discussed the 
possible transfer of the Katif Bloc's hothouses to the 
Palestinians.  Israel Radio also quoted Dahlan as 
saying that he has devised a security agreement with 
Israel, which must be implemented, and that Israel is 
not respecting the commitments made at his meeting with 
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz regarding the lifting of 
roadblocks. 
 
Over the past few days, the media discussed a remark 
made by Police Insp. Gen. Moshe Karadi at Sunday's 
cabinet meeting, according to which a Jewish religious 
ruling has been issued, allowing shooting at Druze and 
Bedouin IDF soldiers participating in the disengagement 
move.  Last night, Channel 2-TV reported on a ruling by 
a Bedouin religious man that people attempting to kill 
Bedouin soldiers should be shot at. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Palestinian and Israeli 
officials who attended a meeting called by the UN 
Environmental Program (UNEP) in Helsinki decided that 
the joint environmental committee, which ceased at the 
beginning of the Intifada, will resume its work in the 
area in two months. 
 
Leading media reported that President Bush on Wednesday 
reiterated his demand that Syria withdraw from Lebanon. 
He said that the world "is speaking with one voice when 
it comes to making sure that democracy has a chance to 
flourish in Lebanon."  Jerusalem Post quoted Hizbullah 
officials as saying in interviews with the newspaper 
that Israel should have no illusions that the rise of 
the opposition tide in Lebanon, and even the possible 
departure of Syrian troops from that country, will 
smooth a path to warmer relations between Jerusalem and 
Beirut. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Abbas is slated to meet with 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Saudi FM Saud al- 
Faysal in Sharm-el-Sheikh today. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that a delegation of some 15-20 
Israelis of Libyan origin will visit Libya within the 
next couple of weeks.  This is the first time Israelis 
will travel to that country. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the U.S. is toughening its 
stance on Iran's nuclear program, following the 
publication of a report by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) that states that Iran continues to 
violate its commitments and refuses to admit inspectors 
at sites where nuclear weapons are possibly being 
developed. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that Yitschak Ben-Gad, Israel's 
new Consul-General in Miami, has recently published a 
book entitled "The Road Map to Hell."  The newspaper 
quoted Ben-Gad as saying that the publisher changed the 
book's name from "Jihad: License to Kill" against Ben- 
Gad's wishes, and that he does not believe that the 
book would harm his relations with Florida Governor Jeb 
Bush. 
 
A Dialog poll supervised by Prof. Camille Fuchs and 
conducted for Ha'aretz found that the Israeli public is 
confident that PM Sharon initiated the disengagement 
for the good of Israel, rather than because of the 
criminal investigations against him, but at the same 
time, a large majority believes that Sharon is corrupt. 
-48.6 percent: Sharon initiated the disengagement for 
reasons based on the good of Israel. 
-62 percent: Sharon is corrupt. 
-19 percent: Sharon has undergone a real ideological 
transformation with respect to the occupation. 
-12.2 percent: The reason for the disengagement 
initiative was Sharon's political troubles. 
-12.4 percent: The probes of Sharon and his sons are 
the real reason for the disengagement. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "One 
can only hope that Israel will put pressure on the 
Palestinians when it comes to matters of security, but 
will refrain at the same time from settlement activity 
that would further undermine the territorial contiguity 
of the Palestinian state to be." 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized: "Blair is 
the person who is urging the President of the U.S. to 
be forthcoming with the Palestinians and to act 
assiduously for the establishment of a Palestinian 
state." 
 
Settler leader Israel Harel wrote in Ha'aretz: "Indeed, 
and this is a message for Israel, the rulers of the 
region are now internalizing the fact that Bush is 
determined to make his declarations come true, which is 
something that cannot be said of them and their Israeli 
counterparts." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Question of Balance" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (March 
3): "The London Meeting on Tuesday dealt primarily with 
helping the Palestinians move toward establishing an 
independent and democratic state.  But one cannot 
ignore the determined commitment to implementing the 
road map that was expressed by all those who 
attended.... The reactions in Jerusalem to the London 
Meeting conclusions and the statements by Condoleezza 
Rice on the expectations for progress along the road 
map track following the disengagement were mixed.  On 
the one hand, justified concerned was expressed with 
regard to the fact that the London Meeting failed to 
place sufficient emphasis on the Palestinians' fight 
against terror.  On the other hand, both Sharon and his 
deputy, Ehud Olmert, reiterated Israel's commitment to 
the road map.  Minister Olmert justifiably said that 
the London Meeting declarations could not be set apart 
from the events in the field -- namely, the terror 
attacks.  One can only hope that Israel will put 
pressure on the Palestinians when it comes to matters 
of security, but will refrain at the same time from 
settlement activity that would further undermine the 
territorial contiguity of the Palestinian state to be." 
 
II.  "Blair, the Palestinians' Friend" 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized (March 3): 
"British Prime Minister Tony Blair is an enthusiastic 
supporter of the Palestinians.  Moreover, in order to 
repel the criticism aired against him from within his 
own party ranks about his too cozy relationship with 
U.S. President George Bush, he wants to pay a heavy 
price, at Israel's expense.  Not only that, Blair is 
the person who is urging the President of the U.S. to 
be forthcoming with the Palestinians and to act 
assiduously for the establishment of a Palestinian 
state.  Abu Mazen emerged from the London conference 
with many assets in hand.  He was 'painted' a rosy hue 
for the consumption of British and European public 
opinion, and he also received far-reaching promises to 
rehabilitate the Palestinian Authority.  Abu Mazen, in 
practice, has not been obliged to do anything tangible 
and thorough against the terror organizations.  For 
Tony Blair and his comrades, it is enough that Abu 
Mazen air statements in condemnation of terrorism and 
make promises that he will do everything in his power 
to combat terrorism." 
 
III.  "The Dreamer" 
 
Settler leader Israel Harel wrote in Ha'aretz (March 
3): "Indeed, and this is a message for Israel, the 
rulers of the region are now internalizing the fact 
that Bush is determined to make his declarations come 
true, which is something that cannot be said of them 
and their Israeli counterparts.... Democracies, [Bush 
has] said, do not fight each other and do not provide a 
haven for terrorism.... And why, one must ask, doesn't 
the government of Israel ... adopt this doctrine and 
present it as an ultimatum to the Palestinians? After 
all, specifically now when Bush has transformed it into 
his strategic vision for the Middle East, and the 
London Conference is also pushing in that direction, 
the Palestinians will not be able to dismiss it easily. 
And this is also indeed a way, apart from a more 
credible agreement, of also gaining more courageous 
presidential support for Israel." 
 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Lebanon: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
Veteran journalist Yaron London wrote in the lead 
editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "The developments in Lebanon conceal threats 
that are larger than the hopes." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Dov Kontorer wrote in 
conservative Russian-language daily Vesty: " The mass 
demonstrations by the Lebanese opposition make Lebanon 
one of the most interesting arenas of current world 
politics." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Let Us Be Wary of Our Hopes" 
 
Veteran journalist Yaron London wrote in the lead 
editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (March 3): "The transformations in Lebanon are 
giving Israelis rare hours of satisfaction.... [It 
looks as if] through the mediation of the global 
broadcasting networks, the democratic zeal in Lebanon 
already influences other Arab societies, and as if it 
is already possible to witness President Mubarak 
somewhat loosening the grip of his dictatorship -- and 
some Syrian intellectuals encouraging their president 
to leave Lebanon.  Israelis often recall that 
democratic states have never fought against each other. 
Thus, we conclude that democratization of the Arab 
world will create a New Middle East at peace with 
Israel.  One had better cast doubts about all those 
assumptions.  The power of Syria's fans in Lebanon has 
not yet become clear; neither has it become obvious 
whether the cohesion of the [Lebanese] opposition is a 
stable political phenomenon.  Had Israel been in 
control of the agenda, it should have demanded that the 
Shi'ite militia [Hizbullah] be disarmed even before the 
Syrians complete their withdrawal.  But the Americans 
are pressed for time.  Let us conclude by saying that 
the developments in Lebanon conceal threats that are 
larger than the hopes." 
 
II.  "A Cautious Glance at the Independence 
Extravaganza in Lebanon" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Dov Kontorer wrote in 
conservative Russian-language daily Vesty (March 3): 
"The latest events in Lebanon are a unique example of 
mass political protest of the citizens in the Arab 
world.... The mass demonstrations by the Lebanese 
opposition make Lebanon one of the most interesting 
arenas of current world politics ... and are actually 
primarily connected to Bashar Assad's constraints and 
inability to use military power without the danger of a 
[subsequent] smashing American attack.... Bashar Assad 
is ... passively observing the Lebanese developments, 
which are very unfavorable for Syria, and doesn't find 
a possibility of interfering. ... If something 
endangers the Lebanese protest movement, it is not 
Syrian intervention, but the danger of an internal 
split and a ... military confrontation among the 
different religious communities ... The possibility of 
the escalation of those internal contradictions will be 
unavoidably increase towards the Parliamentary 
elections scheduled for the second part of May 2005. 
Israel is staying away from the events in Lebanon for 
several reasons: first of all, [Israel's] public 
activity would be counterproductive; secondly, because 
of a natural fear that the democratic processes in the 
Arab countries would go in the direction of 
radicalization and Islamism.... At the same time 
involving Israel in the Lebanese events is actually one 
of the Syrian interests." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Guy Bechor, a lecturer 
at the Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "[Severe] 
forecasts [about the Iranian nuclear program] are 
intolerable.... The U.S. must urgently understand that 
this is a classical case of the necessity of 
prevention." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Time Is of the Essence" 
 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Guy Bechor, a lecturer 
at the Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (March 3): "The 
news that emanated from President Bush's entourage 
during this trip to Europe is not encouraging. 
According to The Washington Post, the U.S. 
Administration has for the time being abandoned its 
militant approach vis-a-vis Iran's nuclearization, and 
it prefers instead to offer the Iranians a gift, if 
they cease their efforts to develop nuclear weapons, 
Bush himself has said: 'Iran is not Iraq,' and 
'Democracy is just beginning'.... [Severe] forecasts 
[about the Iranian nuclear program] are intolerable. 
If the foot-dragging and the light treatment continue, 
those predictions could result in an irremediable 
strategic threat that would thoroughly change the 
balances of power and nuclearization in the entire 
world.  The U.S. must urgently understand that this is 
a classical case of the necessity of prevention." 
 
KURTZER