08AITTAIPEI1622
MEDIA REACTION: G-20 SUMMIT
Tue Nov 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1622 3230834
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180834Z NOV 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0389
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8748
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0201UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: G-20 SUMMIT 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage November 18 on the Cabinet's plan to issue consumption 
vouchers to the general public; on the controversy of the four 
agreements signed recently between Taiwan and China; and on the 
state of former President Chen Shui-bian's health after Chen started 
a hunger strike subsequent to his detention.  In terms of editorials 
and commentaries, an op-ed in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" said Chinese President Hu Jintao attended the G-20 Summit 
because he wants to obtain a better understanding of U.S. 
President-elect Barack Obama and the latest U.S. political 
situation.  An editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" criticized the United States for being 
the culprit of the global financial crisis, but one can only wait 
until President-elect of the United States Barack Obama assumes 
office to solve the problem.  End summary. 
 
A) "Obama, Hu Jintao, Will There Be Sparks Coming out When They 
Meet?" 
 
Chen Yu-chun, a Taiwan academic now working as a senior research 
fellow at China's Tsinghua University, opined in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (11/18): 
 
"[Chinese President] Hu Jintao recently attended the summit 
initiated by [U.S. President George W.] Bush to tackle the financial 
crisis.  Hu did so first because of China's position in the global 
economic system nowadays, and second because he wanted to use this 
opportunity to obtain a better understanding of the latest U.S. 
political situation and to observe [U.S. president-elect] Barack 
Obama more closely.  For Hu, Obama will be his rival in wrestling 
for power over the next four years.  As a result, Obama's 
understanding of China, his views about geopolitics, U.S. power and 
the international system have all added to make Beijing feel that it 
is necessary to evaluate the possible challenges the Obama 
Administration might pose to Chinese power. ... 
 
"Finally, of course there is the Taiwan issue and the U.S. arms 
sales to Taiwan.  Even though both Beijing and Washington emphasize 
the importance peaceful dialogue across the Taiwan Strait, U.S. 
strategic interests lie with 'no unification and no independence,' 
whereas China's national strategic goal is to 'oppose independence 
and facilitate unification.'  Evidently potential dangerous clashes 
lie [ahed].  The Obama camp has stressed the importance of the 
Taiwan Relations Act, but there are two kinds of views [within the 
camp]:  One believes that [Washington] can restrain its arms sales 
to Taiwan, and the other advocates that [Washington] play the Taiwan 
card to restrain China.  Beijing, in particular the Chinese 
military, is opposed to the Taiwan Relations Act.  Even though Hu 
expressed his expectations for [the future of] Sino-U.S. relations 
when Obama was elected, both sides are still in the break-in 
process; whether sparks will fly between the two is an uncertainty 
factor." 
 
B) "Waiting for Obama to Lead" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (11/18): 
 
"The emergency meeting of world leaders in Washington over the 
weekend was a success because everybody who should be there was 
there and a failure because its goal, producing a plan to arrest the 
worsening global financial crisis, was beyond reach.  Not that the 
20 presidents or prime ministers did not have plans to tackle the 
crisis, but because the host country, the world's undisputed leader 
since WWII, did not have a clear leader to take charge -President 
Bush is leaving office in 60 days and it is unconstitutional for 
president-elect Barack Obama to step in before Bush leaves.  So the 
world's worst financial crisis in 80 years must wait. ... 
 
"The leaders also agreed that a dramatic failure of market oversight 
in 'some advanced countries' was among the root causes of the 
financial crisis, an implicit rebuke of the United States. ...  The 
final communique was significant in what it did not include.  There 
was no mention of the creation of a global financial market enforcer 
as demanded by emerging countries but opposed by the U.S." 
 
YOUNG