08ANKARA1950
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7657
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1950/01 3151540
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101540Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7959
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9295
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4986
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3382
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6966
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6818
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3387
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001950 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Commemorating the 70th Anniversary of Ataturk's Death 
Media outlets give prominent front-page feature coverage to mark the 
70th anniversary of the death of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the 
country's founding leader.  Papers cover commentaries and interviews 
in memoriam under headlines such as Sabah's "70 Years Later, Ataturk 
is still Dearly Missed," far right Ortadogu's "He Lives in the 
Hearts of 70 Million People," mainstream Hurriyet's "You Are Always 
in Our Hearts," mainstream Aksam's "You Are Living in Our Hearts," 
Islamist-oriented Zaman's "Commemorating Ataturk with Respect," and 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet's "He Cannot Be Forgotten." Anatolian 
News Agency reports, "Today, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk was commemorated 
throughout Turkey, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) 
and Turkish missions in foreign countries on the 70th anniversary of 
his demise. Daily life and traffic stopped for two minutes of 
silence that began at 9:05 a.m., the time at which Ataturk passed 
away 70 years ago. Flags across the country were flown at 
half-staff. President Abdullah Gul led a delegation of top state 
officials to a ceremony at Ataturk's mausoleum, where President Gul 
signed the mausoleum's register by saying, "We are honored to be in 
your presence in our powerful country which is a source of 
confidence and balance in its region. Turkey has gained the respect 
of the whole world with its position, power, dynamism, and 
international influence regarding global peace and stability." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Ataturk's Legacy 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Ataturk and his 
founding principles of the Turkish Republic remain a shining 
historical example.  All one has to do in order to reach this 
logical conclusion is to spend a couple of weeks in a Muslim Arab 
country or a North African country.   If Ataturk had never 
transformed Turkey, today's Turkey would no different from today's 
Morocco, Egypt or Saudi Arabia.  For this reason alone, Ataturk 
deserves our full respect." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Some people are hiding 
behind Ataturk's name as they deepen their anti-Western sentiments. 
I would suggest these people check the list of books, which is 
maintained by the National Library, that Ataturk used to read. That 
list is the source of Ataturk's inspiration to re-shape Turkey's 
political and social model.  Unfortunately, some circles today do 
not want to admit that Ataturk adopted the technical and 
institutional infrastructure of democracy, secularism and women's 
rights, not from the East but from the West.  Turkey's development 
relies today also on that infrastructure inspired by the West.  And 
that infrastructure directs Turkey's EU path.  It is important to 
realize reforms that are vital for Turkey, which is more important 
than Turkey's EU membership." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "Ataturk filled his short 
life with miracles like military victories and unbelievable civilian 
reforms.  The reason for the attacks against him today lies in the 
fact that Ataturk was the only obstacle to shaping Turkey 
accordingly to some people's personal will.  Ataturk is not only a 
flag or an idol, but the gate to modernity.  Ataturk is our national 
trust.  Any hostility directed against him is bound to be 
defeated." 
 
 
Alevi Demonstrations Criticize the AKP Government and Outline Their 
Demands 
Media outlets report around 100,000 Alevis rallied yesterday in 
Ankara, urging for the abolishment of the Sunni-dominated religious 
affairs directorate Diyanet.  Demonstrators also called on the 
government to end the construction of mosques in Alevi villages, to 
recognize traditional Alevi Cemevis as places of worship and to end 
compulsory religious eduction.  Ali Balkiz, the head of 
Alevi-Bektasi Federation, said the protests would continue.  Papers 
 
ANKARA 00001950  002 OF 003 
 
 
report opposition CHP, DSP and pro-Kurdish DTP lawmakers 
participated in the rally in a show of support.  Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak condemned the rally "for providing an opportunity for the 
DTP to propagate Kurdish demands."  Papers say the ruling AKP 
government rejected the Alevi's "extreme" demands, with State 
Minister Said Yazicioglu stating his government would "pay no 
attention" to the demands voiced in the gathering. 
 
PM Erdogan in Erzurum 
Sabah, Milliyet, Turkiye, Vatan, Hurriyet, Radikal, Zaman, 
Cumhuriyet:  PM Erdogan addressed residents of eastern province of 
Erzurum yesterday and said "We were always against ethnic and 
regional nationalism.  We remained at the same distant to all 
beliefs and never discriminated against other religions or sects," 
reports mainstream Hurriyet.  Mainstream Vatan reports that after 
the protests he faced in the Southeast, PM Erdogan's morale was 
boosted in Erzurum yesterday with the warm welcome he received from 
the residents of Erzurum.  Posters carried by the crowd pleased the 
PM, including one that read, "Our windows, doors and souls are open 
to you."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye quotes Erdogan from his 
speech in Erzurum when he said, "Turkey does not have time to waste 
with arguments or clashes.  We have a single flag and single 
state." 
 
The AKP's Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat Resigns 
Media outlets reported over the weekend and today that top AKP 
official Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat resigned from his post as deputy 
chairman.  Firat's resignation comes amid rumors that he was sacked 
by Prime Minister Erdogan over disagreements regarding the Kurdish 
issue.  Firat allegedly criticized Erdogan during the most recent 
party board meeting for his hard-lined statements during a recent 
trip to southeast, in which the PM said those who were not happy 
with Turkey should feel free to leave the country.  Firat was also 
allegedly uncomfortable with another statement Erdogan made in 
support of a man who has fired his shotgun on DTP demonstrators in 
Istanbul.  Erdogan announced Firat quit due to health problems. 
Firat was replaced by former Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu, an 
influential Kurdish leader from Diyarbakir.  Mainstream papers 
speculated over the weekend that Firat, feeling cornered in the face 
of corruption charges directed earlier by CHP's Kemal Kilicdaroglu, 
used Erdogan's statements on the Kurds as a pretext to leave his 
party. 
 
Editorial Commentary on U.S. President-elect Barack Obama 
 
Ceyda Karan writes in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Turkey will 
face foreign policy challenges during the Obama administration. 
Turkey can be prepared for this by producing policies based on 
regional realities.  Relations with Armenia and Iraq are only some 
of these challenges.  It will be to Turkey's benefit as long as 
America, under Obama's leadership, promotes a dynamic Turkish 
foreign policy." 
 
Huseyin Bas opines in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Obama's 
options are limited, because no matter what he does, he will have to 
gather his staff from among those who are responsible in the 
negative situation we are going through today.  The real danger is 
that under this establishment, this talented and honest man might 
turn into one of those he wants to change --- just like Tony Blair, 
who came to power with great expectations but concluded his term as 
an ordinary politician, turning into just the opposite of what he 
wanted to be." 
 
Ali Bulac writes in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Before Obama had time 
to announce his victory, Israel killed six innocent civilians in 
Gaza in a senseless air strike on the region.  Could it be a message 
from the Israeli hawks that Obama's presidency won't change Israeli 
policy towards Palestine?  Political and strategic calculation in 
Afghanistan is one question, but the continuation of massacres 
against innocent and defenseless people formulates another problem. 
 
ANKARA 00001950  003 OF 003 
 
 
The world, first of all, wants Obama to decisively stop these 
massacres." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said "The AKP is collapsing," 
and challenged Prime Minister Erdogan to confront him in a televised 
debate. 
 
- Three PKK suspects were arrested in Izmir while preparing to stage 
a bomb attack. 
 
- Turkey's state-owned weapons company MKEK will produce sniper 
rifles with a 1000-meter range. 
 
International News 
 
- The Polish President's office backtracked on a previous claim that 
President Obama promised to continue the Bush administration's 
missile defense program. 
 
- A Taliban suicide car bomb attack on a NATO military convoy in 
Afghanistan killed two Spanish soldiers. 
 
- Inspired by Barack Obama, the French first lady and other leading 
figures publish a manifesto urging an end to racist discrimination 
in French politics and society. 
 
WILSON