08BEIJING4329
NOVEMBER 25 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SED, SIX-PARTY TALKS,
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9717
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4329/01 3302337
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 252337Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1071
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 9637
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 3776
RUEHPF/AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH 0972
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4450UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004329 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON EFIN TW CH RS PE
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 25 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SED, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
TIBET, PRC MILITARY BUILDUP, TOY SAFETY, U.S. ECONOMIC STIMULUS 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 25 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China will host the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED) 
December 4-5 and hopes the meeting will lay the "building blocks for 
enduring cooperation." 
 
-- China has proposed to host the next round of Six-Party Talks on 
December 8 and is consulting with the other parties on this issue. 
China is working to make "good preparations to implement the second 
phase" of the North Korean nuclear disablement process in a 
"comprehensive and balanced way." 
 
-- On Tibet, the MFA spokesperson refused to respond in detail to a 
question on the recent Dharamsala meeting of Tibetan exiles and 
whether China plans to continue talks with the Dalai Lama's 
representatives, merely stating, "We have talked about this issue 
many times in the past."  On French President Sarkozy's upcoming 
meeting with the Dalai Lama, the spokesperson said Beijing expects 
every country to respect that Tibet is a part of China and hopes 
that the PRC and France can "overcome all distractions and maintain 
overall bilateral relations." 
 
-- China's military policy is "defensive in nature," and China 
"unswervingly pursues peaceful development." 
 
-- Chinese authorities have "strengthened inspections" of toys, 
"especially those for export."  If any problems are discovered, 
China will "not allow the products to be exported." 
 
-- China "hopes the United States will maintain a stable economy," 
which will be good for China and the entire world.  China looks 
forward to "strong communication, cooperation and coordination" with 
the United States in this regard. 
 
STRATEGIC ECONOMIC DIALOGUE 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the November 25 MFA press briefing, spokesperson Qin Gang said 
China will host the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED) 
December 4-5.  Chinese Vice Premier Wang Qishan and U.S. Treasury 
Secretary Henry Paulson will lead the dialogue, accompanied by other 
senior representatives from their respective governments.  China 
hopes the SED will lay "building blocks for enduring cooperation" 
and "strategically manage economic risk" to cope with "traditional 
challenges and promote an environment for trade and cooperation." 
 
SIX-PARTY TALKS 
--------------- 
 
¶3. Qin said China has proposed to host the next round of Six-Party 
Talks on December 8 and that it is maintaining communication and 
consultation with the other parties on this issue.  China is working 
to make "good preparations to implement the second phase" of the 
North Korean nuclear disablement process in a "comprehensive and 
balanced way."  When asked later for clarification on whether the 
December 8 date was fixed, Qin said China was still waiting for 
replies and feedback from the other Six-Party members and would 
finalize plans according to their "opinions."  Qin said how long the 
talks last would depend on discussions among the Six-Party members. 
 
TIBET 
----- 
 
¶4. Qin refused to respond in detail to a question on the recent 
Dharamsala meeting of Tibetan exiles and whether China plans to 
continue talks with the Dalai Lama's representatives, merely 
stating, "We have talked about this issue many times in the past." 
When asked about France hosting the China-EU dialogue, as well as 
French President Nicholas Sarkozy's planned meeting with the Dalai 
Lama on December 6, Qin said the Chinese Government attaches "great 
importance to the EU-China relationship" and wants to "expand 
cooperative relations at all levels to ensure win-win progress." 
The Chinese Government position on the Dalai Lama issue is "clear 
and consistent," Qin stated.  China "opposes the Dalai Lama's 
separatist activities overseas" and "opposes leaders of other 
countries participating in meetings with him in any way."  China 
expects every country to commit to respecting that Tibet is a part 
of China.  Qin added that "Tibet-related issues are an internal 
Chinese affair," and he hoped China and France can "overcome all 
distractions and maintain overall bilateral relations." 
 
CHINESE MILITARY BUILDUP 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. When asked about comments reportedly made by U.S. Navy Admiral 
John J. Donnelly in Australia stating that the United States is 
moving 60 percent of its submarine fleet to the region to counter 
China's buildup of its submarine fleet, Qin replied that China 
"unswervingly pursues peaceful development" and China's military 
 
BEIJING 00004329  002 OF 002 
 
 
policy is "defensive in nature."  China "advocates the new concept 
of security" by building dialogue and working with other nations. 
China's defense buildup does not "pose a threat to any other 
country," Qin declared. 
 
CHINESE TOY SAFETY 
------------------ 
 
¶6. When questioned about the safety of Chinese-made toys ahead of 
the Christmas shopping season, Qin responded that China "takes 
product safety very seriously" and is a "big toy producer" whose 
exports "bring happiness to children and adults" around the world. 
The Chinese Government requires toy producers to "pay attention to 
quality" and "strengthen management and supervision."  Chinese 
authorities have "strengthened inspections" of toys "especially 
those for export," and if any problems are discovered, China will 
"not allow the products to be exported." 
 
¶7. Qin acknowledged "several incidents" in recent years, stating 
that the Chinese Government took a "serious and objective" view of 
them.  Some Chinese products were made "according to the design of 
foreign clients" and there were sometimes "problems with the design 
by the foreign side."  The Chinese Government "urged" Chinese 
producers not only to focus on production, but also to "pay 
attention to" design.  If they "found problems" with the design 
"they should refuse" the order.  Qin said Christmas was not far away 
and wished Children around the world a "Merry Christmas." 
 
U.S. ECONOMIC STIMULUS 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. The Chinese government has "taken note" of some of U.S. 
President-elect Obama's appointments to cabinet and advisor 
positions, Qin said, commenting that China is ready to work with 
them to "strengthen cooperation" and "promote U.S.-China 
collaboration in a wide range of fields."  Asked about the U.S. 
President-elect's plan for an economic stimulus package, Qin said 
China believes all countries should "take measures in accordance 
with their national conditions to restore confidence and ensure 
economic growth."  The United States, as the "largest economy," will 
have the "greatest impact" on other nations around the world.  China 
"hopes the United States will maintain a stable economy," which will 
be good for China and the rest of the world.  China looks forward to 
"strong communication, cooperation and coordination" with the United 
States in this regard. 
 
UNITED NATIONS TORTURE REPORT 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. Qin repeated his November 22 comments in response to a question 
about the United Nations Committee Against Torture, reiterating that 
the report "was not objective, fair or just."  The report was made 
by "biased committee members" who "chose to ignore the substantial 
progress the Chinese Government has made in recent years."  Qin said 
the report was also based on "untrue and unverified information." 
The "report made groundless accusations against China," alleging 
that China "persecutes" Tibetans and Uighurs and that the PRC 
"overused armed forces in the March 14 incident and persecuted the 
Dalai Lama."  Qin said all of these charges were "totally fabricated 
and groundless." 
 
CHINESE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SECURITY OVERSEAS TRIP 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. Chinese Minister of Public Security Meng Jianzhu will visit 
Cambodia and Vietnam November 28-December 6 at the invitation of 
Cambodian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior Sar Kheng 
and Vietnamese Minister of Public Security Le Hong Anh. 
 
"CHINESE DEMOCRACY" 
------------------- 
 
¶11. When asked about the release of the "Guns N' Roses" album 
"Chinese Democracy," Qin said that according to his understanding, 
many people do not like this music as it is "too loud." 
 
MFA HUTONG REMODELING 
--------------------- 
 
¶12. In response to a question about the planned demolition of an 
MFA-owned Qing dynasty hutong in Beijing's Nanluoguxiang 
neighborhood, Qin said the Chinese Government would proceed with a 
plan to "renovate" the hutong neighborhood so as to "strengthen 
[its] management."  The MFA has decided to "renovate and open" the 
hutong to the public.  Qin said the MFA was doing a "good job" to 
move the people living in the hutong and to "venerate" the relics in 
accordance with the standards for protection of Beijing cultural 
relics.