08BERLIN1515
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. Elections, Russia, EU
Thu Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 061151Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2581
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 001515 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. Elections, Russia, EU 
 
¶1.    Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (U.S.)   Outcome of U.S. Elections 
¶3.   (Russia)   Medvedev Address 
¶4.   (EU)   Accession Report 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
All German media led with lengthy reports on the results of the U.S. 
elections and carried images of President-elect Obama and his 
family.  Mass tabloid Bild headlined: "Germany congratulates the new 
U.S. President: Yes, we can--be friends."  Berliner Zeitung's 
headline said: "The world celebrates Obama."  FT Deutschland: "Obama 
Promises A New America."   Editorials focused on the U.S. elections 
and Russia's announcement to deploy missiles near the Polish 
border. 
 
¶2.   (U.S.)   Outcome of U.S. Elections 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesthemen commented: "With spontaneous rallies, the 
nation wanted to collectively get rid of a nightmare.  A nightmare 
America plunged itself into by electing the terrible George W. Bush 
eight years ago...  The rapture of last night might soon be followed 
by a painful headache if the people realize how little a 'messiah' 
like Obama can achieve and meet their expectations....  Apart from 
the admiration for the democratic achievements of the American 
people, there is also skepticism.  The excitement over Obama's 
charisma and visionary power could soon turn into disappointment and 
frustration." 
 
ARD-TV Tagesschau opined: "Last night the United States showed the 
world that it is capable of reinventing itself: America elected an 
African-American President.  Race barriers have fallen down.... 
America is right to be proud of itself.   But things will be tough 
once the tears of joy are dry and the songs of praise died out. 
There has never been a President of the most powerful nation in the 
world who faced such a legacy before.  The challenges are 
enormous....  Americans and the whole world are now curious to hear 
details about how Obama wants to bring change about. 
 
ZDF-TV's Heute remarked: "Many Americans and people around the world 
view November 4, 2008 as a day of liberation... especially because 
Obama promises a serious morale change to his fellow countrymen and 
not just them....  He raises hope for an end of political lies and 
social constraint.  The underdog becomes the yardstick and the hope. 
 He led Americans to themselves and freed them from their alienation 
with their own country.  His notion of listening instead of hitting 
is disarming.  His language and style return young people to the 
ballots and maybe also into the community." 
 
Deutschlandfunk radio noted: "In a time in which utopias have 
disappeared and capitalism must be repaired, we are searching for a 
deeper understanding.  Obama called on the power of ideas - not a 
specific god or ideology but on the idea that the unthinkable can be 
possible.  This kind of inspiration excited young people for 
politics again." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine editorialized: "Concerning the world, 
America's partners and allies have it in their hands whether Obama 
will be successful.  He will reach out and listen to them and their 
matters and priorities.  He will also let them know about his 
priorities.  We will then see whether, apart from the will for a new 
beginning, there can be a solid program for a global community." 
 
Under the headline "America's Liberation," S|ddeutsche commented: 
"America wants a new beginning.  Strained by two wars and a 
financial crisis, the country is longing for liberty.  The majority 
of voters cast their ballots in an attempt to resist the decline, 
the loss of significance and political mismanagement....  The many 
faces wet with tears suggest that great tension vented during the 
election night.  The first African-American president - what a 
 
symbol for a society that that claims to lead the world in terms of 
dynamics and open-mindedness.  What a sign for minorities and those 
who are hopeful - who if you take them together will soon be a 
majority in the United States." 
 
Die Welt has this to say: "The fact the Obama was elected President 
could help those who have been persistently ignoring America's inner 
strength and attractiveness to open their eyes. Anti-Americanism 
will have to change with Obama as President." 
 
Bild comments: "The new transatlantic embrace is an historic 
opportunity.  Thanks to the Americans, we rose to prosperity again 
after the war, Americans defended Berlin during the air lift, 
created peace in Kosovo, defended our security against terrorists 
and many more things.  And also economically, we depend more on the 
United States as the other way around.  Therefore it is important 
that the excitement goes on also after the election night." 
 
¶3.   (Russia)   Medvedev Address 
 
Deutschlandfunk commented: "It is no coincidence that Russia 
announced the deployment of missiles on this day.  Right at the 
beginning of the Obama era, 'a pile' is driven into the ground.  But 
we cannot accept that Russia is describing this step as an answer to 
the deployment of NATO defense systems.  Short-range missiles are 
first of all political weapons.  In this respect, Moscow pursues the 
same policy it began with its crusade in Georgia.  Now Moscow has 
also demonstrated that it is uses military means to implement its 
foreign policy goals.  Now NATO's strategic concept must really be 
rethought, and Obama's foreign policy quickly faces its first test, 
not in Iraq and Afghanistan, but in relations with Russia." 
 
Handelsblatt opined: " Medvedev has struck the wrong tone and thus 
acted like a bull in a china shop, for the next U.S. president is by 
no means such a fervent admirer of a U.S. missile defense shield at 
the Russian front door.  Obama has taken a pragmatic approach to the 
project.  It will be set up only if it is financially feasible.  In 
view of the immense burdens of the U.S. budget, this project seems 
increasingly unlikely.  It would have been wiser if Medvedev had 
taken a clear analysis of Obama's position, for Obama pins his hopes 
on dialogue.  Now the two are likely to meet in an icy atmosphere 
some day in the future.  But letters 'From Moscow With Love' have 
always had a special tone." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung wondered: "Was it a coincidence that 
the Russian president delivered his first speech on the state of the 
country explicitly on the day when the whole world openly 
acknowledged and took note with enthusiasm whom the American people 
entrusted the leadership of the country during difficult times? 
This is hardly the case.  Not even one day after his greatest 
triumph, Obama is not being spared [from criticism].  On the 
contrary, according to the leadership in Moscow, the obligation to 
improve U.S.-Russian relations is only up to Obama.  Indeed, 
Washington and Moscow have much to talk about, but Medvedev's 
welcome address for Obama did not sound like the invitation for 
talks but rather like a provocation." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung asked: "Was that really necessary?  Especially 
on the day of Barak Obama's greatest triumph, Russian President 
Medvedev morosely attacked the United States.  But it is easy to 
decipher Medvedev's message to Washington: The new Russian president 
wants to talk to the new U.S. president at eye level.  The missile 
deployment in Kaliningrad should first of all appease the national 
soul, but will not block the path for talks later.  For the time 
being, Medvedev has now gotten a greater scope of action, and that 
is why it will not last long before U.S.-Russian relations will 
relax a bit again." 
 
In the view of Tagesspiegel, "It has certainly to do with the U.S. 
election that Russian President Medvedev started to hit back only 
yesterday.  It is a clear signal to President-elect Obama not to 
repeat the mistakes of his predecessor, underestimate Moscow, and to 
insist that economic and political decisions of global significance 
are made solely by and in Washington.  That is why the freshly 
elected U.S. president would be well-advised to deal with the new 
realities in a constructive way and not to pursue a confrontational 
course." 
 
According to Die Welt, "the [Russian] imperial reflexes have again 
coming to the fore and have demonstrated a surprising inertia. 
Russia considers itself primarily threatened by dwindling spheres of 
influence to which it believes it is entitled.  Medvedev confronted 
his counter part [in the U.S.] especially on the day of his election 
triumph with this claim and presented him a long list with the sins 
of his predecessor.  If this was considered a new start in relations 
with the United States, then only one term is coming to the fore: 
false start." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau observed: " A state leader who is willing to 
make compromises, someone who is seeking a new beginning in 
Russian-U.S. relations after Barak Obama's triumphant election 
victory would and sound different from the gruff leader in the 
Kremlin who sent out a threat to deploy missiles instead of sending 
congratulations to Washington."  Regional daily Nordwest Zeitung of 
Oldenburg judged: "Russian President Medvedev and his government 
leader Putin are again turning the spiral of distrust.  The old 
thinking in blocks is again coming to the fore."  Volksstimme of 
Magdeburg observed: " 
 
¶4.   (EU)   Accession Report 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, "it is certainly a bit 
rash to promise Croatia an end to the accession talks at the end of 
2009, because this is a country where the mafia kills unpleasant 
journalists.  Other accession candidates, especially Turkey, have 
not had a promising year either.  That is why the EU member states 
should admit that at issue is not the question of whether the - 
overestimated - Lisbon Treaty has entered into force or not.  No 
candidate is mature enough to accede to the EU.  The premature 
acceptance of Bulgaria and Romania has already created enough 
damage.  This should not happen again." 
 
Berliner Zeitung dealt with the EU's credibility and noted: "There 
is no reason to freeze the EU's enlargement.  At issue is the EU's 
credibility.  The prospect for a future membership is a stabilizing 
factor in many accession countries.  In other countries it makes 
reforms possible that would otherwise be unthinkable  Croatia in 
particular can demonstrate to the EU that it is really serious about 
its neighbors.  If the country meets all requirements, it should 
accede.  This would be an important political signal.  And it is 
very likely that the EU would also be able to cope with it." 
 
 
TIMKEN