08BEIJING4208
NOVEMBER 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: G-20 SUMMIT, SIX-PARTY
Thu Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0537
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4208/01 3182240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 132240Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0846
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0093
RUEHRK/AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK 0032UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004208 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON EFIN KS KN BG IN TW CH
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: G-20 SUMMIT, SIX-PARTY 
TALKS, CHINA-NORTH KOREA BORDER, TIBET MEETING, OTHER ISSUES 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 13 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China hopes the upcoming G20 Financial Summit will "send the 
positive message that countries are united." 
 
-- China had taken note of North Korea's comments that it will not 
allow sampling of its nuclear sites, but hopes the Six-Party Talks 
will progress. 
 
--Chinese VFM Wu Dawei met with DPRK DG for North American Affairs 
Ri Gun on November 12 to discuss the current situation and next 
phase in the Six-Party Talks. 
 
--The MFA has no information about reported changes in Chinese troop 
levels or crossing restrictions along the China-North Korea border. 
 
--The meeting of Tibetan leaders in Dharamsala does not represent 
the views of the vast majority of Chinese people and China hopes 
India will fulfill its commitment not to allow activity aimed at 
separating China on its soil. 
 
G20 Summit and Financial Crisis 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the November 13 regularly scheduled MFA press conference, 
spokesman Qin Gang said that China hopes the upcoming G20 Financial 
Summit will "send the positive message that countries are united" in 
tackling the financial crisis.  The Summit should "raise confidence 
and reach a decision on measures to stabilize markets and ensure 
economic growth," said Qin.  China hopes there will be 
"comprehensive reforms to ensure an orderly and fair financial 
system and a better monitoring system to help developing countries." 
 However, China recognizes that "there are only two days" in which 
to discuss all these issues.  Asked about the International Monetary 
Fund's (IMF) role in resolving the crisis, Qin said that China is 
"ready to stand by the IMF and other institutions to address the 
financial crisis."  Asked whether China will assist Iceland in a 
financial bailout, Qin said that China "welcomes the decision of the 
IMF" in agreeing to provide financial assistance to Iceland. 
 
Status of the Six-Party Talks 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. Asked how North Korea's statement that it will not allow sampling 
from its nuclear sites as part of the verification process would 
impact the Six-Party Talks, the spokesperson said China has "taken 
note of North Korea's comments" and the "Six-Party Talks are still 
in the process of implementing the second phase."  Qin said China 
hopes that the "talks can progress" and China will continue to "play 
a constructive role" in the process. 
 
¶4. North Korean DG for North American Affairs Ri Gun made a stopover 
in Beijing following his trip to the United States.  In Beijing, he 
met with Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei to discuss the "current 
situation and next phase" in the Six-Party Talks, said Qin. 
 
China-North Korea Border 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. Asked whether China has increased troop levels along its border 
with North Korea, Qin replied that he had "not heard of any abnormal 
activity" along the border.  In response to a related question 
seeking clarification on reports that Chinese citizens have been 
told they can no longer cross by land into North Korea, Qin again 
answered that he had "not heard of any abnormal activity along the 
border with North Korea."  Regarding reports that North Korea has 
closed its border with South Korea, Qin said that China hopes North 
and South Korea will resolve the issues "through consultations" in 
the "interest of stability on the Korean Peninsula." 
 
Meeting of Tibetan Leaders in Dharamsala 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. When asked about a meeting of Tibetan exiles in Dharamsala, 
India, Qin answered saying the Chinese government "solemnly opposes 
any activity aimed at the separation of China," and the "people 
meeting in Dharamsala could not possibly represent the interests of 
the vast majority of the Chinese people."  Qin said that the Indian 
government had "made a commitment not to allow any activity on its 
soil aimed at separating China" and that the Chinese government 
"hopes India will fulfill this commitment." 
 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
¶7. Other topics discussed were: 
 
-- Qin said he has no information about whether Taiwan Kuomintang 
Chairman Lien Chan will meet with Chinese President Hu Jintao on the 
 
BEIJING 00004208  002 OF 002 
 
 
sidelines of the G-20 summit in the United States.  Qin also 
referred journalists to the Taiwan Affairs Office for China's 
reaction to former Taiwan President Chen Shui-bian's arrest on 
corruption charges. 
 
-- When asked about the lawsuits against the Sanlu milk powder 
company, Qin answered that the Chinese government will "firmly and 
resolutely" deal with any breaches of the law.  Qin noted that the 
MFA was not the relevant authority on this issue and referred 
questions to the relevant authorities. 
 
-- When asked about Former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra's 
visit to China, Qin confirmed that he had seen reports that Thaksin 
had visited the Mainland and that he believed Thaksin had departed 
for Hong Kong.  When asked whether Thaksin was seeking permission to 
move to China, Qin said he did not know any other details of 
Thaksin's visit. 
 
-- The spokesman was not aware of any specifics regarding 
negotiations on an oil pipeline to Siberia.  The talks are "normal 
business negotiations." 
 
-- President Hu Jintao will visit Cuba from November 17-18. 
 
RANDT