08CAIRO2301
UNDER SECRETARY DOBRIANSKY'S MEETING WITH EGYPTIAN
Mon Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #2301/01 3081320
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031320Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0782
INFO RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 0137
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0080
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0232
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0408UNCLAS CAIRO 002301 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID EG KFLU TBIO WHO
SUBJECT: UNDER SECRETARY DOBRIANSKY'S MEETING WITH EGYPTIAN 
PRIME MINISTER 
 
¶1. (U) Summary. On October 25, Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed 
Nazif met with U/S for Democracy and Global Affairs, Paula 
Dobriansky, to discuss the strategic relationship between 
Egypt and the United States, the significance of Africa in 
the spread of avian influenza (AI), and the way forward for 
collaboration on virus sample sharing and vaccine 
development. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On October 25, on the margins of the International 
Ministerial Conference on Avian and Pandemic Influenza in 
Sharm El Sheikh, Prime Minister Nazif met with U/S 
Dobriansky, accompanied by Amb Margaret Scobey, Amb John 
Lange, Dr. Kent Hill (USAID) and emboff (notetaker).  He 
thanked U/S Dobriansky for the generous USG bilateral avian 
influenza assistance to Egypt, totaling $23 million, which 
she announced earlier that morning.  He also highlighted the 
importance of the strategic relationship between the two 
countries as well as the strong trade partnership. U/S 
Dobriansky noted that the U.S.-Egyptian bilateral 
relationship would remain strong regardless of the U.S. 
presidential election outcome, and that it would also endure 
despite the current economic challenge.  Nazif noted that 
Egypt has never felt that a change in U.S. administrations 
affected the bilateral relationship in a fundamental way and 
expressed confidence that the global financial crisis will 
bring people together to respond in the right way.  He stated 
that while Egypt has not been affected directly by the 
financial crisis and Egyptian banks have remained intact, the 
country will ultimately be affected by a slowdown in the 
U.S., specifically in the export and tourism sectors as well 
as by decreasing Suez Canal revenues.  Nazif added that U.S. 
elections are coming at a critical time and that the new 
administration will inherit the positives and negatives of 
the current administration. 
 
¶3. (SBU) U/S Dobriansky commended Egypt's transparency in 
providing AI virus samples for the purpose of research and 
noted the challenge of addressing developing countries, 
concerns about receiving benefits (such as vaccines) in the 
event of a pandemic.  The UN and WHO have been trying to 
address that challenge in a balanced way.  Minister of Health 
and Population El Gabaly noted that countries that provide 
samples, such as Indonesia, are asking for a fair 
distribution of benefits in return. He stated that there is a 
line of demarcation between the West and the rest of the 
world in terms of the West providing technology/research and 
others providing virus samples.  Minister of Agriculture 
Abaza added that countries are concerned with the lapse in 
time between providing virus samples and receiving the 
benefits of a vaccine.  While Egypt has worked closely with 
NAMRU-3 to share information, he understands other countries' 
reluctance in sharing virus samples.  Minister El Gabaly said 
he would meet with the Indonesians and other countries later 
that day to begin drafting an agreement of principles and a 
way to move forward in tackling AI sample and benefit 
sharing.  (Note:  after several inconclusive side meetings on 
sample/benefit sharing during the conference, the GOE, in the 
concluding document, Vision for the Future, highlighted the 
importance of resolving the issue in the December meeting at 
the World Health Organization.  End note.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Prime Minister underlined the importance of 
Africa when addressing AI; Africa is affected but awareness 
is low and information scarce.  He cited Egypt's location on 
migratory bird routes to and from Africa, noting that it is a 
continuing cause for concern in Egypt.  Minister El Gabaly 
mentioned Egypt's offer to provide doctors and expertise to 
Nigeria when they had an AI breakout and his surprise that 
they did not accept the offer.  He noted that African 
countries focus on malaria and other diseases but do not 
understand the risk of AI.  U/S Dobriansky agreed that Africa 
is critical and highlighted Egypt's being chosen as host of 
the Sharm el-Sheikh conference as an indication of Africa's 
growing importance.  She noted the critical work of 
institutions such as the OIE, WHO, FAO and UN in bolstering 
networks in Africa, but agreed that more needs to be done. In 
addition, she stated that religious concerns need to be taken 
into consideration as well and that Egypt can play a pivotal 
role in working with Muslim nations in Africa.  Minister of 
Agriculture Abaza agreed and said that increased awareness of 
AI will lead to fewer outbreaks in Africa.  Egypt wants to 
align its efforts with those of the U.S. in combating AI 
outbreaks throughout the continent. 
 
¶5. (U) Earlier that day, just prior to the conference,s 
opening session, U/S Dobriansky met with Prime Minister Nazif 
along with UN System Influenza Coordinator David Nabarro, the 
Cairo-based European Commission head of delegation, and Amb. 
Lange (in recognition of the co-sponsors of the conference: 
 
the USG, the International Partnership on Avian and Pandemic 
Influenza, the UN System and the EC).  The Prime Minister 
said that losses from AI had led the GOE to go to the root 
cause of the problem and restructure its poultry industry on 
a non-political basis.  U/S Dobriansky noted how important it 
was that the GOE was hosting this year,s international 
conference to continue high-level focus on the threat from 
avian and pandemic influenza. 
 
¶6. (U) This cable has been cleared by U/S Dobriansky. 
SCOBEY