08CHENGDU267
CHENGDU YET TO SEE SURGE OF RETURNING WORKERS FROM CLOSED
Wed Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO9987
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0267/01 3310853
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260853Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3003
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3662UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000267 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ELAB FCS PAS POL
SUBJECT: CHENGDU YET TO SEE SURGE OF RETURNING WORKERS FROM CLOSED 
FACTORIES 
 
CHENGDU 00000267  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary.  While laid off workers from the coast 
returning to Sichuan may eventually boost unemployment in 
Sichuan Province, Chengdu labor experts have yet to see evidence 
of this trend.  Disagreeing with recent press reports, Consulate 
contacts say that the softening local economic conditions over 
the past year have contributed more to increasing unemployment 
than an influx of returning workers.  Local government officials 
lack a good plan to help boost employment.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
Job Demand Rising in Chengdu 
 
----------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) During a recent visit to Chengdu's Jiuyanqiao Labor 
Market, Congenoff saw 200 or more unemployed laborers, many of 
them migrant workers, seeking employment as handymen, cooks, 
construction workers, and in other low-skilled positions.  One 
worker said he was from a town 60 miles outside of Chengdu, and 
Congenoff saw other workers still carrying luggage, who appeared 
to have just arrived in Chengdu.  Congen LES observed that the 
number of people seeking jobs appeared higher than in the past, 
echoing claims made in recent local press reports.  Many migrant 
workers come to Chengdu from other parts of Sichuan Province, 
which has a population of 80 million. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) A scholar at the Sichuan Academy of Social Science, Guo 
Xiaoming, told Congenoff that the weakening economy during the 
second half of 2008 has boosted unemployment in the provincial 
capital.  He said businesses in Chengdu were already feeling the 
effects of the global financial crisis as demand eased for 
Chengdu's exports.  Guo also noted that the yearlong real estate 
downturn had reduced jobs in construction and other related 
fields. 
 
 
 
Inaccurate Labor Statistics? We Really Aren't Sure. . . 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Guo and labor market officials told Congenoff it was 
difficult to quantify the increase in job seekers in recent 
months.  Local press reported a 30 percent increase in the 
number of laborers seeking work, but Guo expressed skepticism 
about this figure.  He felt the reported figure is probably 
inaccurate, and said he did not know whether the actual number 
of unemployed workers was lower or higher than the reported 
figure.  An official at another labor market that caters to 
skilled workers and college graduates said that the 30 percent 
figure was based on applications for specific jobs rather than 
the number of unemployed workers.  She also believed that the 30 
percent number could well be inaccurate, but did not offer her 
own estimate. 
 
 
 
Laid Off Workers Try to Find New Jobs, Stay on East Coast 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Workers returning from shuttered factories in China's 
more prosperous eastern region have not had a clear impact on 
the Chengdu job market.  Guo said that many recently laid off 
workers in coastal areas would likely not return to Sichuan 
immediately after losing their jobs.  He noted that workers 
typically need to wait for some time after they are laid off to 
receive unpaid wages from their former employer.  He added that 
workers typically would spend time looking for new employment 
before deciding to return home.  Congenoff spoke with migrant 
workers who supported Guo's point.  Two workers said their adult 
children lived in coastal Guangdong province, but could not find 
 
CHENGDU 00000267  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
work.  The children did not want to return home, however, and 
were waiting in Guangdong to find new employment. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Guo said that migrant workers typically return home for 
the Chinese New Year, which falls in late-January 2009.  He 
expects that workers who were unable to find work would likely 
return home for the New Year and not go back to the coast.  If 
this occurs, the current employment situation could worsen as 
demand increases for a limited supply of jobs.  Guo also said a 
surge of returning workers could begin as early as December, but 
he did not explain why he thought this would be the case. 
 
 
 
Post-Quake Rebuilding to Provide Some Needed Jobs 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Guo saw great potential for the earthquake rebuilding 
effort to provide a significant number of jobs to Sichuan 
workers.  At the same time, he cautioned that reconstruction 
could not provide all of the jobs he estimated would be needed 
if migrant workers begin returning in larger numbers from the 
coast.  One difficulty emerging already is funding for 
rebuilding projects.  Much of the money local governments across 
China, and the central government in Beijing, pledged for 
rebuilding earthquake-damaged areas has yet to materialize, 
according to Guo.  He explained that available funds were being 
used for unspecified projects that would help make villagers 
more comfortable during the winter in the mountainous areas 
hardest hit by the May earthquake. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Guo said that the Sichuan provincial government did 
not, as of early November, have a plan for dealing with a 
possible surge in returning workers.  He mentioned that Sichuan 
sent survey teams to coastal provinces to assess the size of the 
potential returning labor pool.  Sichuan officials determined 
that returning laborers would not be a significant problem for 
the province, according to Guo. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment:  Although the effects are not yet fully 
clear, declining exports and the global financial crisis come on 
top of an already difficult year for Sichuan business, hit hard 
by the May earthquake and unrest in its Tibetan areas.  Thus 
far, Sichuan's internal conditions remain the most important 
factor in affecting the local job market, although that could 
all change if dire predictions of increased year-end factory 
closures on the east coast come true. 
ONUFER