08DOHA827
NUCLEAR POWER: MODELS AND ANTI-MODELS ABOUND AT
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
R 250727Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8469
INFO ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS DOHA 000827 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG KNNP PARM PREL QA EG MU KU AE FR BE CA
SUBJECT: NUCLEAR POWER: MODELS AND ANTI-MODELS ABOUND AT 
DOHA FORUM 
 
REF: A. PARIS 1447 
     ¶B. DOHA 456 
     ¶C. CAIRO 1307 
     ¶D. KUWAIT 761 
 
---------------- 
(SBU) KEY POINTS 
---------------- 
 
-- The Secretary's Special Envoy for Nuclear 
Nonproliferation, Ambassador Jackie Wolcott, represented the 
U.S. Government at the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) 
Nuclear Energy Forum November 10-11 and spoke forthrightly 
about the safety, security, and proliferation risks that 
accompany the deployment of nuclear power. 
 
-- Although Iran,s Vice President was expected to address 
the conference, the Iranians ultimately did not attend. 
Nevertheless, Wolcott made direct reference to Iran in her 
speech, citing it as the "anti model" to the open and 
transparent way a country should approach nuclear power. 
 
-- Qatari officials announced that Qatar was moving ahead on 
studies of adopting nuclear power. Meanwhile, the draft MOU 
on civil nuclear cooperation with the U.S. that would pave 
the way for enhanced cooperation with Texas A&M is pending a 
decision in the Prime Minister,s office. 
 
-- Egypt announced that a draft law covering safety, 
security, safeguards, and liability would be sent to 
Parliament later this month, with finalization expected by 
June 2009.  The Egyptians also told Wolcott that a final 
decision on Egypt,s nuclear construction tender would likely 
be rendered by January 2009. 
 
-- Oman and Kuwait are also studying adoption of nuclear 
power. 
 
------------- 
(SBU) COMMENT 
------------- 
 
-- Participants at the conference made repeated references to 
nuclear power,s benefits in combating climate change and as 
a diversified source of energy alongside solar and wind. 
Participants also stressed the importance of establishing 
proper national infrastructures to support nascent nuclear 
power programs. 
 
-- Seldom mentioned, however, was the need to mitigate the 
inherent proliferation risks associated with nuclear power. 
Other nuclear suppliers used the forum to promote their 
services with little emphasis on accompanying 
responsibilities. 
 
-- Amb. Wolcott,s speech, which highlighted frankly the 
importance of tangible commitments to the highest safety, 
security and nonproliferation standards, was the exception 
and therefore an important contribution to this conference. 
 
END KEY POINTS AND COMMENT. 
 
---------------- 
FORUM BACKGROUND 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (U) On November 10-11, Ambassador Wolcott participated in 
the MENA Nuclear Energy Forum in Doha, Qatar, during which 
she delivered a special address.  Additional speakers 
included representatives of 
regional governments (the UAE, Egypt, Qatar, Oman, and 
Yemen); multilateral organizations (Gulf Cooperation Council, 
Arab Atomic Energy Agency, and the International Atomic 
Energy Agency); and the nuclear industry (Thorium Power, 
Areva, Electricite de France, Total, Suez-Tractebel, and 
Atomic Energy of Canada Limited).  The event was sponsored by 
Qatar General Electricity and Water Corporation (Kahramaa), 
Qatar Petroleum (QP), Thorium Power, Electricite de France 
(EDF), and ACWA International, with additional support from 
the Qatar Science and Technology Park. 
 
---------------------- 
IRAN AS COUNTEREXAMPLE 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In her special address, "Nuclear Power: Benefits and 
Responsibilities," Wolcott addressed the unique safety, 
security, and proliferation risks associated with nuclear 
 
power.  She emphasized the "right way" of pursuing nuclear 
power - carefully, transparently, and in adherence to 
international nonproliferation, safety, and security norms - 
as well as the advantages of civil nuclear cooperation to 
help states pursue a responsible path. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In response to last-minute indications that her 
speech would be preceded by an address by Reza Aghazadeh, 
Vice President of Iran and President of the (UN Sanctioned) 
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, she portrayed Iran as the 
"anti model" for how a state should approach nuclear power. 
Though the U.S. was deeply dismayed that Iran had been given 
such a prominent role at an ostensibly legitimate conference 
on nuclear power, the Iranian delegation, without 
explanation, ultimately did not attend the conference. 
Wolcott,s full remarks are available at 
http://www.state.gov/t/isn/rls/rm/111757.htm. 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUPPLIERS - PLEASE BUY OUR STUFF 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) In addition to the United States, other major 
nuclear suppliers in attendance included France, Belgium, and 
Canada (all representatives of their state-owned industries). 
 In stark contrast to the U.S. call for a measured and 
responsible approach to nuclear power, presentations from 
Areva, EDF, Total, Suez-Tractebel, and Atomic Energy of 
Canada Limited (AECL) promoted goods and services without 
mentioning the responsibilities that accompany nuclear power. 
 
¶5. (SBU) For example, Total informed the conference goers 
that it was the "most diversified major in the Middle East" 
and through its partnership with Areva and Suez was a great 
candidate to oversee a build-own-operate contract for the 
UAE,s nuclear power plants.  A Scientific Advisor to Areva, 
after explaining the numerous hurdles facing a state new to 
nuclear power, assured the audience that "help was available" 
via the IAEA, AFNI (the fee-based French government agency 
recently established to assist emerging nuclear energy 
states, see Ref A) or other consultants (such as himself). 
AECL carefully described the advantages of continuous 
refueling of its CANDU-6 reactor, while leaving unspoken any 
reference to the proliferation advantages and disadvantages 
associated with the operation of heavy water reactors. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In the end, Wolcott,s was the only presentation 
that emphasized the need to mitigate the proliferation risks 
of nuclear power, despite the conference setting a few 
hundred miles from Iran,s nuclear power plant at Bushehr. 
 
--------------------- 
QATAR - MOVING SLOWLY 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Abdullah bin Hamad Al-Attiyah, Qatar,s Deputy Prime 
Minister and Minister of Energy and Industry, announced in 
his address that Qatar was "reassess(ing) the role that 
nuclear energy might play in (its) domestic energy mix." 
Later in the program, the manager of Kahramaa (Qatar's power 
and water utility), Yousuf Janahi, announced that an expert 
committee, including representatives from Qatar Petroleum and 
Kahramaa, has proposed a detailed study of the prospects of a 
national nuclear power program.  The primary uncertainties, 
he noted, included the ability of Qatar,s electricity grid 
to support a 1,000 MW nuclear power plant and finding a 
suitable site for it.  These and other questions would be 
studied in detail with the assistance of an unidentified 
outside consultant. 
 
¶8. (SBU) On the sidelines of the Forum, Wolcott met with Dr. 
Rashid Al-Kuwari, Director of the Radiological Protection and 
Nuclear Energy Department of the Ministry of Environment. 
Al-Kuwari explained that the Ministry of Environment, 
recently formed to replace the Supreme Council for the 
Environment and Natural Reserves, would act as Qatar,s 
regulator for nuclear applications.  This body would also 
oversee the country,s progress towards nuclear power, 
including the conclusion of technical cooperation agreements, 
adoption of international conventions, and development of a 
strategic plan.  Separately, the Ministry of Energy (with 
support from the Qatar Foundation) would oversee 
nuclear-related research and training. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Asked for the status of the nuclear cooperation 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that the U.S. proposed in 
May (Ref B), Al-Kuwari explained that it was now in the Prime 
Minister,s office for a decision, expected "in ten days." 
He appeared to take careful note when Wolcott encouraged 
swift Qatari concurrence, since its entry into force (along 
with finalization of Qatar,s safeguards agreement with the 
IAEA) would allow Texas A&M to launch a joint nuclear 
applications education program with Qatar University and 
would pave the way for the founding of a formal nuclear 
engineering program at Texas A&M/Qatar under the Qatar 
Foundation (QF) at Education City in Doha. 
 
¶10. (SBU) In a separate meeting, QF Science Advisor Tidu 
Maini told Wolcott that everything was in place to launch the 
Texas A&M program, but that nothing could commence absent 
"the blasted MOU."  He informed Wolcott that QF had just 
declined a French-proposed training program that could have 
begun immediately, since it preferred to build on existing 
(non-nuclear) engineering programs at Texas A&M/Qatar.  To 
try and expedite the process, Maini proposed that Wolcott 
send a letter to Sheikha Mozah, Chair of QF,s Board of 
Directors and wife of the Amir, stressing the importance of 
the MOU.  Wolcott agreed, and a letter to be delivered on 
November 18 (a previous letter from Wolcott encouraging 
action was delivered on June 16, 2008). 
 
------------------------------- 
EGYPT - PROCEEDING STEP-BY-STEP 
------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) In his keynote address, Egyptian Minister of 
Electricity and Energy, Dr. Hassan Younes, reported that 
Egypt had established a Supreme Council for Peaceful Uses of 
Nuclear Energy to explore ways Egypt can enhance its existing 
nuclear infrastructure to support a nuclear power program. 
He noted that a draft law covering safety, security, 
safeguards, and liability would be sent to Parliament in the 
new session beginning the week of November 16, and he 
announced that Egypt would award its consultancy tender (to 
cover site selection, project implementation, and 
construction of its first nuclear power plant) by the end of 
the year.  Regarding civil nuclear cooperation, he noted that 
the Egyptians were "looking for all the help we can get," but 
also amenable to sharing its own experience with states just 
beginning to develop nuclear infrastructure. 
 
¶12. (SBU) During a bilateral meeting with Wolcott, Younes 
elaborated that the draft law before Parliament would call 
for the creation of a national nuclear regulator and should 
be decided on by June of 2009.  He conceded that the decision 
on the consultancy contract could slip to January.  In 
response to Wolcott,s advocacy for Bechtel,s bid, he 
energetically reassured her that the process is proceeding 
"step-by-step and by the book" consistent with international 
rules. 
 
¶13. (SBU) With regards to the "working group" designed to 
examine the rejuvenation of U.S.-Egyptian civil nuclear 
cooperation (see Ref C), Dr. Khalil Yasso (First 
Undersecretary of the Ministry of Electricity and Energy) 
explained that a proposal, which would establish points of 
contact for assistance with (1) safety training and (2) 
licensing, siting, and NPP operation, is now being finalized 
and could be transmitted to the United States in about one 
week.  Consistent with this, Younes later stressed that 
Egypt,s current focus was on regulation and safety. 
 
----------------------------- 
OMAN - STILL NO "THERE" THERE 
----------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) In his address to the forum, Chairman of the Omani 
Public Authority for Electricity and Water Mohammed Al 
Mahrouqi reported that nuclear power is "on the agenda" in 
Oman, as are solar power and wind energy.  That said, during 
his bilateral meeting with Wolcott, he elaborated that Oman 
is "still gathering information" and hoping that the IAEA can 
visit to help Oman develop a strategy once its newly minted 
IAEA membership is "implemented." 
 
-------------------------------- 
KUWAIT - DOING IT DEMOCRATICALLY 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) On the margins of the forum, Wolcott met with Adnan 
¶A. Shihab-Eldin, former OPEC and IAEA official and current 
advisor to the Kuwaiti government.  He informed Wolcott that 
that Kuwait may soon announce the formation of a "high level 
committee" with an executive office tasked to examine nuclear 
power in Kuwait.  He commented that, as a democracy, any 
decisions on nuclear power in Kuwait will be slowed relative 
to other states in the region with more autocratic 
decision-making structures.  (Note:  Shihab-Eldin was not in 
Kuwait during Wolcott,s visit in June - see Ref D.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶16. (SBU) Shihab-Eldin added that he had attended the GNEP 
ministerial in Paris and that Kuwait likes what it sees so 
far, but wants to learn more.  He expressed a degree of 
residual mistrust about the political objectives of the 
partnership (asking to what extent it could lead to a change 
in legal rights under the NPT).  Speaking more generally, he 
expressed support for initiatives designed to provide 
reliable access to nuclear fuel, adding that he had 
personally advised the Government of Kuwait to support the 
Nuclear Threat Initiative proposal to establish an IAEA fuel 
bank. 
 
------------------------------------ 
GCC PROJECT - NOT DEAD, BUT EVOLVING 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶17. (SBU) During their bilateral meeting, Shihab-Eldin also 
provided Wolcott some insight into the origins and status of 
the GCC-wide effort to explore nuclear power.  Based on his 
experience as an early advisor to the effort, he reported 
that the GCC approach was originally proposed by Qatar to the 
remaining partners.  Following initial resistance, the Saudi 
king "put his weight behind" the decision to launch the 
regional look into nuclear power.  Following an 
IAEA-supported pre-feasibility study, the GCC secretariat is 
interested in putting together a full-time committee that 
will work with a consultant on a full-scale feasibility 
study.  The individual efforts by GCC member states to 
explore national nuclear power programs began when the UAE 
made clear it would move ahead on its own in parallel with 
the GCC effort. 
 
¶18. (SBU) In his personal view, Shihab-Eldin said the GCC 
could help "harmonize" national programs in the region, 
though he advised against establishing a "GCC superstructure" 
to try and oversee and regulate power plants in more than one 
state.  An example of the merits of a regional approach is 
creating efficiencies to facilitate human resource 
development or grid improvements.  In addition, a regional 
approach could help harmonize policy positions, such as in 
the development of multilateral mechanisms for reliable 
access to nuclear fuel. 
 
¶19. (U) Ambassador Wolcott has cleared this message. 
LeBaron 
 
 
NNNN