08MANAGUA1353
NICARAGUA: RAAS PROTEST REVEAL REGIONAL RIFT
Wed Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO3763
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1353/01 3101533
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 051533Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3345
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 001353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR KRAAIMORE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2018 
TAGS: PGOV NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: RAAS PROTEST REVEAL REGIONAL RIFT 
REGARDING REFORMS 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 1149 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 953 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4 (B) & (D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: On October 29, 2008 in Rama, within 
Nicaragua's South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS), a crowd 
of over three hundred people, led by regional government 
leaders, publicly rejected plans for demarcation reform for 
the Autonomous region proposed by National Assembly Deputies 
Brooklyn Rivera and Francisco Sacasa.  The proposed assembly 
reforms would carve out four of the 12 RAAS municipalities to 
form a new department or Autonomous region (see REFs A and 
B).  The non-violent protest, directed at Rivera and Sacasa, 
took place during the 21st year anniversary of Law 28 that 
established Nicaragua,s autonomous regions.  END SUMMARY. 
 
A Private Meeting... 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (C) On October 29, National Assembly Deputies Brooklyn 
Rivera, from the Yatama indigenous party currently aligned 
with the Sandinista (FSLN), and Francisco Sacasa, from the 
Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC), went to Rama to 
participate in a private forum organized by the Commission of 
Ethnic Affairs, Autonomous Regimes and Indigenous Communities 
in the Kingston Hotel.   Both Rivera and Sacasa represent the 
Atlantic Coast in the National Assembly and support proposed 
demarcation reforms to Nicaragua,s Autonomous Law (see REF 
A) that would form a new Autonomous region or department, 
called Zelaya Central, from the RAAS by stripping out four of 
the RAAS,s western municipalities, Muelle de los Bueyes, El 
Rama, El Ayote and Nueva Guinea.  Rivera and Sacasa met with 
four FSLN regional council members, and three municipal 
election candidates, a mayor, and thirty other invitees in 
their private forum to pre-cook the plans for approval of the 
reforms. 
 
A Public Confrontation... 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) At the same hour as the Rivera meeting, RAAS Regional 
Government President Lourdes Aguilar, RAAS Governor Yadira 
Flores and representatives from the twelve RAAS 
municipalities, who oppose the demarcation reforms, held a 
separate public forum in the Rama municipal gymnasium.  When 
Rama Mayor Roger Canales decried the private Rivera meeting, 
the crowd of over three hundred costenos (people from the 
Nicaragua,s Atlantic Coast) rose to their feet and marched 
three blocks to the Kingston Hotel to protest.  The crowd 
surrounded the hotel for over an hour, chanting against 
Rivera and Sacasa, calling them "cowards, thieves, shameless 
violators of human rights and the laws of the Constitution." 
Aguilar and Flores called the deputies to come out to the 
people who elected them and talk with them "under the light 
of the sun."  When Sacasa and Rivera finally emerged, they 
defended their plans to form a new department in the RAAS and 
told the crowd to listen to their proposal first, before they 
would be willing to listen to the crowd,s demands.  In the 
end, the deputies told the crowd that they already had their 
work to do and that they would not abandon it to go to the 
gymnasium to listen to complaints.  Aguilar and Flores then 
led the group back to the gymnasium to continue their public 
meeting, in which they declared it was clear that the 
National Assembly deputies were not interested in listening 
to the people except during elections.  The public meeting 
continued with presentations by mayors from Muelle de los 
Bueyes, El Rama, El Ayote and Nueva Guinea, who each called 
for more integration with the RAAS regional government. 
 
¶4. (C) On October 30, 2008 Aguilar held a press conference in 
which she reiterated the regional government,s firm 
opposition to any efforts to carve up the RAAS into new 
territories.  Aguilar stated that "we are not going to permit 
that they (National Assembly deputies) destroy our region, 
nor are we going to allow them to impose a new department on 
us or carve up our territory."  Aguilar called on the 630,000 
costenos to unite in order to demonstrate to the central 
government that it needs to "respect our territory and our 
rights."  She accused the government of robbing the region,s 
resources, from lumber to lobsters, through resolutions and 
licenses originating in Managua.  She promised that "we are 
the owners of our natural resources and we are going to 
defend them today more united than before."  The mayor of 
Rama, Roger Araica, remarked that the embarrassing and 
humiliating attitude of the deputies was unfortunate, but 
reminded the press that Sacasa was inappropriately elected to 
represent the costenos.  (NOTE: Sacasa is mestizo, from Rivas 
on the Pacific coast and was not directly elected by costenos 
to his deputy position.  Ex-president Arnoldo Aleman 
appointed Sacasa "por dedaso" (by finger) to be a PLC deputy 
for the RAAS.  Sacasa's connection to the RAAS involves his 
family's large land holdings, which are currently subject to 
several lawsuits.  It is widely believed that proposed 
reforms to Law 28 would directly benefit Sacasa in preserving 
his family's land holdings and ending the lawsuits.  END 
NOTE)  Other opinion leaders in the RAAS shared these same 
views, including the influential Reverend Rayfield Hodgson 
and Vice Rectors Claribel Castillo and Zarifet Bolanos from 
Uraccan University in Bluefields and Nueva Guinea. 
 
Unfulfilled Laws... 
- - - - - - - - - - 

¶5. (C) The RAAS regional leaders and National Assembly 
deputies had gathered in Rama, one of the larger 
municipalities in the RAAS to participate in celebrations for 
the 21st anniversary of Law 28, known as the law of autonomy 
that established Nicaragua,s two autonomous regions.  In 
addition to the meetings in Rama, our contacts tell us that 
FSLN Atlantic Coast Secretary Lumberto Campbell was in 
Bluefields on October 29 holding private meetings regarding 
demarcation reform. 
 
¶6. (C) Rivera,s proposal to reform Law 28 (see Ref A and B) 
and form two new departments from RAAS and North Atlantic 
Autonomous Region (RAAN) municipalities is widely unpopular 
among coastal people who understand its implications.  Many 
coastal leaders believe that Sacasa, Rivera and Campbell are 
following instructions from their party leaders to divide the 
RAAS and RAAN before completing the demarcation and land 
titling process required under Law 445.  Demarcation expert 
Lottie Cunningham told us that only a fraction of the 235 
indigenous communities within 3 of the 23 RAAN territories 
have received land titles in the last five years, despite 
millions of dollars of financing from the World Bank and 
other donor nations to carry out the task.  Moreover, 
Cunningham believes that the government,s administration of 
the demarcation process is technically flawed because workers 
do not spend sufficient time to complete a thorough 
diagnostic study; often they spend less than a day in a 
community conducting surveys.  In Rama communities where the 
diagnostic study is complete, the GON will not approve it 
because of the influx of Spanish-speaking Pacific migrants, 
who would normally have second preferences for land claims 
behind indigenous groups.  Cunningham claimed that during his 
2006 campaign President Daniel Ortega had promised the 
mestizo migrants that they would get title to the land ahead 
of the Indians. 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT: The public confrontation over Rivera,s plans 
to reform Law 28 and carve out new departments from the RAAS 
and RAAN was no accident.  The reforms are not sought by the 
Costenos, but are being imposed on the Atlantic Coast by 
political leaders in Managua in order to consolidate 
political power and doubtless, to benefit from the money to 
be made from exploiting the region's natural resources and 
avoid obligations to complete the demarcation process by 
¶2009. 
CALLAHAN