08STATE122827
GUIDANCE: DISARMAMENT PRST, NOVEMBER 19
Wed Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2827 3241803
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191757Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 122827 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PARM UNSC CS
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: DISARMAMENT PRST, NOVEMBER 19 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN is authorized to 
join consensus on a Costa Rica-penned PRST regarding the 
regulation and reduction of armaments, with text as 
follows.  A vote on this PRST is anticipated on November 
19, 2008. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text of PRST: 
 
Strengthening collective security and armament regulation 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility 
under the Charter of the United Nations for the 
maintenance of international peace and security. 
 
The Security Council remains convinced of the necessity to 
strengthen international peace and security through, inter 
alia, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. It 
considers that the regulation and reduction of armaments 
and armed forces, as appropriate, constitutes one of the 
most important measures to promote international peace and 
security with the least diversion of the world's human and 
economic resources. 
 
The Security Council notes the importance of collective 
security and its impact on disarmament and development, 
and stresses its concern at increasing global military 
expenditure. 
 
The Security Council stresses the importance of 
appropriate levels of military expenditure, in order to 
achieve undiminished security for all at the lowest 
appropriate level of armaments.  It urges all States to 
devote as many resources as possible to economic and 
social development, in particular in the fight against 
poverty and the achievement of the Millennium Development 
Goals. 
 
The Security Council affirms the 2005 World Summit Outcome 
in which Heads of State and Government recognized that 
development, peace, security and human rights are mutually 
reinforcing. 
 
The Security Council stresses the vital importance of an 
effective multilateral system, to better address, in 
accordance with international law, the multifaceted and 
interconnected challenges and threats confronting our 
world and to achieve progress in the areas of peace and 
security, development and human rights, which are the 
pillars of the United Nations system and the foundations 
for collective security and well-being.  It also expresses 
its support for multilateralism as one of the most 
important means for resolving security concerns in 
accordance with international law. 
 
The Security Council expresses support for national, 
bilateral, regional and multilateral measures adopted by 
governments aimed at reducing military expenditures, where 
appropriate, thereby contributing to strengthening 
regional and international peace and security. 
 
The Security Council underlines the importance of 
promoting norms setting in accordance with international 
law, as part of the efforts to strengthen 
non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control measures, 
as well as the importance of compliance with and 
reinforcing of the existing agreements, conventions, and 
treaties which relate to these matters and international 
peace and security. 
 
The Security Council reiterates that cooperation with 
regional and sub-regional organizations in matters 
relating to the maintenance of peace and security and 
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United 
Nations can improve collective security and therefore 
should be continuously strengthened.  In this regard, it 
underlines the importance of strengthening the capacity of 
such organizations in conflict prevention, crisis 
management, armaments control and in supporting States 
recovering from conflict and laying the foundation for 
sustainable peace and development. 
 
The Security Council recalls the obligation of all States 
to accept and carry out its decisions in accordance with 
article 25 of the United Nations Charter and affirms its 
commitment to continue monitoring and promoting the 
effective implementation of its decisions, in order to 
avoid conflict, promote and maintain international peace 
and security and further confidence in collective 
security. 
 
The Security Council calls on Member States, regional and 
sub-Regional organizations, the Secretariat and the 
competent United Nations Funds and Programs, as 
appropriate, to make further efforts to preserve, 
facilitate, develop and strengthen international and 
regional cooperation in the areas of arms control, 
non-proliferation and disarmament, through, inter alia, 
further implementation, development and strengthening of 
relevant agreements and instruments. 
 
The Security Council intends to continue following this 
issue. 
 
END TEXT 
RICE