08SURABAYA133
WEST NUSA TENGGARA: HIGH EXPECTATIONS FOR CHANGE FROM THE
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Surabaya
VZCZCXRO5373
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJS #0133/01 3250749
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200749Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL SURABAYA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0333
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 0318
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 0162
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 0152
RUEHJS/AMCONSUL SURABAYA 0338UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SURABAYA 000133 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, INR/EAP, DRL/IRF, INL, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KIRF PHUM KISL EINV ID
SUBJECT: WEST NUSA TENGGARA: HIGH EXPECTATIONS FOR CHANGE FROM THE 
NEW GOVERNOR 
 
REF: A. SURABAYA 82  (ANOTHER GOLKAR GUBERNATORIAL DEFEAT) 
     ¶B. SURABAYA 119 (LIFE FOR LOMBOK'S AHMADIYAH SECT) 
 
SURABAYA 00000133  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Elected on an anti-corruption platform, 
recently inaugurated Governor of West Nusa Tenggara (NTB) 
Muhammad Zainul Majdi remains extremely popular among the local 
population of Mataram, the provincial capital.  Political 
observers, however, are skeptical that he has the skills or 
discipline necessary to achieve results.  A well-respected 
religious leader, Zainul promotes a political vision that 
emphasizes religious and ethnical pluralism and focuses on 
managing social capital to spur development and attract 
investment.  It remains to be seen, however, if his 
administration can organize itself sufficiently to follow 
through.  While religiously conservative, NTB's electorate has 
traditionally supported Golkar party members in local elections 
and supported secular, nationalist candidates with military 
backgrounds in the 2004 presidential elections -- preferring 
General Wiranto in the first round before supporting President 
Yudhoyono in the run-off.  Political observers expect that 
inclination to continue in the 2009 presidential elections.  The 
provincial government seems at a loss with how to deal with 
members of the Ahmadiyah sect.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) During a recent visit to Mataram, the capital of NTB, 
located on the island of Lombok, Surabaya Principal Officer was 
regaled with stories by average citizens about the positive 
change newly inaugurated Governor Muhammad Zainul Majdi had 
brought to NTB.   Average citizens with whom we spoke were 
unanimous in their praise for his anti-corruption efforts. 
Political observers were more skeptical, acknowledging his 
popularity but warning that, public opinion aside, very little 
had changed.  Adhar Hakim, NGO activist and journalist, 
commented to us that Zainul's administration was still 
uncoordinated and chaotic, with little of the discipline 
necessary to get things done.  Zainul's ability to deliver on 
promises remains to be seen. 
 
Presidential and Party Politics 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Adhar commented that NTB's enthusiasm for the new 
governor, a Tuan Guru (religious teacher), did not mean that NTB 
voters were inclined to support a religious leader or candidate 
from an Islamic party for president.  Given a choice, he 
explained, NTB voters preferred a secular nationalist, usually 
with a military background, to lead the country.  In the 2004 
presidential election, NTB gave the majority of its votes to 
General Wiranto in the first round.  In the second round, they 
supported President Yudhoyono.  He added that Golkar remains the 
most popular party in NTB at the local level, with Golkar 
members filling most local parliamentary and local government 
seats.  However, in the NTB governor's election, like so many 
recent elections throughout Indonesia, personal characteristics 
and issues drove voters, not party membership.  Zainul -- 
supported by the Islamic Prosperous Justice (PKS) and Crescent 
Star parties (PBB) -- was elected governor over the Golkar 
candidate because he was well-known, respected, and running an 
anti-corruption campaign against an incumbent accused of 
embezzlement, not solely because of his religious credentials 
(Ref A).  (Note: In late October, the NTB Prosecutor's Office 
arrested former Governor Lalu Serinata on corruption charges.) 
 
Government Priorities 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Apologizing that the Governor was still in a meeting 
with the Secretary General from the Ministry of Education, Vice 
Governor Badrul Munir outlined for us Zainul's priorities. 
Noting that Zainul wanted to develop NTB as a `province with 
faith,' Badrul said that the issue of religious and ethnic 
pluralism was paramount in all of the Governor's priorities. The 
Governor pledged to provide up to nine years of free education 
to the poor; provide free basic health services though existing 
local health clinics; build and repair infrastructure; develop 
the agro-industry; and support micro businesses, the `people's 
economy.'  Badrul noted that NTB currently ranks 32 out of 33 
provinces on the Human Development Index, but ranks ninth in 
purchasing power.  Improving NTB's ranking on the Human 
Development Index is a priority. 
 
Tackling Corruption -- Attracting Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
SURABAYA 00000133  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Governor signed an MOU with the Prosecutor's 
Office, the provincial Police, and the Finance and Development 
Supervisory Board to work cooperatively to eradicate corruption. 
 The local community has direct access to the local government 
through a special mail box and phone number to report incidents 
of corruption.  As part of this effort, Zainul wants all public 
services to be open, transparent, accountable, and secure.  This 
anti-corruption drive is also designed to give investors greater 
confidence in working in NTB. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Asked about the provincial government's relationship 
with Newmont mining, which operates a gold mine on the NTB 
island of Sumbawa, Badrul said relations were very good. 
Government and Newmont officials have met four times since the 
new Governor was inaugurated.  While revenue from the mine goes 
directly to the central government, Newmont has an active 
community development program in the area.  NTB is looking to 
increase domestic and foreign investment in seaweed farming, 
fisheries, and livestock, but has yet to develop an `investment 
profiles guide book' to distribute to potential investors.  NTB 
is building a new international airport, scheduled for 
operations in late 2009, and hopes to boost tourism in the 
province as an alternative to neighboring Bali.  An investor 
from Abu Dhabi is building a family-friendly resort aimed at 
Middle Eastern tourists on Lombok's south coast, hoping to take 
advantage of Lombok's Muslim culture and undiscovered beaches. 
 
Ahmadiyah 
--------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Following up on Ref B, PO noted the USG's concern about 
treatment of the Ahmadiyah community and asked about the 
Governor's plans for the Lombok Ahmadiyah community living in 
temporary accommodations in Mataram.  Badrul said the local 
government was providing food to the 150 refugees living in the 
Transito camp and trying to help them return to their home 
villages.  He stressed however that the government's efforts 
were complicated by the Ahmadi's insistence that they remain an 
`exclusive' community with little interaction with other groups. 
 Badrul did not explain why this specific request made it 
difficult for the Ahmadis to return home or how the provincial 
government planned to proceed. 
MCCLELLAND