05ANKARA6754
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, November 1-
Wed Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, November 1- 
15, 2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2.  Published by Milliyet and also reported by Vatan, Sabah 
  and Radikal on Tuesday, November 1: 
 
  TITLE:  Slave children's camp in Tekirdag 
 
  BEGIN TEXT:  Ugur Dundar's Arena program, aired on Kanal 
  D and CNN Turk, showed the plight of child workers who 
  were made to work like slaves at brick factories. 
 
  Dundar, accompanied by Labor Ministry inspectors, visited 
  the factory and brought to light the unhealthy working 
  conditions.  He also showed how he was detained by the 
  Jandarma. 
 
  The Arena team, following a tip that was received from 
  Tekirdag, documented that many children were made to work 
  under incredible conditions at brick factories. 
 
  Children who were employed illegally were carrying heavy 
  bricks in the mist of dust and soil.  They were sleeping 
  in unhealthy conditions at night.  Even girls were 
  working under the same conditions. 
 
  Dundar and his team entered a brick factory and 
  interviewed the children.  Upon the factory owner's 
  application, the Jandarma detained Dundar and his team in 
  Kumbag.  They were released after three hours. 
 
  Murat Ayhan Basaran, Department Head for Child Labor at 
  the Labor Ministry, said that children must not be 
  employed under those conditions. 
 
  Highlights of the interview with the children included: 
 
  -- How old were you when you began to work here? 
  -- Nine. 
 
  -- Do you wear a mask? 
  -- No. 
 
  -- You have been here for one and a half months.  How 
  many times did you have meat to eat? 
  -- Twice. 
 
  -- What do you do for ten hours? 
  -- We clean the premises.  It is hard.  There is dirt and 
  stone.  We are constantly in dust.  You cannot see 
  around. 
 
  -- How much money do you get? 
  -- I get 10 million TL (less than 8 USD) a day. 
 
  -- Have you received that money? 
  -- Not yet. 
 
  -- Why are you washing your mouth? 
  -- It is full of dust. 
 
  -- When you spit, do you feel the dust? 
  -- Yes. 
 
  -- How do you describe this place? 
  -- I would say that working conditions are very hard. 
  The daily payment is low.  Sleeping (here) is awful. 
 
  -- In other words, you are saying that it is not suitable 
  to sleep? 
  -- When you go inside, (you see) bedbugs.  You can see 
  (on me) their marks.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by Moldova.org on Friday, November 4: 
 
     TITLE:  Woman trafficked to Kosovo becomes pimp in 
     Moldova 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The capital's police have detained a 
     resident of Anenii Noi district who is suspected of 
     trafficking many young girls to Kosovo. 
 
     According to the General Police Commissariat, Carolina 
     Gherasimov, 25, was arrested in an apartment on Ginta 
     Latina Street from the capital, together with three 
     young girls who were to be trafficked soon to Kosovo. 
 
     Gherasimov is also suspected of procuring in Moldova. 
     The cited source says that the forces of order 
     discovered three cases of trafficking organized by 
     Gherasimov.  The suspect registered all the necessary 
     documents for transporting the victims.  She was 
     cooperating with a person from Kosovo who is still 
     unidentified. 
 
     Upon investigation it was established that Gherasimov 
     was earlier trafficked to Kosovo, where she practiced 
     prostitution.  The police found out that while 
     registering the documents Gherasimov forced the young 
     girls to provide intimate services for clients from 
     Moldova. 
 
     Criminal proceedings were instituted on the basis of 
     Articles 220 and 165 of the Penal Code (procuring) and 
     (trafficking in human beings), which stipulate jail 
     terms of up to 25 years. 
 
     Sergiu Purcica, division head at the Center for 
     Combating Trafficking in Persons, told REPORTER.MD that 
     216 cases of trafficking in persons, 47 cases of 
     trafficking in children and 90 cases of procuring were 
     registered in the first nine months of the current 
     year.  Purcica specified that Turkey, the Arab Emirates 
     and Russia, especially Moscow, are the most attractive 
     centers of activity for traffickers at present.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by Milliyet and same story picked up by Bugun 
and Vatan on Wednesday, November 9: 
 
     TITLE:  They marketed a Russian woman with AIDS to 200 
     people 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  It was claimed that three foreign women 
     captured in operations carried out by the Foreigners' 
     Police were HIV positive and carrying Hepatitis B.  It 
     was also claimed that the women had sexual contact with 
     many businessmen and sportsmen. 
 
     Moldovan Natalia Gribal informed authorities that she 
     was forced into prostitution.  Police raided a hotel on 
     Istiklal Street (in Istanbul) and Gribal was saved from 
     the hands of the network.  Alina Muradova, the alleged 
     ring leader, was detained, and her deputy, Melisa Kagan 
     Chitvas, fled. 
 
     Natali Matinga, Anzhelika Marchenko and Inna Belkusova, 
     who were forced into prostitution by the network, were 
     detained.  Following their medical check, it was found 
     out that Moldovan Natalia Matinga was HIV positive, and 
     Russians Anzhelika Marchenko and Inna Belkusova had 
     Hepatitis B.  It was reported that Matinga, who had 
     AIDS, has been with approximately 200 people.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by Sabah on Thursday, November 10: 
 
     TITLE: Natasha by accident 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Kiev-born movie actress, Milla Jovovich, 
     is going in front of the cameras to portray a Russian 
     sex slave.  Thirty-year-old Jovovich shares top billing 
     with Kevin Kline in the film, "Welcome to America."  In 
     the film she plays a woman who goes to America to be a 
     childcare giver, but later finds herself in Mexico as a 
     sex slave.  The film, with a budget of 12 million 
     dollars, was written by Roland Emmerich and will be 
     produced by Marco Kreuzpaintner.  END TEXT. 
MCELDOWNEY