05CAIRO8850
SENIOR MFA OFFICIAL ON MULTILATERAL ISSUES: GOE
Wed Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 008850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM EG UN
SUBJECT: SENIOR MFA OFFICIAL ON MULTILATERAL ISSUES: GOE 
TAKES STRONG POSITIONS BUT MORE DIALOGUE IN ORDER 
 
REF: STATE 207928 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The DCM raised UN reform and the need for 
greater U.S.- GOE cooperation at the UN with Assistant 
Minister for Multilateral Affairs Naella Gabr on November 16. 
 Gabr noted that Egypt differs from the U.S. on many reform 
initiatives, the use of country specific resolutions on human 
rights, the Peacebuilding Commission, the religious 
intolerance resolution, the Comprehensive Convention on 
International Terrorism (CCIT), and Secretary General 
discretion on General Assembly mandates.  But she nonetheless 
listened to the DCM's points on the USG's positions and 
ultimately agreed that there may be room for cooperation and 
compromise, particularly on proposals for the Peacebuilding 
Commission and the CCIT. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Iran resolution:  DCM delivered reftel demarche 
requesting Egypt's support in voting against the "No Action 
Motion" pending against the Third Committee human rights 
resolution on Iran.  Gabr said that Egypt would not support 
the U.S. and does not like country specific resolutions in 
general.  Although they bring pressure, such resolutions do 
not, Gabr said, produce results and are highly political. 
Accordingly, they should be used minimally, and only after a 
staged review of a country's record.  Egypt's position, she 
explained, is both an Africa group and a national one. 
 
3,  (SBU)  Religious Intolerance resolution:  Gabr said Egypt 
does not support the use of "anti-Semitic" in the Religious 
Intolerance Resolution because the phrase concerns race not 
religion.  The resolution's language must reflect its goal, 
as described in the title.  FM Aboul Gheit feels strongly 
about this issue, Gabr noted. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Human Rights Commission reform:  Gabr said Egypt 
wants: 
-- the group to be more democratic and representative 
(minimum of 53 members) so more nations have responsibility 
for human rights; 
-- no criteria for membership on the council; 
-- votes to be determined by the "majority rules" principle 
(vice U.S. preference for a 2/3 vote); 
-- the commission to spend fewer resources on conferences and 
more on education, training, and capacity building; and 
-- nations to contribute funds to the commission without an 
earmark so that the commission has greater discretion. 
 
DCM pushed back that these offered no reforms at all.  Egypt 
just wanted to continue with the status quo in the Human 
Rights Commission.  Gabr countered that the Commission should 
be more involved in providing technical assistance.  When 
asked if Iran would welcome UN technical assistance on human 
rights, Gabr argued it would. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  UNSC reform:  Gabr told the DCM that Egypt wants 
the African continent to have greater representation on the 
UNSC, but said it is equally important that African 
representation not be a divisive matter among African 
nations.  She also noted that she does not believe the U.S. 
will tackle the issue of the veto and does not see strong USG 
support for Japan.  The DCM responded that U.S. support of 
Japan is not in question, but added that none of the UNSC 
reform proposals currently on the table appear compelling. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) USG Financial Support:  Gabr flagged USG financial 
support for the UN as a sensitive matter for Egypt.  The GOE 
would like to see the U.S. funnel more of its development 
assistance, in the Palestinian Authority, for example, 
through UN programs.  DCM noted the need for much greater 
management reform within the UN system before the USG would 
agree to shift bilateral aid to UN programs. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Mandate review:  Gabr said Egypt strongly opposes 
any effort to give the Secretary General discretion to review 
mandates.  These should remain in the General Assembly so 
that nations retain control.  DCM suggested that Gabr was 
mischaracterizing the U.S. proposal. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Gabr said Egypt wants the Peacebuilding Commission 
to fall under the ECOSOC, not the Security Council, as the 
U.S. prefers.  However, there may be some room for discussion 
on this issue, she added.  Gabr concluded that it remains 
important to Egypt that the recipient country consent to any 
programs. 
 
¶9. (SBU)  CCIT:  Gabr said MFA's legal department is working 
on language concerning the right to self-determination and 
the rights of people under occupation.  Her Deputy, Ihab 
Fouzy, added that the GOE may consider cooperating on the 
desire for a simple "declaration" in exchange for a 
discussion (possible topics to include: best practices, 
training opportunities, and experiences) at a high level 
meeting of the General Assembly.  Gabr said Egypt wants there 
to be a consensus (not a vote) on the CCIT because a vote on 
a legally binding instrument could lead to credibility 
problems. 
 
10  (SBU)  Comment:  Gabr is a genuine expert on the UN 
system having served in both NY and as Ambassador in Geneva. 
She is also an unreconstructed NAMist, and a champion of NAM 
positions.  A toe-to-toe exchange with Ambassador Tahir Kheli 
should be revealing and constructive. 
 
 
RICCIARDONE