05CAIRO8929
NEW ORLEANS ALL STARS BRASS BAND LIGHTS UP
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 008929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR R, NEA, AND ECA/PE/C/CU 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL EG
SUBJECT:  NEW ORLEANS ALL STARS BRASS BAND LIGHTS UP 
EGYPT 
 
REF:  A) STATE 194800, B) STATE 194812, C) CAIRO 8192 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: The New Orleans All Stars Brass Band 
played for about 900 people including senior 
representatives of the GOE, business leaders, military 
officers, and jazz fans in lively concerts in 
Alexandria on Nov. 18 and Cairo on Nov. 19.  The 
concerts, held to thank the Egyptian government for 
its assistance to Hurricane Katrina victims, 
highlighted the value of the American-Egyptian 
partnership at a time of crisis.  END SUMMARY 
 
-------------- 
Press coverage 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  Al-Ahram and other Egyptian daily newspapers 
published favorable stories, including quotes from 
the Ambassador, following the concerts.  In addition, 
Orbit satellite channel conducted interviews with the 
band and the Ambassador for a five-minute segment 
expected to air on the popular al-Qahira al-Yowm 
(Cairo Today) show seen by millions across the Arab 
world. 
 
¶3.  Press coverage even extended to the sports page. 
In al-Ahram's widely read Friday edition, the sports 
section ran a prominent photo of the Ambassador using 
the occasion of the concert to congratulate al-Ahly, 
a storied Cairo soccer club, for capturing the 
African Champions League crown. 
 
¶4.  Alexandria Channel 5 television broadcast an 
extended story on the Alexandria performance, 
focusing on attendance by senior military figures and 
the USG's message of thanks. 
 
------------- 
Cairo concert 
------------- 
 
¶5.  While scheduling conflicts related to the 
parliamentary elections reduced attendance by invited 
VIPs in Cairo, post filled the gap with invitations 
to students and cultural contacts, who added a lively 
mix to the audience. 
 
¶6.  The audience responded with applause to the 
thanks offered by Ambassador Ricciardone and members 
of the band for Katrina assistance. (NOTE: Shortly 
after the hurricane, the Egyptian military dispatched 
two C-130 planes filled with relief supplies. END 
NOTE.)  The Ambassador presented Egyptian Major 
General Mohamed Said El-Assar, Advisor to the 
Minister of Defense, a coffee-table book on New 
Orleans as a token of USG gratitude. 
 
¶7.  The American Chamber of Commerce in Egypt 
sponsored a reception following the concert, 
providing an opportunity for the jazz musicians and 
Embassy officers to engage Egyptian guests, 
furthering the objective of strengthening cross- 
cultural, people-to-people engagement and exchanges. 
Among the guests were two New Orleans natives who had 
raised $5,000 here for hurricane relief. 
 
¶8.  Photos of the concert and reception are on the 
Mission's website, cairo.usembassy.gov. 
 
---------- 
Alexandria 
---------- 
 
¶9.  An audience of nearly 300 senior government, 
military, business and academic figures filled the 
Alexandria Creativity Center hall, clapping and 
rising to their feet to dance as the band played 
"Mardi Gras in Old New Orleans."  American Presence 
Post Alexandria Principal Officer began the evening 
with remarks in Arabic, thanking the government and 
people of Egypt and in particular the Egyptian Armed 
forces, represented by a delegation of Egyptian Naval 
officers, for Egypt's assistance following Hurricane 
Katrina. 
 
¶10.  Following the show, the band and audience 
members mingled in a reception and viewed an IIP 
paper show on Jazz and the city of New Orleans. 
Afterward, a smaller group of guests joined the band 
for dinner at a local restaurant. 
 
RICCIARDONE