05CAIRO8587
ROUND ONE OF PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS:  EGYPTIAN
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141014Z Nov 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 008587 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC JO EG
SUBJECT:  ROUND ONE OF PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS:  EGYPTIAN 
MEDIA THEMES, NOVEMBER 7 TO 13 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Egyptian media gave extensive coverage to 
the first round of parliamentary elections on November 9, 
with Egyptian TV devoting live coverage throughout the day 
of voting.  Pro-government media coverage emphasized what 
it termed the election's "transparency" and high voter 
turn-out and reported on the loss of seats by key 
opposition figures, such as Ayman Nour.  Meanwhile, the 
independent and opposition media focused on allegations of 
vote buying and violence and reported on demonstrations 
critical of election results.  A prominent pro-government 
commentator praised the first round as "great progress," 
but then stated that "the issue of bribes" was a problem. 
Most opposition and independent commentators focused on 
allegations of irregularities.  "There will be no 
difference between the previous and the coming 
parliaments," wrote a commentator on November 11 in a 
leading independent daily.  In addition to the elections, 
the Egyptian media covered the November 9 terrorist attacks 
in Jordan.  Two large circulation pro-government dailies 
reported on November 12 that leading Islamic scholars in 
Egypt condemned the attacks as "illegitimate" and "anti- 
Islamic."  End summary. 
 
¶2.  First round of parliamentary elections coverage, I: 
Egyptian TV (ETV) gave live, around-the-clock coverage to 
the first round of parliamentary elections on November 9. 
Throughout the day, TV reporters were stationed outside of 
polling places interviewing voters, many of whom spoke 
positively about their voting experience, while other 
voters complained of poor organization at some polling 
places.  ETV also hosted throughout the day newspaper 
editors and political analysts to discuss the logistics of 
the elections and their meaning to future democratic 
reform.  Leading pro-government daily Al-Ahram 
(circulation: 750,000) asserted on November 10 in its 
banner headline that the first round of elections were "the 
most honest in 50 years."  Al-Ahram's front page reported 
that Ayman Nour, Head of Al-Ghad party and runner-up in 
this year's presidential election, lost his seat, as did 
the Deputy Head of Al-Wafd party; while leading ruling 
National Democratic Party (NDP) figures, such as Kamal Al- 
Shazly (still the longest serving parliamentarian in the 
world), retained their seats.  Pro-government daily Al 
Akhbar (circulation: 800,000) reported on its front page on 
November 10 that there was "unprecedented voter turn-out." 
The front page of leading opposition daily Al-Wafd 
(circulation: 75,000) alleged that there were "grave 
violations in the elections, using old voters lists and 
bribing voters with money and drugs."  Independent daily 
Al-Masry Al-Youm (circulation: 25,000) reported on its 
November 10 front page that "the opposition reported NDP 
violations and fraud, including preventing voters from 
reaching stations and using nontransparent ballot boxes." 
 
¶3.  First round of parliamentary elections coverage, II: 
Ardently pro-government daily Al-Gomhouriya (circulation: 
500,000) printed a banner headline that highlighted the 
"success of democracy" and the "opposition's defeat" on 
November 11.  Al-Gomhouriya also reported that "in light of 
their poor performance in the first round of the elections, 
all [opposition] political parties are not expected to 
obtain the 5 percent (26 seats) needed to run in the 2011 
presidential elections."  Pan-Arab daily Al-Sharq Al-Awsat 
and Al-Wafd reported on November 12 that after Friday noon 
prayers the day before in an middle class neighborhood of 
Cairo, Muslim Brotherhood (MB) members "staged a large 
demonstration and shouted slogans in protest of government 
interference in the November 9 elections."  The articles 
also reported that security forces arrested around 40 MB 
demonstrators.  Al-Masry Al-Youm reported on November 11 
that some of its reporters were assaulted by security 
forces on election day.  Egyptian website bloggers were 
abuzz with news that an Al-Jazeera reporter was beaten by 
two unknown men on November 9.  Independent daily Nahdet 
Masr (circulation: 25,000) reported on November 12 that the 
opposition movement Kifaya ("Enough") would organize 
demonstrations nationwide "to protest the NDP's rigging of 
the election."  Deputy A/S Elizabeth Cheney was quoted on 
November 10 in Al-Ahram as saying that the elections were 
"an important step towards real democracy." DAS Cheney also 
appeared on ETV on November 12 to say that the 
international community would "work to ensure that Egypt is 
taking further steps towards expanding the democratic 
process." 
 
¶4.  First round of parliamentary elections - commentary: 
While all pro-government commentators praised the first 
round of elections, many agreed that there were problems. 
Former Editor-in-chief of Al-Ahram, Ibrahim Nafei wrote on 
November 11, "There was great progress in the elections. 
However, the issues of bribes and religious slogans still 
have to be dealt with."  A columnist writing in Al-Ahram 
the following day praised the "democratic atmosphere in 
which the elections were conducted," but then pointed out 
that "bullying and bribery" had tarnished the elections. 
Another columnist in Al-Ahram wrote pessimistically on 
November 11 that the first round of elections showed that 
"old regimes cannot cope with new systems and they only 
seek to remain in power without really believing in 
reform."  The Editor-in-chief of Al-Wafd opined on November 
11 that "the elections showed that the government and the 
NDP do not believe in a pluralistic system and will not 
give up its majority in the parliament by any means." 
"There will be no difference between the previous and the 
coming parliaments," wrote Al-Masry Al-Youm's leading 
columnist on November 11.  "The NDP will not move toward 
reform by itself and needs to be pressed."  The next day, 
the same columnist criticized the "lack of transparency. 
Bribery and bullying ruled supreme." 
 
¶5.  Jordan terrorist attacks:   All major newspapers and 
ETV reported on November 11 that President Mubarak had 
pledged Egyptian support to Jordan in the aftermath of the 
November 9 terrorist attacks in Amman, along with details 
of the attacks.  The same day, the unsigned editorial in 
Al-Gomhouriya blamed "the situation in Iraq" for the Amman 
terrorist attacks, stating that "justice is the first step 
to defeating international terrorism."  On November 12, Al- 
Akhbar and Al-Gomhouriya reported that leading Islamic 
scholars and mosques in Egypt condemned the terrorist 
attacks as "illegitimate" and "anti-Islamic." 
 
RICCIARDONE