05DAMASCUS5791
Damascus Media Reaction: UNSC Resolution on Syria,
Wed Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAMASCUS 005791 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: UNSC Resolution on Syria, 
Iraq, Palestinian Territories (11/2-2) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian newspapers published the text of UN 
Security Council Resolution 1636 demanding full Syrian 
cooperation with the UN probe into the murder of former 
Lebanese PM Al-Hariri. They highlighted the fact that the 
resolution dropped the threat of sanctions and called on 
Syria to cooperate with the investigation commission. Papers 
also published the text of FM Al-Shar'a's speech to the 
Security Council and reported on the other speeches. 
 
On 11/2 papers reported local, Arab and international 
reactions to the UNSC resolution, saying that "the Mehlis 
report and the UNSC resolution show premeditated intentions 
to finalize the US-Zionist project," and that "the 
resolution is new proof of US hegemony and its double 
standard policy." 
 
Papers also reported a demonstration near the U.S. Embassy 
in Damascus by a private public relations group, civil 
institutions and crowds of students in a show of support for 
President Asad and in protest of pressure and accusations 
against Syria. 
 
On Iraq, papers reported a call by Iraqi PM Al-Ja'fary for a 
year's extension of the stay of occupation troops in Iraq 
and a White House statement that withdrawal from Iraq would 
encourage extremists to demolish Israel. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"President Al-Asad receives a letter from Emir of Qatar 
Sheikh Hamad Ben Khalifa Al Thani on the situation in the 
region and issues of mutual concern and cooperation between 
the two countries. President Asad sends letters to the 
leaders of the UAE, Bahrain and Kuwait on the regional 
situation and pressures on Syria" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 11/1) 
"The UN Security Council adopts a resolution dropping the 
sanctions and calling on Syria to cooperate with the 
international investigation. Foreign Minister Al-Shara: 
There is a hidden intention to accuse us; we will cooperate 
with the commission to establish the truth" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 11/1) 
"Unreceptive Arab and international reactions to the Mehlis 
report and UNSC Resolution 1636: The report and the 
resolution harbor premeditated intentions to finalize the US- 
Zionist project" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/2) 
"Thousands of Syrians stage a sit-in Al-Rawda Square in 
rejection of pressure and false accusations" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 11/2) 
"Russia: The Syrian investigation committee is a positive 
step. China: We opposed sanctions, to maintain stability in 
the region. Algeria: Fear and worry from the UN Security 
Council resolution. Brazil: The preliminary draft resolution 
violated the principle of 'the accused is innocent unless 
proven otherwise.'" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/01) 
"Israel welcomes Resolution 1636 and calls for implementing 
the Larsen report" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/2) 
"Speaker of the People's Assembly appeals to Speakers of 
Arab and international parliaments to side with Syria in the 
face of foreign pressures against it" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 11/1) 
"Israel arrests 3 youths in occupied Golan on charges of 
resisting Israeli occupation" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
11/1) 
"Israeli occupation forces assassinate two activists in 
Jebalia. Hamas threatens severe retaliation and calls for 
supporting the Palestinian Authority. Conditional Israeli 
approval to open the Rafah border crossing" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 11/2) 
"Sharon renews challenges to the international will: 
Settlement activities will continue in the West Bank and 
Golan. One Palestinian martyred in Qabatiya. Palestinian 
fear of Israeli strike" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/1) 
"Al-Ja'fari calls for a one-year extension for occupation 
troops. The White House: Withdrawal from Iraq would 
encourage extremists to demolish Israel" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 11/2) 
"Seven U.S. soldiers killed in al-Youssefiya and Balad. US 
forces kill and injure over 125 Iraqis in Karbala" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 11/1) 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
"Transparency of the Syrian Position" 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (11/1): "Now that the Security Council has adopted 
a resolution calling for full Syrian cooperation with the UN 
investigation commission, and dropped the threat of imposing 
economic sanctions, it should be noted that the attempts to 
turn the UN Security Council into a mechanism for 
investigating Syria and interfering with the authorities of 
the UN investigation commission have failed. The majority of 
the world community has no suspicions about the transparency 
of the Syrian position and the deliberate injustice 
represented by the premeditated political stands towards 
Syria.... 
"The UNSC resolution is more political than judicial. Syria 
rejects the accusation that it did not cooperate with the 
investigation into the Al-Hariri assassination. We must 
stress that the emphasis by some international parties on 
the issue of Syria's non-cooperation with the investigation 
commission is a shameful hypocrisy and a preconceived 
political position.... 
"The Security Council resolution remained more political 
than judicial, as evidenced by the debate that took place in 
the session, when the British Foreign Secretary and the US 
Secretary of State deliberately repeated the refrain of 
 
SIPDIS 
accusations that Syria has not cooperated -- either with the 
investigation commission or on other Middle East issues. 
"Syria has all along stated its desire to arrive at the 
truth and identify the criminals, based on conclusive 
evidence. Based on this legal rule, the international 
community, represented by the United Nations, is called upon 
to help Syria continue the investigation in a transparent 
way to reach the result that Syria and the whole world seek: 
uncovering and punishing the real culprits in the crime of 
the Al-Hariri assassination.... 
"While thanking its friends in the international community 
for their constructive position in the Security Council and 
in all other international forums, Syria reaffirms that, 
just as it was a pioneer in its cooperation with the United 
Nations and its commitment to all its resolutions, it will 
cooperate fully with the international organization and its 
specialized committees. This is because Syria was and still 
is working with established credibility and transparency to 
enforce international law and achieve peace and security in 
the region." 
"Recollections at a Difficult Time" 
Dr. Fayez Sayegh, chief editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented (11/1): "This is not the first time that 
Syria has come under such immense pressure to bring it to 
its knees.... 
"The Syrian people have always been able to overcome 
difficulties and resume life calmly and with self- 
confidence. Syria's secret lies in its national unity and 
full accord between the people and the political 
leadership.... Foreign attempts to separate the people from 
the leadership in Syria only strengthen the bonds between 
them and heighten the Syrian citizen's sense of 
responsibility, regardless of his political, social, and 
cultural position. 
"The growing campaign against Syria, however, dictates 
further national cohesion and the adoption of additional 
measures and initiatives to achieve greater national unity, 
so as to make it impossible for others to wager on any 
penetration of the domestic front, no matter what the 
pressure...." 
Seche