05FRANKFURT8115
CG Frankfurt Iftaar Bolsters Ties, U.S. Image
Wed Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 008115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KISL PGOV PHUM GM
SUBJECT: CG Frankfurt Iftaar Bolsters Ties, U.S. Image 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for Internet distribution. 
 
REF: Frankfurt 7398 (notal) 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) ConGen Frankfurt recently hosted its first Iftaar 
event (featuring U.S. Army Muslim chaplains) during the 
Muslim holy month of Ramadan as part of our outreach to the 
large Muslim community in Post's district.  The many guests 
expressed their gratitude and praised USG efforts to reach 
out to Muslims, expressing surprise and approval that the 
USG hosts Iftaars in Washington and around the world.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
Consulate General Hosts First Iftaar 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Over sixty guests attended the event, held at Amerika 
Haus in Frankfurt.  Two U.S. Army Muslim chaplains stationed 
in Germany led the call to prayer, the breaking of the fast, 
and the prayers that marked the opening of the event. 
Guests included Turkish business community representatives 
as well as members of Muslim cultural and religious groups, 
consular corps representatives from Turkey, Indonesia, 
Morocco, and Egypt, and German officials working on 
integration issues.  The guests were predominantly male, but 
a half-dozen Muslim women also attended.  Following the 
prayers, Consulate representatives gave opening remarks 
including a German translation of President Bush's Ramadan 
message. 
 
"Germany Has A Lot to Learn From You" 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) A leading member of the Islamische 
Religionsgemeinschaft Hessen (IRH, the largest Muslim 
organization in the German state of Hessen) told Poloff that 
the German government could learn a great deal from the 
United States with regards to Muslim outreach, citing 
President Bush's annual Iftaar at the White House as an 
important example of U.S. efforts to reach out to the Muslim 
community.  Another interlocutor called the United States a 
model of religious freedom since Muslims are allowed to 
worship freely, despite the events of September 11.  Another 
guest opined that Germans want to reach out to Muslims but 
feel awkward ("Beruehrungsangst"). 
 
"Thanks for Thinking of Us" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The overwhelming sentiment from the guests was 
gratitude for being able to attend an American-sponsored 
Muslim event.  For many, this was the first opportunity to 
mingle with official Americans.  Some remarked that the 
invitation provided the Muslim community a measure of 
legitimacy and acceptance that they often do not receive 
from German society.  Guests also noted that since the 
attacks of September 11, many Muslims in this area feel they 
are branded as extremists and/or terrorists. 
 
"Muslims in the U.S. Army?" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The Iftaar also revealed and countered many 
participant pre-conceptions about the U.S. (some expressed 
surprise that Muslims were allowed in the U.S. military, let 
alone as chaplains).  A highlight of the evening was the 
crowd's response (a combination of awe, surprise, respect, 
and appreciation) to the chaplains' call to prayer and 
religious ceremony (all in Arabic).  Many commented that 
this type of event helps build bridges of understanding and 
cooperation.  During the Iftaar meal that followed, the 
chaplains were treated like rock stars with guests jostling 
to line up to meet them and be photographed with them.  We 
hope to invite U.S. military imams for future events that 
involve exchange of ideas on Muslim life in America and 
related topics.  (Note: A number of guests also exchanged 
contact information with the chaplains, suggesting positive 
momentum in that community). 
 
 
Muslim Community Concerns 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The evening also provided insights into the Muslim 
community's concerns.  IRH representatives vented 
frustration over their inclusion in the latest report by the 
state Office for the Protection of the Constitution (LfV, 
the German law enforcement organization which tracks 
domestic extremists), dismissing allegations of 
fundamentalism and unfair treatment of women as baseless. 
Other guests expressed unease over a Christian Democratic- 
led government in Berlin and possible negative repercussions 
for Muslims throughout Germany.  Some painted Christian 
Democrat (CDU) representatives as distrustful of Muslims and 
said a "grand coalition" might enact legislation curbing 
freedom and damaging the integration process.  As evidence, 
they pointed to the CDU-led Hesse government's recent 
dragnet raids in Muslim neighborhoods (reftel), and the 
CDU's call for Turkey to become a "privileged partner" in 
the EU rather than a full member. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7. (U) The success of this event has reinforced and expanded 
ties with Muslim contacts (several of the group also 
attended the open house celebration at the new Consulate 
General building on October 31 a few days later).  Guests 
expressed enthusiasm about making our Iftaar an annual 
event.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8. (U) This cable has been cleared by Embassy Berlin. 
 
PASI