05MADRID4009
LETTER TO SECRETARY FROM FM MORATINOS
Thu Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171530Z Nov 05UNCLAS MADRID 004009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
EUR/WE FOR ALLEGRONE AND HALL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SP
SUBJECT: LETTER TO SECRETARY FROM FM MORATINOS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) During the November 16 visit to Madrid of EUR 
Assistant Secretary Daniel Fried, Deputy Foreign Minister 
Bernardino Leon gave A/S Fried a letter to Secretary Rice 
from Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos.  The 
letter discusses the Spanish government,s positive view of 
the state of the bilateral relationship and invites the 
Secretary to visit Spain in the first quarter of 2006.  Para 
 
SIPDIS 
2 contains an informal translation of the letter.  The 
original will be sent to the Department via pouch. 
 
¶2. (SBU) INFORMAL TRANSLATION OF LETTER FROM FM MORATINOS TO 
THE SECRETARY: 
 
Begin text: 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
The Minister and Cooperation 
Ms. Condoleezza Rice 
Secretary of State 
 
SIPDIS 
United States of America 
 
Madrid, November 15, 2005 
 
Dear Condi: 
 
First I want to express my satisfaction over the positive 
development in relations between Spain and the United States 
of America in recent months.  This is undoubtedly due to the 
efforts and attention you and your team at the Department of 
State have devoted to these relations. 
 
The Spanish Government has also made great efforts to promote 
relations between our two countries.  Our working meeting on 
last April 15th in Washington was followed by visits by the 
Spanish Ministers of Interior, Justice, Defense, Education 
and Science, and Industry, Trade and Tourism, and meetings 
between senior officials of our two countries on regional 
issues in the Middle East, the Mediterranean, North Africa 
and Latin America.  In the fight against terrorism and 
organized crime, along with signing agreements on mutual 
legal assistance, extradition and customs cooperation, we 
have also agreed to establish operational working groups 
between our two countries, respective services. 
 
Spain and the United States have also increased their 
cooperation in areas of crisis, such as Bosnia, Kosovo, 
Afghanistan, and more recently in NATO,s operations to aid 
Pakistan.  Last September, Spain took charge of a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team in Afghanistan in the framework of ISAF. 
The Spanish Government confirms its full commitment in the 
Atlantic Alliance,s effort to promote peace and well-being 
for the Afghan people. 
 
My Government agrees with the U.S. Government on the need to 
promote economic and political reforms in countries in the 
Middle East and North Africa.  I am very pleased to have 
participated in the recent meeting of the Forum for the 
Future in Bahrain and that Spain is actively collaborating in 
the creation of the Foundation for the Future.  I am also 
pleased that the United States Government has stated its 
intent to participate in the Alliance of Civilizations 
initiative that the Governments of Spain and Turkey are 
jointly sponsoring. 
 
I therefore feel that regular consultations between the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation and the Secretary 
of State are very important to continue promoting our 
relations and our collaboration.  I am therefore pleased to 
invite you to make an official visit to Spain, if possible 
during the first quarter of 2006, whenever your schedule 
permits, in order to continue such consultations.  Your 
presence in our country would undoubtedly send a clear 
message of the firm desire of the United States and Spain to 
cooperate in solidarity as allies and friends. 
 
Warm regards. 
 
Yours (illegible) (handwritten) 
 
Miguel 
Miguel Angel Moratinos 
 
End text. 
AGUIRRE