05PARIS7573
AVIAN FLU PREPAREDNESS: FRENCH EFFORTS
Fri Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041843Z Nov 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007573 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G, OES, OES/IHA, EUR/WE 
HHS FOR INTERNATIONAL/STEIGER/BUDASHEWITZ/GAY 
USDA FOR ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
USDA FOR FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
CDC FOR DR. DBELL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO EAGR SOCI FR
SUBJECT: AVIAN FLU PREPAREDNESS: FRENCH EFFORTS 
DESIGNED TO REASSURE PUBLIC 
 
REF: PARIS 7132 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The GOF continues to hone preparations 
for a future avian flu pandemic. On October 27, 
Research Minister Goulard made symbolic visits to some 
of France's most prestigious biological research 
facilities that could prove critical in any response to 
an H5N1 viral outbreak.  On November 3-4, a full-scale 
exercise was conducted on a poultry farm in the 
Finistere region (Brittany).  In addition to its 
training value, it was also meant to reassure the 
French public that the government can handle the real 
thing.  According to a recent announcement, mandatory 
containment of poultry has been instituted in one- 
quarter of continental France.  End summary. 
 
Research - Front and Center 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On October 27, Research Minister Goulard visited 
key public research centers in the Lyon area 
(Technopole Lyon-Gerland) to discuss the potential 
availability of French experts and research facilities 
in the event of an avian flu pandemic.  Visits 
included: 
 
-- European Research Center for Virology and Immunology 
(CERVI; a joint INSERM-Lyon I University lab); 
 
-- Ecole Normale Superieure (ENS Lyon) with its world 
renowned research laboratories; 
 
-- Sanofi-Pasteur's Research and Production Center at 
Marcy l'Etoile (vaccine production); and 
 
-- Jean Mrieux-INSERM P4 laboratory de Lyon, a high- 
level bio security and research center for highly 
pathogenic viruses (ebola, lassa, etc.). 
 
Herve Raoul, Assistant Director at the P4 laboratory 
was widely quoted in the press for his remark that the 
lab was "ready to stop all other research to focus on 
the avian flu virus in case of a pandemic." 
 
`Confidential' Seminar 
---------------------- 
 
¶3.  On November 3, the Research Ministry gathered 50 
key French scientists to discuss on-going research on 
emerging diseases of viral origin and notably avian 
flu.  Little has filtered out concerning substance of 
this meeting. However, in the closing speech (which 
permitted press access), Minister Goulard announced 
that the new French Research Agency's budget for 
research on infectious diseases of human or animal 
origin would be strengthened in 2006.  This funding (no 
figures provided) is to be devoted to the 
characterization of emerging viruses, better 
understanding of mutation mechanisms, and development 
of vaccinal and antiviral therapies. 
 
France stages `what if' exercise 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  French authorities sealed off a poultry farm in 
Kergloff, Brittany, on November 3-4 to test their 
ability to handle a bird flu outbreak.  The purpose of 
the exercise was to validate on a large scale the 
implementation of containment mechanisms in infected 
areas, test coordination between teams, and evaluate 
numbers of personnel and equipment necessary in case of 
real emergency. 
 
¶5.  Scheduled nearly a year ago, the drill received 
high profile media coverage with the recent arrival of 
the H5N1 virus in Europe.  Approximately 80-100 
journalists in protective suits and masks attended the 
two-day drill.  The first day was devoted to the 
quarantine of the poultry farm and assessment of the 
threat (sending blood samples from chickens, setting up 
road blocks, etc.).  The second day (postulating a 
confirmed contaminated bird) focused on measures 
related to the slaughtering of poultry and protection 
of deployed personnel.  While the exercise had 
originally been designed to deal with animal 
contamination, the local hospital used the occasion to 
test its procedures in the event of a human bird flu 
casualty. 
 
¶6.  Comment: This was the second exercise conducted in 
the area. The previous one that took place in June 
2005, before the arrival of the H5N1 virus in Europe, 
attracted almost no attention.  The recent exercise 
received much press attention.  While the government 
wanted to show off its capabilities, poultry producers 
reportedly were unhappy fearing more adverse publicity 
might further deter consumers from purchasing poultry. 
Poultry consumption in France has fallen an estimated 
20-25 percent in the recent weeks.  End Comment. 
 
Jailed Birds 
------------ 
 
¶7.  The GOF has ordered poultry breeders in 26 
Departments at particular risk of contact with 
migratory wildfowl (which could spread the virus) to 
keep their chickens, ducks, and geese indoors.  The ban 
covers roughly 25 percent of French territory, mostly 
areas along the Atlantic coast and in eastern France. 
The government also suspended markets and displays 
featuring wild birds across the country. 
 
Hot Pictures 
------------ 
 
¶8.  The Health Ministry will launch in November 2005 a 
test to evaluate the effectiveness of infra-red cameras 
for the detection of febrile travelers in French 
airports.  Cameras will be tested for a two-month 
period at the emergency services of the Pitie- 
Salpetriere hospital in Paris.  Commenting on this new 
initiative, Interministerial Coordinator for Avian Flu 
Didier Houssin stated that it will not be practical to 
equip entire airports with the cameras.  The Health 
Ministry is also considering the use of electronic ear 
thermometers in embarkation and disembarkation areas. 
STAPLETON