05SOFIA1942
PRESS REACTION: DELAY IN LIBYAN CASE EVOKES MIXED
Fri Nov 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sofia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SOFIA 001942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PINR PGOV LY BU
SUBJECT: PRESS REACTION: DELAY IN LIBYAN CASE EVOKES MIXED 
REACTION IN BULGARIA 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  The November 15 decision by the Libyan 
Supreme Court to postpone judgment on the case of five 
Bulgarian medics until January 31st 2006, has provoked a 
mixed reaction in Bulgaria.  Government leaders, while 
relieved at having averted confirmation of the death 
sentences, have voiced concerns that the new delay will 
prolong the suffering of the five innocent nurses. 
Bulgarian officials note that the postponement allows for 
more time to continue efforts at securing the medics' 
release.  Bulgarian media coverage on the decision has been 
extensive, including widespread coverage of the clashes 
between angry Libyans and riot police outside the courtroom 
in Tripoli.  Some editorials are expressing hope that the 
West will help to work out a behind-the-scene deal for the 
Bulgarian medics' release. END SUMMARY. 
 
PURVANOV: DECISION ONLY PROLONGS NURSES' FATE 
 
¶2. (U) Bulgarian politicians were swift to react to the 
Libyan court's decision.  President Purvanov said in a 
statement that the court was expected to deliver the only 
possible decision---an acquittal. "A thorough analysis of 
the evidence in the case, made by European, Bulgarian and 
Arab legal experts, proves that the evidence contains 
nothing to confirm the guilt of the Bulgarian medics," 
remarked the President.  Purvanov added the "Libyan Supreme 
Court decision is prolonging the drama of the innocent 
Bulgarian medics."  He expressed hope that "this 
postponement would be the last and that a fair resolution 
will be achieved."  The President thanked Bulgaria's friends 
and partners for their support, and said that "efforts 
should continue to reach an agreement with the Libyan 
authorities that would allow that innocent nurses return 
back home".  The media highlighted Purvanov's personal 
message to the five nurses, assuring them that "Bulgaria 
will not spare any effort to ensure a favorable outcome of 
this painful trial." 
BULGARIA STEADFAST IN ITS POSITION 
¶3. (U) The Bulgarian government echoed Purvanov's message 
and said the relevant institutions would continue to press 
for a favorable resolution to the case.  Foreign Ministry 
spokesman Dimitar Tsanchev said Bulgaria hoped the delay 
would give the court an opportunity to further consider the 
indisputable evidence of the nurses' innocence.  Like 
Purvanov, Tsanchev underscored the government's growing 
concern for the nurses' welfare, saying that the 
postponement tested the limits of the nurses' physical and 
emotional endurance.  Tsanchev maintained that there would 
be no change in Bulgaria's official position of refusing to 
accept Libyan demands for payment in exchange for the 
nurses' release.  "Any payments, compensations or other 
forms that imply acknowledgement of guilt are unacceptable 
for Bulgaria," Tsanchev added.  According to the spokesman, 
"Bulgarian authorities will continue to work towards 
securing a maximum level of international support for the 
medics." 
¶4. (U) Other politicians also expressed concern over the 
nurses' current health.  Former President and current 
Chairman of the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) party Petar 
Stoyanov said Bulgaria should demand a change in the 
conditions under which the nurses are being held, which he 
described as "appalling."  Rather than being kept in 
custody, Stoyanov argued that the nurses should be released 
on bail.  Stoyanov sees the nurses release on bail as a key 
step that could relieve some of the pressure built up around 
the case. 
HIV CASE PART OF A "COMPLEX LIBYAN PUZZLE" 
¶5. (U) The ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) expressed 
its disappointment and alarm with the decision. "The 
Bulgarian medics are becoming hostages and part of the 
complex Libyan puzzle, they are means which Libya is using 
to solve its domestic and foreign policy problems," BSP 
spokesman Angel Naidenov said.  "The adjournment of the case 
allows the Libyan regime to continue the political haggling 
with the international community and Bulgaria in a bid to 
derive certain economic and political dividends from the 
fate of the Bulgarian medics," said MP Konstantin Dimitrov 
from the center-right Democrats for Strong Bulgaria.  "At 
the same time, Bulgaria is getting an extra chance to 
broaden international support, including through joint 
action between Sofia, Brussels and Washington," Dimitrov 
added.  Defense lawyers of the nurses saw the delay as a 
positive sign, saying new appeals meant new chances for the 
defense to prove the medics' innocence. 
EDITORIALS NOTE `PROLONGED AGONY' BUT ALSO HOPE 
 
¶6. (U) The court's decision received widespread media 
coverage with the clashes between the angered relatives of 
the infected children and police figuring prominently in the 
headlines.  Bulgaria's largest circulation daily Trud 
published a photo of one of the parents of Libyan children 
protesting outside the court and quoting a mother as calling 
"on Al Qaeda to launch revenge against the Bulgarians." 
Another parent was quoted by "Trud" as saying that he "will 
become a soldier of Al Qaeda and kidnap any Bulgarian, 
working in Libya." 
 
¶7. (U) Some editorials were optimistic that a delay in the 
court's decision would lead to the nurses' release. An 
editorial in "24 Chasa" daily said that even though the next 
76 days will be painful for the nurses and Bulgarian 
society, the delay allowed extra time for vigorous efforts 
to secure the nurses' release. An editorial in "Standart" 
daily says that "to expect an acquittal for the nurses and 
the Palestinian doctor is now out of the question. 
Hopefully, the West could pay for the nurses' release 
because the U.S., UK and France negotiated with Tripoli on 
the Lockerbie, La Belle and UTA plane.  The truth no longer 
matter, interests do," Standart said. 
BEYRLE