05TAIPEI4652
MEDIA REACTION: BUSH'S ASIA TRIP
Mon Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

212308Z Nov 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TAIPEI 004652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: BUSH'S ASIA TRIP 
 
 
¶1. Summary: The Taiwan dailies gave extensive reporting and 
editorial coverage November 19-21 to the APEC summit in 
Pusan and U.S. President George W. Bush's visit to Beijing, 
with a special emphasis on Bush's summit with Chinese 
President Hu Jintao Sunday.  Coverage also focused on the 
campaigns for the upcoming 3-in-1 elections, the cross- 
Strait deal on holiday charter flights, and the 
International Commission on Conserving Atlantic Tuna's 
decision to slash Taiwan's big-eye tuna quota for 2006.  The 
pro-independence newspapers in general covered the Bush-Hu 
summit by focusing on Washington's disappointment with 
China's human rights and religious freedom, while the pro- 
unification and pro-status quo papers described both 
Washington and Beijing's desire to strengthen cooperation in 
not only bilateral, but also global issues.  With regard to 
Taiwan, several newspapers reported the United States' 
determination to maintain military balance in East 
Asia and its reiteration that it does not support 
independence nor the use of force in the Taiwan Strait. 
 
¶2. Almost all major Taiwan dailies editorialized on Bush's 
Asia trip, his speech in Kyoto, and the Bush-Hu summit.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" and "Taiwan Daily" asserted 
in their editorials that Washington should adjust and review 
its one China policy, adding that since Bush 
endorsed Taiwan's democracy, it should not try to suppress 
Taiwan's democracy simply to curry favor with China.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News" urged Washington to 
contemplate on the degree to which Washington can keep a 
balance between safeguarding its own national interests and 
protecting Taiwan's democracy from China's military 
expansion.  The centrist "China Times" ran an editorial on 
the Bush-Hu summit, saying that Washington evidently looks 
to use more direct contact to resolve U.S.-China disputes. 
Professor Chu Yun-han of National Taiwan University said in 
a commentary in the "China Times" that Bush's trip to East 
Asia indicated that the United States is trying its best to 
safeguard its strategic leadership in the region and prevent 
China from undermining Washington's role in East Asia.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, pro- 
unification, English-language "China Post" called Bush's 
speech in Kyoto a "pat on the back" but urged Taiwan not to 
overlook the fact that Washington needs Beijing's 
cooperation in most crucial areas.  End summary. 
 
A) "[While] Endorsing Taiwan's Democracy, [Washington] 
Should Not Suppress Taiwan's Democracy" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
asserted in an editorial (11/21): 
 
". [W]e want to remind [Washington] that even though [U.S. 
President George W.] Bush endorsed Taiwan's democratic 
achievements, the U.S. government, constrained by China, has 
constantly shown reluctance in its policy toward Taiwan's 
further development of its democracy.  For example, in order 
for Taiwan to become a normal country, rectifying its name 
and writing a new constitution are necessary steps for its 
democracy.  But the U.S. government, perhaps out of its need 
to work with China in dealing with international issues or 
due to China's military intimidation against Taiwan, has 
constantly suppressed Taiwan's democracy to curry favor with 
China. . 
 
"The United States as a democratic model and China's 
military intimidation are the two forces that have a strong 
influence on Taiwan's political evolution. .  The fact that 
Bush hailed Taiwan's democracy on the one hand while the 
U.S. draws a red line on Taiwan's democracy on the other is 
incomprehensible to most Taiwan people. ." 
 
B) "Since Bush Lauds Taiwan's Democracy, [Washington] Should 
Adjust Its `One China Policy' in an Attempt to Push for Both 
Sides of the Taiwan Strait to Engage in a Dialogue That 
Carries No Pre-Condition" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
editorialized (11/21): 
 
". President [George W.] Bush's [Kyoto] speech turned Taiwan 
into an international focus.  Whether this speech represents 
a change in Washington's cross-Strait policy and what impact 
the speech will have on Washington-Beijing-Taipei ties are 
also issues of concern. .  But while endorsing Taiwan's 
democratic development, Bush should adopt concrete measures 
to consolidate Taiwan's democracy in an attempt to prevent 
the island from being annexed by China.  The Bush 
administration should establish a channel to engage in 
direct contact and dialogue with Taiwan and adjust its `one 
China policy' so as to create a sound environment for 
Taiwan's democracy. . 
 
"The United States has always supported Taiwan's democracy. 
To sustain Taiwan's democracy and to ensure that political 
freedom will become the foundation of human rights 
protection ., the United States must support Taiwan in 
becoming a sovereign nation worthy of its name. .  The 
United States should also make good use of Taiwan's 
strategic position, quickly and significantly enhancing 
Taiwan's strength to prevent the island from being 
marginalized. ." 
 
C) "The Right Course for U.S.-Taiwan Ties" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
[circulation: 20,000] commented in an editorial (11/21): 
 
"In a speech delivered last week in Kyoto, Japan, United 
States President George W. Bush lauded Taiwan as a model for 
freedom and prodded the leaders of the People's Republic of 
China to respond positively to meet their citizens' demands 
for liberty and openness. . What the Bush administration 
should really contemplate is the degree to which Washington 
can keep a balance between safeguarding its own national 
interests and protect Taiwan's full-fledged democracy from 
China's military expansionism while engaging in building a 
`constructive, candid and cooperative' relations with an 
undemocratic PRC regime. 
 
"The efforts of Taiwan's DPP government to initiate 
constitutional reforms should be treated as a process of 
democratic maturation and institutionalization.  Washington 
should encourage Taiwan's efforts to upgrade its 
institutional foundations for democratic governance as a 
solid basis for a sustainable relationship." 
 
D) "The Changing Washington-Beijing Relations as Viewed from 
the Bush-Hu Summit" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] commented in an editorial (11/21): 
 
". In other words, when the rise of China is no longer a 
theory [but a fact], how will the United States address such 
a development?  It is an issue of concern not only for 
Taiwan but for Asia as a whole.  Following a series of 
events such as the U.S.-China jet collision, war on 
terrorism, and the Six-Party Talks, the United States has in 
fact been constantly fine-tuning its policy.  This year is 
in particular a critical year [for U.S.-China relations]. 
U.S. officials ranging from Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, Secretary of 
the Treasury John Snow, to the heads of Commerce Department 
have all visited mainland China in tow; even Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld, who holds a tough attitude toward 
Beijing, went to Beijing a month ago.  Perhaps these moves 
may not be sufficient enough to judge whether the United 
States has changed its policy, but evidently, Washington 
looks to use greater contact to resolve U.S.-China disputes. 
Looking at the [official U.S.] language, [it is noteworthy 
that] more and more American officials choose to use 
`manage' rather than `challenge' to describe current 
Washington-Beijing relations. ." 
 
E) "George W. Bush's Diplomatic Quandary" 
 
Chu Yun-han, professor of political science of National 
Taiwan University, noted in the "Weekly Commentary" column 
of the centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] (11/21): 
 
"[U.S. President George W.] Bush started his trip to East 
Asia last week, and he plans to visit four Northeast Asian 
countries including Mongolia.  But has devoted the most time 
and energy to this trip [than any other trip] since he 
started his second term.  The trip indicates that the United 
States is trying its best to safeguard its strategic 
leadership in East Asia, in particular, to prevent the rise 
of China from undermining Washington's leadership in the 
region.  But basically the situation has developed to an 
extent that it is out of U.S. control.  In just the past 
five years, East Asia has evolved and is no longer the same 
as it used to be.  For many years, the last thing Washington 
wanted to see was the rise of regionalism in East Asia and 
China playing a leading role in that process.  It is exactly 
during the five years under Bush's term, however, that these 
two trends have taken shape.  The vision of East Asian 
regionalism gradually emerges and assembles political 
support mainly because the United States has failed to come 
up with a plan that attracts most countries [in the region]. 
The Bush administration's deliberate manipulation which led 
China to confront Japan step by step also agitated many East 
Asian countries.  The climax of Bush's trip this time was 
the APEC summit in Pusan.  But many international observers 
sense that APEC has lost its focus and the function to 
continue developing. .  Just as Joe Nye of Harvard 
University said, the real climax on this year's East Asian 
political stage is the first-ever East Asia summit to be 
held in Kuala Lumpur.  [Unfortunately], this big show will 
feature Beijing, and the United States will be excluded. ." 
 
F) "A Pat on the Back from President Bush" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" [circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (11/19): 
 
"Taiwan got an unexpected pat on the back this week when 
U.S. President George W. Bush praised this `self-governing 
island' as `a model of freedom' and urged mainland China to 
emulate it.  Nothing would have gladdened Taiwan more than 
the American president's warm praise of Taiwan and 
gratuitous criticism of Beijing .  As there are many other 
`models of freedom' in Asia, why did Bush single out Taiwan 
which he knew would irritate Beijing?  He must have decided 
to do it purposely. 
 
"President Bush chose Kyoto, Japan, as the venue to deliver 
his speech on democracy to send a blunt message to Beijing. 
Wrapped in democracy, the message is `getting tough on 
China' on most issues, political, military, and economic. . 
President Bush's lavish praise for Taiwan, and his lecturing 
to Beijing should make President Chen Shui-bian and his pro- 
independence party jump about in glee.  For too long, Taiwan 
has been under Beijing's heavy hand to squeeze its 
international living space, including this week's Asia 
Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in Busan, South Korea. 
Bush's speech has put Taiwan on the map, to the chagrin of 
Beijing. 
 
"But realpolitik is about political reality.  Bush's `pat on 
the back' for Taiwan had to be followed by his reiteration 
of Washington's support for the `one China' policy. 
President Bush has to confront the reality that Mainland 
China is a rising power that challenges American supremacy 
in Asia if not the world.  He knows that U.S. relations with 
the Mainland are the most important of its foreign 
relations.  Washington needs Beijing's cooperation in most 
crucial areas - including the six-party talks on North 
Korea's nuclear weapons programs. ." 
 
PAAL