05TAIPEI4655
MEDIA REACTION: BUSH'S ASIA TRIP
Tue Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: BUSH'S ASIA TRIP 
 
¶1. Summary: The front-page headline story for almost all 
major Chinese-language Taiwan dailies November 22 was the 
indictment of 18 Taiwan officials, businessmen and 4 Thai 
laborers in the Kaohsiung Rapid Transit Corp scandal, among 
who, most notably, is former Presidential Office Deputy 
Secretary-General Chen Che-nan.  Newspaper coverage also 
 
SIPDIS 
focused on other scandals, campaigns for the upcoming 3-in-1 
elections, Taiwan's tuna quota cut for 2006, and the 
aftermath of U.S. President George W. Bush's summit with 
Chinese President Hu Jintao.  Most newspapers carried in 
their inside pages Taiwan Mainland Affairs Council Chairman 
Joseph Wu's comment in the Legislative Yuan Monday that 
Taiwan can breathe a sigh of relief now that the U.S. policy 
on cross-Strait relations has not changed after the Bush-Hu 
summit.  The centrist "China Times" ran a news article that 
quoted an unnamed high-ranking Taiwan official as saying the 
United States will stage a joint military exercise in 
Mongolia in June 2006 to rival China's "Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization," adding that Taiwan is seeking to participate 
in the exercise, too. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, Tamkang 
University's Graduate Institute for American Studies 
Professor Chen Yi-hsin said in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" that Bush's trip to Asia has led many Asian countries 
to sense that China has not only risen in stature but is 
also taking advantage of this current opportunity whereas 
Washington has to focus its foreign policy in the Middle 
East to significantly expand its sphere of influence in that 
region.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
discussed the Bush-Hu summit, saying that Washington and 
Beijing appear in sync on how to handle Taiwan, and the 
island should think hard about its place in the new world 
order.  End summary. 
 
A) "How Will the United States Restore Its Prestige in Asia" 
 
Chen Yi-hsin, professor at Tamkang University's Graduate 
Institute for American Studies, commented in the mass- 
circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (11/22): 
 
"President George W. Bush's trip to Asia may have led many 
Asian countries to sense that China has not only risen [in 
stature] but is also taking advantage of this current 
opportunity whereas Washington has to focus its foreign 
policy in the Middle East to significantly expand its sphere 
of influence [in that region].  If Washington does not 
change its policy now, Asia might gradually drift away from 
the United States.  The United States has attached too much 
importance on the Middle East, whereas the outcome [of its 
diplomatic efforts] may not be seen immediately.  In the 
meantime, however, there is a temporary vacuum in Asia's 
power structure.  China joined Russia in demanding at the 
annual conference of the Six Nations Cooperation 
Organization that the United States withdraw from the 
military bases in Central Asia.  China will also play a 
leading role in the East Asia Summit, which will take place 
in December, from which the superpower United States will be 
excluded. . 
 
"For mainland China, Bush's praise of Taiwan's democracy in 
Kyoto seemed on the surface as a move to persuade China to 
emulate Taiwan's democracy and freedom.  But in reality, . 
it seems evident that the United States has gradually come 
to realize that Beijing, following the enactment of its Anti- 
Secession Law, is about to replace Washington [in its level 
of influence] with regard to cross-Strait issues.  Bush's 
playing the card of Taiwan's democracy this time was thus an 
attempt to seize back its leadership regarding cross-Strait 
issues. ." 
 
B) "U.S., China in Sync on ROC" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" [circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (11/22): 
 
"For the first time in decades, Taiwan was not a problem 
issue in U.S.-China summit talks, but an appendix.  This is 
good-bad news for Taiwan.  Good, it signals the cross-strait 
status quo will be upheld without disruptions.  Bad, Taiwan 
is increasingly losing control of its future to the two 
powers. . 
 
"In Washington, there's a realization that while the U.S. 
can wage wars unilaterally, it can't achieve peace that way. 
This is especially true after 9-11.  China, though still a 
communist dictatorship and a potential challenger, is no 
longer called a strategic competitor but an indispensable 
partner and a `stakeholder' in managing world issues.  U.S. 
influence on China in economics, political development and 
human rights is limited.  China has to be accepted for what 
it is. . 
 
"Bush's Asia tour is widely seen as part of a campaign to 
rejuvenate U.S. leadership for a new world order.  In 
addition to engaging China, Washington is also expected to 
forge a partnership with Russia, accept India's nuclear 
status, welcome a more assertive Japan, and encourage a more 
capable and active Europe.  All are firm believers in the 
one-China principle.  Taiwan will be further sidelined.  The 
U.S. and China appear in sync on how to handle Taiwan, the 
island should think hard about its place in this new world 
order." 
 
PAAL