04DUBLIN944
THE PRESIDENT'S MEETING WITH IRISH PRESIDENT MARY
Wed Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L DUBLIN 000944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHITE HOUSE FROM AMBASSADOR JAMES C. KENNY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2009 
TAGS: PREL PGOV
SUBJECT: THE PRESIDENT'S MEETING WITH IRISH PRESIDENT MARY 
MCALEESE - JUNE 26, 2004 
 
REF: DUBLIN 867 
 
Classified By: Ambassador James C. Kenny, reason 1.4 (d) 
 
¶1.   (U)  This message provides information for the 
President's meeting with Irish President Mary McAleese at 
Dromoland Castle on June 26, prior to the start of the 
U.S.-EU Summit. 
 
The Role of Irish President 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.   (U)  President McAleese became the eighth Irish 
President in November 1997.  She was directly elected by the 
people and serves a seven-year term as the head of state; the 
head of government is Prime Minister Bertie Ahern.  The 
President is the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, but 
Irish law requires approval by the Parliament and by the 
Government before any troops can be deployed overseas -- and 
then only to UN-mandated missions. 
 
¶3.   (U)  Although she does not have an executive or policy 
role in her capacity as President, Mary McAleese has been 
extremely active in representing Ireland around the world, 
receiving foreign leaders in Dublin, and promoting peace and 
reconciliation with Northern Ireland.  She has also been an 
active promoter of Ireland's economy, and led a delegation to 
China last year to encourage greater trade with that nation. 
 
Northern Ireland 
---------------- 
 
¶4.   (C)  Mary McAleese, a Catholic, is the first Irish 
President to come from Northern Ireland.  Both she and her 
husband Martin were born and raised in Belfast, and their 
families suffered attacks during "The Troubles."  They are 
both deeply engaged in the Northern Ireland peace process. 
Martin -- whose childhood home was destroyed in an arson 
attack by loyalist paramilitaries -- spends almost all of his 
time working quietly behind the scenes with loyalist groups, 
one of the most disenfranchised communities in Northern 
Ireland.  Loyalist paramilitaries represent the most radical 
fringe of the unionist community, and Martin has taken on the 
challenge of persuading them to end their violent activity 
and enter the political process.  Whereas Sinn Fein has used 
its influence to bring republican paramilitaries into the 
fold, the Unionist parties in Northern Ireland have held 
loyalists at arms length in protest over their criminal 
activity (e.g. drug smuggling), violent intra-community turf 
wars, and attacks on Catholic nationalists. 
 
¶5.   (C)  Martin McAleese's work with loyalists is 
controversial, but he firmly believes in the value of Irish 
outreach.  Martin has brought loyalist groups to Dublin (a 
first) to meet with Irish officials for private and honest 
exchanges.  His efforts have the support of Prime Minister 
Bertie Ahern, who has also met with loyalist leaders. 
 
Personal Information 
-------------------- 
 
¶6.   (SBU)  President McAleese -- whose 53rd birthday is June 
27, the day after President Bush meets with her -- is married 
to Dr. Martin McAleese (an accountant and dentist).  They 
have three children.  Emma, aged 22, just graduated from 
university with a degree in electrical engineering and will 
spend six weeks in the U.S. this summer working at NASA 
headquarters in Washington.  Sara and Justin are twins, aged 
19; Justin is very interested in politics and hopes to attend 
the Republican National Convention in New York in August. 
President McAleese's professional background is in law and 
journalism.  She is a barrister and former Professor of Law. 
 
¶7.   (SBU)  Although President McAleese has not confirmed her 
intention to run for a second 7-year term this November, it 
is likely that that she will, and that she will face little 
serious opposition.  Her approval ratings are in the high 
80s/low 90s. 
KENNY