07DUBLIN171
IRELAND - SEVENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO6490
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0171/01 0610839
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 020839Z MAR 07 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8010
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITY
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA PRIORITY 0028
RUEHYD/AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE PRIORITY 0001
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 0133
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0249
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST PRIORITY 0530
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS PRIORITY 0047
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 18 DUBLIN 000171 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM 
STATE FOR EUR/PGI 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAP EI
SUBJECT: IRELAND - SEVENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
(TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 202745 DEC 06 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  001.4 OF 018 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Ireland's awareness of and positive 
performance on trafficking in persons (TIP) issues 
increased significantly in 2006, while the overall 
estimated number of suspected trafficking victims 
remained small.  Numerous public awareness campaigns, 
sponsored by the Government and NGOs, drew attention to 
Ireland's relatively new status as an immigration magnet 
and to the related possibility that the country, over 
time, could become a trafficking destination for the sex 
industry and cheap labor.  Recognizing the need to 
preempt this possibility, the Government drafted two new 
legislative bills that will address acknowledged gaps in 
anti-trafficking laws and bring Ireland into conformity 
with UN and EU regulations. The Government also took the 
first steps towards signing the Council of Europe 
Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings. 
The Secretary General of the Department of Justice, 
Equality, and Law Reform (DOJ) confirmed that Ireland 
would sign the Convention in late March 2007. 
 
In 2005, the Government established a TIP inter-agency 
Working Group that drew primarily from the DOJ and 
National Police (Garda).  In 2006, the Government made 
the Working Group a permanent body and expanded its 
membership to include representatives from the Department 
of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE), the 
Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the Health Services 
Executive (HSE) and the Irish Naturalisation and 
Immigration Service (INIS), which is part of the DOJ. 
The Garda continued three investigative operations from 
2005: Operation Quest, which investigates brothels and 
lap-dance clubs; Operation Hotel, which coordinates 
action against trafficking on a nationwide basis; and 
Operation Poppy, which investigates the use of falsified 
Irish passports for trafficking and smuggling.  The Garda 
also continued a joint program with the United Kingdom, 
Operation Pentameter, which investigates trafficking 
movement between the two countries.  In December 2006, 
the Garda piloted a new training program for working with 
suspected trafficking victims, which was created with 
input from several NGOs.  In 2007, this program will 
become a standard module in the basic training of new 
Garda recruits and will become part of their in-service 
training system (the continuing education system for all 
Garda officers). 
 
Growing attention to trafficking has accompanied 
Ireland's increasing awareness that its new wealth has 
brought significant demographic changes and new social 
problems.  Once a poor nation characterized by large- 
scale emigration, Ireland is now economically prosperous 
and an attractive destination for thousands of asylum and 
employment seekers.  The unprecedented flow of people 
into Ireland has prompted the Government to address 
issues relating to border control, residency rights, 
labor standards, and social inclusion. 
 
Although reliable trafficking statistics in Ireland in 
2006 are difficult to determine, Government officials and 
NGOs estimate that there were 5-20 suspected cases in 
¶2006.  One of Ireland's most vocal NGOs said that this 
estimate represents the number of potential victims who 
sought aid with its organization, but other NGO and Garda 
estimates stand-by these numbers as estimates for 
trafficking cases in total.  All NGO representatives 
agreed that specific numbers of victims are difficult to 
determine given the nature of trafficking.  NGOs are 
concerned with two shifts in the sex industry in the last 
decade: the increase of non-national women, who they 
believe are more easily exploited, and the increasing 
tendency to move the sex trade off the streets and behind 
closed doors where it is harder to detect.  With that in 
mind, the Garda continued to focus on brothels in 2006 as 
part of Operation Quest. 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  002.4 OF 018 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Post has engaged the Irish Government at the 
highest levels to stress Ireland's role in fighting 
European and global trafficking.  We also have urged the 
Government to develop a national action plan, and to move 
draft anti-trafficking legislation forward as quickly as 
possible.  The Ambassador, DCM, POL/ECON chief, and 
Embassy political officers discussed trafficking with the 
DFA, DOJ, DETE, HSE, INIS, and local Garda as well as 
numerous NGOs.  Post will continue to urge the Government 
and NGOs to improve cooperation to identify, assess, and 
prosecute cases of trafficking.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The following items are keyed off reftel. 
 
Overview: 
--------- 
 
-- A. Is the country a country of origin, transit, or 
destination for international trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Specify numbers for each group; how they were 
trafficked, to where, and for what purpose.  Does the 
trafficking occur within the country's borders?  Does it 
occur in territory outside of the government's control 
(e.g. in a civil war situation)?  Are any estimates or 
reliable numbers available as to the extent or magnitude 
of the problem?  Please include any numbers of victims. 
What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
trafficking in persons or what plans are in place (if 
any) to undertake documentation of trafficking? How 
reliable are the numbers and these sources?  Are certain 
groups of persons more at risk of being trafficked (e.g. 
women and children, boys versus girls, certain ethnic 
groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
While there are no official estimates of the number of 
trafficking victims in Ireland, there are indicators and 
anecdotal evidence that Ireland might be, on a very 
limited scale, a destination and transit country for 
international trafficking victims.  NGO estimates for 
the total number of actual trafficking cases in 2006 
varied between 5 and 20.  Many of these cases overlapped 
with Garda investigations, so the total number of cases 
is estimated to be less than 20.  Representatives of 
Ruhama, an NGO that aids prostitutes, said that most of 
the victims they encountered were identified as foreign 
women between 18 and 25 years of age from Eastern Europe 
and Africa (Nigeria was specifically named).  Ruhama 
representatives stated that they worked with about 19 
young women in 2006 whom they suspected were trafficking 
victims.  In each case where the victim was willing, 
Ruhama referred the case to the Garda.  One trend that 
Ruhama representatives noted was that many prostitutes, 
especially those from other countries, are no longer 
working the streets, but are increasingly working in 
private apartments/houses that function as brothels. 
 
In 2006, Garda continued Operation Quest, which targeted 
brothels.  Since August 2005, investigators involved in 
Operation Quest have raided 12 brothels in Dublin and, 
according to press reports, are preparing "a number of 
cases" for prosecution.  However, no allegations of 
trafficking have emerged during the investigations, 
according a Garda contact. 
 
Dublin-based representatives from the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) believed that they 
worked with between 5 and 7 potential trafficking 
victims in 2006.  The IOM referred to the Garda the 
cases of two South African women suspected of being 
victims of trafficking for domestic labor.  IOM 
representatives also met with a Malaysian woman who was 
likewise a suspected victim of trafficking for domestic 
labor, but she refused to speak with the Garda.  All 
three women returned to their home countries with the 
aid of the IOM.  The IOM also worked with three other 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  003.4 OF 018 
 
 
women ? a Nigerian, a Russian, and a Cameroonian ? who 
were suspected of having been trafficked for sexual 
exploitation.  The three cases were referred to the 
Garda for investigation, and all three women returned to 
their countries of origin. 
 
Unaccompanied minors entering Ireland have continued to 
be an area of concern for both the Government and NGOs. 
When minors (anyone under 17) come to Ireland without a 
parent or guardian, they are automatically placed into 
care facilities overseen by the Health Services 
Executive (HSE), the administrative body that runs the 
healthcare system.  According to an HSE official, the 
majority of these children travel to Ireland to join 
their families who have already established residency or 
are waiting for an asylum decision.  However, those 
children not reunited with their families are placed in 
foster care or in a Government-run hostel.  These 
children are considered to be at a higher risk for 
trafficking.  In 2006, the media focused on the number 
of children who disappear from the HSE hostels each 
year.  Garda investigations indicated that many of the 
children considered missing had entered Ireland for work 
purposes and that they were actually older than they had 
claimed upon entry.  Others were children of illegal 
immigrants and had been reunited with their families. 
NGO representatives speculated that some of those 
children not accounted for were victims of trafficking. 
Garda officials, however, investigate all cases of 
missing children in Ireland, and no instances of 
trafficked children have been discovered. 
 
-- B. Please provide a general overview of the 
trafficking situation in the country and any changes 
since the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in direction). 
Also briefly explain the political will to address 
trafficking in persons. Other items to address may 
include:  What kind of conditions are the victims 
trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted by the 
traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods are 
used to approach victims? (Are they offered lucrative 
jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends of 
friends, etc.?)  What methods are used to move the 
victims (e.g., are false documents being used?). 
 
NGO and Government contacts agreed that the majority of 
suspected trafficking cases involved women who were 
brought into Ireland for the sex industry.  Most cases 
involved Eastern European women, with a limited number 
of people from Asia, Africa and South America.  Most 
suspected victims entered Ireland legally, either from 
EU Member States or with a valid visa.  Also, since 
Ireland shares a Common Travel Area with the United 
Kingdom, many were suspected to have entered Ireland 
through the UK and Northern Ireland.  Garda believe that 
organized criminal gangs of foreign nationals 
facilitated much of the suspected sex trade trafficking 
and that these gangs also arranged for the victims' 
employment and accommodation in brothels.  The criminal 
gangs reportedly solicit clients via text and voice 
mobile phone contacts and the use of the Internet. 
During the investigations, many women interviewed stated 
that they had been recruited in their home countries, 
where they had already been working in the sex industry, 
and that they had traveled voluntarily.  Garda National 
Immigration Bureau (GNIB) officials suspect some use of 
fraudulent documentation in cases involving victims from 
West Africa and non-EU East European nations. 
 
 
-- C.  What are the limitations on the government's 
ability to address this problem in practice?  For 
example, is funding for police or other institutions 
inadequate?  Is overall corruption a problem?  Does the 
government lack the resources to aid victims? 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  004.4 OF 018 
 
 
For several consecutive years, the Irish Government has 
enjoyed a budget surplus, and there are no unique 
limitations on resources to address trafficking.  Irish 
police and border authorities are competent and well-run. 
The Government has acknowledged the need for new 
legislation that specifically defines and outlaws 
trafficking in persons, even though there are already in 
place a number of legislative measures criminalizing 
actions that would be categorized as trafficking (see 
section A under Investigation and Prosecution).  The DOJ 
is drafting legislation, the Criminal Law (Trafficking in 
Persons and Sexual Offences) Bill, that will bring 
Ireland into conformity with UN, EU and COE anti- 
trafficking regulations and give police more precise 
legal tools.  The DOJ has published this legislation in 
outline form on its website, and Government officials 
expect this legislation to be introduced to parliament in 
¶2007.  A limitation on the Government's ability to 
address trafficking would be lack of experience with TIP 
issues, since immigration into Ireland, including illegal 
immigration, is a relatively new phenomenon.  The 
Government is now striving to deploy the necessary staff, 
resources, and procedures to deal with this increased 
flow. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international 
organizations, its assessments of these anti-trafficking 
efforts? 
 
The Government established a TIP Working Group in 2005 
that coordinates the anti-trafficking efforts of the 
Department of Justice, DETE, Department of Foreign 
Affairs, GNIB, INIS, and the Health Services Executive. 
The Working Group liaises with various Irish and 
international NGOs on TIP programs and the identification 
of possible victims.  The TIP Working Group issued its 
first report in May 2006 and expects to issue its second 
report in the summer 2007.  The Government actively 
engages with international organizations dealing with 
trafficking, including the UN, EU, and OSCE, and works 
bilaterally with countries that are transit or source 
countries of the sex industry.  The GNIB works under the 
Irish National Police but carries out its immigration 
functions on behalf of the Minister of Justice.  This 
system ensures a sharing of information among immigration 
policy-makers, immigration officers, and national police. 
A GNIB official, in addition to representing Ireland at 
the EU Border Agency in Warsaw, participates in an 
information-sharing forum of NGOs working to combat 
trafficking and to deter violence against women.  Given 
the limited number of trafficking cases identified in 
Ireland, the Government does not specifically track, and 
therefore does not publish, trafficking statistics. 
 
PREVENTION: 
----------- 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking 
is a problem in that country?  If no, why not? 
 
The Irish Government acknowledges that Ireland is a 
potential destination and transit country for trafficking 
and that a very limited number of trafficking victims 
have been identified.  It has not found evidence that the 
problem presently exists in any measurable scale.  It 
actively investigates all credible allegations of 
trafficking. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  005.4 OF 018 
 
 
The Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform (DOJ) 
has a significant role in anti-trafficking efforts since 
it is responsible for criminal law and law enforcement 
policy, immigration and border control laws, and gender 
equality.  The DOJ heads the TIP Working Group.  The 
Working Group released its first report, "Trafficking in 
Human Beings" in May 2006.  This report can be found on 
the DOJ website at 
http://www.justice.ie/80256E010039C5AF/vWeb/ 
flJUSQ6PHDTQ-en/$File/THBreport.pdf. 
 
Agencies of the Irish National Police (Garda) are 
primarily responsible for operational anti-trafficking 
efforts.  The Garda National Immigration Bureau (GNIB) is 
responsible for all matters pertaining to immigration. 
Within the Garda's National Support Services, the 
National Bureau of Criminal Investigation has 
responsibility for investigations of trafficking in human 
beings. 
 
In conjunction with the GNIB, the Departments of Justice 
and Foreign Affairs participate in regional and 
international conferences on trafficking.  The Department 
of Foreign Affairs (DFA) also is engaged through 
development assistance, EU, COE and OSCE obligations, and 
the co-sponsorship of resolutions at the UN and UNHCR. 
 
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE) 
has a role in relation to the protection of workers 
rights and would be involved in any cases of suspected 
trafficking of forced laborers. 
 
The Health Service Executive (HSE) has particular 
responsibilities with regard to the welfare of child 
victims of human trafficking.  The Refugee Act 1996 
requires immigration officers and members of the Garda 
who encounter minors unaccompanied by parents or 
guardians to place them in the care of the HSE. 
 
-- C. Are there, or have there been, government-run 
anti- trafficking information or education campaigns? 
If so, briefly describe the campaign(s), including their 
objectives and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target 
potential trafficking victims and/or the demand for 
trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor). 
 
The Minister for Justice launched an awareness campaign 
in May 2006 as part of Ireland's participation in the 
United Kingdom's Operation Pentameter, a law enforcement 
effort that targets organized criminal gangs involved in 
trafficking.  The campaign mostly consisted of posters, 
translated into several languages, that were 
strategically placed at locations where vulnerable non- 
Irish nationals were known to frequent or pass through, 
i.e. airports, bus and rail stations, ports, hospitals, 
pubs, nightclubs and Garda Stations.  The posters listed 
a toll-free number for secure and confidential calls and 
encouraged victims of human trafficking to report their 
situation to the authorities.  The posters also 
requested men who used prostitutes to report, on a 
confidentail basis, if they come across women they 
believed were being held against their will. 
 
The Sexual Violence Centre in Cork, which is partially 
funded by the Government, launched a sex trafficking 
awareness campaign in June 2006 aimed at raising public 
awareness on trafficking issues in Ireland and Cork in 
particular.  The program consisted of posters, 
brochures, and a street campaign aimed at raising 
awareness of trafficking for sexual exploitation. 
 
-- D. Does the government support other programs to 
prevent trafficking? (e.g., to promote women's 
participation in economic decision-making or efforts to 
keep children in school.)  Please explain. 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  006.4 OF 018 
 
 
 
The Irish Government co-funds the Dublin-based 
International Organization of Migration's (IOM) "Return 
and Reintegration" program, which is designed to reunite 
families divided by migration. 
 
The Garda have a Racial and Intercultural Office to train 
the police to interact effectively with the new 
minorities who have immigrated to Ireland in recent 
years.  The training focuses on gaining the trust of 
minority communities and encouraging community members to 
approach the police and report crime. 
 
-- E. What is the relationship between government 
officials, NGOs, other relevant organizations and other 
elements of civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
The working relationship between Government officials and 
NGOs is excellent.  While several NGOs would like to see 
more support for trafficking victims, all the NGOs 
reported a good rapport among their organizations and 
various Government offices, including the Garda and the 
DOJ.  Government officials also reported close working 
ties to a number of NGOs.  One Garda official noted that, 
although the NGOs and Government did not always agree on 
certain issues or the number of potential victims in 
Ireland, they were mutually respectful and shared the 
same goals of stopping trafficking and aiding victims of 
trafficking. 
 
The Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS) 
division of the Department of Justice works closely with 
the GNIB to combat illegal immigration.  To facilitate 
the tracking of potential victims, the GNIB shares its 
immigration database with local Garda precincts and a UK 
immigration official posted to the GNIB headquarters. 
Cooperation and coordination with NGOs takes place 
through direct contacts between the Irish Government and 
the relevant NGOs.  Ireland en Route (IER) is a loose 
network of Government agencies, NGOs, academics and other 
experts who meet three times per year to communicate on 
topics such as training for police, EU and domestic 
legislation, best practices and other trafficking issues. 
It is not a national action plan or task force, but does 
facilitate the coordination of anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
The Department of Justice consulted widely with 
transportation companies prior to the introduction of 
legal sanctions in the Immigration Act 2003.  This Act 
followed the 2001 creation of a voluntary Code of 
Practice with the Irish Road Haulage Association to 
encourage greater vigilance in ensuring that covert 
passengers were not present in vehicles arriving in 
Ireland. 
 
-- F. Does it monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law 
enforcement agencies screen for potential trafficking 
victims along borders? 
 
Yes, the Government monitors its borders and 
immigration/emigration patterns for evidence of 
trafficking, and law enforcement agencies respond 
appropriately to such evidence.  Immigration officers are 
present at all air and seaports within the state.  In 
2003, a new information technology system equipped with a 
passport reader and facial recognition technology was 
introduced to allow immigration officers at the border to 
link-up with a database at GNIB headquarters in Dublin. 
Through this system, a range of reports on immigration- 
related issues are generated on a daily basis enabling 
identification of patterns, trends, and modus operandi 
with regard to a wide range of immigration-related 
criminal activity. Detection and investigation of 
potential incidents of human trafficking is facilitated 
by the GNIB.  Immigration officials also take 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  007.4 OF 018 
 
 
fingerprints of most visitors entering the country who 
have entry visas. 
 
Ireland has a land border with Northern Ireland that is 
difficult to monitor due to numerous unmanned crossing 
points, which, according to police, are popular points of 
entry for illegal immigrants.  An estimated 12,000 
illegal movements take place at the border with Northern 
Ireland every year.  Immigration officers from the GNIB 
and from local districts monitor certain crossing points 
periodically. 
 
A new Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill 
(separate from the Criminal Law (Trafficking in Persons 
and Sexual Offences) Bill mentioned in section C) was 
drafted and published in 2006 and immigration officials 
expect to present the Bill to parliament in 2007.  The 
Bill will strengthen the reporting requirements for 
persons entering Ireland and the carriers involved in 
transporting them.  In an effort to monitor the movements 
of unaccompanied minors, the Bill will require that all 
foreign national entering the country register with the 
GNIB (at present registration is required only for those 
over age 16). 
 
-- G. Is there a mechanism for coordination and 
communication between various agencies, internal, 
international, and multilateral on trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi- agency working group or a task 
force?  Does the government have a trafficking in 
persons working group or single point of contact?  Does 
the government have a public corruption task force? 
 
In 2006, Ireland's multi-agency Working Group became a 
permanent part of the Department of Justice.  The group 
expanded in 2006 to include members from the Department 
of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (in order to address 
issues of trafficking for forced labor) and the Health 
Services Executive (to concentrate on trafficking of 
children).  The group also included members from the 
INIS, the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Department 
of Justice, and the Garda. 
 
On international and multilateral levels, Ireland engages 
on trafficking issues through its participation in the 
EU, UN, OSCE, and COE.  The Department of Foreign Affairs 
has the lead and coordinates Ireland's participation with 
all relevant ministries. 
 
The GNIB worked directly with several foreign police 
departments on trafficking issues in 2006.  In addition 
to ongoing cooperation with the UK on Operation 
Pentameter, Garda contacts said they began working with 
Lithuanian authorities in 2006 on anti-trafficking 
measures due to the high number of Lithuanian citizens in 
Ireland (an estimated 70,000-100,000, according to the 
Lithuanian Embassy in Dublin) and the high level of fraud 
with Lithuanian passports. 
 
De facto law enforcement coordination exists as a result 
of the multiple functions of the GNIB.  The GNIB works 
under the direction of the Garda, but its immigration 
function is carried out on behalf of the Minister of 
Justice.  This ensures constant contact between 
immigration policy makers, immigration police and regular 
police. 
 
-- H. Does the government have a national plan of action 
to address trafficking in persons?  If so, which 
agencies were involved in developing it?  Were NGOs 
consulted in the process?  What steps has the government 
taken to disseminate the action plan? 
 
The Government has not published a plan to address 
trafficking exclusively.  Rather, the inter-agency 
Working Group, with NGO input, coordinates on Government 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  008.4 OF 018 
 
 
measures that focus on trafficking, as described above. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
-- A. Does the country have a law specifically 
prohibiting trafficking in persons--both trafficking for 
sexual exploitation and trafficking for non-sexual 
purposes (e.g. forced labor)? If so, what is the law? 
Does the law(s) cover both internal and external 
(transnational) forms of trafficking? If not, under what 
other laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, 
are there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of coercion or fraud?  Are these 
other laws being used in trafficking cases?  Are these 
laws, taken together, adequate to cover the full scope 
of trafficking in persons?  Please provide a full 
inventory of trafficking laws, including civil 
penalties, (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against 
illegal debt). 
 
There are presently five Laws that deal with trafficking 
in persons - The Immigration Act 2003, The Illegal 
Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000, The Child Trafficking 
and Pornography Act 1998, The Proceeds of Crime Act 1996 
and The Criminal Law (Sexual Offenses) Act 1993.  Under 
current Irish law, "trafficking" encompasses both 
smuggling and trafficking. 
 
In July 2006, the Irish Government authorized the DOJ to 
draft a Criminal Law (Trafficking in Persons and Sexual 
Offences) Bill. The Bill will separate trafficking 
offenses from smuggling.  Under the new Criminal Law, 
convicted traffickers will be liable up to life 
imprisonment when a victim is under 18 years or up to 14 
years imprisonment when the victim is an adult.  The 
Office of the Parliamentary Counsel is finalizing the 
technical drafting of the Bill, which is expected to be 
published later this year.  Government officials expect 
to present this legislation to Parliament in 2007.  The 
proposed Bill can be viewed on the Department of Justice, 
Equality and Law Reform website at 
http://www.justice.ie/80256E010039C5AF/vWeb/ 
flJUSQ6PHDTQ-en/$File/THBreport.pdf. 
 
The Immigration Act 2003 requires carriers operating 
aircraft, ferries, or other vehicles bringing persons to 
Ireland from any area except the Common Travel area 
between Ireland and the UK, to ensure that those 
passengers are in possession of the necessary immigration 
documentation. The Act provides for a fine for passengers 
traveling with inadequate documentation. 
 
In addition, the Act requires Government departments, 
local authorities, health boards, the Garda, and refugee 
applications determination bodies to share information on 
non-nationals, including applicants for refugee status, 
in order to ensure compliance with laws relating to their 
entry, residence, and removal from the State. 
 
The Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000 made it an 
offense for a person to organize or knowingly facilitate 
the entry into the State of a person whom he knows to be, 
or has reasonable cause to believe to be, an illegal 
immigrant or person who intends to seek asylum. While 
this law more correctly describes smuggling, a trafficker 
would also be subject to this law.  Section 2 of this Act 
would apply most readily to traffickers, as it 
specifically prohibits bringing in illegal immigrants for 
the financial gain of those facilitating the entry.  The 
penalty on conviction of indictment for this offense is 
an unlimited fine, or up to 10 years imprisonment, or 
both.  The penalty for a guilty plea, however, is a 
maximum of 12 months incarceration and a fine not to 
exceed euro 1,500. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  009.4 OF 018 
 
 
The Child Trafficking and Pornography Act makes it an 
offense, inter alia, to organize or knowingly facilitate 
the entry into, transit through, or exit from the State 
of a child for the purpose of sexual exploitation, or to 
provide accommodation to such a child while in the State. 
The maximum penalty is life imprisonment. 
 
The Proceeds of Crime Act allows for the confiscation of 
assets of those involved in criminal activity, including 
trafficking in people.  The assessment of tax liability 
on the illegal earnings may also be pursued.  In 
addition, Ireland has comprehensive civil legislation 
that provides for seizure of assets acquired through 
criminal activity.  A criminal conviction is not 
necessary before a civil case can be filed, and the 
burden of proving that the assets are not the proceeds 
of crime rests with the defendant in civil proceedings. 
The Criminal Assets Bureau implements this legislation 
working with other Government agencies. 
 
The Criminal Law (Sexual Offenses) Act of 1993 prohibits 
and penalizes those found soliciting or importuning for 
the purpose of prostitution.  The act also penalizes 
those controlling or directing the activities of a 
prostitute, organizing prostitution by controlling or 
directing the activities of more than one prostitute for 
the purpose of prostitution, or compelling or coercing a 
person to be a prostitute. 
 
False imprisonment is an offence under section 15 of the 
Non-Fatal Offences against the Person Act 1998 and is 
punishable by up to life imprisonment. 
 
The Slave Trade Act 1824 renders all operations in 
connection with the slave trade illegal and slavery or 
servitude is prohibited under the Irish Constitution 
(Article 40). 
 
-- B. What are the penalties for traffickers of people 
for sexual exploitation?  For traffickers of people for 
labor exploitation? 
 
The one crime of trafficking covers both offenses.  If 
the circuit court deals with a case, then the penalty 
can include up to a 1,500 euro fine and 12 months in 
jail.  If a case is appealed to the district court, then 
the penalty is a maximum of ten years imprisonment. 
There is no cap on the fine. 
 
-- C. What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the penalty for sex 
trafficking? 
 
Under Irish Law, the maximum sentence possible for rape 
is life imprisonment (eight years is the average 
sentence), and the maximum possible sentence for 
aggravated sexual assault is life imprisonment.  This is 
similar to the penalty for Child Trafficking as provided 
for in the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998. 
 
-- D. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers 
criminalized?  Are these laws enforced? If prostitution 
is legal and regulated, what is the legal minimum age 
for this activity? Note that in many countries with 
federalist systems, prostitution laws may be covered by 
state, local, and provincial authorities. 
 
Prostitution itself is not illegal under Irish law, but 
it is an offense to solicit another person for the 
purposes of prostitution, to be involved in organized 
prostitution, or to live off the proceeds of a third 
party's income from prostitution (pimping).  Under the 
Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, it is also illegal to 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  010.4 OF 018 
 
 
procure a woman or girl to become a prostitute, to leave 
the country to become a prostitute, or to leave her 
usual place of abode to become a prostitute.  Brothels, 
defined as establishments of two or more women made 
available for prostitution, are illegal.  Under the 
above mentioned Act, it is an offence to detain any 
woman or girl against her will in a brothel. A woman or 
girl is deemed to have been detained in a brothel where, 
inter alia, property belonging to her is withheld. 
 
-- E. Has the government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences, including 
details on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and 
available.  Are the traffickers serving the time 
sentenced:  If no, why not?  Please indicate whether the 
government can provide this information, and if not, why 
not?  (Note:  complete answers to this section are 
essential. End Note) 
 
In December, a Congolese man was convicted and sentenced 
to 15 years imprisonment for sexual violence offences 
against two female minors.  One of the victims was a 15- 
year-old girl he claimed to have married after paying "a 
dowry of goat, a length of fabric, a frying pan and 
?500."  The other victim was a 13-year-old girl whom he 
and his wife had brought to Ireland to "help rear their 
children."  Although Garda and DOJ officials considered 
this to be a trafficking case, the Director of Public 
Prosecutions sought prosecution for several sexual 
violence charges because the available evidence and 
likelihood of prosecution was stronger on those charges. 
Police detectives from the girls' country attended the 
trial in Ireland.  Both girls also traveled back to 
their country to testify in a related case.  One of the 
girls remained in her home country while the other 
victim chose to return to Ireland, where she is seeking 
asylum.  She has been granted legal status while her 
application is being processed. 
 
In March, a newspaper reported the investigation into a 
Romanian woman's account of forced prostitution and 
false imprisonment by a Romanian man who helped her and 
her three children obtain visas to Ireland.  The Garda 
investigated the information she provided and worked 
with Interpol to track down leads in Romania.  The case 
is still under investigation. 
 
In January 2005, the GNIB charged a Nigerian-born Irish 
citizen under trafficking laws for attempting to bring 
12 Mauritian nationals into the country.  This case was 
referred to the Circuit Court, and a June 2007 trial 
date was set.  The man is currently released on a 10,000 
euro bail bond.  Garda officials traveled to Mauritius 
in 2006 to interview the 12 suspected victims.  The 
interviews did not indicate that the 12 Mauritian 
citizens were victims of trafficking, but that they had 
been attempting to enter Ireland for the purpose of 
obtaining employment. 
 
In 2006, there were no prosecutions or convictions 
specifically for trafficking.  Three people were 
convicted under the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking Act) 
2000, but these cases were human smuggling rather than 
trafficking. 
 
Targeted Garda operations uncovered a small number of 
suspected trafficking cases.  The majority of these 
cases involved Eastern European nationals suspected of 
trafficking countrywomen into Ireland to work in the sex 
industry.  The Garda have also encountered a small 
number of suspected cases of African children being 
trafficked into Ireland for the purpose of sexual 
exploitation and forced labor within African communities 
in Ireland (see case sample above).  Garda are currently 
investigating 10 cases of suspected trafficking. 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  011.4 OF 018 
 
 
 
-- F. Is there any information or reports of who is 
behind the trafficking?  For example, are the 
traffickers freelance operators, small crime groups, 
and/or large international organized crime syndicates? 
Are employment, travel, and tourism agencies or marriage 
brokers fronting for traffickers or crime groups to 
traffic individuals? Are government officials involved? 
Are there any reports of where profits from trafficking 
in persons are being channeled?  (e.g. armed groups, 
terrorist organizations, judges, banks, etc.) 
 
Government contacts suspected that organized criminal 
elements, mainly from Eastern Europe, and individual 
traffickers from Africa were responsible for a portion of 
the limited amount of trafficking in Ireland.  NGO 
accounts from possible trafficking victims suggested that 
trafficking occurred along nationality lines.  One 
example given by an NGO representative was of Lithuanian 
women being brought in by Lithuanian contacts for 
prostitution solely among the Lithuanian immigrant 
population in Ireland. 
 
While evidence of the involvement of criminal gangs is 
scarce, Ireland has undertaken a number of Garda 
operations to prevent and detect such activity, including 
Operation "Hotel", Operation "Quest" and Operation 
"Poppy," described below. 
 
There are no allegations of involvement by Government 
officials. 
 
-- G. Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking?  (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.)  Does the 
government use active investigative techniques in 
trafficking in persons investigations?  To the extent 
possible under domestic law, are techniques such as 
electronic surveillance, undercover operations, and 
mitigated punishment or immunity for cooperating 
suspects used by the government?  Does the criminal 
procedure code or other laws prohibit the police from 
engaging in covert operations? 
 
The Government does actively investigate alleged cases of 
trafficking.  When there is suspicion of trafficking, the 
Government responds appropriately.  Since the enactment 
of the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000 
approximately 100 people have been arrested on suspicion 
of committing offences under the Act.   Four people have 
been charged with breaches of section 2(1) - aiding or 
facilitating the entry of an illegal alien into the 
country for profit.  Two people were convicted of 
smuggling, and two are awaiting trial on charges of 
smuggling. 
 
There are approximately 10 alleged breaches of the 
Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000 currently under 
investigation, although the majority of these cases 
relate to smuggling. 
 
As mentioned above, the Garda have several active 
operations in place to investigate suspected trafficking 
activity.  These included: 
 
Operation Quest, in which Garda continued to raid lap- 
dance clubs and brothels, thoroughly questioned those 
involved in the raids, and maintained contact in 
subsequent months, to determine if any of the workers 
were trafficking victims.  Even though the underlying 
motive for the investigations was suspicion of 
trafficking, no workers claimed to be trafficked, and 
Garda prosecuted only for work permit violations and 
prostitution violations. 
 
Operation Hotel, a joint effort between the Criminal 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  012.4 OF 018 
 
 
Assets Bureau, the Garda fraud unit, the National Bureau 
of Criminal Investigations and the Garda National 
Immigration Bureau, investigates allegations of 
trafficking nationwide.  Since its inception in 2005, 
Garda have arrested three individuals on non-trafficking 
related offenses. 
 
Operation Poppy was established in 2005 to prevent the 
illegal use of Irish passports in smuggling or 
trafficking instances.  In one case, investigations 
revealed the use of 13 Irish passports in efforts to 
smuggle Romanians into the country. 
 
The Irish Criminal Code does not prohibit or regulate 
covert operations. 
 
-- H. Does the government provide any specialized 
training for government officials in how to recognize, 
investigate, and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
The Government provides training in country and sends 
officials to seminars and conferences abroad.  Some 
examples follow: 
 
-- In July, the Dublin-based office of the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) conducted a two-day 
training seminar titled "The Training of Border Guards, 
Border Police and Customs Officials in Identifying of and 
Providing Assistance to the Victims of Trafficking." 
Attendees included Garda Training College personnel, GNIB 
officers, immigration officials, and UK law enforcement 
officials.  This course was sponsored by the Belgian and 
Hungarian Governments in cooperation with the European 
Commission.  IOM contacts said that the Government has 
already expressed interest in running this program again 
in 2007. 
 
--In December, a similar victim recognition and 
assistance training seminar was developed and piloted by 
the Garda with the assistance of the NGO Ruhama.  This 
program will now be provided to key Garda personnel 
throughout Ireland as part of their continuous 
professional development program.  The training program 
has been designed specifically to enable Garda to 
identify the victims of trafficking, including children, 
whom they encounter in the course of their duties.  The 
program also aims to ensure that Garda fully understand 
the complexity of trafficking issues and that victims 
receive appropriate assistance.  To date, this training 
has been delivered to immigration officers and members 
of district detective units, on a national basis. 
 
--In addition to this program, a new training module on 
the phenomenon of human trafficking will be included as 
part of the overall training for new Garda recruits and 
will be part of the organization's in-service training 
system. 
 
--Irish law enforcement organizations take part in 
European-wide conferences on the prevention of organized 
exploitation of women and children and are part of the 
Interpol Working Group on Trafficking in Human Beings. 
This group developed a manual of best practices for 
investigators that provides practical guidelines for 
investigators and a structured way to locate advice on a 
specific issue. 
 
--Garda personnel also regularly participate in courses 
organized by CEPOL, the European Police College, related 
to human trafficking.  These courses are targeted at 
senior police officers who are responsible aiding in the 
prosecution of trafficking cases or organized crime 
cases, members of lecturing staff in national police 
training colleges, and chiefs of police and Government 
officials from relevant ministries dealing with 
questions of human trafficking. 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  013.4 OF 018 
 
 
 
--As part of the EU AGIS program (a criminal justice 
cooperation program for EU Member States), the Garda 
hosted a conference in Dublin in November 2005 titled 
"Forum to Improve Best Practice in the Prevention, 
Detection and Investigation of Trafficking in Human 
Beings."  The Conference was funded by the European 
Commission and the Irish Department of Justice, Equality 
and Law Reform. 
 
 
--I. Does the government cooperate with other 
governments in the investigation and prosecution of 
trafficking cases?  If possible, can post provide the 
number of cooperative international investigations on 
trafficking? 
 
The Government does cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation of prosecution of trafficking victims. 
 
Since Ireland and the United Kingdom share a Common 
Travel Area, the two countries have close cooperation on 
a number of immigration and trafficking investigations, 
including Operation Pentameter.  The two countries also 
exchange liaison officers between GNIB and UK immigration 
Service (UKIS).  In September, the two Governments signed 
a Memorandum of Understanding in relation to facilitating 
the systematic exchange of immigration-related 
information. 
 
Ireland has also established operational cooperation 
with immigration and police authorities in Lithuania, 
Spain, the Netherlands, and France, major transit points 
for illegal immigration into Ireland, with a particular 
focus on trafficking and smuggling activity.  Department 
of Justice officers are also assigned to the Irish 
Embassies in Russia, China, India, Egypt, and Nigeria to 
interact with local law enforcement authorities on 
immigration and trafficking matters.  Additionally, the 
GNIB liaises with carrier companies whose routes may be 
vulnerable to traffickers. 
 
On a multilateral level, a Garda officer is currently 
seconded to Interpol headquarters in Lyons, working as a 
Criminal Intelligence Officer in the Trafficking in Human 
Beings sub-directorate. Garda representatives are also 
part of the Interpol Working Group on trafficking in 
women. 
 
-- J. Does the government extradite persons who are 
charged with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can 
post provide the number of traffickers extradited?  Does 
the government extradite its own nationals charged with 
such offenses?   If not, is the government prohibited by 
law form extraditing its own nationals?  If so, what is 
the government doing to modify its laws to permit the 
extradition of its own nationals? 
 
Ireland does extradite persons in certain circumstances 
with those countries with which it has extradition 
agreements in place.  However, Irish courts take a very 
exacting approach toward such requests.  Requests that do 
not fully comply with the standards set by the courts are 
often delayed or denied, as the legal presumption is 
against extradition.  In addition, Irish courts will deny 
an extradition request if they feel that the defendant 
will not be given the same guarantees available under the 
Irish constitution in the requesting jurisdiction. 
 
Within the European Union, persons can also be returned 
to their own jurisdiction under the provisions of the 
European Arrest Warrant Act 2004.  In 2006, Ireland 
received three European Arrest Warrants from EU countries 
in relation to persons wanted on trafficking offences. 
Two cases are ongoing.  In the third case the High Court 
ordered that the person be surrendered to the country in 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  014.4 OF 018 
 
 
question.  The domestic arrest is currently being 
processed. 
 
-- K. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional 
level?  If so, please explain in detail. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional 
level. 
 
-- L. If government officials are involved in 
trafficking, what steps has the government taken to end 
such participation?  Have any government officials been 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or 
trafficking- related corruption?  Have any been 
convicted?  What actual sentence was imposed?  Please 
provide specific numbers, if available. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in 
trafficking. 
 
-- M. If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin?  Does 
the country's child sexual abuse laws have 
extraterritorial coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
 
Ireland does not have an identified child sex tourism 
problem.  The Government has authority to deport non- 
national pedophiles according to the strictures of its 
extradition treaty with the country of origin of the 
arrested individual. 
 
-- N. Has the government signed ratified, and/or taken 
steps to implement the following international 
instruments?  Please provide the date of 
signature/ratification if appropriate. 
 
--ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms 
of child labor.  ILO Convention 182 was ratified on 
December 12, 1999. 
 
--ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory 
labor.  ILO Convention 29 was ratified on June 11, 1958 
and ILO Convention 105 was ratified on March 2, 1931. 
 
--The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child 
prostitution, and child pornography.  The Optional 
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of a Child was 
signed on September 7, 2000, and ratifying legislation is 
pending. 
 
--The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime.  The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons was signed in December 
2000, and ratifying legislation is pending. 
 
According to DOJ officials, the enactment of the 
Criminal Law (Trafficking in Persons and Sexual 
Offences) Bill is the next step towards ratification of 
the final two protocols listed above. 
 
The Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform 
announced in December 2006 his intention to ask the 
Government to sign the Council of Europe Convention on 
Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings.  It is 
expected that the Convention will be signed during the 
first half of 2007.  The Minister also announced that 
the Government intends, as part of the new Immigration, 
Residence and Protection Bill, to provide a policy 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  015.4 OF 018 
 
 
statement on the issue of trafficking in human beings. 
This statement will be binding on staff dealing with 
persons who are victims of trafficking. 
 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
------------------------------------- 
 
-- A. Does the government assist victims, for example, 
by providing temporary to permanent residency status, 
relief from deportation, shelter and access to legal, 
medical and psychological services?  If so, please 
explain.  Does the country have victim care and victim 
health care facilities?  If so, can post provide the 
number of victims placed in these care facilities? 
 
The current assistance program for trafficking victims 
uses partially Government-funded humanitarian NGO 
facilities and programs.  Given the relatively small 
number of trafficking cases in Ireland, the Government 
and Garda refer potential victims on a case-by-case basis 
to organizations like Ruhama and the International 
Organization for Migration.  These NGOs provide food, 
shelter, social and medical care, and legal assistance if 
desired. 
 
The current immigration system allows Irish 
Naturalization and Immigration Service (INIS) authorities 
to provide potential victims with permission to remain in 
Ireland, as necessary.  Government officials stated that, 
in addition to providing respite for the individual, it 
is in the interests of both the victims of trafficking 
and the authorities to co-operate to ensure the 
protection of victims and the prosecution of 
perpetrators. 
 
Trafficking victims can also be assisted to return and 
reintegrate in their countries of origin with the aid of 
the International Organization for Migration. There are 
also links to the Red Cross which can help to establish 
contact with families in the country of origin. 
 
The Government provides care for separated children 
seeking asylum and for unaccompanied minors entering 
Ireland.  The Department of Health receives referrals 
from the INIS, the GNIB and the Office of the Refugee 
Applications Commissioner. The Health Service Executive 
(HSE) is responsible for the care of children (17 and 
younger) and provides social, medical, psychological, and 
educational services as well as family reunification, 
when possible.  An HSE official estimated that HSE 
receives 13-15 cases per month, although the majority of 
these children are reunited with their families after 
familial ties are confirmed by HSE.  There are 
approximately 300 children currently in care with the 
HSE, according to HSE contacts. 
 
The proposed Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill 
will also include a trafficking victim's policy 
statement.  This statement will codify the Government's 
various policies on how Government officials should 
assist potential trafficking victims and will be binding 
on the various agencies involved in immigration. 
 
-- B. Does the government provide funding or other forms 
of support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to 
victims?  Please explain. 
 
In 2006, the DOJ's Probation and Welfare Service 
provided euro 275,000 to Ruhama.  The DOJ's Commission 
for the Victims of Crime also provided Ruhama with an 
additional euro 57,500 that was specifically earmarked 
as funds to cover living expenses while victims await 
court appearances. 
 
The Government provided euro 838,000 to the local office 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  016.4 OF 018 
 
 
of the International Organization for Migration in 2006 
and has budgeted euro 810,000 for 2007.  Although the 
IOM does not specifically address trafficking concerns, 
the organization is used as an assistance resource for 
those victims wishing to return to their home countries. 
 
Ireland En Route (an anti-trafficking coalition of NGOs 
and Government officials) twice applied for funding from 
the DOJ's violence against women budget. They were 
granted euro 12,000 to set up the forum and euro 26,768 
to employ an anti-trafficking coordinator.  The 
Government also provides personnel to Ireland En Route 
 
The Irish Government's Overseas Development Program, 
known as Irish Aid, provided a total of euro 2.042 
million for on-going anti-trafficking programs: 
 
Irish Aid provided euro 1.363 million to support the 
International Labour Organisation's (ILO) five-year 
regional program in Albania, Moldova and Ukraine, which 
promotes employment, vocational training and national 
policy measures to prevent and reduce trafficking in 
women. 
 
In 2006, Irish Aid committed to fund euro 300,000 over 
three years to ECPAT (End Child Prostitution, Child 
Pornography and Trafficking of Children for Sexual 
Purposes), a global network of organizations working on 
issues of children's rights, child prostitution, child 
pornography and child trafficking for sexual purposes. 
 
Also, under its Civil Society Fund, Irish Aid provided 
euro 379,000 over three years (beginning in 2005) to the 
Irish NGO, Children in Crossfire.  The aim of this 
program is to combat trafficking in human beings, 
especially women and children, within South Asia by 
promoting the roles of community and local Government in 
the reduction of trafficking and by increasing the level 
of participation of poor women and children in social 
and economic activities. 
 
-- C.  Is there a screening and referral process in 
place, when appropriate, to transfer victims detained, 
arrested or placed in protective custody by law 
enforcement authorities to NGO's that provide short- or 
long-term care? 
 
Garda regularly make referrals to Ruhama and other NGOs, 
who then provide women with care and support. 
 
-- D. Are the rights of victims respected, or are 
victims also treated as criminals?  Are victims 
detained, jailed, or deported?   If detained or jailed, 
for how long?  Are victims fined?  Are victims 
prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as those 
governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
NGOs report that women suspected of being trafficking 
victims are generally treated well, although there have 
been instances in rural areas where Garda officials, 
unfamiliar with the trafficking phenomenon, have 
initially detained women in prison.  Alleged victims have 
also been held in jail until the courts were 
satisfactorily able to determine their true identity. 
 
Ireland is a signatory to the EU's Framework Decision on 
the Standing of Victims in Criminal Proceedings to 
harmonize the treatment of victims of crime across the 
EU.  Government implementing legislation requires the 
Garda to show special sensitivity in relations to victims 
of sexual offenses. 
 
-- E. Does the government encourage victims to assist in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May 
victims file civil suits or seek legal action against 
the traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  017.4 OF 018 
 
 
to such legal redress?  If a victim is a material 
witness in a court case against the former employer, is 
the victim permitted 
to obtain other employment or to leave the country?  Is 
there a victim restitution program? 
 
NGOs and Garda both reported that the Garda encourage 
women to assist in investigations, but do not pressure 
them to do so.  Some of the funding the NGO Ruhama 
received for victim support was specifically earmarked as 
funds to cover living expenses while victims awaited 
court appearances. 
 
NGOs that work with migrant and immigrant workers 
reported assisting possible victims of labor trafficking 
in filing civil claims against their employers, although 
the situations described were cases of exploitation 
rather than trafficking.  In the majority of cases, the 
courts found in favor of the plaintiff (employee). 
According to Department of Enterprise, Trade and 
Employment contacts, the legal status of a non-Irish 
employee had no bearing on cases brought to court. 
 
-- F. What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide 
these protections in practice?  What type of shelter or 
services does the government provide?  Does it provide 
shelter or any other benefits to victims for housing or 
other resources in order to aid the victims in 
rebuilding their lives? Where are child victims placed 
(e.g. in shelters, foster-care type systems or juvenile 
justice detention centers)? 
 
The Government has a witness protection program, but no 
trafficking victims have, to date, been included in the 
program.  There are no restrictions that would prevent a 
trafficking victim from participating in this program, 
if needed. 
 
Both the Government and NGOs provide shelter to people 
in need, but because of the low number of suspected 
cases, there are no shelters specifically earmarked for 
victims of trafficking or smuggling. 
 
Unaccompanied minors who enter the country are deemed 
vulnerable, and at risk to be picked up by traffickers. 
These children are turned over to the Health Service 
Executive (HSE) for care.  The HSE is responsible for 
the appropriate placement of all children taken into 
their care, including placements in residential and 
foster care. 
 . 
-- G. Does the government provide any specialized 
training for government officials in recognizing 
trafficking and in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, including the special needs of 
trafficked children?  Does the government provide 
training on protections and assistance to its embassies 
and consulates in foreign countries that are destination 
or transit countries?  Does it urge those embassies and 
consulates to develop ongoing relationships with NGOs 
that serve trafficked victims? 
 
Social workers, members of the Special Unaccompanied 
Minors Unit in the Dublin Health Service Executive, the 
GNIB, Garda, and staff of the Refugee Applications 
Commissioner are trained to spot possible trafficking 
victims.  In addition, a new training module on human 
trafficking will be delivered to new Garda recruits and 
to existing Garda through the organization's in-service 
training system.  The GNIB works closely with UK 
counterparts to review and track cases of suspected 
trafficking and employs an exchange program of officials 
with the UK to further bilateral cooperation in the field 
of immigration.  While Department of Foreign Affairs 
officials participate in international conferences and 
 
DUBLIN 00000171  018.4 OF 018 
 
 
training sessions, the diplomatic corps as a whole is not 
specifically trained regarding assistance or support for 
trafficking victims, although they do receive training in 
overall human rights issues, which includes trafficking. 
 
-- H. Does the government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its 
repatriated nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
The Government is not aware of any Irish nationals who 
have become victims of human trafficking. 
 
-- I. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims?  What type of services do 
they provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive 
from local authorities? 
 
There are several smaller NGOs, particularly minority or 
immigration rights NGOs, who may indirectly come into 
contact with trafficking victims.  However, the most 
active organizations are: 
 
- Ruhama - Ruhama provides support to prostitutes and 
women suspected of having been trafficked for sexual 
exploitation.  Ruhama provides emergency accommodation, 
if possible, social and psychological support, referrals 
to health and legal authorities, and assistance in 
accessing educational and employment opportunities. 
 
- International Organization for Migration, Dublin ? In 
relation to trafficking, IOM carries out information 
campaigns, provides counseling services, conducts 
research on trafficking, provides Government funded 
training to Irish officials, and assists victims who 
willingly want to return to his or her home country. 
 
- Ireland En Route - Ireland En Route is a Forum on 
Trafficking of Women and Children for Sexual 
Exploitation.  This is a multi-agency group comprised of 
Health Service representatives, Garda, members of the 
GNIB, and NGOs.  The forum was set up in 2000 to raise 
awareness and address some of the issues associated with 
trafficking of women and children for sexual 
exploitation.  It also attempts to disseminate 
trafficking information within the group and with other 
organizations. 
 
- Migrant Rights Center Ireland - The Migrant Rights 
Center Ireland is a Human Rights advocate for migrant 
workers and their families.  The organization provides 
information on rights to migrants and lobbies the 
Government to change the laws and policies that affect 
these workers. 
 
¶4.  (U) Point of Contact for this report is Political 
Officer 
Jennifer Danover, office phone 353-1-630-6275, fax number 
353-1-667-0056, e-mail DanoverJJ@state.gov. 
 
¶5.  (U) The number of hours spent compiling this report 
by embassy employees is as follows: 
 
Name, rank and time spent: 
Ambassador Thomas C. Foley, FA-NC - 4 hours 
DCM Jonathan Benton, FS-01 - 7 hours 
POL/ECON Chief Joe Young, FS-02 - 15 hours 
POL/ECON Officer Jennifer Danover, FS-04 - 80 hours 
POL/ECON OMS Anne Marie Witkowski, FS-06 - 2 hours 
POL/ECON Specialist, Peter Glennon, FSN-10 - 10 hours 
CONS Chief Danny Toma, FS-02 - 1 hour 
 
 
FOLEY 
FOLEY