08DUBLIN50
IRISH VIEWS ON PROGRESS OF NORTHERN IRELAND PEACE
Mon Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO2580
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0050/01 0281127
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281127Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8862
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITY
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2452
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST PRIORITY 0663
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2018 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EI
SUBJECT: IRISH VIEWS ON PROGRESS OF NORTHERN IRELAND PEACE 
PROCESS 
 
REF: BELFAST 8 
 
DUBLIN 00000050  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert J. Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: During her visit to Ireland January 16, 
EUR/WE Office Director Kathy Allegrone met with Department of 
Foreign Affairs Anglo-Irish Division Director General Pat 
Hennessy, and Department of the Taoiseach (Prime Minister) 
International Affairs Advisor Martin Fraser, to discuss the 
Irish view of the current state of the Northern Ireland peace 
process.  Both officials expressed gratification that the 
process has proceeded so well in such a short time, but 
identified a number of problems.  Lack of capability in the 
Northern Ireland civil service, they said, could adversely 
affect economic development and community reconciliation, as 
well as the planned investment conference in May 2008.  They 
identified this summer's marching season as a potential 
flashpoint for trouble.  Neither official appeared unduely 
worried that the peace process will founder over the issue of 
the devolution of policing and justice, though they thought 
the May 2008 timetable for devolution is likely to slip.  We 
are confident that we will get a quick heads-up from the 
Irish if they think the peace process is beginning to falter 
seriously.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) The Taoiseach's International Advisor, Martin Fraser, 
pointed to the civil service of the Northern Ireland Assembly 
(NIA) as in need of reform.  Not only is it too big, he said, 
it is also generally unresponsive to the sort of innovative 
change needed as the North develops its economy and 
reconciles its communities.  He noted, in particular, that 
key officials in the bureaucracy appear reluctant to deal 
with Government of Ireland officials or support North-South 
cooperation -- a hangover, he said, from the days of 
sectarian violence when the Government of Ireland was 
perceived by many unionists in the North to be siding with 
republican militants. 
 
¶3.  (C) Of immediate concern, Fraser noted, is the 
USG-sponsored investment conference, planned for May 2008. 
Fraser indicated that the Irish Government would feel more 
confident in the success of the conference if organizers in 
the NIA Ministry of Enterprise, Trade, and Investment were 
more forthcoming in communicating with their counterparts in 
the South.  Fraser mused that the communication difficulties 
could be caused by the Minister of Enterprise, Trade, and 
Investment Nigel Dodds, a staunch unionist. 
 
¶4.  (C) Fraser also said he thought the Northern Ireland 
civil service -- and, indeed, the politicians -- were very 
inexperienced at playing on the international stage.  He 
commented that they seemed to take access to senior officials 
in the UK, EU and U.S. for granted and didn't take good 
advantage of such access, not realizing that the window of 
opportunity for such contacts is closing.  He concluded that 
the Assembly needs all the help it can get. 
 
¶5.  On a positive note, Fraser said there have been many 
useful contacts between Northern Ireland politicians and the 
Irish Government.  Fraser mentioned that when NIA members go 
overseas, they seek out assistance from the Irish Embassy 
rather than their own NIA liaison offices.  He commented that 
when Nigel Dodds was in Washington recently, he sought out a 
photo opportunity with Irish Ambassador Michael Collins in 
the Irish Embassy -- a place Dodds would have regarded as 
"enemy territory" not so long ago.  Pat Hennessy noted that 
NIA First Minister Ian Paisley asked the Irish Embassy in 
Brussels to coordinate his recent visit there. 
 
¶6.  (C) Fraser stated that the Government of Ireland is still 
working within the framework of the Good Friday Agreement, 
which includes the devolution of policing and justice from 
Westminister to the Northern Ireland Assembly.  Fraser said 
the Irish Government understands the fundamental conflict 
between the unionist Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), which 
is reluctant to devolve policing and justice in May 2008, and 
the republican Sinn Fein party, which agreed in Janaury 2007 
to endorse policing in the North based, in part, on an 
understanding that policing and justice would be devolved in 
May 2008.  Both sides, he said, have legitimate concerns 
about meeting the expectations of their rank-and-file 
supporters. 
 
¶7.  (C) However, Fraser said, contacts the Irish Government 
has had with Sinn Fein so far indicate that Sinn Fein is not 
yet overly worried about the May 2008 deadline.  In coming 
weeks, Fraser pointed out, the political process will 
proceed, including the outcome of the NIA Committee on 
Devolution of Policing and Justice, led by DUP member Jeffrey 
 
DUBLIN 00000050  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Donaldson.  Fraser said that the negotiating process could 
well produce the desired result.  He wryly commented, "We 
will know when Sinn Fein is really worried."  (Note: Sinn 
Fein President Gerry Adams met recently with both the Consul 
General in Belfast (reftel) and Ambassador Foley in Dublin to 
express his concern about not meeting the May 2008 deadline. 
End Note.)  The bottom line, in Fraser's opinion, is that 
devolution of policing and justice will occur this year, but 
probably not in May. 
 
¶8.  (C) In spite of two trouble-free seasons, both Fraser and 
Hennessy identified this summer's marching season, which will 
be underway in May when devolution is scheduled to occur, as 
a potential flashpoint for trouble. 
 
¶9.  (C) Hennessy's views largely coincided with that of 
Fraser, including some unease about the capabilities of the 
NIA politicians, the NIA civil service, and the progress of 
planning for the May 2008 investment conference.  Hennessy 
felt that the recent meeting of Ian Paisley and Martin 
McGuinness with President Bush made a significant 
contribution to cementing the peace, noting that since that 
visit, Paisley seemed more comfortable in his role. 
 
¶10.  (C) Commenting on the issue of policing and justice in 
the North, Hennessy acknowledged the difficulty of achieving 
devolution, but noted some positive signs.  He commented that 
Paisley has not said anything recently that would make it 
more difficult to proceed with devolution negotiations, that 
each side has been careful to deal with other contentious 
issues in ways that do not scotch the negotiations over 
devolution, that both sides understand the significance of 
policing and justice and their responsibilities under the 
Good Friday Agreement and St. Andrew's Agreement, and that 
the ongoing work of the NIA Committee on the Devolution of 
Policing and Justice demonstrates that the DUP wants to be 
ready to implement devolution when the political time is 
ripe.  Hennessy agreed with Fraser that devolution will 
occur, though not necessarily in May, saying, "It's an 
article of faith that the DUP will break the May 2008 
deadline." 
 
¶11.  (C) Hennessy said it will be very important that outside 
forces -- the U.S., the British Government, and the Irish 
Government -- continue to robustly remind the DUP of their 
obligation to accept the devolution of policing and justice. 
The DUP will need such pressure to persuade its rank-and-file 
that it has no choice, Hennessy declared, and will expect 
such pressure to be forthcoming.  In the end, Hennessy 
stated, the Government of Ireland will accede to whatever 
timeframe for devolution Sinn Fein and the DUP agree between 
themselves. 
 
¶12.  (C) Comment:  The Irish Government does not appear to be 
unduely worried at this point that the peace process will 
founder over the issue of the devolution of policing and 
justice, though the timetable for such devolution is in 
question.  We are confident that we will get a quick heads-up 
from the Irish if they think the process is beginning to 
falter seriously. 
 
FOLEY