08DUBLIN382
STEMMING THE FLOW OF FOREIGN TERRORISTS INTO IRAQ
Tue Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
SECRET
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDL #0382 1761544
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 241544Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9290S E C R E T DUBLIN 000382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR PTER EI
SUBJECT: STEMMING THE FLOW OF FOREIGN TERRORISTS INTO IRAQ 
FROM IRELAND 
 
REF: INGALLS (S/CT) E-MAIL OF 04/15/2008 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas C. Foley; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1.  (S) Summary:  The Ambassador briefed Justice Minister 
Dermot Ahern on June 19 on the S/CT presentation, "Stemming 
the Flow of Foreign Terrorists into Iraq: Presentation to the 
Government of Ireland" (reftel).  Ahern indicated clearly 
that he wants to thwart terrorist activities on Irish soil. 
He said that the Government of Ireland would cooperate 
closely with U.S. intelligence services -- "within the 
parameters of Irish law" -- to thwart terrorist threats. 
Nonetheless, Irish law, the courts, and government 
bureaucracy sometimes make it difficult to aggressively 
pursue alleged terrorist links and can complicate 
cooperation.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S) The Ambassador, EMBOFFs, and Station Chief briefed 
Minister of Justice, Equality and Law Reform Dermot Ahern on 
June 19 on the S/CT presentation (reftel), explaining that 
the purpose of the briefing was to acquaint the newly 
appointed Minister with a terrorist threat.  Ahern was 
accompanied by senior Justice Department officials Sean 
Aylward, Secretary General, Ken O'Leary, Assistant Secretary, 
and Patrick Forsyth, Assistant Principal. 
 
¶3.  (S) Stating, "We don't want Ireland to be a base for 
murder or for an attack on another country," Ahern declared 
that the Government of Ireland would cooperate closely with 
U.S. intelligence services -- "within the parameters of Irish 
law" -- to thwart terrorist threats emanating from Ireland. 
He stated that adequate legislation is in force to enable 
Ireland to deal effectively with terrorists.  Ahern noted 
that the Irish Government was particularly concerned about 
the potential for attacks on the United Kingdom, partly due 
to the open border between the two nations, but it also 
appeared they had some intelligence indicating an elevated 
risk of an attack in the U.K.  In this regard, he stated that 
Irish intelligence authorities were liaising closely with 
British, French, and Israeli intelligence services in 
relation to foreign terrorists.  (Note: The primary Irish 
intelligence operation is a division of the Garda (police), 
which falls under Ahern's jurisdiction as Minister of 
Justice.  There is also a military intelligence wing of the 
Irish Army, which reports to the Minister of Defence.  End 
note.)  Ahern went on to say, however, that the Justice 
Ministry did not intend to micromanage Irish intelligence 
operations.  Rather, he said, the Ministry would stipulate 
that close cooperation was authorized with U.S. authorities 
on issues of foreign terrorists and step back to let the 
intelligence authorities do their job.  He declared, however, 
that the Justice Ministry would be tracking developments 
closely and that he was prepared to "mediate roadblocks." 
 
¶4.  (S) Comment: Ahern is clearly committed to thwarting 
terrorist activities on Irish soil.  Nonetheless, Irish law, 
the courts, and government bureaucracy sometimes make it 
difficult to aggressively pursue alleged terrorist links and 
can complicate cooperation.  There may also be a dollop of 
complacency in Irish efforts to pursue alleged terrorists -- 
there have been no foreign terrorist acts against Ireland or 
launched from Ireland into Europe ... as yet. 
FOLEY