08DUBLIN106
IRELAND - EIGHTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP)
Mon Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO2980
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0106/01 0631021
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031021Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8925
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0046
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0159
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0676
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0065UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 16 DUBLIN 000106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM 
STATE FOR EUR/PGI 
STATE FOR USAID 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB EI
SUBJECT: IRELAND - EIGHTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) 
REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 02731 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  001.2 OF 016 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On the verge of passing new comprehensive 
anti-trafficking legislation, Ireland made great strides during the 
reporting period to shore up protections against trafficking in 
persons (TIP) in the country.  In addition to the new Criminal Law 
(Human Trafficking) Bill 2007, which Department of Justice, Equality 
and Law Reform (DOJ) contacts expect will become law by April 2008, 
new immigration legislation was published that includes protections 
for trafficking victims.  In April 2007, the Government signed the 
Council of Europe Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human 
Beings (CoE Convention).  Enactment of the two new laws will be the 
final steps to enable the Irish Government to ratify the CoE 
Convention. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) DOJ created and staffed a new Anti-Trafficking Unit, 
headed by an Executive Director who reports directly to the Minister 
for Justice.  This highly-placed Unit will be responsible for 
coordinating and facilitating the implementation of a new national 
strategy to address human trafficking and will act as one of the key 
liaison offices between NGOs and Irish Government officials. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A new High Level Group on Combating Trafficking in Human 
Beings was established during the year, replacing the TIP 
inter-agency Working Group created in 2005.  The new High Level 
Group is co-chaired by the Director General of the Irish National 
Immigration Service and the Assistant Secretary in the DOJ.  Members 
of the new High Level Group include principal officers from the 
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE), the 
Department of Foreign Affairs, the Health Services Executive (HSE), 
the Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS), the Garda 
(Irish National Police) National Immigration Bureau (GNIB), and the 
Executive Director of the DOJ's Anti-Trafficking Unit.  The Garda 
launched Operation Snow during the year that focused on 
investigating possible trafficking of unaccompanied children into 
Ireland.  They continued Operation Hotel, which coordinates action 
against trafficking on a nationwide basis.  Ireland also took part 
in Operation Pentameter II (launched October 2007 and continuing), a 
joint program with the United Kingdom which investigates trafficking 
movement between the two countries.  The Garda implemented a new 
training program on ways to work with suspected trafficking victims, 
which was created with input from several NGOs.  During the 
reporting period, an estimated 120 officers attended this training 
and the program became a standard module in the basic training of 
new Garda recruits.  The training is now also a part of the Garda's 
required in-service training program. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The estimated number of suspected trafficking victims 
remained small during the year; an academic study by university 
researchers at National University of Ireland Galway (NIU/G) and 
Trinity College concluded that a minimum of 76 victims were 
trafficked into Ireland for sexual exploitation over a 7-year period 
(2000-2006).  Data provided by NGOs indicated that the number of 
suspected victims ranged from just a handful to maybe as many as 150 
victims during the same period.  During the reporting period, the 
estimated number of potential victims from individual NGOs ranged 
from 3 to 13.  NGOs often referred cases among themselves, so this 
number may include duplicate cases. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Post has engaged the Irish Government at the highest 
levels to stress the importance of Ireland's role in fighting 
European and global trafficking.  We have urged the Government to 
develop a national action plan and to develop an awareness campaign 
that focuses on reducing demand.  The Ambassador, DCM, POL/ECON 
chief, and Embassy political officers regularly discussed 
trafficking with the Department of Foreign Affairs, DOJ, DETE, the 
HSE, the INIS, and the GNIB as well as numerous NGOs.  Post will 
continue to urge the Government and NGOs to improve cooperation to 
identify, assess, and prosecute cases of trafficking, and to assist 
victims.  End Summary. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The following items are keyed to reftel. 
 
OVERVIEW OF A COUNTRY'S ACTIVITIES TO ELIMINATE TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or destination 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  002.2 OF 016 
 
 
for internationally trafficked men, women, or children?  Provide, 
where possible, numbers or estimates for each group; how they were 
trafficked, to where, and for what purpose.  Does the trafficking 
occur within the country's borders?  Does it occur in territory 
outside of the government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)? 
 Are any estimates or reliable numbers available as to the extent or 
magnitude of the problem?   What is (are) the source(s) of available 
information on trafficking in persons or what plans are in place (if 
any) to undertake documentation of trafficking? How reliable are the 
numbers and these sources?  Are certain groups of persons more at 
risk of being trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus 
girls, certain ethnic groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
There are indicators and anecdotal evidence that Ireland is, on a 
limited scale, a destination and transit country for international 
trafficking victims.  The estimated number of trafficking victims 
that individual NGOs encountered during the reporting period ranged 
between 3 and 13 victims.  Many NGOs made referrals among themselves 
and with the police, so some of these cases may have overlapped. 
Ruhama, an NGO that aids prostitutes, said that most of the 
trafficking victims they had encountered during the year were 
identified as young foreign women between 18 and 25 years of age 
from Eastern Europe and Africa.  (Nigeria was specifically named.) 
Ruhama also expressed concern over the growing number of Chinese 
massage parlors in Ireland, theorizing that this industry could be a 
destination for trafficking victims for both sexual exploitation and 
forced labor.  One trend that Ruhama noted was that many 
prostitutes, especially those from other countries, were no longer 
working the streets, but were increasingly working in private 
apartments or houses that function as brothels. 
 
In September 2007, a widely accepted study conducted by researchers 
from National University of Ireland at Galway (NUI/G) and Trinity 
College reported that the minimum estimated number of trafficking 
victims for sexual exploitation into Ireland over a seven year 
period (2000-2006) was 76.  Although some NGOs argued that this 
estimate was too low (Ruhama, for example, said their staff had 
encountered about 150 trafficking victims during this same time 
period) most agreed that the report was a positive step in 
identifying the extent of the trafficking problem in Ireland. 
Ruhama took part in the data gathering portion of the NUI/G study, 
but according to the researchers, a significant number of Ruhama's 
cases were not accepted due to lack of information in the case 
files.  The full NIU/G report can be found at 
http://www.nuigalway.ie. 
 
Several NGOs also provided data on cases they had collected over 
several years.  The Migrant Rights Centre reported 46 cases of 
suspected trafficking for labor exploitation from July 2005 - 
December 2007.  The largest number of these victims came from 
Bangladesh, followed by Pakistan, Egypt and the Philippines. 
Smaller numbers came from South America, Africa, Eastern Europe and 
Asia.  The Migrant Rights Centre said that there were three main 
areas in which such trafficking victims worked: domestic labor, 
restaurants and agricultural production.  (Mushroom pickers were 
specifically named). 
 
Unaccompanied minors entering Ireland continued to be an area of 
concern for both the Government and NGOs.  When minors (children 
under 17) come to Ireland without a parent or guardian, they are 
automatically placed into care facilities overseen by the Health 
Services Executive (HSE), the administrative body that runs the 
healthcare system.  According to HSE officials, the majority of 
these children travel to Ireland to join their families who have 
already established residency or are waiting for an asylum decision. 
 However, those children not reunited with their families are placed 
in foster care or in a Government-run hostel.  An NGO representative 
who works directly with separated children said that these children 
are vulnerable to being trafficked.  In response to these concerns, 
the Garda have launched Operation Snow, which is dedicated to 
investigating possible trafficking of unaccompanied children into 
Ireland. 
 
Government, Garda and NGOs are considered credible sources of 
information on trafficked persons.  Their findings are reasonably 
consistent given the difficulty of gathering such data. 
 
-- B. Please provide a general overview of the trafficking situation 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  003.2 OF 016 
 
 
in the country and any changes since the last TIP Report (e.g. 
changes in direction).  (Other items to address may include:  What 
kind of conditions are the victims trafficked into?  Which 
populations are targeted by the traffickers?  Who are the 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business people? 
Small or family-based crime groups?  Large international organized 
crime syndicates?  What methods are used to approach victims? (Are 
they offered lucrative jobs, sold by their families, approached by 
friends of friends, etc.?)  What methods are used to move the 
victims (e.g., are false documents being used?).  Are employment, 
travel, and tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved with or 
fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
 
NGO and Government contacts agreed that the majority of suspected 
trafficking cases involved women who were brought into Ireland for 
prostitution.  Most cases involved Eastern European women, with a 
limited number of people trafficked from Asia, Africa and South 
America.  Most suspected victims entered Ireland legally, either 
from EU Member States or with a valid visa.  Also, since Ireland 
shares a Common Travel Area with the United Kingdom, many were 
suspected to have entered Ireland through the UK and Northern 
Ireland.  Garda believe that organized criminal gangs of foreign 
nationals facilitated much of the suspected sex trade trafficking 
and that these gangs also arranged for the victims' employment and 
accommodation in brothels.  The criminal gangs reportedly solicited 
clients via text and voice mobile phone contacts and the use of the 
Internet.  Garda National Immigration Bureau (GNIB) officials 
suspected some use of fraudulent documentation in cases involving 
victims from West Africa and non-EU East European nations. 
 
During investigations, some women considered possible trafficking 
victims by NGOs stated to the Garda that they had been recruited in 
their home countries, where they had already been working in the sex 
industry, and that they had traveled to Ireland voluntarily. 
 
There was an increase in awareness among law enforcement personnel 
and NGO communities regarding trafficking for labor exploitation 
during the past year.  This was a result of specific 
trafficking-identification training efforts by the Garda as well as 
concentrated efforts by NGOs to make trafficking for labor 
exploitation a part of trafficking discussions and campaigns.  To 
date, however, there have been limited numbers of suspected 
trafficking victims for labor exploitation identified in Ireland. 
 
There is no evidence that employment, travel or tourism agencies, or 
marriage brokers, are involved with or fronting for traffickers or 
crime groups to traffic individuals. 
 
-- C. Which government agencies are involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts and which agency, if any, has the lead? 
 
In December 2007, the DOJ created an Anti-Trafficking Unit that 
leads anti-trafficking efforts for the Government of Ireland.  This 
new highly placed Unit, headed by an executive director who reports 
directly to the Minister for Justice, is responsible for 
coordinating anti-trafficking efforts in Ireland and for creating a 
National Action Plan on trafficking in persons.  DOJ is also 
responsible for policy in relation to criminal law and law 
enforcement, immigration/border control and gender equality. 
 
An Garda Sochna, the national police force, is responsible for the 
investigation of criminal offences, including human trafficking. 
Within the Garda, the Garda National Immigration Bureau (GNIB) and 
the Garda National Bureau of Criminal Investigation (NBCI) are the 
key bureaus that investigate most suspected trafficking cases. 
 
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE) is 
responsible for the protection of workers rights.  The National 
Employment Rights Authority office within the DETE is responsible 
for inspection and enforcement of labor laws. 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs has an anti-trafficking role in 
relation to Embassy officials accepting visa applications, and in 
relation to international human rights and overseas development 
assistance. 
 
The Health Service Executive (HSE) is responsible for the welfare of 
child victims of human trafficking.  The Refugee Act 1996 places an 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  004.2 OF 016 
 
 
obligation on immigration officers and members of the police who 
encounter minors unaccompanied by parents or guardians to invoke 
provisions of the Child Care Act 2001, which involves placing the 
minor concerned in the care of the HSE. 
 
-- D.  What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address this problem in practice?  For example, is funding for 
police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall corruption a 
problem?  Does the government lack the resources to aid victims? 
 
For several consecutive years, the Irish Government has enjoyed a 
budget surplus, and there are no unique limitations on resources to 
combat trafficking.  Irish police and border authorities are honest, 
competent and well-run.  The Government has acknowledged the need 
for new legislation that specifically defines and outlaws 
trafficking in persons and introduced a new Criminal Law (Human 
Trafficking) Bill 2007, which will bring Ireland into conformity 
with UN, EU and CoE anti-trafficking regulations and give police 
more precise legal tools, was in the final stages of the legislative 
process at the end of February 2008.  Irish officials anticipate 
that this bill will become law in April 2008.  A limitation on the 
Government's ability to address trafficking would be lack of 
experience with TIP issues, since immigration into Ireland, 
including illegal immigration, is a relatively new phenomenon.  The 
Government is now striving to deploy the necessary staff, resources, 
and procedures to deal with increased immigration.  Specifically, a 
dedicated police unit will be created to focus on enforcing the new 
anti-trafficking Criminal Law, once the bill has been enacted. 
 
-- E. To what extent does the government systematically monitor its 
anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- prosecution, victim 
protection, and prevention) and periodically make available, 
publicly or privately and directly or through regional/international 
organizations, its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
In addition to the new Anti-Trafficking Unit, the Government created 
a new High Level Group on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings in 
January 2008 that coordinates the anti-trafficking efforts of the 
Department of Justice, DETE, Department of Foreign Affairs, GNIB, 
INIS, and the HSE.  The High Level Group liaises with various Irish 
and international NGOs on TIP programs and the identification of 
possible victims.  The Government actively engages with 
international organizations dealing with trafficking, including the 
UN, EU, and OSCE, and works bilaterally with countries that are 
transit or source countries of the sex industry.  Ireland is also 
part of a European G6 Initiative against human trafficking.  This 
initiative, involving six European countries (UK, Poland, Italy, 
Netherlands, Spain and Ireland), includes sharing best practices 
learned from anti-trafficking efforts.  The GNIB works under the 
Garda but carries out its immigration functions on behalf of the 
Minister of Justice.  This system ensures a sharing of information 
among immigration policy-makers, immigration officers, and national 
police.  A GNIB official, in addition to representing Ireland at the 
EU Border Agency in Warsaw, participates in an information-sharing 
forum of NGOs working to combat trafficking and to deter violence 
against women.  There is open cooperation and sharing of information 
among Government officials, Garda officers and NGOs. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
-- A. Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons--both for sexual and non-sexual purposes 
(e.g. forced labor)?  If so, please specifically cite the name of 
the law and its date of enactment and provide the exact language of 
the law prohibiting TIP and all other law(s) used to prosecute TIP 
cases.  Does the law(s) cover both internal and external 
(transnational) forms of trafficking? If not, under what other laws 
can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against 
slavery or the exploitation of prostitution by means of force, fraud 
or coercion?   Are these other laws being used in trafficking cases? 
 Please provide a full inventory of trafficking laws, including 
non-criminal statutes that allow for civil penalties against alleged 
trafficking crimes, (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against 
illegal debt). 
 
Ireland is in the final stages of passing the Criminal Law (Human 
Trafficking) Bill 2007 which will outlaw all forms of trafficking, 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  005.2 OF 016 
 
 
including for sexual exploitation, labor exploitation, or 
exploitation for organ removal.  Under the new criminal law, 
traffickers can be convicted for up to life imprisonment when a 
victim is under 18 years and up to 14 years imprisonment when the 
victim is an adult.  The bill has passed the Dail (lower house of 
Parliament) and is currently in the final stages of review by the 
Seanad (Senate; upper house of Parliament).  The bill will then go 
to the President for signing, followed by a one-month period before 
it comes into force.  DOJ officials anticipate the bill's enactment 
in April 2008. 
 
The exact language in the Crime Law (Human Trafficking) Bill 2007 
prohibiting TIP is, "A person who trafficks a child for the purposes 
of the exploitation of the child shall be guilty of an offence.  A 
person who sells a child, offers or exposes a child for sale or 
invites the making of an offer to purchase a child, or purchases or 
makes an offer to purchase a child, shall be guilty of an offence. 
A person who causes an offence under subsection (1) or (2) to be 
committed shall be guilty of an offence.  A person who attempts to 
commit an offence under subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall be guilty 
of an offence.  A person guilty of an offence under this section 
shall be liable upon conviction on indictment to a fine, or 
imprisonment for life, or both. A person (in this section referred 
to as the "trafficker") who trafficks another person (in this 
section referred to as the trafficked person"), other than a child 
or a person to whom subsection (2) applies, for the purposes of the 
exploitation of the trafficked person shall be guilty of an offence 
if, in or for the purpose of trafficking the trafficked person, the 
trafficker - (a) coerced, threatened, abducted or otherwise used 
force against the trafficked person,(b) deceived or committed a 
fraud against the trafficked person,(c) abused his or her authority 
or took advantage of the vulnerability of the trafficked person to 
such extent as to cause the trafficked person to have had no real 
and acceptable alternative but to submit to being trafficked,(d) 
coerced, threatened or otherwise used force against any person in 
whose care or charge, or under whose control, the trafficked person 
was for the time being, in order to compel that person to permit the 
trafficker to traffick the trafficked person, or(e) made any payment 
to, or conferred any right, interest or other benefit on, any person 
in whose care or charge, or under whose control, the trafficked 
person was for the time being, in exchange for that person 
permitting the trafficker to traffick the trafficked person.  A 
person who trafficks a person who is mentally impaired for the 
purposes of the exploitation of the person shall be guilty of an 
offence." 
 
In addition, there are presently five laws that deal with 
trafficking in persons - The Immigration Act 2003, The Illegal 
Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000, The Child Trafficking and 
Pornography Act 1998, The Proceeds of Crime Act 1996 and The 
Criminal Law (Sexual Offenses) Act 1993. 
 
The Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000 made it an offense for 
a person to organize or knowingly facilitate the entry into the 
State of a person whom he knows to be, or has reasonable cause to 
believe to be, an illegal immigrant or person who intends to seek 
asylum.  While this law more correctly describes smuggling, a 
trafficker would also be subject to this law.  Section 2 of this Act 
would apply most readily to traffickers, as it specifically 
prohibits bringing in illegal immigrants for the financial gain of 
those facilitating the entry.  The penalty on conviction of 
indictment for this offense is an unlimited fine, or up to 10 years 
imprisonment, or both.  The penalty for a guilty plea, however, is a 
maximum of 12 months incarceration and a fine not to exceed Euro 
1,500 (2,190 USD). 
 
The Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998 makes it an offense, 
inter alia, to organize or knowingly facilitate the entry into, 
transit through, or exit from the State of a child for the purpose 
of sexual exploitation, or to provide accommodation to such a child 
while in the State.  The maximum penalty is life imprisonment.  This 
law is enforceable for crimes committed outside of Ireland by Irish 
citizens and residents. 
 
The Immigration Act 2003 requires carriers operating aircraft, 
ferries, or other vehicles bringing persons to Ireland from any 
area, except the Common Travel area between Ireland and the UK, to 
ensure that those passengers are in possession of the necessary 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  006.2 OF 016 
 
 
immigration documentation.  The Act provides for a fine for 
passengers traveling with inadequate documentation. 
 
In addition, the Act requires Government departments, local 
authorities, health boards, the Garda, and refugee application 
determination bodies to share information on non-nationals, 
including applicants for refugee status, in order to ensure 
compliance with laws relating to their entry, residence and removal 
from the State. 
 
The Proceeds of Crime Act 1996 allows for the confiscation of assets 
of those involved in criminal activity, including trafficking in 
persons.  The assessment of tax liability on the illegal earnings 
may also be pursued.  In addition, Ireland has comprehensive civil 
legislation that provides for seizure of assets acquired through 
criminal activity.  A criminal conviction is not necessary before a 
civil case can be filed, and the burden of proving that the assets 
are not the proceeds of crime rests with the defendant in civil 
proceedings.  The Criminal Assets Bureau implements this legislation 
working with other Government agencies. 
 
The Criminal Law (Sexual Offenses) Act of 1993 prohibits and 
penalizes those found soliciting or importuning for the purpose of 
prostitution.  The act also penalizes those controlling or directing 
the activities of a prostitute, organizing prostitution by 
controlling or directing the activities of more than one prostitute 
for the purpose of prostitution, or compelling or coercing a person 
to be a prostitute. 
 
False imprisonment is an offence under section 15 of the Non-Fatal 
Offences against the Person Act 1998 and is punishable by up to life 
imprisonment. 
 
The Slave Trade Act 1824 renders all operations in connection with 
the slave trade illegal and slavery or servitude is prohibited under 
the Irish Constitution (Article 40). 
 
-- B. What are the prescribed penalties for trafficking people for 
sexual exploitation?  What penalties were imposed for persons 
convicted of sexual exploitation over the reporting period?  Please 
note the number of convicted sex traffickers who received suspended 
sentences and the number who received only a fine as punishment. 
 
Under the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000, the penalty can 
include up to a Euro 1,500 (2,190 USD) fine and 12 months in jail. 
If a case is appealed to the district court, then the penalty is a 
maximum of ten years imprisonment and there is no cap on the fine. 
 
 
-- C. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for labor 
exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor and involuntary 
servitude?  Do the government's laws provide for criminal punishment 
-- i.e. jail time -- for labor recruiters in labor source countries 
who engage in recruitment of laborers using knowingly fraudulent or 
deceptive offers that result in workers being trafficked in the 
destination country?  Are there laws in destination countries 
punishing employers or labor agents in labor destination countries 
who confiscate workers' passports or travel documents, switch 
contracts without the worker's consent as a means to keep the worker 
in a state of service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of 
keeping the worker in a state of service?  If law(s) prescribe 
criminal punishments for these offenses, what are the actual 
punishments imposed on persons convicted of these offenses?  Please 
note the number of convicted labor traffickers who received 
suspended sentences and the number who received only a fine as 
punishment. 
 
Under the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000, which addresses 
both trafficking for sexual exploitation and labor exploitation, the 
penalty can include up to a Euro 1,500 (2,190 USD) fine and 12 
months in jail.  If a case is appealed to the district court, then 
the penalty is a maximum of ten years imprisonment and there is no 
cap on the fine.  Labor exploitation cases are often heard by the 
Rights Commissioner, who can award compensation for exploited 
workers.  In January 2008, the Rights Commissioners awarded a 
Pakistani migrant worker Euro 116,000 (169,360 USD) in a case 
against his employer.  Although criminal charges were not filed, the 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  007.2 OF 016 
 
 
circumstances of the case, including holding the employee's 
passport, indicated that this may have been a trafficking case. 
 
-- D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the prescribed penalties for crimes 
of trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation? 
 
Under Irish Law, the maximum sentence possible for rape is life 
imprisonment (eight years is the average sentence), and the maximum 
possible sentence for aggravated sexual assault is life 
imprisonment.  This is similar to the penalty for Child Trafficking 
as provided for in the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998. 
 
 
-- E. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized?  Specifically, 
are the activities of the prostitute criminalized?  Are the 
activities of the brothel owner/operator, clients, pimps, and 
enforcers criminalized?  Are these laws enforced?  If prostitution 
is legal and regulated, what is the legal minimum age for this 
activity? Note that in many countries with federalist systems, 
prostitution laws may be under state or local jurisdiction and may 
differ among jurisdictions. 
 
Adult prostitution (18 years of age and older) is not illegal under 
Irish law, but it is an offense to solicit another person for the 
purposes of prostitution, to be involved in organized prostitution, 
or to live off the proceeds of a third party's income from 
prostitution (pimping).  Under the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, 
it is also illegal to procure a woman or girl to become a 
prostitute, to leave the country to become a prostitute, or to leave 
her usual place of abode to become a prostitute.  Brothels, defined 
as establishments of two or more women made available for 
prostitution, are illegal.  Under the above mentioned Act, it is an 
offence to detain any woman or girl against her will in a brothel. 
A woman or girl is deemed to have been detained in a brothel where, 
inter alia, property belonging to her is withheld. 
 
-- F. Has the government prosecuted any cases against human 
trafficking offenders?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences served, including details 
on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Please 
indicate which laws were used to investigate, prosecute, convict, 
and sentence traffickers.  Also, if possible, please disaggregate by 
type of TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual exploitation) and victims 
(children, as defined by U.S. and international law as under 18 
years of age, vs. adults).  Does the government in a labor source 
country criminally prosecute labor recruiters who recruit laborers 
using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers or impose on 
recruited laborers inappropriately high or illegal fees or 
commissions that create a debt bondage condition for the laborer? 
Does the government in a labor destination country criminally 
prosecute employers or labor agents who confiscate workers' 
passports/travel documents, switch contracts or terms of employment 
without the worker's consent, use physical or sexual abuse or the 
threat of such abuse to keep workers in a state of service, or 
withhold payment of salaries as a means to keep workers in a state 
of service?  Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced?  If 
not, why not?  Please indicate whether the government can provide 
this information, and if not, why not? 
 
In July the Dublin District Court convicted a Nigerian-born Irish 
national of trafficking 12 Mauritian nationals into the country 
under the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000.  Although this 
Act covers both smuggling and trafficking, the local newspapers 
referred to this as a trafficking in persons case.  It was unclear 
from published accounts whether the Mauritian nationals were 
smuggled against their will and since they were denied admittance 
into Ireland, it was unclear if the convicted man intended to 
exploit them.  The Irish national was sentenced to four years in 
prison, which he is now serving. 
 
-- G. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to recognize, investigate, and prosecute 
instances of trafficking?  Specify whether NGOs, international 
organizations, and/or the USG provide specialized training for host 
government officials. 
 
The Government provides training in-country and sends officials to 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  008.2 OF 016 
 
 
seminars and conferences abroad.  Some examples follow: 
 
In July, August and October, the Dublin-based Office of the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM), in conjunction with 
the GNIB, conducted several two-day training seminars titled "The 
Training of Border Guards, Border Police and Customs Officials in 
Identifying of and Providing Assistance to the Victims of 
Trafficking."  Attendees included Garda Training College personnel, 
GNIB officers, immigration officials, and officers from the UK Human 
Trafficking Centre (UKHTC).  Several NGOs presented various portions 
of the training seminar and an estimated 120 Irish police attended 
the training.  This program is provided to key Garda personnel 
throughout Ireland as part of their continuous professional 
development program. 
 
A new training module on the phenomenon of human trafficking is 
included as part of the overall training for new Garda recruits. 
 
Irish law enforcement organizations take part in European-wide 
conferences on the prevention of organized exploitation of women and 
children and are part of the Interpol Working Group on Trafficking 
in Human Beings.  This group developed a manual of best practices 
for investigators that provides practical guidelines for 
investigators and a structured way to locate advice on a specific 
issue. 
 
Garda personnel regularly participate in courses organized by the 
European Police College (CEPOL) related to human trafficking.  These 
courses are targeted at senior police officers who are responsible 
for aiding in the prosecution of trafficking cases or organized 
crime cases, members of lecturing staff in national police training 
colleges, chiefs of police and government officials from ministries 
dealing with issues of human trafficking. 
 
--H. Does the government cooperate with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? If possible, can 
post provide the number of cooperative international investigations 
on trafficking during the reporting period? 
 
The Government cooperates with other governments in the 
investigation of prosecution of trafficking victims. 
 
Since Ireland and the United Kingdom share a Common Travel Area, the 
two countries have close cooperation on a number of immigration and 
trafficking investigations, including Operation Pentameter (2006) 
and Operation Pentameter II (launched in October 2007).  The two 
countries also exchange liaison officers from GNIB and the UK 
immigration Service (UKIS).  In September 2006, the two Governments 
signed a memorandum of understanding in relation to facilitating the 
systematic exchange of immigration-related information.  In 
addition, the Garda cooperate with the UK Human Trafficking Centre 
(UKHTC) in Sheffield. 
 
Ireland has also established operational cooperation with 
immigration and police authorities in Lithuania, Spain, the 
Netherlands and France, which are transit points for illegal 
immigration into Ireland, with a particular focus on trafficking and 
smuggling activity.  DOJ officers are assigned to the Irish 
Embassies in Russia, China, India, Egypt and Nigeria to interact 
with local law enforcement authorities on immigration and 
trafficking matters.  A DOJ Legal Attach at the Irish Embassy in 
Washington, DC liaises with the U.S. Government on trafficking and 
other international legal matters.  Additionally, the GNIB liaises 
with carrier companies whose routes may be vulnerable to 
traffickers. 
 
-- I. Does the government extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post provide the number 
of traffickers extradited during the reporting period?  Does the 
government extradite its own nationals charged with such offenses? 
If not, is the government prohibited by law form extraditing its own 
nationals?  If so, what is the government doing to modify its laws 
to permit the extradition of its own nationals? 
 
Ireland extradites persons in certain circumstances to those 
countries with which it has extradition agreements in place. 
However, Irish courts take a very exacting approach toward such 
requests.  Requests that do not fully comply with the standards set 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  009.2 OF 016 
 
 
by the courts are often delayed or denied, as the legal presumption 
is against extradition.  In addition, Irish courts will deny an 
extradition request if they feel that the defendant will not be 
given the same guarantees available under the Irish Constitution in 
the requesting jurisdiction. 
 
Within the European Union, persons can be returned to their own 
jurisdiction under the provisions of the European Arrest Warrant Act 
¶2004.  In January 2008, the High Court extradited an Irish resident 
from Nigeria to the Netherlands, where he was wanted for the alleged 
trafficking of up to 200 children from Nigeria into Spain, Italy and 
the Netherlands. 
 
-- J. Is there evidence of government involvement in, or tolerance 
of, trafficking on a local or institutional level?  If so, please 
explain in detail. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level. 
 
-- K. If government officials are involved in trafficking, what 
steps has the government taken to end such participation?  Please 
indicate the number of government officials investigated and 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption during the reporting period.  Have any been convicted? 
What sentence(s) was imposed?  Please specify if officials received 
suspended sentences, were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to 
another position within the government as punishment.  Please 
provide specific numbers, if available.  Please indicate the number 
of convicted officials that received suspended sentences or received 
only a fine as punishment. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in trafficking. 
 
-- L. As part of the new requirements of the 2005 TVPRA, for 
countries that contribute troops to international peacekeeping 
efforts, please indicate whether the government vigorously 
investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced nationals of the 
country deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping or other similar 
mission who engage in or facilitate severe forms of trafficking or 
who exploit victims of such trafficking. 
 
There was no evidence that Irish troops engaged in or facilitated 
severe forms of trafficking or of exploiting victims of trafficking, 
nor were any Irish troops accused of these crimes during the year. 
 
-- M. If the country has an identified child sex tourism problem (as 
source or destination), how many foreign pedophiles has the 
government prosecuted or deported/extradited to their country of 
origin?  What are the countries of origin for sex tourists?  Do the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial coverage 
(similar to the U.S. PROTECT Act)?  If so, how many of the country's 
nationals have been prosecuted and/or convicted under the 
extraterritorial provision(s) for traveling to other countries to 
engage in child sex tourism? 
 
Ireland does not have an identified child sex tourism problem.  The 
Government has authority to deport non-national pedophiles according 
to the strictures of its extradition treaty with the country of 
origin of the arrested individual.  In addition, the Child 
Trafficking and Pornography Act has extraterritorial coverage. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
-- A. Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, for 
example, by providing temporary or permanent residency status, or 
other relief from deportation?  If so, please explain. 
 
The current assistance program for trafficking victims uses 
humanitarian NGO facilities and programs that are partially 
Government-funded.  Given the relatively small number of trafficking 
cases in Ireland, the Government and Garda refer potential victims 
on a case by case basis to organizations like Ruhama, the Migrant 
Rights Centre and the International Organization for Migration. 
These NGOs provide food, shelter, social and medical care, as well 
as legal assistance if desired. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  010.2 OF 016 
 
 
The current immigration system allows INIS authorities to provide 
potential victims with permission to remain in Ireland, as 
necessary.  Government officials stated that, in addition to 
providing respite for the individual, it is in the interests of both 
the victims of trafficking and the authorities to co-operate to 
ensure the protection of victims and the prosecution of 
perpetrators. 
 
Trafficking victims can be assisted to return and reintegrate in 
their countries of origin with the aid of the International 
Organization for Migration.  There are links to the Red Cross which 
can help to establish contact with families in the country of 
origin. 
 
The Government provides care for separated children seeking asylum 
and for unaccompanied minors entering Ireland.  The Department of 
Health receives referrals from the INIS, the GNIB and the Office of 
the Refugee Applications Commissioner.  The HSE is responsible for 
the care of children (17 and younger) and provides social, medical, 
psychological and educational services, as well as family 
reunification when possible.  There are approximately 300 children 
currently under the care of the HSE, according to HSE and NGO 
contacts. 
 
The Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill, currently in the 
first stages of Parliamentary approval, includes provisions for the 
protection of trafficking victims.  Under this bill, trafficking 
victims will be allowed to stay in the country for a 45 day 
"recovery and reflection" period and may be given a temporary 
residence permit during the investigation and trial of their case. 
 
-- B.  Does the country have victim care facilities which are 
accessible to trafficking victims?  Do foreign victims have the same 
access to care as domestic trafficking victims?  Does the country 
have specialized facilities dedicated to helping victims of 
trafficking?  If so, can post provide the number of victims placed 
in these care facilities during the reporting period?  What is the 
funding source of these facilities?  Please estimate the amount the 
government spent (in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these specialized 
facilities dedicated to helping trafficking victims during the 
reporting period.  Does the government provide trafficking victims 
with access to legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, 
please specify the kind of assistance provided, and the number of 
victims assisted, if available. 
 
Due to the low number of trafficking cases, there are no shelters 
specifically earmarked for victims of trafficking or smuggling, 
though both the Garda and the NGOs have staff members who are 
specialized in assisting trafficked persons.  The Government and 
NGOs provide shelter to trafficked persons - as well as legal, 
medical and psychological services as needed - on a case by case 
basis.  Such assistance does not appear to be curtailed by financial 
constraints.  Costs are borne by both the Government and the NGOs. 
 
 
Unaccompanied minors who enter the country are deemed vulnerable, 
and at risk to be picked up by traffickers.  These children are 
turned over to the HSE for care.  The HSE is responsible for the 
appropriate placement of all children taken into their care, 
including placements in residential and foster care. 
 
 -- C. Does the government provide funding or other forms of support 
to foreign or domestic NGOs and/or international organizations for 
services to trafficking victims?  Please explain and provide any 
funding amounts in U.S. dollar equivalent.  If assistance provided 
is in-kind, please specify exact assistance.  Please explain if 
funding for assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional 
or local governments. 
 
In 2007, the DOJ's Commission for the Victims of Crime provided 
Ruhama with an estimated Euro 50,000 (73,000 USD) that was 
specifically earmarked as funds for victim support while victims of 
sexual exploitation awaited court appearances. 
 
The Government budgeted Euro 810,000 (1.18 million USD) for 2007 to 
the local office of the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM).  Although the IOM does not specifically address trafficking 
concerns, the organization was used as an assistance resource for 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  011.2 OF 016 
 
 
those victims wishing to return to their home countries. 
 
In 2006, the Irish Government's Overseas Development Program, known 
as Irish Aid, provided a total of Euro 2.042 million (2.981 million 
USD) for on-going anti-trafficking programs, including the 
following. 
 
Irish Aid provided Euro 1.363 million (1.989 million USD) to support 
the International Labor Organization's (ILO) five-year (beginning in 
2006) regional program in Albania, Moldova and Ukraine, which 
promotes employment, vocational training and national policy 
measures to prevent and reduce trafficking in women. 
 
Irish Aid committed funding of Euro 300,000 (438,000 USD) over three 
years (beginning in 2006) to ECPAT (End Child Prostitution, Child 
Pornography and Trafficking of Children for Sexual Purposes), a 
global network of organizations working on issues of children's 
rights, child prostitution, child pornography and child trafficking 
for sexual purposes. 
 
Under its Civil Society Fund, Irish Aid provided Euro 379,000 
(553,340 USD) over three years (beginning in 2005) to the Irish NGO, 
Children in Crossfire.  The aim of this program is to combat 
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, within South 
Asia by promoting the roles of community and local Government in the 
reduction of trafficking and by increasing the level of 
participation of poor women and children in social and economic 
activities. 
 
-- D. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and social 
services personnel have a formal system of proactively identifying 
victims of trafficking among high- risk persons with whom they come 
in contact (e.g., foreign persons arrested for prostitution or 
immigration violations)?   What is the number of victims identified 
during the reporting period?  Has the government developed and 
implemented a referral process to transfer victims detained, 
arrested or placed in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities to institutions that provide short-or long-term care? 
How many victims were referred for assistance by law enforcement 
authorities during the reporting period? 
 
Although not formalized in legislation, Government policy requires 
law enforcement, immigration and social services personnel to 
routinely refer suspected trafficking victims to NGOs for 
assistance.  According to NGO contacts, Government officials 
referred 10 suspected trafficking victims to their organizations 
during the reporting period. 
 
-- E. For countries with legalized prostitution: does the government 
have a mechanism for screening for trafficking victims among persons 
involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex trade? 
 
The police have conducted various operations focused on the sex 
trade, including Operation Quest, where Garda raided lap-dance clubs 
and brothels, thoroughly questioned those involved in the raids, and 
maintained contact during subsequent months to determine if the 
women were trafficking victims.  Even though the underlying motive 
for the investigations was suspicion of trafficking, no victims 
claimed to be trafficked, and Garda prosecuted individuals only for 
work permit and prostitution violations. 
 
Since the sex trade is not regulated in Ireland there are no formal 
mechanisms to screen commercial sex trade workers.  However, police 
officers are trained to look for signs of trafficking. 
 
-- F. Are the rights of victims respected?  Are trafficking victims 
detained or jailed?  If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are 
victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, 
such as those governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
NGOs report that women suspected of being trafficking victims are 
generally treated well, although there have been instances in rural 
areas where Garda officials, unfamiliar with the trafficking 
phenomenon, have initially detained women in prison.  Alleged 
victims have also been held in jail until the courts were able to 
determine their identity. 
 
Ireland is a signatory to the EU's Framework Decision on the 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  012.2 OF 016 
 
 
Standing of Victims in Criminal Proceedings to harmonize the 
treatment of victims of crime across the EU.  Government 
implementing legislation requires the Garda to show special 
sensitivity in relations to victims of sexual offenses. 
 
-- G. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many victims 
assisted in the investigation and prosecution of traffickers during 
the reporting period?  May victims file civil suits or seek legal 
action against traffickers?  Does anyone impede victim access to 
such legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employer, is the victim permitted to obtain 
other employment or to leave the country pending trial proceedings? 
Are there means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
NGOs and Garda both reported that the Garda encourage women to 
assist in investigations, but do not pressure them to do so.  Some 
of the funding Ruhama received for victim support was specifically 
earmarked as funds to cover living expenses while victims awaited 
court appearances. 
 
NGOs that work with migrant and immigrant workers reported assisting 
possible victims of labor trafficking in filing civil claims against 
their employers.  During the reporting period a key case of labor 
exploitation was settled in court and the victim received a Euro 
116,000 (169,360 USD) settlement.  According to Department of 
Enterprise, Trade and Employment contacts, the legal status of a 
non-Irish employee has no bearing on cases brought to court. 
 
-- H. What kind of protection is the government able to provide for 
victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these protections in 
practice?  What type of shelter or services does the government 
provide?  Are these services provided directly by the government or 
are they provided by NGOs or IOs funded by host government grants? 
Does the government provide shelter or housing benefits to victims 
or other resources to aid the victims in rebuilding their lives? 
Where are child victims placed (e.g., in shelters, foster care, or 
juvenile justice detention centers)?  What is the number of victims 
assisted by government-funded assistance programs during the 
reporting period?  What is the number of victims assisted by non 
government-funded assistance programs?  What is the number of 
victims that received shelter services during the reporting period? 
 
The Government has a witness protection program, but no trafficking 
victims have, to date, needed to use it.  There are no restrictions 
that would prevent a trafficking victim from participating in this 
program, if needed. 
 
Due to the low number of trafficking cases, there are no shelters 
specifically earmarked for victims of trafficking or smuggling, 
though both the Garda and the NGOs have staff members who are 
specialized in assisting trafficked persons.  The Government and 
NGOs provide shelter to trafficked persons - as well as legal, 
medical and psychological services as needed - on a case by case 
basis.  Such assistance does not appear to be curtailed by financial 
constraints.  Costs are borne by both the Government and the NGOs. 
 
Unaccompanied minors who enter the country are deemed vulnerable, 
and at risk to being trafficked.  These children are turned over to 
the HSE for care.  The HSE is responsible for the appropriate 
placement of all children taken into their care, including 
placements in residential and foster care. 
 
-- I. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in identifying trafficking victims and in the 
provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including the special 
needs of trafficked children?  Does the government provide training 
on protections and assistance to its embassies and consulates in 
foreign countries that are destination or transit countries?  Does 
it urge those embassies and consulates to develop ongoing 
relationships with NGOs and IOs that serve trafficked victims?  What 
is the number of trafficking victims assisted by the host country's 
embassies or consulates abroad during the reporting period?  Please 
explain the level of assistance.  For example, did the host 
government provide travel documents for the victim to repatriate, 
did the host government contact NGOs in either the source or 
destination countries to ensure the victim received adequate 
assistance, did the host government pay for the transportation home 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  013.2 OF 016 
 
 
for a victim's repatriation, etc. 
 
Social workers, members of the Special Unaccompanied Minors Unit in 
the Dublin HSE, the GNIB, Garda, and staff of the Refugee 
Applications Commissioner are trained to spot possible trafficking 
victims.  In addition, a new training module on human trafficking is 
continually delivered to new Garda recruits and is available to 
existing Garda through the organization's in-service training 
program.  The GNIB works closely with UK counterparts to review and 
track cases of suspected trafficking and employs an exchange program 
of officials with the UK to further bilateral cooperation in the 
field of immigration.  While Department of Foreign Affairs officials 
participate in international conferences and training sessions, the 
diplomatic corps as a whole is not specifically trained regarding 
assistance or support for trafficking victims, although they do 
receive training in overall human rights issues, which includes 
trafficking. 
 
-- J. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical aid, 
shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are repatriated as 
victims of trafficking? 
 
The Government is not aware of any Irish nationals who have become 
victims of human trafficking. 
 
-- K. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work with 
trafficking victims?  What type of services do they provide?  What 
sort of cooperation do they receive from local authorities?  How 
much funding (in U.S. Dollar Equivalent) did NGOs and international 
organizations receive from the host government for victim assistance 
during the reporting period?  Please disaggregate funding for 
prevention and public awareness efforts from victim assistance 
funding.  NOTE:  If post reports that a government is incapable of 
providing direct assistance to TIP victims, please assess whether 
the government ensures that TIP victims receive access to adequate 
care from other entities.  Funding, personnel, and training 
constraints should be noted, if applicable.  Conversely, the lack of 
political will in a situation where a country has adequate financial 
and other resources to address the problem should be noted as well. 
 
The most active organizations directly involved in working with the 
victims of trafficking are: 
 
- Ruhama:  Ruhama provides support to prostitutes and women 
suspected of having been trafficked for sexual exploitation.  Ruhama 
provides emergency accommodation, and, if possible, social and 
psychological support, referrals to health and legal authorities, 
and assistance in accessing educational and employment 
opportunities. 
 
- International Organization for Migration, Dublin:  In relation to 
trafficking, IOM carries out information campaigns, provides 
counseling services, conducts research on trafficking, provides 
Government funded training to Irish officials, and assists victims 
who want to return to their home country. 
 
- Ireland En Route:  Ireland En Route is a Forum on Trafficking of 
Women and Children for Sexual Exploitation.  It is a multi-agency 
group comprised of Health Service representatives, Garda, members of 
the GNIB, and NGOs.  The forum was set up in 2000 to raise awareness 
and address some of the issues associated with trafficking of women 
and children for sexual exploitation.  It also attempts to 
disseminate trafficking information within the group members and 
with other organizations. 
 
- Immigrant Council of Ireland:  The Immigrant Council of Ireland 
provides information to immigrants on their rights in the areas of 
immigration law, employment, accommodation, and social welfare.  The 
Council has recently added an anti-trafficking coordinator to assist 
possible trafficking victims and liaise with the police. 
 
- Migrant Rights Centre Ireland:  The Migrant Rights Centre Ireland 
is a human rights advocate for migrant workers and their families. 
The organization provides information on rights to migrants and 
lobbies the Government to change the laws and policies that affect 
these workers.  The Migrant Rights Centre Ireland's trafficking 
focus is on trafficking for labor. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  014.2 OF 016 
 
 
There are also several smaller NGOs, particularly minority or 
women's rights groups, who may indirectly come into contact with 
trafficking victims. 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a problem 
in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
The Irish Government acknowledges that Ireland is a destination 
country for trafficking and that a small number of trafficking 
victims have been identified.  It has not found evidence that the 
problem presently exists on any significant scale.  It actively 
investigates all credible allegations of trafficking. 
 
-- B. Are there, or have there been, government-run anti- 
trafficking information or education campaigns conducted during the 
reporting period?  If so, briefly describe the campaign(s), 
including their objectives and effectiveness.  Please provide the 
number of people reached by such awareness efforts if available.  Do 
these campaigns target potential trafficking victims and/or the 
demand for trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
 
The partly Government funded NGO Ruhama launched an education 
campaign during the reporting period that echoed the Government-run 
poster campaign in 2006.  The new posters listed Ruhama's helpline 
as the contact number for secure and confidential calls and the 
posters encouraged victims of human trafficking to report their 
situation to the authorities.  Although this program was run by 
Ruhama, the police and Government officials were key in distributing 
and displaying the posters in strategic areas that might be 
frequented by possible trafficking victims such as airports, bus and 
rail stations, ports, hospitals, pubs, nightclubs and Garda 
Stations. 
 
-- C. What is the relationship between government officials, NGOs, 
other relevant organizations and other elements of civil society on 
the trafficking issue? 
 
The working relationship between Government officials and NGOs is 
excellent.  While NGOs would like to see more support for 
trafficking victims, all the NGOs reported a good rapport between 
their organizations and various Government offices, especially the 
Garda.  All the NGO contacts praised the creation of the new 
Anti-Trafficking Unit, saying they were pleased to work with the new 
DOJ office.  Government officials also reported close working ties 
to NGOs.  Exemplifying the effectiveness of close Government/NGO 
relations, Government Anti-Trafficking Unit and NGO officials 
collegially participated in a productive digital video conference 
dialogue with the U.S. Ambassador for Trafficking in Persons in 
February 2008. 
 
The INIS division of the DOJ works closely with the GNIB to combat 
illegal immigration.  To facilitate the tracking of potential 
victims, the GNIB shares its immigration database with local Garda 
precincts and a UK immigration official posted to the GNIB 
headquarters.  Cooperation and coordination with NGOs takes place 
through direct contacts between the Irish Government and the 
relevant NGOs. 
 
Ireland en Route is a loose network of Government agencies, NGOs, 
academics and other experts who meet three times per year to 
communicate on topics such as training for police, EU and domestic 
legislation, best practices and other trafficking issues.  It is not 
a national action plan or task force, but does facilitate the 
coordination of anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
-- D. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement agencies 
screen for potential trafficking victims along borders? 
 
The GNIB monitors borders and immigration/emigration patterns for 
evidence of trafficking.  Since the GNIB is part of Ireland's law 
enforcement agency, GNIB officers are able to respond appropriately 
to any evidence of trafficking.  GNIB officers are present at all 
air and seaports within the state.  An information technology system 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  015.2 OF 016 
 
 
equipped with a passport reader and facial recognition technology 
allows immigration officers at the border to link-up with a database 
at GNIB headquarters in Dublin.  Through this system, a range of 
reports on immigration-related issues are generated on a daily basis 
enabling identification of patterns, trends, and modus operandi with 
regard to a wide range of immigration-related criminal activity. 
Detection and investigation of potential incidents of human 
trafficking is facilitated by the GNIB.  Immigration officials also 
take fingerprints of most visitors entering the country who have 
entry visas. 
 
Ireland has a land border with Northern Ireland that is difficult to 
monitor due to numerous unmanned crossing points, which, according 
to police, are popular points of entry for illegal immigrants.  An 
estimated 12,000 illegal movements take place at the border with 
Northern Ireland every year.  Immigration officers from the GNIB and 
from local districts monitor certain crossing points periodically. 
 
The published Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill will 
strengthen the reporting requirements for persons entering Ireland 
and carriers involved in transporting them.  In an effort to monitor 
the movements of unaccompanied minors, the bill will require that 
all foreign national entering the country register with the GNIB. 
(At present registration is required only for those over age 16.) 
 
-- E. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and multilateral 
on trafficking-related matters, such as a multi-agency working group 
or a task force?  Does the government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the government have 
a public corruption task force? 
 
During the reporting year, Ireland's multi-agency TIP Working Group 
became the High Level Group on Combating Trafficking in Human 
Beings.  The High Level Group is staffed by Principal Officers and 
co-chaired by the Director General of the Irish National Immigration 
Service and the Assistant Secretary in the Department of Justice. 
The new Executive Director of the Anti-Trafficking Unit is also a 
member of the High Level Group.  All Government efforts to combat 
trafficking will be coordinated through this High Level Group. 
 
On international and multilateral levels, Ireland engages on 
trafficking issues through its participation in the EU, UN, OSCE, 
and CoE.  The Department of Foreign Affairs has the lead and 
coordinates Ireland's participation with all relevant ministries. 
 
The GNIB worked directly with several foreign police departments on 
trafficking issues in 2007.  In addition to ongoing cooperation with 
the UK on Operation Pentameter II, Garda contacts said they began to 
liaise with the new Lithuanian security attach to the Lithuanian 
Embassy in Dublin on anti-trafficking measures due to the high 
number of Lithuanian citizens in Ireland (an estimated 
70,000-100,000, according to the Lithuanian Embassy in Dublin) and 
the high level of fraud with Lithuanian passports. 
 
De facto law enforcement coordination exists as a result of the 
multiple functions of the GNIB.  The GNIB works under the direction 
of the Garda, but its immigration function is carried out on behalf 
of the Minister of Justice.  This ensures constant contact between 
immigration policy makers, immigration police and regular police. 
 
 
-- F. Does the government have a national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were involved in 
developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the process?  What steps has 
the government taken to disseminate the action plan? 
 
The new Anti-Trafficking Unit within the DOJ will be responsible for 
creating a national plan of action to address trafficking in 
persons.  According to the Executive Director, her office will work 
with both NGOs and the High Level Group to establish the action 
plan.  She expects to have a draft plan written by summer 2008. 
 
-- G: For all posts:  As part of the new criteria added to the 
TVPA's minimum standards by the 2005 TVPRA, what measures has the 
government taken during the reporting period to reduce the demand 
for commercial sex acts? 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000106  016.2 OF 016 
 
 
As part of the G6 Initiative against Human Trafficking, Ireland is 
responsible for creating and implementing the Awareness Raising 
strand and co-leading the Victim Care strand of the Initiative.  In 
January 2008, Ireland hosted a G6 meeting to compare the success of 
previous awareness raising campaigns.  Ireland is designing a 
proposal for a shared campaign to raise awareness and discourage 
demand for services of victims of sexual exploitation that will be 
rolled out in 2008 in all six G6 countries. 
 
The Minister for Justice has proposed an amendment to the Criminal 
Law (Human Trafficking) Bill 2007 that would make it illegal for 
persons to purchase sexual services from known trafficking victims. 
 
-- H. Required of Posts in EU countries and posts in Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, China, Singapore, South Korea, 
Taiwan, and Hong Kong:  As part of the new criteria added to the 
TVPA's minimum standards by the 2005 TVPRA, what measures has the 
government taken during the reporting period to reduce the 
participation in international child sex tourism by nationals of the 
country? 
 
Although Irish officials do not consider international child sex 
tourism to be a major problem among Irish citizens, they have 
provisions under the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act to 
prosecute any Irish resident for child sex tourism.  This same 
provision is also part of the pending Criminal Law (Human 
Trafficking) Bill 2007. 
 
-- I. Required of posts in countries that have contributed over 100 
troops to international peacekeeping efforts: What measures has the 
government adopted to ensure that its nationals who are deployed 
abroad as part of a peacekeeping or other similar mission do not 
engage in or facilitate severe forms of trafficking or exploit 
victims of such trafficking? 
 
Ireland's military Code of Conduct for soldiers on peacekeeping 
missions states that personnel deploying overseas should not exploit 
the people, especially women and children, and that Defense Forces 
should not use the services of prostitutes.  The Department of 
Defense (DOD) has several training courses that focus on human 
rights.  These courses include modules that address human 
trafficking and sexual exploitation.  All Irish troops attend these 
courses in preparation for overseas peacekeeping missions.  For 
example, DOD's "Sexual Exploitation & Abuse" awareness program 
covers what action soldiers should take if they come into direct 
contact with potential trafficking victims or who have knowledge of 
suspicious activity that may indicate human trafficking is taking 
place in the Area of Operation or its periphery.  This training also 
emphasizes the prohibition of direct involvement by Irish soldiers 
on peacekeeping missions in sexual exploitation and abuse 
exploitation of trafficking victims.  The DOD's child protection 
module addresses protection of child soldiers. 
 
¶4.  (U) Point of Contact for this report is Political Officer 
Jennifer Danover, office phone 353-1-630-6275, fax number 
353-1-667-0056, e-mail DanoverJJ@state.gov. 
 
¶5.  (U) The number of hours spent compiling this report by embassy 
employees is as follows: 
 
Name, rank and time spent: 
Ambassador Thomas C. Foley, FA-NC - 5 hours 
DCM Rob Faucher, FS-01 - 8 hours 
POL/ECON Chief Theodore Pierce, FS-02 - 30 hours 
POL/ECON Officer Jennifer Danover, FS-04 - 120 hours 
POL/ECON OMS Anne Marie Witkowski, FS-06 - 5 hours 
POL/ECON Specialist, Peter Glennon, FSN-10 - 10 hours 
CONS Chief Danny Toma, FS-02 - 1 hour 
 
FOLEY