09DUBLIN45
IRISH GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE TOWARDS FOREIGN INVESTMENT
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dublin
R 301358Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9727
INFO DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DC
DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
USDOC WASHDC
CIMS NTDB WASHDCUNCLAS DUBLIN 000045 
 
 
STATE FOR EEB/IFD/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EFIN ETRD ELAB OPIC KTDB USTR EI
SUBJECT: IRISH GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE TOWARDS FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
 
¶1. The Irish Government actively promotes foreign direct investment 
(FDI), a strategy that has fueled robust economic growth since the 
"Celtic Tiger" period of the late 1990s.  Ireland's pro-investment 
climate saw total FDI stock grow from euro 53 billion in 1998 to 
euro 131 billion in 2007.  Traditionally, the principal goal of 
investment promotion has been employment creation, especially in 
technology-intensive and high-skill industries.  More recently, the 
Government has focused on Ireland's international competitiveness by 
encouraging foreign-invested companies to enhance research and 
development (R&D) activities and to deliver higher-value goods and 
services. 
 
¶2. The Irish Government's actions have had considerable success in 
attracting U.S. investment.  In 2008, the U.S. investment stock in 
Ireland, a country of just over 4 million, was worth USD 87 billion. 
 According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), in 2007, U.S. 
investment flows into Ireland reached USD 14.5 billion.  Of this, 
about one-half (USD 7.1 billion) came from the information and 
scientific, professional and technical services sectors.  There are 
over 600 U.S. firms in Ireland, directly employing approximately 
100,000 workers and supporting work for another 250,000, out of a 
total labor force of about 2 million people.  U.S. firms operate 
primarily in the following sectors: chemicals; bio-pharmaceuticals 
and medical devices; computer hardware and software; electronics; 
and, financial services.  Ireland has become a magnet for U.S. 
internet/digital media investment, with industry leaders Yahoo, 
Google, and Amazon making Dublin the hub of their respective 
European operations. 
 
¶3. U.S. companies are attracted to Ireland as an export platform to 
the EU.  In 2006, Irish-based U.S. firms exported roughly USD 57 
billion worth of goods and services, mostly destined for the EU 
market.  Other reasons for Ireland's attractiveness as an FDI 
destination include: a 12.5 percent corporate tax rate for domestic 
and foreign firms; the quality and flexibility of the 
English-speaking work force; cooperative labor relations; political 
stability; pro-business government policies; a transparent judicial 
system; and, the pulling power of existing companies operating 
successfully in Ireland (a "clustering" effect).  Factors that 
negatively affect Ireland's ability to attract investment include: 
increasing labor costs, skilled labor shortages, inadequate 
infrastructure (such as in the transportation and internet/broadband 
sectors), and absolute price levels that are among the highest in 
Europe.  The Irish government has become more concerned about the 
possibility of rising energy costs and the reliability of energy 
supply undermining Ireland's attractiveness as an FDI destination. 
 
 
¶4. Four state organizations promote inward investment into Ireland 
by foreign companies: 
 
-   The Industrial Development Authority of Ireland (IDA Ireland) 
has overall responsibility for promoting and facilitating FDI in all 
areas of the country, except the Shannon Free Zone.  IDA Ireland is 
also responsible for attracting foreign companies to Dublin's 
International Financial Services Center (IFSC).  IDA Ireland 
maintains offices in New York, Chicago, San Jose, and Atlanta, as 
well as in Europe and Asia; 
 
-   Enterprise Ireland promotes joint ventures and strategic 
alliances between indigenous and foreign companies.  The agency also 
assists foreign firms that wish to establish food and drink 
manufacturing operations in Ireland; 
 
-   Shannon Free Airport Development Co. (SFADCO), or "Shannon 
Development," handles FDI in the Shannon Free Zone (see para 61) and 
owns properties in the Shannon region as potential investment 
greenfield sites.  Under the 2006 Industrial Development Amendments 
Act, responsibility for investment by Irish firms in the Shannon 
region transferred from Shannon Development to Enterprise Ireland. 
The IDA remains responsible for FDI in the Shannon region outside 
the Shannon Free Zone; 
 
-   Udaras na Gaeltachta has responsibility for economic development 
in those areas of Ireland where Irish (Gaelic) is the predominant 
language, and works with IDA Ireland to promote overseas investment 
in these regions. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Major Laws/Rules/Taxation Policy 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Ireland's judicial system is transparent and upholds the sanctity 
of contracts as well as laws affecting foreign investment.  These 
laws include: 
 
-  The Industrial Development Act of 1993, which outlines the 
functions of IDA Ireland; 
 
-  The Mergers, Takeovers and Monopolies Control Act of 1978, which 
sets out rules governing mergers and takeovers by foreign and 
domestic companies; 
 
- The Competition (Amendment) Act of 1996, which amends and extends 
the Competition Act of 1991 and the Mergers and Takeovers (Control) 
Acts of 1978 and 1987, and sets out the rules governing competitive 
behavior; 
 
-  The Companies Act of 1963, which contains the basic requirements 
for incorporation in Ireland (amended in 1990); and, 
 
-  The 2004 Finance Act, which introduced tax incentives to 
encourage firms to set up headquarters in Ireland and to conduct 
R&D.  Further, the government of Ireland intends to enhance R&D 
incentives during 2009. 
 
In addition, there are numerous laws and regulations pertaining to 
employment, social security, environmental protection and taxation, 
with many of these keyed to EU Directives. 
 
¶6. One of Ireland's most attractive features as an FDI destination 
is the low corporate tax rate.  Since January 1, 2003, the corporate 
tax rate for both foreign and domestic firms has been 12.5 percent. 
Foreign firms that established an Irish presence prior to this date 
retain their entitlement to the "old" 10 percent rate until 2010 in 
the case of manufacturing and certain internationally traded 
services.  Ireland's corporate tax rate is among the lowest in the 
EU, and the Irish Government continues to oppose proposals not only 
to harmonize taxes at a single EU rate, but also to standardize the 
accounting methods used by EU Member States to calculate corporate 
taxes. 
 
¶7. All firms incorporated in Ireland are treated on an equal basis. 
With only a few exceptions, there are no constraints preventing 
foreign individuals or entities from ownership or participation in 
private firms/corporations.  The most significant of these 
exceptions was eliminated on September 24, 2008 by EU Regulation 
1008/2008, which did away with the requirement that Irish airlines 
(and those from other EU countries) must be at least 50 
percent-owned by EU residents in order to have full access to the 
single European aviation market.  There are also requirements 
related to the purchase of agricultural lands (see para 9). 
 
¶8. While Ireland does not have a formal privatization program, the 
Government in September 2005 privatized the state-owned national 
airline, Aer Lingus, through a stock market flotation that valued 
the carrier at euro 1.2 billion.  The Government retains about a 
one-quarter stake in the airline.  There are no barriers to 
participation by foreign institutions in the sale of Irish 
state-owned companies, as evident in the purchase of Aer Lingus 
shares by U.S. investors.  Residents of Ireland, however, may be 
given priority in share allocations to retail investors, as was the 
case with the state-owned telecommunications company, Eircom, 
privatized in 1998. 
 
¶9. Citizens of countries other than Ireland and other EU member 
states can acquire land for private residential purposes and for 
industrial purposes.  Under Section 45 of the Land Act, 1965, all 
non-EU nationals must obtain the written consent of the Land 
Commission before acquiring an interest in agricultural land, though 
there are many stud farms and racing facilities in Ireland that are 
owned by foreign nationals.  There are no restrictions on the 
acquisition of urban land. 
 
¶10. There is no formal screening process for foreign investment in 
Ireland, though investors looking to receive Government grants or 
assistance through one of the four state agencies responsible for 
promoting foreign investment in Ireland are often required to meet 
certain employment and investment criteria (see section "D").  These 
screening mechanisms are transparent and do not impede investment, 
limit competition, or protect domestic interests.  Potential 
investors are also required to examine the environmental impact of 
the proposed project and to meet with Irish Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) officials. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Ireland uses the Euro as its national currency and enjoys full 
current and capital account liberalization.   There are no 
restrictions or reported significant delays in the conversion or 
repatriation of investment capital, earnings, interest, or 
royalties, nor are there any plans to change remittance policies. 
Likewise, there are no limitations on the import of capital into 
Ireland.  Foreign exchange is easily obtainable at market rates. 
 
------------------------------ 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶12. Private property is normally expropriated only for public 
purposes in a non-discriminatory manner and in accordance with 
established principles of international law.  State condemnations of 
private property are carried out in accordance with recognized 
principles of due process.  Where there are disputes between owners 
of private property subject to a government taking, the Irish courts 
provide a system of judicial review and appeal. 
 
¶13. The only recent case of expropriatory action involved a dispute 
over the disposition of the ownership rights to the Lusitania, the 
ship that was sunk off Ireland's southern coast in 1915 by a German 
submarine and which is owned by a U.S. citizen.  In 2001, the U.S. 
owner brought action against the Government in the Irish courts 
after his applications for a license to dive to the vessel were 
denied.  In 2005, a High Court ruling in the case noted that "the 
State simply cannot directly or indirectly expropriate this property 
from (the owner), or totally, or even substantially deny him access 
to or the use of his property or any part or parts of his property, 
even under color of merely regulating that access or use for the 
purpose of safeguarding a national asset, without paying appropriate 
compensation."  In March 2007, the Irish Supreme Court ruled in 
favor of the U.S. citizen owner. 
 
------------------ 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
¶14. Ireland has no specific domestic laws governing investment 
disputes with foreign firms.  There is, however, a legal arbitration 
framework available to parties that opt to arbitrate a dispute, 
including investment disputes, rather than litigate the case. 
Currently, there are no disputes involving investments by U.S. firms 
either in arbitration or litigation.  In recent years, however, U.S. 
business representatives have occasionally called into question the 
transparency of government tenders, some of which have been won by 
U.S. companies.  According to some U.S. firms, lengthy budgetary 
decisions delay procurements, and the Government sometimes 
identifies preferred bidders before making a tender decision.  Some 
U.S. firms also claim that unsuccessful bidders have had difficulty 
receiving information on the rationale behind the tender outcome. 
Conversely, successful bidders have experienced delays in finalizing 
contracts, commencing work on major projects, obtaining accurate 
project data, and receiving compensation for work completed, 
including through conciliation and arbitration processes. 
Successful bidders have also subsequently found that the original 
tenders do not accurately describe conditions on the ground. 
 
¶15. The Irish legal system is based on common law, legislation and 
the Constitution.  The Companies Act 1963 (amended 1990) is the most 
important body of law dealing with commercial and bankruptcy law and 
is applied consistently by the courts.  Irish bankruptcy laws give 
creditors a strong degree of protection.  The Department of 
Enterprise, Trade and Employment is the state agency with primary 
responsibility for drafting and enforcing company law.  The 
judiciary is independent, and litigants are entitled to trial by 
jury in commercial disputes.  Ireland is a member of the 
International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, and 
the Irish Government has been willing to agree to binding 
international arbitration of investment disputes between foreign 
investors and the state.  Ireland is also a party to the New York 
Convention of 1958 on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign 
Arbitral Awards.  There is no specific domestic body for handling 
investment disputes. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Performance Requirements and Incentives 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. The Irish Government does not maintain any measures that it has 
notified the WTO to be inconsistent with Trade-Related Investment 
Measures (TRIMs) requirements.  Moreover, there have been no 
allegations that the Government maintains measures that violate the 
WTO's TRIMs text. 
 
¶17. Three Irish organizations, SFADCO, IDA Ireland, and Udaras, have 
regulatory authority for administering grant aid to investors for 
capital equipment, land, buildings, training, R&D, etc.  Foreign and 
domestic business enterprises that seek grant aid from these 
organizations must submit investment proposals.  Typically, these 
proposals include information on fixed assets (capital), labor, and 
technology/R&D components and establish targets using criteria such 
as sales, profitability, exports, and employment.  This information 
is treated in confidence by the organizations, and each investment 
proposal is subject to an economic appraisal prior to approval for 
support.  In 2007, IDA Ireland paid out Euro 78.5 million in grants 
to foreign firms, as compared to Euro 96.6 million in 2006. 
 
¶18. Performance requirements are generally based on employment 
creation targets established between the state investment agencies 
and foreign investors.  Grant aid is paid out only after externally 
audited performance targets have been attained.  Generally, parent 
companies must guarantee repayment of the government grant if the 
company closes before an agreed period of time elapses, normally ten 
years after the grant has been paid.  Grant agreements generally 
have a term of five years after the date on which the last grant is 
paid.  There are no requirements that foreign investors purchase 
from local sources or allow nationals to own shares. 
 
¶19. EU Regional Aid Guidelines (RAG) that apply to Ireland were 
announced in 2006 and became effective on January 1, 2007.  The RAG 
govern the amount of grant aid that the Irish Government can provide 
to companies, depending on their location.  The differences in the 
aid ceilings noted in the chart below reflect the less developed 
status of business/infrastructure in regions outside the greater 
Dublin area.  For the period 2007-2008, the following ceilings 
apply: 
 
- Location 
Maximum Grant Percent Allowed 
(EE = eligible expenditure) 
 
- Border, Midlands, West 
30 percent on first euro 50 million of EE 
15 percent on next euro 50 million of EE 
10.2 percent of balance above euro 100 million of EE 
 
- South East, Mid West, and South West 
10 percent on first euro 50 million of EE 
5 percent on next euro 50 million of EE 
3.4 percent of balance above euro 100 million of EE 
 
- East 
NIL 
 
¶20. While investors are free, subject to planning considerations, to 
choose the location of their investment, IDA Ireland has encouraged 
investment in regions outside Dublin since the 1990s.  This linkage 
is consistent with the National Spatial Strategy, which was adopted 
in 2001 with the aim of spreading investment more evenly around the 
country (an approach that was replicated in the 2007-2013 National 
Development Plan, which was launched in early 2007).  One of the 
National Spatial Strategy's stated goals was to direct 50 percent of 
all new jobs related to greenfield investment to the border, 
midlands, and western (BMW) counties of Ireland, where the economy 
is less developed.  In 1999, roughly 25 percent of jobs related to 
IDA-supported investment were located in the BMW region; by 2007, 
this figure had grown to 39 percent.  The 2007-2013 National 
Development Plan continues to favor balanced regional investment, 
but now focuses more on innovative and knowledge-based activities 
than on the number of jobs generated per region.  In 2006 and 2007, 
nearly 60 percent of greenfield projects were located outside of 
Dublin.  To encourage client firms to locate outside Dublin, IDA 
Ireland has developed "magnets of attraction," including: a Cross 
Border Business Park linking Letterkenny and Derry, a regional Data 
Center in Limerick, and the National Microelectronics Research 
Center in Cork.  The IDA has supported construction on business 
parks in Oranmore and Dundalk. 
 
¶21. There are no restrictions, de jure or de facto, on participation 
by foreign firms in government-financed and/or subsidized R&D 
programs on a national basis.  In fact, the government strongly 
encourages foreign companies to conduct R&D as part of a national 
strategy to build a more knowledge-intensive, innovation-based 
economy.  Science Foundation Ireland (SFI), the state science 
agency, was responsible for administering a Euro 365 million R&D 
fund under the 2000-2006 National Development Plan.  The 2007-2013 
National Development Plan envisions a significant ramp-up in such 
funding.  The fund has targeted leading researchers in Ireland and 
overseas to promote within Ireland the development of biotechnology 
and information/communications technology, as well as complementary 
worker skills.  Under the 2004 Finance Act, moreover, a credit of 20 
percent of the incremental expenditure on revenue items, royalties, 
plant, and machinery related to R&D can be offset against a 
company's corporation tax liability in the year in which it is 
incurred.  In 2008, IDA Ireland supported 56 R&D investment 
projects, involving a planned total investment of euro420 million. 
Investments included: a euro 50 million R&D investment at Boston 
Scientific in Galway; Oriflame Cosmetics' euro 2.4 million 
investment in Co. Wicklow; and the DePuy part of the Johnson & 
Johnson family decision to locate its new innovation centre in Cork 
with 20 new jobs.  Announcements in 2008 in ICT included a euro 29 
million R&D investment in Dublin by Business Objects, an expansion 
by Synopsis, the world leader in providing software and intellectual 
property products, of its R&D operation in Dublin, and EMC's euro 20 
million investment in R&D activities. 
 
¶22. In addition to the new RAGs, a new EU framework for research, 
development, and innovation (RD&I) for the 2007-2013 period has also 
come into force.  The framework is geared toward achieving the 
 
objectives of the Lisbon Agenda, and grant support is available 
throughout all regions of Ireland.  The table below shows grant 
rates for each category of eligible RD&I. 
 
Type of Research                          Grant Percent 
 
-"Fundamental" (activity designed     100 
to broaden scientific and technical knowledge not linked  to 
industrial or commercial objectives) 
 
-"Industrial" (planned research     50 
of critical investigation aimed at the acquisition of new knowledge, 
the objective being that such knowledge 
may be useful in developing new products,  processes or services or 
in bringing  about a significant improvement in existing  products, 
processes or services) 
 
-"Experimental" (shaping of the results   25 
of industrial research into a plan of  design for new, altered or 
improved  products, processes or services, whether they are intended 
to be sold or used, including the creation of an initial prototype 
which could not be used  commercially) 
 
¶23.  Visa, residence, and work permit procedures for foreign 
investors are non-discriminatory and, for U.S. investors, generally 
liberal.  There are no restrictions on the numbers and duration of 
employment of foreign managers brought in to supervise foreign 
investment projects, though their work permits must be renewed 
yearly.  There are no discriminatory export policies or import 
policies affecting foreign investors. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶24. The most common form of business organization in Ireland is the 
incorporated company, limited by shares, registered under the 
Companies Act, 1963, or previous legislation.  Irish law does not 
prevent foreign corporations from carrying on business in Ireland. 
Any company incorporated abroad that establishes a branch must, 
however, file certain papers with the Registrar of Companies.  A 
foreign corporation with a branch in Ireland will have the same 
standing in Irish law for purposes of contracts, etc., as a company 
incorporated in Ireland.  Private businesses are not at a 
competitive disadvantage to public enterprises with respect to 
access to markets, credit, and other business operations. 
 
¶25. Before 1999, Irish company law differed from international norms 
by allowing, for tax purposes, the registration of companies in 
Ireland that were not actually resident in Ireland (so-called Irish 
Registered Non-Resident companies (IRNRs)).  In response to concern 
that a large number of the estimated 40,000 IRNRs were engaged in 
fraud, tax evasion, money laundering, and other illegal activities, 
the 1999 Finance Act equated registration in Ireland with tax 
residence and liability for all companies except in limited 
circumstances.  Exceptions include cases where the Irish company, or 
a related parent company, is carrying on trade in Ireland, and the 
company is ultimately controlled either by residents of an EU member 
state or by residents of a country with which Ireland has a tax 
treaty (including the United States).  Nonetheless, all Irish-based 
companies, including U.S. firms, claiming non-residence in Ireland 
because of tax treaty provisions must identify the beneficial owners 
of the company. 
 
¶26. Similarly, the "Companies (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 1999" requires 
that every application for company registration in Ireland show the 
manner in which the proposed company will carry out activities in 
Ireland.  Section 43 of the legislation stipulates that a company 
must either have a director resident in the State or provide a bond 
in the event that the company commits an offense under the Companies 
Act or tax legislation.  Section 44 states that these requirements 
may be waived when the Company obtains a certificate from the 
Companies Office stating that the company has a real and continuous 
link with one or more economic activities in Ireland.  Like the 1999 
Finance Act, the Companies Act is designed to prevent the use of 
IRNRs for exclusively foreign activities without any connection to 
Ireland. 
 
----------------------------- 
Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------- 
 
(I) Real Property 
 
¶27. Secured interests in property, both chattel and real estate, are 
recognized and enforced.  The Department of Justice administers a 
reliable system of recording such security interests through the 
Land Registry and Registry of Deeds.  An efficient, 
non-discriminatory legal system is accessible to foreign investors 
to protect and facilitate acquisition and disposition of all 
property rights. 
 
(II) Intellectual Property Rihts 
 
¶28. Ireland is a member of the World Intellctual Property 
Organization and a party to the Iternational Convention for the 
Protection of Intllectual Property.  In July 2000, Irish President 
Mary McAleese signed legislation bringing Irish inellectual 
property rights (IR) law into compliance with Ireland's obligations 
under the WTO Trade-Related Intellectual Property Treaty (TRIPs). 
The legislation came into force on January 1, 2001, and gives 
Ireland one of the most comprehensive legal frameworks for IPR 
protection in Europe. 
 
¶29.  This legislation addressed several TRIPs inconsistencies in 
previous Irish IPR law that had concerned foreign investors, 
including the absence of a rental right for sound recordings, the 
lack of an "anti-bootlegging" provision, and low criminal penalties 
that failed to deter piracy.  The legislation provides for stronger 
penalties on both the civil and criminal sides, but does not include 
minimum mandatory sentencing for IPR violations. 
 
¶30.  As part of this comprehensive copyright legislation, changes 
were also made to revise the non-TRIPs conforming sections of Irish 
patent law.  Specifically, the IPR legislation addresses two 
concerns of many foreign investors in the previous legislation: 
 
- the compulsory licensing provisions of the previous 1992 Patent 
Law were inconsistent with the "working" requirement prohibition of 
TRIPs Articles 27.1 and the general compulsory licensing provisions 
of Article 31; and, 
 
- applications processed after December 20, 1991, did not conform to 
the non-discrimination requirement of TRIPs Article 27.1. 
 
¶31.  DVD and CD piracy, however, continues to be a problem. 
Industry representatives claim that the counterfeit DVD market is 
almost 50 percent the size of the legitimate market.  Industry 
groups also believe that light penalties given to counterfeiters in 
DVD piracy court cases serve no deterrent value and hamper industry 
and police enforcement efforts.  In mid-2006, the Government 
responded to piracy problems by forming an inter-agency task force, 
which begun a consultation process with industry on potential 
countermeasures, resulting in a structured regional Multi Agency 
Task Force enforcement regime. However with mandatory penalties 
rejected by Government, deterrent sentencing remains an ongoing 
issue.  In addition to DVD and CD counterfeiting, industry sources 
estimate that up to 37 percent of PC software used in Ireland is 
pirated.  The Business Software Alliance in Ireland estimates that 
reducing this rate by ten percentage points would help the USD 2.6 
billion domestic IT industry to grow to USD 4 billion by 2009. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Transparency of Regulatory System 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶32.  The Irish Government generally employs a transparent and 
effective policy framework that fosters competition between private 
businesses in a non-discriminatory fashion.  While ongoing Irish 
judicial "tribunals" are investigating possible links between 
indigenous Irish companies' political donations in the late 1980s 
and favorable government decisions, U.S. businesses can, in general, 
expect to receive national treatment in their dealings with the 
Government.  There is no report of any U.S. firm or investor having 
being required or forced to make payments during that period. 
 
¶33.  In recent years, independent bodies have taken over regulatory 
powers from Cabinet Departments in key economic sectors.  The 
Commission for Communications Regulation and the Commission for 
Energy Regulation are responsible for regulating the communications 
and energy sectors, respectively.  Both are independent bodies with 
institutional links to the Department of Communications, Energy and 
Natural Resources.  The Commission for Aviation Regulation is an 
independent body that regulates the aviation sector.  It is 
institutionally linked to the Department of Transport, which has 
direct regulatory powers over other segments of the transportation 
sector. 
 
¶34.  The Competition (Amendment) Act 1996 amends and extends the 
Competition Act 1991, strengthens the enforcement power of the 
Competition Authority, introduces criminal liability, increases 
corporate liability, and outlines available defenses.  Most tax, 
labor, environment, health and safety, and other laws are compatible 
with European Union regulations, and they do not adversely affect 
investment.  Proposed laws and regulations are published in draft 
form for public comment, including by foreign firms and their 
representative associations.  Bureaucratic procedures are 
transparent and reasonably efficient, in line with a general 
pro-business climate espoused by the Government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶35.  Capital markets and portfolio investments operate freely, and 
there is no discrimination between Irish and foreign firms.  In some 
instances, development authorities and banks are able to facilitate 
loan packages to foreign firms with favorable credit terms.  Credit 
is allocated on market terms, although the Irish Competition 
Authority found in 2004 that the banking sector's lack of 
competition limited the amount of credit available to small and 
medium-sized firms.  Irish legal, regulatory, and accounting systems 
are transparent and consistent with international norms and provide 
a secure environment for portfolio investment.  The capital gains 
tax rate is 20 percent. 
 
¶36.  In late 2008, the Irish banking system began to buckle under 
the combined weight of the global economic downturn and the collapse 
in the Irish property market.  The loan book of the leading banks is 
heavily weighted toward property and house prices have fallen 
significantly in 2008 - in some places by as much as 30 - 40 
percent.  The banks, as a result, have required significant 
government support.  In September 2008, the Irish government 
announced that it would guarantee all deposits at the six leading 
Irish banks.  This offer was extended to foreign-domiciled banks 
with a "significant" presence in Ireland but none of these 
institutions took part in the guarantee.  In December 2008, the 
government announced that it would provide up to USD 10 billion in 
new capital to the three largest banks - Allied Irish Bank (AIB), 
Bank of Ireland, and Anglo Irish Bank.  As of January 2009, the plan 
to transfer the funds had not yet been put in place.  The chief of 
the financial regulator announced his retirement following the 
revelation that the former Anglo Irish Bank chairman had improperly 
transferred funds out of the bank over a period of several years in 
an attempt to conceal the true state of the bank's books. 
 
¶37. The estimated total assets of all licensed credit institutions 
at the end of November 2008 was approximately euro 1.4 trillion, 
with the Bank of Ireland and Allied Irish Banks holding a combined 
25 percent of total assets.  U.S. banks operating in Ireland include 
Citigroup and Chase Manhattan. 
 
¶38.  As of end-December 2008, equity market capitalization in the 
Irish Stock Exchange (ISE) was euro 31.3 billion, down from an 
end-2007 figure of euro 90.4 billion.  In terms of market weight, 
the stocks of four companies are predominant: Allied Irish Bank, 
Bank of Ireland, CRH (a construction industry supplier), Elan (a 
pharmaceuticals firm), Aer Lingus, and Ryanair.  Until 2007, the 
Irish stock market had seen a steady recovery since plummeting in 
2002 following the global economic slowdown and management problems 
at several major Irish companies.  From 2002 to 2006, ISE delivered 
returns of between 19 and 28 percent each year.  However, driven in 
part by concerns over possible spillover from the sub-prime crisis 
in the United States, the market capitalization fell by almost nine 
percent through the first 11 months of 2007 and, as can be seen from 
the numbers above, the market cap at the end of 2008 was 1/3 of what 
it was at the end of 2007.  In 2005, ISEQ opened up a secondary 
market, the Irish Enterprise Exchange (IEX), which caters to smaller 
firms with a minimum market cap of euro 5 million. 
 
¶39.  In May 2003, the Central Bank of Ireland was reorganized into 
the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland 
(CBFSAI), in accord with the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland Act 2003.  Under the legislation, the Governor 
of the CBFSAI has responsibility for the overall stability of the 
Irish financial system.  The legislation also established the Irish 
Financial Services Regulatory Authority (IFSRA), which is an 
autonomous but constituent part of CBFSAI that regulates financial 
services institutions in Ireland and, since 2006, the Irish Stock 
Exchange.  IFSRA took over this responsibility from a mix of 
government bodies, including: the Central Bank, the Department of 
Trade, Enterprise, and Employment (DETE), the Office of Director of 
Consumer Affairs, and Registrar of Friendly Societies.  The 
legislation also enhanced the regulatory powers given to IFSRA, 
particularly in consumer protection. 
 
¶40.  The Central Bank is a member of the European System of Central 
Banks (ESCB), whose primary objective is to maintain price stability 
in the euro area.  Ireland no longer operates an independent 
monetary policy.  Rather, ESCB formulates and implements monetary 
policy for the euro-zone, and the Central Bank implements that 
policy at the national level.  The Governor of the Central Bank is 
one of 18 members of the Governing Council for the ECB and has an 
equal say in the formulation of monetary and interest rate policy. 
The other main tasks of the Central Bank include: issuing euro 
currency in Ireland; acting as manager of the official external 
reserves of gold and foreign currency; conducting research and 
analysis on economic and financial matters; overseeing the domestic 
payment and settlement systems; and, managing investment assets on 
behalf of the State. 
 
¶41.  The Irish Takeover Panel Act of 1997 governs company takeovers. 
 Under the Act, the "Takeover Panel" issues guidelines, or "Takeover 
Rules," which aim to regulate commercial behaviour in the context of 
mergers and takeovers.  According to minority squeeze-out provisions 
in the legislation, a bidder who holds 80 percent of the shares of 
the target company can compel the remaining minority shareholders to 
sell their shares.  There are no reports that the legislation has 
been used to prevent foreign takeovers specifically, and, in fact, 
there have been several high-profile foreign takeovers of Irish 
companies in the banking and telecommunications sectors in recent 
years.  In 2006, for example, the Australian investment group, 
Babcock & Brown, acquired the former national telephone company, 
Eircom.  The EU Directive on Takeovers provides a framework of 
common principles for cross-border takeover bids, creates a level 
playing field for shareholders, and establishes disclosure 
obligations throughout the EU.  The Directive was implemented 
through Irish legislation in May 2006, though many of its principles 
had already been enacted in the Irish Takeover Panel Act 1997. 
 
------------------ 
Political Violence 
------------------ 
 
(I) Impact of Northern Ireland Instability 
 
¶42. The growth of business investment and confidence in Northern 
Ireland following the cessation of widespread violence has benefited 
the Republic of Ireland.  In 2006, the Irish and British Governments 
launched a report on potential areas for cross-border economic 
cooperation, such as R&D collaboration, energy and transportation 
infrastructure linkages, and joint trade missions.  The 2007-2013 
National Development Plan earmarks funding to develop these 
linkages.  No violence related to the situation in Northern Ireland 
has been specifically directed at U.S. citizens or firms located in 
the South. 
 
¶43.  The 1998 ratification of the Good Friday Agreement by large 
majorities in both Ireland and Northern Ireland further diminished 
the potential for violence.  Although groups in Northern Ireland 
opposed to the peace process have continued to commit infrequent 
acts of criminality, there have been no serious incidents in the 
Republic of Ireland.  In May 2007, the Northern Ireland Assembly was 
restored and local government resumed; a key landmark in the 
successful peace process in Northern Ireland that commenced with the 
Good Friday Agreement.  In November 2008, Sinn Fein and the 
Democratic Unionist Party, former combatants, announced they had 
struck a deal to devolve policing and justice functions from 
national control to the Northern Ireland Assembly.  This resolved 
the last major political hurdle to full resumption of normal local 
government in Northern Ireland and represented significant 
maturation of the Northern Ireland peace process. 
 
(II) Other Acts of Political Violence 
 
¶44.  On September 16, 2008 a bomb was found outside of the Dublin 
offices of Royal Dutch Shell.  Shell is developing an offshore gas 
field off the coast of Mayo.  Part of the project involves laying an 
on-shore pipeline to connect the field to the national gas grid. 
This work has been opposed by a vocal minority in the local 
community.  The protests have been mainly confined to the area 
around the site for the pipeline.  In 2003, several Irish citizens 
opposed to the Iraq War damaged U.S. military assets at Shannon 
Airport.  In 2004, one of these citizens was convicted in an Irish 
court and given a suspended sentence.  In late 2005, a group of 
opposition and independent Irish parliamentarians said publicly that 
they would not oppose further attacks on U.S. military aircraft 
transiting Ireland.  In 2006, five other Irish citizens involved in 
the damage of U.S. military assets in 2003 were acquitted by a jury 
decision in an Irish court.  The jury accepted arguments by the 
defendants, the so-called "Shannon Five," that they had acted to 
prevent loss of life and property damage in Iraq. 
 
---------- 
Corruption 
---------- 
 
¶45.  Corruption is not a serious problem for foreign investors in 
Ireland.  The principal Irish legislation relating to anti-bribery 
and corruption includes the Public Bodies Corrupt Practices Act 
1889, the Prevention of Corruption Act 1906, the Prevention of 
Corruption Act 1916, and the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) 
Act 2001.  This body of law makes it illegal for Irish public 
servants to accept bribes.  The Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 
provides for the written annual disclosure of interests of people 
holding public office or employment. 
 
¶46.  Ireland signed the UN Convention on Corruption in December 
2003, and ratification is pending a review of the legal measures 
required for implementation.  In January 2000, the GOI introduced to 
Parliament the "Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2001," to 
ratify and implement the OECD Convention on Bribery.  The 
legislation, which enabled Ireland to ratify a number of conventions 
dealing with corruption drawn up by the European Union, the Council 
of Europe, and the OECD, came fully into force as law in November 
¶2002.  Ireland formally ratified the OECD Convention in September 
¶2003.  Ireland is also a member of the OECD Working Group on Bribery 
and the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO).  Under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, the bribery of foreign officials is a 
criminal offense.  Bribery of foreign officials may also invalidate 
a contract that a party is seeking to enforce in Ireland. 
 
¶47.  A number of ongoing judicial tribunals are seeking to establish 
whether political donations by certain Irish companies in the late 
1980s and early 1990s can be linked to favorable government 
decisions, mostly at the local level, in zoning and tax matters. 
There is also media and public concern that business interests may 
have compromised Irish politics in the late 1980s and early 1990s. 
Despite these reports of payments to political parties and figures 
in the 1980s and early 1990s, there remains no indication that 
foreign businesses or investors have had to make such payments or 
been approached to make such payments to conduct business during the 
period in question or in years since. 
 
¶48.  In 2006, the Irish media disclosed information leaked from the 
Mahon Tribunal that Prime Minister (Taoiseach) Bertie Ahern had, as 
Finance Minister in the 1990s, accepted the equivalent of roughly 
euro 50,000 in loans from associates.  Following the disclosure, the 
Prime Minister made public statements about the incident, noting 
that his actions had not been illegal and that political favors had 
been neither sought nor granted in connection with the loans.  The 
Mahon Tribunal continued to meet on occasion in 2007 and 2008 
without reaching any determination.  Its deliberations will continue 
in 2009.  Prime Minister Ahern resigned in May 2008, stating, in 
part, that the Mahon Tribunal investigation was distracting the 
government from its business.  In 2006, the Moriarty Tribunal found 
that former Prime Minister Charles Haughey had accepted the 
equivalent of roughly euro 12 million in payments between 1979 and 
1996 in return for political favors, such as tax reductions for 
associates and the procurement of a passport.  Haughey died in 
¶2006. 
 
¶49.  The Irish police investigate allegations of corruption.  If 
sufficient evidence of criminal activity is found, the Director of 
Public Prosecutions prepares a file for prosecution.  A small number 
of public officials have been convicted of corruption and/or bribery 
in the past. 
 
------------------------------- 
Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------- 
 
¶50.  Ireland's only bilateral investment protection agreement is 
with the Czech Republic.  In addition, Ireland has bilateral tax 
treaties with a wide range of countries, most importantly with the 
United States and the U.K.  These agreements serve to promote trade 
and investment between Ireland and the partner countries that would 
otherwise be discouraged by the possibility of double taxation.  In 
the absence of a bilateral tax treaty, provisions within the Irish 
Taxes Act allow unilateral credit relief against Irish tax for tax 
paid in the other country in respect of certain types of income, 
e.g., dividends and interest. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶51. Since 1986 the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation 
(OPIC) has been authorized to operate in Ireland as part of the U.S. 
effort to support the process of peace and reconciliation in 
Northern Ireland.  There is some potential in Ireland for OPIC's 
credit guarantee programs, such as in regard to aircraft purchases. 
No other countries have an investment insurance program in Ireland. 
Ireland is a member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
(MIGA). 
 
----- 
Labor 
----- 
 
¶52.  In 2008, the economy fell into recession resulting in a fall in 
the level of employment.  Levels in Ireland reached historical 
highs, the result of continued strong economic growth.  As of May 
2008 (the latest available official figures), the number of persons 
employed was roughly 2.1 million, unchanged year-on-year.  However, 
the job losses began to hit after May and the end-December 2008 
unemployment rate figure stood at 8.3 percent.  Those claiming some 
type of unemployment benefit jumped to 293,500 people in December 
2008 from 172,400 at the same time one year ago.  Between 1994 and 
the middle of 2008, employment growth averaged over 4.0 percent, 
 
with lower rates recorded in 2002 and 2003 following the post 9/11 
global economic slowdown.  Prior to the labor market contraction in 
mid-2008, Ireland had one of the lowest unemployment rates among EU 
Member States at roughly half the EU average.  Local economists are 
predicting that the rate of unemployment may reach as high as 12 
percent in 2009.  There is a worry that unemployment among the young 
will be significantly higher and that this may have broader 
implications, especially with regard to criminal activity. 
 
¶53. Recent immigrants to Ireland, principally from Poland and the 
Baltic countries, are beginning to leave Ireland in search of work 
elsewhere in the EU.  This has alleviated some of the downward 
pressure on wages but the harder issue to fix is labor demand, which 
is falling due to the contraction of the Irish economy.  In spite of 
the labor market turmoil, the focus of government strategy continues 
to be on upgrading skills and increasing the number of workers in 
technology-intensive, high-value sectors. 
 
¶54. Irish labor force regulation is less restrictive compared with 
most continental EU countries.  The Irish workforce is characterized 
by a high degree of flexibility, mobility, and education.  There is 
a relative gender balance in the workforce, with 1.162 million males 
and 850,700 females employed as of end 2007 (there is no official 
data for 2008 yet).  This gender balance reflects a change in social 
mores that has facilitated a surge in female employment since the 
mid-1980s 
 
¶55. Until 2008, wages remain on an upward growth curve.  As of the 
end of the second quarter 2008 (the latest available official data), 
average industrial earnings per worker were euro641 per week, a 2.1 
percent increase year-on-year.  Between 1998 and 2003, compensation 
per employee increased by 37.1 percent, compared to an increase of 
8.7 percent in Germany over the same period.  The minimum wage was 
euro 5.20 when it was first introduced in 2000 and rose to euro 8.65 
in July 2007. 
 
¶56. Unprecedented inward migration levels, particularly from Eastern 
Europe, have added a new dynamic to the Irish labor market.  For 
example, of the 83,000 new workers added to the labor force between 
the third quarters of 2005 and 2006, roughly 40,500 were non-Irish 
nationals, working mostly in the construction and lower-end services 
sectors.  According to Ireland's Central Statistical Office (CSO), 
the number of non-nationals residing in Ireland has more than 
doubled between since 2002 to roughly 420,000, or roughly 10 percent 
of the total population.  Irish labor unions and Labor Party 
politicians have expressed concern over the possibility of 
displacement of Irish workers by non-nationals.  Until the 2008 
economic slowdown, however, yearly job creation in Ireland was 
sufficient to accommodate both Irish and non-Irish workers and that 
there was no evidence of downward pressure on wages.  However, with 
the slowdown, anecdotal evidence suggests that Ireland is 
experiencing job losses rather than net job creation for this first 
time in more than a decade. 
 
¶57. The Irish system of industrial relations is a voluntary one. 
Pay levels and conditions of employment are generally agreed through 
collective bargaining between employers and employees.  Since 1987, 
collective bargaining has taken place under the framework of a 
series of national economic programs, negotiated by representatives 
of employers, trade unions, farmers, and the government.  Over the 
years, employers have generally implemented the benchmarks for pay 
and employee benefits established by the national economic programs, 
even thought the benchmarks do not have legal force.  This 
consensual "Social Partnership" approach has been a major factor in 
improving the industrial relations climate since the mid-1980s.  In 
2007, the number of working days lost as a result of industrial 
disputes was 6,038, as compared to 130,000 in 1995. 
 
¶58. In September 2006, Ireland's major unions and the employers' 
representative body agreed to the latest national economic program, 
"Toward 2016," under the Social Partnership framework.  The 
agreement followed a nine-month negotiation that centered on the 
increasingly significant role of foreign workers in the Irish 
economy.  The national economic program sets out consensus positions 
on wide-ranging social policies over a 10-year period and includes a 
10-percent pay increase for workers over the first 3 years.  The 
package encompasses measures to protect employment standards, such 
as the establishment of a new agency (the Office of the Director of 
Employment Rights Compliance), a tripling of the Labor Inspectorate, 
and tougher penalties for employers who exploit foreign workers. 
The deal also calls on the Government to engage with unions and 
employers in drawing up a comprehensive policy on pensions.  In 
response to the economic slowdown, the social partners in late 2008 
agreed to an 18-month "transition" agreement that contained an 
accord on wage hikes.  As of January 2009, it looks likely that this 
deal will be amended to roll back the agreed-to wage increases. 
 
 
¶59. Employers typically resist trade union demands for mandatory 
trade union recognition in the workplace.  While the Irish 
constitution guarantees the right of citizens to form associations 
and unions, Irish law also affirms the right of employers not to 
recognize unions and to deal with employees on an individual basis. 
Currently, roughly 33 percent of workers in the private sector are 
unionized, compared to 95 percent in the public sector.  Among 
foreign-owned firms, roughly 80 percent of workers do not belong to 
unions, although pay and benefits are usually more attractive 
compared with domestic firms. 
 
------------------------------ 
Foreign-Trade Zones/Free Ports 
------------------------------ 
 
¶60. The Shannon duty-free Processing Zone (SDFPZ) was established by 
legislation in 1957.  Under the legislation, eligible companies 
operating in the Shannon Free Zone are entitled to the following 
benefits: goods imported from non-EU countries for storage, handling 
or processing are duty-free; no duty on goods exported from Shannon 
to non-EU countries; no time limit on disposal of goods held 
duty-free; minimum customs documentation and formalities; no Value 
Added Tax (VAT) on imported goods, including capital equipment; 
choice of having import duty on non-EU product calculated on its 
landing value or selling-out  price.  Qualifying criteria for 
eligible companies include employment creation and 
export-orientation.  Foreign-owned firms in the Shannon Free Zone 
have the same investment opportunities as indigenous Irish 
companies.  At the end of 2008, there were about 100 foreign 
manufacturing and service companies established in the Shannon Free 
Zone, employing roughly 7,000 workers.  Also in 2007, trade from the 
Shannon Free Zone amounted to euro 3.3 billion.  U.S. companies, 
which make up 57 percent of the firms operating out of Shannon, 
include GE Capital, Bristol Myers Squibb, UPS, FedEx, Pfizer, Intel, 
and Symantec.  The Shannon Free Zone is technically an asset of 
Shannon Development. 
 
¶61. Duty-free exemptions are available also to companies operating 
in Ireland's major deep-water port at Ringaskiddy in County Cork, 
although these have been used infrequently in recent years. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶62. According to Ireland's Central Statistical Office (CSO), the 
stock of FDI in Ireland for end-year 2006 stood at euro 118 billion, 
a euro 23 billion drop from 2005.  (Note: The most recent FDI 
available from the CSO is 2006.  63. In the past, CSO and U.S. 
Commerce Department figures for U.S. FDI in Ireland have differed, 
due to different calculation methods.) 
 
¶63. During 2008, IDA Ireland negotiated 130 new business projects 
with new and existing clients, which involved a total investment 
commitment of euro 2 billion over the coming years and 8800 new 
jobs.  The average salary of jobs at these new investments was in 
excess of euro 45,000.  IDA Ireland announced 84 new and expansion 
projects with U.S. companies during 2008. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Major U.S. Investments in Ireland 
--------------------------------- 
 
Company - Location 
 
Apple Computers - Cork 
 
AIG Europe - Dublin 
 
Amazon - Dublin 
 
Bausch & Lomb - Waterford 
 
Berlitz - Dublin 
 
BISYS - Waterford 
 
Boston Scientific - Galway, Cork, Wexford 
 
Bristol Myers Squib - Limerick, Dublin 
 
HP-Compaq Computers - Galway, Dublin 
 
Citigroup - Dublin 
 
Conoco Phillips - Whitegate, Midleton, Co. Cork 
 
Dell Computers - Limerick, Dublin 
 
Eastman Kodak - Limerick, Cork 
 
eBay - Dublin 
 
Fidelity - Dublin 
 
Gartner Group - Limerick 
 
Google - Dublin 
 
Hertz - Dublin 
 
Hewlett-Packard - Leixlip, Kildare 
 
IBM Ireland - Dublin 
 
Intel Ireland - Dublin, Leixlip 
 
Johnson & Johnson - Dublin 
 
Millipore Ireland BV - Cork 
 
Motorola - Cork 
 
Netscape Communications - Dublin 
 
Novartis - Cork 
 
Pfizer - Cork 
 
PFPC - Navan, Wexford 
 
Prudential Insurance of America - Letterkenny 
 
3Com - Dublin 
 
United Airlines - Dublin 
 
US Robotics - Dublin 
 
Woodchester Investments - Dublin 
 
Wyeth Biopharma - Dublin 
 
Yahoo - Dublin