06KHARTOUM1068
Sudanese Armed Forces Addresses UNSCR 1672
Fri May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5105
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1068 1250951
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 050951Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2638
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM AORC MCAP UN SU
SUBJECT:  Sudanese Armed Forces Addresses UNSCR 1672 
¶1.  On April 30, Official Spokesman of the Sudanese Armed 
Forces General Osman Mohammed al-Aghbash issued a press 
release regarding the UN Security Council Resolution 1672 
sanctions involving Major General Gaffer Mohammed al- 
Hassan. 
 
¶2.  The text of the press release reads as follow 
(unofficial Embassy translation from Arabic): 
 
(Begin text) 
 
The General Command of the SAF 
Office of the Official Spokesman of the SAF 
Date, April 30, 2006 
Press Release: 
 
(Prelude of Koran verses) 
 
To the revolutionary and free citizens:  The SAF is 
continuously presenting its sons as oblations to true 
nationalism.  They sacrifice and exert efforts according 
to the military institution's orders, without surmounting 
or overstepping them.  It is obliged to bear any measures 
against them, and they are accountable to it when they 
make mistakes.  Hence, in accordance to the previous 
decision of the President and the high command of the 
SAF, that states it is not to extradite wanted citizens 
to foreign authorities, and in support to the popular 
leaders and dignitaries that are still continuing to 
provide support and backup (to the SAF) through the 
Popular Defense Forces, we release this statement in 
confrontation to the demand of the UN Security Council to 
extradite some of our officers, and of our brothers from 
the native leadership to be prosecuted outside its 
borders.  With concern, we would like to assure all of 
the following: 
 
First:  Any defamation or slander of those who belong to 
the SAF is considered as defamation to sovereign 
institutions and accordingly, it is considered as 
defamation of state sovereignty, which is completely 
rejected.  The laws pertaining to the SAF also do not 
allow extraditing officers belonging to it to the outside 
to prosecute them. 
 
Second:  Major General Gaffer Mohammed Al-Hassan is a 
military man of outstanding performance and he had been 
awarded by medals that reflect his discipline, 
competence, and his obligation to the chain of command of 
the SAF.  He has never been observed as an outlaw; he 
always carries out the duties delegated to him.  Hence 
the SAF will be the first answerable to any charges or 
allegations made against him.  The SAF also is the party 
that is accountable to charge him if he commits any 
mistake according to the SAF laws and regulations, which 
are standard to international military laws. 
 
We assure to our honest citizens that the SAF will 
continue be the armor of the homeland and protector to 
its people from whomever aggressor without any negligence 
in the veneration and glory of our beloved homeland. 
 
Allah Akbar and Glory for Sudan 
 
General Dr. Osman Mohammed Al-Aghbash 
 
Official Spokesman of SA 
 
(End text) 
 
STEINFELD