06KHARTOUM2036
LRA Talks: Workshops and then the Real Work
Mon Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2470
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2036 2400836
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 280836Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4307
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 002036 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS UN UG SU
SUBJECT:  LRA Talks: Workshops and then the Real Work 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 1978 and previous 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  Over the past week, the two delegations in the 
talks between the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and the government of 
Uganda have been presenting their new position papers and having 
workshops on various aspects of the talks.  Once all the position 
papers are presented, likely by the end of the week, the mediation 
team will make compromise documents based on the papers.  While the 
LRA has requested that a South African delegation join the talks, 
their participation is unlikely at this phase according to a high 
ranking UN diplomat from South Africa who is in Juba to meet with 
the parties.  An observer from UN OCHA also commented that the 
visits from northern Uganda ethnic, civil and government leaders was 
very productive.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
Workshops Propel, Focus Talks 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) Vice President Riak 
Machar, who is the lead mediator for the talks, invited three 
speakers on successive days this week to hold workshops on ceasefire 
modalities, the conditions and needs of the people of northern 
Uganda, and the International Criminal Court (ICC).  The speaker on 
ceasefire modalities, a legal expert provided by UNMIS, explained 
the difference between a cessation of hostilities and a true 
ceasefire and how each can be accomplished.  The LRA delegation was 
reportedly pleased with this presentation because it has been asking 
for a cessation of hostilities before a ceasefire, while the Ugandan 
Government had been basically using the terms interchangeably. 
 
¶3.  (U) The workshop held on the situation in northern Uganda and 
the needs of its people was basically aimed at grounding the LRA 
negotiating team, most of whom have lived overseas for many years. 
The final speaker, a lawyer from London specializing in the ICC, 
attracted the most interest.  The lawyer explained how the Acholi 
traditions and the laws of Uganda could be applied in a way that 
would satisfy the ICC.  He cautioned, however, that the ICC would 
most likely only accept a solution whose goal was justice, and not a 
response crafted specifically to appease the ICC. 
 
-------------------------- 
The UN Takes a Closer Look 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The UN also sent one of its senior diplomats, Welile 
Nhlapo, Director of the Africa I Division, to meet with the parties 
and report back to New York.  Nhalpo, who is from South Africa, told 
the Acting Consul General (A/CG) that he believes the South Africans 
will not get involved in the talks at this late stage unless there 
is a reason the LRA is unhappy with their current mediators.  LRA 
Deputy Commander Vincent Otti reportedly made the request to the 
South African Ambassador in Kampala, by phone and in writing, but 
did not articulate any specific problems with the current process. 
Nhalpo suspects it is because they are distrustful of the insistence 
that Otti go to Juba, and are unhappy that the GoSS has asked that 
they identify their numbers and proceed to rally points.  Nhalpo 
commented that the LRA has still not adjusted to Machar's shift from 
a host trying to bring them to the table to a mediator seeking an 
agreement from both sides. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) An observer from UN OCHA said that the Ugandan Government 
presented all of its papers last week, while the LRA was lagging 
behind but would be done this week.  The observer felt that the 
talks benefited from the recent visit from Acholi elders, civil and 
religious leaders of northern Uganda, and members of the Ugandan 
Government including members of parliament.  The delegation's 
mission was to help the LRA focus more on the needs of the north. 
However, the group also reportedly learned a lot that they would 
bring back to their people and their government to secure wide 
support for the negotiations and to ensure that any agreement is 
supported by Uganda and backed up by the Ugandan legislature.  In 
response to a question from the A/CG, the UN OCHA observer commented 
that all sides, observers, mediators and participants, were focused 
on making sure any agreement is just and meets the demands of the 
LRA without supporting impunity.  The UN OCHA observer also agreed 
that the lack of a solid connection to LRA leadership was a 
hindrance but that it will be addressed at some point.  Newspapers 
have reported direct talks between the Ugandan delegation and Otti 
over the phone within the framework of the negotiations. 
 
HUME