06KHARTOUM1559
SUDAN/DARFUR:  SPLM REJECTS BASHIR'S POSITION
Mon Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7634
OO RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1559/01 1841028
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031028Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3516
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001559 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPKO SOCI PINR PREL AU UN SU
SUBJECT:  SUDAN/DARFUR:  SPLM REJECTS BASHIR'S POSITION 
ON UN PKO, REVEALING CLEAR NCP-SPLM SPLIT ON KEY ISSUE 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 1540 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: First VP Salva Kiir and other key 
leaders of the SPLM have publicly announced that they 
have no objection to UN peacekeeping in Darfur.  They add 
that they were not consulted by the NCP with regard to 
President Bashir's enunciation of a strong rejection of a 
transition to the UN.  This marks the first time that the 
SPLM has publicly taken on the NCP on a critical national 
security issue.   Given early reports of Bashir's 
continued "nyet" in Banjul, however, it is not clear what 
impact, if any, the SPLM's voice will have on this 
matter.  Meanwhile, NCP heavyweights here continue the 
drumbeat against the UN with inflammatory, almost 
apocalyptic, rhetoric, and press commentary frets over 
the public split in the GNU.  End Summary. 
 
Kiir takes on Bashir 
--------------------- 
¶2.  (U) During the inauguration of UN radio in Juba on 
June 30 (septel), First VP Salva Kiir said that the SLPM 
"does not have any problem with the coming of the UN to 
Darfur.  We accepted deployment of a UN peacekeeping 
mission and we do not see any differences between the UN 
forces in the South their presence in western Sudan.  If 
there is anything the NCP is afraid of in Darfur this is 
their problem." 
 
¶3. (U)  SPLM spokesman Yassir Arman also spoke to the 
issue in a June 30 press conference, noting pointedly 
that the SPLM was not consulted by the NCP in formulating 
the government's position.  "Our position is that the 
SPLM wants dialogue between Sudan the international 
community."   He denied that the GNU discussed the issue 
of deployment of UN forces.   He also said that the SPLM 
would not now concur to the idea of sending Joint 
Integrated Units (SAF and SPLA) into Darfur, an idea 
raised two years ago by John Garang, and recently revived 
by the NCP.  He said that this was also not discussed 
between the two parties, and that this idea now "comes 
too late." 
 
Defending Deng Alor 
--------------------- 
¶4. (U)  These comments with regard to UN PKO come in the 
wake of GNU (SPLM) Minister Deng Alor's statement last 
week distancing the SPLM from Bashir's decision, comments 
that were then slammed by NCP Nafie ali Nafie  (reftel). 
Arman criticized Nafie's dressing down of Deng Alor, 
saying the SPLM would not tolerate intimidation of its 
ministers.  "Our ministers must be treated with respect. 
The remark made against Deng Alor is not acceptable; it 
hurt us and we will not tolerate such intimidations. 
Our ministers are not students of anybody else's school 
of politics.  SPLM was built on its own ideology and will 
make decisions and act according to its own good 
judgment; so any harassment of our ministers cannot be 
tolerated." 
 
NCP continues to defend Bashir's position:  Martyrdom 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. (U)  Meanwhile, as this NCP-SPLM disagreement 
continues to play itself out, NCP hardliners -- the 
Defense and Interior Ministers, and Intel Head Salah Gosh 
-- stress the importance of supporting Bashir and the GNU 
(sic) stance of rejecting deployment of international 
forces in Darfur.  They also called for the unification 
of the internal front.  The Defense minister confirmed 
the readiness of the armed forces to stand with the 
President in the same ditch to defend the homeland 
(referring to Bashir's comment last week that he would 
lead the resistance in Darfur).  Salah Gosh is reported 
to have received death pledges at a rally last week from 
a large number of participants who held photos of Bashir 
on which were written:  "I solemnly promise not to 
return, and only to the Creator shall I kneel." 
 
The Press joins the Fray:  Fears of the "New Sudan" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶6. (U)  As reflected in a spate of editorials over the 
past week, there is considerable public alarm that the 
inter-party dispute might spiral out of control, perhaps 
really inflicting damage on the National Unity 
Government.  "Where is this Government Taking Us?" (Al- 
Adwaa, June 29), for instance, deplores the evident lack 
of consultation between the coalition partners, while "Be 
Quiet, Nightingale" (Al-Sudani, July 2), raises the 
specter of a Somali-style state collapse.  The pro- 
Southern press has sharpened its rhetoric against the 
 
KHARTOUM 00001559  002 OF 002 
 
 
NCP.  An editorialin the English-language daily The 
Citizen ("Who is Irresponsible?" July 2) criticizes the 
NCP stance on international intervention (and its attack 
on the SPLM) as another in a series of "irresponsible" 
decisions of the Northern right-wing going back to the 
1950s.  For the Khartoum Monitor, the NCP is trying to 
highjack the entire government on the peacekeeping issue, 
despite Kiir's explicit disavowal of this stance ("Al 
Basher's Unilateralism Exposed," July 2) 
 
¶7. (U) On the right, there are fears that the split could 
make Sudan even more vulnerable to "foreign intervention" 
("Between the Hammer and the Anvil," Al-Sahafa, June 29). 
Al-Tayib Mustafa, uncle of Bashir and prominent leader in 
the Northern separatist camp, writes that the SPLM stance 
is part and parcel of a "New Sudan" package hostile the 
North ("Hot Air," Al-Intibaha, June 29). 
 
"The formation of a New Sudan is supported and created by 
the U.S. to reconfigure the Sudan in such a way as to put 
an end to its Arab and Islamic identity.  This is also in 
line with plans for redesigning the region to further 
American strategies, including enhanced security for 
Israel by threatening Egypt's national security -- which 
depends largely on the Nile.  In addition, there are 
hidden schemes for controlling the resources of Sudan, in 
a manner similar to that of Iraq. 
 
We have the right to ask, will the SPLM army support the 
international forces if they arrive in Khartoum to 
implement the resolutions of the international community 
(otherwise known as the U.S.)?" 
 
HUME