06KHARTOUM1053
Agreement Reached on Khartoum Constitution
Thu May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3928
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1053 1241102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041102Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2619
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SU
SUBJECT:  Agreement Reached on Khartoum Constitution 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  A Technical Committee (TC) formed by the 
Khartoum Legislative Assembly (KLA) and made up of 
representatives from the ruling National Congress Party 
(NCP), the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), and 
the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) has reached a 
compromise on the draft constitution of Khartoum State. 
This issue has been contested seriously by various 
political forces for the last three months in the 
Khartoum State Legislative Assembly.  The agreement now 
defines Khartoum as an Islamic state, while recognizing 
its special status and the status of non-Muslims who live 
in the capital.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------- 
Results of the Compromise 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The new draft constitution acknowledged Khartoum 
State as both a northern Sudanese state and the national 
capital of the Republic of Sudan, as well as a symbol of 
national unity, where the country's diversity in creed, 
culture, ethnicity, and language shall be respected. 
Sharia law shall be implemented fully in Khartoum state, 
but the rights of non-Muslims will be protected through 
some form of special status.  This draft constitution 
will now be sent to the KLA for endorsement and finally 
to the Federal Ministry of Justice for ratification and 
compatibility with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
(CPA) and Interim National Constitution of Sudan.  If 
unresolved issues remain after that, the state 
constitution may be sent to the Council of States for 
final resolution. 
 
¶3.  Khartoum State has a unique status compared to other 
Sudanese States, as it is both the national capital of 
the Republic of Sudan and the capital of Khartoum State 
as one of 15 northern states.  It has a population of 
about 7 million, including 4 million internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) and squatters, mainly from Southern Sudan, 
Southern Kordofan, and Western Sudan that were forced to 
immigrate to Khartoum because of war. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Formation of the Khartoum Government 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  In January 2006, the Governor of Khartoum State, Dr. 
Abdel Halim Ismail Al Motuwafi, established the Khartoum 
Legislative Assembly (KLA) in accordance with the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) sections on power 
sharing.  The Assembly has 48 seats, with the National 
Congress Party (NCP) occupying 31 seats, the Sudan 
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) 5 seats, and other 
northern political parties 9 seats.  The speaker is from 
the NCP, and the deputy speaker is SPLM. 
 
¶5.  Khartoum State has not yet named its cabinet.  The 
cabinet shall be composed of 8 ministers, in which 4 go 
to the NCP, 2 to the SPLM, and 2 to other northern 
political forces in accordance with the CPA allocation 
and distribution of power sharing.  The governorship goes 
to the NCP, with the deputy governor coming from the 
SPLM.  However, power sharing at state localities is 
still to be worked out, as the Technical Committee could 
not reach a compromise on it. 
 
STEINFELD