06KHARTOUM1969
Darfur:  NGO Forum Addresses Security Issues
Fri Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3898
PP RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1969/01 2300439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 180439Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4209
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001969 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV AU UN SU
SUBJECT:  Darfur:  NGO Forum Addresses Security Issues 
 
REF:  Khartoum 01912 
 
¶1.  Summary:  NGOs discussed the worsening security environment and 
decreasing humanitarian access in Darfur during an August 10 NGO 
forum in Khartoum.  Key points raised were strong USG support for 
the DPA and condemnation of violence, the fact that security 
conditions had made it difficult for NGOs to carry out their 
operations, that the Voluntary and Humanitarian Act restricted civil 
society development and NGO activities, that security violations 
continued to increase - with eight humanitarian workers killed in 
July alone - more than in the two previous years combined, and that 
humanitarian access is at its lowest point in the past three years, 
with humanitarian indicators in danger of reversal.  Furthermore, 
the inability of AMIS to provide basic protection has stirred 
interest in transitioning to a UN peacekeeping operation.  End 
Summary. 
---- 
NGO Forum Raises Security, Humanitarian Access Issues 
---- 
¶2.  On August 10, an NGO forum in Khartoum dealt with concerns of 
NGOs operating in Darfur, with an emphasis on the changing security 
environment and limits to humanitarian access.  The Charge presented 
the position of the USG, reiterating its strong support for the 
Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) and the need for all groups to fully 
cooperate with the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS).  He took 
the opportunity to distribute the recent Department of State press 
release condemning violence in Darfur, and stressed the need for all 
parties to respect international law and for threats to humanitarian 
workers to decrease in order for them to carry out their vital 
assistance to the displaced people.  The NGOs noted that the strong 
push for the implementation of the Joint Assessment Mission (JAM) 
under the current security conditions makes them and their work seem 
partisan and endangers their staff. 
---- 
NGO Activities on Operational Minimum Due to Risks 
---- 
¶3.  The NGOs submitted that their activities were already on an 
operational minimum providing only life saving support to the 
displaced people in camps.  The ongoing threat to their workers, 
however, has impacted on their ability to recruit and deploy staff 
to Darfur and to retain them.  Many organizations begin to think 
about suspending operations in Darfur.  One representative noted 
that headquarters and trustees are reflecting on the question of how 
many deaths among staff they are willing to accept.  Another 
representative noted that it is no longer a question of what action 
to take "if" a death occurs, but rather "when" it occurs. 
---- 
Voluntary Humanitarian Act Restricts Civil Society 
---- 
¶4.  The NGO Forum stressed the fundamental importance of a vibrant 
civil society to demand government accountability.  The new 
Voluntary and Humanitarian Act released in March is restrictive to 
the development of such a civil society.  The NGOs have appealed it 
in the constitutional court, but the Act has not been suspended. 
The Act heavily impacts on international NGOs' ability to operate in 
Darfur and even worse in the rest of Sudan, particularly in the East 
and in the Three Areas.  National NGOs are more severely affected. 
The main message to the international community was the need for a 
joint effort to reduce violence, adhere to the ceasefire, and 
respect humanitarian operations. 
---- 
Post-DPA Darfur Security Incidents 
---- 
¶5.  The signing of the DPA did not lead to a resolution of security 
concerns in Darfur; the number of incidents continues at an 
unacceptable level.  A list of reported security incidents since the 
May 5 signing compiled by the AU details 94 specific security 
incidents reported in South Darfur, 74 violations in North Darfur, 
and 70 in West Darfur, and the AU states the list is not 
comprehensive.  (Note:  This list was challenged at the Joint 
Commission meeting on August 3, however, with the Chairman directing 
the AMIS Force Commander to return to the September Joint Commission 
meeting with a full investigation of all those reported violations 
that had not been witnessed by AMIS personnel.  End note.)  Security 
concerns are adversely affecting humanitarian work.  The number of 
incidents reported is trending upward over time - relatively few 
security incidents were reported in May, more incidents were 
reported in June and still more in July. 
---- 
Deteriorating Security and Shrinking Humanitarian Access 
---- 
¶6.  In July 2006, eight humanitarian aid workers were killed in 
Darfur, more than the total of the past two years combined.  In 
addition to these deaths, hijackings, robberies, and incidents of 
intimidation have also increased.  Aid agencies are in uniform 
agreement that the situation has significantly deteriorated since 
the May 5 signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement.  In addition, the 
UN's Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
states access to people in need in Darfur is at its lowest level 
since the conflict began.  More than 45,000 people have been 
displaced in July alone.  Unsubstantiated rumors of government aid 
workers poisoning water supplies and vaccines have led to outbreaks 
of violence among IDPs.  Aid workers have responded by curtailing 
 
KHARTOUM 00001969  002 OF 002 
 
 
services and hours of operation, further exacerbating the 
humanitarian situation.  Most troubling, improvements in 
humanitarian indicators made across the past three years are in 
danger of reversal. 
---- 
AMIS Struggling to Maintain Control 
---- 
¶7.  The independence and effectiveness of the African Union Mission 
in Sudan (AMIS) is now seriously in doubt due to AMIS' bungled 
stewardship of the DPA and almost complete lack of ability to 
protect civilians in and around IDP camps.  AMIS is so unwelcome 
that it has completely withdrawn from six major IDP camps.  Most 
disturbing, there are reports of a spike in the number of rapes of 
women venturing outside of IDP camps in search of firewood (reftel). 
 AMIS' inability to conduct adequate firewood patrols has destroyed 
any credibility the force held in the past.  IDPs increasingly 
demand the transition of AMIS forces to those of the UN, though they 
undoubtedly harbor unrealistic expectations as to what the UN can do 
in the near term to increase security. 
 
HUME