06KHARTOUM2665
SOUTHERN SUDAN:  TENSIONS OVER CONSTRUCTION OF
Tue Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO8221
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2665/01 3181240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141240Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5217
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ASEC MCAP SU
SUBJECT: SOUTHERN SUDAN:  TENSIONS OVER CONSTRUCTION OF 
INTERIM SPLA HEADQUARTERS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Approximately 20 men armed with machetes, 
knives, and other weapons stormed the construction site of 
the new interim general headquarters for the Sudan People's 
Liberation Army (SPLA) November 11 and threatened expatriate 
staff.  An SPLA soldier on site responded and called in 
reinforcements, who repulsed the group.  One intruder was 
injured in the incident, the latest in a series involving the 
SPLA and local villagers claiming rights to the land.  The 
headquarters is being built with USG funds, through the prime 
contractor DynCorp and various sub-contractors.  End Summary. 
 
--------------- 
Armed Intruders 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The trouble began around 10:00 a.m. local time on an 
otherwise quiet Saturday.  A ragtag group of approximately 20 
men entered the large SPLA construction site, brandishing 
machetes, knives, and clubs.  The group identified two 
Lebanese engineers at the site, told them to stop working, 
and threatened them with death if they "dug another hole." 
The engineers are employed by the Millennium Group, 
sub-contractors to the U.S.-based DynCorp.  DynCorp is 
constructing the headquarters with USG funding, part of a 
larger program to assist in the transformation of the SPLA 
from a guerilla army to a more professional force. 
 
¶3. (SBU) After being threatened, the Lebanese engineers 
alerted the single SPLA soldier on site, who attempted to 
discuss the situation with the intruders.  He also managed to 
summon several other SPLA soldiers from a nearby site.  Once 
the SPLA was present in greater numbers, they forcefully 
directed the intruders to depart.  One SPLA soldier struck an 
intruder on the head with the blunt side of a machete.  The 
intruders departed with no further injuries. 
 
-------- 
Response 
-------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ConGen staff contacted SPLA Chief of Staff Gen. Oyai 
Deng by mid-afternoon November 11, immediately upon learning 
of the incident.  We stressed that the SPLA must provide 
adequate security at the site and must resolve its 
differences with the local population and the villagers' 
political leaders and allies.  Deng said he would inform GoSS 
Vice President Riek Machar of the incident immediately.  He 
also promised to consult further with Central Equatoria State 
Governor Clement Wani and to dispatch an SPLA delegation to 
meet with community leaders.  SPLA officials and a local 
government leader conferred with villagers later in the day 
on November 11 and made plans for follow-up consultations on 
November 13. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The dispute is one of several in the Juba area 
between the local population and various land claimants, 
including the Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS).  ConGen 
staff and the ARSO visited the SPLA site November 9.  Work 
was proceeding smoothly.  Four SPLA soldiers were present at 
the site to provide security.  Three others were absent 
fetching water and/or obtaining food.  We underscored to the 
soldiers the importance of their mission.  We also encouraged 
construction personnel to move quickly to refurbish a 
wellhead damaged in an earlier incident of community 
violence, so that there would be fewer reasons for SPLA 
soldiers to be absent from the site. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In the previous incident, on October 14, armed 
intruders did tens of thousands of dollars worth of damage to 
electrical equipment, fence posts, a wellhead, and other 
equipment at the site.  Subsequent to the incident, the SPLA 
arrested three persons, including at least one community 
leader.  Custody of the detainees was later transferred to 
the police after the intervention of Governor Wani.  At least 
two of the detainees are now said to have been released. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Wani invited ConGen staff to view an alternative 
site for the construction on October 29.  We accepted the 
invitation and viewed the site, approximately two kilometers 
distant from the current construction.  The current site is 
bordered by a small village of perhaps 20 households.  The 
villagers are mainly ethnic Bari.  In addition, there are 
three homesteads of about a dozen ethnic Mundari still living 
on the current construction site.  According to Wani, the 
SPLA has never visited the alternative site, and never 
 
KHARTOUM 00002665  002 OF 002 
 
 
consulted with him about the location of the interim 
headquarters.  The SPLA claim they consulted with Wani and 
others at various levels of government, including the local 
community, and that the site was accepted. 
 
¶8. (SBU) ConGen urged Wani to consult directly with the SPLA 
on all issues concerning the construction and ensure that all 
stakeholders, including the SPLA, discuss the construction 
project further with local residents.  We later visited Gen. 
Deng to urge him to talk directly to Wani, and to reinforce 
SPLA efforts to reach out to the local community.  We have 
pointed out to all concerned that the site was selected after 
a lengthy process and that significant funds have already 
been expended to commence construction. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) DynCorp personnel and their subcontractors are 
prepared to resume operations at the site, but only on the 
condition that the SPLA maintain a force of no fewer than 
seven armed soldiers at the site at all times.  DynCorp will 
also erect a sign identifying the site as intended for the 
SPLA headquarters, rather than a private construction 
project.  ConGen staff has underscored the importance of 
adequate security with the SPLA and stated that work cannot 
continue at the site if adequate security cannot be provided. 
 A further evaluation of the security posture should be 
undertaken after SPLA and GoSS representatives hold further 
consultations with the affected community and its leaders. 
There are currently approximately 20 SPLA soldiers on the 
site providing security. 
HUME