06KHARTOUM901
SPLM Position on Darfur and Eastern Sudan
Thu Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2704
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0901 1031528
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131528Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2358
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000901 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SU
SUBJECT:  SPLM Position on Darfur and Eastern Sudan 
 
REF:  Khartoum 00849 
 
¶1.  During its April 2-5 Interim Political Bureau meeting 
in Rumbek, the SPLM discussed a number of issues 
(reftel).  Aside from its Final Communique, the SPLM also 
issued a formal position paper on Darfur and the East. 
In essence, the SPLM holds that both Darfur and the East 
involve legitimate political grievances that the GoNU 
should address, and that a ceasefire and confidence- 
building measures are key to lasting peace in both 
regions of the country. 
 
¶2.  The document is as follows: 
 
(Begin text) 
 
SPLM position on Darfur and Eastern Sudan 
 
In its inaugural meeting in Rumbek, the Interim Political 
Bureau (IPB) of the Sudan Peoples' Liberation Movement 
(SPLM) discussed the conflict in Darfur and the situation 
in Eastern Sudan and their internal and external 
ramifications.  Conscious of its responsibilities as a 
major partner in the Government of National Unity (GoNU) 
and aware of the international and regional 
responsibilities of Sudan as a member of the UN and the 
AU, the SPLM IPB: 
 
-- Recognizes that the problems of Darfur and Eastern 
Sudan are essentially political and that the people of 
Darfur and Eastern Sudan have genuine grievances. 
 
-- Resolves that the GoNU should give urgent, immediate 
and undivided attention to the peaceful settlement of the 
conflicts in Darfur and Eastern Sudan, so that peace 
becomes comprehensive and all-embracing. 
 
-- Commits itself to continue working with National 
Congress Party (NCP) on a joint and common position on 
Darfur in order to achieve a just and sustainable peace 
in Darfur 
 
-- Believes that the resolution of the conflict in Darfur 
requires the unity of all Darfurian movements and 
undertakes to initiate open and direct dialogue with all 
those movements with the aim of achieving peace, 
reconciliation and unity. 
 
-- Endorses regional contacts undertaken by its Chairman 
with a view to engage regional players in the resolution 
of Sudanese conflicts and normalization of relations with 
neighbours. In that context it encourages the initiative 
of its Chairman to engage the Eritrean Government and the 
Eastern Front to set up a mutually acceptable negotiating 
forum in Asmara with the involvement of the Libyan 
Government. 
 
-- Supports and expresses appreciation of the decision 
taken on March 10th by the AU Peace and Security Council 
in giving the attainment of peace in Darfur the priority 
it deserves. 
 
-- Maintains that the CPA offers a reasonable framework 
for the resolution of the problem in Eastern Sudan. 
 
-- Calls on all parties to the conflict to refrain from 
the use of inflammatory, derisive or intimidating 
language that is prejudicial to peace and instead seek to 
build confidence based on mutual respect especially at 
the negotiations fora. 
 
-- Further calls on all parties to respect the 
humanitarian cease-fire agreements and protocols and 
provide a peaceful environment conducive to the effective 
delivery of humanitarian assistance and protection of 
civilian life. 
 
-- Urges all parties to commit themselves to cessation of 
hostilities and to conclude the Enhanced Ceasefire 
Modalities tabled by the mediators at Abuja Talks. 
 
April 5 
Rumbek, Lakes State 
Southern Sudan 
 
(End text) 
 
STEINFELD