06KHARTOUM1262
Sudan/Darfur - Minni returns to Darfur; meets
Tue May 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0693
OO RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1262/01 1500737
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300737Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2964
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI KAWC SU
SUBJECT:  Sudan/Darfur - Minni returns to Darfur; meets 
Winter del; Trilateral Kiir/Minni/Abdul Wahid meeting 
planned 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Kiir, Minawi, and Wahid Plan Meeting in Southern Sudan 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶1.  In a meeting with Roger Winter, Kate Almquist, and 
Brian D'Silva on Friday, May 26, First Vice President 
Salva Kiir reported that he had invited Abdul Wahid to 
meet with him somewhere in southern Sudan before May 31 
to reiterate and urge Wahid to sign the DPA.  Kiir also 
extended a meeting invitation to Minni Minawi during a 
phone call on May 26 to which Minawi immediately agreed. 
On May 27, Winter, Almquist, and D'Silva raised with Kiir 
the possibility of meeting with both Minawi and Wahid. 
All parties have now agreed to meet in southern Sudan on 
Wednesday, May 31.  (Note: A National Congress Party 
(NCP) - Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) joint 
party meeting in Khartoum precludes the possibility of 
meeting prior to May 31.  End note.) 
 
¶2.  Both Kiir and Minawi are firm about not reopening the 
Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) to further negotiation. 
However, both parties aim to secure Wahid's support for 
the DPA in order to neutralize Fur discontent over the 
agreement.  In private discussions with each of the three 
parties, Winter stressed the need to find a way to bring 
Wahid on board without altering the established agreement 
or negatively affecting Minawi, who already signed the 
accord.  With or without Wahid, Minawi and Kiir both view 
the meeting as an important step in developing a 
collaborative relationship to work together to build a 
new, more democratic Sudan.  Taken in this regard, 
opening this dialogue with Kiir will help Minawi prove to 
his constituents that signing the DPA was the right thing 
to do.  (Please note:  Plans for this trilat meeting 
should be closely held, and not shared liberally with 
foreign interlocutors in capitals.  There is no need for 
a slew of onlookers to descend on Juba.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
USG Delegation Rallies Support for DPA in North Darfur 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  Winter, Almquist, and D'Silva traveled to El Fasher, 
North Darfur, on May 28 to visit Ali Trayo, a key 
political advisor to Minawi, in a remote location 
northeast of Kutum.  At the meeting, Winter and Almquist 
explained the DPA to approximately 50 SLA commanders and 
answered questions for almost three hours.  Question 
topics ranged broadly from development and recovery 
concerns to what will happen to outliers after the AU's 
May 31 deadline to sign the DPA, what is the USG view of 
those who oppose the DPA, when will DPA implementation 
begin, and when will immediate tangible benefits - such 
as medical care for war wounded and military training for 
SLA combatants - be forthcoming. 
 
------------------------------ 
Minawi Returns to North Darfur 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  Minni Minawi returned to Darfur for the first time 
since signing the DPA on Monday, May 29.  Arriving in 
style on a Libyan Airways A-300 airbus from Tripoli to El 
Fasher, Minawi and his delegation were met on arrival by 
the Wali of North Darfur, the AU Deputy Chief of Mission, 
representatives from UNMIS, and the USG delegation 
consisting of Winter, Almquist, and D'Silva.  Despite the 
Wali's efforts to organize a "victory tour" for Minawi in 
El Fasher, Minawi insisted on only a brief greeting on 
the tarmac.  He was then adroitly whisked away by the AU 
to the AMIS compound where he spent the night.  On 
Tuesday, May 30, Minawi is expected to travel to several 
of his areas in North Darfur to begin explaining the DPA 
directly to his commanders and constituents.  Winter and 
Almquist will accompany him for the day. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
USG Extends Support for DPA Implementation to SLM/Minawi 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶5.  Meeting with Minawi on May 29, Almquist explained the 
USG's offer to the AU to provide two offices for the use 
of DPA signatories and to support overall implementation 
of the DPA in Khartoum and El Fasher.  Minawi was 
particularly interested in the Khartoum office, as he and 
his representatives currently have no office space in the 
capital.  Winter, Almquist, and D'Silva also visited a 
building which USAID/OTI partner Development 
Alternatives, Inc. (DAI) identified as a potential DPA 
 
KHARTOUM 00001262  002 OF 002 
 
 
support office in El Fasher.  Embassy RSO has approved 
the facility, and USAID is proceeding with plans to lease 
and refurbish the building.  Dyncorp has requested 
permission to travel to Khartoum as soon as possible to 
begin work on the Khartoum office location. 
Additionally, Winter briefed Minawi on USG plans for 
Security Advisor Todd Wilson to arrive within the next 
week to provide security assistance and advice to the 
SLM.  Minawi appreciated this offer of support and is 
eagerly awaiting Wilson's arrival.  Modalities of 
security engagement with SLM/Minawi will need to be 
worked out upon Wilson's arrival in Sudan. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  SLM support for the DPA is extremely tenuous, even 
among Minawi's core.  Minawi and Trayo both expressed 
significant concern about the AU's May 31 deadline for 
Wahid to sign the agreement - what actions will the AU 
Peace and Security Council take if Wahid still has not 
signed the DPA when this latest deadline passes?  SLA 
commanders on the ground do not understand when the DPA 
goes into effect.  If the AU keeps shifting the deadline, 
SLA commanders on the ground will find it harder and 
harder to understand why Minawi signed the DPA on May 5. 
Both Minawi and Trayo felt that instability will escalate 
if the AU again extends the deadline for Wahid to sign 
the accord.  Minawi seriously considered traveling to 
Addis to address the AU Peace and Security Council 
directly on this point, although he will forgo these 
plans in order to meet in southern Sudan with Kiir and 
Wahid on May 31. 
 
¶7.  Minawi is frustrated at having lost considerable time 
in N'djamena and Tripoli before being able to return to 
Darfur.  Despite some logistical challenges and ongoing 
ambiguity with the timing of the Minawi-Kiir-Wahid 
meeting, he has demonstrated decisiveness and command of 
his time and agenda.  U.S. delegation is further 
impressed by the AU's handling of Minawi's return to El 
Fasher, ensuring Minawi's desires were not overtaken by 
the government's desire to "handle" him.  The AU provided 
Minawi sanctuary and facilitated his plans as requested 
to ensure his safety and comfort while in El Fasher. 
 
STEINFELD