07KHARTOUM1565
DARFUR - BRAZEN CARJACKINGS BRING NGOS TO TIPPING POINT
Mon Oct 08 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3657
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1565/01 2811143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081143Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8740
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROMEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 001565 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/SPG, PRM, AND ALSO PASS USAID/W 
USAID FOR DCHA SUDAN TEAM, AFR/SP 
NAIROBI FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA, USAID/REDSO, AND FAS 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NAIROBI FOR SFO 
NSC FOR PMARCHAM, MMAGAN, AND TSHORTLEY 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
USUN FOR TMALY 
BRUSSELS FOR PBROWN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI UN SU
SUBJECT:  DARFUR - BRAZEN CARJACKINGS BRING NGOS TO TIPPING POINT 
 
REFS: A) KHARTOUM 1511 B) KHARTOUM 1390 
 
KHARTOUM 00001565  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Recent attacks on non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
working throughout Darfur, including USAID partners CARE and World 
Vision, have impacted the delivery of humanitarian services.  Brazen 
daytime carjackings in Nyala town, the capital of South Darfur, have 
prompted the UN to impose a 14-day restriction on travel outside the 
town limits and within the town as well.  The travel restriction 
will impact operations in the four internally displaced person (IDP) 
camps near Nyala, Al Salam, Kalma, Otash, and El Shereif.  At the 
very same time and as the Sudanese government, armed opposition 
groups, and other international actors prepare for the October peace 
negotiations in Tripoli, security incidents are increasing and 
tensions within IDP camps are rising.  The deteriorated security 
situation in Darfur is impeding access and delivery of humanitarian 
assistance in several of Darfur's largest IDP camps, including Kalma 
camp in South Darfur where reconciliation discussions are currently 
underway.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Following the September 20 ambush of World Vision near Bulbul 
Tismbago, South Darfur, in which three staff sustained gunshot 
wounds (REF A), relief agencies in South Darfur continue to face 
violence during carjackings and robberies.  The repeated daytime 
carjacking of NGO vehicles in Nyala town has caused humanitarian 
agencies to re-evaluate their security and travel procedures and has 
hindered their ability to implement humanitarian programs.  From 
September 18 to October 1, at least six separate incidents of 
carjacking and banditry hindered USAID NGO partners' ability to 
implement humanitarian assistance programs in South Darfur.  During 
this period, several incidents of violence against humanitarian 
agencies also occurred in North and West Darfur. 
 
-------------------------------- 
NGO Staff Abducted in Carjacking 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) On September 30 at approximately 1500 hours local time, a 
CARE vehicle was carjacked in Nyala town, only five minutes away 
from the NGO's office.  At the time of the carjacking, the driver 
and a Sudanese national staff member were en route from the CARE 
office to the CARE warehouse to pick up spare parts to fix a broken 
water pump in Kalma IDP camp.  At the CARE warehouse, unidentified 
armed men stole the vehicle and abducted the two NGO staff.  The 
vehicle was a Landcruiser, but not a Buffalo, which is easily 
converted for military use.  On October 2, the driver and staff 
member were located in Umm Salaya, after having walked for six hours 
to a police station, and returned safely to Nyala following three 
days without food.  Field reports indicate that the bandits ran out 
of fuel, tried to steal fuel from villagers who chased them, and got 
a flat tire.  Of particular concern are reports that indicate that 
the bandits argued whether or not to kidnap the staff members or 
leave them to return to the village.  For months, aid agencies have 
feared that carjacking trends will escalate into kidnapping for 
ransom. 
 
¶4. (SBU) CARE has temporarily grounded vehicles in Nyala town and 
surrounding areas.  At a meeting with the South Darfur Humanitarian 
Aid Commission (HAC) on October 1, CARE stated the carjacking 
incident would have implications for the NGO's water, sanitation, 
and hygiene programs in all four Nyala-area camps (Al Salam, Otash, 
Kalma, and El Sherief) On October 2, CARE told USAID staff that it 
intends to scale-back operations and reduce staffing levels in South 
Darfur.  The NGO's staff are severely shaken up.  On October 2, CARE 
drivers refused to work out of fear of another carjacking.  USAID is 
in communication with CARE leadership to determine if the scale-back 
in activities will affect CARE's ability to truck water into Al 
Salam camp and maintain existing water points in Kalma, Otash, and 
El Sherief camps.  Further, the scale-back will reduce CARE's 
ability to monitor the water programs, ensuring that community water 
committees are distributing water fairly and that vulnerable groups 
have access to safe drinking water. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In discussion with USAID staff in Khartoum, CARE reported 
that the HAC in Nyala has implied that NGO staff (both CARE and 
other NGOs who have experienced carjackings) are believed to be the 
ones responsible for stealing the vehicles.  The South Darfur Wali 
 
KHARTOUM 00001565  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
stated that NGOs brought these incidents on themselves because they 
are sympathetic to the opposition groups.  The Wali went on to 
accuse NGOs of failing to limit their hiring to drivers cleared and 
recommended by the authorities, as well as for refusing police 
escorts and armed protection.  This incident follows the recent 
expulsion of CARE's country director (REF B), adding yet another 
challenge to an already weary organization. 
 
----------------------------------- 
14-Day UN Travel Restriction Issued 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) On October 1, the UN issued a 14-day travel restriction 
prohibiting UN vehicles and staff from traveling outside of Nyala 
town.  In addition, the UN advised that travel within the town 
should be limited to essential travel on'Q1QRQQed by a Sudanese government police escort going to Al Salam 
IDP camp.  The only other exception to the travel restriction is for 
official convoys proceeding to Kalma IDP camp to pursue 
reconciliation of the ongoing tensions. 
 
¶7. (U) The travel restrictions apply to all UN agencies.  Although 
the UN cannot enforce this requirement on NGOs, they strongly 
recommend that NGOs follow the travel restrictions.  The USAID field 
officer based in Nyala reports that most NGOs are adhering to this 
requirement.  Previously, some NGOs were able to maintain a limited 
presence in camps declared as UN no-go areas by sending Sudanese 
national staff for short periods of time. [Note:  USAID staff in 
Darfur adhere to UN travel policies. End note.] 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Access Restricted to Al Salam IDP Camp 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) On September 16, unidentified men shot at USAID partner 
CARE's vehicle on the Nyala-Al Salam road and attempted to carjack 
the vehicle.  Shots hit the engine block, but the NGO staff were not 
injured and returned safely to Nyala.  Following this attempted 
carjacking, NGOs working in the camp requested a police escort for 
aid convoys traveling to Al Salam.  The police escorts are scheduled 
to meet at the police checkpoint at 0930 hours for the camp and 
return at 1400 hours.  However, USAID field staff based in Nyala 
report that the police escort policy is not working effectively.  On 
September 25 and 26, police escorts failed to arrive, delaying 
planned visits.  On September 30, the police escorted NGOs to the 
camp but never returned to escort the agencies back to Nyala. 
 
¶9. (U) Humedica International is the camp coordinator for Al Salam 
camp, where more than 35,000 IDPs currently reside.  USAID funds 
CARE's water, sanitation, and hygiene programs in the camp, 
including the delivery of water by truck.  USAID also funds the 
International Medical Corps to provide health services in Al Salam 
camp. 
 
¶10. (U) In January 2007, Al Salam hosted approximately 3,500 IDPs, 
according to Action Contre la Faim (ACF).  Seven months later, the 
camp population increased to more than 35,000 people newly displaced 
from fighting and insecurity in Buram locality, South Darfur. 
Relief agencies responded to the increased displacement through 
expansion of existing services, but the population remains 
particularly vulnerable.  In May 2007, ACF reported 23 percent 
global acute malnutrition (GAM) and 2.8 percent severe acute 
malnutrition (SAM) rates in Al Salam camp among children between 6 
and 59 months old.  Both rates indicated that malnutrition levels 
have exceeded emergency thresholds. 
 
¶11. (U) Although limited access to Al Salam camp is currently being 
achieved through use of police escorts, the deteriorating security 
conditions are impacting the ability of NGOs to provide even basic 
services.  Even when police escorts are available, the time left for 
program implementation in the camp is only 2 or 3 hours daily. 
Efforts to improve the availability of safe drinking water and 
sanitation facilities, provide primary health care services, and 
identify and treat IDPs suffering from malnutrition can be expected 
to be scaled-back and delayed.  As a result of the police escort 
policy and limited program time, ACF reports that it is unable to 
check on all recovering malnutrition patients and provide follow up 
 
KHARTOUM 00001565  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
care due to the limited time in camp. 
 
-------------- 
Kalma IDP Camp 
-------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Since September 6, the UN has declared Kalma IDP camp a 
no-go area due to ongoing ethnic tension and insecurity in the camp. 
 Kalma camp hosts nearly 92,000 IDPs and is known as one of the most 
politicized and volatile camps in Darfur. 
 
¶13. (U) Field sources confirmed that four Fur IDPs were killed on 
September 29 in sector 4 of the camp.  On September 30, the Sudanese 
government police transported the bodies to Nyala.  Unconfirmed 
reports indicate that one of the IDPs may have participated in the 
September 6 murders of four suspects, who had attempted to carjack a 
UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) vehicle in Kalma camp.  In addition, 
unconfirmed reports indicate that 2 to 4 other Fur IDPs were also 
killed outside the camp on September 29. 
 
¶14. (U) The root cause of the violence is ongoing tensions between 
Fur and Zaghawa IDPs residing in the camp.  Throughout September, 
the UN and NGOs have made repeated attempts to meet with IDP 
community leaders and resolve the tensions.  As of October 1, USAID 
field staff report that reconciliation meetings in Kalma Camp have 
not resulted in reduced tensions or increased access to the camp for 
all agencies. 
 
¶15. (U) Since Kalma camp has been designated a no-go area for nearly 
one month, the September food aid distribution was repeatedly 
delayed until October 1.  In addition, USAID partner CARE has had 
severely reduced access to the camp, impacting its ability to 
implement and monitor water, sanitation, and hygiene activities for 
the camp. 
 
-------- 
Comments 
-------- 
 
¶16. (U) While carjacking has become routine in Darfur and insecurity 
a daily risk for aid organizations, the recent upsurge in violence 
against humanitarian workers and tensions in IDP camps are severe 
and has humanitarian aid organizations seriously considering the 
viability of remaining in South Darfur.  With the end of the rainy 
season in September, a time when carjackings and fighting subside 
due to the limited ability to travel on water-damaged roads, many 
aid agencies expected a return to business-as-usual in carjacking 
and banditry.  However, the number of incidents in the last week, 
the prolonged abduction of two CARE staff, and the recent shooting 
of World Vision staff raise new concerns about the trends in 
violence and risks that aid workers face in implementing the world's 
largest humanitarian operation. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Many humanitarian organizations also predict an increase 
in politicization and violence in IDP camps and other areas in 
Darfur.  As the October peace negotiations approach, tensions in IDP 
camps are rising and aid organizations are already reducing 
operations as a result. Recent examples of the heightened tensions 
and politicization include, ethnic clashes in Kalma camp and violent 
demonstrations by IDPs supporting the Sudan Liberation Army faction 
led by Abdul Wahid in Zalingei and El Fasher.  As a result, the UN 
has issued a warning for aid agencies to avoid Abu Shouk and As 
Salaam IDP camps in El Fasher.  Camp coordinating organizations in 
El Fasher have advised delegations to avoid Abu Shouk and As Salaam 
camps and humanitarian organizations to limit movements in these 
camps. 
 
¶18. (U) Reducing life-saving humanitarian assistance for IDPs at 
this time is particularly problematic, as malnutrition and poor 
water, sanitation, and hygiene services are urgent concerns that 
need to be addressed. In addition, populations in camps are entirely 
dependent on food aid and services that relief agencies provide. 
USAID has observed that its partners are already stretched to the 
limit and most have suffered repeated attacks on staff, including 
sexual assault, gunfire, abductions, physical assault, and robbery. 
While UN agencies and NGOs have not announced the closure of Darfur 
operations, the constantly eroding access and recurring temporary 
program suspensions have real humanitarian consequences for the 
populations dependent on these services. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001565  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
FERNANDEZ