07KHARTOUM1834
ELECTIONS TIMELINE URGENT; DONOR GROUP TO EXPRESS CONCERN
Sun Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4565
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1834/01 3290517
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 250517Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9277
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001834 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, SE NATSIOS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: ELECTIONS TIMELINE URGENT; DONOR GROUP TO EXPRESS CONCERN 
TO SRSG, NCP, SPLM 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Elections donor group Ambassadors met November 22 
in Khartoum to discuss strategies to keep the elections timetable 
outlined in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) on track.  All 
agreed there is an increasingly narrow window and the NCP and SPLM 
must resolve their differences and pass an elections law by late 
December in order for a census to proceed in March 2008.  Otherwise 
the census will not be possible before the 2008 rainy season, 
possibly delaying the 2009 elections, which must occur between 
November 2008 and March 2009 to avoid pushing the elections 
themselves into the 2009 rainy season, which could disadvantage the 
South.  Donor group Ambassadors agreed to meet jointly with SRSG 
Qazi as soon as possible to ensure UNMIS is prepared for its role in 
the elections; to press for greater public emphasis on the urgent 
timeline for census and elections in public statement; and to press 
the NCP and SPLM to resolve their differences and stay the course on 
elections.  Post recommends U.S. official also express publicly the 
need for a timely census and elections, drawing attention to the 
urgent timeline. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The European Commission (EC) chaired a meeting of Elections 
Donor Group (EDG) Ambassadors November 22 in Khartoum to review 
preparations for the upcoming census and elections and to agree on 
the agenda for a meeting with SRSG Qazi.  EC elections officer Lars 
Tummers described the critically short timeline to ensure that the 
census occurs before the 2008 rainy season.  Lars reviewed the 
current state of play: 
 
--The Sudanese parliament has not passed the elections law; it is 20 
months late per the timeline laid out in the CPA. 
 
--Therefore there is no elections commission in place with which to 
coordinate and which is needed to guide the programs of the UN and 
other donors. 
 
--The next rainy season will begin in April 2008, which will 
seriously complicate the census in the South. 
 
--If the census does not occur by March, the elections scheduled for 
the following year may be delayed due to lack of required 
information from the census on proportionally-allocated seats for 
the parliamentary elections. 
 
--The Sudanese Parliament is in session until the end of December 
and will not reconvene until April, after the rains have started. 
 
--The current political impasse between the NCP and SPLM has blocked 
all progress on the draft elections law, which is now before the 
review commission, but there also remains a disagreement between the 
parties about percentages of direct vs. proportional seats in the 
future parliament. 
 
--For the census and elections to stay on track, the NCP and SPLM 
must therefore resolve their differences and pass an elections law 
before the end of December. 
 
¶3. (SBU) UN Chief Elections Officer Ray Kennedy said that the 
elections schedule in 2009 could be compressed, so that even if the 
parties do not resolve their current differences in time to pass an 
elections law allowing the census to move forward, it is 
theoretically possible to stay on schedule.  However he said that 
with a compressed schedule the chances of a well organized, 
transparent, free and fair election would be reduced.  Kennedy also 
noted that an election is possible without a census, though it is 
required by the CPA and is needed to sort out proportionally 
allocate seats in the parliament.  Kennedy assured donors that his 
office will move forward with planning for the elections despite the 
fact that the implementing legislation is not in place.  The UN 
Elections Office (within UNMIS) will prepare its programming and 
procurement plan and will begin staffing up in anticipation that an 
on-time election will still be possible.  The UN will also continue 
to remind the parties of urgency of CPA implementation and timely 
elections.  (Note: Kennedy is a U.S. citizen who most recently 
helped manage the elections in Afghanistan.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ambassadors expressed the urgency of the international 
community not making any public statements about the difficulty of 
organizing a timely census and election, given the current state of 
play between the GNU partners.  Rather, the international community 
must press for rapid resolution of the crisis and put a greater 
spotlight on the urgency of the census and elections timeline.  The 
Ambassadors agreed to meet jointly with SRSG Qazi as soon as 
possible to review UN preparations and urge that the electoral 
process be given a higher profile in UN statements and messages to 
the parties.  Ambassadors also agreed to deliver this same message 
to the parties, in their own bilateral contacts with the NCP and 
SLPM.  The meeting with SRSG Qazi will include the U.S., UK, 
Norwegian, Dutch, and Italian Ambassadors.  (Note: There was some 
 
KHARTOUM 00001834  002 OF 002 
 
 
discussion among EC Ambassadors about which ones would be included, 
whether the Naivasha representatives which included Italy, or the 
IGAD representatives which included France.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: Sending the right messages to the UN and the 
parties (NCP and SPLM) is critical, to press for an on-time census 
and elections.  If elections are delayed, the legitimacy of the GNU 
and the credibility of the parties will be brought into question, 
and tensions will mount further between the parties.  Of course the 
reality is that the current political impasse between the NCP and 
the SPLM has stopped all progress on implementing legislation for 
the census and the elections. It is also true that the two parties 
have often expressed less enthusiasm for elections than the 
international community. However the international community must 
continue to press the parties toward timely elections, and not allow 
Abyei to block CPA progress, nor allow Darfur to distract from the 
even more critical implementation of the CPA - in which the 2009 
elections play the central role.  Though the UN and the U.S. 
Administration have urged "CPA implementation" publicly, a greater 
focus in our public statements on the increasingly urgent timeline 
for census and elections is required. End comment. 
 
¶6. (U) Tripoli minimize considered. 
 
FERNANDEZ