08KHARTOUM1752
SUDAN - U.N. UNDER-SECRETARY GENERAL HOLMES BRIEFS DONOR
Thu Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
P 041248Z DEC 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2483
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE
CJTF HOA
USMISSION UN ROME
NSC WASHDCUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001752 
 
 
AIDAC 
 
DEPT FOR AF A/S FRAZER, SE WILLIAMSON, AF/SPG, PRM 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SP, DCHA SUDAN 
NAIROBI FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA, USAID/REDSO, AND SFO 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NSC FOR CPRATT, MMAGAN, AND BPITTMAN 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
BRUSSELS FOR JADDLETON 
USMISSION UN ROME FOR RNEWBERG, HSPANOS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ASEC PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI UN SU
SUBJECT: SUDAN - U.N. UNDER-SECRETARY GENERAL HOLMES BRIEFS DONOR 
COMMUNITY ON RECENT TRIP TO SUDAN 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On November 29, U.N. Under-Secretary General (U/SYG) 
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator John 
Holmes briefed the donor community in Khartoum on his recent trip to 
Sudan, which included visits to all three Darfur states, the Three 
Areas, and Southern Sudan, as well as meetings with government 
officials in Khartoum.  Holmes expressed concern regarding worsening 
violence and increasingly constricted access to affected communities 
in Darfur, noting the fragility of the humanitarian operation. 
Holmes also noted significant resource gaps for early recovery 
needs, particularly in the health sector, in Southern Sudan, where 
the humanitarian emergency has ended but key indicators for child 
and maternal health remain critical.  The U/SYG also observed that 
lack of reconciliation between communities and reconstruction is 
preventing many internally displaced persons (IDPs) from returning 
to the Three Areas. 
 
¶2.  U/SYG Holmes's visit came at a time when humanitarian agencies, 
particularly in South Darfur, have expressed growing concern 
regarding the sustainability of Darfur aid operation, given 
bureaucratic obstacles (which are worst in South Darfur state) and 
increased insecurity.  U/SYG requested that the humanitarian 
community do everything possible to resolve lingering issues before 
problems escalate, while also stressing to the Government of 
National Unity (GNU) Humanitarian Aid Commission (HAC) their 
responsibility to protect humanitarian aid workers, the importance 
of consistent application of agreements, and the necessity of 
continuing humanitarian interventions for IDPs and non-IDPs.  End 
Summary. 
 
------ 
DARFUR 
------ 
 
¶3.  The prevailing themes that emerged from Holmes's visits to the 
three Darfur states were security, or lack thereof, and shrinking 
humanitarian space.  While humanitarian agencies have been 
remarkably successful in sustaining the lives of more than 4.7 
million Darfuris, insecurity continues to escalate, with attacks on 
humanitarian workers and limited access hampering relief efforts. 
Many places in Darfur are only accessible via helicopter, making 
access difficult and expensive. 
 
¶4.  Holmes acknowledged that the problems facing the humanitarian 
community throughout Darfur are at their worst in South Darfur, 
where non-governmental organizations (NGOs) experience a level of 
intimidation and Sudanese government harassment not felt in other 
Darfur regions.  Holmes relayed that he had encouraged Sudanese 
government officials in South Darfur to consider protection and 
gender-based violence programs as part of a complete humanitarian 
response to the Darfur crisis and to take counter-measures against 
attacks on IDPs, NGOs, and U.N. staff. 
 
¶5.  During the U/SYG's visit to Kalma IDP camp, which has been 
historically the most politically sensitive camp in Darfur and was 
the site of a Sudanese government massacre in August 2008, IDPs 
reported no intention of returning to their pre-crisis homes.  IDPs 
expressed concern regarding the ongoing insecurity and requested 
increased security measures.  Holmes reported that U.N.-African 
Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) patrols have improved the security 
situation in Kalma camp now that there is a 24-hour Bangladeshi FPU 
(Formed Police Unit) presence since September.  Holmes noted, 
however, that many other camps in Darfur are in need of increased 
protection and security measures, particularly in the face of 
continued gender-based violence.  UNAMID currently lacks the 
capacity to replicate the Kalma patrols in all camps and the HAC 
remains suspicious of all protection and gender-based 
violence-related programming (Note: the Kalma FPU is the first of 19 
expected FPUs under UNAMID, two others - Indonesia and Nepalese - 
have now arrived in Darfur but are not fully operational). 
 
¶6.  Security is also a significant problem in West Darfur, where the 
presence of large numbers of Khartoum-supported Chadian armed 
opposition forces requires UNAMID to escort humanitarian workers to 
project sites.  Holmes reported that IDPs have concerns regarding 
limited UNAMID presence and continued insecurity, which prevents 
IDPs from considering returns.  Holmes also noted that the prolonged 
presence of Darfur's IDP camps is causing severe environmental 
damage, with firewood collection and use, the timber trade, 
construction, and brick-making (which requires water) straining the 
already limited natural resources in the area. 
 
---------------------------------- 
THE THREE AREAS AND SOUTHERN SUDAN 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  U/SYG Holmes identified returns as the main concern in Agok and 
Abyei, noting that conditions remain unfavorable for full returns. 
Holmes met with the new Abyei Administrator and Deputy 
Administrator, who reported that government resources have not yet 
materialized for the implementation of the Abyei roadmap.  In Abyei, 
only 1,000 of approximately 50,000 IDPs have returned, and 
reconstruction has not yet begun.  Approximately 30,000 of the IDPs 
from Abyei remain in Agok.  The IDPs continue to be distrustful of 
living near the Misseriya Arabs and require assurances of security 
before returning. 
 
¶9.  U/SYG Holmes also highlighted the continued early recovery and 
recovery needs in Southern Sudan, noting that key health and 
nutrition indicators in Southern Sudan continue to be significantly 
worse than in Darfur.  Holmes urged continued donor support for 
basic services, construction efforts, and development.  Holmes 
stated that reconstruction in areas outside of Juba remains limited 
and noted that the Government of Southern Sudan must contribute more 
to the early recovery and construction effort in areas outside of 
Juba. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
MEETINGS WITH KHARTOUM-LEVEL MINISTERS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  The U/SYG's meetings with HAC Commissioner Hassabo Abdurahman 
in Khartoum focused primarily on the obstacles to the humanitarian 
effort in Darfur.  Holmes and the HAC Commissioner discussed 
programming in sensitive areas and harassment of NGOs in South 
Darfur, as well as the need for increased GNU investment in the aid 
effort, improved camp coordination, the introduction of multiple 
entry and exit visas for NGO staff, and government intervention to 
improve security.  The notoriously duplicitous HAC agreed to 
consider the requests but gave no indication of when or if the 
U/SYG's suggestions would be implemented. 
 
¶11.  Holmes noted that the humanitarian community and the Sudanese 
government continue to hold diverging positions regarding the issue 
of returns in Darfur.  The Khartoum government insists that 
large-scale returns have begun in Darfur, while the humanitarian 
community does not currently report on returns.  Holmes recognized 
increasing evidence that small numbers of IDPs are returning to 
cultivate and harvest but noted that the population movements are 
currently on a very small scale.  The HAC believes that humanitarian 
agencies are exaggerating the total numbers of affected Darfuris, 
while underestimating the numbers of returnees.  During meetings 
with HAC officials, Holmes agreed to re-examine the numbers of 
returnees and the total number of affected populations, including 
IDPs, in Darfur. 
 
¶12.  Holmes commended the government for their increased engagement 
and dialogue with international NGOs on key issues as a result of 
the Joint Communique.  However, extensive delays and blockages 
remain in place on visas, travel permits, the transfer of funds, and 
equipment.   While acknowledging the positive steps that had been 
taken with the timely renewal of the Moratorium on Restrictions, the 
earliest ever renewal, Holmes highlighted the importance of the 
government's compliance with existing agreements in both letter and 
spirit.  Holmes encouraged the GNU to ensure the High Level 
Committee meets once a month to monitor the implementation, or lack 
thereof, of the Joint Communique and monitor the functioning of the 
new state level Tri-partite Joint Technical Committee (TJTC). 
Holmes requested that the humanitarian community address 
inconsistencies between state and federal-level application of 
agreements within the TJTC, urging that relief agencies resolve 
outstanding issues before the problems escalate.  Given U.K. and 
U.S. concerns regarding HAC seizure of government-owned NGO assets, 
Holmes agreed to raise the issue with the HAC in future meetings. 
 
---------- 
CONCLUSION 
---------- 
 
¶13.  U/SYG Holmes's third visit to Sudan confirmed the continuing 
deterioration of access and security in Darfur and ongoing 
challenges for early recovery in other regions of Sudan. According 
to Holmes, the key issues remain protection of civilians, 
particularly women and children; safety and security for aid 
workers; and respect for the fundamental principles of 
humanitarianism.  Holmes identified an enduring and comprehensive 
peace settlement in Darfur as the needed solution for the crisis, 
the absence of which will continue to hamper relief efforts and 
place conflict-affected Darfuris and humanitarian staff at risk. 
Embassy Khartoum will continue to monitor government cooperation and 
advocate on behalf of NGOs in Darfur. 
 
FERNANDEZ