09KHARTOUM802
PARTING THOUGHTS ON THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN DARFUR FROM THE
Wed Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4071
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0802/01 1820803
ZNY EEEEE ZZH
O 010803Z JUL 09 ZDS
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4031
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOA
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0074
RUEHSUN/USUN ROME ITUNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 000802 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y  -  EFTO 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A/S CARSON, AF/C 
NSC FOR MGAVIN 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
BRUSSELS FOR PBROWN 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
UN ROME FOR HSPANOS 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
 
SENSITIVE NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PREF EAID KPKO SOCI ASEC AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: PARTING THOUGHTS ON THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN DARFUR FROM THE 
OCHA CHIEF 
 
KHARTOUM 00000802  001.4 OF 003 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) On his last day on the job after five years with the UN 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Sudan, 
two of those years as the OCHA/Sudan Chief,  Mike McDonagh (protect) 
provided USAID officers with a candid tour d'horizon of the 
humanitarian situation in Darfur.  Respected throughout his tenure 
in Sudan as an experienced and reasonable voice on humanitarian 
issues, McDonagh lamented the lack of quality, gap-filling programs 
following the expulsion of 13 NGOs in March, and the ongoing 
bureaucratic impediments imposed upon the humanitarian community by 
the Government of National Unity's Humanitarian Aid Commission 
(HAC).  McDonagh acknowledged that NGO and UN efforts appear to have 
narrowed the gaps and prevented a humanitarian crisis in Darfur, 
while recognizing that the greatest impact of the expulsions is some 
loss of quality in programming and humanitarian interventions in 
contested areas of Darfur.  McDonagh acknowledged inconsistent 
messages coming from UN leadership on gap-filling, early recovery, 
and returns policy, but downplayed these differences in messaging as 
irrelevant, noting that at the end of the day, returns do not depend 
on UN opinion, but rather security and IDP resolve.  Looking 
forward, McDonagh predicted that the humanitarian community would 
get over the expulsion hump, and the humanitarian situation in 
Darfur would remain relatively stable and under control if 
new/returning NGOs are permitted to expand programs and the rainy 
season is not severe.  McDonagh urged continued U.S. pressure on the 
Government of Sudan (GOS) - particularly on the "problematic and 
intimidating" HAC Commissioner Hassabo Abdel Rahman - to abide by 
its humanitarian commitments, particularly those relating to 
population movements and returns.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Not Content with Checking the Box 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On June 25, 2009, the outgoing UN OCHA Chief, Mike 
McDonagh, provided USAID/OFDA and Food for Peace (FFP) officers with 
his views of the evolution and current state of the humanitarian aid 
effort in Darfur.  According to McDonagh, the March 4 expulsions of 
13 international and three national NGOs ushered in a new period in 
humanitarian operations here, one that is more vulnerable.  While 
admitting that the aid program prior to the expulsions verged on 
"overkill" in some sectors, McDonagh noted that we are now in the 
unfortunate position of "underkill", specifically with regard to 
program quality and access. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Although efforts to measure the humanitarian situation 
have been ongoing through the joint UN/GOS joint assessment, McDonagh 
cautioned against using the assessments as the end-all-be-all 
measure of humanitarian needs in Darfur.  He emphasized that that 
the assessment teams had only visited 38 locations within Darfur 
that were directly impacted by the expulsions, but had not assessed 
areas with pre-expulsion needs.  McDonagh also added that  the 
assessment results should be treated with some suspicion given the 
HAC's persistent intimidation of technical line ministries.  [Note: 
Line ministries such as the Ministry of Agriculture, not the UN 
cluster leads, are charged with producing the reports that are 
presented to the HLC each month. End note.]  Referring to a recent 
incident when HAC Commissioner Hassabo Abdel Rahman threatened to 
expel the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) after a report on nutrition 
indicators, McDonagh noted:  "If the HAC is willing to threaten the 
head of a UN agency, I can only imagine what they do to a poor 
doctor from the Ministry of Health." 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to McDonagh, political expediency is creating 
a situation in which cosmetic changes are considered adequate 
substitutes for the programming expertise lost by the expulsions. 
Organizations are so focused on providing coverage to various areas, 
that they are not considering the ability of affected populations to 
access those areas:  "If services can still go on, the box gets 
checked."  Although humanitarian services have resumed in many 
locations, significant questions remain regarding sustainability, 
program quality, and impact.  McDonagh recognized that the 
qualitative effect of humanitarian operations is inherently 
difficult to measure, and the ongoing assessments and reports to the 
international community tend to focus on outputs rather than impact. 
 
KHARTOUM 00000802  002.3 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) At the same time, McDonagh said the HAC continues to 
block assessments that could provide a more objective indication of 
program quality and impact, such as nutrition assessments.  McDonagh 
noted that there will be a lag-time before the humanitarian 
community begins to see the limits of this approach, but the cracks 
will become more evident the next time that systems are tested by 
disease outbreaks or new displacements.   Additionally, McDonagh 
lamented the loss of technical quality and outreach to rural and 
"contested" areas due to the expulsions, referring to Medecins Sans 
Frontieres, Action Contra la Faim, and Solidarites in particular. 
In his view, these organizations were on the front lines of the aid 
effort, ensuring that sectors meet technical standards and pushing 
operations into hard-to-reach rural areas.  In McDonagh's words, "We 
lost our Marines." 
 
-------------------------- 
U.S. Pressure Still Needed 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Despite his less-than-sanguine view of the 
post-expulsion operating environment, McDonagh sees hope 
with new agencies beginning to "resume" operations in Darfur. 
Although the success of the operation will depend on the 
severity of the rainy season, McDonagh believes that new or 
resuming programs, if targeted to areas of high need such 
as Kalma, Kass, and Zalingei, will reintroduce much-needed access 
and technical quality that will help stabilize the situation, 
assuming the GOS does what is necessary to 
facilitate the return of these organizations. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) McDonagh noted the issue of population movements/return 
as a key area of needed U.S. engagement with the UN and GOS.  He added 
that the specific issue of certifying population movements is an 
area where U.S. pressure on the GOS is sorely needed.  Although  not 
specifically addressed by the Joint Communique, 
population/movements/returns is covered by existing agreements  - 
including a memorandum of understanding (MOU) directly between the 
GOS and the International Organization for Migration (IOM). 
McDonagh urged the U.S. to continue pushing the government to allow 
the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and IOM 
to implement activities directly related to their mandates.  Despite 
signing MOUs with IOM in 2004 and 2006, the GOS continues to 
restrict IOM work in all three Darfur states, most notably in South 
Darfur.  IOM is the only international organization with a written 
MOU with the GOS with regard to monitoring and verifying the 
appropriateness of returns and other population movements and 
ensuring that these movements do not violate international 
humanitarian principles, as in the case of coerced and/or forced 
displacement. 
 
¶8. (SBU) UNHCR reports continuing challenges in commencing 
protection and camp coordination and camp management activities in 
North and South Darfur, despite repeated engagement by donors and 
high-level UN representatives.  The HAC continues to prevent the 
organization from full operation in North and South Darfur, 
asserting that UNHCR lacks a mandate to work with IDPs, and that 
UNHCR is seeking to assume the government's role in managing IDP 
camps and protecting its people. 
 
¶9. (SBU) According to McDonagh, the UN will soon be finalizing 
its "framework" on returns for presentation to donors and GOS; however, 
much of the foundation of the framework has already been approved by 
the GOS.  McDonagh urged the U.S. to engage with the HAC, 
particularly Commissioner Hassabo, to live up to its existing 
humanitarian commitments. 
 
¶10. (SBU) When pressed by USAID officers, McDonagh acknowledged 
that senior UN leadership in Sudan holds varying positions and 
opinions on topics such as the level of gap-filling, need for early 
recovery programming, and returns policy.  McDonagh chalked this up 
to differing perspectives on the nature of the conflict and 
political pressure from both the GOS and UNAMID.  While downplaying 
these differences of opinion, McDonagh was quick to note that UN 
Under-Secretary General/Emergency Relief Coordinator John Holmes has 
been consistently strong in his messaging to the GOS on these 
issues. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00000802  003.3 OF 003 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) We generally concur with McDonagh's forthright 
assessment of the current humanitarian situation in Darfur.  Post 
is concerned that continued focus on expulsion-related gaps, as 
well as ongoing HAC harassment, intimidation, and interference, 
could limit the visibility of overall humanitarian needs and dilute 
the picture that is presented to the international community. 
At this critical juncture prior to the full onset of the 
rainy season, the humanitarian community must avoid settling for 
cosmetic measures in lieu of quality, targeted humanitarian 
interventions.  However, like McDonagh, we are optimistic that 
humanitarian operations can regain significant lost capacity and 
program quality as new/affiliate NGOs re-establish and expand 
programs.  The devil remains in the details of implementation, 
however, and continued high-level engagement will be 
necessary to ensure that the GOS lives up to all of its 
humanitarian commitments, including ensuring safe and voluntary 
returns per international standards. 
 
WHITEHEAD