09KHARTOUM1262
SOUTHERN SUDAN ASKS FOR HELP IN PREPARING FOR ELECTIONS
Sun Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1262/01 3120705
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADXOD478D4 MSI9392 611)
O 080705Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4704
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001262 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (CAPTION) 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINS SU
SUBJECT: SOUTHERN SUDAN ASKS FOR HELP IN PREPARING FOR ELECTIONS 
SECURITY 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Voter registration began in Southern Sudan on 
November 1 amid logistical and political hurdles.  (Septel will 
report on registration progress.) This cable discusses the 
Government of South Sudan's (GoSS) urgent plea for help in preparing 
security for the elections following an October 23 incident when a 
convoy carrying voter registration materials was mistakenly fired 
upon, killing one civilian and injuring two JIU members.  The GoSS 
has submitted an "electoral security assistance" proposal totaling 
8.4 million USD.  Donors, including the USG, will need to make quick 
decisions concerning funding for this proposal and other possible 
elections security related measures to forestall violence and help 
ensure a conducive environment for elections in April 2010.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
Security Incident and GOSS Response 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On October 23 a UN convoy carrying elections registration 
materials was involved in a serious security incident.  UN Deputy 
Resident Coordinator Lise Grande told poloff that the GOSS police 
escorting the convoy arrived on duty drunk and late.  Once the 
convoy reached a routine checkpoint on the Juba-Terreka road, the 
police refused to stop and reportedly opened fire.  It is unclear 
whether the JIU returned fire, but the incident resulted in the 
death of one civilian woman and injuries to two JIU soldiers. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The following day, GoSS Minister of Internal Affairs Gier 
Chuang Along convoked the UN for an emergency elections security 
meeting.  Grande explained that in previous meetings, Gier had been 
aware of election security concerns, but did not become seized of 
the issue until this incident.  The Minister relayed that in 
response to the incident he had appointed a Sudan People's 
Liberation Army (SPLA) Brigadier General (BG) to oversee the 
deployment of elections materials throughout Southern Sudan and 
would deploy ten colonels under the BG to liaise with the UN and the 
State High Committees (SHCs) responsible for overseeing elections 
preparations.  Gier asked for UN assistance and funding for an 
elections security package that the GoSS had presented to the UN 
during the summer of 2009. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The focus of the package is on support for the Southern 
Sudan Police Service (SSPS).  The Elections Security Package, 
developed by the UN and SSPS, aims at providing the SSPS with 
additional training, equipment, communications, mobility, temporary 
police posts and infrastructure support.  The total amount is 8.4 
million USD, of which 500,000 USD is already being funded through 
current UN police (UNPOL) training. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Donors Convene To Consider Request 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) On October 30, the U.S. Consulate General Juba and UN 
co-hosted a meeting to discuss how the international community might 
support the Minister's request and what other measures might be 
required to forestall violence and ensure a conducive environment 
for elections.  While the US, UK and UN all have ongoing programs 
aimed at enhancing the capacity of the SSPS, all agreed that these 
efforts would not be sufficient to enable the SSPS to provide 
effective security for the April 2010 elections.  Similarly, donors 
concurred that while the proposal presented by the Minister was "a 
bargain" at USD 8.4 million, these additional measures alone would 
not be sufficient.  The current baseline of SSPS professionalism and 
efficacy was simply too low for the SSPS to be able to ensure a 
secure electoral environment in only six months. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Donors concluded that they must provide support to the SSPS 
in order to help it build capacity for the elections and referendum 
security.  Ensuring public order is a police function which the SSPS 
must be able to assume at some point.  However, in the near term, 
there was agreement among donors that the police could not be the 
sole focus of electoral security assistance.  By necessity, the 
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) would need to be involved in 
elections security, and hence trained to play a constructive role. 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The GoSS concurs with this hybrid approach and in multiple 
forums Gier has voiced his intent to involve both the SPLA and SSPS 
in elections security. However, it is unclear whether the Minister 
has fully developed this idea, and the GoSS has not yet presented 
donors with an overall GOSS security strategy.  Notional donor ideas 
have centered on providing joint/joint training for the SPLA and 
SSPS; creating three rapid response units (based in Juba, Wau and 
Malakal) capable of reacting to incidences of violence; organizing a 
senior level conference on elections security involving governors 
 
and other political actors; and establishing a GOSS operations 
center for the elections. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Next Steps on Funding Elections Security 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) At the October 30 meeting, donors agreed to a number of 
next steps to ensure assistance for elections security begin 
immediately.  The UN agreed to review the elections security package 
presented by Gier and include information on procurement mechanisms, 
and prioritization of geographical "hot spots," most likely to 
experience violence as well as "hot times" in the period leading up 
to elections, like the campaign period, for example.  The US agreed 
to review the package and identify areas we could consider 
supporting, in coordination with the peace and security team of the 
United States Special Envoy to Sudan.  The US and UN further 
committed to jointly meet with Gier to provide feedback on the 
proposal; elicit a key point of contact for this process; secure his 
commitment to appoint his best police to work on the initiative; and 
discuss ideas on how the SPLA should be integrated into the process. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  We remain concerned with GOSS capacity to provide 
adequate security during the 2010 elections and 2011 referendum, and 
will work with the Minister to develop an overall elections security 
strategy detailing how the SSPS and SPLA will engage and coordinate 
security during these two events. The international community will 
need to ensure that proper safeguards are put into place to ensure 
that "elections security" does not translate into "voter 
intimidation."  Timely USG support and assistance is imperative, as 
well as close coordination with the UN and UK.  Some of the line 
items in the proposed GoSS package require close scrutiny, including 
the provision of two vehicles in the capital of each state and 
formation of rapid deployment units that do not have the equipment 
to deploy at all.  Other items, such as radios for increased 
communication with outlying areas, make better sense.  End Comment. 
 
WHITEHEAD