09KHARTOUM1076
New Attacks in Jonglei State Pose Destabilizing Threat to
Wed Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2548
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1076/01 2661454
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231454Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4451
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001076 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR PREL PINS SU
SUBJECT: New Attacks in Jonglei State Pose Destabilizing Threat to 
Peace in Southern Sudan 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Attacks by Luo Nuer on a Dinka village in Duk Padiet 
county in Jonglei on September 20 have raised new concerns over the 
destabilizing effects of militia activity in Jonglei state and 
overall security in southern Sudan.  While local authorities 
attempted to negotiate an agreement with the armed Lou Nuer youth up 
until the evening of September 19, their efforts failed.  The 
attacks resulted in the deaths of approximately 72 civilians and 
security forces, and many more injured as of September 22.  The UN, 
along with GOSS representatives, undertook an assessment in Jonglei 
on September 21 to address immediate security and humanitarian 
issues.  The UN has agreed to airlift SPLA troops into the region to 
ensure security.  End Summary. 
 
New Attack in Jonglei Leaves 72 Dead 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) During the September 22 UN Security Management Team (SMT) 
meeting, the UN confirmed that 72 people were killed in a September 
20 attack by Lou Nuer on Dinka Hol tribe in Duk Padiet, Jonglei 
State, but that numbers may increase in coming days.  The UN, along 
with Minister of Interior Gier Chuang Aluong and Jonglei Governor 
General Koul Manyang Juuk, made  an assessment of Duk Padiet village 
on September 21.  The attack took place after the deputy governor's 
attempt to stop the attack through talks with the leader of the 
armed Lou Nuer youth--a former member of an Other Armed Group (OAG) 
and disaffected ex-SPLA--broke down on the evening of September 19. 
The deputy governor had been in talks with the youth since September 
14, and had informed the UN that an agreement was close to 
conclusion, hence the failure of the UN to intervene, reported David 
Gressly, UN Regional Coordinator. 
 
Attack on Duk Padiet 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Initial reports claim that anywhere from 1,000 to 4,700 
Lou Nuer armed youth attacked Duk Padiet at 11:30am on September 20 
and seized the village for just over an hour and a half.  The youth 
came from  three Jonglei counties:  Akobo West, Nyirol and Uror. 
Initial reports claim that the armed youth were dressed in military 
uniforms armed with G-3 rifles and rocket propelled grenades (RPGs); 
however, Gressly could not confirm this information.   Speculation 
on the cause of the attack continues, as it was the second of its 
kind  by Lou-Nuer on a Dinka Hol tribe, and there were no cattle in 
the area. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Just before reaching Duk Padiet, the armed Lou Nuer youth 
split into three groups, one attacking the administrative 
headquarters straight on, the other two groups flanking the area. 
The joint UN/GOSS assessment confirmed that the attack appears to 
have directly targeted  the GOSS organized security forces-including 
 SPLA, police and prison security-- which is very different from 
pervious inter-ethnic attacks.  The attackers were repelled after 
they ran out of ammunition and the SPLA, police and armed civilians 
counterattacked and drove the Lou Nuer out of the area. 
 
Humanitarian Repercussions 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) During the attack, thousands of people fled, 260 tukuls were 
burned down and the World Food Program (WFP) warehouse was 
ransacked, but very little stolen.  The assessment team reports that 
most women and children had already fled south-west before the 
attack, although their present location cannot be confirmed.   As of 
September 22, Duk Padiet is currently at UN Security Level 4 for 
another 48 hours when it will be reviewed again and possibly lowered 
to Level 3. 
 
UN/GOSS Response 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) In response to the attacks, the SPLA is sending 
reinforcements to the area.  The assessment team reports that the 
SPLA is  in control of the county, and that the attackers have 
retreated, but it is unclear whether they are regrouping and 
planning a new attack.  UNMIS is using helicopters to evacuate the 
wounded out of the area to Juba for medical assistance.  UNMIS is 
also airlifting SPLA troops into Duk Padiet to reinforce the 
government's presence. 
 
Jonglei Stabilization Plan and Peace Process 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The UN and local government authorities continue to work 
towards stabilizing the situation among  fighting tribes in the 
Jonglei area.  The Jonglei Governor's office plans to hold an 
inter-tribal reconciliation conference in early October with  Dinka, 
Murle and Lou Nuer groups.  Similarly, UNDP and UNMIS Civil Affairs 
continue to facilitate peace conferences for fighting tribes in 
Jonglei.    Lastly, UNDP and Jonglei state held a workshop with UN 
 
KHARTOUM 00001076  002 OF 002 
 
 
agencies, GOSS representatives and USAID on the Sudan Recovery Fund 
Phase 3 plan in Bor, Jonglei on Septembeb 12-13.  The  meetings 
focused on  setting  priorities for use of $15-17 million of donor 
funds to promote  peace and stability programs in the area. 
Participants  concluded that roads and radio projects are the top 
two priorities. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment:  The recent attacks in Duk Padiet are of concern 
due to the changing nature of the attacks.  The latter have shifted 
from traditional cattle raiding to more targeted attacks on GOSS 
security forces, with the apparent aim of provoking further 
violence.  Moreover, Jonglei peace initiatives are useless without 
follow-up on agreements reached between groups, sustained UN 
presence to protect civilians and a clear chain of command within 
the GOSS on  responsibility for  civilian welfare and protection. 
Lastly, the SPLA's reliance on UN logistical support to undertake 
internal security raises concerns about the GOSS' security 
ccapacity.  It may also   potentially impact perceptions of UN 
neutrality.  End comment. 
WHITEHEAD