10KHARTOUM316
Donors Press NEC on Outstanding Issues Threatening to Delay
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0316/01 0550907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY AD29737E TOQ3914-695)
R 240906Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0268
INFO IGAD COLLECTIVE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000316 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KDEM SU
SUBJECT: Donors Press NEC on Outstanding Issues Threatening to Delay 
Elections 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  At the February 18 National Elections Commission 
(NEC) Policy Committee meeting, donors pressed the for answers on a 
host of issues threatening to delay the April elections, including 
planning and funding for the transportation of elections materials, 
clarification on the number of polling stations, an assessment of 
the accuracy of the voter roll, and accreditation of domestic 
observers. The DCM attended the February 18 meeting with the USAID 
Deputy Mission director. At a follow up technical session on 
February 19, attended by the USAID Elections Advisor, UNMIS and 
UNDP provided an estimate of transportation costs totaling 
approximately USD 43.8 million; however, the funding question 
remained unresolved. At the meeting, the NEC committed to ensure 
that all planes arriving in Khartoum with electoral materials will 
receive the clearances required to land. Electoral experts are 
concerned that the delays in logistical planning will necessitate a 
delay of one to two weeks in the start of polling. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The National Elections Commission Policy Committee, 
comprised of NEC and Government of Sudan officials, the Government 
of Southern Sudan, international technical experts, and donors, met 
on February 18 in a three hour session. This was the first meeting 
in approximately two months; the meeting was originally scheduled 
for late January. The main issue for discussion was the 
transportation of electoral materials from Khartoum and Juba to 
polling stations. Three key components to transportation must be 
addressed: timing, NEC capacity, and funding. The NEC said it 
understood that transportation was a key issue that would make or 
break the elections, and asked donors for funding as well as 
technical assistance. The NEC estimated that USD7.5 million would 
be required to cover the cost of the transportation of materials. 
NEC did not respond to questions from donors about whether it has 
requested funding from the Ministry of Finance, but urgently 
requested that the donors transfer Basket Fund money that was not 
spent on voter registration to pay for these transportation costs. 
(Note:  The United States does not contribute to the Basket Fund. 
End Note.) 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Donors responded with strong statements, affirming their 
continued commitment to holding all elections (legislative and 
executive) in April according to the current electoral calendar, 
and expressing serious concern that the transportation issue, first 
raised by donors several months ago, remains unresolved less than 
two months before polling begins. They noted that, in the budget 
agreed to by NEC and donors in September 2009, the Basket Fund 
donors agreed to fund only a portion of the cost of transportation, 
with the remainder to be covered by funding transferred to NEC by 
the Government of National Unity for transportation. Furthermore, 
inadequate expense statements provided to donors by NEC to date 
indicate that only 20 percent of that allocation has been spent. 
The NEC responded that its budget left transportation from Khartoum 
and Juba to state capitals unfunded, and that the GNU has agreed to 
pay only for transportation of materials from state capitals to 
constituencies. Donors reminded the NEC that donors have been 
asking for an operational plan for transportation since August 
2009, but have still not received one. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The DCM, seconding a point made by the European Union 
representative, urged the NEC to finalize as soon as possible 
a detailed operational plan for transportation of electoral 
materials. He noted that, regardless of who will ultimately pay for 
the cost of transportation, it was essential that the NEC, with 
assistance from the international experts, develop a workable 
operational plan immediately. The operational plan must include 
provisions for the speedy entry of imported electoral materials 
unhindered by customs or tax procedures. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In response to concerns about budgetary issues, the NEC 
proposed a technical meeting on February 19 to discuss 
transportation see paras 11-12). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Late Ballot Specs, Late Ballot Arrival 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The meeting then moved to other agenda items. The UNDP 
representative expressed concern that the NEC had not yet fulfilled 
its obligation to provide ballot specifications; as a result, the 
UNDP had missed the deadline for finalizing a purchase order, and 
ballots would not arrive by March 15 as planned. The NEC promised 
final specifications within two days, but the UNDP cautioned that 
this timeline and any additional delay would leave less and less 
time for dissemination of the ballots to the polling places. (Note: 
As of February 21, NEC had not yet provided the necessary specs. 
End Note.) Donors told the NEC that they had heard that some ballot 
 
 
papers, notably those for the Presidency of Southern Sudan, had 
already begun to be printed locally, despite the fact that 
specifications had not yet been finalized. NEC denied these 
reports. Donors cautioned that local printing of ballots without 
adequate provision for observation of the process threatened the 
transparency of the process. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
No Independent Review of Voter Rolls 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Donors noted that the NEC had still not conducted a 
previously-promised internal review of the voter roll, nor had NEC 
allowed an independent audit proposed on December 14, 2009, by 
USAID partner IFES. Donors urged an independent audit to assess the 
quality and accuracy of the voter roll to enable the NEC to respond 
to criticism and increase its credibility about the registration 
process, while providing NEC and other bodies (e.g. referendum 
commissions) the opportunity to improve the process in the future. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Accreditation of Domestic Observers 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Donors asked the NEC for an update on the rules and 
regulations for accreditation of election observers. The NEC 
responded that printing of forms for domestic observers had started 
and that it expected to call domestic observers on or about 
February 27 to collect the forms. (Note: USAID partner IFES was 
asked by NEC to print the rules and regulations and code of conduct 
for observation, as well as some of the forms, but has not received 
final versions to send for printing.  End Note.) At the same time, 
the NEC waffled over whether an update to the existing regulations 
is forthcoming or whether the old regulations stand.  The USAID and 
UNDP representatives noted that existing regulations, released in 
late 2009, include a number of provisions that will hinder the 
ability of domestic groups to observe the elections. Of particular 
concern are provisions that require domestic observers to submit 
copies of identification documents and photographs; many people in 
rural Sudan, particularly in the South, do not possess identity 
cards nor do they have places where they can get photographs taken. 
Moreover, the centralization of the accreditation process is 
problematic in light of the limited time remaining before polling 
begins. The NEC responded that the accreditation requirements would 
not be changed, suggesting that anyone who can understand how to 
observer elections should have appropriate documentation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
GOSS:  Insufficient Polling Stations for the South 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The representative of the Government of Southern Sudan 
(GOSS) expressed concern that there would not be a sufficient 
number of polling stations in the South to ensure that everyone who 
wanted to vote would be able to do so. The USAID representative 
asked the NEC to clarify the number of polling stations, noting 
that the NEC and its international advisors had jointly decided on 
approximately 21,000 polling stations nationwide, a number that was 
confirmed by President Bashir during his recent meeting with 
President Carter.  However, NEC cable number 66, dated February 14, 
instructed State High Committees to set up polling stations to 
accommodate a minimum of 1,000 voters in the South and 1,200 voters 
in the North, for a total of approximately 14,500 polling stations. 
Procurement of some electoral materials has already begun, with 
orders based on the higher number of polling stations. In the case 
of polling kits, procured by USAID partner IFES, an additional USD 
1.5 million was spent to purchase kits that now appeared not to be 
needed. Furthermore, a reduction in the number of polling stations 
could disenfranchise a significant number of voters unable to 
travel the distance necessary to reach a polling station. In 
addition, the increased number of voters served per polling station 
could result in long lines of voters at polling stations with 
insufficient staff in place to maintain crowd control. NEC did not 
respond to the USAID representative's points. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Transport Issue Clarified, Not Resolved 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) On February 19, the NEC, international technical 
advisors from UNMIS, UNDP, and IFES, the USAID Elections Advisor, 
and two representatives from the Basket Fund donors met to discuss 
in greater detail the transportation of electoral materials. The 
Basket Fund representatives emphasized that they would not make any 
 
 
decisions regarding whether or how to fund the transportation of 
electoral materials until the NEC provided a full report of 
expenses to date according to a format provided by the Basket Fund 
donors to the NEC following the February 18 Policy Committee 
meeting. To assist the NEC in preparing the report, NEC, UNMIS and 
UNDP financial advisors met on February 20 to prepare the requested 
expense report. UNMIS reminded meeting participants that the 
funding issue must be resolved by Sunday so a contract (through 
UNDP) can be issued on Monday for transportation of materials from 
Khartoum and Juba to state capitals, noting that if the contract is 
not signed on Monday, materials will not arrive in time for 
polling. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) According to UNMIS and UNDP estimates, the total cost of 
transportation of materials from Khartoum/Juba to polling stations 
will be approximately USD 43,791,000. This figure is comprised of 
two components. 1) A revised estimate from UNDP for the 
transportation of electoral materials from Khartoum/Juba to state 
capitals totals approximately USD 5.5 million. 2) UNMIS estimated 
the cost to rent four cars per geographic constituency for 30 days 
for the purpose of transporting electoral materials from state 
capitals to constituencies to polling stations would cost 
approximately USD 38,291,000. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Comment: Despite differing views on how to solve a range 
of serious problems, donors, technical advisors, and the NEC are 
agreed on the urgency of their working together to find solutions. 
Nevertheless, there are significant hurdles to overcome in the 
short time remaining before polling begins. International electoral 
experts are concerned that the delays in logistical planning could 
necessitate a delay of one to two weeks in the start of polling if 
these problems are not resolved. 
ASQUINO