08DURBAN71
POLITICAL PARTIES COMMIT TO TOLERANCE AND NON-VIOLENCE AHEAD
Wed Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Durban
VZCZCXRO7308
RR RUEHBZ RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHDU #0071/01 3381217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031217Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1363
INFO RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0736UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DURBAN 000071 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/S, INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SF
SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES COMMIT TO TOLERANCE AND NON-VIOLENCE AHEAD 
OF 2009 ELECTIONS 
 
REF: DURBAN 69 
 
DURBAN 00000071  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
(U) This cable is Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU).  Not for 
Internet Distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On November 25, 2008, South Africa's 
Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) hosted a conference of 
political parties where representatives committed their parties 
to respect the electoral code of conduct and pledged political 
tolerance ahead of 2009 presidential elections. End summary. 
 
Background and Introduction 
 
¶2. (SBU) Over 300 delegates from all political parties 
represented in South African national and provincial parliaments 
attended the November 25 IEC conference, which discussed the 
creation of an environment conducive to free and fair elections 
in 2009. The IEC convened this national conference after 
incidents of political intolerance and the rise in the use of 
inflammatory language by political leaders. In KwaZulu Natal 
(KZN), African National Congress (ANC) Provincial Secretary 
Senzo Mchunu is reported to have declared the province a "no-go 
area" for the new breakaway party, Congress of the People (COPE) 
(reftel). Party leaders have raised concerns about the rise of 
incidents of political intolerance and violence, especially in 
KZN, where COPE meetings in Verulam and Chatsworth were 
allegedly disrupted by ANC members.  The KZN-based Inkatha 
Freedom Party (IFP) also declared that COPE is not the only 
party that is experiencing incidents of intolerance at the hands 
of the ANC. The IFP reported that its election registration 
posters were destroyed in Umzinto and in a November 26 statement 
its national chairperson noted that disturbances at IFP public 
meetings by ANC supporters were commonplace. 
 
Strong Civil Society Participation 
 
¶3. (SBU) Civil society organizations including faith-based 
groups had a robust presence at the conference. The Human Rights 
Commission and Commission on Gender Equality also participated. 
Rev. Dinis Motsolo, Chairman of the Mozambique Council of 
Churches gave a presentation on the Mozambican experience which 
created an environment conducive to free and fair elections. 
Representatives from the House of Traditional Leaders, National, 
Provincial and Local Governments also joined the gathering. 
 
Adherence to Code of Conduct and Rules Governing Elections Urged 
 
¶4. (SBU) The IEC provided copies of the electoral code of 
conduct and the electoral act to all delegates. The Chairperson 
of the IEC, Ms. Brigalia Bam, spoke at length about the code of 
conduct and the electoral act. She emphasized the importance of 
political parties' adherence to the code of conduct. Ms. Bam 
also encouraged political parties to do more to educate their 
members about the code of conduct and the rules governing 
elections. Ms. Bam indicated that the IEC was concerned about 
the recent incidents of political intolerance, especially in 
KZN, and she called upon all political parties to act against 
members who are perpetuating political intolerance and violence. 
Ms. Bam cautioned against the use of violent language by 
politicians and said that this had the potential to inflame 
violence. She called for an end to the "war-talk" during 
campaigning. 
 
Atmosphere Calm, Respectful 
 
¶5. (SBU) No incidents of political intolerance took place at the 
conference and political leaders present treated each other with 
respect. Representatives of parties pledged to end incidents of 
political intolerance. Discussions were well conducted and all 
parties had an opportunity to engage with the IEC and other 
stakeholders present.  However, vigorous debate among political 
parties on political intolerance and other related issues did 
not take place at this conference.  Politicians and members of 
civil society at the conference discussed a number of issues 
including "the role of civil society in promoting an environment 
conducive to peaceful, free and fair election and the role of 
security institutions in assisting to establish an environment 
conducive to free and fair elections." Opposition party 
representatives criticized the SABC for giving the ANC more 
coverage and called on the IEC to organize a meeting between the 
SABC, IEC and political parties to discuss election campaign 
coverage by SABC. SABC 2 hosted live coverage of a session where 
political leaders publicly committed their parties to respect 
the code of conduct and the electoral act during campaigning and 
the election itself. 
 
Notable Absences: COPE, Senior Leaders of Other Parties 
 
¶6. The new breakaway party from the ruling African National 
Congress (ANC), the Congress of the People (COPE), was not 
 
DURBAN 00000071  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
officially represented at the conference because the IEC had 
invited only political parties represented in national 
parliament and provincial legislatures. Other senior leaders of 
political parties, such as ANC President Jacob Zuma, Democratic 
Alliance Leader Hellen Zille and Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) 
President Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi did not attend the 
conference. 
 
Comment 
 
¶7. (SBU) Despite the overall success of the conference, the 
absence of senior political leaders, especially from the ANC, 
was noteworthy and disappointing. The ANC missed an opportunity 
for its senior leadership to respond to allegations of political 
intolerance from opposition parties. All political parties 
committed themselves to respect the rules of electoral conduct 
and to ensure political tolerance.  However, it remains to be 
seen whether they will be able to control their more energetic 
members, especially at the grassroots level. Although KZN is a 
province with a history of political violence and intolerance, 
no special focus was paid to discussing the situation in the 
province, aside from the comments from Ms. Bam (para 4). 
However, the conference was an important platform for the IEC to 
set the ground rules and educate both political and civil 
society organizations on rules governing elections and 
campaigning. Also, the strong interest in the electoral process 
displayed by civil society organizations and other sectors like 
the business and religious community who attended the meeting is 
good for South Africa's democracy. 
DERDERIAN