09DURBAN21
DURBAN 2010 WORLD CUP PREPARATIONS ON TRACK, BUT CUTTING IT
Fri Feb 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Durban
R 201529Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1404
INFO AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 
AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 
AMCONSUL DURBANUNCLAS DURBAN 000021 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SF
SUBJECT: DURBAN 2010 WORLD CUP PREPARATIONS ON TRACK, BUT CUTTING IT 
CLOSE 
 
Summary 
 
1.(U) Summary: eThekwini Municipality's Head of Strategic 
Projects and 2010 Unit Ms. Julie May Ellingson believes Durban's 
2010 preparations are proceeding well but could be derailed by 
escalating costs for stadium construction, late completion of 
other 2010 related projects and strict FIFA processes related to 
communication, marketing and selection of service providers. She 
also believes that 2010 will be good for South African tourism 
industry as thousands of tourists will arrive and spend money in 
the local economy. Ms. Ellingson is confident South Africa will 
overcome challenges of transport, accommodation and crime to 
stage a very successful World Cup. 
 
 
2010 Helps to Fast-Tracking Development Projects but Time Frames 
Tight 
 
¶2. (U) Ms. Julie May Ellingson met with Consul General and 
Pol/Econ Assistant on February 2 to discuss Durban's 
preparations for 2010. She began the discussion by noting that 
most of the city's major projects were not initially linked to 
2010, but the World Cup helped to fast-track these projects, 
which were already planned.  The major infrastructure projects 
underway include the new King Shaka International Airport, R6.8 
billion, Beachfront Development Project. Ms. Ellingson said the 
time frame for these projects is very tight and identified the 
Beachfront development as having a tighter schedule and doubted 
it will be completed by 2010. She indicated that if deadlines 
are not met, the impact will be greatly felt especially by the 
local private sector. 
 
 
Moses Mabhida Stadium On Schedule, Over Budget 
 
¶3. (U) Ms. Ellingson noted that construction of the Moses 
Mabhida Stadium is progressing well and expected it to be 
finished before the deadline. She said a Sports Precinct will be 
built around the stadium to ensure that the project has future 
utility. Ellingson noted that the cost of building the new 
stadium has increased greatly because of foreign exchange rates 
and increases in the price of construction materials. 
 
She noted that the stadium was initially expected to cost R2.6 
billion but is now estimated to cost R3.1 billion. She said the 
city contributed R500 million, the province R300 million and the 
rest was funded by the national government. 
 
The resulting impact is that many aspects of the project have 
had to be scaled down to save on costs, as additional funding is 
not available. However, Ms Ellingson noted that the increase of 
R500 million in Durban was not as bad as in Cape Town. She said 
"the situation is under control in Durban". 
(Reference 08CAPETOWN223) 
 
Ms. Ellingson said municipalities of Ugu (Port Shepstone) and 
Msunduzi (Pietermaritzburg) also received funding of about R150 
million for 2010 related projects. She also indicated that 
stadia in historically disadvantaged areas around Durban, 
Clermont, Umlazi and KwaMashu are also being refurbished as they 
will be used as training facilities during the World Cup. 
 
 
Transport is Single Biggest Challenge 
 
¶4. (U) Ms. Ellingson acknowledged that transport infrastructure 
is the biggest challenge facing South Africa in relation to 
¶2010. She is confident that the new International Airport will 
be finished and operational before the World Cup but 
acknowledged that there was a tight completion schedule. 
 
(U) Ms. Ellingson confirmed that the city will mostly use a bus 
transport system for 2010 visitors. She said the tender for the 
bus system is out and the municipality will select a vendor by 
end of March 2009. She also said Durban will use a ticket system 
that will allow commuters to use various modes of transport with 
one ticket. Ms. Ellingson said the city is currently piloting 
project "People Mover" with buses which are safe, clean and 
punctual. She said the city is looking at working more closely 
with the taxi industry to improve it and is looking for creative 
ways to use taxis during non-peak hours between 9 AM and 3 PM. 
(Reference: 08DURBAN65) 
 
 
KZN Tourism to Benefit But Challenges of Accommodation, 
Marketing Remain 
 
¶5. (U) Although Ellingson has seen visitor estimates as high as 
750,000 visitors to South Africa during the World Cup, she 
believes the actual number will be closer to 350 000 . She said 
the municipality is working with Tourism KwaZulu Natal to create 
a tourist package that will attract visitors to Durban and 
KwaZulu Natal.  She noted that working with the FIFA- appointed 
travel coordinator had been problematic because its approach is 
oriented to more typical venues in the developing world that 
offer many high-end hotels.  FIFA has since named specific tour 
operators to organize travel for the United Kingdom and Europe 
(a tour operator for the U.S. is still to be appointed). As a 
result, the situation has improved because these tour operators 
better understand the system of B&Bs and guest houses in South 
Africa. 
 
(U) Ms. Ellingson said it is critical to make sure that 2010 
tourists spend money in Durban during the World Cup. Ms. 
Ellingson acknowledged that accommodation is another challenge 
facing Durban as not enough beds are available for visitors. She 
indicated that three hotels are currently being developed in 
Durban to cater for 2010. 
 
 
Creative Approaches to the Challenge of Crime 
 
¶6. (U) Crime could negatively impact the 2010 World Cup, 
Ellingson acknowledged, and South Africa is receiving assistance 
from an American team of security experts in this regard. She 
said that a Joint Operational Centre involving representatives 
from national, provincial and local level will coordinate crime 
prevention initiatives during the World Cup.  She indicated that 
Durban has a detailed plan for creating parks in the beachfront 
area to cater for fans and tourists who cannot afford tickets. 
These fan parks will be controlled by the city and will be very 
secure. 
 
 
Maximizing Economic Benefits but Small Enterprises Face 
Challenges 
 
¶7.  Ms. Ellingson believes 2010 will provide businesses major 
economic opportunities but that it will be difficult for Small, 
Medium Businesses to take full advantage of the economic 
spin-offs from 2010 because they lack financial capital, skills 
and capacity. She believes fan parks will benefit small 
businesses and the informal sector more. She said, "if one 
visitor leaves Durban with money in his/her pocket, we have not 
done our job well". 
 
 
Comment 
 
¶8. (U) Durban's preparations for 2010 are progressing well in 
spite of challenges with regards to transport, accommodation and 
crime. Time frames for other 2010 related projects seem to be 
tight and there are doubts about their readiness for 2010. The 
issue of crime could be a concern for many tourists who might 
travel to South Africa for the World Cup. South Africa's plan to 
fight crime during the World Cup is critical to alley the fears 
of potential tourists. 
 
(U) Escalation of costs for stadium construction could delay its 
completion as the city and the national treasury fight over who 
should foot the bill for additional costs. 
 
U) The economic spin-offs from the World Cup might not filter 
down to ordinary South Africans, informal sector and small 
business because of limited economic opportunities for them. 
 
(U) 2010 will also benefit historically disadvantaged areas 
surrounding Durban as they have been allocated funds to 
refurbish their local stadiums as part of preparations for the 
World Cup. This will be a lasting impact of 2010 in these 
communities. The fan park concept might prove to be a smart idea 
as many local soccer fans might struggle to afford tickets to 
watch the games at the stadium. 
 
 
DERDERIAN