02AMMAN6862
JORDAN CELEBRATES THE HOLY MONTH OF RAMADAN WITH
Mon Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 006862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM JO IS
SUBJECT: JORDAN CELEBRATES THE HOLY MONTH OF RAMADAN WITH 
         PRAYER AND TREPIDATION 
 
¶1.    The following cable was drafted by one of our FSNs and 
   conveys  the  mood  of Ramadan 2002 in  Jordan  from  her 
   perspective. 
 
¶2.    Summary:  While  last year's Ramadan was  marked  with 
   pessimism and lethargy, one would have thought  that  the 
   situation wouldn't and couldn't possibly get worse.  Last 
   year, Jordanians greeted Ramadan with daily fresh images of 
   wounded Palestinians and the added weightiness of the  US 
   campaign in Afghanistan. This year, the mood in Ramadan is 
   one of "accumulated frustration", "further disillusionment", 
   and  "a case of hopelessness". Jordanians see a continued 
   Intifada that seems to be going nowhere; an inevitable war 
   on Iraq; political unrest within Jordan; a sinking economy; 
   and a new war many believe to be targeted at Islam and Arabs 
   at  large.   Faced  with  these  simultaneous  pressures, 
   Jordanians are spending more time in reflection,  and  in 
   mosques.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.    Although this year's Ramadan is far from festive,  the 
   mood is not all one of gloom and tension.  Homes and streets 
   are decorated with lanterns and crescents (in the manner of 
   Christmas);  special-made food  items  are  prepared  and 
   fashionably displayed; and cafes and hotels offer Ramadan 
   Iftars and quiz nights at a good price. The King and Queen 
   host  Iftars for the underprivileged, other Royal  Family 
   members  host Iftars for orphans, and donations and  food 
   packages are routed to the poor by the able and fortunate. 
   The streets are emptied at sunset and grid locked after the 
   stomachs are full. Non-Jordanian satellite TV stations host 
   many politicized shows such as Horseman without a Horse -- 
   about resistance to the British and Zionist colonization - 
   which  are  aired in prime time. (Note: Jordan Television 
   (JTV) is not airing this program.  However, Jordanians are 
   able to view it either on the "Al- 
   Manar" or "Dream" satellite stations. End Note.) This  is 
   followed  by the story of Juha, the legendary figure  who 
   represents  the  underdog in society  facing  up  to  the 
   government.  Several lottery shows - increasingly popular - 
   promise  people a chance to win - and offer  a  momentary 
   escape from reality. 
 
¶4.   Beneath it all, however, people have become cynical and 
   depressed about the reality they are forced to  live.  "I 
   don't read the news as much because it's the same everyday." 
   "It's supposed to be a holy month, but there is nothing holy 
   or  sanctified  about it . . . there  are  still  Israeli 
   incursions  and  deaths everyday. Nothing  has  changed." 
   "People   are   praying  more  because  it   leaves   the 
   responsibility to God to do something". 
 
¶5.    Consequently, more Jordanians are spending their  time 
   in quiet reflection and prayer. People are less politicized 
   publicly, but their worries and frustration are evident. In 
   contrast to last year, the number of people attending mosque 
   prayers after Iftar has increased dramatically, especially 
   among young women. There are now new facilities that make it 
   easier for women to attend - women can take their children 
   with them and have the mosque management attend to them. The 
   press has featured articles deeming it `wrongful' for men to 
   stop their wives from going to post Iftar prayers; there's a 
   lot of Quran reading and more and more TV shows catering for 
   this religious segment. We have also heard anecdotal reports 
   that  the  number of Jordanians traveling to  Mecca  this 
   Ramadan  to perform Umra has also increased significantly 
   over  previous years. It is well known that in  times  of 
   trouble people turn to religion, and Jordanians have a lot 
   on  their  minds these days as the region inches  towards 
   conflict. 
 
¶6.     Jordanians  have  somehow  adopted  a  new  level  of 
   normalcy. While Ramadan carries on as usual, beneath it all 
   lies a cautious ennui and trepidation about possible more 
   difficult times to come. 
 
GNEHM