04AMMAN5430
OFFICIAL/INFORMAL FOR DCM AMBASSADOR JAMES JEFFREY
Fri Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

020842Z Jul 04UNCLAS AMMAN 005430 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FROM DAVID HALE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EFIN JO IZ
SUBJECT: OFFICIAL/INFORMAL FOR DCM AMBASSADOR JAMES JEFFREY 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Post personnel have recently been in contact with a 
Jordanian conference organizer who has expressed his 
readiness to organize a conference focusing on investing 
opportunities in both Iraq and Jordan.  The conference, 
tentatively planned to be held in Amman and dated October 
5-7, would be the first to focus primarily upon 
portfolio/capital investment opportunities in both countries 
(previous conferences have focused primarily upon contracting 
and foreign direct investment opportunities).  We feel that 
such a conference would be of substantial benefit to the 
economies of both Jordan and Iraq in giving fund managers a 
greater comfort level with the regulatory structures and true 
level of risk in both countries.  An informal sounding of 
American fund managers has indicated a high level of interest 
in such a conference among this target group. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Although the proposed conference will likely happen 
with or without us, we feel that the potential benefits for 
USG interests warrant Post's support in facilitating the 
conference's success.  We remain aware that for such efforts 
to be a success, we will need to cooperate closely with 
Embassy Baghdad.  For this reason, we would appreciate 
Embassy Baghdad's help in designating a point of contact with 
whom we may deal on issues relating to this conference.  If 
Embassy Baghdad is supportive, we can provide a draft, joint 
cable from Embassy Amman and Embassy Baghdad, announcing the 
upcoming conference and soliciting U.S. agencies' support. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Points of contact on this issue in Embassy Amman 
will be Laurie Farris (laurie.farris@mail.doc.gov), CAPT 
Caroline Pogge (caroline.pogge@us.army.mil), and James 
Flowers (FlowersJH@state.gov). 
 
¶4. (SBU) We welcome the opening of Embassy Baghdad and see 
our cooperation on this issue as the beginning of what we 
hope will be a close post-to-post relationship. 
GNEHM