04AMMAN3955
U/S LARSON MEETING WITH QATARI MINISTER OF ECONOMY
Wed May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 003955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
OES FOR NIST 
PASS TO USTR 
PASS TO USDOE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EPET EAID QA IZ NG
SUBJECT: U/S LARSON MEETING WITH QATARI MINISTER OF ECONOMY 
AND COMMERCE MOHAMMED BIN AHMED BIN JASSEM AL-THANI 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) U/S Larson met with Qatari Minister of Economy and 
Commerce Mohammed Bin Ahmed Bin Jassim Al-Thani on May 15 at 
the margins of the World Economic Forum at the Dead Sea in 
Jordan.  Larson opened by seeking the views of the Qataris on 
the G-8 reform initiative.  He passed a copy of the latest 
reform draft, asking that they review and send comments in 
the coming days.  Al-Thani took a quick glance at the major 
themes and said that these ideas were ones they were already 
working on in Qatar for Qataris.  Larson suggested that 
setting up networks to take advantage of the lessons learned 
should be an element of the G-8 agenda. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Al-Thani indicated Qatar's willingness to look at 
new initiatives and to determine whether they meet Doha's 
objectives and strategies and allow it to play a leading role 
in the region.  He added that he saw a role for Qatar in 
private investment.  Qatar has attracted more than $60 
billion in foreign direct investment in recent years and is 
willing to work with others in the region and to undertake 
needed reforms. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Larson encouraged Al-Thani to think creatively not 
only about the broader concepts but more specifically on what 
role Qatar envisions for itself in stimulating private 
investment for the region.  Al-Thani responded by saying that 
he thought the G-8 initiative was right for the region; it 
deals with the region's problems and would win over the 
hearts and minds of its people. The initiative must be 
perceived to be honest and transparent and it is critical to 
incorporate the views and concerns of the region's 
leadership.  Larson agreed and said it was this type of 
honest feedback he was seeking. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Al-Thani turned the discussion toward TIFA and FTA 
talks he planned to hold with USTR Zoellick in June.  He said 
Qatar was willing to make sacrifices, opening up 
traditionally closed sectors such as banking and 
telecommunications.  He said that the Qatari government 
understood this move was critical and anything less would 
prevent them from joining the global economy as equal 
partners.  He announced his intentions to a group of EU 
Ambassadors and they warned him of the costs in signing an 
FTA with the U.S. He dismissed their views as simple jealousy 
and added that trying to negotiate an association agreement 
with seven countries, with Saudi Arabia as part of the mix, 
is virtually impossible.  Larson cautioned that the Qataris 
must use their June visit to develop congressional contacts, 
and Al-Thani agreed and said it was something the government 
is working on.  Al-Thani added that Qatar plans to address 
some of the contentious labor issues raised by Rep. Sandy 
Levin.  Larson said that correcting Qatar,s labor problems 
will eliminate one of the current barriers in accessing OPIC 
coverage. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Al-Thani pushed for more information on the U.S. LNG 
market.  Larson cautioned against thinking the U.S. market is 
limitless; there are several competing supply projects and it 
will be important that Qatar move quickly and plan 
strategically.  Al-Thani responded by making it clear that 
the U.S. market was Qatar's interest and indicated that the 
selection of U.S. partners Conoco-Phillips and Exxon-Mobil 
for its new 15 billion cubic meter LNG projects bear that 
out. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Larson thanked Al-Thani for sponsoring the Iraq 
donors group later this month.  Al-Thani said that the 
Qataris are very interested in supporting not only with 
official funds but also through private investment.  They set 
up a company with a group of Iraqis whose sole focus is to 
place rebuilding projects, have begun working, but recent 
violence has slowed the pace.  The Qatari government will 
continue to do more for Iraq because doing so is critical to 
the region's stability.  Stability improves the lives of 
everyone in the region. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Larson asked Al-Thani for support on the polio 
eradication initiative.  Recent efforts by the OIC to 
inoculate Nigerians have been hampered by local political 
intransigence; he asked Al-Thani to intervene.  He also asked 
Al-Thani to consider joining the efforts of other donors to 
eradicate this disease by helping close a $120 million 
funding gap the UN program will have over the next few years. 
 Al-Thani asked for an update on AIDS and Larson outlined the 
$15 billion program the USG is funding that will not only 
focus on containment and treatment but also prevention. 
 
¶8. (U) This message was cleared by Under Secretary Larson. 
GNEHM