04AMMAN2098
DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  UNHCR REQUEST TO RESETTLE
Thu Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002098 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR NEA AND PRM; GENEVA FOR RMA; CPA BAGHDAD FOR MODM 
ADVISOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL KPAL KWBG IS IZ JO
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  UNHCR REQUEST TO RESETTLE 
IRAQI-PALESTINIANS 
 
REF: STATE 56688 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Refcoord delivered ref points in separate 
conversations with UNHCR Jordan Representative Sten Bronee 
and UNHCR Iraq Representative Yacoub El Hillo on March 16, 
emphasizing that a voluntary return to Iraq was the only 
possible solution for the 348 Iraqi-Palestinians remaining in 
Ruweished refugee camp.  PolCouns reinforced the points in a 
separate conversation later the same day. While UNHCR 
continues to pursue a regional solution for this group 
("return" to the West Bank and Gaza or residency in Jordan or 
another Arab country), Bronee said he recognizes that the 
possibilities of regional resettlement are slim.  He 
commented that U.S. opposition to resettlement of 
Palestinians outside the region -- including on family 
reunification grounds -- would make other traditional 
resettlement countries reluctant to consider the 
Iraqi-Palestinians.  Nevertheless, UNHCR would continue to 
pursue resettlement possibilities with Australia, Canada, 
Sweden and Norway.  Realistically, he continued, return to 
Iraq was indeed the only viable solution for this group but 
security conditions in Baghdad would make it difficult for 
UNHCR Iraq to organize a voluntary repatriation program. 
Bronee also claimed erroneously that UNHCR Iraq has been 
unable to find solutions for the displaced Palestinians in 
Baghdad. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Because UNHCR is about to embark on a comprehensive 
profile of the Iraqi-Palestinians, Bronee requested that 
refcoord postpone a visit to Ruweished refugee camp until 
early April.  Bronee hopes the profiling exercise will 
identify candidates for "family reunification" cases in the 
West Bank and Gaza and resettlement/family reunification 
cases outside the region.  UNHCR will not develop contingency 
plans for the voluntary return of the Palestinians to Iraq 
until it has completed the profile.  Bronee welcomed 
refcoord's suggestion that all future discussions of this 
issue include representatives from the UNHCR Iraq mission, 
noting that he has been unable to coordinate strategies on 
this issue even though the Iraq team works just one floor 
above the Jordan office.  The Iraq mission, he complained, 
has not treated the new caseload as a high priority. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Separately, Bronee told refcoord he had been 
convoked by Minister of Interior Habashneh, who complained 
that 100 Iraqi-Palestinians had slipped out of the Ruweished 
camp and disappeared into Amman.  Most had subsequently been 
found and returned by GOJ authorities to the camp but 
Habashneh asked Bronee to tighten up operations and 
reorganize the camp so GOJ police could keep better watch 
over the camp's inhabitants.  Bronee interpreted this request 
as an indication the GOJ would allow the camp to remain open 
beyond the current April 9 deadline. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comment:  Despite our pleas for better 
coordination, the UNHCR Jordan and Iraq missions continue to 
exhibit a total disconnect between their priorities and 
programs.  We will insist that any meetings to address these 
cross-boder issues include representatives from both 
missions.  Reinforcement of this message in Geneva would also 
be helpful. 
 
¶5.  (U) CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
GNEHM