06MANAGUA803
VISAS DONKEY: REQUEST FOR CORRUPTION 212(F) VISA
Mon Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0803/01 1002016
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 102016Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5919
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/C/P, CA/VO/L/C, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/03/2036 
TAGS: CVIS PREL PGOV KCOR KCRM EFIN NU
SUBJECT: VISAS DONKEY: REQUEST FOR CORRUPTION 212(F) VISA 
INELIGIBILITY FINDINGS--ROBERTO ERASMO CEDENO MENDOZA AND 
AMINTA OROZCO REYES DE CEDENO 
 
REF: A. 04 STATE 45499 
     ¶B. 04 MANAGUA 2808 
     ¶C. 04 STATE 242524 
     ¶D. 05 MANAGUA 345 
     ¶E. 05 MANAGUA 259 
     ¶F. 05 MANAGUA 260 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR PAUL TRIVELLI. REASONS 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST:  Embassy is seeking a 
security advisory opinion under section 212 (f) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act, proclamation 7750, 
suspending the entry into the United States by Roberto Erasmo 
Cedeno Borgen, born in Nicaragua on November 25, 1938 and by 
Aminta Orozco Reyes de Cedeno, born in Nicaragua on October 
26, 1943.  Roberto Erasmo Cedeno Borgen is the former Mayor 
of Managua and a close political and business associate of 
former President Arnoldo Aleman, who was convicted of 
corruption in December 2003 and sentenced to twenty years 
imprisonment for his crimes. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Aminta Orozco Reyes de Cedeno is Cedeno's wife and a 
beneficiary of his participation in Aleman's corruption. 
Cedeno served as a town councilman and, later, as Deputy 
Mayor of Managua during Aleman's term as Mayor (1990-1996) 
and was subsequently elected as Mayor (1997-2001) in his own 
right with Aleman's support.  Throughout his period in the 
municipal government of Managua (1990-2001), Cedeno committed 
numerous acts of official corruption, some in cooperation 
 
with Aleman and others on his own.  These corrupt acts 
benefited Cedeno, his wife and family, Aleman, and other 
corrupt associates. 
 
¶3.  (C)  While president, Arnoldo Aleman was the linchpin in 
several high-level corruption schemes that defrauded the 
Nicaraguan state of reportedly over USD 100 million.  Cedeno 
participated in some of these corruption schemes and 
developed his own in the Managua mayor's office.  Since he 
and Aleman left office in 2001-2002, Cedeno has returned to 
the private sector, but he remains an active supporter of 
Aleman in the Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) and helps 
the ex-president to retain total control of the party.  The 
massive corruption of which Cedeno was an integral part 
caused serious damage for U.S. national interests in the 
stability of democratic institutions in Nicaragua, U.S. 
foreign assistance goals, and the international economic 
activities of U.S. businesses. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Along with other corrupt associates, Cedeno and 
Aleman continue to damage all of these national interests by 
working to free the corrupt ex-president, undermine the 
government of President Enrique Bolanos, and place all of the 
country's government institutions under their control.  For 
all of these reasons, the Department has already found 
Arnoldo Aleman to be ineligible to enter the United States 
under INA 212 (f).  Post recommends that the Department now 
issue a 212 (f) finding against Roberto Erasmo Cedeno Borgen, 
and his wife, Aminta Orozco Reyes de Cedeno, who has 
benefited from her husband's corrupt acts.  The following 
provides information requested in reftel A, paragraph 16. 
END SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST. 
 
PROCLAMATION INCLUDES DEPENDENTS AND IMMIGRANTS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  (U) Sections 1a through 1c of the presidential 
proclamation suspend the entry into the United States, as 
immigrants or nonimmigrants, of corrupt public officials and 
former public officials whose acts of corruption have had 
serious adverse effects on the national interests of the 
United States.  Section 1(d) then goes on to suspend the 
entry of, "...spouses, children, and dependent household 
members of persons described in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) 
above, who are beneficiaries of any articles of monetary 
value or other benefits obtained by such persons." 
 
¶6.  (U) Reftel A also contained a series of questions and 
answers on the proclamation as additional guidance for posts. 
 The answer to question eight specifies that, "the 
proclamation specifically covers corrupt officials, those who 
corrupt them, and their dependents.  The inclusion of 
dependents - those who benefit from corruption - is 
consistent with other provisions of visa law that target 
activities that generate illicit funding.  For example, we 
also extend visa ineligibility to the dependents of 
controlled substance traffickers, to ensure that the 
traffickers and their family cannot benefit from ill-gotten 
gains by sending family members to the United States." 
 
 
 
 
ARNOLDO ALEMAN'S CORRUPTION ALREADY DOCUMENTED AND HIS VISA 
REVOKED 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  -- - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) Arnoldo Aleman, who until January 10, 2002, served as 
Nicaragua's President, is currently serving a twenty year 
sentence for being the linchpin of several high 
level-corruption schemes to defraud the Nicaraguan government 
of reportedly over USD 100 million while he was President. 
The elaborate financial schemes orchestrated by Aleman 
involved the transfer of public funds from the accounts of 
various government agencies to the accounts of shell  foreign 
corporations set up for the sole purpose of defrauding the 
GON.  Aleman and several of his associates have been 
convicted of various corruption crimes against the state, 
including embezzlement, misappropriation of public funds, 
money laundering, and conspiracy to commit these crimes. 
Reftel B described Aleman's corruption activities in detail, 
as well as the mass of evidence against the ex-President.  In 
reftel C, the Department issued a 212 (f) finding against 
Aleman.  Prior to this decision, the Department had already 
revoked the visas of Aleman and three of his main 
co-conspirators under INA 212 (a)(2)(I). 
 
ROBERTO CEDENO'S PARTNERSHIP WITH ALEMAN AND HIS CORRUPTION 
IN THE MANAGUA MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Roberto Cedeno was a founding member of Aleman's PLC, 
and is a long-time friend and associate of the ex-president. 
When Aleman served as Mayor of Managua from 1990 to 1996, 
Cedeno was initially a member of the municipal council, but 
Aleman later appointed him to serve as his Deputy Mayor. 
Since Cedeno proved a loyal instrument of Aleman's will and a 
partner in his corruption schemes, in 1996 Aleman nominated 
Cedeno to be his party's candidate for Mayor of Managua, even 
as Aleman himself ran for the presidency.  Both were elected, 
and Cedeno became Mayor of Managua in January 1997, at the 
same time that Aleman was inaugurated as President of 
Nicaragua. 
 
¶9.  (C) When Cedeno first entered government service as a 
Managua city councilman in 1990, he signed a legal financial 
probity document stating that his personal assets totaled USD 
5,000.  However, when he signed another such document after 
being elected mayor in 1996, he claimed assets of USD 1.3 
million.  The discrepancy between the two documents provoked 
an uproar, with the Controller General's office (Contraloria) 
asking how Cedeno's assets could increase so dramatically in 
the space of six years when his only stated sources of income 
were his salaries as town councilman and Deputy Mayor. 
Cedeno claimed that he had possessed the larger total of 
assets all along, but had concealed them in 1990 for fear 
that the Sandinistas might return to power and steal them 
from him.  While many Nicaraguans did conceal some of their 
assets in the early 1990s for this reason, it was clear that 
Cedeno owned nothing close to USD 1.3 million in assets in 
1990, and he never offered a convincing explanation for the 
newfound wealth that he reported in 1996.  However, with 
Cedeno enjoying the protection of Aleman, the Contraloria 
ultimately accepted his dubious argument and assigned Cedeno 
only "administrative" (rather than criminal) penalties for 
misrepresenting his net worth in his 1990 probity statement. 
 
¶10.  (C) While Deputy Mayor and Mayor of Managua, Cedeno 
participated in numerous schemes involving illegal 
sole-source contracts for city services.  Many of these cases 
involved road construction, in which contracts were awarded 
to shell companies owned by Aleman and/or his cronies, which 
either carried out the construction themselves, doing a very 
poor job, or subcontracted to genuine construction companies, 
but skimming off large amounts of taxpayer money.  Another of 
Aleman's cronies in the Managua municipal government involved 
in these schemes to steal money from the city budget was 
Victor Guerrero, whose visa was revoked under INA 212f in 
¶2005.  The cases that follow in paragraphs 9-11 were already 
reported in reftel D, but are repeated here for the 
convenience of the Department. 
 
¶11.  (C) In 1999 Cedeno and director of public works Victor 
Guerrero ignored laws requiring public solicitation of all 
government contracts and approved twenty-two different 
contracts with SOLECTRA Industrial Anonymous Society worth 2 
million cordobas (USD 125,000) to provide the city with 
garbage containers.  SOLECTRA was owned by Juan Solorzano 
Castillo, the brother of Pedro Solorzano, a prominent member 
of the Managua city council.  Investigations by the media 
revealed that SOLECTRA was a dummy corporation whose only 
resource was a single warehouse where garbage containers were 
 
 
stored after they were purchased from the real manufacturer 
at a much lower price than that at which SOLECTRA sold the 
containers to the municipal government.  Such a 
subcontracting arrangement was in direct violation of the 
contract that Cedeno signed with SOLECTRA. 
 
¶12.  (C) When the Contraloria sought to investigate the 
SOLECTRA case, Cedeno and Guerrero refused to provide it 
copies of relevant documentation.  Such a refusal was 
illegal, but Cedeno and Guerrero were able to defy the 
Contraloria thanks to the support of Aleman.  Even without 
their cooperation, the Contraloria went ahead with its 
investigation and concluded that Cedeno, Guerrero and the 
other conspirators should face criminal charges and be fined 
as much as 8 million cordobas (USD 500,000) for their 
actions.  Then-Attorney General Julio Centeno Gomez (another 
Aleman crony whose visa was revoked under INA 212f in 2005), 
did his best to block any criminal charges by declaring that 
the state was not "offended" and had not suffered a loss due 
to Cedeno's actions, but the Contraloria brought criminal 
charges on its own.  In 2000, a Managua judge ultimately 
found Cedeno guilty of fraud and misuse of public funds. 
However, Cedeno appealed the verdict as far as the Supreme 
Court in 2001, where Aleman's PLC magistrates negotiated a 
deal with their Sandinista counterparts whereby Cedeno's 
conviction was overturned. 
 
¶13.  (C) On another occasion in 1999, Cedeno and Guerrero 
used city equipment, workers, and construction materials to 
construct a private road for Aleman crony and then-Central 
Bank Director Noel Ramirez.  At the time, Ramirez (whose visa 
was revoked under INA 212f in 2005) was using stolen GON 
funds to construct a huge 800,000 USD mansion in Managua and 
wanted new and improved roads constructed around it (reftel 
E).  Even though these roads were (obviously) not in the city 
budget approved by the municipal council, Cedeno and Guerrero 
spent 10,000 USD of city funds to build them for Ramirez. 
Cedeno and Guerrero did this at a time when an estimated 70 
percent of planned municipal projects were left undone 
because of budget shortfalls.  On other occasions, (non-PLC) 
members of the Managua city council regularly accused Cedeno 
and Guerrero of renting out construction equipment belonging 
to the city government and pocketing the proceeds. 
 
¶14. (C) Cedeno and Guerrero were also involved in another 
corruption and contract solicitation scandal in 2000, shortly 
before they left the Managua city government, when portions 
of the newly completed "suburbana" highway in the capital 
were washed away in mudslides, damaging and destroying the 
homes of nearby residents in the process.  The city contract 
for the construction of the new highway had been given to the 
state-owned Rural Development Institute (IDR), which was led 
by Aleman-crony Eduardo Mena (whose visa was revoked under 
INA 212f in 2005) and served as one of the president's 
primary vehicles for the theft and laundering of GON funds 
(reftel F).  Although the city of Managua paid over 6 million 
USD for the construction of the highway, the IDR did shoddy 
work and failed to construct the drains, gutters and ditches 
necessary to protect the new highway and nearby residences 
during Nicaragua's annual six-month long rainy season.  As 
Mayor and Director of Public Works, Cedeno and Guerrero were 
ultimately responsible for inspecting the quality of the 
IDR's work, but they never brought any claims against it, 
even when the first rains it experienced produced massive 
damage and huge costs for the city. 
 
¶15.  (C) When Cedeno took office as Mayor in 1997 he 
persuaded the PLC and FSLN caucuses that dominated the city 
council to increase his salary by 150 percent, raising it to 
USD 10,000 per month, an astronomical figure for the second 
poorest country in the hemisphere, and, as the media noted, 
much more than the Mayor of Miami-Dade County made at the 
time.  At the time Cedeno raised his salary, the municipal 
government was deep in financial arrears, and was seeking 
additional funds from the central government to cover basic 
municipal services.  Cedeno arranged for the salary increase 
to take place when he was out of the country, so that he 
could claim that he had nothing to do with it, but the public 
outcry forced him and the city council (whose salaries were 
indexed to that of the mayor) to reverse the pay hikes.  At 
the time, Aleman publicly defended Cedeno, claiming that 
sky-high government salaries were the "only way to avoid 
corruption." 
 
¶16.  (C) Thus thwarted in his effort to increase his salary 
in a nominally legal manner, Cedeno turned to illegal 
methods.  He began secretly using the municipal budget to pay 
all of the electrical, water, gas, and telephone bills at his 
two Managua residences, one of which was owned by him and the 
 
 
other by his wife, Aminta Orozco.  When word of this practice 
leaked to the media in 1999, and the daily newspaper El Nuevo 
Diario published copies of Cedeno's utility bills paid by the 
municipal government on his orders, Cedeno admitted 
everything.  He tried to justify his use of taxpayer funds to 
pay his personal bills by claiming that "everyone does it" 
and complaining that his "low" monthly salary of USD 4,000 
was simply insufficient to support his and his wife's 
lifestyles and their two residences. 
 
¶17.  (C) With a compliant city council and the support of 
Aleman, no official investigation of Cedeno's use of city 
funds to pay all his private phone and utility bills ever 
took place, and Cedeno continued to use city funds to pay for 
such bills through the end of his term.  Because there was no 
formal investigation, the total amount of funds that Cedeno 
stole in this manner is unknown, but individual utility bills 
published by El Nuevo Diario in 1999 were as large as 14,000 
cordobas (approximately USD 800 today, but much more at the 
time) for individual monthly phone bills at one of Cedeno's 
two residences.  El Nuevo Diario also published copies of 
bloated municipal expense and "representation" accounts 
benefiting Cedeno and several of Aleman's closest associates, 
including Maria Haydee Osuna, Victor Guerrero, and Jose 
Marenco (all of whose visas were revoked under INA 212f in 
2005). 
 
¶18.  (C) As Mayor, Cedeno also established a shell 
corporation (owned by the municipality) used to skim 
municipal funds for use by himself, Aleman, other corrupt 
associates, and PLC electoral campaigns.  The Municipal 
Corporation of Managua Markets (COMMEMA) was nominally formed 
as a vehicle to funnel tax revenue raised from Managua 
merchants to invest in the infrastructure of the city's 
marketplaces.  However, in reality, no such investment took 
place, and Cedeno instead used COMMEMA as a slush fund for 
personal and party purposes.  Cedeno, Victor Guerrero, Maria 
Haydee Osuna and other corrupt associates of Aleman 
affiliated with the municipal government used COMMEMA to pay 
for bogus expense accounts and "representation" vouchers in 
the tens of thousands of dollars.  COMMEMA also paid salaries 
to "ghost employees" and "advisors" of the city government 
who never worked a day for the city but were rewarded with 
fake jobs for their loyalty to Aleman. 
 
¶19.  (C) Cedeno also transferred COMMEMA taxpayer funds 
directly to the accounts of the PLC, where they were used to 
fund electoral campaigns, including the unsuccessful 2000 
Managua mayoral candidacy of Aleman loyalist Wilfredo 
Navarro.  During this campaign, Cedeno also illegally ordered 
the use of municipal offices, vehicles and workers to support 
Navarro, and COMMEMA funds paid the salaries of many of 
Navarro's full-time campaign workers.  Although the total 
amount of COMMEMA funds that Cedeno stole or used for illegal 
purposes is unknown, in 1999 El Nuevo Diario published 
COMMEMA documents showing that at least 1.3 million cordobas 
(USD 80,000) "disappeared" from COMMEMA accounts in 1997-1998 
alone.  Other municipal documents published by the newspaper 
showed that millions of additional cordobas in city revenue 
were transferred to COMMEMA for similarly dubious purposes. 
Because of the protection of Aleman, no charges were ever 
brought against Cedeno in the COMMEMA case. 
 
¶20.  (C) Since Cedeno left office in 2001, numerous civil 
claims have been brought against him relating to alleged 
fraudulent purchase and sale of municipal land.  In some of 
these cases, Cedeno is accused of having sold the same piece 
of municipal property to multiple buyers, while in others he 
is accused of fraudulently "selling" municipal properties to 
shell companies owned by himself and others.  Although he has 
not held elected office since 2001, Cedeno remains a close 
friend of Arnoldo Aleman and an active supporter of Aleman 
within the PLC.  In his capacity as a PLC convention member, 
Cedeno has served as one of Aleman's enforcers of loyalty in 
the party.  Aleman uses the 750 voting members of the 
national PLC convention to provide a fig leaf of democracy in 
the party, but all the convention members, including Cedeno, 
owe their positions to Aleman and serve as nothing more than 
rubber stamps for Aleman's decisions. 
 
SERIOUS ADVERSE EFFECT ON U.S. NATIONAL INTEREST 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶21.  (C) The massive corruption of Arnoldo Aleman, Roberto 
Erasmo Cedeno Borgen and their other associates, specifically 
their theft of tens of millions of dollars from Nicaraguan 
institutions and their efforts to launder some of the money 
in U.S. banks, had serious adverse effects on those U.S. 
interests specified in the Presidential Proclamation as well 
 
 
 
as U.S. foreign policy priorities highlighted in the 
Embassy's Mission Program Plan (MPP).  The Embassy has 
encouraged Nicaragua to prosecute officials for corruption 
and has provided financial and technical support in 
corruption cases, including that of Aleman himself. 
President Bolanos has made the imprisonment of Aleman, the 
recovery of stolen assets and a wider anti-corruption 
campaign the cornerstones of his presidency.  Since his 
conviction, Aleman, who still enjoys vast political influence 
in the country, has worked incessantly through Cedeno and 
other corrupt associates in the PLC and other institutions to 
further undermine all of Nicaragua's democratic institutions, 
including the presidency, the National Assembly and the 
judiciary, all in an effort to have his conviction erased, 
regain the frozen assets they stole from the Nicaraguan 
state, and maintain political power. 
 
¶22.  (C) Stability of Democratic Institutions:  The Embassy's 
top priority is strengthening and consolidating democracy 
through the development of transparent, accountable and 
professional governmental institutions, including the 
judiciary.  Our MPP states that "... abuse of power, 
corruption and politicization of many state institutions, 
especially the judiciary, have impeded the consolidation of 
democracy and economic growth."  A judicial system subject to 
political and corrupting influences undermines democracy and 
could lead to instability.  The actions of Arnoldo Aleman, 
Cedeno and their associates have contributed directly to the 
widespread belief in Nicaragua that justice comes from 
political bosses and can be bought and sold.  This attitude 
has undermined confidence in the system.  In addition to 
working for Aleman's release from imprisonment, Aleman and 
Cedeno's actions have helped other corrupt figures, including 
Cedeno himself, to elude justice.  Additionally, a judiciary 
free of corruption is necessary for improving the ability of 
the GON to investigate and prosecute those guilty of 
international criminal activities that can have a direct 
impact on United States homeland security, such as money 
laundering, human trafficking or terrorism. 
 
¶23.  (C) Foreign Assistance Goals:  One of the top three USG 
foreign assistance goals in Nicaragua is strengthening 
democracy.  The chief goals of USAID assistance in this area 
are battling corruption and effecting judicial reform. 
Aleman and Cedeno's actions have directly damaged progress in 
both of these areas.  In December 2003, the USG froze USD 49 
million of judicial assistance in response to endemic 
judicial corruption, highlighted by what appeared to be an 
imminent fraudulent "not guilty" verdict for Aleman, due to 
backroom dealing between Sandinista (FSLN) leader Daniel 
Ortega and the corrupt ex-president.  Thanks to corrupt 
members of the PLC such as Cedeno, Aleman retains near total 
control of the party and its caucus in the National Assembly 
and uses this power to negotiate with Ortega.  Without 
co-dependent cronies such as Cedeno in the PLC and the 
Assembly, Aleman would not be able to  control the PLC caucus 
and use it to negotiate with Ortega and corrupt all the other 
institutions of the state that are under the Assembly's 
supervision, including the Controller General's Office, the 
judiciary, and the Supreme Electoral Council, among others. 
 
¶24. (C) International Activity of U.S. Businesses:  Corrupt 
Nicaraguan institutions hamper U.S. investment in Nicaragua 
and discourage U.S. exporters from establishing 
agent/distributor relationships.  U.S. investors and 
business-people are reluctant to risk their resources in 
Nicaragua, knowing they could easily be subjected to the 
vagaries of a corrupt judiciary or the whims of politicians 
should they become involved in any commercial dispute, real 
or trumped up.  By stealing over a hundred million dollars 
from the Nicaraguan state and subsequently trying to 
manipulate the presidency, judiciary, and the National 
Assembly behind the scenes in order to erase Aleman's 
conviction and keep their ill-gotten gains, Aleman, Cedeno 
and their associates have contributed directly to the erosion 
of confidence of the business community in all of Nicaragua's 
democratic institutions. 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR FINDING 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶25.  (C) Roberto Erasmo Cedeno Borgen and Aminta Orozco Reyes 
de Cedeno have been informed of the fact that they may be 
covered by Presidential Proclamation number 7750, under 
section 212 (f) of the INA. 
 
¶26.  (C) Roberto Erasmo Cedeno Borgen and Aminta Orozco Reyes 
de Cedeno have been issued numerous B1/B2 visas over the 
years, but they do not presently possess valid visas.  On 
 
 
March 29, 2006, Cedeno and Orozco applied for legal permanent 
residence status in the United States, based on an immigrant 
visa petition submitted by Orozco's sister.  These 
applications for LPR status were refused under INA P212f in 
order to allow time for post to submit an advisory opinion 
request to the Department. 
 
¶27.  (C) Post recommends that the Department make a 212f 
ineligibility finding for Roberto Erasmo Cedeno Borgen and 
Aminta Orozco Reyes de Cedeno and that no (rpt no) further 
travel be allowed to the United States. 
TRIVELLI