06MANAGUA835
NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS REGIONAL REPORTING:  MATAGALPA
Mon Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0011
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0835/01 1071838
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 171838Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5980C O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000835 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: ELECTIONS REPORTING 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV SOCI
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS REGIONAL REPORTING:  MATAGALPA 
 
 
Classified By: PAUL A. TRIVELLI.  Reasons:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  On March 30, Property Officer and LES 
Lawyer visited Matagalpa, capital of the northeastern 
Nicaraguan Department of Matagalpa, to discuss upcoming 
national elections with local business, political and civil 
society leaders and to gauge their views on the prospect of 
free and fair elections in November.  Respondents predicted 
that the pace of voter registration irregularities will 
escalate in the months to come.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2,  (SBU)  Interviewees: Diana Urbina of the Liberal 
Constitutionalist Party (PLC); Norman Le Clair of the Friends 
of Alvarado Movement (AA); Carlos Javier Mejia of the 
American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM) and Esperanza Coffee 
Group; Mercedes Fley of the Ethics and Transparency group 
(ET); Jose Gonzalez Picado of the Herty 2006 Movement 
(HERTY); and Luis Fonseca and Enrique Matamoros of the 
Liberal Nicaraguan Alliance/Conservative Party (ALN/PC). 
 
ELECTORAL COUNCILS SELECTIVE IN ISSUING CEDULAS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  According to our interlocutors, delays and 
glitches in obtaining national IDs (cedulas) required for 
voter registration plague non-Sandinista Matagalpinos trying 
to register to vote.   At the same time, stories abound of 
"expedited" "one-stop shopping" service for known or 
prospective pro-Sandinista sympathizers in Matagalpa.  While 
the legal voting age is 16, contacts claimed that underage 
and/or disaffected teenagers are being cynically manipulated 
by FSLN militants via falsified birth certificates and dreams 
of future patronage.  (Comment:  Similar changes were common 
in the Atlantic Coast prior to the March 5 elections, 
however, little hard evidence was uncovered by electoral 
missions.  End comment.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Interviewees were unified in their disrespect for 
Matagalpa representatives in the National Assembly, 
regardless of party affiliation.   They accused the deputies 
of virtually abandoning local constituents after election to 
office in order to bask in the relative luxury of the 
capital.  Meanwhile, schools, clinics and the huge potholes 
on the bumpy road to Matagalpa fall into greater disrepair, 
and children scrape dirt off roadsides to fill potholes 
instead of begging outright. 
 
PLC SUPPORT FOR QUINONEZ OR RIZO? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The local PLC party president and current National 
Assembly deputy hopeful, Diana Urbina, stated that 
presidential pre-candidates Quinonez and Rizo were the 
front-runners in the race for her party's upcoming selection, 
but that Rizo is "soft" and "susceptible to arm-twisting by 
ex-President Aleman".  Assessing coffee planter and cattle 
owner preferences, she indicated Quinonez as the department 
favorite because of his experience, loyalty to the region, 
and anti-FSLN stance during the Sandinista regime. 
(Comment:  In fact, Rizo came out well ahead of Quinonez, 
with 30 votes versus 16 in the PLC Department Convention 
process.  End comment.)  A defaced poster of President 
Bolanos, contrasted with untouched photos lauding 
ex-Presidents Anastasio Somoza, Arnoldo Aleman and other 
party regulars, was prominently featured in the PLC office. 
 
AMBASSADORIAL STATEMENTS 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) When queried about Matagalpinos' impressions of the 
U.S. Embassy and the statements of Ambassador Trivelli, Ms. 
Urbina considered the Ambassador's observations acceptable, 
but not the tone.  Specifically, she objected to the word 
"delinquent" when used to characterize ex-President Aleman, 
noting that Aleman's "El Chile" residence is practically a 
pilgrimage site.  President of the Amigos de Alvarado (AA) 
organization, Norman Le Clair, viewed the Ambassador's 
statements as sincere, on target and preferable to usual 
diplomatic platitudes.  The Montealegre and Herty camps 
expressed positive feelings toward United States and the 
Ambassador. 
 
TECHNOCRATS, BANKERS, POPULISTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Regarding Nicaraguan political actors, interviewees 
viewed President Bolanos as a respected futurist or 
technocrat with laudable intentions, but faulted his scant 
populist skills.  Liberal candidate Eduardo Montealegre was 
taken very seriously by our interlocutors, despite some 
concern regarding his financial sector ties.  Since many 
Matagalpa coffee producers suffered property foreclosures in 
the past, they are wary of the banking industry in general. 
Sandinista candidate Herty Lewites is considered an 
improvement over FSLN leader Daniel Ortega, but not a serious 
frontrunner for the presidency. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The last two mayors of the city of Matagalpa have 
been Sandinistas and the FSLN is considered well positioned 
to influence November elections.  Fearing yet another FSLN 
victory, our interlocutors warned that the Supreme Electoral 
Council (CSE) was poised to overlook fraudulent registration 
and other irregular voting shenanigans that could lead to a 
new caudillo administration unless opposition is galvanized 
more effectively.  The Vamos Con Eduardo (Montealegre 
supporters) (VCE) group is particularly apprehensive that 
skittish voters will hold their noses and vote for the PLC, 
rather than risk an Ortega victory. 
 
 
MONTEALEGRE-LEWITES:  A DREAM TEAM? 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Herty Lewites campaign manager Jose Gonzalez 
suggested a dream team consisting of Montealegre for 
president with Herty as vice president.  (Comment:  We've 
heard this match before, as well as the comment that it's an 
unrealistic and unnatural alliance, especially for rural 
voters to accept.  End comment.)  Gonzalez firmly dismissed 
the notion that Herty could be a stalking horse for Daniel 
Ortega, as alleged by Liberal contacts. 
 
COMMENT: 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  There is palpable fear among Matagalpa's voters 
that the country's fragile democracy is at risk and that 
reprisals are always possible.  Although frontrunners, 
candidates Lewites and Montealegre must convince voters that 
they have built party machines sufficient to defend their 
positions against the predatory and fraudulent tactics of the 
traditional parties.  Our Matagalpino interlocutors reason 
that if illegal issuance of voter identification cards has 
been impossible to halt until now, what irregularities will 
the Supreme Electoral Council not condemn next?  Non-FSLN 
parties have no trouble spinning nightmare scenarios of a 
political juggernaut strong-arming its way to victory in 
November and will continue to seek U.S. encouragement, if not 
our outright seal of approval, of their respective candidates. 
 
TRIVELLI