06MANAGUA1359
VERIFICATION SUCCESSFUL, BUT CSE NOTES SOME
Tue Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1359/01 1712159
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 202159Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6703
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SOCI NU
SUBJECT: VERIFICATION SUCCESSFUL, BUT CSE NOTES SOME 
IRREGULARITIES 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: With over 45 percent of eligible Nicaraguan 
voters estimated to have verified their status and location 
on the official voters list (padron), the Supreme Electoral 
Council (CSE) proclaimed the two-weekend verification process 
a success.  This assessment was supported by observers from 
the Carter Center and the Latin American Council of Electoral 
Experts (CEELA).  CSE officials noted, however, that a 
suspiciously large number of voters in Jinotega, Matagalpa, 
and Rio San Juan registered a change of address from the 
North and South Atlantic Autonomous Regions (RAAN and RAAS), 
where regional elections took place in March.  The CSE will 
now focus on encouraging eligible voters to apply for their 
voter ID card (cedula) and register before the August 6 
deadline.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Despite a slow start (only about five percent of 
voters verified the first weekend), the CSE estimates that 
ultimately an estimated 46 percent of citizens (1.5 million 
out of 3.4 million) turned out to verify their status and 
voting location in the padron on June 10, 11, 17 and 18.  The 
turnout was lower than the CSE's goal of 1.8 million, but CSE 
president Roberto Rivas nevertheless pronounced the process a 
success.  Senior CSE official Rodrigo Barreto told poloff on 
June 20 that CSE officials are very pleased with the 
verification, which registered a higher turnout than previous 
verification efforts, and the training they received from 
IFES.  Barreto commented, however, that CSE officials did not 
receive full cooperation from the Ministry of Education in 
opening several voting centers on time, which impeded the 
process of verification in some areas.  The CSE will now 
focus on encouraging eligible voters to apply for their voter 
ID card (cedula) and register before the August 6 deadline. 
After August 6, the CSE will compile the final version of the 
padron for the November 5 elections, Barreto reported. 
 
SUSPICIOUS POPULATION SHIFTS NOTED IN CERTAIN AREAS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) After the verification, Rivas alerted the press that 
10,000 people in the department of Matagalpa and 8,300 in 
Jinotega (representing over two percent of all registered 
voters in those departments) had registered a change of 
address from the RAAN and the RAAS, where regional elections 
had taken place only four months before.  Barreto privately 
informed poloff that a large number of voters also registered 
a change of residence in Rio San Juan.  He opined that this 
movement of voters could explain the unexpected success of 
the PLC in the regional elections.  (Comment: A number of our 
non-PLC contacts alleged that the PLC had temporarily 
transferred a number of supporters to the RAAN and RAAS to 
turn the outcome of the Atlantic Coast elections in the PLC's 
favor.  End Comment.) 
 
MOST POLITICIANS SATISFIED, EXCEPT LEWITES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU) PLC and FSLN officials expressed satisfaction with 
the verification on July 19.  PLC vice president Wilfredo 
Navarro commented that he had informally checked the voting 
location for his wife and children, which could indicate that 
the formal verification number does not indicate the true 
percentage of voters who checked on their status.  ALN 
Presidential candidate Eduardo Montealegre was not 
particularly concerned about the turnout and stated that 
"many people already know where they are supposed to vote." 
Local Carter Center representative David Dye reported that a 
CSE contact told him that the ALN covered 98 percent of the 
voting centers with their "fiscales" to monitor the 
verification process, with the FSLN covering 78 percent and 
the PLC only 73 percent. 
 
¶5. (U) MRS presidential candidate Herty Lewites warned that 
the creation of "virtual" voting tables (JRVs) for the 
verification process could confuse voters and contribute to 
electoral fraud by discouraging voters sympathetic to 
minority parties.  Lewites advised the CSE to locate all new 
JRVs in the same voting centers to minimize confusion. 
(Note: When any particular JRV is projected to exceed its 
maximum number of 400 registered voters, the CSE creates a 
new JRV to accommodate the overflow.  End Note.)  The 
following day, Rivas responded by implying that Lewites is 
ignorant of the electoral process and the public has nothing 
to worry about. 
 
CARTER CENTER/CEELA: VERIFICATION A QUALIFIED SUCCESS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) A team from the Carter Center observed the final 
weekend of the CSE's effort to verify the padron.  Observers 
were present in 15 of Nicaragua's 17 departments and regions. 
 The Carter Center is planning to release a statement that 
praises CSE officials for carrying out the verification in a 
professional manner.  The CSE received adequate material in 
good condition to document the verification, although some 
stations ran out of "change of address" forms (especially in 
Matagalpa).  The Carter Center statement notes that at least 
two, and usually three, fiscales were present from the 
different political parties in the different voting centers. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Carter Center declaration also remarks on the 
apparent low turnout of citizens to verify, but offers the 
following explanations: citizens verified informally for 
friends and relatives; many did not bother to verify because 
they are confident that they are properly registered; CSE 
publicity efforts in some areas were insufficient.  The 
Carter Center urges all Nicaraguans that have not yet 
verified to do so at CSE branches before the August 6 
deadline. 
 
¶8. (U) Representatives of CEELA also responded favorably to 
the verification process.  Eugenio Chicas, a magistrate of El 
Salvador's Supreme Electoral Tribunal, commented favorably on 
the Nicaraguan verification process in comparison with others 
in the region and noted that the CSE seemed better prepared 
than when it conducted the Atlantic Coast verification last 
February. CEELA president Nicanor Moscoso offered the 
following recommendations to the CSE: increase public 
outreach efforts on verification and cedulization and remind 
the public of the August 6 deadline to verify/solicit a 
cedula; publish the electoral regulations; and encourage 
political parties to seek training for their fiscales. 
 
COMMENT: KEEPING AN EYE ON THE PADRON 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (SBU) Post is supporting efforts to encourage voters to 
verify and apply for a cedula if necessary.  After August 6, 
the CSE will work to complete the final padron (to be 
published on October 5) for use on November 5.  Post will 
monitor this process to determine if new JRVs are located far 
from voters' customary voting centers. 
TRIVELLI