06MANAGUA2161
NICARAGUAN POLITICAL PARTIES PLEDGE TO SUPPORT
Fri Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0019
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2161/01 2722251
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 292251Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7736
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS MARR NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN POLITICAL PARTIES PLEDGE TO SUPPORT 
DEFENSE WHITE PAPER 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Representatives of four political parties 
contesting Nicaragua's November 5 national elections pledged 
to support (more or less) the Nicaraguan Defense White Paper 
should their party come to power.  Enthusiasm for White Paper 
policy goals varied, however, between officials of the 
Sandinista Front (FSLN), Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN), 
Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS), and the Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC).  The FSLN representative 
equivocated on the role of civilian authority over the armed 
forces, while the MRS spokesman stated that White Paper 
policies could be addressed only after the PLC-FSLN pact is 
destroyed and the rule of law instituted and respected.  The 
ALN and PLC representatives were more fully supportive of the 
White Paper, including promoting civilian control over the 
military and increased budget transparency.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On September 27, spokesmen of four political parties 
contesting the Nicaraguan national elections attended a 
conference on the responsibilities of political leaders in 
the management of Nicaraguan security policy organized by 
poloffs and the Institute for Strategic Studies and Public 
Policy (IEEPP).  The parties were represented by National 
Assembly deputy Jose Figueroa (FSLN), National Assembly 
deputy Fernando Avellan (PLC), MRS National Coordinator 
Irving Davila, and Oscar Sovalbarro (ALN).  National Assembly 
deputy for the Alternative for Change (AC) party Orlando 
Tardencilla attended the opening of the conference, but left 
before he could give his presentation.  Vice Minister of 
Government Deyanira Arguello attended the conference along 
with several senior members of the Nicaraguan National Police 
(NNP).  A mid-ranking official from the Ministry of Defense 
was present, but army officials were conspicuously absent. 
IEEPP Director Javier Melendez opened the conference, and 
regional defense and security expert Dr. Margaret Daly Hayes 
gave a presentation emphasizing the need for defense and 
security policy to be an integrated effort taking into 
account all related actors in a society to better deal with 
non-traditional internal and transnational threats such as 
terrorism, narcotrafficking, illegal migration, and organized 
crime. 
 
¶3. (C) Background: Post agencies invested considerable energy 
and funds helping the GON to develop a Defense White Paper in 
2004 and 2005 to help define defense and security policy and 
the evolving role of the Nicaraguan Army and its relationship 
with civilian authorities.  The final report, a product of 
protracted negotiations between the army, Ministry of 
Defense, and civil society groups, was released in early 
2005, shortly before the resignation of then-Minister of 
Defense Jose Adan Guerra.  Guerra was a strong promoter of 
White Paper goals, which include professionalization of the 
army, integration with, and civilian control via the Ministry 
of Defense, and increased budget transparency. 
 
¶4. (C) Background continued: Many in the Nicaraguan army, 
jealous of their autonomy, resisted the process from 
beginning to end and continue to work against any efforts 
that threaten their privileges.  The current Minister of 
Defense, Avil Ramirez, has essentially pigeonholed the White 
Paper, and contacts agree that implementation is unlikely to 
happen before a new President and National Assembly are 
inaugurated in January.  Poloffs and IEEPP organized the 
conference to keep the issue on the media's radar screen and 
urge the parties to declare a position on the White Paper. 
End Background. 
 
PLC WILL SUPPORT WHITE PAPER RECOMMENDATIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (SBU) PLC deputy and former head of the National 
Assembly's Defense Commission Fernando Avellan was the first 
to present.  Avellan declared that a PLC government would use 
the White Paper as a guideline to develop defense and 
security policy.  He acknowledged the legislature has an 
important role in terms of implementing the legal aspects of 
defense policy and providing an oversight role, but noted 
that the constant rotation of the members and leadership of 
the Assembly's Defense Commission impedes continuity.  (Note: 
In a nod to current Defense Commission president and ALN 
deputy Delia Arellano, who attended the conference, Avellan 
remarked that the current Commission has "managed the changes 
well."  End Note.) 
 
¶6. (U) Avellan claimed that the depolitization of the army 
was successful, and now the army is viewed as a responsible 
 
and independent institution.  However, the Ministry of 
Defense and Ministry of Government need "better trained" 
officials, he opined.  Avellan declined to answer directly a 
question from the audience on whether the PLC would replace 
Ministry officials in a new administration, thus creating 
significant problems with continuity and institutional 
knowledge. 
 
MRS: RULE OF LAW MUST COME FIRST 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (U) MRS representative Irving Davila, a retired lieutenant 
colonel, gave a well-organized power point presentation on 
MRS defense and security policy.  The MRS government plan 
incorporates all of the major elements of the White Paper, 
including inserting the Minister of Defense into the military 
chain of command and making the Ministry responsible for 
policy formulation, focusing the army's activities on 
humanitarian and disaster relief missions, and promoting 
regulations for increased budget transparency. 
 
¶8. (U) Davila placed an asterisk after these positive 
reforms, however, by passionately declaring that the new 
government must first abolish the control of the PLC-FSLN 
pact over state institutions, including the Supreme Court and 
Supreme Electoral Council, and instituting the rule of law. 
He blamed the pact and outside forces on non-traditional 
security threats such as terrorism and narcotrafficking. 
Davila praised the army as "the most credible institution in 
Nicaragua." 
 
ALN READY TO IMPLEMENT WHITE PAPER 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (U) ALN official and former contra commander Oscar 
Solbavarro read a statement prepared by ALN leaders for the 
conference.  Solbavarro stated that the ALN will implement 
the White Paper policy recommendations and, based on Dr. Daly 
Hayes' recommendations, invited civil society to participate 
in defense policy formulation.  Answering an audience 
question on how the parties plan to obtain resources for the 
army and the NNP, Solbavarro stated that the ALN has the 
"best relationship" with donor countries and, therefore, the 
best possibility to obtain international funds for security 
issues. 
 
FSLN: "THE DEVIL IS IN THE DETAILS" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10. (U) Representing the FSLN, Assembly deputy Jose Figueroa 
gave a power point presentation on the history of the army 
and the NNP and FSLN defense and security policy.  Figueroa 
stated that the FSLN will "promote positive relations will 
all countries" and will not provoke renewed civil war or 
institute military conscription.  He promised that the FSLN 
would support the following items if elected: a law of 
national security; an integrated system of national defense; 
better salaries/resources for the army and NNP; support for 
regional integration and balance of forces agreement; finish 
the demining of Nicaragua; and support peacekeeping 
deployments.  Briefly addressing White Paper recommendations 
in his presentation, Figueroa pointed out that the law states 
that the chief of the armed forces may report to the 
President or the Minister of Defense. 
 
¶11. (U) After Figueroa's presentation, Dr. Daly Hayes 
commented that the "devil is in the details," referring 
specifically to Figueroa's inference that the FSLN would 
support the quid pro quo in terms of civilian oversight of 
the armed forces.  Another audience member challenged 
Figueroa on where the FSLN would find the finances to 
increase police and military salaries and asked if the FSLN 
supports budget transparency.  The FSLN representative 
responded that the party would "consider the White Paper 
recommendations" when developing defense policy and commented 
that "internal audits" are conducted by the military and 
reported to the GON.  He also criticized the "politization" 
of the Defense Ministers, implying that Ministry control 
could threaten the army's "independence." 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶12. (C) All of the representatives praised the army as a 
professional, independent institution, reflecting the 
prevailing public perception.  While the army has come a long 
way since 1990, senior officers still expect direct access to 
 
the President and near absolute autonomy in terms of 
promotions and budget control.  The army also derives 
off-budget income from several private businesses.  No matter 
which party wins the elections, the army will likely continue 
to resist substantive challenges to internal control and 
privileges. 
TRIVELLI