06MANAGUA1105
NICARAGUA: DEMOCRACY PROMOTION PROGRESS REPORT
Fri May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1105/01 1391905
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 191905Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6350
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0119
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0682
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0030
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI 0033
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0441
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 0068
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0220
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 0132
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 0161
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0196
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCS E C R E T MANAGUA 001105 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/12/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL KDEM KCOR NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: DEMOCRACY PROMOTION PROGRESS REPORT 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 1079 
 
     ¶B. 05 MANAGUA 3213 
     ¶C. 05 MANAGUA 2719 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: This cable update's post's democracy 
promotion strategy submitted in October and reviewed in 
December 2005 (refs B and C).  Now that the executive will in 
all likelihood remain in place through the end of President 
Bolanos' term, we must focus on the results of Nicaragua's 
national elections.  Nicaragua faces an electoral crossroads 
in -- the five-way race may increase the chances of an FSLN 
victory, but at the same time offers the Nicaraguan people 
the tools to break from the corrupt caudillo rule of the 
past.  The USG can best help Nicaraguans exercise this option 
by ensuring free and fair elections, encouraging support for 
democratic candidates, reminding Nicaraguans of the perils of 
returning to the past, and encouraging high voter 
participation.  End Summary. 
 
Ensure Free and Fair Elections 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (C) The foundation of our strategy to ensure free and fair 
elections in November consists of technical support to the 
CSE, observation, voter education and awareness, and training 
of elections officials and monitors.  On the political side, 
we must work to ensure that the will of the Nicaraguan people 
is not thwarted by exclusion of dissident candidates by 
Nicaragua's politicized courts or judicial system. The 
following is a summary of our accomplishments to date and 
planned activities: 
 
- Technical Support to CSE: The OAS plans to provide a set of 
recommendations to the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) via an 
elections expert to improve the CSE's electoral regulations. 
According to elections team leader Gustavo Fernandez, these 
recommendations will help clarify the elections ground rules 
and allow the CSE less room for subjective maneuvering during 
the period of legal challenges to voting results.  IFES is 
offering to support the technical training to CSE staff 
(including the partisan officials that man the voting 
tables), the drafting and production of regulations manuals, 
and web site design. 
 
- Observation: The OAS will field an international 
observation mission with USG support.  (Note: Emboffs plan to 
participate in the OAS mission.  End Note.)  Through local 
NGO Ethics and Transparency (ET), NDI will help fund a local 
observation team and national quick count on election day. 
(Comment: The quick count is crucial since the CSE does not 
plan to release preliminary voting results until two weeks 
after election day -- plenty of time for the PLC and FSLN to 
meddle with the vote count.  End Comment.) The European 
Union, local NGO IPADE, and others will also field 
observation teams on election day. 
 
- Training for Elections Monitors: IRI will hold training 
seminars for the official voting observers (fiscales) of the 
non-pact parties (ALN, MRS, and AC).  IRI will not train 
fiscales from the PLC and FSLN since, given the electoral 
regulations, these parties are automatically represented at 
each voting table and will receive training through IFES. 
 
- Ensuring Democratic Choice: Nicaragua is anticipating 
historical elections in November as the political spectrum 
has seen major splits on both the Right (Eduardo Montealegre) 
and the Left (Herty Lewites) in response to the corrupt and 
anti-democratic activities of the two major parties. 
Contacts have warned us on numerous occasions that the PLC 
and FSLN may abuse their positions in the CSE or justice 
system to disqualify Lewites and/or Montealegre.  Ambassador 
has repeated on numerous occasions that the inhibition of 
either of these alternative candidates would impugn the 
credibility of the elections.  The Swedish and Finnish 
ambassadors have repeated this declaration.  Post and 
Washington must work to promote this message and encourage 
other local embassies (especially donor countries) to do the 
same. 
 
Encourage Support of Democratic Candidates 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (S/NF) The inscription of political alliances at the CSE 
on May 11 marked a watershed in negotiations to unite the 
Liberal forces.  Ultimately, Montealegre refused to join with 
a PLC controlled by Arnoldo Aleman, while former "Third Way" 
presidential candidate Jose Antonio Alvarado embraced the PLC 
in exchange for the party's vice presidential nomination. 
The alliances have until May 31 to register candidates for 
elected positions, and, as senior Montealegre advisor Edmundo 
Leal recently informed poloff, the ALN is holding open its 
first national deputy position, possibly in anticipation of a 
defection from a senior member of the PLC.  The USG should 
encourage support of democratic candidates by encouraging 
funds to flow in the right direction; promoting defections of 
salvageable individuals from the PLC camp; granting 
Montealegre high-profile meetings in the United States; 
bringing internationally recognized speakers to discuss 
successful reform campaigns; and countering direct partisan 
support to the FSLN from external forces (notably Venezuela 
and Cuba): 
 
- Directing Funds: After numerous discreet meetings with 
Emboffs and others on the subject, post has received 
information from several sources that major Nicaraguan 
financier Carlos Pellas has decided to back Montealegre and 
withdraw support from PLC candidate Jose Rizo.  (Note: Local 
media outlets recently reported that Mexican capital is 
contributing to Rizo's campaign.  End Note.)  We should 
continue to encourage Pellas and other Nicaraguan and 
international financiers to "do the right thing" by 
supporting Montealegre (or Lewites).  The PLC's most credible 
talking point on why major actors should back them instead of 
Montealegre is that only they have the "party structure" and 
recognition to defeat the FSLN.  Montealegre's advisors have 
assured us that they too can build an adequate party 
structure with sufficient funding -- an ALN-affiliated NGO 
recently submitted a $1.3 million proposal to IRI to train 
ALN candidates and poll watchers.  (Comment: Nicaraguan 
capital typically provides to support to all sides in an 
election -- including the FSLN.  This behavior is likely to 
continue.  Thus, our goal should be to sway the great 
majority of these funds to the democratic candidates.  End 
Comment.) 
 
- Promoting Defections: Several high-profile National 
Assembly deputies have left PLC and ally parties for the ALN. 
 These include Alfonso Ortega Urbina and Bladimir Pineda 
(formerly PLC), and Delia Arellano (formerly Camino 
Cristiano).  More recently, APRE president Miguel Lopez 
Baldizon joined the ALN caucus and National Assembly 
president Eduardo Gomez is expected to follow suit after he 
returns from medical treatment abroad.  In addition, much of 
the PLC's departmental leadership has defected to the ALN, 
and several PLC mayors covertly support Montealegre.  A 
senior Montealegre advisor recently credited Emboff's 
reporting trips to the departments to meet with local leaders 
and explain USG policy as "very helpful" in this regard.  In 
addition, Polcouns recently facilitated contacts between 
Montealegre and Yatama dissidents unhappy with leader 
Brooklyn Rivera's self-serving deal with FSLN leader Daniel 
Ortega.  These meetings resulted in a highly publicized 
alliance between Montealegre and the Yatama group on May 14. 
Poloffs also exploited a break in PLC-APRE alliance 
negotiations to facilitate an APRE rapprochement with the ALN 
that resulted in a last-minute surprise alliance with 
Montealegre.  Arnoldo Aleman and other PLC leaders have 
promised positions on the PLC's deputy slate to numerous 
Liberals -- reportedly far more than the PLC can accommodate. 
 After the PLC is forced to define its slate on May 31, 
Emboffs will meet with senior PLC leaders who may be 
disappointed with the results and susceptible to defection. 
 
- Comment on Primaries Proposal: In April, post developed and 
presented a proposal for multi-party primaries to all 
factions (including the PLC) that had expressed an interest 
in such a project.  Although the proposal was accepted only 
by the ALN, it forced the other parties to "show their cards" 
regarding their real interest in internal reform and 
highlighted the ALN as the only truly democratic Liberal 
force.  End Comment. 
 
- Meetings for Montealegre: The Nicaraguan political class is 
quite savvy reading the "winds of change" in Washington.  The 
tabloid press has already reported on Jose Rizo's inability 
to secure high-level meetings with USG officials.  Such 
attention would confirm Montealegre's status as a candidate 
acceptable to the USG to those Liberals sensitive to our 
preferences.  These meetings should be balanced by similar, 
parallel offers to Herty Lewites as the other democratic 
candidate. 
 
- Present Successful Dissident Leaders: A significant 
obstacle for Montealegre and Lewites is the belief among many 
Liberal and Sandinista voters that only the PLC and FSLN, 
regardless of the sins of their leaders, have the strength to 
defeat the other.  Post would like the Department's 
assistance to sponsor a series of "reformist leaders" such as 
Vaclav Havel, Ukranian President Viktor Yushchenko, Georgian 
President Mikheil Saakashvili, and Lech Walesa, to explain to 
the Nicaraguan people how their dissident movements were able 
to bring down the corrupt old guard and strengthen democracy 
in their respective countries. 
 
- Countering External Support to FSLN: In addition to 
Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez' brazen and direct 
endorsement of FSLN candidate Daniel Ortega, Venezuela and 
Cuba have been providing increased financial and material 
support to FSLN leaders (ref A).  Cuba and Venezuela have 
given programming, press footage, transmitters, and other 
equipment as well as money to Sandinista media outlets. 
Sixty Venezuelan "trainers" recently visited FSLN Pacific 
coast mayors to teach them to get out the vote (the Chavez 
way).  In addition, Venezuela has provided loans and 
fertilizer to farmers in FSLN districts, offered medical 
services, and promised to supply Sandinista mayors with 
discounted oil.  To assist in electoral fraud, Venezuela has 
provided the CSE with poor quality ink (easily wiped off to 
facilitate multiple voting) and has reportedly rigged the 
delegation of Latin America Electoral Council (CELA) 
delegates by "screening" the members for the Nicaraguan 
elections.  Post does not have the funding and programmatic 
flexibility that the Venezuelans enjoy and would appreciate 
guidance on how to counter Chavez' strategy. 
 
Remind Nicaraguans of the Perils of Returning to the Past 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (C) The official voting age in Nicaragua is 16, and given 
the base-heavy age pyramid in the country, a large number of 
potential voters do not remember the "bad old days" of 
Sandinista rule -- only the corruption and ineffectiveness of 
subsequent Liberal governments.  The USG should ensure that 
the electorate is reminded that a return to Sandinismo under 
the un-reformed leadership of Daniel Ortega -- or a party 
controlled by Arnoldo Aleman -- would be tragic for the 
country by advertising the atrocities committed by the 
Sandinista Army against Atlantic Coast indigenous groups in 
the 1980s, promoting Zoilamerica Narvaez' human rights abuse 
case against stepfather Ortega before the Inter-American 
Human Rights Council, facilitating 
corruption/money-laundering cases pending against Aleman in 
Nicaragua, Florida, Panama, and the Dominican Republic, 
encouraging the European Union and others to declare Aleman 
persona non grata, and working with the Elections Donor Group 
to issue a statement warning Nicaraguans of the consequences 
of an Ortega or Aleman-controlled government. 
 
- Sandinista Atrocities: USAID is funding a CPDH project to 
document interviews recounting Sandinista atrocities on the 
Atlantic Coast in the 1980s involving a dirty war of forced 
marches, disappearances, crop burning, and assassinations, 
primarily targeting the Miskito Indian population.  The 
project, still in development, has already generated 
considerable consternation in the Sandinista ranks (resulting 
in death threats to the organizers) and generated more 
sympathy for the ALN among the indigenous population.  Some 
Miskito contacts believe that a press conference announcing 
the preliminary results a few days before the March 5 
Atlantic Coast regional elections may have cost the FSLN 
votes (the party indeed fared significantly worse than polls 
predicted).  We should continue to support CPDH and ensure 
that the results are brought to the Nicaraguan public's 
attention before November.  An ad campaign to remind voters 
of the past and its impediments in promoting new economic 
opportunities is essential as is the timing of the campaign. 
Post seeks funds for big media buys on radio and television 
beginning in August and peaking in October. 
 
- The Narvaez Case: Daniel Ortega's stepdaughter, Zoilamerica 
Narvaez, brought a case against Ortega in 1998 for rape, 
sexual abuse, and sexual harassment but the case was 
suppressed in Nicaragua for political reasons.  Narvaez is 
interested in continuing her case before the Inter-American 
Human Rights Commission (IAHRC).  Zoilamerica submitted a 
letter to the IAHRC on April 8, confirming her interest in 
continuing her case, and noting that an amicable settlement 
with the GON had not succeeded.  Subsequently, IAHCR director 
Santiago Canton Nelson contacted her in fall 2002 and offered 
his support.  According to Zoilamerica, the GON ceased its 
negotiations with her in fall 2002 as part of its agreement 
with Ortega to support the removal of Aleman's immunity. 
Embassy is drawing on its democracy funds to CPDH to assist 
Narvaez in advancing her own case as well as strengthening 
her foundation Sobrevivientes (Survivors), which deals with 
domestic violence.  Narvaez will visit Miami in June under 
the sponsorship of Vital Voices and then wishes to travel to 
Washington to meet with OAS and State Department officials as 
well as with NGOs possibly interested in advancing her case. 
Post has sought desk assistance in arranging appointments at 
the Department and with NGOs.  By our facilitating Narvaez' 
efforts to obtain a hearing, attention will be drawn towards 
Ortega's character and gender issues in Nicaragua. 
 
- Aleman's Trials: Arnoldo Aleman is currently serving a 
20-year sentence for money laundering and fraud in Nicaragua, 
although he has been granted a "medical parole" by a friendly 
judge that allows him to move freely around Managua.  Fervent 
Arnoldistas repeat that his conviction was politically 
motivated and that Aleman is being persecuted by his enemies 
in the FSLN and Bolanos Administration.  In addition to his 
current conviction, however, Aleman and his family are the 
subjects of a civil forfeiture trial and criminal 
investigation in Florida, a criminal investigation in the 
Dominican Republic, a criminal trial in Panama (in which a 
judge found probable cause at a preliminary hearing on May 
17), and an additional criminal investigation in Nicaragua, 
where prosecutors expect an indictment in early August. 
Nicaraguan investigators will travel to the National Drug 
Intelligence Center in Pennsylvania June 4-17 to analyze 
documents and organize evidence for the case.  Nicaraguan 
investigators and prosecutors are ready and willing to assist 
the USG and other governments to pursue the other cases 
against Aleman.  The USG should take advantage of these 
resources and pursue convictions against Aleman and his 
relatives without delay.  Foreign convictions would severely 
damage the Arnoldista's claims that Aleman's local conviction 
was purely a political maneuver and hopefully weaken the PLC 
leadership's commitment to this corrupt individual. 
 
- Declaring Aleman Persona Non Grata: A series of U.S. visa 
revocations against corrupt PLC officials weakened the PLC's 
resolve and has caused a few leaders to leave the PLC or 
re-think their allegiance to Aleman.  The hard core 
Alemanistas that remain in the PLC, however, have claimed 
that further revocations will not weaken the resolve of the 
loyalists and have tied the revocations to USG support for 
Montealegre.  Action against Aleman, his family, and core 
supporters from other countries would send an unequivocal 
signal that Aleman is not an acceptable actor on the 
international stage and defray the accusation that he is 
suffering politically-motivated persecution from the USG. 
Post understands that Spain is working to have Aleman 
declared persona non grata in the Schengen Group of European 
countries.  The Panamanian court's May 15 order of 
preventative detention for Aleman, his wife Maria Fernanda, 
farther-in-law Jose Antonio Flores Lobo, and Byron Jerez may 
serve to discourage Nicaraguan voter support for the PLC and 
could encourage more politicians to rally around Montealegre. 
 The USG should support this initiative and encourage other 
countries, especially in Latin America, to take similar 
action. 
 
- Donor Group Statement: Emboffs have worked with like-minded 
countries to form an Elections Donor Group and coordinate 
funding.  The Donor Group has committed to activities such as 
observation, fiscal and party official training, cedula 
production and distribution, and voter registration.  The 
Donor Group could send a powerful message by releasing a 
joint statement explaining that Donor Group countries are 
committed to helping Nicaragua conduct free and fair 
elections and will respect the results of such an election; 
however, Group members would have to seriously reconsider 
current aid packages if a government controlled by Ortega or 
Aleman obtains power.  Local officials at the German and 
Dutch embassies have expressed tentative approval for such a 
statement. Emboffs will continue to meet with local 
counterparts, and conversations at the Foreign Ministry level 
would also be useful.  (Note: Sweden and Denmark recently cut 
off funding to the politicized and corrupt Human Rights 
Ombudsman.  End Note.)  The Donor Group is comprised of: 
Japan, Canada, Finland, Norway, Denmark, Spain, the 
Netherlands, Sweden, Germany (currently holds the EU 
presidency for Luxembourg), the European Union Delegation, 
and the U.S. 
 
Encourage High Voter Participation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (C) According to historical trends, Nicaraguan voter 
participation in national elections has been high (over 85%), 
which has been a key factor contributing to FSLN defeats. 
FSLN voters tend to be more disciplined and organized, as 
shown in regional in municipal elections where FSLN 
supporters have provided a predictable core voting base. 
Conversely, Liberal and independent voters have shown less 
inclination to vote consistently.  Disturbingly, the CSE has 
over 200,000 national ID/voting cards (cedulas) that remain 
undistributed and also faces a significant backlog of cedulas 
yet to be produced.  To ensure high turnout on election day, 
we must encourage Nicaraguans to obtain a cedula and vote, 
while facilitating the production and distribution of cedulas 
to all qualified voters: 
 
-  Get Out the Vote: IRI is sponsoring focus groups, 
conferences, and workshops on political party activities as 
well as funding a voter education campaign that encourage 
citizens to obtain a cedula, verify their status on the voter 
registry, and participate in the electoral process.  Through 
JUDENIC, IRI is planning a "Rock the Vote" campaign to target 
youth voters which make up more than sixty percent of the 
voting population.  NDI is working with ET to conduct a 
national review of the official voter lists (padron). 
Potential voters will not only recognize the importance of 
the youth vote. 
 
- Distribution of Cedulas: IFES has completed an inventory of 
the approximately 200,000 cedulas produced by the CSE but not 
recovered by their owners.  IFES plans to execute a public 
information campaign to encourage voters to retrieve their 
cedulas and also assist the CSE to transport the cedulas to 
more accessible locations using mobile units.  Emboffs are 
encouraging CSE officials to facilitate IFES activities. 
NDI, through ET and UCA, is conducting a review of the cedula 
issuance process to determine where delays are present in the 
CSE pipeline and whether or not partisan influence factors 
into the efficiency of cedula issuance.  NDI is also funding, 
through Movimiento por Nicaragua (MpN), Citizen Attention 
Centers to help Nicaraguans complete the paperwork necessary 
to obtain a cedula. 
TRIVELLI