07MANAGUA1036
LIBERAL MAYORS REJECT ALEMAN, PLEDGE TO SUPPORT
Mon Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO4313
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1036/01 1132332
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 232332Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 001036 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: LIBERAL MAYORS REJECT ALEMAN, PLEDGE TO SUPPORT 
LOCAL UNIFICATION EFFORTS 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0982 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0953 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 0905 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: A group of mayors from the Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) meeting with leaders of the 
Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) strongly rejected any role 
for convicted PLC leader Arnoldo Aleman in the Liberal 
unification process.  The mayors plan to form local 
commissions ahead of the 2008 municipal elections to bring 
together the democratic forces and jointly confront the FSLN. 
 Members of the private sector Foro Liberal also attended the 
meeting and pledged to continue supporting Liberal unity 
efforts.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador and poloffs met with Liberal mayors, ALN 
officials, and members of the Foro Liberal on April 20 to 
discuss plans for local unity efforts.  Eduardo Montealegre 
(ALN president and deputy), Jamileth Bonilla (deputy), and 
Ramiro Silva (deputy) represented the ALN.  The PLC mayors 
were Bronley Alvarez (Ciudad Dario), Boanerges Gonzalez 
(Sebaco), Carlos Roque (Matiguas), Luis Jarquin (La 
Trinidad), Elba Salinas (Santa Lucia), Nubia Marin 
(Comalapa), and Jose Rizo Falcon (a Resistencia-affiliated 
mayor from Rio Blanco). 
 
¶3. (C) The mayors detailed their plans to form local "unity 
commissions" to bring in all groups that oppose the current 
administration (including the Conservatives and MRS) and 
identify candidates for the 2008 municipal elections (ref B). 
 Salinas and Roque mentioned the need to reach out to the 
rural population and pressure the PLC Central Committee to 
permit "true Liberal renovation."  The group pledged to 
oppose constitutional reforms such as continuous presidential 
re-election and select a new box on the voting ballot that 
would not be affiliated with the PLC or ALN.  Boanerges 
Gonzalez commented that the reformist mayors should confront 
the pro-Aleman directorship of the Liberal Association of 
Patriotic Mayors (ASALPAT) and "take over the agenda" of the 
forum. 
 
¶4. (C) The group was unanimous in its rejection of Arnoldo 
Aleman -- a far cry from their pre-election vacillation. 
Luis Jarquin labeled Aleman a "blood sucker" and a "loyal 
Sandinista."  Jose Rizo Falcon related that his constituents 
were critical of his support for Eduardo Montealegre before 
the elections, but now realize that Montealegre was the 
"right choice" and reject Aleman for his support for Ortega 
and Chavez.  In general, the mayors reported that Aleman's 
recent tour of Nicaragua has not been successful, although 
they complained that the media gives the colorful caudillo 
too much coverage. 
 
¶5. (C) The mayors commented that their opposition to Aleman 
has resulted in threats, physical intimidation, and 
persecution through pact-controlled institutions such as the 
courts and Comptroller's Office.  Polcouns suggested the 
mayors seek assistance from CENIDH to file complaints before 
the Inter-American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC).  Bronley 
Alvarez reported that the PLC recently orchestrated the 
destitution of the anti-Aleman mayor of Diriomo on trumped up 
financial mismanagement charges by bribing town councilors to 
vote for his ouster.  Ambassador thanked the mayors for their 
courage and urged them not to let Aleman and his supporters 
"infect" the unity process. 
 
¶6. (C) Eduardo Montealegre, referring to a private New Link 
study (ref C), commented that a united opposition could win 
122 of 153 municipalities.  Montealegre warned that any 
appearance of deal making with Aleman would result in a 
significant loss of support from independent voters and drive 
away potential allies.  He predicted that a successful 
rapprochement at the municipal level could put pressure on 
PLC deputies in the National Assembly to openly break with 
Aleman in favor of a democratic alliance.  The group should 
also reach out to ex-PLC presidential candidate Jose Rizo, 
who has gained sympathy with grass-roots supporters because 
of abuse by the party leadership, Montealegre said. 
 
¶7. (C) The members of the Foro Liberal agreed that Aleman is 
an obstacle to unity and he has betrayed the Liberal cause. 
The purpose of his tour is to recapture ALN votes for 
himself, they believe.  Margarita Sarmiento, who provided the 
venue for the meeting, pledged that the Foro would continue 
to support the groups' efforts financially. 
 
MANAGUA 00001036  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶8. (C) Comment: The reformist mayors have come much closer to 
the ALN post-elections, although we cannot assume that all of 
them will remain committed to the cause -- Luis Jarquin 
reportedly phoned Aleman after the meeting to confirm his 
loyalty to the PLC.  Montealegre's presence, despite his 
apparent skepticism with the project (ref A), was a positive 
sign, and he and the Ambassador were able to firmly clarify 
that any deal with Aleman is unacceptable and self-defeating. 
 It is still uncertain whether this core group of reformists 
will be able to convince a critical mass of Liberal mayors 
and town councilors to break with Aleman despite the threats 
and intimidation, and whether private sector organizations 
such as the Foro Liberal will finally loosen their purse 
strings to support democratic efforts. 
TRIVELLI