08VATICAN42
WHA A/S SHANNON DISCUSSES CUBA, PARAGUAY, BOLIVIA, AND
Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Vatican
VZCZCXRO3255
PP RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHFL RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHSR RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHROV #0042/01 1581527
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 061527Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY VATICAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0943
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0977C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 VATICAN 000042 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  6/5/2033 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KIRF UN CU PA NU VT
SUBJECT: WHA A/S SHANNON DISCUSSES CUBA, PARAGUAY, BOLIVIA, AND 
D'ESCOTO WITH HOLY SEE DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER 
 
REF: AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 00500 
 
VATICAN 00000042  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Rafael  P. Foley, ADCM, Embassy Vatican. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  The Holy See wants a peaceful transition to 
democracy in Cuba and will continue to raise the issue of 
political prisoners with Havana, but believes that change will 
be slow.  For the Holy See, social justice and addressing 
inequality are key to the success of democracy in the 
hemisphere.  The Holy See supports the positive role that the 
Church can play in addressing social and political tensions, 
such as in Bolivia, but notes that having clerics assume 
political positions -- such as in Paraguay and Nicaragua -- is 
against canon law and Church teachings.  Nevertheless, the Holy 
See will try to avoid controversies regarding President Lugo's 
election, and over Father d'Escoto's nomination to preside over 
the UN General Assembly. 
 
¶2.  (C) WHA Assistant Secretary Tom Shannon met with Holy See 
deputy foreign minister, Monsignor Pietro Parolin, on May 4. 
A/S Shannon was in Rome to participate in an Embassy Vatican 
conference on Catholic social thinking and Latin American 
influences in the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (septel). 
 
Cuba 
 
---- 
 
¶3.  (C) Parolin said that the Holy See continues to monitor the 
situation in Cuba.  While some say that Raul Castro will only 
introduce cosmetic changes, the Holy See is "a bit more 
optimistic" that there may be more substantial changes, even if 
at a very slow pace.  Parolin agreed that there seems to be no 
desire on the part of the regime for structural changes, and 
that for this reason some reforms may be aimed at protecting 
rather than transforming the system.  Cuban government officials 
are not willing to speak about a transition.  At the same time, 
he added, many Cubans are more preoccupied with access to basic 
necessities than about immediate political change. 
 
¶4.  (C) Parolin reaffirmed that the Holy See wishes Cubans to 
enjoy peace and democracy.  A political change in Cuba must come 
from Cuba itself, not the outside, and in this regard he agreed 
that the regime should engage in dialogue with dissidents. 
While the Holy See does not align itself with any particular 
political group, it believes that peaceful initiatives for 
change -- such as the Varela project -- are positive.  Parolin 
confirmed that Cardinal Bertone had raised the issue of 
political prisoners with the Cuban government during his 
February 20-26 visit to the island.  A/S Shannon underscored the 
importance of the Holy See urging the release of the political 
prisoners at every opportunity. 
 
Bolivia 
 
------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Parolin welcomes what he sees as a change of attitude of 
President Evo Morales with respect to the Catholic Church in 
Bolivia, and how Church officials there are playing a positive 
role in addressing social and political tensions.  Morales had 
initially pushed aside relations with the Church, and engaged in 
a very confrontational path to implement his economic reforms. 
Parolin added that, while the goal of addressing the needs of 
indigenous populations and correcting deep socioeconomic 
inequalities is a legitimate and commendable aspiration, 
Morales' means had been ineffective, something he may now 
realize. 
 
¶6.  (C) Parolin was pleased that La Paz had named a new 
Ambassador to the Holy See who is both close to Morales and "a 
good Catholic" who was educated in Catholic institutions. 
Parolin said that President Morales had requested a meeting with 
the Pope, adding that such a meeting may not be imminent because 
the Pope already has many such requests from other heads of 
State. 
 
 
 
The social role of the Church 
 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Parolin welcomed and strongly agreed with A/S Shannon's 
comments on social justice as crucial to democracy in the 
region.  Parolin lamented that a continent with such a great 
number of Christians, mostly Catholics, is also the one where 
inequality between the rich and the poor is greatest.  The 
Church, he added, has a role to play in this regard, but at the 
social and moral level: it is up to lay Catholics, not the 
clergy, to take the commitment to social justice to the 
political arena. 
 
 
VATICAN 00000042  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Parolin lamented that Bishop Lugo had decided to 
contravene canon law and Church teachings by running for office 
in Paraguay.  The election of Lugo represents a challenge for 
the Holy See, which is sympathetic to his discourse on human 
dignity -- and grateful for his conciliatory statements of love 
for the Church -- but disappointed by his decision and concerned 
that others may emulate him. 
 
¶9.  (C) Parolin said that the Holy See does not wish to create a 
controversy over Lugo's election.  He speculated that the 
appropriate Holy See dicastery (the Congregation for Bishops) 
might agree to Lugo's request for a more permanent dispensation 
from his clerical status, a request that had been previously 
denied. (Note: Bishop Lugo is currently suspended "a divinis", a 
serious sanction that forbids him from carrying on his episcopal 
responsibilities and which is generally a punishment for clergy 
who have acted in a way inconsistent with their religious 
vocation.  End note.) 
 
¶10.  (C) Parolin asked A/S Shannon for our views on Nicaragua's 
Father D'Escoto becoming President of the UN General Assembly 
(reftel), and confided that "we, too (are horrified)" by it.  He 
added that the Holy See would keep a low profile on the matter, 
and thought that the USG approach to the issue was wise (note: 
D'Escoto is suspended "a divinis" and thus forbidden from 
exercising regular priestly duties, but he is still a priest. 
End note.) 
 
Comment 
 
------- 
 
¶11.  (C) Parolin was genuinely pleased with A/S Shannon's 
exposition of the linkage between democracy and social justice. 
A/S Shannon's message was equally well received, later in the 
day, by Latin American Ambassadors and the 120-plus audience at 
the Embassy-sponsored conference on human rights (septel). 
 
¶12.  (C) For some Holy See officials and Catholic NGO and lay 
movements in Rome and beyond, USG interests for the region are 
self-serving (in areas such as drug reduction or security), 
driven by domestic lobbyists (in the case of Cuba), or 
insensitive to the plight of the most vulnerable (in urging 
structural reforms or rapid trade liberalization).  A/S 
Shannon's message that we share a concern for equality and 
social justice in Latin America, and welcome the participation 
of broad segments of historically underprivileged sectors of 
Latin American societies in their respective countries' 
political systems, challenges this bias and helps to refocus the 
attention and responsibility for Latin America's future on their 
political leaders. 
GLENDON