09MANAGUA1137
OPPOSITION UNITY TALKS CONTINUE - ARNOLDO ALEMAN REMAINS KEY
Fri Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO3874
OO RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS
RUEHTM
DE RUEHMU #1137/01 3451614
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O R 111614Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0260
INFO WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 001137 
 
SIPDIS 
AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN PASS TO AMEMBASSY GRENADA 
AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PASS TO AMCONSUL QUEBEC 
AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PASS TO AMCONSUL RECIFE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/12/10 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL KDEM NU
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION UNITY TALKS CONTINUE - ARNOLDO ALEMAN REMAINS KEY 
 
REF: A) STATE 124850; B) MANAGUA 1103 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert Callahan, Ambassador; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  In a December 3 meeting, a group of prominent 
Nicaraguan business and political leaders reported to the 
Ambassador on their efforts to promote opposition unity.  The 
group, several of whom had traveled to Washington the week before 
for a talk at the Inter American Dialogue and for meetings with the 
Department, believe the opportunity for Liberal, and broader 
opposition, unity is greater than ever before.  However, unity 
continues to hinge on the participation of ex-President Arnoldo 
Aleman and his Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC).  The group urged 
the USG to reconsider its relationship with Aleman in order to 
improve the chances for unity and to reduce the risk that Aleman 
will form another "pacto" with Ortega.  Ambassador responded that 
the USG is prepared to work with all those interested in preserving 
democracy in Nicaragua, including Aleman, but would need to see 
credible and concrete evidence of action on the part of Aleman and 
the PLC before a reciprocal response by the USG could be expected. 
End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2. (C) On December 3, Ambassador met with Antonio Lacayo, former 
Minister of the Presidency under Violetta Chamorro, Roger Arteaga, 
businessman and President of the American Chamber of Commerce 
(AMCHAM), Cesar Zamora, past President of AMCHAM, Arturo Cruz, 
former Nicaraguan Ambassador to the U.S., Noel Vidaurre, 
Conservative Party leader and former Presidential Candidate, and 
Eduardo Montealegre, Liberal opposition leader and 2006 
Presidential candidate, to discuss ongoing opposition unity 
efforts.  The group recently returned from a November 24 
presentation on Nicaragua at the Inter-American Dialogue and from 
meetings with senior officials at the Department (ref a).  The 
group has been working for the last several months to bring 
opposition groups, civil society, and the business community 
together to confront President Daniel Ortega, preserve democratic 
space, and form a united bloc to challenge Ortega and/or the 
Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) in the 2011 national 
elections. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Lacayo believes the chances for opposition unity are better 
than ever, following the successful November 21 opposition march 
and other recent setbacks for Ortega domestically and 
internationally (ref b).  The march showed that the opposition 
political parties and civil society can work together successfully, 
turning out participation far greater than had been expected in 
spite of all the difficulties and harassment by the Ortega 
government.  Fear, he said, had been broken.  Lacayo called the 
previous two weeks the "worst of Ortega's presidency," noting the 
strong turnout by the opposition, the successful efforts of 
Nicaraguan National Police Chief Aminta Granera to preserve public 
order and facilitate the march (despite explicit pressure from 
Ortega not to do so), and the selection of Julio Cesar Aviles (whom 
Ortega opposed) to be the next Chief of the Nicaraguan Armed 
Forces.  These three events, according to Lacayo, were clear losses 
for Ortega and showed what the opposition and key institutions can 
achieve if they remain firm. 
 
 
 
WHERE IS ALEMAN AND WHAT DOES HE WANT? 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) Montealegre lamented the decision by the PLC not to oppose 
the 2010 budget and fiscal reform package submitted by the FSLN, in 
which the PLC largely abstained from voting and some PLC Deputies 
cast deciding votes to facilitate its rapid passage as well as the 
passage of key amendments (septel).  According to Montealegre, 
these votes show that Aleman has not yet firmly committed to being 
in the opposition.  "He wants to be in the opposition, but is not 
yet prepared to pay the price of separating from Ortega," 
Montealegre commented in reference to the "pacto" power-sharing 
agreement between Aleman and Ortega. 
 
MANAGUA 00001137  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶5. (C) Lacayo and the group believe that the opposition cannot win 
without Aleman and the PLC and that the PLC finally recognizes it 
cannot win without the rest of the opposition.  The PLC's votes in 
the National Assembly are necessary for the opposition to be able 
to propose and vote on new members for key government institutions, 
including the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE), Supreme Court of 
Justice (CSJ), the Comptroller's Office, and other positions.  Only 
with a united block of Deputies that includes the PLC can the 
opposition force the FSLN's hand and take control of these 
institutions.  Montealegre also acknowledged that of all the 
opposition parties involved in the unity effort, only the PLC is 
viable to compete in the 2011 elections .  (Note: Montealegre's 
Vamos con Eduardo/Independent Liberal Party (PLI) remains hobbled 
by internal problems and legal challenges and both the Sandinista 
Renovation Movement (MRS) and Conservative Party (PC) remain 
banned.) In the unity discussions, Aleman has been using the PLC's 
strong legal position to press Montealegre and other leaders to 
commit early in 2010 to a "primary" system to select the 
presidential candidate for 2011. 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Montealegre noted that the Liberals continue to make 
progress on uniting their collective forces through a dialogue 
mediated by Esteli Bishop Abelardo Mata.  In the group's meeting on 
December 2, the PLC, Montealegre's Liberals (Vamos con Eduardo and 
the Independent Liberal Party), and the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance 
(ALN), which holds five Deputy positions in the National Assembly, 
agreed to block elections to the aforementioned government 
institutions through March 14, to allow more time to achieve 
Liberal unity.  According to Montealegre, this was significant as 
Aleman had been previously unwilling to commit to blocking votes on 
all of these positions and had been pressing for an agreement 
before the end of 2009 to hold primaries. 
 
 
 
¶7. (C) Cruz and Vidaurre acknowledge that Aleman believes he can be 
the opposition candidate for 2011, though they expressed doubts 
that the opposition could hold together under his candidacy or that 
he could win a general election.  According to Cruz, Aleman's 
popularity among the Liberal base has risen over the course of 2009 
but not enough to overcome likely massive abstention among the 
general electorate in a head to head race against Ortega.  The key, 
therefore, is to continue to draw Aleman into a closer and stronger 
relationship with the rest of the opposition so that he cannot 
break away once it becomes clear he cannot be the candidate in 
¶2011. 
 
 
 
RENEWING A USG-ALEMAN RELATIONSHIP? 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
¶8. (C) The group argued that greater incentives are needed to draw 
Aleman further into the opposition camp and make it politically 
impossible for him to renew his "pacto" with Ortega.   The group 
has supported the efforts negotiated by Mata, as well as broader 
unity efforts that bring together the business community, civil 
society and other smaller political parties.  They remained 
concerned, however, that Aleman could break from the unity efforts 
if he does not believe his long-term interests will be protected or 
advanced in the unity coalition.  When pressed, Lacayo and Cruz 
believe that Aleman is primarily interested in retaining control 
over his political party, protecting himself from further criminal 
prosecution, and securing long-term protection and stability for 
his family.  In a subsequent conversation, PLC Deputy and Aleman 
confidante Oscar Moncada confirmed to us that these are Aleman's 
primary personal objectives.  In light of this concern, Lacayo 
urged the USG to reconsider its relationship with Aleman and his 
family.  In particular, they urged that visas be restored to his 
family members and that the USG (the Embassy) enter a direct 
relationship with Aleman.  Lacayo believes a meeting with Aleman 
 
MANAGUA 00001137  003 OF 003 
 
 
would help secure the PLC's place in the opposition coalition and 
provide strong disincentives for Aleman to again negotiate directly 
with Ortega. 
 
 
 
¶9. (C) Ambassador noted that the PLC, and Aleman in particular, 
have failed to respect their public and private commitments making 
it difficult to believe that they will honor these current 
commitments either.  In December 2008 and January 2009, despite 
multiple pledges to defend the rightful winners of the November 
2008 municipal elections and to form a democratic-leaning National 
Assembly, the PLC switched sides and joined with the FSLN to divide 
up control and to exclude Montealegre and other non-PLC opposition 
members.   The December 4 vote on the budget and fiscal reform 
package was just one more incident in the long history of Aleman 
and PLC pledging to support democracy and the opposition, while 
forming their own agreement with the FSLN on the side, that made it 
difficult to take Aleman's recent pledges seriously. 
 
 
 
¶10. (C) Nonetheless, the Ambassador noted, the USG remained 
interested in meeting with and working with all groups that are 
interested in preserving democracy in Nicaragua.   If Aleman and 
the PLC were committed to unity and took verifiable and irrevocable 
steps to support democracy, including changes in the CSE that would 
lead to more democratic elections in 2011, we could be prepared to 
consider changes in the relationship with Aleman and other senior 
leadership within the PLC, including a meeting with Aleman at a 
future date.  The burden, however, would be on the PLC to 
demonstrate its commitment.  Commitment would be measured in deeds, 
not words ("obras y no palabras," in Spanish, was a key campaign 
slogan and governing theme of Aleman's administration). 
 
 
 
COMMENT 
 
------------- 
 
 
 
¶11. (C)  The opposition is correct that they cannot win in 2011, or 
make the necessary changes to the election law and other 
institutions like the CSE that are needed to be able to compete in 
fair elections, without Aleman and the PLC.  At the same time, the 
polls remain clear that Aleman is one of the most despised public 
figures in the country and his candidacy at the top of a "unity" 
ticket would likely divide the opposition further, increase 
political apathy and voter abstention, and weaken Nicaragua's 
increasingly fragile democracy.  In fact, in a recent lunch with 
the MRS leadership, they told us that never, under any 
circumstance, could they support Aleman as the opposition leader. 
We have maintained our position that the terms for opposition unity 
are something for Nicaraguans, not the USG, to decide, and all 
parties, from Eduardo Montealegre, to the MRS, to the PLC have 
welcomed this position and believe it has contributed to the 
ongoing efforts to foster unity.   To that end, the request to 
consider changing our relationship with Aleman and the PLC bears 
serious consideration and may prove useful to coalition-building 
efforts.  At the same time, Aleman and senior PLC leaders have 
previously shown their unwillingness or inability to commit to 
breaking their current relationship with Ortega and the FSLN, so 
caution is in order.   We will provide septel a proposed series of 
benchmarks on which to monitor PLC commitment towards fostering 
opposition unity and preserving democracy that could be matched 
with steps on the USG side to change our relations with the PLC, 
including Aleman personally. 
CALLAHAN