07USUNNEWYORK1141
LEBANON: BRAMMERTZ PREDICTABLY TIGHT-LIPPED IN
Mon Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7932
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHBZ RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #1141/01 3441405
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101405Z DEC 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3291
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER UNSC SY LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: BRAMMERTZ PREDICTABLY TIGHT-LIPPED IN 
UNSC MEETING 
 
REF: USUN 1116 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  During a December 5 open briefing to the 
UNSC and closed consultations with member states that 
followed, departing UN International Independent 
Investigation Commission (UNIIIC) head Serge Brammertz hewed 
closely to his written report to the Council and declined to 
provide more information about the state of his 
investigation.  Amb Khalilzad praised Brammertz and the 
progress the Commission had achieved thus far.  He urged 
UNIIIC to complete its investigation as soon as possible and 
the UN Secretariat to set up the Special Tribunal for Lebanon 
quickly.  Turning to the Lebanese presidential elections, Amb 
Khalilzad also called for free and fair elections to be held 
"without conditions, without delay, and without foreign 
interference."  European delegations generally supported the 
call for the rapid establishment of the Tribunal.  Russia 
argued that UNIIIC should continue its work until its 
investigation is over and that the Commission and Tribunal 
should not exist simultaneously.  Other delegations praised 
positive Syrian cooperation with UNIIIC.  After the 
consultations, the Council President read out an oral press 
statement on UNIIIC and the tribunal (below).  End Summary. 
 
Brammertz Declines to Provide More Detail 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) During his public briefing to the UNSC, Brammertz 
revealed few details about the state of his investigation, 
and largely repeated the technical points in his written 
report to the Council.  Asked whether he could provide more 
information in closed consultations, Brammertz declined to do 
so, describing a "duty of confidentiality" towards both 
potential suspects and witnesses.  He added that if the 
Commission were to disclose names of suspects, the witnesses 
who identified them or the suspects themselves might 
disappear.  Brammertz identified the major challenge in 
making the transition between UNIIIC and the tribunal as 
ensuring the retention of staff.  He reported that UNIIIC has 
begun working with the UN Secretariat on ways to clarify 
future job prospects to entice Commission staff to remain 
with the organization in the run-up to the operationalization 
of the tribunal.  In response to questions about whether 
UNIIIC has been distracted from the Hariri probe by its work 
on the other 18 cases, Brammertz repeated his view that the 
other investigations have helped to shed light on the Hariri 
assassination itself. 
 
U.S. Pushes for Tribunal and Elections Now 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Amb Khalilzad commended Brammertz for his leadership 
of UNIIIC, congratulated Bellemare on his appointment, and 
welcomed the progress the Commission has achieved in its 
investigation thus far.  He urged the Commission to complete 
its work as soon as possible and encouraged the UN 
Secretariat to ensure the Tribunal becomes operational 
 
SIPDIS 
quickly.  Recalling the initial U.S. contribution of USD 5 
million to fund the Tribunal, Amb Khalilzad called on other 
countries to do their part as well.  Turning to the Lebanese 
presidential elections, he deplored the fact that Lebanon's 
parliament had not been allowed to meet in conformity with 
the country's constitution.  Amb Khalilzad called for 
elections to take place "without conditions, without delay, 
and without foreign interference."  Decyring the fact that 
several Lebanese MPs and the Prime Minister himself had been 
forced to seek refuge in their offices and hotels for fear of 
assassination, he underscored the need for the rapid 
establishment of the Tribunal as a means to end impunity in 
Lebanon and uphold Lebanese democracy. 
 
Others Commend Syria and Call for Tribunal Setup 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4. (SBU) European delegations joined Amb Khalilzad in 
pressing for the rapid establishment of the Tribunal.  The UK 
and France noted that while the Council could not determine 
the future of the Commission yet, they hoped the SYG would be 
able to declare the tribunal operational soon.  Russia argued 
UNIIIC should continue its work until its investigation is 
over, and transfer its work to the tribunal only when 
appropriate, but underscored that UNIIIC and the tribunal 
should not exist in parallel.  South Africa asked whether the 
Council needed so many reports from UNIIIC, whether it had 
been distracted by its work on the other 18 cases, and warned 
against politicization of its investigation.  Several 
delegations, including Russia, Slovakia, Indonesia, South 
Africa, and Italy welcomed positive Syrian cooperation with 
the Tribunal.  Italy, praising Syria's participation in the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001141  002 OF 002 
 
 
Annapolis conference, expressed hope that the SARG's 
cooperation with the tribunal was another example of its 
willingness to play a constructive role in the region. 
 
Council Adopts Oral Press Statement 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) After the consultations, the Council President (Italy) 
read out the following oral press statement on behalf of 
Council members: 
 
The members of the Security Council received today the last 
briefing from Mr. Serge Brammertz in his capacity of 
Commissioner of the United Nations International Independent 
Investigation Commission into the assassination of former 
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri. 
 
They commended Mr. Serge Brammertz for his outstanding work 
as the head of the Commission and thanked him for his 
leadership in advancing the investigation and for his 
commitment to assisting the Lebanese Government and people in 
bringing an end to impunity in their country. 
 
The members of the Security Council welcomed the 
Secretary-General's decision to appoint Mr. Daniel Bellemare 
 
SIPDIS 
as the next Commissioner as well as the Prosecutor of the 
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, while taking note that he will 
commence his official duties as Prosecutor at a later date. 
 
They reiterated their support for the work of the Commission, 
in particular to prepare the transition to the Office of the 
Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. 
 
The members of the Security Council recalled their support 
for the Secretary-General's efforts for the rapid 
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, according 
to resolution 1757 (2007). 
 
They reiterated their support for the Secretary-General's 
call on Member States to contribute financing, in accordance 
with the provisions of resolution 1757 (2007), to the 
establishment and activities of the Special Tribunal. 
Khalilzad