08USUNNEWYORK623
SRSG EIDE AND U/SYG HOLMES BRIEF SC ON AFGHANISTAN
Mon Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0623/01 1962114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH(CCY ADXB54D81 TOQ6694 - 648)
O 142114Z JUL 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4592
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0225UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000623 
 
C O R R E C T E D  COPY (PARAS RENUMBERED NO MISSING PARA #4) 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC AF
SUBJECT: SRSG EIDE AND U/SYG HOLMES BRIEF SC ON AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  On July 9, the Security Council met to 
discuss Afghanistan, following the Secretary-General's 
special report on the outcome of the June 2008 Paris 
Conference.  Special Representative of the Secretary-General 
for Afghanistan Kai Eide and UN Under-Secretary-General for 
Humanitarian Affairs John Holmes briefed on the situation in 
Afghanistan.  Afghanistan Foreign Minister Spanta, Pakistan 
Foreign Minister Qureshi and other delegations (including 
India, Canada and Iran) also addressed the Council.  In his 
brief to the SC, SRSG Eide confirmed that UNSCR 1806 was 
sufficiently robust, and did not need further amendment. 
However, he called for more qualified personnel and financial 
resources to meet the UNAMA mandate.  Eide said he was very 
pleased at the unanimous agreement of the SC on the success 
of the Paris Conference and the way forward with the 
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and the UNAMA 
mandate.  He said the support for UNAMA was "more than 
encouraging," and noted that he senses a different attitude, 
one of a "readiness to be coordinated."  U/SYG Holmes, who 
recently visited Afghanistan for four days, stressed four 
"serious and growing" humanitarian issues:  food insecurity, 
Afghanistan's limited capacity to absorb millions of Afghan 
returnees from neighboring countries, an increase in civilian 
casualties, and Afghanistan's vulnerability to natural 
disasters.  He said that PRT's engaged in humanitarian 
assistance increase the risks to civilian humanitarian 
actors, and called for the PRT's to provide relief only as a 
"last resort." 
 
¶2. (SBU) Afghan FM Spanta stressed that the insurgency is 
sustained by a complex set of networks that cannot be 
defeated by military operations inside Afghanistan alone.  He 
said that international terrorist networks constitute a 
common threat to Afghanistan and Pakistan and can only be 
defeated by a "coherent, integrated, regional, and global 
approach."  He expressed his full support for and trust in 
UNAMA and SRSG Eide, and thanked the international community 
for financial, technical, and humanitarian assistance. 
Pakistan FM Qureshi expressed support for UNAMA but stressed 
that the mandate is "specific and limited to Afghanistan," 
and noted that any relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan 
would be handled bilaterally.   Qureshi stated that Pakistan 
has taken several measures to prevent cross-border 
infiltration by terrorists and insurgents, but that the 
security environment in the frontier regions deteriorated 
sharply in 2007 when Al-Qaeda and some Taliban-linked groups 
turned on Pakistan and its security forces.  He expressed 
Pakistan's support for the ANDS and emphasized Pakistan's 
$300 million pledge for reconstruction and $20 million pledge 
for the resettlement of Afghan refugees.  While Council 
members were unanimous in their praise and support for the 
UN's effort in Afghanistan, China and Russia both expressed 
concern that ISAF operations have caused an increase in 
civilian deaths.  Russia specifically mentioned civilian 
deaths caused by "faulty air strikes."  End Summary 
 
Remarks by SRSG Eide 
 
¶3. (SBU) Eide discussed the increase in insurgent activities 
and condemned the recent attack on the Indian Embassy in 
Kabul.  In regards to the protection of civilians, Eide 
stated that he is in regular dialogue with the Commander of 
ISAF to develop ways to reduce civilian casualties, but 
underscored that insurgents continue to display total 
disregard for civilian lives.  On a positive note, Eide 
reported that the Independent Electoral Commission decided to 
proceed with the voter registration process.  He highlighted 
two critical components of the Afghanistan National 
Development Strategy (ANDS) - a massive institution-building 
effort and the expansion of agricultural production and 
energy projects.  He noted that UNAMA had underestimated the 
humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan, particularly the 
emerging food security crisis.  In his concluding remarks at 
the end of the session, SRSG Eide said he was pleased at the 
near unanimous agreement of the SC on the success of the 
Paris Conference and the way forward with the ANDS and the 
UNAMA mandate.  He said the support for UNAMA was "more than 
encouraging," and he sensed a different attitude, one of a 
"readiness to be coordinated."  He expressed his commitment 
to carrying out the mandate under Afghan leadership and at 
the service of the Afghan people. 
 
Remarks by U/SYG Holmes 
 
¶4. (SBU) U/SYG Holmes commented on his four-day trip to Kabul 
and Nangarhar and Kunar provinces in East Afghanistan.  He 
described the humanitarian situation as "serious and 
growing," and said that the humanitarian community is finding 
it progressively harder to respond to humanitarian needs 
because of insecurity and lack of access.  He cited 137 
serious attacks on humanitarian organizations so far in 2008. 
Food insecurity fueled primarily by drought and the rise in 
global food prices (particularly the 58% increase in the 
price of wheat in 2007) is hurting Afghans badly.  Holmes 
stated that 4.8 million Afghans in neighboring countries have 
returned home since 2002 (1/6 of the population), with over 
140,000 returning home so far in 2008.  According to Holmes, 
another 2.3 million Afghan refugees are in Pakistan and 
950,000 are in Iran.  The country's capacity to absorb these 
returnees is very limited.  Holmes also called attention to 
the estimated 150,000 internally displaced Afghans.  In 
regards to civilian casualties, U/SYG Holmes said that 698 
civilian deaths have been reported by UNAMA so far in 2008, 
compared to 430 in the same period last year.  Of those 698 
deaths, 422 were attributed to anti-government elements, 255 
were attributed to national and international military 
forces, and 21 were unattributed.  Of note, the number of 
accidental deaths caused by international and national 
military forces decreased from 2007 to 2008.  Children are 
frequently being recruited into anti-government fighting 
forces and have been victim to 228 school attacks in 2007 and 
another 83 school attacks in 2008.  U/SYG Holmes cited 
Afghanistan's propensity for natural disasters (floods, 
earthquakes, droughts), as a contributing factor to the 
country's significant humanitarian needs. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Holmes also expressed great concern about "blurred 
lines between military and humanitarian activities," 
specifically citing Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) as 
an example in which military humanitarian assistance 
increases the risks faced by civilian humanitarian actors. 
He said PRTs should only provide relief as a last resort in 
cases where the security situation prevents civilian 
humanitarian agencies from doing so.  Donors should channel 
money through mandated UN agencies and NGOs, and not through 
PRTs, Holmes said. 
 
Remarks by Afghanistan FM Spanta 
 
¶6. (SBU) FM Spanta noted the recent spike in terrorist 
attacks, the assassination attempt on President Karzai, the 
Kandahar jail-break, and the drastic increase in the loss of 
life in international military forces.  He cited the "de 
facto truce in the tribal areas beyond the border," as a 
major factor contributing to the deterioration of the 
security situation in Afghanistan.  Spanta stressed that the 
insurgency is sustained by a complex set of networks that 
cannot be defeated by military operations inside Afghanistan 
alone.  International terrorist networks constitute a common 
threat to Afghanistan and Pakistan and can only be defeated 
by a "coherent, integrated, regional, and global approach." 
Spanta welcomed the results of the Pakistani elections and 
noted that Afghanistan supports the democratic process in 
Pakistan and the expansion of friendly relations with 
Pakistan's civilian government.  He acknowledged that 
narcotics and corruption undermine GOA's goals and create 
conditions of instability.  The Afghanistan Cabinet agreed 
last week on the mandates and responsibilities of an 
anti-corruption monitoring commission.  Spanta stated that 
Afghanistan would establish a special police force, special 
courts, and new attorney offices specifically designed to 
fight corruption.  In regards to counter-narcotics, Spanta 
asserted that poppy production has decreased in 23 out of 34 
provinces while the number of poppy-free provinces has 
increased to 16.  FM Spanta called the Paris Conference a 
"landmark success," and thanked the international community 
for the $21 billion pledge for the implementation of the 
ANDS.  He expressed his full support for and trust in UNAMA 
and SRSG Eide, and thanked the international community for 
financial, technical, and humanitarian assistance. 
 
Remarks by Pakistan FM Qureshi 
 
¶7. (SBU) Pakistan FM Qureshi expressed support for UNAMA but 
stressed that the mandate is "specific and limited to 
Afghanistan," and noted that relations between Afghanistan 
and Pakistan would be handled bilaterally.  Qureshi stated 
that peace and stability in Afghanistan are in Pakistan's 
vital interest since they enable Pakistan and Afghanistan to 
serve as a trade corridor between South Asia, Central Asia, 
China, and the Gulf.  He emphasized that apart from the 
Afghan people, Pakistan has suffered the most from decades of 
conflict in Afghanistan - specifically by hosting over 3 
million refugees, suffering from instability brought on by 
Afghan narcotics, and having to deal with instability in the 
frontier regions which has become more acute since 2001.  FM 
Qureshi stressed that Pakistan has lost more soldiers than 
any other country in the fight against terrorism and 
extremism.  Qureshi stated that Pakistan has taken several 
measure to prevent cross-border infiltration by terrorists 
and insurgents, but that the security environment in the 
frontier regions deteriorated sharply in 2007 when Al-Qaeda 
and some Taliban-linked groups turned on Pakistan and its 
security forces. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Qureshi expressed Pakistan's commitment to 
cooperation with Afghanistan and Coalition Forces to 
stabilize Afghanistan, but reiterated that Pakistan will not 
allow foreign troops to operate within its borders.  He asked 
Afghanistan to take the following measures to enhance 
operational cooperation: expansion of military deployments 
and checkposts on the Afghan side of the border, real-time 
intelligence sharing, caution in the use of artillery and 
aerial attacks, supply of counter-insurgence equipment, more 
effective monitoring of the 40,000 daily legal crossings 
through the use of biometrics, and relocation of Afghan 
refugee camps close to the border from Pakistan to 
Afghanistan.  Qureshi expressed Pakistan's support for the 
ANDS and emphasized Pakistan's $300 million pledge for 
reconstruction and $20 million pledge for the resettlement of 
Afghan refugees. 
 
Statements by China, Russia, Iran, and Libya 
 
¶9. (SBU) China and Russia commended the Paris Conference and 
expressed their support for UNAMA and SRSG Eide, but 
expressed concern that ISAF operations have contributed to an 
increase in civilian deaths.  Russia suggested that this 
increase is often caused by "faulty air-strikes."  China also 
called for the international community to provide more aid to 
Afghan Security Forces to enable them to operate more 
independently.  Iran, one of nine non-Council members who 
requested to participate, expressed support for UNAMA and 
SRSG Eide, but called for more independence of Afghan 
security forces and greater ownership of Afghans over the 
security of their country.  Iran also addressed narcotics 
trafficking, asserting that Iran fights against drug 
trafficking "with utmost seriousness and almost 
single-handedly."  Libya expressed support for the Paris 
Conference and UNAMA, but emphasized that ISAF must do a 
better job safeguarding Afghan civilians and providing those 
who are imprisoned with fair and just trials as specified 
under international law. 
 
Remarks by other SC Members and Non-Members 
 
¶10. (SBU) Italy, France, Belgium, South Africa, Panama, Costa 
Rica, Indonesia, Burkina Faso, the UK, the US, Croatia, 
Vietnam, as well as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, 
Turkey, the Netherlands, and Norway all expressed strong 
support for the priorities identified at the Paris 
Conference, the UNAMA mandate, and the central role of SRSG 
Eide.  France, speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU), 
reiterated the EU's commitment to the Paris Conference and 
the final declaration published under the three co-chairs - 
France, Afghanistan, and the UN.  The Indian PR lamented the 
loss of four Indians who were killed in the July 7 Indian 
Embassy bombing in Kabul, and expressed India's renewed 
commitment to working with Afghanistan to secure its 
stability and development.  He added several pointed comments 
harshly criticizing those who harbor and train terrorists, 
saying they are no better than "the basest criminals."  He 
also criticized "bargains for temporary and local peace" with 
terrorists and extremists because they "send mixed signals 
while the rest of us contend with the consequences of such 
deals." 
Khalilzad