08USUNNEWYORK887
UN GENERAL DEBATE: FOCUS ON ISRAEL/PALESTINE,
Tue Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO5401
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #0887/01 2742018
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 302018Z SEP 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5030
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000887 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PBTS AORC UNGA VM PP PE EG SA ML
AJ, BE, SY, MU, KZ, AG, BA, AE, GA, RO, NG 
SUBJECT: UN GENERAL DEBATE: FOCUS ON ISRAEL/PALESTINE, 
IRAN, AND "FROZEN" CONFLICTS 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: During the September 27 morning plenary meeting 
of the UNGA General Debate, Vietnam, Papua New Guinea, Peru, 
Egypt, Mali, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Syria, Oman, Kazakhstan, 
Algeria, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Gambia, 
Niger and Romania spoke.  Saudi Arabia distributed its 
Foreign Minister's statement, but did not speak. 
Participants continued discussing the global financial, food 
and energy crises; climate change; implementation of the 
Millennium Development Goals; combating transnational crimes 
such as terrorism and the trafficking of drugs, arms, and 
persons; the need to conclude the Doha Round of trade talks; 
respect for human rights; and UN reform.  Arab countries 
argued for a Palestinian state and Israeli nuclear 
disarmament.  Syria criticized the United States for "failing 
to prioritize peace in the Middle East."  Several speakers 
addressed Iran's nuclear program.  Egypt and others urged 
countries to stop "interfering" with Sudan's security and 
stability.  Speakers called for international attention to 
the conflicts in the former Soviet Union, and Syria hinted 
that Western powers were behind the recent instability in 
Georgia.  All statements are available at 
www.un.org/ga/63/generaldebate.  END SUMMARY. 
 
ARAB COUNTRIES ON IRAQ, PALESTINE, ISRAEL, AND LEBANON 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2. Stability and peace in Iraq remains a central concern for 
countries in the region.  Saudi Arabia called on "certain 
states" (i.e., Iran) to stop violating Iraq's sovereignty by 
providing military and financial support to militias there. 
Syria, meanwhile, blamed the U.S. invasion for creating 
"abominable" humanitarian conditions that forced Iraqis to 
flee their homeland, demanding a withdrawal of all foreign 
troops.  Oman noted its satisfaction with the "relative 
improvement" in Iraq's security situation, and called for 
continued efforts to reach a "comprehensive national 
understanding."  All offered their political support for the 
restoration of Iraq's important role in the region. 
 
¶3. Saudi Arabia, Syria, Egypt, Oman, Bahrain, and the UAE 
called for a peaceful, comprehensive solution to the issue of 
Palestinian statehood.  Egypt offered its qualified 
appreciation for U.S. peace-brokering efforts, but questioned 
Israel's conviction to reach a "just" settlement.  Israel 
must stop its "politically loaded" settlement activities, 
Egypt added.  Syria questioned the efficacy of the Annapolis 
talks and claimed that after years of "deliberately ignoring" 
the pursuit of peace in the Middle East, the United States 
must now prioritize this issue.  Oman argued for the 
international community to "intensify its efforts to make 
Israel shoulder its responsibilities."  The UAE called upon 
the UN Security Council and the Quartet to "exert further 
pressure on Israel" to lift "the siege it has imposed on the 
Palestinian people" and to end its "unlawful settlement 
activities" by withdrawing from Jerusalem, the Golan Heights, 
and occupied Lebanese territories.  Bahrain emphasized the 
need for Israel to withdraw from the Syrian Golan Heights and 
Lebanese territories.  The Saudis noted that Israel is the 
only Middle Eastern country "loaded to the teeth" with 
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and sought the disarmament 
of its nuclear warheads.  Egypt lamented that "prominent 
members of the international community are unduly permissive" 
with Israel's nuclear capabilities and insisted that Israel 
adhere to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) and 
subject its nuclear facilities to IAEA safeguards. 
 
¶4. Several speakers from Arab nations congratulated Lebanon 
on its elections and formation of a national unity 
government.  Syria described in positive terms its 
relationship with Lebanon.  It noted the decision to exchange 
diplomatic representation, the shared intent to resume work 
of the joint border demarcation commission, and efforts to 
fight smuggling and promote cross-border commerce.  Saudi 
Arabia welcomed these developments and underscored its call 
for Israel to withdraw from the Shebaa farms area, which it 
claimed Israel itself acknowledges to be occupied territory. 
Oman stated that Lebanese progress "invites optimism," and 
called upon Lebanon to commit to and implement the Doha 
Agreement. 
 
SPLIT VIEWS ON IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Vietnam argued for a lasting solution to the Iranian and 
North Korean nuclear issues on the basis of respect for a 
state's legitimate right to a peaceful nuclear program while 
adhering to the tenets of the NPT.  Saudi Arabia expressed 
its hope that Iran will take seriously the obligation to 
prevent the proliferation of WMDs and avoid a "futile" arms 
race in the region.  Meanwhile, Syria supported Iran's claims 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000887  002 OF 002 
 
 
to a peaceful nuclear program.  "Deep mistrust" between Iran 
and its interlocutors has prevented a political solution, the 
Syrian speaker continued.  Bahrain reiterated its call for a 
peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear question "to avoid 
the scourge of war," and emphasized the need for the 
elimination of WMDs, including nuclear weapons, from the 
Middle East, while protecting the rights of countries to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy.  The UAE urged Iran to 
continue its collaboration with the IAEA, to dispel "concerns 
and suspicions" regarding the nature and objectives of its 
nuclear program.  The UAE also expressed strong concern over 
Iran's occupation of three of its islands, calling for full 
restoration of the UAE's sovereignty over this territory. 
 
REGIONAL CONFLICTS SPUR CONCERNS OVER TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶6. Romania, Azerbaijan, and Vietnam highlighted the need to 
respect territorial integrity in Georgia and, more broadly, 
the Former Soviet Union.  Romania expressed concern regarding 
the international community's frequent reference to "frozen" 
conflicts when speaking of the conflicts in South Ossetia, 
Abkhazia, Transnistria, and Nagorno-Karabakh.  "A dormant 
volcano can still be an active volcano," the Romanian Foreign 
Minister said.  The crisis in Georgia, he stressed, proved 
that the international community "cannot hide or stay shy 
from dealing with uncertain situations under the assumption 
that they will simply disappear eventually."  He called for 
international attention to all of the region's "protracted 
conflicts" (as listed above).  Azerbaijan stated that the 
events in Georgia proved that these "protracted conflicts" 
remained a major source of instability, and that "a fragile 
cease-fire regime cannot be a substitute for a lasting and 
durable peace in the region."  Stability is necessary to 
ensure that hydrocarbon resources from the Caspian Sea can 
reach international markets, Azerbaijan noted.  Syria hinted 
that Georgia and its allies were responsible for igniting the 
tensions and provoking Russia. 
 
¶7. Egypt urged countries to stop "interfering" with Sudan's 
security and stability in an apparent drive to partition the 
country, and Algeria cautioned against efforts to "undermine 
the sovereignty" of the Sudan.  Foreign powers should avoid 
actions that could hinder the achievement of peace in Darfur, 
the Saudis added.  Referring to Sudan (and Burma), Belgium 
cautioned that countries can not be allowed to use 
sovereignty as an excuse to abdicate the responsibility to 
protect their peoples.  Many speakers called for continued 
efforts to establish peace in the Darfur region. 
Khalilzad