08USUNNEWYORK967
UNSC: MULTIPLE DELEGATIONS, INCLUDING UK, CALL FOR
Thu Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2727
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0967/01 2972044
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232044Z OCT 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5171
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000967 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPAL KWBG UNSC IS LE SY
SUBJECT: UNSC: MULTIPLE DELEGATIONS, INCLUDING UK, CALL FOR 
COUNCIL ACTION ON MIDDLE EAST 
 
REF: STATE 112275 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) In his monthly briefing to the Security Council on 
the Middle East, Under Secretary General for Political 
Affairs Pascoe reviewed October 22 the series of meetings 
held in late September on the Israeli-Palestinian peace 
negotiations.  In terms of the West Bank, he noted the start 
of the olive harvest and referred to the Quartet's previous 
call for the enforcement of rule of law when dealing with 
settler violence towards Palestinian farmers.  He 
specifically commented that there has been no progress on 
Israel's key Road Map and Annapolis commitments during the 
period.  On Gaza, he said that the problems associated with 
the tunnels underscore the need for a sustained and orderly 
reopening of the crossings into Gaza.  While there have been 
no further indirect Israeli-Syrian talks, he welcomed the 
Lebanese-Syrian agreement to re-establish diplomatic 
relations and the passage of the Lebanese electoral law. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In Council consultations after the briefing, 
multiple delegations called for the Council to act on Middle 
East issues.  The UK Perm Rep called for the Council to issue 
a statement of support, in the coming months, for the work 
that has been done on all peace tracks.  The South African 
Perm Rep questioned the impartiality of the Quartet since it 
was not calling for the release of Palestinian prisoners, 
along with Israeli CPL Shalit, and had not specifically 
condemned the Israeli settler attacks against Palestinian 
farmers during the olive harvest.  The majority of 
delegations welcomed both the UN Special Coordinator for 
Lebanon's arrival in Beirut and the October 16 renewal of 
Lebanese-Syrian diplomatic relations.  End summary.  (Note: 
The full text of the U.S. remarks, as prepared for the 
meeting, is contained in reftel.  End note.) 
 
 
U/SYG Pascoe Briefs Council 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In his October 22 briefing to the Security Council 
during a meeting on the Middle East, Under Secretary-General 
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe reviewed the series of 
meetings held in New York during the General Debate regarding 
the Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations.  (Note: Mission 
e-mailed the text of Pascoe's remarks to IO/UNP on October 
¶22.  End note.)  He said the Quartet principals had welcomed 
the parties' suggestion to brief the Quartet on the 
negotiations at their next meeting, hopefully in the coming 
weeks.  He noted that the Quartet had agreed that Spring 2009 
would be an appropriate time for an international meeting in 
Moscow.  During the Secretary General's September 26 iftar, 
he said the discussion had focused on how the Quartet members 
and the Arab representatives could work together in support 
of the "Israeli-Palestinian process, Palestinian 
reunification, and regional peace" and that it reaffirmed the 
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Pascoe highlighted the Israeli-Palestinian clashes 
over the past month, including the firing of tear gas at a 
civilian delegation that included a European Commission 
official and local Palestinian officials and NGO members.  He 
cited the injuries to 19 Israelis when a Palestinian from 
East Jerusalem drove a car into a group of pedestrians and 
the communal clashes in Acre in Israel during and following 
Yom Kippur.  Pascoe then turned to the start of the olive 
harvest and the concerns for the safety of Palestinian 
farmers harvesting their olive trees in the vicinity of 
settlements and outposts.  He referenced Israeli Defense 
Minister Barak's denunciation of those attacking the olive 
pickers and Barak's statements that the IDF is attempting to 
protect Palestinian farmers but that it is impossible to 
guard all locations.  Pascoe reiterated the Quartet's call 
"for the enforcement of the rule of law given continued 
settler violence against Palestinian citizens." 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Pascoe listed the number of obstacles to 
Palestinian movement in the West Bank at 630 for the period. 
Pascoe specifically commented, "There has been no progress in 
the reporting period on Israel's key Road Map and Annapolis 
commitments: that is, a genuine settlement freeze, removal of 
outposts, and opening of Palestinian institutions in East 
Jerusalem."  He noted continuing settlement construction in 
the West Bank and East Jerusalem and said the Quartet's clear 
statement must be heeded.  On Jerusalem, he said a majority 
of Palestinian Muslims were not able to pray at al-Aqsa 
Mosque during Ramadan because of access and permit 
restrictions, while a synagogue was opened by settlers in the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000967  002 OF 003 
 
 
Muslim Quarter of the Old City on October 12 under increased 
Israeli security presence.  He said, "The Secretary-General 
continues to call for an end to unilateral action in 
Jerusalem and reminds all parties that the status of the city 
remains an issue for permanent status negotiations." 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On Gaza, Pascoe highlighted the deaths of 14 
Palestinians as a result of collapses, closures, or accidents 
in tunnels between Gaza and Egypt, which he said is 
reportedly regulated by Hamas.  He said this situation 
"underscores the importance of a sustained and orderly 
reopening of crossings into Gaza under the Palestinian 
Authority."  After mentioning that the teachers' strike 
continues in Gaza, he said a student was declared clinically 
dead after falling three stories October 21 after an 
altercation involving a Hamas-appointed teacher.  In terms of 
healthcare, he said the percentage of essential drug items 
now at the zero level in Gaza has jumped to 22 percent -- now 
double the level of items out of stock than in August when 
responsibility for delivering medical supplied to Gaza was 
transferred from WHO to the PA Health Ministry.  He 
reiterated UN support for efforts to secure the release of 
Israeli CPL Gilad Shalit as well as a number of Palestinian 
prisoners. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Turning north, he said there had been no further 
indirect Israeli-Syrian negotiations facilitated by Turkey 
over the last month.  He highlighted the recent 
Lebanese-Syrian agreement providing for the establishment of 
diplomatic relations, and termed the Lebanese Parliament's 
passage of a new electoral law an important milestone in the 
implementation of the Doha agreement.  He said that the first 
phase of rubble removal from the Nahr el-Bared Palestinian 
refugee camp began October 17 and should be completed in 
eight months, and that funding is urgently required by UNRWA 
to meet the camp's reconstruction costs and humanitarian 
needs.  Pascoe termed the situation in UNIFIL's area of 
operations as tense but generally quiet, but he did highlight 
Israeli air violations averaging ten per day over the past 
month.  He also announced that UN Special Coordinator for 
Lebanon Michael Williams began work October 1. 
 
Multiple delegations call for Council 
to act on Middle East issues 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) In Security Council consultations immediately 
following Pascoe's briefing, multiple delegations honed in on 
Pascoe's statement that Israel had not made progress during 
the period on its key Road Map and Annapolis commitments. 
The Indonesian Perm Rep, speaking second after Libya, noted 
the Quartet's strong statement on settlements in September 
and said he hoped the Council would soon be able to speak 
"coherently and with one voice on this issue."  (Separately, 
the Indonesian DPR told Ambassador Wolff they would like to 
see a product before they leave the Council.)  The South 
African Perm Rep called for the Council to assist the parties 
in getting to their goal since the situation on the ground 
has not improved.  While encouraging both sides to persist in 
negotiations, he said the Council should "do its part and not 
avoid its mandate."  The Russian DPR said that the Council 
would need to discuss what could be done on this issue.  The 
Costa Rican Perm Rep voiced concern with the Council's 
silence on this issue and said there was a need for a 
"statement on a collective security approach."  The Burkina 
Faso DPR said that the Council needs to "make its own 
contribution, going beyond rhetoric." 
 
UK Perm Rep calls for Council statement 
of support for all peace tracks 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The UK Perm Rep said the three priorities for the 
period ahead were to (1) keep the process going through the 
upcoming political transitions and keep supporting 
Turkish-facilitated Israeli-Syrian talks; (2) improve the 
situation on the ground for Palestinians and cease settlement 
building; and (3) enhance regional engagement and support for 
the Arab Peace Initiative.  He specifically noted that the UK 
was taking action against the importation of settlement 
goods.  The UK Perm Rep said, "We must be prepared - at the 
right time - to express our united and strong support for the 
work that has been done on all peace tracks, and to 
demonstrate the Security Council's resolve to help deliver a 
comprehensive Middle East Peace.  That is the challenge for 
us; when the time is right in the coming months we need to be 
prepared to meet it."  The Belgian expert expressed the need 
to maintain the current momentum and not allow any 
backsliding by either of the parties.  He said Belgium was 
ready to contribute to any initiative by the Council.  The 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000967  003 OF 003 
 
 
French Political Coordinator, in contrast, kept his remarks 
focused on Quartet efforts.  He observed that it is a pivotal 
moment in the peace process; that France, as EU President, is 
prepared to be fully supportive of the process at the next 
Quartet meeting.  He stressed that both parties need to be 
more resolute in achieving an agreement; that there must be a 
full freeze on settlement construction; and that trade 
restrictions with Gaza should be lifted. 
 
South Africa asks if the 
Quartet has acted impartially 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The South African Perm Rep raised whether the 
Quartet has acted impartially.  On the issue of settlements, 
he said the Quartet had acted impartially.  On the issue of 
Palestinian prisoners, he said the Quartet had not acted with 
impartiality since it only called for the release of Israeli 
CPL Shalit, not any of the Palestinian prisoners.  In 
contrast, he referred to Pascoe's briefing and said Pascoe 
had properly highlighted both.  The South African Perm Rep 
also said the Quartet had failed on the Israeli settler 
attacks against Palestinian farmers.  He said the issue 
should not be "reduced to a rule of law issue" if Israeli 
settlers are the perpetrators and a terrorism issue when 
Palestinians are the perpetrators.  Ambassador Wolff 
challenged the South African on this point during his 
intervention and noted that numerous UN conventions make a 
distinction between criminal acts and terrorist acts and we 
must bear this distinction in mind in our discussions. 
 
Lebanon 
------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The majority of delegations specifically welcomed 
both Michael Williams' arrival in Lebanon to assume his new 
position as UN Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the 
October 16 renewal of diplomatic relations between Syria and 
Lebanon.  The Russian DPR specifically welcomed the October 
16 renewal and said that the bilateral diplomatic path is 
always preferable.  He explained that was why his delegation 
had abstained on UNSCR 1680.  (Comment: UNSCR 1680, passed in 
May 2006, called for full implementation of UNSCR 1559 and 
strongly encouraged the Syrians to respond positively to the 
request by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their 
border with Lebanon and establish full diplomatic relations. 
We assume the Russian DPR wanted to stress Russia's 
preference for direct bilateral engagement over Security 
Council pressure.  The Council will meet again on October 30 
to discuss the Secretary General's report on the 
implementation of UNSCR 1559.  End comment.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) We found this month's briefing by U/SYG Pascoe to 
be less balanced than usual and more critical of Israel. 
While efforts to form a new government have preoccupied 
Israeli political leaders during the last month and may have 
slowed some movement on the ground, neither Pascoe's nor most 
of the other interventions acknowledged this reality. 
Instead, Pascoe's message may have fed into the increasing 
calls by Council members for renewed Council engagement and 
action on the Middle East. 
Khalilzad