08USUNNEWYORK870
AT THE UN, IRAN, GEORGIA, BOLIVIA AND OTHERS
Mon Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0870/01 2731444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291444Z SEP 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5003UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON UNGA AORC FI BK RW LH IR LE
KE, PM, GG, GY, UG, BL, WA, BN 
SUBJECT: AT THE UN, IRAN, GEORGIA, BOLIVIA AND OTHERS 
CONTINUE THE GENERAL DEBATE 
 
REF: A. STATE 98982 
     ¶B. USUNNY 864 
 
 ¶1.  Summary: The annual UN General Debate continued in the 
afternoon of September 23 on the themes of global food crisis 
and UN reform among others.  Iran and Lebanon strongly 
criticized Israel.  Iran also defended its nuclear program. 
Georgia spoke about the need for a stronger UN role given 
Russia provocations in the region; Lithuania echoed Georgia's 
call.  Bolivia accused the United States of interfering in 
its domestic affairs.  The heads of state of Finland, Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, Rwanda, Lithuania, Iran, Lebanon, Kenya, 
Panama, Uganda, Guyana, Georgia, Bolivia, Namibia, and Benin 
made interventions.  Video and texts of the speeches can be 
found at www.un.org/ga/63/generaldebate . End Summary. 
 
Iran attacks "Zionist" interference in world affairs 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  Iranian President Mahmood Ahmadinejad said that Iraq was 
attacked under false pretenses and argued that narcotics 
production and terrorism have increased in Afghanistan since 
NATO forces arrived.  He defended Iran's "peaceful nuclear 
program" as its inalienable right.  He said the U.S. opposes 
other nations' progress, monopolizing technology in order to 
impose its will on other nations. 
 
¶3.  Ahmadinejad claimed that "Zionists" and the United States 
control the United Nations and the rest of the world due to 
U.S. power in NATO and status on the UNSC.   He called 
"deceitful and furtive" the "Zionists" who he claims dominate 
financial centers and political decision making in the West. 
He also claimed that "Zionist murderers" were supported by 
the UNSC under pressure from "a few bullying powers" in their 
"invasion" of Palestine.  However, he commented that a 
declining hegemony means the next U.S. rulers will be forced 
to limit their interference to their own borders.   (Note: 
Per guidance, the USDEL vacated the U.S. desk leaving only a 
note taker. End Note.) 
 
Georgia pledges to fight aggression with democracy 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  President Saakashvili of Georgia said the implications of 
Russia's recent invasion of his country cut to the heart of 
the UN Charter.  He asked if the United Nations would support 
its principles or allow them "to be crushed under the treads 
of invading tanks, under the boots of ethnic cleansers, under 
the immobilizing impact of cyber attacks, and under the 
pernicious tactics of violent separatism."  Saakashvili urged 
that Member States support UN principles by speaking out 
against this violation of human rights, adopting a 
non-recognition policy toward the provinces of South Ossetia 
and Abkhazia, ensuring compliance with the ceasefire 
agreement, and creating a meaningful UN conflict resolution 
process to reunify Georgia. 
 
¶5.  Saakashvili emphasized repeatedly Georgia's pledge to be 
a transparent democracy.  He invited an investigation of the 
cause of the invasion.  He said "whereas others waged this 
war with arms, we will wage it with (democratic) values."  He 
listed the invitations for talks Georgia had extended to 
Russia, which he said were refused. 
 
Lebanon's Intervention Focuses on Israel 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Lebanese President General Sleiman requested the UN and 
the international community stop Israel's threats of war 
against Lebanon and provide assistance in regaining 
territories that Israel occupies.  Sleiman reiterated his 
country's commitment to UNSC resolution 1701, but argued that 
Israel's failure to comply with 1701 pushed Lebanon toward 
other, "legitimate options."  He made three arguments against 
the resettlement of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon: 1) it 
violates their right to their homeland, 2) it would 
overextend Lebanon's limited resources, and 3) resettlement 
is rejected in the Lebanese Constitution.  Sleiman announced 
Lebanon's candidacy for the Security Council election in 
October 2009. 
 
Bolivian President speaks out against the U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7.  Bolivian President Evo Morales Morales directly addressed 
his reasons for expelling the U.S. Ambassador in early 
September. First, he argued that the United States did not 
denounce the groups in Bolivia who were destroying oil and 
gas pipelines.  Morales called these "acts of terrorism."  He 
expressly made reference to President Bush's call to denounce 
terrorism during his intervention in the General Debate (Ref 
B).  Morales also claimed that the United States had 
orchestrated his 2002 expulsion from parliament.  He claimed 
that U.S. programs for civil society undermined his attempts 
at reform.  Morales also alleged that the United States 
consistently tries to control members of the Bolivian 
military.  He further complained that the United States said 
that farmers from the Andes are "Taliban" and that he himself 
is from the Andes.  Morales based a majority of his speech on 
his pamphlet "The Ten Commandments to Save the Planet, 
Humankind and Life."  These include ending capitalism and 
imperialism and multiple injunctions to respect and protect 
the environment. 
 
General Themes of the Afternoon 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Lithuania, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Georgia, Lebanon, and 
Kenya called for the United Nations to take a stronger stand 
in conflict resolution and mediation of justice in their 
respective regions.  Speeches by Finland, Rwanda, Kenya, 
Panama, Uganda, Namibia, and Benin concentrated on the global 
food crisis and its effects on poverty and the 
democratization of the United Nations.  Namibia, Rwanda and 
Benin all pointed out that rising food costs counteract 
progress in poverty reduction.  Uganda, however, called the 
food crisis an economic opportunity for equatorial Africa and 
said it would be "very good" for Ugandan farmers.  Most 
speeches called for investment in agriculture and increased 
attention to climate change as an exacerbating cause of food 
and energy shortages.  Guyana spoke at length about the 
international financial crisis.  On the democratization of 
the United Nations, Benin and Kenya called for reform of the 
UN Security Council (UNSC).  Kenya stated that Africa should 
have permanent representation on the UNSC.  Other speeches 
lauded the idea of UN reform and democratization, but offered 
no concrete suggestions. 
Khalilzad