09USUNNEWYORK1154
IRAN: CONCERN OVER IAEA REPORT, SANCTIONS
Wed Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4583
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #1154/01 3572147
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232147Z DEC 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7909
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHII/VIENNA IAEA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM MNUC ETTC KNNP IR UNSC
SUBJECT: IRAN: CONCERN OVER IAEA REPORT, SANCTIONS 
VIOLATIONS 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001154  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: On June 15, the chair of the Security Council's 
Iran Sanctions Committee ("1737 Committee") briefed the 
Council on the Committee's activities over the previous 
ninety days, highlighting the response to two reported 
sanctions violations and noting "with grave concern an 
apparent pattern of sanctions violations."  Ambassador Rice 
highlighted troubling findings in the IAEA Director General's 
latest report, condemned the pattern of sanctions violations 
and said recent events underscored the need for full 
implementation of UN sanctions on Iran.  If Iran continues to 
fail to meet its obligations, she said, then the 
international community will have to consider further 
actions.  The UK and French Perm Reps expressed similar 
concerns, with both calling for new sanctions if Iran 
continues to reject engagement.  The Libyan Perm Rep 
criticized the Council's lack of attention to Israel's 
nuclear program.  The Russian Perm Rep called the Iranian 
nuclear issue "not simple," held open the possibility for 
renewed dialogue and asserted that Iran was taking seriously 
the signal sent by the recent IAEA Board of Governors 
resolution.  The Chinese Perm Rep also suggested that there 
was still space for the international community to resume 
talks with Iran.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  On December 10, Japanese Perm Rep Takasu, chair of the 
Security Council's Iran Sanctions Committee ("1737 
Committee"), briefed the Council on the Committee's 
activities over the previous ninety days.  He explained that 
during this reporting period the Committee had received two 
reports of sanctions violations, both were violations of the 
export ban on arms and related materiel from Iran contained 
in resolution 1747.  Takasu said that the Committee has 
studied these reports and "notes with grave concern an 
apparent pattern of sanctions violations involving prohibited 
arms transfers from Iran." 
 
¶3.  Takasu explained the circumstances of the two reported 
violations (the "Hansa India" and the "Francop" incidents) 
and described the Committee's initial efforts to write to the 
two states involved in the prohibited transfer to ask for an 
explanation.  In both instances, he said, the state that 
reported the incident said that it had retained and stored 
the cargo. 
 
¶4.  Ambassador Rice said the IAEA Director General's latest 
report on Iran underscored Iran's refusal to comply with its 
international obligations and fully cooperate with the IAEA. 
She listed specific findings in that report regarding Iran's 
non-cooperation.  Rice condemned the three sanctions 
violations reported to the 1737 Committee this year, all 
involving the transfer of arms or ammunition from Iran to 
Syria.  Rice applauded the responsible actions of Member 
States to disrupt these illicit arms transfers and encouraged 
the Committee to respond vigorously.  Recent events, she 
said, including the discovery of the Qom facility, Iran's 
announced intention to build new enrichment plants, Iran's 
prohibited arms transfers, underscored the renewed urgency of 
robust implementation of UN sanctions on Iran.  Rice 
regretted Iran's failure to take advantage of the 
IAEA-brokered deal regarding the transfer of material for the 
Tehran Research Reactor (TRR).  She reaffirmed U.S. 
willingness to engage with Iran, but added that "should Iran 
continue to fail to meet its obligations, the international 
community will have to consider further actions." 
 
¶5.  French Perm Rep Araud also condemned the pattern of arms 
transfers from Iran, saying that they were destabilizing the 
region and that he was not happy with a response that 
consisted only of writing letters that received no reply.  He 
regretted Iran's refusal to accept the TRR deal, noted Iran's 
violations of its IAEA obligations and highlighted elements 
of the November 27 IAEA Board of Governors resolution.  "If 
Iran continues to be in violation of five Security Council 
resolutions," Araud said, "then we must move to a new 
sanctions resolution." 
 
¶6.  UK Perm Rep Lyall-Grant also referred to the "pattern" of 
sanctions violations and thanked states for their prompt and 
responsible actions to indict and report the illicit 
transfer.  Lyall-Grant also highlighted troubling elements of 
the IAEA Director General's recent report, including its 
findings about the Qom enrichment facility.  He called the 
TRR deal a fair offer and said Iran's approach of delaying 
discussions was an attempt to "buy time and divide the 
international community."  Lyall-Grant urged Iran to accept 
the outstretched hand offered to it, but added that if Iran 
chooses not to engage then further sanctions are needed. 
 
¶7.  Libyan Deputy Perm Rep Dabbashi called for the peaceful 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001154  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.  He drew a negative 
parallel with Iraq, saying "what happened in Iraq, should not 
happen elsewhere, especially not based upon groundless 
information."  He criticized the Security Council's lack of 
action regarding Israel's nuclear program and Israel's 
refusal to allow IAEA inspections of its nuclear facilities. 
 
¶8.  Russian Perm Rep Churkin said the 1737 Committee should 
continue considering the reported sanctions violations and 
act within the letter and spirit of its mandate.  The Iranian 
nuclear issue is, he said, "not simple" and the six countries 
principally involved had not discarded the possibility of 
renewed dialogue.  Churkin called for patience and calm, 
saying he believed Iran was taking seriously the signal sent 
by the recent IAEA Board of Governors resolution. 
 
¶9.  Chinese Perm Rep Zhang noted the "different views" on the 
TRR deal, but said that the path to resolving the Iranian 
nuclear issues is still not blocked and there is space for 
the international community to resume talks.  This may 
require, he said, more time and patience.  Zhang reiterated 
support for the peaceful resolution of the issue through 
diplomatic means. 
RICE