09USUNNEWYORK1123
UNSC: COUNCIL CONSULTATIONS ON UNDOF
Tue Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO6935
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #1123/01 3492143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152143Z DEC 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7811
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001123 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UNSC IS SY
SUBJECT: UNSC: COUNCIL CONSULTATIONS ON UNDOF 
 
REF: STATE 126217 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The Council met on December 14 in 
consultations to discuss the UN Disengagement Observer Force 
(UNDOF) since its mandate expires at the end of the month. 
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Mulet 
briefed the Council on the Secretary-General's six-month 
report, UNDOF's patrols, and the new Philippine contingent 
that is now operating in the southern sector.  While noting 
that the area has been generally quiet, Mulet stated that 
UNDOF's freedom of movement is occasionally restricted by the 
parties.  Nevertheless, he said the Secretary-General 
recommends another six-month renewal and hopes the parties 
will return to negotiations.  Council members expressed 
appreciation and support for UNDOF and troop contributors. 
Several, including Ambassador DiCarlo, asked DPKO to consider 
recommending a longer mandate during the next review period 
and the P-3 pressed the Department of Peacekeeping Operations 
(DPKO) for a more robust report.  The Council is scheduled on 
December 21 to adopt the draft resolution extending UNDOF's 
mandate for another six months.  End summary. 
 
DPKO briefing 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Council met on December 14 in consultations to 
discuss the Secretary-General's six-month report, dated 
November 18, on the UN Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). 
(Note: Report was e-mailed to IO/PSC and IO/UNP.  End note.) 
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations 
Edmond Mulet briefed the Council first.  (Comment: Mulet's 
comments were largely the same as Department of Peacekeeping 
Operations (DPKO) Asia and Middle East Division 
Officer-in-Charge Nina Lahoud's briefing during the Council's 
December 7 private meeting with troop-contributing 
countries (TCCs).  End comment.)  Mulet stated that UNDOF is 
currently operating from 40 fixed positions in and around the 
area of operations and has more mobile monitoring positions. 
It currently performs approximately 70-80 patrols of the area 
per day and ten patrols at night, as well as fortnightly 
patrols and inspections in the areas of limitation to ensure 
that upper force strength limits are respected.   In 
addition, two new watchtowers have been constructed in the 
southern area, which have increased the mission's 
observational abilities. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Mulet referred to DPKO and UNDOF's May 2009 
technical assessment which concluded that the Philippine 
brigade replacing the Polish brigade should have an increased 
operational presence in the southern areas because of the 
increased Syrian civilian activity there.  Mulet confirmed 
that the hand-over between the Polish and Philippine forces 
had successfully taken plans and another 30 addition UNDOF 
personnel had been redirected from logistics to operational 
activities in the southern area.  (Note: DPKO's assessment 
last spring, which they only briefed orally to the Council 
but never in writing, indicated a need for more operational 
forces in the southern zone given the increased Syrian 
civilian presence in the area.  The increased civilian 
presence does not contravene the disengagement protocol.  End 
note.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Mulet referred to the report, which notes that the 
parties sometimes deny inspection teams access to some of 
their positions and impose restrictions on the Force's 
freedom of movement.  (Note: In the TCC meeting, Lahoud 
highlighted the need for the parties to give the teams full 
access to all sites in question, especially through the A and 
B gates.  She urged that restrictions on UNDOF's freedom of 
movement be halted but noted that, overall, both Israel and 
Syria are making improvements in this regard.  End note.) 
Mulet also noted from the report that mines continue to pose 
a threat to UNDOF, especially when their condition 
deteriorates.  He called for the resumption of negotiations 
between the parties and said that the Secretary-General 
recommends that the mandate be extended for another six 
months to June 30, 2010.  Mulet announced that Austrian UNDOF 
Force Commander Jilke is scheduled to rotate out on February 
4, 2010 and that the Secretariat is proceeding with the 
selection of his replacement.  No rotational delay is 
expected. 
 
Council appreciates UNDOF's 
efforts and voices its support 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) All Council members expressed appreciation for 
UNDOF's efforts and the contributions of troop contributors. 
A number of countries voiced hope that the two parties would 
restart negotiations, whether indirectly or directly.  The 
Turkish Perm Rep said that Turkey is ready to continue its 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001123  002 OF 002 
 
 
role in indirect negotiations between the parties.  The 
Libyan Deputy Perm Rep referred to Israeli Knesset action to 
require a referendum before any Israeli withdrawal from 
occupied territory and expressed doubt about the sincerity of 
Israeli authorities' efforts towards a comprehensive 
settlement.  A number of Council members called for both 
parties to give UNDOF full access and freedom of movement. 
China added a call for all counties to pay their peacekeeping 
assessments on time.  Several members, including Austria, 
Costa Rica, and Vietnam, expressed concern about mines in the 
areas of operation, to which Mulet replied that UNDOF 
de-mines for operational reasons but does not have a 
humanitarian de-mining mandate. 
 
Number of members ask DPKO to consider 
recommending longer mandate 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Drawing from reftel, Ambassador DiCarlo expressed 
strong U.S. preference for a 12-month mandate for the sake of 
Council efficiency, given UNDOF's non-controversial nature, 
and asked DPKO to consider recommending a longer mandate for 
the next renewal period.  A number of countries called for 
the same, including the UK and Costa Rica.  Austria and 
Croatia, both TCCs, said they would be open to a 12-month 
mandate if both parties agreed. 
 
P-3 calls for a more robust report 
---------------------------------- 
¶7.  (SBU) The UK Deputy Perm Rep called on DPKO to follow up 
on its May technical assessment now that the Philippine 
contingent is in place.  Both the UK and France reminded the 
Council that all peacekeeping operations should be under 
constant review and UNDOF is no exception.  They both joined 
Ambassador DiCarlo in calling DPKO to revamp the format of 
its UNDOF report since it currently "offers little value." 
Mulet later replied that he had taken note of requests for a 
more detailed report and that there would be a move away from 
"recycled texts."  Japan voiced appreciation to the Security 
Council President for holding the Council's meeting with TCCs 
one week before the Council's own consultations, thereby 
giving the TCCs time to feed their thoughts into the 
Council's own deliberations. 
 
Council scheduled to adopt 
mandate extension 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Council is scheduled on December 21 to adopt a 
draft resolution, identical to UNSCR 1875, to extend UNDOF's 
mandate for another six months to June 30.  As in previous 
renewals, the Council has also been asked to approve an 
accompanying one-paragraph Presidential Statement.  Both 
drafts have been e-mailed to IO/PSC. 
RICE