09USUNNEWYORK997
U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONTINUES (SEPTEMBER 24, PM):
Thu Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO0534
RR RUEHMJ
DE RUCNDT #0997/01 3092331
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 052331Z NOV 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7539
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 0003
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0713
RUEHJL/AMEMBASSY BANJUL 0093
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0409
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0294
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0278
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM 0333
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 0001
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0203
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI 0539
RUEHLG/AMEMBASSY LILONGWE 0068
RUEHLJ/AMEMBASSY LJUBLJANA 0115
RUEHLS/AMEMBASSY LUSAKA 0147
RUEHMJ/AMEMBASSY MAJURO 0101
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 1389
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 1711
RUEHRA/AMEMBASSY RIGA 0054
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 0001
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI 4745
RUEHVT/AMEMBASSY VALLETTA 0036
RUEHVB/AMEMBASSY ZAGREB 3332UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 USUN NEW YORK 000997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPKO UNGA VE SI GY CS PA TZ LG
MI, IZ, GA, MV, GT, HA, SG, FI, ZA, HR, RM, MT, GG 
SUBJECT: U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONTINUES (SEPTEMBER 24, PM): 
CHAVEZ CRITICIZES THE UNITED STATES; GEORGIA CONDEMNS 
RUSSIAN WAR-MONGERING 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The afternoon session of the 2nd day of the 
UNGA General Debate on September 24 opened with Venezuelan 
President Hugo Chavez criticizing the United States, 
dissecting the intentions of President Obama, and extolling 
the merits of socialism. Latin American leaders from 
Venezuela, Costa Rica, and Paraguay condemned the coup in 
Honduras. Many leaders called for reforming the United 
Nations and increasing the size and permanent membership of 
the Security Council. Many leaders focused on the urgent need 
to address climate change, the Maldives claiming the issue as 
a matter of survival. Slovenia and Guyana called on the 
United Nations to organize a new Bretton Woods conference. 
The session closed with the President of Georgia delivering 
an impassioned condemnation of Russia for its role in 
provoking the conflict between the two countries, and 
thanking the United States for its support. 
 
¶2. (U) Speakers included heads of state and foreign ministers 
from Venezuela, Slovenia, Guyana, Costa Rica, Paraguay, 
Tanzania, Latvia, Malawi, Iraq, Gambia, Maldives, Guatemala, 
Haiti, Senegal, Finland, Zambia, Croatia, Marshall Islands, 
Malta, and Georgia. Full text of statements available on at 
www.un.org/ga/64/generaldebate, video archives are at 
www.un.org/webcast/2009.html. END SUMMARY 
 
¶3. (U) VENEZUELA: President Hugo Chavez began by promoting a 
new film by Oliver Stone, "South of the Border."  Chavez 
encouraged everyone to see the film "if the capitalist 
theater monopolies do not keep it from being shown." Chavez 
extolled the unique virtues of Bolivarian Socialism and at 
one point complimented President Obama and said he prayed God 
would protect him. After receiving a large round of applause 
for this comment, Chavez added that the dais no longer 
smelled like sulfur, but now smelled like hope. However, 
Chavez asked several times, "How many 'Obamas' are there?" 
He explained that there are, in fact, two "Obamas" - the one 
who spoke at the United Nations and called for international 
cooperation - and another who built bases in Colombia and 
maintained an embargo on Cuba. He asked the Obama who spoke 
at the United Nations to "come over to the socialist side" 
and "join the axis of evil."  Chavez condemned the coup in 
Honduras and claimed that it was initiated by the Pentagon, 
which he said operates independently around the world outside 
the control of the U.S. Government. Chavez concluded by 
saying that capitalism caused climate change and that the 
world needs an entirely new economic system. 
 
¶4. (U) SLOVENIA: President Danilo Turk stated that the world 
needs a comprehensive strategy to address climate change and 
that steps must be taken in unison, but differentiated for 
each state. He called on the United Nations and the G-20 to 
lead the way to financial stability and insisted the Bretton 
Woods organizations be adjusted. Turk also described four 
issues facing the United Nations: 1) structural change 
(especially Security Council reform), 2) a strengthened U.N. 
role in peacekeeping operations, 3) 
disarmament/non-proliferation, and, 4) the United Nations, 
continued role as a forum for international consultations. He 
described the situation in Afghanistan as an example of a 
crisis where the United Nations can play a vital role. 
 
¶5. (U) GUYANA: President Bharat Jagdeo said the global 
financial crisis hit small Caribbean nations harder than most 
because of their dependence on commodities. He called for a 
global commission to restructure debt and for the United 
Nations to hold a new Bretton Woods conference. Jagdeo also 
warned that the world must stop deforestation now, as opposed 
to waiting until 2030. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000997  002 OF 005 
 
 
 
¶6. (U) COSTA RICA: President Oscar Arias Sanchez addressed 
the evils of defense spending and the international arms 
trade. He said that money and human resources currently spent 
on defense should be refocused on global problems, such as 
climate change. He claimed that national militaries serve no 
purpose other than to suppress their own people. Sanchez said 
that developing countries in Latin America face three 
national challenges: strengthening their democracies, arms 
reduction, and creating a new international order to combat 
climate change. Arias said that Latin America's civil 
structure is hollow and needs to build democratic 
institutions. 
 
¶7. (U) PARAGUAY: President Fernando Mendez of Paraguay 
claimed that war and defense spending enrich developed 
nations but harm developing nations. Mendez described the 
need for a new economic world order that would strengthen 
small economies, develop democratic institutions, end 
criminal aggression against the environment, find peaceful 
solutions to conflicts, and eliminate gender discrimination. 
He also called for the end of the United States' Cuba embargo 
condemned the coup in Honduras. Mendez concluded by 
expressing his fears of an arms race in Latin America. 
 
¶8. (U) TANZANIA: President Jakaya Kikwete pressed for 
agricultural technology assistance for Africa as a means to 
address climate change. He extolled the virtues of youth 
employment programs in Africa, noting that employed young 
people are less inclined to engage in violent acts. He 
commended progress (but wanted to see more) on the MDG's and 
publicized the African Leaders Malaria Alliance. He expressed 
support for a two state solution for Israel and Palestine and 
asked that the people of Western Sahara be allowed to decide 
their own future. He called for Security Council reform and 
asked for assistance with Tanzania,s refugee problem and 
support for developing democratic institutions in Africa. 
 
¶9. (U) LATVIA: President Valdis Zatlers said the world must 
focus on the three crisis "E's" (energy, economy, and 
environment) and the three crisis "F's" (finance, food, and 
fuel). He said that countries must not act strictly in 
self-interest and extolled the virtues of the MDG's. Zatlers 
stated that each nation should contribute to the fight 
against climate change according to its own capabilities. He 
called for continued support for peace and stability in 
Afghanistan and the Middle East. He reiterated Latvia's 
support for Georgia and complained about human rights abuses 
in Iran after the elections. Zatlers reaffirmed support for 
the Geneva Convention and the International Criminal Court. 
He reminded the General Assembly of the Human Rights Council 
review in 2011 and said it would be a good time to strengthen 
the organization. He also called for Security Council reform 
and said that the United Nations must prioritize its budget 
and make it more transparent and disciplined. 
 
¶10. (U) MALAWI: President Bingu Mutharika called for 
strengthened multilateralism and expressed the need to reform 
the United Nations (particularly the Security Council), spur 
international action on food security, and bolster 
international cooperation in addressing climate change. 
Mutharika closed by calling for a global dialogue on 
democracy and its institutions. 
 
¶11. (U) IRAQ: President Jala Talabani spoke about political 
and economic progress in Iraq. He requested that nations 
currently hosting Iraqi refugees enable and encourage them to 
return home where they would be welcomed. He said that the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000997  003 OF 005 
 
 
real threat to Iraq is external, and requested a Security 
Council investigation into the August 19 Baghdad bombings. 
Talabani asked that the current Security Council resolutions 
against Iraq be removed and that the United Nations increase 
its engagement. Talabani registered support for the struggle 
of the Palestinian people and called for the Middle East to 
become a nuclear-weapon free zone. 
 
¶12. (U) GAMBIA: President Yahya Jammeh blamed Africa's 
problems on large western multi-national corporations and 
debt. He said that the lack of development in Africa is not 
Africa's fault and that Africa can do little to help itself. 
Jammeh cautioned that there will be consequences if the 
situation does not improve. He called for speedy resolution 
of the plight of the Palestinians, Taiwan's inclusion in the 
United Nations, lifting the U.S. embargo on Cuba, support for 
Morocco's plan in Western Sahara, and Security Council 
reform. 
 
¶13. (U) MALDIVES: President Mohamed Nasheed focused his 
attention on climate change, emphasizing that the matter is 
of dire consequence for the Maldives population. Nasheed 
called for aggressive measures to be taken at the upcoming 
summit in Copenhagen, warning that, "to do otherwise would be 
to sign a death warrant for the 300 thousand Maldivians." The 
President declared his intention to have the Maldives become 
carbon neutral. Nasheed spoke about the importance of freedom 
and thanked the international community for its support in 
helping the Maldives to become a democracy. Reminding the 
audience that he had once been a political prisoner himself, 
Nasheed asked that leaders release all political prisoners. 
The President promoted efforts to rid the world of terrorism, 
while suggesting that such efforts not be done at the expense 
of people's democratic freedoms. 
 
¶14. (U) GUATEMALA: The President of Guatemala, Alvaro Colom 
Caballeros, focused his speech on the financial crisis and 
effects on his already poor country, complaining about the 
significant decline in foreign remittances and a surge in 
unemployment. He commented that the ongoing drought and the 
recent financial crisis have left millions of Guatemalans in 
a vulnerable state. Colom mentioned some of the basic efforts 
by his country to tackle poverty and malnutrition and noted 
the challenges faced by Guatemala in its war against 
organized crime and narco-trafficking. He cited a seven-fold 
increase in cocaine seizures as evidence of more effective 
policing. Raising the matter of the recent murder of the 
esteemed lawyer Rodrigo Rosenberg (Note: Rosenberg produced a 
video found post-mortem suggesting the President and others 
would likely murder him), Colom said "there will be justice" 
and expressed his determination to find the truth through an 
independent investigation. Guatemala offered support for 
Honduras and the ousted Zelaya government, and noted that 
"President Zelaya needs to return so elections can be 
legitimate." 
 
¶15. (U) HAITI: President Rene Garcia Caballeros addressed 
poverty as the central area of concern for Haiti, citing a 
shortfall of development aid necessary to create 
infrastructure that can withstand natural disaster. The 
President shared his belief that the matter of alleviating 
poverty through sustainable development will have spillover 
effects in the realm of security, declaring that "the real 
vector for peace and security is development." Caballeros 
noted that the work of MINUSTAH (the United Nations 
Stabilization Mission in Haiti) should be expanded in order 
to build upon peace and poverty elimination and greater 
development. The President expressed condemnation for the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000997  004 OF 005 
 
 
coup in Honduras and railed against the U.S. economic embargo 
on Cuba. 
 
¶16. (U) SENEGAL: President Abdoulaye Wade spoke about the 
financial crisis, development issues, poverty and food 
security. Wade declared that "we are condemned to prevail," 
despite the challenges facing developing nations including 
his own and urged leaders to reform international 
institutions to better serve struggling nations. The 
President advocated for an eventual expansion of the G8 and 
G20, but also called for a "shadow G20" comprised of experts 
from around the world. He asserted that food security 
requires a new and sustainable approach, and suggested that 
the African food fund be entrusted to the World Bank. The 
President stressed the importance of young people in raising 
awareness and promoting changes, particularly on 
environmental issues. Wade praised the goal of creating the 
Great Green Wall stretching from Dakar to Djibouti. He 
commended President Obama for his support of the two-state 
solution in Israel-Palestine, while contending that "Israeli 
illegal activity is counter-productive." Wade expressed 
support for African Unity and described the importance of his 
country's role as OIC chair in connecting with Muslim Ummah 
(community). 
 
¶17. (U) FINLAND: President Tarja Halonen discussed the need 
for measures addressing climate change to be fair and 
balanced and offered his hope that the Copenhagen Summit will 
be a success. She contended that climate change, gender 
equality, and food production are most critical to those 
living in poverty. She noted that the majority of the 
impoverished and hungry in the world are women and expressed 
concern that climate change will further reduce global food 
production. Halonen urged leaders to take additional steps in 
promoting disarmament and non-proliferation. 
 
¶18. (U) ZAMBIA: President Rupiah Bwezani Banda stated the 
financial crisis was taking a huge toll on his country and 
recommended that reforms be enacted to prevent future such 
events. The President strongly urged leaders to focus on 
climate change, pointing out the devastating effects of 
desertification and drought, while taking into account the 
special needs of developing countries. Banda reiterated the 
call of other African leaders in urging that the UN Security 
Council be expanded to include additional permanent and 
non-permanent members. Banda criticized the ongoing U.S. 
economic embargo against Cuba as unfair and unjustified and 
said that now is the "time for it to be lifted." 
 
¶19. (U) CROATIA: President Stjepan Mesic stated that with 
respect to the world,s problems today, "the consequences are 
always global." He recommended that a new world order be put 
in place to tackle the economic situation and that member 
states create a shared social and economic model. Mesic 
registered support for a dialogue between civilizations and 
called for the global community to fight discrimination. 
¶20. (U) MARSHALL ISLANDS:  President Tomeing echoed the 
sentiment of other island nations, calling on member states 
to take urgent steps to assure that global carbon emissions 
peak no later than 2015. He stressed the moral obligation for 
countries to seize the opportunity presented to them in 
Copenhagen and expressed hope that the United States will 
increase its participation in the debate. On the issue of 
non-proliferation, the President said that he was encouraged 
by the session led earlier the same day in the Security 
Council by President Obama. Tomeing lamented nuclear weapons 
production, citing the testing of dozens of bombs in the 
Marshall Islands as a continuing disaster for his country. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000997  005 OF 005 
 
 
The Marshall Islands also commented on its special 
relationship with the United States and praised its soldiers 
that have fought with U.S. forces. 
 
¶21. (U) MALTA:  Prime Minister Lawrence Gonzi addressed the 
importance of climate change and called for leaders to 
embrace a global solution. The PM noted that Malta plays an 
intermediary role between Africa and Europe and reflected on 
the challenges of the many African refugees and asylum 
seekers who show up on their shores. While Malta promises to 
"honor our international obligations vis-avis genuine 
refugees", the PM asked the U.N. to take greater steps in 
dealing with illegal immigration "so as to find solutions to 
a humanitarian problem that countries like Malta and other 
Mediterranean countries are facing in an unprecedented 
manner." He reminded delegates of Malta's long historical 
commitment to the two-state solution for Palestine and Israel. 
 
¶22. (U) GEORGIA: President Mikheil Saakashvili gave an 
impassioned speech condemning Russia for its military actions 
in Georgia and accusing it of the lion share of wrongdoing 
for the hostilities that took place between the two 
countries. The President bemoaned the hundreds killed and 
wounded and claimed that Russian brutality had gone 
unpunished. He pleaded with leaders to recognize that 
Russia,s actions are typical and that they "will do it 
again, unless they are stopped." He declared that Russia,s 
intervention had been against international norms and law. 
Saakashvilli offered thanks to the U.S. for its support 
during the conflict as well as to Vice-President Biden for 
his visit to Georgia this past summer. Saakashvili noted that 
he shared President Obama,s assessment, that "new walls 
should not divide us." He declared that his country will 
prevail and claimed that, "Georgia is winning the peace." 
Towards the end of the speech, President Saakashvilli praised 
the assassinated human rights activist Anna Politkovskaya, 
referring to her as a personal hero. 
Rice