09USUNNEWYORK251
SRSG FALL BRIEFS SECURITY COUNCIL ON CAR
Thu Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
P 121700Z MAR 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6077
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY BANGUI PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA PRIORITYUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000251 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPKO PREF PREL UNSC CD CT SU
SUBJECT: SRSG FALL BRIEFS SECURITY COUNCIL ON CAR 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On March 10, the Council was briefed on recent 
developments in the Central African Republic (CAR) by SRSG 
Fall, along with Belgium Perm Rep Grauls, who chairs the 
Central African Republic (CAR) configuration of the 
Peacebuilding Commission.  CAR Perm Rep Poukre-Kono also 
addressed the Council, urging implementation of the Secretary 
General's (SYG) proposal for an integrated peacebuilding 
office.  French Perm Rep Ripert indicated that France would 
table a Presidential Statement (PRST) concerning integration 
of the UN mission in CAR.  Council members recognized 
positive developments in CAR, particularly implementation of 
the recommendations from the Inclusive Political Dialogue, 
but expressed concern with recent violence in northern CAR. 
Most members expressed support for the French PRST proposal. 
End Summary. 
 
SRSG Fall and Perm Rep Grauls Brief the Council 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  The Special Representative of the Secretary General for 
the Central African Republic, Francois Fall, was joined by 
the chair of CAR configuration of the Peacebuilding 
Commission, Belgium Perm Rep Johann Grauls, in briefing the 
Security Council on recent developments in CAR.  SRSG Fall 
will leave his position in CAR soon; this was his last 
Council briefing.  Fall stated that, despite the positive 
developments created by implementation of the Inclusive 
Political Dialogue recommendations, CAR,s progress toward 
stability remained precarious.  Fall cited recent attacks on 
government facilities, riots in Bangui and the refusal of two 
rebel groups to join the Libreville peace process as 
challenges to stability.  Fall also noted that the main rebel 
groups failed to meet a February deadline to provide a list 
of their combatants prior to the launching of Disarmament, 
Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) and were now expected 
to submit their lists by March 19. 
 
¶3.  Belgium Perm Rep Grauls spoke for the Peacebuilding 
Commission, noting the need for donors to assist the country 
in tackling "a deterioration in living conditions."  Grauls 
listed several concerns:  the resurgence of violence in the 
North leading to additional displaced persons; the need for 
all parties to continue to implement the terms of the 
Libreville Peace Agreement and the National Dialogue; and the 
lack of progress toward launching DDR.  Grauls said the PBC 
would work to raise donor financing for DDR.  He asked the 
government to finalize disbursement of the Central African 
Economic and Monetary Community's (CEMAC) 16 million USD 
contribution towards DDR.  Grauls also urged the SYG to 
quickly appoint Fall's successor.  CAR Perm Rep Poukre-Kono 
briefly spoke, emphasizing the need for the UN to fully 
implement the SYG,s proposal for an integrated peacebuilding 
office capable of addressing security, development, and 
political issues with a coordinated strategy in CAR. 
 
Council Members React 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  Security Council members expressed support for swift 
implementation of an UN integrated office in CAR and asked 
the SYG to move quickly to appoint Fall,s successor.  France 
proposed, and other members supported, a PRST endorsing the 
SYG,s plan.   In response to a question from Mexico, SRSG 
Fall said the integrated office would be funded at the same 
level as the current United Nations Peacebuilding Support 
Office in CAR (BONUCA) for 2009. 
 
¶5.  France and Uganda emphasized the need for countries with 
influence over rebel groups not participating in the peace 
process to urge those groups to commit to the Libreville 
terms.  Libya,s intervention focused on CAR President 
Bozizie,s trip to Tripoli last week.  Libyan DPR Dabbashi 
said that Qadhafi and Bozizie had discussed "ways and means" 
to help all rebel groups join the Libreville process.  (Note: 
 Rebel leader Abdoulaye Miskine reportedly resides in Tripoli 
and has signed, but not ratified or implemented the 
Libreville terms.  End Note) 
 
¶6.  In response to questions from several delegations, 
including the United States, on the demobilization of child 
soldiers, SRSG Fall noted that he would seek a dual-hatted 
child/gender expert to work with donors to execute a 
demobilization program.  Fall summarized the tasks for the 
new integrated peacebuilding office as: (1) maintaining 
momentum for implementation of the recommendations of the 
National Political Dialogue; (2) swiftly implementing DDR as 
a part of overall Security Sector Reform; (3) immediately 
beginning preparations for elections in 2009 and 2010; (4) 
convincing Miskine and other outstanding rebel leaders to 
join the peace process, perhaps through the good offices of 
the Secretary-General; and (5) launching the rebuilding of 
the country, including implementation of the Development Pole 
strategy for extending basic social services outside of the 
capital. 
 
Wolff