09USUNNEWYORK1050
UNGA: U.S. CO-SPONSORED RESOLUTION ON AFGHANISTAN
Tue Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO0950
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUCNDT #1050/01 3212317
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 172317Z NOV 09 ZDK
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7655
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 001050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D C O P Y ADDED WEB LINKS PARA 1 , 2 , 3 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PREF PGOV KPKO UNGA AF
SUBJECT: UNGA: U.S. CO-SPONSORED RESOLUTION ON AFGHANISTAN 
SUPPORTING ELECTIONS AND SECURITY ADOPTED BY CONSENSUS 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001050  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: The General Assembly met in plenary to 
discuss the Report of the United Nations Secretary-General on 
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for 
international peace and security.  A draft resolution, 
co-sponsored by the United States and over 90 countries, 
passed by consensus.  The resolution praises Afghanistan for 
holding elections and underscored the fight against extremism 
and the need to improve the security situation. The U.S. 
statement affirmed its support for the newly elected 
government and underscored the damaging role of the Taliban, 
Al Qaida, and other extremist groups. Delegations widely 
condemned the recent attacks in Kabul and called for measures 
to enhance security, often connecting development efforts 
with peace-building.  Afghanistan joined the chorus in 
praising the recent elections, while pointing out the flaws 
with the process, and placed the election at the forefront of 
efforts to improve the rule of law and create stability. E.U. 
countries led calls for greater protection against civilian 
casualties, with most pointing out that the majority of 
events are caused not by international forces, but by the 
Taliban. Many expressed support for UNAMA's mission with 
several countries including Norway and Indonesia advocating 
for an expanded budget and mandate.  Russia and a host of 
others emphasized the urgency of combating the flow of drugs. 
In addition to the United States, the following countries 
delivered interventions: Germany , Afghanistan, Sweden 
(E.U.), Norway, the Russian Federation, Pakistan, Uzbekistan, 
 Poland, Turkey, Kuwait, Canada, New Zealand, Iran, Italy, 
India, Slovakia, Republic of Korea, Libya, the United 
Kingdom, Indonesia, Australia, and France. The press release 
for the debate can be found 
at:http://www.un.org/news/press/docs/2009/ga1 0884.doc.htm 
 
¶2.  (U) RESOLUTION CO-SPONSORED BY UNITED STATES ADOPTED BY 
CONSENSUS:  The U.S. and over 90 other countries co-sponsored 
draft resolution A/64/L.8, which was adopted by consensus at 
the close of the session. The resolution expresses concern at 
the security situation in Afghanistan, underscores the fight 
against terrorist and extremist groups, calls for increased 
and improved civilian-military relations, and praises the 
country for holding national elections. Full text of the 
draft resolution can be found 
at:http://daccess-dds-ny-un.org/doc/undoc/LTD /n09/593/89/pdf/no959389.p 
df?OpenELment 
 
¶3.  (U) UNITED STATES AFFIRMS SUPPORT FOR NEW GOVERNMENT: 
Ambassador Erdman delivered the U.S. intervention, 
recognizing the continuing efforts of the Afghan government 
and security forces in addressing the "challenges in 
security, governance, human rights, and the rule of law." It 
stressed that "violent attacks by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and 
other extremist and criminal groups undermine efforts to 
bring stability, security and a representative government to 
Afghanistan."  The U.S. promised to "support the new 
government" in delivering better "security, governance, 
justice and economic progress to the Afghan people." Full 
text of the U.S. statement can be accessed at: 
http://usun.state.gov/briefing/statements/200 9/131690.htm 
 
¶4.  (U) DELEGATES COMMENT ON ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES, ISAF, 
AND PRT'S: Pakistan affirmed the importance of its "security 
and intelligence cooperation, including through the 
Tripartite Commission, which also includes the United States 
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). This 
cooperation is essential to cement our gains in the campaign 
against terrorism and extremism."  Pakistan stressed the 
importance of preventing cross-border movements, highlighting 
its efforts to create 1000 border posts with Afghanistan. 
Pakistan also stressed the need for the GOA and ISAF to 
step-up border protection measures on the Afghan-side of the 
border. Poland noted the importance of creating effective 
civil-military cooperation, pointing to its contribution of 
30 civilian personnel working with the US-led PRT in Ghazni 
as a noteworthy effort. New Zealand said that it welcomes 
"ISAF Commander, General McChrystal's renewed focus on 
training and mentoring" and affirmed that "empowering Afghan 
forces to lead on security in Afghanistan is a key commitment 
for the international community." Iran commented that the 
"military operations by foreign forces is yet another concern 
preoccupying the people of Afghanistan."  Iran suggested 
"instead of dispatching more troops to the country, the 
Afghan National Army and Police should be strengthened in an 
expeditious manner." Italy reaffirmed its unwavering 
commitment to its troop contribution and in fighting 
terrorism and the cultivation of narcotic drugs.  Australia 
noted its plans to increase troop numbers in Afghanistan from 
1,100 to around 1,550 as well as providing funding of $US200 
million over five years to the Afghan National Army Trust 
Fund. Numerous countries stressed the importance of PRT's and 
highlighted their own contributions to the teams, the 
Republic of Korea citing its recently announced plans to 
launch a PRT and noting its support of a Korean medical and 
vocational training team co-located with the U.S. PRT in 
Bagram. 
 
¶5.   (U) AFGHANISTAN NOTES IMPROVEMENTS, BLASTS THE TALIBAN, 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001050  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
AND CALLS FOR RECONCILIATION: Afghan Permanent Representative 
Ambassador Zahir Tanin claimed that the situation has 
improved, pointing out that "eight years ago, we were 
debating how to build what did not exist: a government, an 
army and police force, and a functioning economic and social 
life."  Tanin said that the emphasis is now on building an 
"effective government, a well-trained army and police, and a 
productive economy."  He took a hard line on extremist 
elements, explaining that "we missed the chance to wipe out 
the Taliban, al-Qaeda and other terrorists." Later, the 
Ambassador claimed that "our aim is not to kill every Taliban 
fighter," but instead to isolate them and to "earn the trust 
of the people, and encourage the engagement of Afghan 
civilians in the peace and reconciliation process." In the 
spirit of reconciliation, Afghanistan will "welcome any 
Afghan who is willing to join the peace process and respect 
the Afghan Constitution."  Tanin called the elections "as 
free as possible, as fair as possible, and as transparent as 
possible" given that they took place in an "emerging 
democracy threatened by conflict." Tanin said that in moving 
forward, Afghanistan will "create and maintain two compacts: 
one with the Afghan people, and one with the international 
community." He stated that the domestic compact will 
emphasize good governance, economic development, and the rule 
of law, while the compact with the international community 
will emphasize "our shared commitment to pursue security, 
development and good governance." 
 
¶6.  (U) KABUL ATTACKED CONDEMNED:  Nearly every country 
immediately condemned the recent bombing of a UN facility in 
Kabul. In reference to the event, Poland reflected a 
sentiment expressed by many delegations, stating that it 
"reiterates its determination to combat all forms of 
terrorism and strongly condemns all acts of terror, 
especially directed against those who work towards the 
country's stability and security." Kuwait "decries the 
increase in targeting United Nations missions, since this 
leads to an increase in the number of victims among civilian 
Afghanis." France expressed support for the families of the 
victims and to the Afghans who had been "sorely tested" in 
this situation. Sweden affirmed that the "E.U. salutes half a 
century of UN commitment to Afghanistan and hopes that it 
will be possible, following its security review, for the UN 
presence there to return to full strength." 
 
¶7.  (U) ELECTIONS PRAISED DESPITE FLAWS: Sweden reaffirmed 
that the "European Union has supported these elections, and 
the Afghan institutions responsible for conducting them, 
throughout the process and will continue to do so" and noted 
that they "stand ready to assist Afghanistan to review and 
improve the electoral system." Poland said "participation in 
the election by young people as well as the public engagement 
in the election campaign, provide us with grounds for 
cautious optimism" but also noted that it deplores "the 
numerous electoral irregularities and fraud." Turkey praised 
the fact that Afghanistan has now been through two elections, 
noting that "each election experience undoubtedly constitutes 
a step in strengthening democracy." India commended the 
"determination of the Afghan people who participated in this 
historic election process, notwithstanding threats and 
intimidation by the Taliban." New Zealand welcomed "the 
respect shown by all parties for the electoral complaints 
process," and said "attention must now be focused on securing 
a safe and secure future for Afghanistan. To this end we call 
on President Karzai to move swiftly to form a new, inclusive, 
credible and effective Government." 
 
¶8.  (U) E.U. DELEGATIONS STRESS PREVENTION OF CIVILIAN 
CASUALTIES: Germany clearly defined the debate on civilian 
casualties, noting that "on the one hand, the resolution 
clearly stresses the fact that the Taliban, al-Qaida and 
other extremist and criminal groups are responsible for the 
wide majority of civilian casualties" while "on the other 
hand, the resolution calls on the security forces to continue 
its intensified efforts aimed at ensuring the protection of 
civilians." Germany mentioned that it may be necessary to 
review the tactics used by security forces in this regard. 
Sweden said that the priority of the E.U. is to ensure that a 
stable security environment allows the development agenda to 
move forward and in this regard that "everything possible 
should be done to avoid civilian casualties."   Poland 
expressed that it "deeply regrets any civilian casualty" and 
added "the Taliban and other anti-Government elements are 
responsible for almost three-fourths of civilian deaths." 
Poland said protection of the Afghan population is "the 
central and essential element of the international presence 
in Afghanistan."  Libya stated there must be programs to 
ensure the security of Afghan civilians and expressed concern 
that the report of the Secretary General does not mention 
detention centers and a determination as to whether human 
rights are being upheld there. The United Kingdom commented 
that "any civilian life lost is a tragedy" and contrasted its 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001050  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
efforts at protecting lives to that of the Taliban, which it 
claimed is responsible for most civilian deaths. 
 
 
¶9.  (U) THE TALIBAN: INDIA SAYS NO TO "GOOD" AND "BAD" 
DICHOTOMIES:  The Russian Federation stated that the 
isolation of extremist groups should remain a priority for 
Afghanistan and the international community.  Pakistan 
declared that "the core of violence and conflict in 
Afghanistan emanate from terrorist groups, foreign militants 
such as Al-Qaeda, and militant Taliban who are not prepared 
to reconcile." India said that it is time to "go beyond 
unworkable divisions between 'good' and 'bad' Taliban" and 
said that "terrorism cannot be compartmentalized," adding 
"Faustian bargains with terrorists often result in such 
forces turning on the very powers that sustained them in the 
past." 
 
¶10.  (U) RUSSIA AND OTHERS STRESS URGENCY OF CURTALING THE 
DRUG TRADE:  Russia contended that efforts to control the 
trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan have thus far been 
ineffective and called for intensifying international efforts 
to stem the flow of the drug trade including creating tighter 
controls to monitor money laundering.  Russia referenced the 
"Channel Operation," a recent operation involving 139,000 
officials in Afghanistan that led to 26,000 criminal cases, 
as one successful endeavor in the long fight to combat 
trafficking.  Pakistan claimed that the insecurity of the 
country is "exploited by criminals and drug traffickers" and 
"is the greatest factor impeding progress in Afghanistan." 
Uzbekistan pointed out the links between the drug trade and 
the financing of militants and noted that the narcotics issue 
underscores that the situation in Afghanistan cannot be fixed 
via military means alone.  Kuwait claimed that "the strong 
ties that exist between the drug trade and the terrorist 
activities of the extremist group pose a serious threat to 
security, the rule of law and the development of the 
country." Iran holds that combating drug trafficking 
"requires a long-term and multi-faceted strategy" and urged 
the international community to do more. 
 
¶11.  (U) SECURITY, DEVELOPMENT, AND THE RULE OF LAW:  Many 
delegations focused on the promotion of security, 
development, and the rule of law. Turkey stated that a 
comprehensive approach to Afghanistan must account for 
linkages between "security, governance, rule of law, human 
rights and social and economic development." It stressed the 
need for the "Afghan military and police to take the lead and 
ownership of national security."  Pakistan stressed that 
"peace and economic development in Afghanistan can be brought 
only by a stable government enjoying the majority support of 
Afghan people." Pakistan underscored that the "key to 
long-term stability in Afghanistan is capacity building of 
Afghanistan's security institutions: the Afghan National 
Army, the Afghan National Police, and the relevant 
Ministries." Slovakia stressed the importance of addressing 
key humanitarian and health concerns, mentioning the fact 
that the country remains amongst the four countries with the 
worst success rates in eradicating polio, and lauding its 
work with UNICEF in providing vaccinations to 250,000 
children there.  Indonesia placed some of the development 
burden on Afghanis, stating that "every Afghan has to embrace 
development and embrace a new Afghanistan."  Sweden 
acknowledged the "key role of Pakistan for stability in the 
region."  Germany emphasized fight corruption as a key to 
achieving good governance and creating "an enabling legal and 
political environment for stability." Germany hopes that the 
resolution will encourage "the implementation of Afghan-led 
reintegration, reconciliation and transitional justice 
processes." 
 
¶12.  (U) SUPPORT FOR UNAMA: Norway noted that the "key role 
played by UNAMA in Afghanistan is reflected in the 
significant increase in the mission's budget for 2010" and 
stressed that "only with a sufficient level of predictable 
funding will UNAMA be able to implement its mandate 
effectively. We should not expect more from the UN than we 
are willing to invest in it."  Indonesia called for an 
expansion of UNAMA's capabilities, resources, and 
country-wide presence. Canada called upon "the international 
community to unite behind UNAMA and give it the necessary 
tools to continue its work in Afghanistan" and stressed that 
UNAMA must play a major coordination and outreach role "in 
the more difficult areas of the country." The United Kingdom 
affirmed its support of UNAMA and the difficult work they do 
in a challenging operational environment. 
 
¶13.  (U) REFUGEE SITUATION HIGHLIGHTED BY PAKISTAN AND IRAN: 
Pakistan bemoaned the long-term refugee situation, noting 
that it has "housed over three million Afghan refugees for 
the last three decades" and underscoring the "enormous 
social, economic and security costs already paid by the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001050  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
people of Pakistan."  Pakistan "remains committed to the 
voluntary, gradual, safe and dignified return of all Afghan 
refugees." Iran noted that it has "extended its hospitality 
to over three million Afghan nationals throughout the past 
three decades" and that there remain one million registered 
and one million unregistered refugees in Iran. 
Wolff