10USUNNEWYORK26
SOMALIA: TERRORISM THREAT OF UNSTABLE SOMALIA;
Wed Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2415
OO RUEHIK
DE RUCNDT #0026/01 0200036
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200036Z JAN 10
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA IMMEDIATE 2211
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA IMMEDIATE 1911
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI IMMEDIATE 0012
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM IMMEDIATE 1773
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI IMMEDIATE 0002
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8019UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000026 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC PTER MARR PHUM SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: TERRORISM THREAT OF UNSTABLE SOMALIA; 
UNSC SUPPORTS EXTENDING AMISON'S MANDATE 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000026  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  On January 14, UN Special Representative 
for Somalia Ould-Abdallah briefed the Security Council on the 
situation in Somalia.  He focused on the terrorism threat 
posed by Somalia and urged the international community to 
boost financial support to both AMISOM and the TFG's security 
sector. Commissioner of the African Union Commission Lamamra 
and League of Arab States Permanent Observer Mahmassani 
agreed with Ould-Abdallah's security assessment and called 
for strengthening AMISOM and the TFG to avoid regional 
destabilization.  Permanent Representative of Somalia Duale 
confirmed that the TFG will continue to reach out to all 
elements and focus on reconciliation in 2010. Although 
Council members agreed that greater security is key to 
stabilizing Somalia, there was little agreement with 
Ould-Abdullah's call for a new comprehensive strategy.  All 
delegations agreed to renew AMISOM's mandate, to continue 
support for the TFG and the Djibouti Peace Process, and to 
encourage the timely disbursement of financial pledges. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
SRSG OULD-ABDULLAH BRIEFS ON SOMALIA 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On January 14, Special Representative for the 
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Political 
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah briefed the 
Security Council on the situation in Somalia.  Ould-Abdallah 
stated that the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has 
made progress despite ongoing attacks by armed opposition 
groups. The TFG's progress included consolidating its 
authority in Mogadishu, establishing a federal budget, and 
training security forces.  In spite of this progress, 
Ould-Abdallah noted two challenges to stabilizing Somalia. 
The first is an "absence of concrete commitment to Somalia" 
by the international community, which has encouraged 
extremism. The second is translating international political 
support into concrete financial support.  Ould-Abdallah 
underscored the terrorism threat posed by Somalia's 
continuing lack of security, and stressed that the 
international community must address the crisis' root causes, 
lamenting the eight billion dollars spent over the past 15 
years that addressed only the symptoms of instability. 
Ould-Abdallah asked for AMISOM troop salaries to be increased 
to the level of UN peacekeepers, as well as for the timely 
disbursement of salaries and provision of equipment.  He also 
urged the Council to act against spoilers and called for an 
integrated UN Mission in Somalia. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African 
Union Commission Ramtane Lamamra stated that extremists had 
stepped up their actions in Somalia in hopes of unraveling 
the Djibouti Peace Process.  He said that the links between 
al-Shabaab and international jihadism have been confirmed, 
along with the relationship between al-Qaida and the influx 
of foreign fighters into Somalia. Compared with the entire 
previous period of its existence, twice as many AMISOM forces 
were killed in 2009.  Lamamra called for an extension of 
AMISOM's mandate for 12 months and asked the Council to 
impose a no-fly zone and naval blockade to help thwart the 
insurgency.  Permanent Observer for the 
League of Arab States Yahya Mahmassani described the 
situation in Somalia as the main challenge to peace and 
security in the Horn of Africa.  He stated that a political 
solution must be based on national consensus achieved through 
the Djibouti Peace Process and that all political parties 
must be included in the dialogue.  He urged the international 
community to meet the humanitarian challenge through close 
cooperation with aid agencies, and called for regional groups 
and states to make financial contributions to Somalia and to 
support AMISOM. He also asked the Council to "take necessary 
measures" to tackle the root causes of piracy in Somalia. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Permanent Representative of Somalia Elmi Ahmed 
Duale stressed the importance of enhancing the rule of law 
capacity, especially the judiciary.  He also emphasized that 
Somali national security forces, including the army, police 
and coast guard must be rebuilt.  To do so, he asked for the 
urgent release of financial pledges made in Brussels, stating 
that the delay in resource provision is causing major 
difficulties for the TFG.  Duale highlighted the success of 
his government's new transparent financial mechanism, created 
by a private international firm, and noted the 1,000 coast 
guard forces trained by the TFG who lack equipment to do 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000026  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
their job.  He explained that the difficult security 
situation called for a much larger UN footprint and asked for 
AMISOM to become part of a UN Peacekeeping operation.  He 
stated that the TFG will continue to reach out to all 
elements and plans to focus on reconciliation, recovery and 
reconstruction and regional cooperation this year. 
 
 
COUNCIL FOCUSES ON SECURITY AND FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) In closed consultations, Ould-Abdullah urged Council 
members to move in a new strategic direction vis--vis 
Somalia, stating that "dialogue has become a business."  He 
called for a review of the international community's approach 
and said that the current level of assistance is not 
sustainable.  Somalia needs to move from a "failed state to a 
fragile state."  In response, the United Kingdom rejected 
Ould-Abdullah's call for a new direction, stating that the 
international community has, "the right set of priorities; 
the key is implementation of strategy."  France agreed, 
stating, "there is no realistic 
alternative strategy for what we are doing."  All Council 
members focused on the importance of supporting the Djibouti 
Peace Process, boosting the TFG's security sector capacity 
and disbursing financial pledges made in Brussels.  Many 
noted the importance of greater donor coordination and the 
TFG's need to expand the area under its control. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) All delegations called for AMISOM to be 
strengthened to 8,000 troops and Uganda asked for the timely 
disbursement of equipment, salary payments, as well as 
increased troop rotations.  Ambassador DiCarlo emphasized 
improving Somalia's security to create political stability, 
and called for the deployment of AMISOM to its 
fully-authorized strength.  She noted the United States' 
disbursement of more than $171 million in bilateral 
assistance for logistical and equipment support, as well as 
pre-deployment training for AMISOM's troops.  Many 
delegations asked for a 12-month renewal of AMISOM's mandate, 
including Russia, the United States and the United Kingdom. 
Several delegations linked the situation in Somali to future 
instability in the region and lamented the role of outside 
spoilers.  Reconstruction and development was also raised, 
with Turkey offering to host a conference on this topic. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Ambassador DiCarlo noted the dire humanitarian 
situation, and emphasized that the United States will 
continue to work with the international community to meet 
Somalia's needs. The United Kingdom stated that the Council 
can play a role by encouraging resumption of the World Food 
Program's activities in southern Somalia and by encouraging 
countries to boost financial contributions.  Several 
delegations expressed concern over the recruitment of child 
soldiers; Lebanon expressed concern about the risks faced by 
journalists in Somalia.  Many pointed to piracy as another 
symptom of Somalia's instability, including Nigeria, which 
noted the phenomenon of "copy-cat"  piracy off the coast of 
West Africa.  The United Kingdom said that the international 
community is "too complacent" on piracy, and that it needs to 
address the long-term causes, rather than only the symptoms. 
Lebanon echoed these sentiments, recommending that the 
international community focus on piracy's economic and social 
causes. 
 
UN's Presence in Somalia 
------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Several delegations, including the United Kingdom, 
stated that the time is not right for a UN Peacekeeping 
operation in Somalia.  However, a number of delegations, 
including Gabon, Lebanon, Turkey, the United Kingdom and 
Nigeria, expressed support for the incremental approach to 
establishing a UN footprint in Somalia as mandated by UNSCR 
¶1872.  Japan agreed that the UN should move to the second 
phase of the approach, a light UN footprint in Somalia. 
Brazil said that it supports the "prompt construction of UN 
facilities in Somalia."  Ambassador DiCarlo also welcomed the 
UN's work to establish a presence, including UNPOS's recent 
security sector assessment, co-led by the United States and 
the European Union. 
RICE