04BRASILIA2803

Fri Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 002803 

SIPDIS 

SENSITIVE 

PORT-AU-PRINCE FOR AMB. FOLEY 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BR HA POL MIL

¶1. (SBU) On November 9, Brazilian Federal Deputy Maninha paid a courtesy call on Ambassador Danilovich. Maninha is the current president of COPA (Confederation of the Parliaments of the Americas), and this week she is leading a seven-member delegation (from three countries) on a fact-finding trip to Haiti. She asked our assistance in arranging a meeting with Ambassador James Foley. 

¶2. (SBU) Deputada Maninha is a good friend and contact of the US embassy here. She has traveled to the US on embassy-sponsored programs, and she is currently the Vice-Chair of the Brazilian Chamber's Foreign Affairs Committee. As current president of COPA, she is leading a seven-member delegation to Haiti in order to report back to the Brazilian Congress and COPA on the state of affairs there. She requests a meeting with Ambassador Foley or the DCM, and we support her request. 

¶3. (SBU) Delegation members are: 

1- Federal Deputy Maninha, Brazil 

2- Representative Charlotte L'Ecuyer, Canada 

3- Mr. Jopel Monsils, Assistant to Rep. L'Ecuyer 

4- Federal Deputy Fernando Gabeira, Brazil. 

5- Federal Deputy Clair Flora Martins, Brazil 

6- Mr. Joelson Dias, Assistant to Dep. Maninha 

7- Sra. Jannette Madriz, Venezuela. 

¶4. (SBU) We understand that the delegation will be in Haiti during November 12-15. We apologize for the short notice. Post would greatly appreciate if Embassy Port-au-Prince could meet with Maninha's delegation at your convenience. Due to the short notice, you can respond by contacting the Brazilian Embassy in Port-au-Prince; or contacting Embassy Brasilia (Poloff Richard Reiter at work: 55-61-312-7343, cel: XXXXXX; or Pol Asst Barbara Ramos at work: 55-61-312-7075), or Deputy Maninha's office (Ms. Inae at work: 55-61-915-1952, or cel: XXXXX). 

¶5. (SBU) Biographical Note: 

- Dep. Maninha (pronounced "ma-NEEN-ya") is a Federal Deputy from President Lula's Workers' Party (PT); she represents the Federal District of Brasilia. A physician by background, this is her first term in the federal Congress after two terms in the state assembly. As a member, and now Vice-Chair, of the Foreign Affairs Committee, she has been active in discussions on free trade and Haiti. She comes from the Workers' Party's left-wing but is a reasonable interlocutor regarding US foreign policy issues. She understands English but speaks it only haltingly. 

- Dep. Fernando Gabeira is a more complicated case. As a leftist journalist in 1969 opposed to the military regime, he was part of a group that kidnapped US Ambassador to Brazil, Charles Elbrick. Gabeira released Elbrick after three days, in return for the regime's releasing a dozen political prisoners. Gabeira is now a respected Federal Deputy who founded Brazil's Green Party and later joined Lula's Workers' Party. He is currently "without party". Because of the kidnapping, Gabeira is ineligible to receive a US visa, and US ambassadors here have chosen not to meet with him formally, though there are occasional informal conversations. 

(NOTE: Dep. Maninha told us that her group would be "understanding" if Amb. Foley chooses not to meet with Dep. Gabeira.) 

While Gabeira is serious in conversation and his views are respected in the Brazilian Congress, given the context, post suggests that he not be included in Embassy Port-au-Prince meetings with this delegation. 

DANILOVICH