08ANKARA1170
TURKEY: MILITARY MACHINATIONS ALLEGED, CRITICIZED
Thu Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3389
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHAK #1170/01 1780351
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 260351Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6667
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 1255
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0108
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU PRIORITY
RHMFISS/425ABG IZMIR TU//CC// PRIORITY
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5// PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP:PDUSDP/ISA:EUR/ISA:NESA/DSCA// PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2023 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: MILITARY MACHINATIONS ALLEGED, CRITICIZED 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1167 
     ¶B. ANKARA 0680 
     ¶C. ANKARA 0430 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Kim DeBlauw for reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Chastened by the unintended consequences of its April 
2007 "e-memorandum," Turkey's military has refrained from 
publicly commenting on politics for well over a year. 
However, a series of media reports suggest the brass has been 
busy behind the scenes seeking to influence key institutions 
and public opinion.  These revelations have subjected the TGS 
-- and prospective Chief of Defense Gen Ilker Basbug -- to 
unprecedented criticism, including from erstwhile allies. 
Staunch secularists, meanwhile, are praising the military 
machinations as essential to protecting the state from 
Islamist subversion at the hands of the ruling Justice and 
Development Party (AKP).  Most Turks expect the military to 
continue to exercise its influence behind the scenes through 
sympathetic NGOs, academics and journalists.  More direct 
military intervention is unlikely as long as AKP legislative 
initiatives, and the party itself, remain boxed in by the 
judiciary.  End Summary 
 
Clandestine TGS - Judiciary Meeting 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) For all its efforts to stay out of the political 
limelight since AKP's stunning victory in July 2007 
elections, the Turkish General Staff (TGS) has been 
implicated in a series of political scandals suggesting 
considerable behind-the-scenes machinations.  The 
acknowledgment by both Constitutional Court deputy chief 
justice Osman Paksut and Land Forces Commander (and 
prospective Defense Chief) Ilker Basbug that they met out of 
public view in early March, just ten days before the 
initiation of the closure case against the AKP (ref a), is 
only the most recent revelation of covert and potentially 
conspiratorial relations between the military and other state 
institutions. 
 
Allegations of Coup Plotting 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Basbug-Paksut brouhaha follows a series of 
disclosures of clandestine military plotting over the past 
four years, including the April 2007 publication in the 
weekly magazine Nokta of the purported diaries of former 
Naval Chief Ozden Ornek.  The "Ornek diaries" describe 
anti-government coup plotting at the highest levels of the 
General Staff in 2004, when Gen Hilmi Ozkok was CHOD.  Ornek 
and Ozkok denied the legitimacy of the diaries and Nokta was 
shut down by its owner soon after, presumably under pressure 
from quarters angry at the magazine's revelations.  Still, 
many commentators believe Nokta's reporting reflected a coup 
in the making. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The independent liberal daily Taraf has recently 
published an alleged TGS secret memorandum dated March 2006, 
which listed sympathetic journalists, academics and NGOs 
(including retired military personnel) and offered guidance 
on how to use them to influence public opinion against the 
governing party and in favor of the armed forces.  The memo 
also listed NGOs the TGS believes are financed by the U.S. 
and EU, including through the Soros Foundation and Jewish 
organizations, and which are exploited by Western powers to 
change the secular regime and divide Turkey.  The memo 
alleges as well that German-funded institutions had as their 
goal the provocation of ethnic and religious disputes in 
Turkey.  Many commentators assert that the Basbug-Paksut 
meeting and alleged TGS attempts to influence public opinion 
against the government are proof that such a TGS document not 
only exists but is being implemented. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Former military officers are also implicated in the 
so-called "Ergenekon" conspiracy (ref b), uncovered earlier 
this year.  The government's investigation has yet to run its 
course, with indictments expected soon.  Press reporting 
portrays the Ergenekon conspiracy as a well-organized and 
highly secretive effort to recruit and control academics and 
NGOs, as well as other legal and illegal groups, to be used 
 
ANKARA 00001170  002 OF 003 
 
 
in anti-government activities.  Papers have also asserted 
that evidence gathered so far during the Turkish National 
Police's Ergenekon investigation confirm the coup-plotting 
described in Ornek's diaries. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In April 2008, Taraf and other papers reported on 
former Naval Forces Commander Yener Karahanoglu's 
intervention with the Constitutional Court in April 2007, as 
the Court was preparing to rule on the quorum requirement for 
the presidential election.  The court subsequently ruled 
against the AKP, making it impossible at that juncture to 
elect Abdullah Gul as president and paving the way for early 
elections.  Similar allegations of inappropriate interference 
followed the initiation of the closure case against the AKP 
in March 2008, with media outlets alleging that the TGS had 
covertly provided the Constitutional Court with "evidence" 
that could be used to charge AKP with anti-secular 
activities. 
 
Unconvincing TGS Rebuttals...and Threats 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) The TGS has done itself no favors with its belated and 
vaguely worded rebuttals of such allegations.  The military 
was forced to acknowledge the Basbug-Paksut meeting, but 
characterized it unconvincingly as a friendly call to discuss 
the February cross-border ground operation against PKK 
terrorists in northern Iraq.  In the case of the alleged 
March 2006 memo on influencing civil society, the TGS merely 
said headquarters had never approved any such document, 
leaving open to speculation whether such a document was 
nevertheless prepared and circulated.  The TGS has drawn 
criticism for threatening to prosecute journalists reporting 
such activities. 
 
Tensions Between Military and Secular Opposition 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8. (SBU) In the midst of these revelations, the military has 
found it cannot necessarily rely on old allies -- the 
Kemalist Republic People's Party (CHP) and ultra-right 
Nationalist Action Party (MHP).  Both parties criticized the 
brass for appearing to accede to U.S. demands to end the late 
February 2008 ground operation against PKK terrorists in 
northern Iraq following the visit of Defense Secretary Gates 
to Ankara (ref c).  The TGS issued a sharply-worded rebuke, 
suggesting the opposition's criticism was tantamount to 
treason.  The AKP closure case subsequently refocused the 
military and opposition on their common interest in hobbling 
the Erdogan government, but considerable bitterness remains. 
MHP chairman Bahceli told his parliamentary group on June 10 
that "the only place we should look for solutions to the 
problems of Turkey is the Turkish Grand National Assembly." 
Bahceli was also openly critical of the military 
intransigence embodied in CHOD Buyukanit's comment that the 
closure case against the AKP was a "declaration of an already 
known fact."  Meanwhile, civil society groups have taken to 
the streets to protest the military's political maneuvers: 
several thousand activists demonstrated peacefully June 21 in 
Istanbul against military involvement in politics (septel). 
 
¶9. (SBU) Voices in favor of the military's political 
prerogatives remain strong if shrill, with Kemalist daily 
Cumhuriyet and ultra-rightist Yeni Cag excoriating any who 
dare criticize the military's right to take any measures to 
protect the secular state founded by Ataturk. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. (C) Repeated allegations of military plotting and 
influence peddling with other government institutions, and 
the General Staff's awkward rebuttals and threats of judicial 
retaliation, are meeting with increased criticism from 
mainstream opinion-makers and ordinary Turks of all political 
persuasions who believe 21st century Turkey has outgrown the 
need for military paternalism.  No longer represented as 
before in key governmental or judicial bodies due to 
legislative reforms, frustrated by the fecklessness of the 
political opposition, and offended (in one commentator's 
words) by public skepticism of its tutelage, the military 
will likely intensify its efforts to convey its views through 
sympathetic media, academic personalities, and NGOs -- some 
with dubious civic credentials.  (A prominent Ankara academic 
 
ANKARA 00001170  003 OF 003 
 
 
and embassy contact reports he and selected colleagues are 
periodically summoned to TGS headquarters to be lectured on 
TGS views on political issues.) 
 
¶11. (C) More direct military intervention in politics remains 
unlikely as long as the judiciary continues to stymie the 
government's legislative initiatives and the AKP remains 
under threat of closure.  General Basbug, now under a cloud 
himself, will inherit a military organization that retains 
wide popular respect, but whose political role is subject to 
increasing public skepticism. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
WILSON