08ANKARA1701
TURKEY: MORE ARRESTED IN ERGENEKON INVESTIGATION;
Wed Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0018
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #1701/01 2681541
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241541Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7546
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5// PRIORITY
RUZEJAA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP:PDUSDP/ISA:EUR/ISA:NESA/DSCA// PRIORITY
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TU PRIORITY
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PHUM TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: MORE ARRESTED IN ERGENEKON INVESTIGATION; 
ALLEGED NETWORK MAPPED OUT 
 
REF: A. ISTANBUL 505 
     ¶B. ISTANBUL 499 
     ¶C. ANKARA 1217 
 
Classified By: DCM Doug Silliman for reason 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary:  As many as 17 more suspects were detained 
on September 23 in the latest round of police action in the 
investigation of the alleged anti-government Ergenekon 
organization.  Detainees included a former Istanbul district 
mayor, a former senior police official, a prominent 
journalist, and a retired Army prosecutor.  A chart 
portraying an elaborate organization of the alleged network 
prepared by the prosecutor was leaked to the press.  A 
retired military attorney told us that extreme political 
frustrations of Kemalist "patriots" since the ascendency of 
the AK Party make the Ergenekon network plausible, but the 
prosecution must address the defense's likely challenge on 
the legality of how it obtained its evidence.  Retired 
General Riza Kucukoglu acknowledged that there was probably 
to some of the cases and said the military does not support 
any entities that might undermine its chain of command.   As 
the waves of arrests continue in the Ergenekon case, the 
secular media will increasingly pressure the government to 
present solid evidence against suspects already indicted, and 
to indict those who remain in detention without charges. 
Court hearings in the case are scheduled to begin October 20 
in Istanbul. End Summary 
 
MORE ARRESTS 
------------ 
 
¶2. (U)  According to inconsistent press reports, the eighth 
and latest wave of detentions included Gurbuz Capan, former 
mayor of Istanbul's Esenyurt district; Adil Serdar Sacan, 
senior police official and founder of the Istanbul police 
organized crime unit; Tuncay Ozkan, founder of Kanalturk TV 
and outspoken critic of the AKP; and Tanju Guvendiren, a 
retired Army colonel who was a prosecutor for the State 
Security Court and a member of the Military Court of Appeals. 
 Sacan was reportedly charged with hushing up the Ergenekon 
investigation and destroying evidence.  Retired Col. 
Guvendiren was charged with blocking legal suits and 
blackmailing a former State Security Court prosecutor. 
Tuncay Ozkan and his group allegedly represent Ergenekon's 
media wing.  A total of about 150 people have reportedly been 
taken into custody in connection with the investigation. 
 
¶3.  (U) Retired four-star Army General Sener Eruygur, 
imprisoned since July 1, 2008, was released by the court on 
health grounds September 22 after he reportedly suffered a 
cerebral hemorrhage while in custody.  According to press 
reports, General Eruygar fell down a flight of stairs, 
incurring a head injury which caused the brain hemorrhage. 
On July 23 he was reported to be in critical condition in an 
Istanbul hospital.  The court barred his travel outside of 
Turkey. 
 
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The prosecutor conducting the Ergenekon investigation 
mapped out and submitted to the court what he believed is the 
organizational structure of the clandestine network.  The 
prosecutor's chart, published by the mainstream Sabah 
newspaper on September 21, lays out the alleged roles of a 
number of the suspects in the case.  According to the chart, 
the military-like units in the organization include: 
intelligence, operations, finance, "intra-organization 
research," and "theory design and planning."  The number two 
person in the organization is alleged to be Fikret Emek, a 
retired Special Forces major and currently under arrest. 
 
¶5. (U) In addition to the alleged Ergenekon command 
structure, the prosecutor's chart shows five organized 
suicide teams, which allegedly report to retired military 
officers Major General Veli Kucuk and Army Captain Muzaffer 
Tekin who were arrested in January.  Kucuk and Tekin are 
portrayed in media accounts as facilitating communication 
between civilian and military members of the organization. 
 
"ERGENEKON PLAUSIBLE, BUT INVESTIGATION POLITICAL" 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6. (C)  The political frustrations faced by secular Kemalists 
 
"patriots" since the ascendency of the governing AK Party to 
power in 2002 make a criminal network such as Ergenekon 
plausible, according the Center for Eurasian Strategic 
Studies (ASAM) International Law Advisor and former military 
lawyer Sadi Cayci.  Reserving judgment on the merit of 
specific charges, Cayci outlined a scenario in which the 
threat to the secular Turkish state from political Islam as 
perceived by a number of secular nationalists is such that 
the objective of defeating this threat justifies extralegal 
means in their minds.  Unlike the two decades following the 
1980 military coup in which secularism predominated, he said, 
the secular-military establishment is clearly seen today to 
be in the back-seat, while the AKP and Gulenists are the 
leading elements of current domestic politics.  The 
degeneration of Kemal Ataturk's party, the opposition CHP, 
has left the secularists no legitimate political voice and 
little choice but to seek other means to defend the state. 
 
¶7. (C) According to Cayci, in court the defense will almost 
certainly question the prosecution's method's of obtaining 
evidence.  However, Cayci and other critics of the AKP 
maintain that the government is less interested in 
convictions per se than it is with intimidating its most 
potent foes.  In Cayci's view, while the existence of 
Ergenekon may be plausible, the investigative process has 
clear political motives intended to threaten the governing 
party's Kemalist opponents.  Others speculate that the 
stepped-up intensity of arrests may also be designed distract 
from the on-going Deniz Feneri dispute in which Prime 
Minister Erdogan has been linked to illicit financial 
transfers.  CHP MP Ceytin Soyal was adamant to us that 
Ergenekon was being used as a smokescreen. 
 
 
¶8. (C) Riza Kucukoglu, a retired two-star general heading the 
Retired Officers Association and long-time friend of Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) Chief General Basbug, acknowledged that 
there was probably substance to at least some of the cases 
against Ergenekon defendants.  He said that the military 
would not support any entities which might undermine its 
chain of command, would support transparent investigations 
and, if supported by objective evidence, prosecutions. 
Referring to the visit of Lieutenant General Galip Mendi to 
the two imprisoned retired four-star generals on September 2, 
Kucukoglu said the military was trying to show loyalty to two 
senior officers who had given decades of service to the 
country.  He noted that Mendi did not visit Kucuk, who was 
also held at the same prison.  Kucukoglu explained that TGS 
was making a distinction between those who had been charged 
and those who had not.  In so doing, argues Kucukoglu, TGS is 
sending a signal to the government that it could not 
indefinitely detain individuals without pressing charges. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
WILSON