05ANKARA3976
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT (JUNE-2005)
Fri Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003976 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT (JUNE-2005) 
 
REF: A. 2004 STATE 146478 
     ¶B. ANKARA 3358 
     ¶C. ANKARA 3789 (NOTAL) 
 
  ¶1.      Summary:  EXBS Advisor coordinated the official 
signing ceremony for the NP Cooperation Agreement that, once 
ratified by the Turkish parliament, will allow full 
engagement of the EXBS program in Turkey.  EXBS Advisor moved 
forward with the Department of Energy Commodity 
Identification Training, by sponsoring a meeting between DOE 
reps and Turkish officials to establish goals and milestones 
for the project. EXBS Advisor also reviewed Turkey's 
participation in PSI activities and discussed ways to 
continue to increase Turkey's engagement in this initiative. 
Finally, EXBS Advisor assisted in the discussions between DOE 
International Threat Reduction Program and the Turkish Atomic 
Energy Authority (TAEK) concerning ways to improve security 
of radioactive materials in the regional and explore 
opportunities for cooperative activities in the area of 
radiological threat reduction. End Summary. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          June 1-3 - EXBS Advisor attended the Annual EXBS 
Program Washington Manager's Meeting with Program Advisors 
held at UNVIE in Vienna, Austria.  This meetings brought 
together all EXBS Advisors and allowed the various program 
managers to present changes in the EXBS programs.  It also 
allowed EXBS Advisors to exchange ideas on best practices and 
discuss ways to overcome problems that may be encountered. 
 
2)          June 6-   EXBS Advisor met with Department Head 
for Customs Enforcement  Mehmet Guzel and Ender Gurleyik to 
review EXBS program work with the Turkish Customs, including 
CIT, PIT, and SLD.  EXBS Advisor outlined the agenda for the 
upcoming CIT meetings and how these meetings would assist in 
getting TAEK and Turkish Customs to formulate an achievable 
action plan to move this project forward.  EXBS Advisor also 
presented the draft SLD Implementation Agreement to Guzel in 
an effort to quickly reach agreement on the document and to 
move forward to the design phases of the SLD project.  Guzel 
then reviewed the actions behind the opening of a new 
crossing with Bulgaria and the activities involved in getting 
this accomplished quickly.  Finally, EXBS Advisor requested 
an update on the planned modernization of the Habur Crossing 
facilities.  Guzel stated that they are awaiting the formal 
awarding of the contract and construction should begin 
shortly after that, hopefully by mid-July. 
 
3)           June 9- EXBS Advisor participated in meetings 
with DOE INECP with TAEK and Turkish Customs to refocus the 
CIT project.  These meetings began with a detailed discussion 
with TAEK President, Okay Cakiroglu, and staff to discuss not 
only the CIT project but the overall INECP program.  This was 
followed by a working-level meeting with members of TAEK and 
Turkish Customs to discuss past accomplishments and to 
establish a set of actions and milestones for the next 4 
months with the CIT project.  These milestones included the 
formal designation of Core Technical Group (CTG) members, 
date for CIT Refresher training and revision of the Turkish 
CIT Training Plan. 
 
4)           June 14- EXBS Advisor coordinated the 
Ambassadors participation in the signing ceremony for the 
Non-Proliferation Cooperation Agreement between the United 
States and Turkey.  This Agreement, once ratified by the 
Turkish parliament, will open the door for the full range of 
EXBS activities and cooperation in the future. (Ref B) 
 
5)            June 23- EXBS Advisor met with MFA Arms Control 
and Disarmament Head of Department Osman Yavuzalp to conduct 
monthly update meeting on all current projects in progress in 
Turkey, including Internal Control Program (ICP), Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT), Product Identification Tool 
(PIT) and Second Line of Defense (SLD).  Yavuzalp stated even 
though the NP Cooperation Agreement has been signed, it still 
requires the approval by Parliament in order to be in effect. 
 He then requested that the United States be patient while 
the ratification process is underway. While current and 
future projects can be discussed, they must not appear to be 
moving forward too quickly and should wait for the 
agreement's ratification before full engagement is achieved. 
Yavuzalp also stated that he would prefer waiting for 
ratification before beginning any formal discussions on 
subsidiary agreements,  such as the SLD Implementation 
Agreement.  It was finally agreed that EXBS Advisor could 
begin discussions to establish the framework for the SLD 
Agreement, but a visit by DOE personnel should be delayed 
until the NP Agreement is ratified.   EXBS Advisor also 
discussed Turkey's involvement in PSI, the Turkish 
Interagency Working Group, 2006 Turkish Exercise and the 
Copenhagen PSI experts working group to which Turkey sent a 
significant delegation. 
 
4)          June 28- EXBS Advisor coordinated and 
participated in meetings between members of the DOE Office of 
International Threat Reduction Program (IRTR) and TAEK. The 
purpose of the visit was to begin to discuss shared concerns 
for the security of radioactive materials and to explore 
opportunities for cooperative activities in the area of 
radiological threat reduction in the region. Following 
detailed discussions of various issues and potential areas of 
focus, it was agreed that the first area of Nuclear Threat 
Reduction cooperation with Turkey should focus on the problem 
of nuclear safety in Iraq and the high volume of nuclear 
contaminated material that is stopped at the borders trying 
to depart Iraq. A more detailed summary of this meeting will 
be provided septel. TAEK President concluded the meeting with 
a discussion of the proposed exchange of HEU for LEU fuel 
assemblies and the negative impression that is being 
presented toward Turkey by the United States due to the lack 
of information concerning the status of the Bilateral 
Agreement for the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. (Ref C) 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: 
 
1)         GOT and United States official signed the NP 
Cooperation Agreement during a June 14 ceremony at the 
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  This agreement opens 
the path for full engagement of all aspects of the EXBS 
program with Turkey.  The GOT still needs to present the 
Agreement to the Turkish Parliament for ratification, a 
process Turkish officials expect to be concluded in the early 
fall. (Ref B) 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Jul 9-17- EXBS Advisor on authorized stateside 
leave. 
 
¶B.         Jul 12- DOE officials to meet with TAEK to 
conclude negotiations concerning Turkey's participation in 
the upcoming HEU/LEU fuel exchange. 
 
¶C.         Jul 18-22- EXBS Advisor to renew contract and 
attend consultations in Washington DC. 
 
¶D.         Sep (tent)- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT Refresher 
Training 
 
¶E.         Sep (tent)- CBP visit to conduct baseline 
assessment for cooperation with Turkish Customs Authority. 
 
¶F.         Oct (tent)- University of Georgia EXBS Program 
Assessment visit. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY