05ANKARA4278
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jul 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

251551Z Jul 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JULY 25, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
3 Turks Killed in Egypt - Vatan 
Terror Spreading: Al-Qaeda Kills 88 in Egypt - Turkiye 7/24 
Pope Benedict Denounces Terrorist Attacks - Sabah 
Fadlallah Issues Fatwa to Ban Attacks Against Civilians - 
Hurriyet 
Al-Qaeda Claims to Hold Algerian Diplomats - Milliyet 7/24 
Turkish Engineer Abducted in Iraq - Sabah 7/24 
Four Turks in Bulgarian Council of Ministers - Milliyet 
Iran Hangs Two Teenagers for Sodomy, Theft - Hurriyet 7/24 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Terror Targets Egypt: 88 Killed in Sharm al-Sheikh - Radikal 
7/24 
Erdogan: Egypt Bombings an Attack Against Humanity - Yeni 
Safak 7/24 
Washington Post: Bin-Ladin Ordered Egypt Attack - Cumhuriyet 
Egyptian Police Hunt for Terrorists - Radikal 
Zebari Warns Turkey Against Entering Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Iraq: Turkish Cross-Border Incursion Will Damage Stability - 
Zaman 
Suicide Truck Attack Kills 40 in Baghdad - Radikal 
NYT: Resistance in Iraq Grows Tougher - Zaman 
Blast Injures 12 in Beirut Shortly After the Rice Visit - 
Zaman 7/24 
British Police Acknowledge Arbitary Killing - Cumhuriyet 
7/24 
56 Percent of UK Muslims `Understand' Terrorists' Motives - 
Radikal 
45 Percent of Americans Expect New Attacks Against US - 
Cumhuriyet 
US General Kamiya: Taliban Arms Children in Afghanistan - 
Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
MFA Condemns Sharm al-Sheikh Attacks:  The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) condemned the terrorist bomb attacks staged 
in the Egyptian resort of Sharm al-Sheikh on Saturday which 
killed at least 83 and wounded another 200.  `We consider 
these bombings as attacks that confirm the need to launch an 
international fight against terrorism,' the MFA said in a 
statement.  PM Erdogan said that just as with previous 
terrorist strikes, the Sharm al-Sheikh incident was `an 
attack against civilization.'  `I strongly condemn these 
terrorist attacks, and reiterate my call to the 
international community to launch a joint fight against 
terrorism, without making any discrimination.  I hope that 
the assailants will be captured as soon as possible,' 
Erdogan said.  Dailies report that two Turkish nationals are 
confirmed dead, and two others reported missing in the 
bombing. 
 
General Tolon on Turkish Cross-Border Operations Against 
Terrorists:  First Army Commander General Hursit Tolon said 
on Sunday in Turkey's Thracian province of Tekirdag that 
Turkey does not need permission to carry out operations 
against PKK terrorists.  `They tell us that they will 
support us if we continue this fight within our borders, as 
if anybody has asked for their approval,' Tolon said.  He 
also hinted that turkey would not hesitate to launch a cross- 
border operation into Iraq.  `They say we would need to talk 
first to the independent state there, Tolon said.  `But what 
kind of independent state is this?'  Tolon criticized the 
`double standard' of the `western world' in describing 
terrorists who strike Turkey as `rebels.'  Tolon was 
referring to reported criticism by the Dutch ambassador at a 
meeting of EU envoys in Ankara last month, during which the 
Dutch ambassador had cautioned that Turkish military 
operations against PKK terrorists in southeast Turkey were 
causing concern in the EU. 
 
Zebari Opposes Any Military Intervention in Iraq:  Iraq's 
Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari voiced opposition to any 
regional `military interference in Iraqi affairs, whether 
Turkish, Iranian or Arab,' Monday papers report.  `An 
intervention would destroy confidence and shift the focus 
when our priority is on completing the political process, 
improving the security situation and providing basic 
services in Iraq,' Zebari said.  He added that PKK militants 
are in regions outside the control of Baghdad and the 
regional Kurdish authority.  `If they move, the American 
forces will arrest them.  We have an obligation to Turkey to 
prevent all non-Iraqi armed groups from carrying out 
activities against neighboring countries,' Zebari stressed. 
 
Bomb Wounds Two in Central Istanbul:  A Dutch tourist and a 
Turkish waiter were wounded on Saturday night when a bomb 
exploded in a restaurant on the famous Galata Bridge in 
central Istanbul.  Witnesses have reported that the bomb was 
placed in a bag that was left under a table at the 
restaurant.  There has been no claim of responsibility for 
the attack. 
 
Syria's al-Muallem Meets FM Gul:  Syrian Deputy Foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallem conveyed a message from FM Farouq 
al-Shara to FM Abdullah Gul on Friday, weekend papers 
report.  In a press conference after meeting with Gul, al- 
Muallem lauded the Turkey's approach toward Syria and other 
countries in the region.  He stressed that Damascus was 
grateful to PM Erdogan for telling Washington to launch 
efforts to win Syrian support instead of isolating the 
country in the international arena.  Papers speculate that 
Syrian President Asad is planning to spend his holiday in 
Turkey.  `I can announce that our president and his wife 
will be very happy to visit Turkey in the near future,' al- 
Muallem said.  Responding to a question, the Syrian deputy 
FM also reminded that former US Secretary of State Colin 
Powell had emphasized that many Americans' lives were saved 
thanks to information provided by Syria.  `Given all of 
this, the fact that Syria is still on the terrorism list 
shows that the US does not have an impartial stand,' al- 
Muallem said.  An official from the US Embassy in Ankara is 
reported by "Sabah" as saying that both Turkey and the US 
wanted an end to Syrian support for the instability in Iraq 
and Lebanon. `Nevertheless, Turkey and the US don't 
necessarily agree on the tactics.  We have openly conveyed 
to Turkey our anxiety concerning Syria's activities,' the 
official said. 
 
EU Envoys Urge All in Turkey to Condemn Violence:  The heads 
of mission of EU countries in Ankara, gathered under the 
chairmanship of the UK as acting president, said that all 
political groups in Turkey, a country preparing to begin 
entry talks with the EU, must condemn all forms of violence. 
Diplomatic sources recalled that the Netherlands, as then- 
acting president of the EU, had urged Diyarbakir mayor Osman 
Baydemir in April 2005 to distance himself from statements 
by imprisoned leader of the PKK, Abdullah Ocalan.  The EU 
envoys discussed terrorism in light of recent events in 
Turkey, the UK, and elsewhere.  The UK and Irish 
representatives voiced gratitude for the sympathy shown by 
the Turkish people followng the July 16 bombing in Kusadasi. 
They also praised Turkish authorities for their efforts 
following that attack, in which both British and Irish 
nationals were among the victims. 
 
Erdogan Due to Visit London:  In his upcoming visit to the 
UK this week, Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan will emphasize 
that Turkey supports the fight against terrorism, Monday 
papers report.  During his meeting with Prime Minister Tony 
Blair, papers expect Erdogan to express his anxiety about 
security operations that target Muslims in the UK.  Erdogan 
will also address the British nation to urge the people not 
to harbor hostility toward Muslims.  He will stress that 
terrorism is a threat to humanity, and that terror attacks 
cannot be carried out on behalf of any religion. 
 
Upcoming High Military Council Meeting:  Turkey's High 
Military Council (YAS) will hold its annual meeting on 
August 1-4, papers report.  The meeting will be chaired by 
Prime Minister Erdogan.  Outgoing Naval Forces Commander 
Admiral Ozden Ornek will be replaced by Admiral Yener 
Karahan, and Air Force Commander General Ibrahim Fyrtyna 
will be replaced by Military Academy Commander General Faruk 
Comert.  Deputy Chief of the Turkish General Staff (TGS), 
General Ilker Basbug, will replace retiring First Army 
Commander General Hursit Tolon, and will subsequently become 
Land Forces Commander in 2006 and Chief of the TGS in 2008. 
The YAS meeting is also expected to expel 10 officers from 
the military for involvement in fundamentalist activities. 
 
Sahin on Minority Foundations in Turkey:  Despite warnings 
from the EU, the Turkish government has declined to make 
legal adjustments to compensate religious minority 
foundations for the loss of foundation properties that have 
been sold to third parties, Monday's "Radikal" reports. 
Deputy PM Mehmet Ali Sahin said that Turkish regulations 
with regard to minority foundations are more democratic than 
those in EU countries.  Until recently, religious 
foundations have faced great difficulties in acquiring 
property in Turkey, Sahin said, adding that the draft 
ensured the return of property seized by the state.  Sahin 
also said he was favorable toward the reopening of the Greek 
Orthodox Halki Seminary in Istanbul, adding that the 
National Security Council (NSC) would make the final 
decision on the issue. 
 
Karamanlis Postpones Turkey Visit:  Greek PM Kostas 
Karamanlis, who was expected to make an official visit to 
Turkey in late August at the invitation of PM Erdogan, has 
decided to postpone his trip, "Radikal" reported from 
Athens.  Karamanlis decided to put off his visit after some 
in Greece and Cyprus warned against the danger of visiting 
Turkey before entry talks with the European Union begin on 
October 3. 
 
Kurds Want Direct Flights Between Istanbul, Suleymaniye: 
The Iraqi Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) has proposed to 
the Turkish authorities direct flights between Istanbul and 
Suleymaniye Airport, which was opened last week.  Ankara is 
wary of the proposal, and wants to establish flights only 
between Istanbul and Baghdad.  Kurdish officials said the 
Iraqis are losing valuable time by traveling to Iraq 
overland after landing in Turkey's southeastern province of 
Diyarbakir.  The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) is so far 
withholding approval for Istanbul-Baghdad flights pending 
improvement to the security situation in Iraq. 
 
Five Terrorists Killed in Southeast Turkey:  Turkish 
security forces killed five PKK terrorists, including a 
woman, in the southeastern province of Sirnak, the 
governor's office said over the weekend.  Rifles, 15 hand 
grenades, ammunition and 5 kg of C-3 and C-4 explosives were 
seized in the operation. 
 
Another Turk Abducted in Iraq:  A Turkish engineer working 
at a power plant in Beyci, north of Baghdad, was abducted by 
unidentified gunmen while traveling from Beyci to Kirkuk, 
weekend papers report.  The identity of the Turk was not 
immediately known. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Terrorism; Iraq 
 
"The Third World War" 
Okay Gonensin commented in the mass appeal "Vatan" (7/25): 
"Acts of radical Islamist terrorists do not respect concepts 
such as `innocent people' and `rules of engagement.'  The 
possibility of killing Muslims does not even occur to the 
terrorrists.  They strongly believe in a fight for the 
cause, and they are eager to die for it.  They believe that 
they are going to be martyrs, and that any Muslims who die 
because of their bombings will go to heaven as well.  The 
civilized world cannot possibly find anything rational about 
attacks carried out with such a mentality.  Radical Islam 
used to work for the destruction of the Soviet Union and the 
pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan.  The radical Islamists 
were trained and supported for that purpose by the Western 
powers, particularly by the Americans.  Political Islam was 
resurrected by the Americans, who believed in the `green 
belt' theory at that time.  They never figured that what 
they were playing with would form the basis for today's war. 
We are currently in the Third World War.  Today's war is 
with radical Islam was caused by American policies." 
 
"US and Terror" 
Leftist-nationalist "Cumhuriyet" carried this op-ed (7/25): 
"There are many injustices in the world, but it is 
impossible to establish justice through terror.  A just and 
fair system can never be established by murdering innocents. 
A new world order, based on terrorist tactics, will belong 
to nobody but the murderers.  This is the gist of the issue 
that is being faced by the entire world.   A completely 
unexpected and hellish situation will prevail unless 
humanity unites with the idea of eliminating all kinds of 
terror. . Unfortunately the Bush administration seems to be 
making a distinction between terror tactics.  The Bush 
administration considers that terrorism against the US is 
bad, but terrorism against Turkey is not bad at all.  This 
sick approach only provides PKK terrorism with an American 
shelter.   Terrorism is a menace to humanity, and it will 
create more troubles in the days ahead." 
 
"A Cross-Border Operation May Result in a Clash with the US" 
Semih Idiz warned in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (7/25): 
"Everybody in Ankara diplomatic circles warns against the 
harm of a cross-border operation in Iraq.  If the operation 
happens, it will bring some serious consequences both in 
already-fragile Turkish-American relations and in Turkish-EU 
relations, which require the utmost attention.  Turkey will 
not be able to relax even if such an operation is carried 
out based on the argument of self-defense contained in UN 
regulations.  It seems that a Turkish cross-border operation 
in Iraq, if and when it happens, will turn the entire world 
against Turkey.  . A Western diplomat made a remark on the 
issue that seemed to sum up the general approach in foreign 
circles.   The remark was about Turkey's need to focus on 
solving the Kurdish issue internally instead of focusing on 
the Kandil mountains, `otherwise no cross-border operation, 
even if conducted 50 times, will change this reality.' 
Interestingly enough, this view is shared by some Arab 
diplomats as well. . Many arguments can be made to justify 
Turkey's sensitivities.  But military and civilian planners 
are required to act realistically, not emotionally, no 
matter how upset they may be.  Turkey is capable of carrying 
out such an operation if it really wants to.  There is a 
campaign by some to push for such an operation.  But those 
who advocate an operation should understand that such a 
course will have a price for Turkey and will not bring a 
happy end." 
 
MCELDOWNEY