05ANKARA4258
THE TURKISH PRESS DEBATES THE PKK ISSUE
Fri Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PTER PREL TU PKK
SUBJECT: THE TURKISH PRESS DEBATES THE PKK ISSUE 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The increase in PKK violence in Turkey, culminating 
in the July 16 bus bombing in the Turkish resort of 
Kusadasi, has accelerated the public debate over how best to 
deal with the PKK.  The dominant view continues to blame the 
violence on the perceived US failure to fulfill its 
commitment to eliminate the PKK camps in northern Iraq.  A 
majority of columnists accuse the United States of 
protecting the PKK to use later as a "trump card" against 
Turkey.  However, a small minority (perhaps 10 percent) of 
commentators, however, has broadened the debate to consider 
the government's responsibility to handle - and solve - the 
PKK problem. End Summary. 
 
-------------- 
BLAMING THE US 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Not surprisingly, Turkey's public debate over the 
increase in PKK violence over the past year has focused on 
the continued PKK presence in Iraq, and the failure of the 
United States to take military action against the PKK.  Many 
commentators have speculated that the US has ulterior 
motives for not moving against the PKK. 
 
Mustafa Mutlu's column in the daily "Vatan" on July 20 is a 
typical example of this view: "On June 11, it was reported 
that the US military in Iraq had distributed a list of 150 
`wanted' PKK militants to its troops.  This was seen as a 
gesture by the US following the visit of Prime Minister 
Erdogan to Washington.  But it is very well known where each 
of these 150 people are, what they are doing, even what they 
are eating and drinking.  Our intelligence and security 
forces have this information, as do US troops, from whom 
they have asked help many times.  There is nobody being 
`chased' and nobody `chasing' anyone.  So now 40 days have 
passed.  Within those 40 days, what has the US done besides 
encouraging the rabbit to run away?  A huge nothing!  You 
might say `well, didn't the US hand over Ocalan to us?' 
Yes, that's true.  But the relationship was different then. 
I have serious doubts about whether the United States is 
sincere on the question of capturing PKK leaders." 
 
----------------------- 
SEEING A BIGGER PICTURE 
----------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Although Mutlu's commentary is indicative of the 
dominant perspective in the Turkish press, a small minority 
(perhaps 10 percent) of columnists writing on the PKK 
controversy has broadened the debate. They are questioning 
whether the government has a policy in the southeast, and 
what Turkey could do differently to undercut the PKK at 
home.  Several examples are given below: 
 
Ferai Tinc, foreign news editor of Turkey's leading daily 
"Hurriyet" wrote on July 18:  "The enemy is at home.  It is 
very important to understand that in the struggle against 
terrorism.  After September 11, everyone started to believe 
that the roots of terrorism lay somewhere else, so some went 
looking for them in Iraq and Afghanistan.  And we are caught 
up in the belief that the only effective solution to our 
terrorism problem is through a military operation in 
northern Iraq.  But to strike a blow against terror, we 
don't have to go so far away.  The enemy is here at home. 
We need to start the struggle against terrorism in Turkey." 
 
Hasan Cemal, writing in the daily "Milliyet" on July 21: 
"The Southeast is at a critical turning point.  The people 
don't want to hear the sound of weapons or to watch the same 
horror film again.  This is why the PKK base of support is 
gradually shrinking.  The emergence of a peace movement is 
possible in spite of the PKK.  But just like on the Cyprus 
issue, the Southeast requires political courage, political 
will, and determination.  It is needed for an amnesty, for 
the implementation of reforms, and for the opening of social 
and economic initiatives.  It is also necessary for using 
new approaches and new terminology, to open new windows for 
the Kurdish-origin citizens of the Republic of Turkey. 
There were bad memories in Cyprus, but they were erased 
through political determination.  The world didn't come to 
an end.  There are many bad memories in the Southeast as 
well.  Some of them have also been erased, but others 
remain.  If Turkey, through courage and determination, could 
erase these remaining memories in the Southeast, it will 
open the way not to separatism and instability, but to peace 
and tranquility." 
 
Conservative Islamist columnist Ahmet Tasgetiren, a 
reference point for the AKP, challenged the Government in 
his July 11 column in the Islamist-oriented "Yeni Safak:" 
"A few words for the AKP Government:  Where are you on this 
issue?  When are you going to begin your initiative in the 
East and Southeast?  Once again, security measures are 
coming to dominate that region.  What have you done to 
prevent that from happening over the past two and a half 
years?  The people of the region gave you a bonus (in last 
year's municipal elections).  What have you done to pursue a 
more vigorous dialogue with those people?  And if the tense 
security situation in the Southeast begins to affect 
developments in Ankara, who will be to blame then?" 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The voices quoted in para 3 are a rational 
alternative to the general anti-American, anti-EU tone that 
predominates in the Turkish media.  These columnists face an 
uphill struggle, however, as their arguments fly in the face 
of a strongly nationalist political climate and an 
entrenched press establishment with a tendency to blame 
America (or Europe) first.  End Comment. 
 
MCELDOWNEY