05BRASILIA1968
BRAZIL - POLITICAL SCANDAL HAS NOT DAMAGED THE
Fri Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 001968 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
NSC FOR CRONIN 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - DAS LEE AND FPARODI 
STATE PASS TO FED BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR ROBITAILLE 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/JANDERSON/ADRISCOLL/MWAR D 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USCS/OIO/WH/RD/DDEVITO/DANDERSON/EOL SON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/20/2025 
TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD
SUBJECT: BRAZIL - POLITICAL SCANDAL HAS NOT DAMAGED THE 
ECONOMY, SO FAR 
 
REF: A. BRASILIA 1456 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 521 
     ¶C. BRASILIA 1631 
     ¶D. BRASILIA 1290 
     ¶E. BRASILIA 682 
     ¶F. BRASILIA 1662 
 
Classified By: Economic Counselor Bruce Williamson, reasons 1.4 
(b) and 
 (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The mounting political scandal over 
(alleged) Lula Administration vote buying/influence peddling 
in Congress has had negligible effects to date on the 
financial markets or Brazil's overall economic performance. 
Market participants and economic analysts told visiting 
regional Treasury Attache and Econoff in a series of meetings 
the week of July 11 that the credibility of GoB macroeconomic 
policy, high Brazilian real interest rates and record 
liquidity flowing to emerging markets had combined to 
insulate Brazilian markets from the political scandal.  They 
expected this would continue unless a smoking gun emerges 
linking President Lula or Finance Minister Antonio Palocci in 
any illegal acts.  Brazilian companies and banks have 
stronger balance sheets than they did ahead of the 2002 
crisis, better positioning them to deal with the as yet 
unlikely event that the scandal (or an external event) 
triggers a financial crisis.  Our interlocutors dismissed the 
possibility that any major economic reform measures, 
necessary to increase productivity and Brazil's growth 
potential, would make it through Congress before the 2006 
elections.  End Summary. 
 
Twin Surpluses, Benign External Environment 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Financial market participants and economic analysts 
delivered a consistent message to visiting regional Treasury 
Attache Haarsager and Econoff in a series of meetings in Sao 
Paulo, Brasilia and Rio de Janeiro the week of July 11:  the 
ongoing vote-buying scandal has had only negligible impacts 
on financial markets and economic performance.  Three 
principal factors have combined to insulate Brazilian markets 
from the scandal.  First are Brazil's gravity-defying export 
growth and its solid current account surplus.  The 
credibility of GoB macroeconomic policy and its strong fiscal 
stance (5% of GDP primary surplus in the 12-month period 
through May) also have played a role.  These factors, along 
with record international liquidity, which has flowed to 
Brazil to take advantage of double-digit real interest rates, 
have insulated the markets from the political crisis.  For 
these reasons, Odair Abate of BankBoston explained, external 
events such as U.S. interest rate changes, have had a greater 
impact on Brazilian currency markets than the political 
scandal. 
 
How Far Will it Go? 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) CSFB Chief Economist Nilson Teixeira said that, given 
the current benign international economic environment, it 
would take proof that Lula or Palocci were personally 
implicated in the scandal to spook his bank's foreign 
clients.  A smoking gun that implicated Palocci would be, 
according to JP Morgan President Charles Wortman, a 
"nightmare" scenario.  Central Bank Director for Monetary 
Policy Rodrigo Azevedo was more sanguine.  Lula and his 
Workers' Party (PT), Azevedo averred, had only achieved 
election by moving to the center and promising orthodox 
macroeconomic policies.  This illustrated that there exists a 
national consensus on what economic policy should be.  In the 
unlikely event that Lula had to depart before his term 
expired, Azevedo argued, this consensus would constrain his 
successor's policy choices.  IMF Resident Representative 
(Resrep) Max Alier echoed this point, arguing that Vice 
President Alencar, an outspoken critic of GoB monetary policy 
and high interest rates, would be forced to change his tune 
if he assumed the presidency. 
 
¶4. (C) Few see the scandal leading to Lula's early departure 
from the presidency.  Alier argued that, absent undeniable 
evidence of Lula's involvement, the opposition has little 
interest in provoking an institutional crisis in an effort to 
try to assume the presidency amidst political chaos.  From 
their perspective, he said, it would be better simply to 
bleed and discredit Lula and the PT ahead of the 2006 
elections, making him an easier target.  Based on present 
trends, however, the economy looks likely to aid Lula in his 
reelection drive.  Our interlocutors predicted strengthening 
growth in the second half of 2005.  While first quarter 2005 
performance was dismal (0.3% growth quarter on quarter), 
Teixeira predicted 1% growth (4.1% annualized) in the second 
quarter.  The Central Bank's Azevedo noted that industrial 
production in May was up significantly and several coincident 
indicators of economic growth for June looked quite positive. 
 The Central Bank, he said, is maintaining its growth 
forecast for the year at 3.4%.  Teixeira and Abate noted 
separately that, with inflation now firmly under control, 
they expect a monetary easing within a few months.  The 
effects of this easing would begin to be seen in the first 
half of 2006, well ahead of the October 2006 elections. 
 
Better Positioned to Deal with Financial Crisis 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5. (C) JP Morgan's Wortman noted that Brazil was in a better 
position to deal with a financial setback than it was going 
into the 2002 crisis of confidence, which was triggered by 
concerns over the policies Lula would pursue.  Companies had 
reduced their dollar debt and increased its tenor.  Companies 
are less leveraged than in 2002, he said, and there has been 
a boom in the domestic debentures market as companies 
diversify their funding sources.  The main banks, Wortman 
stated, are well-capitalized, with Itau and Bradesco (the two 
largest) holding capital reserves double what they need to 
under Bank for International Settlements (BIS) capital 
adequacy standards.  The Central Bank's Azevedo added that 
the current account surplus makes a huge difference in 
Brazil's vulnerability.  Moreover, the Central Bank now has 
US$40 billion in net reserves and intends to continue 
building reserves ahead of the 2006 election.  The Finance 
Ministry has been able to purchase dollars to cover its 
external debt service in the market, without recourse to 
Central Bank reserves.  Given the weakness of the dollar, 
Azevedo said, the Finance Ministry, intends to pre-purchase 
US$9 billion to cover its amortization schedule.  Meanwhile, 
in mid-July the GoB announced that it would pre-pay US$ 5.12 
billion in IMF payments due by March 2006. 
 
Economic Risks in the Short Term -- Salami Effect 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6. (C) IMF Resrep Alier warned there exists a risk the GoB 
will attempt to bolster its Congressional base through 
increased pork barrel spending, although he has not yet seen 
signs that this is happening.  Likening the effect to slicing 
away at a large salami until it gone, he argued that even 
though the individual slices from the primary surplus might 
be thin, collectively they could undermine the GoB's current 
strong fiscal stance.  Moreover, even if the GoB maintains 
fiscal discipline, there remains a risk that the Congress 
will advance a negative agenda (in fiscal terms) that a 
weakened GoB would be less able to resist.  Prominent fiscal 
expert and commentator Raul Velloso was not as concerned as 
Alier, observing to Econoff in a July 18 conversation that 
Congress itself was significantly politically weakened and 
would be hard pressed to advance its own agenda. 
Longer Term Risks -- Opportunity Lost 
------------------------------------- 
¶7. (C) The biggest cost of the crisis, Wortman said, would be 
losing the opportunity to move economic reforms through the 
Congress for the last two years of the Lula administration. 
Texeira agreed that there was little prospect for 
microeconomic reforms, necessary to spur investment and 
improve productivity, to make it through the Congress. 
Abate, however, pointed out that the markets already had 
discounted the possibility of significant reforms after the 
PT bungled the election for the presidency of the Chamber of 
Deputies earlier this year.  The loss of the Chamber 
presidency to bombastic populist Severino Cavalcanti crippled 
the PT's ability to set the agenda with Congress.  Indeed, 
Minister of Industry Furlan recently confided to the 
Ambassador that the GoB, realizing that the microeconomic 
reform agenda was on life support, had begun to study what 
reform measures it could pursue without recourse to 
legislation in order to generate jobs and increase 
productivity. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Barring revelations that Lula and/or Palocci played a 
role in the vote-buying scandal, the Brazilian economy looks 
to be out of scandal-related danger, in the near term. 
Although this may prove to be only a temporary calm should 
international financial winds shift, Brazil does appear to be 
less vulnerable now than in 2002, with more solid 
fundamentals.  More troubling is the fact that, without 
reform measures necessary to attract investment, relieve 
infrastructure bottlenecks and improve the functioning of 
Brazil,s distorted financial markets, the country will find 
it difficult to break out of its current low potential growth 
path (which most analysts estimate to be around 3%). 
 
MANGANIELLO