05MANAGUA2142
DIPLOMATIC NOTE RECEIVED ON GON CONCERNS WITH 2005
Tue Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 002142 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KWMN OPRC PHUM PREL SMIG NU
SUBJECT: DIPLOMATIC NOTE RECEIVED ON GON CONCERNS WITH 2005 
TIP REPORT 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 1660 
 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 109082 
 
¶1. On July 15, post received diplomatic note 
MRE/AN/0122/07/05 from the Nicaraguan Foreign Ministry.  The 
diplomatic note relates to the GON's concerns regarding the 
Department's 2005 Trafficking in Persons report (discussed in 
reftels).  Informal translation of the diplomatic note 
follows.  The original Spanish-language version will be faxed 
to WHA/CEN. 
 
¶2. Informal translation of the GON diplomatic note: 
 
(Official Government Seal) 
Ministry of Foreign Relations 
MRE/AN/0122/07/05 
DS/RMC/AAG 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations presents its compliments to 
the honorable Embassy of the United States of America and 
refers to the Embassy's diplomatic note number 89, by which 
the Embassy delivered a copy of the 2005 report on 
trafficking in persons published by the Department of State. 
 
The Ministry takes the opportunity to note that Nicaragua is 
making significant advances in the fight against this crime, 
including the ratification of the United Nations Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children, which was ratified by means of 
decree number 11-2004 of 20 February 2004, which was 
published in the Official Record (number 38) on 24 February 
2004 and approved (by the National Assembly) on 15 June 2004, 
and officially announced on 1 July 2004. 
 
The instruments of ratification were sent to the permanent 
Nicaraguan mission to the United Nations in New York in 
September 2004, so that they could be archived with the U.N. 
Secretary General. 

Likewise, this ministry believes that the formation of a 
national coalition comprised of both government institutions 
and civil society actors involved in the subject of 
trafficking in persons is an important advance.  This 
initiative has been supported by the honorable Embassy of the 
United States of America.  By means of this coalition, the 
government has also opened an office dedicated to 
coordinating the fight against trafficking in persons.  This 
office includes a virtual library open to all persons 
interested in the subject and disseminates information to a 
wide variety of people.  It also serves as a means of 
coordinating the activities of the different institutions 
that make up the national coalition.  The coalition has also 
developed an action plan that includes a series of 
anti-trafficking proposals to be implemented in the next two 
years. 
 
During 2004, as part of ongoing prevention activities, 
training seminars and discussions on sexual abuse and 
trafficking in persons, aimed at students and their parents, 
were carried out in various high schools all over the 
country.  Similarly, security measures were strengthened in 
schools in order to ensure that students would not be exposed 
to traffickers on school grounds. 
 
It is important to mention that during the last year a 
nationwide system of registering trafficking cases was 
designed and implemented, which will make possible the 
analysis of the trafficking problem in all of its aspects, 
including recruitment, transportation and study of activities 
and circumstances in which trafficking takes place, as well 
as the treatment that victims should receive according to the 
type of case.  As part of the implementation of the registry, 
the heads of all the women's police stations ("Comisarias de 
la Mujer") in the country, as well as all persons charged 
with providing psychological and social support to 
trafficking victims, were trained in the use of the registry. 
 
The work of the National Police is of central importance in 
the fight against trafficking and the National Police has 
made trafficking one of its main priorities in its efforts 
against organized crime.  The police have also implemented 
the trafficking registry and have set up a web page to track 
all missing persons. 
 
Taking all of the above into account, this ministry feels 
that Nicaragua made important strides during 2004 to fight 
this crime that affects our societies, despite the fact that 
the Nicaraguan government has limited economic resources 
available.  While recognizing that these efforts should grow 
and become more intensive during 2005, this ministry is 
concerned by the fact that Nicaragua has been placed in the 
Special Watch List of category two in the State Department's 
report, on the same level with other countries that present 
serious problems related to trafficking. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations takes the opportunity to 
reiterate to the honorable Embassy of the United States of 
America the interest and commitment of Nicaragua to fight 
against trafficking in persons at the national and 
international levels.  The Foreign Ministry also assures the 
Embassy of its highest consideration. 
 
 
Managua, 14 July 2005 
(Signature of Foreign Minister Norman Caldera and official 
Foreign Ministry Seal) 
GARZA