05OTTAWA2023
CANADA ON RUMORS OF ARISTIDE'S DESIRE TO RETURN TO
Wed Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 002023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/05/2010 
TAGS: BR HA PREL UNSC
SUBJECT: CANADA ON RUMORS OF ARISTIDE'S DESIRE TO RETURN TO 
HAITI 
 
REF: SECSTATE 121144 
 
¶1. (C) DCM and PolOff shared reftel talking points with FAC 
Director General for Latin America and the Caribbean Jamal 
Khokhar and Caribbean and Central America Director Christian 
Lapointe.  Khokhar said "we are on the same sheet" with 
regards to Aristide, and Canada's consistent message has been 
that "he is of the past and Haiti needs to move forward." 
Khokhar said the GOC understands there is a plan by his 
followers to bring Aristide back to Haiti on July 15th, but 
does not have any clear signals of how it will be done.  Desk 
Officer Caroline Ouellet clarified that the date is based on 
rumors and there are no more signs than usual that it is 
reality.  Still, they have heard the date from enough sources 
to consider it credible.  Even before these recent rumors, 
she said, Canada had a clear position in opposition to the 
return of Aristide. 
 
¶2. (C) Khokhar said Canada has been conveying this message to 
all parties, stressing the need for the international 
community (especially the Caricom countries), to invest in 
the future for Haiti and not remain stuck in the past. 
Canadian officials note the call by SYG Annan for 
reinforcements to provide security for the election and are 
in agreement that the UN mission must be reinforced to be 
effective. 
 
¶3. (C) Lapointe said that Canada has discussed the return of 
Aristide with South African officials during consultations in 
May.  The South Africans reportedly questioned whether it is 
fair to encourage Lavalas to participate in the elections 
without their most important leader being on the ground. 
They are not convinced of the good will of those who would 
exclude him being there.  The GOC reportedly urged the South 
Africans to encourage Lavalas to move beyond Aristide, and 
stressed the importance of finding a new leader in Haiti that 
can unite the country rather than divide it.  Lapointe said 
there may be an opportunity for FM Pettigrew to meet on the 
margins of the G-8 meeting with the South African FM and 
further stress these points. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS