05TELAVIV4727
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 004727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
¶2.  Democracy in Mideast 
 
¶3.  Global Struggle Against Violent Extremism 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Maariv quoted people who attended Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice's meeting with Defense Minister Shaul 
Mofaz during her visit to Israel as saying that she was 
particularly assertive.  The discussion was over 
Secretary Rice's demand that Israel approve the 
 
SIPDIS 
transfer of trucks and military equipment to the PA, 
and her insistence on a tight calendar in the matter. 
The newspaper quoted Israeli defense sources as saying 
that the conversation was tough, and that the talks 
that Rice held with PM Sharon and FM Silvan Shalom were 
difficult as well. 
 
The media continued to report on Sharon's official 
visit to France.  Israel Radio quoted him as saying in 
an interview broadcast on Thursday on a French TV 
network that France should pressure the PA to stop the 
violence, and that Syria has not given up its ambition 
to control Lebanon, where he said Iranian Revolutionary 
Guards are training Hizbullah members.  Maariv reported 
that Sharon told a gathering of French Jewish leaders 
on Thursday that the entire world can see how difficult 
and painful the disengagement plan is to Israel.  He 
was quoted as saying that the upcoming period will be 
one of the most difficult that Israel has known. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Mofaz has thus far rejected a 
recommendation by senior IDF officers that Israel 
launch a major offensive in the Gaza Strip shortly 
before or simultaneously with the disengagement.  The 
newspaper cited Mofaz's belief that all diplomatic 
avenues to persuade the PA to act against the terrorist 
groups must be exhausted first, and that the PA has a 
clear interest in preventing fire.  Jerusalem Post 
quoted a senior officer in the IDF's Southern Command 
as saying that the army will build three fences and a 
range of state-of-the-art weapons systems around the 
Gaza Strip after disengagement in order to foil 
infiltration by terrorists.  Jerusalem Post and 
Hamodi'a quoted the officer as saying that the cost of 
the security apparatus would be 1 billion shekels 
(around USD 220 million). 
 
Yediot and other media reported that the police are 
planning to impose a closure on southern Israel next 
week to prevent the influx of protesters to the area of 
Sderot.  Ha'aretz cited the belief of the IDF's 
Southern Command that the number of right-wing 
activists who have succeeded in infiltrating the Gaza 
Strip since its closure on July 13 appears to be 
between 1,000-1,200, and not 2,000 as announced early 
in the week. 
Israel Radio reported that Ami Ayalon, the co-founder 
of the Peoples' Voice initiative, will lead a pro- 
disengagement rally in Jerusalem today. 
Yediot reported that Israel has informed the U.S. that 
it refuses to allow the FBI to question Naor Gilon, 
head of the political department at the Israeli Embassy 
in Washington, or other Israelis involved in the affair 
of Pentagon analyst Larry Franklin.  However, the 
newspaper writes that Israel agrees to provide written 
answers to all of the investigators' questions.  Yediot 
reported that the U.S. apparently is not satisfied with 
Israel's proposal. 
 
Leading media quoted Hizbullah Secretary-General Sheikh 
Hassan Nasrallah as saying Thursday that his 
organization will not ignite the Israel-Lebanon border 
during the disengagement. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that undercover Border Police 
units shot and killed Islamic Jihad fugitive Muhid 
Mussa near Tulkarm on Thursday afternoon. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that on Thursday, 
the Vatican reacted strongly to Israel's protests over 
Pope Benedict XVI's failure to condemn the Netanya 
bombing.  The media cited the Vatican's announcement: 
"The Holy See cannot take lessons or instructions from 
any other authority on the tome and content of its own 
statements."  The Vatican cited retaliatory actions by 
Israel following past terrorist attacks. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that a new Foreign Ministry 
project hopes to get Jewish and moderate Muslim groups 
in Europe to cooperate in speaking out against 
terrorism.  Reda Mansour, a veteran Druze diplomat who 
has served as consul-general in San Francisco and 
ambassador to Ecuador, heads the new initiative. 
 
Maariv reported that a new border crossing between 
Israel and Egypt will soon open near Nitzana. 
 
Reporting on developments in the trial of four Arab 
American members of Islamic Jihad in Tampa, Fla., 
Ha'aretz cited an agreement that was reached recently 
between U.S. prosecutors and the defendants' attorneys, 
according to which most of the Israeli witnesses who 
were supposed to travel to Tampa this summer will not 
go. 
This week's Maariv/Teleseker poll: 
-57 percent of Israelis support the disengagement (54 
percent in a poll earlier this month). 
-"Were Knesset elections held today, and were the Likud 
to split into two branches, for whom would you vote?" 
(in parliamentary mandates):  Likud (Sharon branch) - 
30; Likud (Netanyahu branch) - 21; Labor + One Nation: 
18; Shas - 10; Shinui - 9; National Union - 7; Meretz - 
6; United Torah Judaism - 5; National Religious Party - 
4; Arab parties - 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------- 
¶1.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
 
Assistant diplomatic correspondent Ilil Shahar wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "It would appear that the 
Americans are concerned that their involvement in the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict will also fail to end in 
success, as has happened in Iraq." 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and extreme right-wing columnist 
Caroline B. Glick wrote in conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post: "The Americans, seeing that Sharon has 
effectively rendered his own fortunes hostage to 
Washington's discretion in not making it too clear that 
no ... guarantees were ever made, can now demand 
anything of him that they wish." 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: 
"Even a banana republic would not sign such an 
agreement.... [However], even without American 
pressure, the time has come to introduce order into 
defense exports from Israel." 
 
Correspondent Dov Kontorer wrote in conservative 
Russian-language Vesty: "The international conference 
promised by Rice is exactly what Sharon was trying to 
avoid.... Nobody would call current relations between 
Israel and the U.S. administration good or even 
satisfactory." 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in Maariv: 
"Israel is hugely disappointed over Washington's 
actions in the matter [of Iran's nuclear arming]." 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Toughness Behind the Smiles: Condoleezza 
Reprimanded Mofaz" 
 
Assistant diplomatic correspondent Ilil Shahar wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (July 29): "A chill wind is 
blowing from the direction of Israel's purported 
closest friend.  Sources who participated in the 
meetings with U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
report that she was more adamant than ever.  In a 
meeting with Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz, Rice 
aggressively asked that Israel authorize the transfer 
of trucks and vans for the use of the Palestinian 
security services, as well as other combat support 
supplies.... Rice then set Mofaz a timetable.... Mofaz 
once again tried to protest the tight schedule: "I am 
the defense minister, I have other things to tend to,' 
he said.  Rice lost her patience: 'I am the Secretary 
of State and I am telling you that it is important'... 
Political sources have noted in recent weeks that 
Rice's visit is not the only sign of a cool attitude on 
the part of the U.S.  Among other things, they 
mentioned that the Americans are not pleased with the 
fact that Israel has not succeeded in reaching 
coordination with the Palestinians on disengagement. 
It would appear that the Americans are concerned that 
their involvement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
will also fail to end in success, as has happened in 
Iraq, and there are also two other unpleasant affairs 
in the background: the sale of the drone spare parts to 
China, and the affair of Pentagon mole Larry Franklin." 
 
II.  "Awaiting the Cavalry Charge" 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and extreme right-wing columnist 
Caroline B. Glick wrote in conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (July 29): "Sharon has justified his 
decision to move ahead with the withdrawal and 
expulsion plan with nonexistent guarantees from 
President George W. Bush to support the remaining 
Israeli communities in Judea and Samaria [i.e. the West 
Bank] and to oppose the Palestinian demand to 
obliterate Israel through the so-called right of 
return.  The Americans, seeing that Sharon has 
effectively rendered his own fortunes hostage to 
Washington's discretion in not making it too clear that 
no such guarantees were ever made, can now demand 
anything of him that they wish." 
III.  "A Shallow Strategic Dialogue" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(July 29): "The assumption was that Washington would 
end the crisis [over Israel's security exports] before 
the disengagement.  Instead, the Americans have 
presented more stringent demands.... An example of the 
shallowness of the strategic contacts is the absence of 
a fundamental discussion between the United States and 
Israel regarding the U.S. administration's plan to 
expand the democratic process in the Middle East.  This 
process has scored some success in several places, but 
at the same time it is also giving free rein to 
extremist forces, which are liable to endanger pro- 
Western regimes such as Egypt.... The American side is 
broadcasting that it has been burned by Israel several 
times, and this time it has decided to be firm. 
Because they feel affronted, they are not taking into 
account the political situation in Israel, and are 
trying to dictate to the Knesset, in an insulting 
manner, a timetable for its decisions.  An agreement is 
meant to end a crisis, and not to force a friendly 
nation to agree to be punished in stages.  Even a 
banana republic would not sign such an agreement.  On 
the other hand, it is clear that the supervision of 
arms exports from Israel is deficient.... Even without 
American pressure, the time has come to introduce order 
into defense exports from Israel." 
 
IV.  "Signs of a Crisis" 
 
Correspondent Dov Kontorer wrote in conservative 
Russian-language Vesty (July 28): "Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice ... said that right after the 
disengagement is completed, she would propose calling a 
new international conference on the Middle East, which 
would give 'a new impulse to the Middle East peace 
process.'  In case Prime Minister Sharon was hoping to 
gain time and ease American pressure on Israel, the 
negative outcome of his plan has become obvious, 
[because] the international conference promised by Rice 
is exactly what Sharon was trying to avoid....  The 
U.S. encourages Sharon in his every step related to the 
uprooting of Jewish settlements, but his attempt to 
disengage from Gaza and all the Gaza-linked problems... 
is producing energetic protests by Arabs and a 
subsequent tough reaction from the White House.  Nobody 
would call current relations between Israel and the 
U.S. administration good or even satisfactory." 
 
¶V.  "Between Paris and Tehran" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in Maariv 
(July 29): "Israel assumes that Iran will achieve 50- 
percent success in the [uranium enrichment] process; 
the Americans believe that it will encounter many 
glitches and delays.  A propos the Americans: Israel is 
hugely disappointed over Washington's actions in the 
matter.  'This is an absolute failure,' say [Israeli] 
experts about the sterile American effort, the lack of 
consciousness, the enormous energy wasted in Iraq, as 
opposed to impotence on the real front, against Bush's 
'axis of evil': North Korea and Iran.  Europe is 
currently leading the struggle against Iran's nuclear 
program.  This might be one of the reasons for Sharon's 
passionate acceptance of the French embrace." 
 
------------------------- 
¶2.  Democracy in Mideast: 
------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Op-ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "A stream of reformists and liberals 
is sprouting inside the Arab world.... Thanks to them, 
the Middle East, and the entire world, too, might look 
better in the future." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"A Salute to Muslims" 
 
Op-ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (July 29): "Now, alongside the 
justified struggle against terror and the necessary 
battle to silence the venomous preachers, and before 
those efforts turn into Islamophobia, one should 
remember that the most important arena against terror 
is the Muslim one.  It is the scene of a giant battle 
between reformists, Jew-haters, and the West.... A 
stream of reformists and liberals is sprouting inside 
the Arab world.  They are fed up with hateful sermons, 
tyranny, oppression of women, hatred of Jews, and self- 
delusion.  They are expressing themselves in key media 
outlets.... Those new voices represent hope.... They 
don't constitute the majority; but neither are they an 
insignificant minority.  Thanks to them, the Middle 
East, and the entire world, too, might look better in 
the future.  Inshallah." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶3.  Global Struggle Against Violent Extremism: 
--------------------------------------------- - 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Editor-in-Chief David Horovitz wrote in conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: "Immensely more articulate 
than Bush and most of Israel's limited advocates, 
[Blair's] verbal onslaught on terrorism was more 
pointed and effective than most any heard these past 
few years." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Tony Blair's Finest Hour" 
 
Editor-in-Chief David Horovitz wrote in conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (July 29): "Commendably, for 
the British government, as Prime Minister Tony Blair 
made plain this week, terrorism is terrorism is 
terrorism.  It has no justifiable pretexts.  It has no 
legitimacy.  And it is no less deplorable and 
unacceptable in one part of the world than in 
another.... Most tellingly for us, his ringing 
declaration that terrorists have no 'justification for 
killing people in Israel' was bookmarked by the prime 
ministerial equivalent of 'I know you're not going to 
like this but I'm going to say it anyway'.... He 
demolished the diabolical historical revisionism that 
cites Afghanistan and Iraq as the catalysts for 9/11, 
noting acidly that 2001's Black September attacks 
predated both those instances of Western 
intervention.... Blair ... evidently will not be moved. 
Immensely more articulate than Bush and most of 
Israel's limited advocates, his verbal onslaught on 
terrorism was more pointed and effective than most any 
heard these past few years: 'There is no justification 
for it, period,' he said.... What a ray of hope to 
witness a British prime minister acknowledge the grim 
challenge posed by the bombers, and begin to grapple 
with the process of beating them." 
 
KURTZER