08MEXICO1839
MEXICO-CUBA TALKS PRODUCE LITTLE MOVEMENT ON
Mon Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO0764
RR RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #1839/01 1682200
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 162200Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2248
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0135
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL
RHMFIUU/CDR USNORTHCOMUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MEXICO 001839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM SMIG KCRM CU MX
SUBJECT: MEXICO-CUBA TALKS PRODUCE LITTLE MOVEMENT ON 
REPATRIATIONS 
 
¶1.  Mexican and Cuban officials met in April to discuss 
building cooperation on migration issues including combating 
criminal trafficking rings, resolving an impasse over 
repatriations, and facilitating the emission of migration 
documentation.  The Foreign Ministry's (SRE) Deputy Director 
for the Office of South America Victor Arriaga told poloffs 
that the two sides hoped to sign a migration agreement 
addressing these matters when Cuba's visited Mexico in 
September.  He conceded, however, the GOM would be 
hard-pressed to forge progress on repatriations as the GOC 
remained resistant to repatriating Cubans who had entered 
through a third country.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Cuba's delegation was headed by Ambassador Carlos Zamora 
Rodr!guez, Director of  Foreign Ministry's Office of Consular 
Affairs and Cubans Residing Abroad.  Zamora was apparently 
accompanied by legal, migration, and intelligence experts. 
The Mexican delegation was headed by Minister Daniel 
Hern ndez Joseph, General Director of the Foreign Ministry's 
Office of  Protection and Consular Affairs.  He was 
accompanied by representatives from the Attorney General's 
Office (PGR), the Interior Ministry (SEGOB), Communications 
and Transportation Ministry (SCT) and the Navy (SEMAR).   The 
meeting was held within the framework of the Working Group on 
Migration and Consular Affairs which had not convened since 
¶2001. 
 
¶3.  According to SRE's Arriaga, the meeting centered on three 
issues: 
 
-- Combating trafficking rings:  An increasing number of 
Cubans seek to transit Mexico as a conduit to enter the U.S. 
Frequently they rely on organized crime networks.  SRE's 
Evith Robledo from the Office of North America made a point 
of stressing that the two sides also touched upon these 
groups' involvement in TIP particularly in the context of 
Mexico's new anti-TIP law.   Arriaga remarked that the two 
sides' law enforcement and intelligence experts engaged on 
how they might better coordinate investigative efforts. 
 
-- Repatriations:  According to Arriaga, approximately 20 
percent of the Cubans who enter the U.S. from Mexico entered 
Mexico with legal documentation; the balance, then, enter 
without documentation.  Mexico would like to repatriate all 
Cubans it detains without documentation regardless of whether 
they enter Mexico directly or via a third country.  He 
remarked that they are a drain on resources while held under 
detention.  Historically, however, Cuba has accepted a 
relatively small percentage Q) 4-5 percent of those detained 
-- refusing to take back those who entered Mexico from a 
third country such as Guatemala.  Arriaga lamented that the 
Cubans did not move on this issue during their April meeting. 
 He was not optimistic about the Cubans changing their tact 
between now and September. 
 
Even if a migration accord is finalized, most Cubans entering 
Mexico for the purpose of transiting through to the U.S. will 
continue to make their way north.  Undocumented travelers can 
be held for no longer than 30 days.  While, on occasion, 
Mexico has held undocumented Cubans for longer periods 
waiting for a GOC response to GOM repatriation requests, 
Cuban migrants denied repatriation are given a "multa" (fine) 
which requires them to pay a fee of 5,000 pesos (about $500). 
 Upon payment, they are presented with an official exit 
document called an "oficio de salida" which allows them 30 
days to leave Mexican soil.  The Cuban migrants are then free 
to continue their journey north to the United States.  Many 
Cubans who enter Mexico via Central America are quite 
familiar with this process and upon encountering INM, 
immediately request their "oficio de salida."  Those who 
expect to be repatriated request a legal review Q) an 
"amparo" -- of their case as a delaying tactic.  (Post 
comment:  A new law, pending President Calderon's signature, 
de-criminalizes undocumented arrivals in Mexico.  We will be 
examining to see what impact this has on transit through 
Mexico of all third country nationals.) 
 
Arriaga described the sweeping majority of Cubans detained by 
INM as "economic migrants" who seek ultimately to enter the 
U.S. for economic reasons.  He said that very few claim to 
suffer or have a fear of political persecution.  He assured 
poloffs such claims are thoroughly investigated and 
maintained that many of those who make these claims rely on 
 
MEXICO 00001839  002 OF 002 
 
 
U.S. lawyers for legal counsel. 
 
-- Travel documentation:  Arriaga stressed the need to 
improve the issuance of travel documents to facilitate 
economic commerce between the two countries.  According to 
Arriaga, the system is beset with administrative delays due 
the GOC's reliance on antiquated technology.   In view of 
rising levels of trade, Mexico was keen on Cuba doing more to 
address this issue. 
 
Next Steps 
 
¶4.  Arriaga told poloffs the working group would next convene 
in Havana in July with Mexico sending a select team of 
officials representing the ministries that attended the April 
meeting.  Both sides aim to have an agreement ready on 
migration issues for their ministers to sign when the Cuban 
Foreign Minister visits Mexico for a meeting scheduled for 
September 11. 
 
¶5.  Comment:  Mexico regards Cubans using its country as a 
springboard to enter the U.S. as an irritant in its relations 
with the U.S. and Cuba.  Unfortunately, Arriaga was not 
optimistic about convincing the Cuban government to take back 
Cubans who have entered Mexico illegally from a third 
country.  Cuba seeks warmer relations with Mexico but likely 
is not keen to embrace the economic burden of repatriating 
the thousands of Cubans entering Mexico would represent. 
Notwithstanding the impasse over repatriation, the SRE 
signaled it was hope the sides would come to an understanding 
on enough issues to sign an agreement come September when the 
Cuban Foreign Minister visits. 
Visit Mexico City's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/mexicocity and the North American 
Partnership Blog at http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
GARZA