08ANKARA405
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1505
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0405/01 0601515
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291515Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5433
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8717
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3947
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2738
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6445
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6278
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2858
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000405 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Military: 237 PKK Terrorists, 24 Soldiers Killed in Iraq 
Operations 
All papers report Turkish ground operations in northern Iraq 
continue despite the heavy snowfall in the region.  Turkish troops 
took control of strategic areas near the PKK camp in Zap and along 
the roads leading to the PKK command center in Zap.  The Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) said in a statement yesterday seven terrorists 
were killed in clashes on Wednesday night, which brings the 
terrorist casualties since the beginning of the incursion to 237, 
and the Turkish losses to 24. 
 
Iraq: All Turkish Troops Are Pulling Out of Iraq 
Turkish televisions report Friday morning that international wire 
agencies report an unidentified senior Turkish military source said 
some Turkish troops have returned to home after completing their 
mission in northern Iraq, but no full withdrawal has begun. 
A spokesman for the Kurdish Peshmerge forces quoted Iraqi border 
guards as saying there had been no attacks by Turkish forces 
overnight, and that troops were withdrawing. 
NTV reports the Iraqi FM Hoshyar Zebari said all Turkish troops have 
withdrawn from northern Iraq.  The Turkish General Staff (TGS) has 
not denied reports of withdrawal, says NTV. 
 
Gates Meets Turkish Leaders in Ankara 
All papers report Defense Secretary Robert Gates met on Thursday 
with President Abdullah Gul, Prime Minister Erdogan, the Chief of 
the General Staff (TGS) Yasar Buyukanit, and Defense Minister Vecdi 
Gonul during his one-day visit to Ankara.  Gates reportedly urged 
Turkey to keep its cross-border operations short and focus on 
precise targets.  Turkish leaders gave Gates a 'unified message' 
that the operations would continue until the targets are achieved, 
say papers. 
 
Commenting on Gates' earlier remarks at a joint press event 
yesterday TGS Chief General Buyukanit said, "Turkey has been 
combating terror for the last 24 years.  I've reminded Gates that 
the US has been fighting against terror in Afghanistan for long 
years; Gates understands Turkey."  Islamist-oriented Zaman claims 
that in his meeting with Gates, Buyukanit turned down the US demand 
for Turkish combat troops for Afghanistan. 
 
In a press conference after the meeting with Gonul, Gates reiterated 
US warnings that Turkey should seek a balance between its right to 
self-defense and the territorial integrity of Iraq, the ongoing 
Turkish offensive in northern Iraq should be short and precisely 
targeted, and military approaches should be supported by economic 
programs and political outreach.  That is the only way to isolate 
terrorists from the population and provide a long-term solution to 
the problem, Gates said.  He also voiced content over the Turkish 
government working closely with the Iraqi leaders including 
President Talabani, Prime Minister al-Maliki, and the regional 
Kurdish administration leader Masssoud Barzani.  Gates rejected 
allegations that the US would rescind its intelligence and 
surveillance assistance for the Turkish operations.  "The US and 
Turkey have shared interests, and those interests are probably not 
advanced by making threats or threatening to cut off intelligence," 
he emphasized. 
 
President Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan also stressed after meeting 
Gates that the goal of the Turkish operation was to ensure border 
security.  He said Turkish troops would return when their mission is 
accomplished. 
 
Mainstream Milliyet says Gates listed demands from the Turkish 
government at the press conference, but behind closed doors he 
agreed that Turkey was right in its fight against terror.  Okay 
Gonensin writes in mainstream Vatan that as seen in Cyprus, efforts 
to seek military solutions to social and political problems are 
 
ANKARA 00000405  002 OF 003 
 
 
doomed to fail.  Gonensin says the military approach was the least 
important aspect of the PKK question, stressing that the solution 
was in Turkey, and not in northern Iraq or Washington. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Secretary Gates' Turkey Visit 
 
"Two Messages to Gates" 
Fikret Bila is a senior media figure in Ankara and an author of 
books on the Iraq war and Turkish-American relations. 
He wrote in mainstream Milliyet (2/29): 
"There are two primary question marks regarding Secretary Gates' 
visit to Ankara.  First of all, did he really urge Turkey to 
withdraw from northern Iraq within a week or two?  And did he ask 
for Turkish combat troops for Afghanistan in exchange for US support 
for the cross border operation?  The answer to the first question is 
this: Secretary Gates actually softened his 'one week or two' 
rhetoric in Ankara.  Instead of using strong language about timing, 
he expressed a moderate tone when he said, 'we hope that such kind 
of operations are short.'   In return, the Turkish Defense Minister 
clearly stated, 'the fight against terrorism is a duty which cannot 
be left unfinished, and this mission will continue until terrorist 
camps and their infrastructure have been completely eliminated.'  We 
should also add that Secretary Gates did not add any new comments 
and he expressed understanding for Turkey's difficult struggle 
against terror.  Minister Gonul, in fact, answered Secretary Gates' 
February 6th letter requesting Turkish troops in Afghanistan.  Gonul 
stated clearly Turkey will not be able to send more troops.  When 
this issue came up during their meeting, Gonul told Gates, "Turkey 
would have been more helpful in Afghanistan had Turkey not been 
focused on the Southeast issue."  In sum, Turkey did not pledge more 
troops for Afghanistan in exchange for US support for land 
operations in northern Iraq." 
 
"The Withdrawal Calendar" 
Erdal Safak is an expert on international relations and a senior 
columnist for mainstream Sabah. 
He wrote in mainstream Sabah (2/29): 
"Secretary Gates warned Turkey to keep its cross border operation 
short in an effort to eliminate anxiety in international public 
opinion.  In reality, both President Bush and Secretary Gates are 
well aware of the fact that they should not pressure Turkey too much 
on this matter.  First of all, the useless trilateral coordination 
mechanism, which was an American initiative, caused Turkey to waste 
18 months in its fight against terrorism.  During this failed 
initiative, the PKK replenished its supply of weapons and recruited 
additional militants.  In addition, Turkey's recent diplomatic 
efforts successfully convinced the US and the EU that a land 
operation was necessary in order to eliminate the PKK's terrorist 
threat.  Turkey's goal is very clear.  The land operations seek to 
eliminate the PKK's ability to use northern Iraq as a base from 
which terrorist attacks are launched against Turkey.  Given the 
target, neither the Turkish General Staff nor the government can 
responsibly argue for a withdrawal before the job is completed. 
Moreover, the US has set a precedent by refusing to withdraw from 
Iraq.  The US will not withdraw from Iraq before security is 
established.  Turkey is trying to do the same thing in northern Iraq 
that the US is doing in Afghanistan." 
 
The Turban Issue Has Turned in to Chaos 
All papers:  The Inter-University Board convened yesterday to 
discuss the turban issue.  The Board urged YOK President Prof. Yusuf 
Ziya Ozcan to resign from his position due to his stance concerning 
the headscarf.  The board points to Ozcan's written memo ordering 
university rectors to allow students wearing the turban to enter 
universities.  Mainstream Milliyet reports that the Board also asked 
President Gul to remove Ozcan from his office if he does not resign. 
 Papers report that the Ankara Chief Prosecutor has initiated an 
investigation into Prof. Ozcan to determine if he overstepped his 
duties when he ordered rectors to allow students with turban in 
 
ANKARA 00000405  003 OF 003 
 
 
universities.  Meanwhile, AKP vice-chairman Dengir Mir Firat said 
that the rectors are committing a crime by not allowing students 
with turban into universities.  He urged the prosecutors to take 
action against them.  Liberal Radikal's front-page headline reads, 
"University and AKP Reach Compromise on Headscarf: Prosecutors 
Should Take Action."   Meanwhile, the Constitutional Court process 
to annul the amendments to articles 10 and 42 started.   Supreme 
Court President Hasim Kilic's sent the application to the court 
reporter.  The non-binding report will be distributed among Supreme 
Court members and they will convene to announce their decision, adds 
Radikal. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Parliament's commission for interior affairs has approved a bill 
for the establishment of 43 new municipalities. 
 
- Professor Ali Bardakoglu, the head of religious affairs 'Diyanet' 
has rejected British press reports that there were preparations in 
Turkey to reform Islam.  He added Diyanet was only working towards a 
better understanding of the Prophet Muhammad's sayings. 
 
- Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association (TUSIAD) and 
the Turkish Central Bank have unveiled the first part of a report on 
integration with the global economy. 
 
International News 
 
- On Thursday, newly-elected Cyprus president Dimitris Christofias 
named Markos Kyprianou, the EU Health Commissioner, as his foreign 
minister. 
 
- Nine million pilgrims have gathered in the Iraqi city of Karbala 
to mark Arbaeen, one of the holiest religious ceremonies for Shiite 
Muslims. 
 
- Austria's President Heinz Fischer has approved the Austrian 
government's decision to recognize Kosovo. 
 
WILSON