08BEIJING745
CORRECTED COPY (PARA 1 and 3)FEBRUARY 28 MFA PRESS
Fri Feb 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1094
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0745/01 0601122
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291122Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5397
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000745 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR KOLY ETRD CH JA RS SU SR BM
KS, KN, TW, XA 
 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY (PARA 1 and 3)FEBRUARY 28 MFA PRESS 
BRIEFING: UK FOREIGN SECRETARY'S VISIT, IRAN, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
DARFUR, HUMAN RIGHTS, JAPAN DUMPLING CASE 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 28, 2008 MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
-- CNOOC's role in developing an Iranian gas field is "a business 
act." 
 
-- Although "there are some problems" in moving the Six-Party Talks 
forward, all parties are optimistic and have expressed a willingness 
to honor their commitments. 
 
-- The United States and China should conduct a human rights 
dialogue with "mutual respect and equality" and Congress should view 
the objective and beneficial developments of human rights in China. 
 
-- Special Envoy Liu Guijin's visit to Darfur demonstrates China's 
willingness to strengthen communication and coordination with 
relevant countries in order to restore peace and improve the 
humanitarian situation in Sudan. 
 
-- China does not believe the Japanese dumpling issue will impact 
President Hu's upcoming visit to Japan. 
 
UK Foreign Secretary Miliband's Visit 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. During the February 28 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson 
Liu Jianchao began by commenting on UK Foreign Secretary Miliband's 
visit to Beijing.  According to Liu, the UK and China agreed carry 
out strategic, economic and financial dialogues, to hold a second 
round of consultations on Africa and to continue their human rights 
dialogue.  Liu said Foreign Secretary Miliband called for 
intensified UK-China cooperation on regional and international 
issues, such as UN peacekeeping, nonproliferation and EU-China 
cooperation, and to discuss the challenges and opportunities of 
globalization.  Liu said Miliband reiterated the UK's one China 
policy. 
 
CNOOC in Iran and UN Sanctions Proposal 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. When asked if China is concerned about repercussions from the 
United States concerning China National Offshore Oil Corporation's 
(CNOOC) role in developing an Iranian gas field, Liu said China 
considers CNOOC's venture "a business act."  China attaches great 
importance to the Iran nuclear issue and believes dialogue and 
negotiations are "conducive to peaceful resolution of the issue." 
China has taken an active role in consultations, he said.  The UN 
Security Council is currently discussing the matter and China hopes 
Iran will address the concerns of the international community. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶4. Liu stated that Secretary Rice discussed the North Korean nuclear 
issue with President Hu and Premier Wen, and that Assistant 
Secretary Hill and his Chinese counterparts also discussed the 
 
SIPDIS 
matter.  China and the other parties have made efforts to implement 
their commitments even though "there are some problems," Liu said. 
All parties are optimistic and have expressed a willingness to honor 
their commitments, said Liu. 
 
U.S. Congressional Hearing on Human Rights 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. When asked China's views on a U.S. Congressional hearing on 
China's human rights record in the lead up to the Olympics, Liu said 
China's Constitution includes a commitment to protect the human 
rights of the Chinese people.  Liu stated that he hoped the United 
States and China could conduct a human rights dialogue with "mutual 
respect and equality" and that Congress could "take off its colored 
glasses" and view the objective and beneficial developments of human 
rights in China. 
 
U.S.-China Cooperation on U.S. MIAs 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Responding to a question on United States-China cooperation on 
U.S. missing-in-action combatants from the Korean War, Liu said that 
the United States and China have enjoyed "sound cooperation" for 
many years.  Following Vice Chairman Guo Boxiang's visit to the 
United States in July 2006 and Secretary of Defense Gate's trip to 
China in November 2007, both countries reached a consensus on joint 
cooperation.  Both sides are discussing the specifics for 
implementing this consensus, according to Liu. 
 
Special Envoy Liu Guijin's Visit to Darfur 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. Responding to a request for a briefing on Special Envoy Liu 
Guijin's visit to Sudan, Spokesman Liu characterized the visit as an 
 
BEIJING 00000745  002 OF 002 
 
 
expression of China's willingness to strengthen communication, 
coordination and exchanges with relevant countries in order to 
restore peace, conduct reconstruction and improve the humanitarian 
situation in Sudan.  Spokesman Liu noted that the Special Envoy met 
with relevant officials in Khartoum and in Darfur, as well as with 
the Chinese contingent of military engineers stationed in Sudan. 
Even though "achievements were made in this visit," the resolution 
of Sudan's "complicated" situation cannot rest on China, but instead 
the international community should encourage all relevant groups to 
implement agreements. 
 
China-Japan Dumpling Issue Should Not Effect Hu Visit 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶8. When asked if the recent poisoned dumpling incident would impact 
President Hu's planned visit to Japan in April, Liu said China 
places a high priority on this investigation but considers it an 
isolated case.  China hopes both countries can handle this matter 
properly by not letting it impact China-Japan relations. 
 
China's Policy towards Sao Tome and Principe 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. In response to a question on the possibility of China 
re-establishing diplomatic ties with Sao Tome and Principe in light 
of a new government there, Liu said China's consistent policy is 
non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries.  If 
countries adopt the "correct one China policy" then China would 
respond positively. 
 
Panchen Lama's Role is as a Religious Leader 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. In response to a question, Liu said that while he had no 
information that the Panchen Lama was recently chosen for a 
political position, the Panchen Lama was chosen and appointed as 
Tibetan Buddhism's second highest religious leader according to 
religious rituals.  According to Liu, the Panchen Lama enjoys a 
"high reputation" and the Chinese Government "believes he could 
provide a better role in promoting religious undertaking in Tibet." 
 
Nigerian President's Visit 
-------------------------- 
 
¶11. Nigerian President Umaru Yar'Adua started his state visit today 
and in the afternoon will meet President Hu, Liu reported.