08JAKARTA304
INDONESIA -- TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS SOLICITATION FOR G/TIP
Thu Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO7945
OO RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #0304/01 0450911
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 140911Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7997
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 2002
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 2324UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JAKARTA 000304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/RSA, G/TIP, EAP/MTS, EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC ELAB PREL SMIG ID
SUBJECT:  INDONESIA -- TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS SOLICITATION FOR G/TIP 
 
REF: State 161287 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  A Mission interagency panel evaluated 12 proposals 
for the Trafficking in Persons solicitation for G/TIP managed by 
2008 ESF and INCLE funds.  We are pleased to recommend the five 
projects below in priority order.  Mission is forwarding the full 
proposals to G/TIP via e-mail as well as an explanation of the 
panel's selections.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) Name of Organization: International Criminal Investigative 
Training Assistance Program (ICITAP) 
 
Name of Project:  Integrated Anti-trafficking Strategy for 
Identification, Investigation, Information Sharing and Prosecution 
of Transnational Trafficking Organizations for the Indonesian 
National Police 
 
Timeline        1 Year 
BUDGET (USD)        115,655.00 
POC:        Robert C. Barlow 
e-mail:         Barlowrc@state.gov 
 
Abstract:  The purpose of this proposal is to provide continued 
ICITAP technical assistance, training, and limited equipment to the 
Indonesian National Police (INP) Assistance Program to assist the 
Government of Indonesia (GOI) to increase and continue the 
development of sustainable efforts initiated in the ICITAP "Point of 
Origin Strategy."  This proposal capitalizes on the integrated 
multi-disciplinary anti-trafficking strategy for identification, 
investigation, information sharing and prosecution of transnational 
trafficking organizations and the protection and safety of 
trafficking victims that began in late 2006.  ICITAP worked directly 
and collaboratively with local IOM, NGOs, and USAID to integrate and 
train law enforcement and non-governmental personnel together in 
geographic areas where the most vulnerable of populations reside, 
specifically in North Sumatra and East Java.  Micro-training 
sessions have resulted in the training of 560 Indonesian police 
officers, 131 Malaysian police officers and 118 NGO staff, 
representing 62 NGO organizations during the past 18 months. The 
result has been an increase of arrests, NGOs now feel more 
comfortable to contact police regarding victims and traffickers and 
have done so on a regular basis since the strategy was initiated. 
As important is the police now understand the role and benefit of 
NGOs and IOM. Further, this strategy was expanded to border areas of 
Malaysia where ICITAP received funding to conduct an 
Indonesia-Malaysia Bi-Lateral TIP Project developing operational 
relationships with Malaysian law enforcement counterparts and also 
non-governmental organizations and stakeholders at Points of Transit 
along the porous borders and waterways of common trafficking routes. 
 This project proposal would expand the strategy to include 
prosecutors being integrated into the process working directly with 
IOM that is currently involved in the training and education of the 
procuracy and judiciary. With a new trafficking law recently passed, 
increased collaboration with IOM and other NGO's, demand for 
assistance, and a new and consistent willingness by the police to 
work with other non-law enforcement components, it is important to 
maintain the momentum generated in the last year.  Outcomes would 
include an augmented, synthesized, multi-disciplinary response to 
trafficking issues in the previously identified areas of North 
Sumatra and East Java; areas plagued by trafficking organizations 
that have preyed upon the vulnerable populations of young women for 
sexual exploitation.  Stakeholders, including police, prosecutors, 
IOM, and NGO's would be again be integrated into training modules to 
develop requisite skills, competencies, and working relationships to 
produce a seamless process of prevention, rescue, investigation, and 
arrest of traffickers and disruption of trafficking organizations in 
Indonesia. This would be supplemented by already existing ICITAP 
initiatives with the Marine Police Special Boat Units interdiction 
capacity along trafficking routes, the ICITAP Cyber Crimes 
Investigative Unit and Child Exploitation Tracking System (CETS) 
that operationally address transnational criminal activities. 
 
¶3.  (U) Name of Organization:  International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) 
 
Name of Project:  Strengthening the Capacity of Government Agencies 
for Placement and Protection of Migrant Workers to Combat Human 
Trafficking as well as to Protect Victims of Trafficking in 
Indonesia 
 
Timeline:      12 Months 
BUDGET (USD)   333,449.00 
POC:           Elizabeth Dunlap, Fitriana Nur 
e-mail:        edunlap@iom.int 
 
Abstract:  Within the framework of this project, IOM proposes to 
work in partnership with GOI to strengthen government capacity to 
combat human trafficking, particularly for labor trafficking, 
 
JAKARTA 00000304  002 OF 003 
 
 
through targeted training with government agencies involved in the 
sending and receiving of labor migrants.  Technical assistance and 
targeted trainings will be carried out for staff of the Overseas 
Migrant Workers Protection Agency (BNP2TKI), Police, ministries of 
Manpower, Immigration, Social Affairs, Foreign Affairs, NGOs, as 
well as other airport and seaport officials.  Successful 
collaboration of each agency present at Jakarta Airports Terminal 3, 
a terminal specific for returning migrant workers, the Surabaya 
airport, as well as the sea ports in Jakarta and Surabaya where 
thousands of domestic and international migrant workers transit each 
month will substantially further the GOI's progress towards 
protecting the rights of its labor migrants.  The overall goal of 
the project is to contribute to Indonesia's efforts to fight human 
trafficking, by strengthening the capacity of agencies tasked with 
the placement and protection of labor migrants to prevent and 
protect trafficking victims.  Project objectives allow for (1) 
strengthening knowledge of front line officers of the above 
mentioned agencies on trafficking and safe migration (2) improved 
implementation coordination between agencies in Jakarta and Surabaya 
for prevention and protection of labor migrant (3) enhanced 
knowledge and role of senior representatives of the relevant 
agencies on their responsibilities under the Anti Trafficking Law 
and migrant protection, and (4) increased awareness of labor 
migrants and potential trafficking victim of regulation of 
regulations and safe migration and for victims to be supported with 
direct assistance.  The project is designed to maximize government 
ownership and sustainability at all levels and will result in 
increase capacity to prevent and identify trafficking of Indonesians 
and to provide individual assistance and protection for victims. 
Progress with regards to Indonesia's efforts to combat trafficking 
largely rests with the success of BNP2TKI, which has requested IOM 
support with training, and its victims as mandated under Indonesia's 
new Anti Trafficking Law.  This project will build upon the 
successful results of IOM's recent law enforcement program to combat 
human trafficking and will also complement IOM Indonesia's on-going 
Return, Recovery and Reintegration Program in Indonesia. 
 
¶4.  (U) Name of Organization:  Save the Children 
 
Name of Project:       Migrant Worker Protection (PROTECT) 
 
Timeline:              3 years 
BUDGET (USD)           500,000 
POC:                   Bambang Ertanto Cahyo Dewa 
e-mail:                bertanto@savechildren.or.id 
 
Abstract:  Around the world, Indonesian migrant workers are 
exploited and abused through domestic servitude, prostitution and 
forced plantation work. Countries including Singapore, Malaysia and 
Saudi Arabia regularly deport migrant workers who have been rescued 
from slave-like conditions. Government health statistics estimate 
that nearly 80 percent of returning "domestic workers" from Saudi 
Arabia are infected with sexually transmitted diseases.  One root 
cause of this problem is that Indonesian migrant workers' rights are 
not protected throughout the process of training and placement 
overseas. Recruiting, processing, training and placing migrant 
laborers are centralized through exclusive monopolies in Jakarta and 
nearly all migrant laborers begin their employment indebted to 
placement companies. Workers are not allowed to return home until 
they have repaid their debt plus accrued interest. This creates 
slave-like conditions as workers who are mistreated, abused and 
enslaved by their employers cannot escape their situation.  Save the 
Children (SC) is pleased to submit this proposal to improve the 
protection of Indonesian migrant workers from trafficking and 
exploitation.  The 30-month Migrant Worker Protection Project 
(PROTECT) will support the Government of Indonesia (GoI) to address 
widespread debt bondage in Indonesia's migrant labor system; 
establish community-level safe migration mechanisms to thwart the 
efforts of traffickers and recruiters; and support two district 
governments in Central Java and West Kalimantan to develop and 
implement protective policies and decentralized job training centers 
to better monitor and protect migrant workers. The project utilizes 
SC's community mobilization model, ENACT, and draws on eight years 
of anti-trafficking work in Indonesia to mobilize communities toward 
safer migration and away from debt bondage.  A key result of the 
PROTECT project will be a replicable and sustainable model of safe 
migration that reduces debt bondage across the country. 
 
Name of Organization:  Center for Strategic and International 
Studies (CSIS) 
 
¶5.  (U) Name of Project:  Mapping Local Capacity to Prevent and 
Protect Human Trafficking in Indonesia: The Strengthening of Local 
Governance. 
 
Timeline:      18 months 
BUDGET (USD)   254,253.00 
POC:           Medelina K. Hendytio 
e-mail:        Medelina@csis.or.id; medelinah@hotmail.com 
 
JAKARTA 00000304  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Abstract:  Although Indonesia was classified as Tier 2 in the US 
Department of State TIP Report, the commitment of the Indonesian 
government and other actors dealing with this issue is still low. 
Statistics are witness to the amount of human trafficking victims 
that increase each year. Despite various efforts and policy to 
eliminate Trafficking in Persons, the stress of most programs, 
interventions, research and recommendations tend to be "nationally 
heavy." In other words, there is limited attention given to 
increasing capacity of local governance. This project therefore aims 
to increase the capacity and knowledge of local governance and at 
the same time enhance  more systematic coordination between local, 
provincial and national governments in dealing with Trafficking in 
Persons.  The intervention will involve mapping capacities in four 
areas (West Kalimantan, Riau, East Java, and North Sulawesi) to get 
better observe the magnitude and needs; training of target groups, 
workshops, establishing Guidelines to deal with Human Trafficking 
for local governance and building data sharing mechanism and 
strategies within the three governmental hierarchies. Through the 
interventions, it is expected that there will be increased knowledge 
and awareness for local governance on trafficking issues and 
strategies to eliminate human trafficking; the establishment of 
Guidelines on preventing and protecting Trafficking in Persons for 
local governance; and the establishment of communication and data 
sharing mechanisms between local, provincial and national 
governments in the prevention and protecting Trafficking in Person. 
 
¶6.  (U) Name of Organization:  Center for Societal Development 
Studies, Atma Jaya Catholic University 
 
Name of Project:  Sensitizing Debt Bondage Practices in the 
Prosecution Process 
 
Timeline:     18 months 
BUDGET (USD)  285,146 
POC:          George Martin Sirait/ Yustina Rostiawati 
e-mail:       martin.sirait@atmajaya.ac.id 
              yustina.rostiawati@atmajaya.ac.id 
 
Abstract:  Debt bondage practices have been widely known as one of 
the most frequent methods the traffickers use to trap VoTs. In the 
prosecution process, however, many law enforcement officials still 
fail to identify this practice. Although the new anti-trafficking 
law of 2007 has highlighted this practice, other related laws do not 
explicitly stipulate relationship between debt bondage and TIP. 
Based on our previous study on Debt Bondage in Human Trafficking: 
Case Study in Two Forms of TIP involving Children and Women (2007), 
we would like to deepen knowledge and sensitize concern, primarily 
of law enforcement officials, to this issue. The project will be 
called "sensitizing debt bondage practices in the prosecution 
process".   The project will include:  deeper studies on updated TIP 
mapping; trends; various forms of debt bondage practices in TIP; and 
collection of best practices of law enforcement process applied 
throughout Indonesia. Secondly, we will propose an innovative 
approach for the sake of TIP victims interests, namely to set up a 
group of TIP consultants, who will assist law enforcers to 
understand TIP cases comprehensively. This improved knowledge and 
institutional building will be established in the local 
(province/regency) level through training, monitoring, and 
consulting.  The project activity will also empower trans-local 
resources, both formal law enforcers and NGOs activists by 
interweaving networks among those involved in the line of sending, 
transit, and receiving areas.