08SANJOSE146
TOOLS FOR A GREEN ISLAND:  ADDRESSING ENVIRONMENT AND
Fri Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXRO5032
RR RUEHAO RUEHGR RUEHHT
DE RUEHSJ #0146/01 0531709
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221709Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9461
RUEHKG/AMEMBASSY KINGSTON 0807
INFO RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 4619
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 4199
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1111
RUEHAO/AMCONSUL CURACAO 0069
RUEHWN/AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN 0792
RUEHHT/AMCONSUL HAMILTON 0023
RUEHBH/AMEMBASSY NASSAU 0258
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 1583
RUEHGR/AMEMBASSY GRENADA 0018
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0572
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 0333
RUEHSP/AMEMBASSY PORT OF SPAIN 0467
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0036
RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SAN JOSE 000146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AID 
AID FOR JGARRISON 
KINGSTON PLEASE PASS TO NCARTER AND JHARMON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID ENRG JM
SUBJECT:  TOOLS FOR A GREEN ISLAND:  ADDRESSING ENVIRONMENT AND 
DEVELOPMENT in JAMAICA 
 
REF: 07 STATE 30914 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  While in Kingston October 21-24, 2007, REO met with 
UNEP, GOJ environmental officials, and U.S. Mission environmental 
partners to discuss priorities and potential tools.  UNEP's Franklin 
Macdonald shared his views on WW2BW's future.  Jamaica's National 
Environment and Planning Agency flagged gaps in land planning 
expertise in seeking to mitigate the impact of development on the 
environment.  AID reviewed on-going environment and poverty 
alleviation projects.  Although this report is dated, we believe the 
information is still of interest, applicable in 2008 and thus useful 
to readers.  See opportunities for cooperation, para 13.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  REO visited Jamaica October 21-24, 2007.  Valuable meetings with 
Econoff Nathan Carter and the AID environmental delegation 
highlighted changing priorities in the U.S.-Jamaica bilateral 
environmental relationship.  REO met with United National 
Environmental Program (UNEP) official Franklin MacDonald and (by 
phone) future hire Maria Plotz to discuss their thinking on White 
Water to Blue Water.  REO reviewed priorities with National 
Environment and Planning Agency officials Winsome Townsend and 
Sheries Simpson, and discussed implementation of Jamaica's 
Enterprise of the Americas Initiative and Tropical Forest 
Conservation Act funds. 
 
White Water to Blue Water:  Ideas for Moving Forward 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.  REO met with Franklin Macdonald, White Water to Blue Water 
co-chair.  (WW2BW is a public-private partnership to promote 
integrated management of watershed and marine resources for the 
Greater Caribbean area.)  He viewed WW2BW's most important 
accomplishment as providing "definition" to environmental efforts, 
promoting a regional grasp of problems and strategies for integrated 
watershed management and marine resource efforts.  MacDonald 
expected that energy would be generated by the launch of a new 
website and 2008 Year of the Reef activities. 
 
¶4.  Macdonald hoped that the proposed Regional Center for Small 
Island Developing States, slated for Barbados, would provide 
secretarial backing to WW2BW, but this entity has not materialized. 
 
SIPDIS 
In order to ensure routine follow-up to inquiries, public outreach, 
and coordination, MacDonald said he would continue to serve as 
co-chair but will reduce his hours in order to bring on board 
part-time Maria Protz of the grassroots Jamaican NGO Friends of the 
Sea.  He also sought to enlist the three Cartegena Convention for 
the Protection and Development of the Marine Environment of the 
Wider Caribbean Region (Cartagena Convention) Regional Action 
Centers (RACs) to take on the responsibility for guiding the four 
thematic groups (Marine Transport, Land-based Sources of Pollution, 
Protected Areas, and Sustainable Tourism).  These will be able to 
coordinate WW2BW with other regional efforts deliver a degree of 
secretarial support.  Macdonald is uncertain whether existing 
 
SIPDIS 
thematic groups would continue. 
 
¶5.  He and Protz recognized the need for local ownership of WW2BW. 
Although WW2BW committees no longer meet regularly in many countries 
due in part to competing priorities and departure of personnel, they 
welcomed continued interest from organizations and private interests 
in the region.  Macdonald recommended that, in countries where 
national WW2BW teams are no longer functioning, an interested 
organization be recruited to serve as a focal point - in Bahamas, 
for example, the quasi-NGO Bahamas National Trust might be sounded 
out.  The prospective Friends of WW2BW might help generate private 
sector support, and Macdonald and Protz pointed to interest from 
major donors like the regional cellphone company Digicel. 
 
¶6.  Protz questioned whether WW2BW had the profile, staff and 
contacts to be able to tap deep pockets of major donors with its 
current resources.  She recommended that WW2BW consider whether it 
should invest instead in outreach to small and medium scale 
 
SAN JOSE 00000146  002 OF 004 
 
 
enterprises, serving as a broker between smaller companies looking 
to partner with reputable community-based organizations or NGOS on 
issues of common interest.  In order to boost its profile, she 
recommended that, in the short term, approximately ten kits on WW2BW 
(a banner, hand-out materials, and a continuous power point 
presentation) be prepared to equip a booth on WW2BW at regional 
conferences. 
 
Development Pressures 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  Conversations on environmental issues confronting Jamaica 
focused on addressing the environmental consequences of development. 
 This marked a change from REO's prior visit in 2004, which 
previously stressed biodiversity - fisheries and coral reefs, forest 
policy and invasive species. 
 
¶8.  NEPA officials Winsome Townsend and Sheries Simpson reviewed the 
workings of Jamaica's Environmental Impact Assessment process.  They 
distinguished between its role in land use planning, in which NEPA 
shares authority with and supports local government decision-making, 
and its role in providing environmental permits, in which it 
exercises sole authority.  With particular concerns for coastal real 
estate development, NEPA intends to integrate risk reduction more 
explicitly into its permits processes, with applications to address 
risks linked to pollution, hurricanes, and climate change.  While 
NEPA is confident in the structure of its processes, staffing and 
resource limitations contribute to delays.  NEPA also encourages 
voluntary certification standards: 
 
--  The Blue Flag Program established beach quality standards relied 
upon by tour operators; 
--  The Green Globe Program certified the environmental management 
systems of tourism businesses, particularly hotels; and, 
--  NEPA informally works with businesses to develop implementation 
plans for operations adjusting to new regulations on water and air 
quality. 
 
¶9.  NEPA's partners include capacity building projects with UNDP, 
SIDA, IDB and GEF, and the regional International Watershed and 
Coastal Resource Management Assessment and Monitoring (IWCRAM). 
 
Changing Priorities for U.S. Assistance 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Reduced U.S. assistance levels and a change in focus from 
environment to poverty alleviation affected the range and staffing 
of environment-related projects on the island.  The projected 
second-generation Ridge to Reef program addressing watershed 
management, whose first iteration helped inspire WW2BW, was 
eliminated.  NEPA noted that Blue Flag and Green Globe projects were 
successful while AID resources flowed, but met with difficulties 
when this flow stopped.  The NEPA contacts said that project 
beneficiaries expected to be paid for improving environmental 
performance even if these changes reduced their costs or positioned 
them to tap higher-paying ecotourism opportunities.  COMMENT: 
Beneficiaries may be contrasting the certainty of costs needed to 
maintain green standards with the uncertainty whether sustainable 
tourism will in fact boost incomes.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶11.  On-going AID projects which incorporated biodiversity 
included: 
 
--  Rural Enterprise, Agriculture and Community Tourism (REACT), 
which creates alternative sustainable income earning operations in 
targeted rural communities that apply sound environmental management 
practices to conserve Jamaica's biological and cultural heritage; 
 
-- Farmers Access to Regional Markets (JA FARMS), a network of 
growers and market organizations that encourages use of more 
efficient production technologies, access to capital and training, 
and a wider choice of markets and products; and, 
 
SAN JOSE 00000146  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
--  Protected Areas and Rural Enterprise (PARE), which strengthens 
the linkage between effective natural resource management and 
livelihoods in and around priority conservation sites.  Components 
include sustainable tourism planning and implementation; threats and 
economic costs of natural disasters on rural economy and 
biodiversity; and management of targeted agricultural sectors and 
businesses that use sustainable, renewable and non-timber forest 
products. 
 
¶12.  In addition, AID represents the Mission on Jamaica's two 
debt-for-nature swaps, the Environmental Foundation of Jamaica (an 
Enterprise of the Americas Initiative fund) and the Tropical Forest 
Conservation Act fund.  According to Maria Protz of the grassroots 
NGO Friends of the Sea, the ECJ provided valuable support for 
grassroots organizations but did not (and was not intended to) 
ensure the long-term sustainability of community-based organizations 
and NGOs.  Founded in 2004, the U.S.-Jamaica TFCA issued its first 
project call and awarded 10 grants in 2007. 
 
COMMENT:  Opportunities for Cooperation 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Building on the well-established history of environmental 
engagement between the U.S. and Jamaica, the link between the 
environment and key economic sectors like tourism, and the range of 
existing funds and programs that incorporate environmental 
components, Embassy Kingston might consider a number of 
opportunities for promoting engagement on ESTH issues. 
 
--  AID might consider the appointment of EFJ and TFCA alternates to 
help bridge gaps in representation and to boost institutional memory 
in times of transition, perhaps approaching other U.S. Embassy 
agencies to serve in this capacity.  Participation of other agencies 
that share an interest in the issues under consideration would boost 
the prospects that the Mission could leverage EAI/TFCA activities 
with tools like the Embassy Science Fellow Program and American 
Fellows Program (see below); Earth Day; International Visitor 
Program and/or other public affairs initiatives.  Peace Corps 
participation might bolster the likelihood that their lessons 
learned could benefit the funds in their dealing with grassroots 
organizations; Public Affairs participation could help ensure that 
the Embassy takes advantage of the plethora of grassroots public 
affairs opportunities (project launches and closings, for example) 
that the funds could provide; or Econ/Pol participation could open 
up new grassroots contacts island-wide. 
 
--  The Embassy Science Fellow Program (Ref A) and the American 
Fellows Program (www.partners.net) are two means for making U.S. 
expertise available to the Funds and their recipient NGO partners; 
to government offices like NEPA; and private sector associations. 
The first permits missions to request a scientist linked to a 
federal agency to work on a project of interest to the Mission for 
up to three months.  The second permits Western Hemisphere 
governments to propose placing a U.S. official in a host government 
agency (or vice versa) for up to six months. NEPA flagged the 
following themes for such an exchange: 
 
i)  bolstering NEPA expertise regarding risk reduction, air quality 
monitoring, air and water pollution loading, and analysis of mapping 
data; 
ii)  mapping data analysis and application of earth observation data 
to NEPA operations via tools like Google Earth; and 
iii)  accessing U.S. satellite data in case of hurricanes or other 
disasters. 
 
--  Video conferencing is another tool for linking Jamaican and U.S. 
scientists and policy-makers.  CEP's Franklin Macdonald suggested 
using this tool for a briefing on the United States-Mexico-Cuba 
effort to study biological and physical aspects of the Gulf of 
Mexico and the Gulf Stream. 
 
 
SAN JOSE 00000146  004 OF 004 
 
 
--  Mission might consider participating in environment-themed IVs 
and VOLVIS programs. 
 
-- While in many instances green issues could be highlighted in the 
context of broader cables on themes like energy, mining or 
agriculture, the Embassy might consider fuller cables directed at 
climate change and adaptation; forestry; and reefs.  The last would 
be especially timely since 2008 is the Year of the Reef, opening up 
public affairs opportunities like Reef-Fest or Earth Day.  It could 
also position Jamaica to tap a debt for nature swap for a third time 
if the U.S. Senate agrees to extend TFCA to reefs. 
 
BRENNAN