08USUNNEWYORK95
JANUARY MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING: RANCOROUS SECURITY
Fri Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7818
PP RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0095/01 0322243
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 012243Z FEB 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3646
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000095 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER KPAL KWBG IS LE SY
SUBJECT: JANUARY MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING: RANCOROUS SECURITY 
COUNCIL DEBATE  OVERSHADOWS ANNAPOLIS PROGRESS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  During the UN Security Council's monthly 
public debate on the Middle East on January 30, past optimism 
about the Annapolis process was overshadowed by rancor 
resulting from the UNSC's inability to adopt a Presidential 
Statement (PRST) on the situation in Gaza as well as 
acrimonious exchanges between the parties.  Although most 
delegations expressed hope that the momentum generated at 
Annapolis would be sustained, several decried continuing 
Israeli settlement activity as contravening the GOI's Roadmap 
obligations.  Most delegations also called on the PA to do 
more to confront terrorism and expressed concern about or 
condemned the rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel. 
Delegates also expressed concern about recent violence in 
Lebanon and generally expressed support for the Arab League's 
effort to find a solution to the impasse over the 
presidential election. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Israeli, Palestinian, Lebanese, and Syrian 
delegates engaged in an acrimonious name-calling exercise at 
the end of the debate in which they argued about the source 
of Gaza's problems (occupation vs. terrorism).  The Syrian PR 
accused Israel of "genocide," while the Israeli PR argued 
Libya was unfit for UNSC membership given its involvement in 
the Lockerbie bombing.  Despite the rancor, the Libyan 
delegation worked privately with USUN to shelve the proposed 
PRST and did not push forward, as would normally be the case, 
an unbalanced resolution that would have triggered a USG 
veto.  Because USUN succeeded in inserting consideration of 
the security aspects of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza into 
the Council discussion, the Arab group was unable to find 
support for its typical tactic of seeking a UN General 
Assembly Special Session once the Council has failed to issue 
a product. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Although the Security Council held an unscheduled 
debate on the situation in Gaza January 22, Council members 
insisted on also holding the regular monthly debate on the 
situation in the Middle East January 30.  A summary of the 
January 30 debate, as well as the full transcript, should be 
available on the UN website (www.un.org, then click on "press 
center") by January 31. End Summary. 
 
Pascoe Presents Update 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Under Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn 
Pascoe delivered the monthly briefing on the Middle East in a 
public briefing of the UN Security Council January 30. Pascoe 
highlighted the gap between the aspirations of the political 
process and realities of the situation on the ground, and 
said that both sides had obligations under Phase I of the 
Roadmap - including a freeze on all settlement activity by 
Israel and disarming of militants by the PA. Pascoe then 
briefed the Council on developments in the crisis in Gaza, 
the casualties of the last month (the "month of heavy 
bloodshed"), continuing negotiations between Israelis and 
Palestinians, follow-up from the Paris donor conference, and 
developments in Lebanon.  On Gaza, Pascoe said that since 
Israel's decision to impose a closure on Gaza on January 18, 
32 truckloads of goods had entered Gaza compared to a daily 
average of 93 trucks during 2007 and 2008. 
 
 
Ambassador Wolff Keeps Focus on Annapolis 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Ambassador Wolff spoke of continuing U.S. commitment 
to a two-state solution and highlighted President Bush's call 
for members to support Israeli and Palestinian progress on 
four tracks: implementing the roadmap, building Palestinian 
economic and security institutions, securing ongoing support 
from the international community, and continuing bilateral 
negotiations aimed at securing a peace settlement. 
Ambassador Wolff also urged the international community to 
maintain the Annapolis momentum that was reinforced in the 
Paris donors' conference. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ambassador Wolff said that the USG shared the regret 
of several other delegations that the UNSC was unable to 
agree on the draft PRST discussed on January 25, but he 
emphasized that the lack of a Council statement did not 
signify a lack of concern for the humanitarian crisis.  He 
called on Hamas to cease its violent terrorist attacks on 
Israel, noting that Hamas was at odds with the aspirations of 
the Palestinian people, and expressed surprise that the 
Palestinian representative did not condemn the rocket attacks 
as President Abbas had in public remarks. Ambassador Wolff 
said the United States supports contact between Israelis and 
the Palestinian Authority to discuss the Palestinian proposal 
to assume control over border crossing points inside Gaza. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000095  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) On Lebanon, Ambassador Wolff strongly condemned the 
Beirut bombing in mid-January, but said that the United 
States would not falter in its support for a democratic 
government in Lebanon.  The Ambassador noted the United 
States' support for UN efforts on a Lebanon tribunal and 
urged other members to provide contributions as soon as 
possible to set up the tribunal.  Ambassador Wolff also 
called for immediate Presidential elections in Lebanon and 
for Syria, Iran, and allies to end their interference in 
Lebanon's democratic process. 
 
Concern over Humanitarian Crisis in Gaza 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) All delegations expressed concern at the continuing 
humanitarian crisis in Gaza.  While most delegations 
expressed concern about or condemned the mortar and rocket 
attacks against Israel, they also admonished Israel for 
practicing "collective punishment" by closing the border 
crossings, and called on Israel to reopen crossing and allow 
free movement of persons and goods.  Libya argued that the 
siege of Gaza was one link in a long chain of Israeli actions 
--including military incursions, terrorizing civilians, 
destroying the Al-Aqsa mosque, and imprisoning women and 
children --intended to destroy the lives of 1.5 million 
Palestinians, and said these activities cast doubt on 
Israel's stated intentions to conclude a peace agreement with 
the Palestinians. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The UK, France, Russia noted their support for the 
Egyptian government's response to the influx of Palestinians 
at Rafah and the UK encouraged all parties to work to 
normalize the operation of the Rafah crossing. The UK and 
China voiced support for the proposal for the Palestinian 
Authority to control border crossings in Gaza, while Russia 
and Indonesia advocated talks among Palestinians on national 
unity.  Italy called Israel's closure policy "unsustainable" 
and "counter-productive," and urged a return to the status 
quo ante as soon as possible. 
 
Deep Disappointment over UNSC Failure to Agree on PRST 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) With the notable exception of Libya, most 
delegations expressed deep frustration over the Council's 
inability to reach consensus on a PRST addressing the 
situation in Gaza.  This frustration fed a public argument 
about the merits of public meetings.  While the UK questioned 
whether the monthly UNSC debates on the Middle East are 
useful - whether they were adding "more light" or just "more 
heat" to discussions on the issue, South Africa argued that 
silence is more dangerous than a discussion in which 
temperatures are raised.  Indonesia opined that in absence of 
consensus, the views of different UNSC members need to be 
expressed, and that the monthly Middle East debate was 
therefore a useful event.  Panama suggested that the General 
Assembly is a preferable forum.  Ambassador Wolff observed 
that these "debates" were typically a platform for unhelpful 
rhetoric. 
 
Continued Hope for Progress on Annapolis Commitments 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Despite expressed concerns that recent events on 
the ground had jeopardized the momentum generated at 
Annapolis, delegations urged the peace process to continue. 
Delegations noted that Israeli and Palestinian leaders, 
negotiators, and experts continued to meet and they called on 
parties to fulfill the commitments in Phase 1 of the roadmap. 
 A number of delegations, including France and South Africa, 
called on Israel to do more to release prisoners, end 
settlement activity, and dismantle outposts, while asking 
Palestinians to increase security efforts and combat 
terrorist activities. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Delegations also called for the international 
community to continue to support the peace process and to 
follow-through on financial commitments made at the Paris 
donor conference.  Repeating a familiar line, Russia said 
that only a comprehensive approach to the Middle East would 
be successful and called for resumption of negotiations on 
the Palestinian, Syrian, and Lebanese tracks. 
 
Concern Over Continuing Violence in Lebanon 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Most delegations voiced concern over the 
deteriorating security situation in Lebanon and condemned the 
recent terrorist attacks.  They also called for the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000095  003 OF 003 
 
 
long-delayed Presidential election to occur quickly, without 
outside intervention, and welcomed the Arab League's 
mediation efforts.  France emphasized that the Special 
Tribunal for Lebanon should be established as soon as 
possible.  The French PR also expressed regret about the 
deaths of the Hizballah/Amal supporters on January 27 and 
said those responsible for these killings must be found. 
 
Parties Return to Acrimonious Debate of the Past 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶14. (SBU) After opening statements from the Israeli and 
Palestinian representatives in which they argued about the 
origin of Gaza's current problems and whether the territory 
is still occupied, exchanges between the parties devolved 
into open recrimination and name-calling following Lebanese 
and Syrian statements.  The Palestinian and Israeli 
representatives later exercised their right of reply. 
 
¶15. (SBU) The Lebanese PR said that people of the Middle East 
are still looking to UNSC for action and that it needs to end 
suffering in Gaza and restore credibility of the peace 
process. He also said that Israel is flouting its Annapolis 
commitments by continuing to support settlements and noted 
that the Israelis haven't lifted the blockade of Gaza. 
Ambassador Salam called for a "diplomatic process" to resolve 
the status of the Sheba'a Farms area.  He expressed the GOL's 
full support for the Arab League plan on Lebanon's 
presidential elections and said the January 27 deaths of the 
Hizballah/Amal supporters are being investigated. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Syria opened by fully supporting Libya's statements 
and complaining that U/SYG Pascoe's briefing had glossed over 
Israeli transgressions and had failed to mention the status 
of the occupied Syrian Golan.  Paying special attention to 
the Golan, the Syrian PR decried Israel's refusal to permit 
residents of the Golan to visit their families in Syria or to 
return Syrian prisoners in Israel.  He said Syria was 
"determined to regain the Golan to the 1967 lines by all 
legitimate means."  He then went on to accuse Israel of 
crimes of "genocide" and alleged that Israel was undermining 
Annapolis by continuing its settlement campaign even after 
the peace conference.  In response to the United States call 
for Syrian non-interference in Lebanon, the Syrian PR noted 
that the policy of non-intervention should apply to everyone, 
including the United States. 
 
¶17. (SBU) The Palestinian representative requested right of 
reply to respond to Ambassador Wolff's point that he had 
failed to mention President Abbas's condemnation of the 
rocket attacks against Israel.  The Palestinian 
representative argued that the Council needed to consider the 
totality of Abbas' position; the Palestinians were flexible 
on condemning the rockets during the PRST discussions last 
week, but that the main reason for the Gaza situation was the 
Israeli occupation and military incursions.  He also said 
that to only address the firing of rockets was not balanced 
or fair.  The Palestinian representative also observed that 
most delegations had welcomed the prospect of the Palestinian 
Authority assuming control of the border crossings, which he 
said would offer a concrete solution to the suffering of 
Gazans. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Israel also requested right of reply and used the 
time to question the legitimacy of Libya's inclusion on the 
Security Council, and quoted the UN Charter about criteria 
for membership.  The representative noted that Council 
members were supposed to contribute to international peace 
and security, but then said this meeting was filled with the 
"bias, bigotry, and hate" demonstrated by the country who had 
"recently been under UN sanctions" and had perpetrated the 
Lockerbie attack, as well as by the "assassins of Damascus." 
The Israeli ended by proclaiming "TGIF - Thank God Its 
February," referring to the end of Libya's Presidency of the 
Council. 
 
¶19. (SBU) Syria responded by accusing Israel of disregarding 
the organization and international law and noting that the 
Israeli representative had only increased his isolation at 
the UN and in the world by attacking the Libyan Presidency. 
KHALILZAD