09CIUDADJUAREZ27
2009 CIUDAD JUAREZ OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT
Tue Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Ciudad Juarez
P R 272258Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL CIUDAD JUAREZ
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5817
INFO AMEMBASSY MEXICO 
AMCONSUL CIUDAD JUAREZ189095
2009-01-27 22:58:00
09CIUDADJUAREZ27
Consulate Ciudad Juarez
UNCLASSIFIED

P R 272258Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL CIUDAD JUAREZ
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5817
INFO AMEMBASSY MEXICO 
AMCONSUL CIUDAD JUAREZ 


UNCLAS CIUDAD JUAREZ 000027 
 
 
FOR DS/OSAC AND DS/IP/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC MX
SUBJECT: 2009 CIUDAD JUAREZ OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 
 
¶I. (U) Overall Crime and Safety Situation: 
 
¶A. Crime Threats 
 
The Department's Critical Crime Threat Level for this industrial 
border city of 1.6 million people does not convey the scope of 
the violence in Ciudad Juarez.  Although Mexican media and 
government sources offer varying crime statistics for Ciudad 
Juarez, all sources indicate that there were at least 1600 
murders committed in and around the city in 2008.  More than 70 
police officers and soldiers were killed in Ciudad Juarez during 
the year.  Mexican cartels battling for control of regional drug 
trafficking routes caused widespread disruption in the 
functioning of city, state and federal government agencies. 
Cartel violence significantly undermined local confidence in the 
capacity of Mexican government institutions, including the army, 
to guarantee public security. 
 
There were 55 known cases of kidnapping, and more than 300 known 
cases of sexual assault and rape, including child molestation, 
in the state of Chihuahua during 2008.  Many crimes of this 
nature are not reported to the police for reasons described 
below in this report.  Furthermore, there were approximately 86 
bank robberies and 17,000 car thefts, including as many as 1,650 
carjackings. 
 
Violent crime is a fact of everyday life in Ciudad Juarez.  No 
trends indicate that criminals in Juarez specifically target 
U.S. citizens.  Instead, they select victims based on an 
appearance of vulnerability, prosperity or inattentiveness, 
particularly in the downtown bar area. 
 
Americans in Juarez need to guard against robbery, theft, and 
burglary.  Displays of cash, jewelry or other signs of wealth 
are magnets for armed street thieves and pickpockets, and items 
of minor value left in a car can trigger a break-in even when 
left for only a few minutes.  Hotel guests should keep valuables 
in secure locations.  Do not leave jewelry, money, identity 
documents, or other valuable items unattended in hotel rooms. 
 
¶B. Personal Safety 
 
¶1. Remain on constant alert for street crime (i.e. armed 
robbery, pocket-picking, purse-snatching, ATM robbery, etc.). 
 
¶2. Maintain a low profile.  Dress casually and keep valuables 
out of sight.  Do not draw attention to yourself. 
 
¶3. Vary your routine.  Be unpredictable in your movements.  Vary 
your routes and your departure and arrival times. 
 
¶4. Be alert to surveillance.  Note and avoid anyone who appears 
out of place along your routes to regularly scheduled 
activities.  Avoid sitting outside at restaurants.  Instead, try 
to find seats in areas not clearly visible from the street. 
 
¶5. Stay informed.  Be aware of popular scams and robbery tactics 
used to distract your attention. 
 
¶6. Reduce the incentive for someone to rob you and minimize the 
possible loss.  Do not carry valuables or large sums of money, 
avoid wearing jewelry, and carry your wallet in your front 
trouser pocket or front jacket pocket. 
 
¶7. When hiring domestic help, check references and criminal 
history as thoroughly as possible and ensure that they are 
trained not to volunteer information to strangers or to allow 
access to workers without prior authorization. 
 
¶8. Take normal tourist precautions when drinking water and 
eating fresh fruits, vegetables, and salads. 
 
¶9. Do not buy prescription medications in Mexico unless you have 
a prescription from a Mexican doctor. 
 
¶C. Driver Safety 
 
Driving in Juarez requires vigilance and a defensive attitude. 
Local drivers are not uniformly well experienced, and often have 
poorly maintained cars.  Road signs and traffic lights are not 
always clear.  Drivers in Ciudad Juarez should give a wide berth 
to public buses, which are known for careless driving. 
 
Road conditions are poor in most areas outside of downtown. 
Potholes and trenches can damage your car or cause drivers to 
swerve into your lane or brake unexpectedly.  Manhole covers may 
be removed at any time, but more often when roads flood, in 
order to drain an area more quickly.  Open manholes are hard to 
spot. 
 
¶D. Protecting Your Vehicle 
 
The head and taillights are held in place by easily accessible 
screws.  Install grilles around the lights. 
 
If your tire is mounted on the outside the vehicle, secure it in 
place with a chain and padlock or similar device. 
 
Theft of a vehicle's operating computer is a common crime, as is 
theft of car sound systems.  Car alarms are strongly 
recommended.  Keep your vehicle free of anything of value, and 
store out of plain view anything that would entice a thief. 
 
Replace one lug nut on each wheel with a specially keyed bolt 
that locks or can only be removed with a special attachment to 
the tire iron. 
 
Avoid leaving your vehicle on the street.  Park inside a 
residential compound, in a parking lot with an attendant, or 
within view of the location of your visit. 
 
¶E. Public Transportation 
 
Avoid public transportation.  In addition to harboring potential 
pick-pockets, city buses are known for reckless driving.  Taxis 
in Juarez are generally safer and more reliable.  Taxis are 
required to be registered with the government, but they are 
usually not metered and may overcharge.  Taxis from the airport 
are paid in advance in the terminal and are well regulated. 
 
II. (U) Political Violence 
 
¶A. Civil Unrest 
 
Northern Mexico is not historically anti-American, but rather, 
well-integrated by family and commercial ties with the U.S. 
border states.  Anti-American sentiment is seldom expressed 
toward U.S. citizens in Ciudad Juarez.  The infrequent 
occurrences in Juarez of trade- or foreign policy-related 
protest generally do not affect visitors and expatriates. 
 
¶B. Demonstrations 
 
Peaceful demonstrations against U.S. policies sometimes occur at 
the U.S. Consulate General and the border bridges.  Avoid 
demonstrations because the potential for violence exists when 
there is a crowd in Juarez. 
 
¶C. International Terrorism 
 
International drug trafficking organizations are responsible for 
most of the homicides and other organized criminal activity in 
Ciudad Juarez and the State of Chihuahua.  Although no trends 
indicate that US Citizens are specifically targeted for violence 
by these organizations, assassinations of police officers and 
other government officials, and other murders, often occur in 
public places and in traffic in Ciudad Juarez.  Any public place 
at any time of day or night could turn into the wrong place at 
the wrong time. 
 
Lax immigration controls, the ease with which fake Mexican 
travel documents can be obtained, and Mexico's geographic 
location make the country an attractive transit point for 
transnational terrorists. 
 
III. (U) Post Specific Concerns 
 
¶A. Murder 
 
Drug related murders can occur anytime in any part of Ciudad 
Juarez, and ordinary residents can be caught in the crossfire. 
Remain alert for trouble at all times, and constantly review 
escape routes and potential safe-havens as you travel in the 
city. 
 
¶B. Robbery 
 
Commercial establishments and their patrons, such as stores and 
restaurants, are increasingly targeted for robbery. 
 
¶C. Kidnapping 
 
There are many forms of kidnapping in Mexico.  For instance, 
"virtual kidnapping" is the term used when criminals falsely 
claim to have kidnapped a victim in order to quickly obtain a 
ransom, and those cases increased 500% in Ciudad Juarez in 2008 
with more than 600 reported incidents.  There have been 
incidents where US Citizens were kidnapped in or near Ciudad 
Juarez, but no trends indicate that US Citizens are being 
specifically targeted. 
 
¶D. Floods 
 
Avoid driving during and after rainstorms because improper 
drainage creates street flooding, submerged potholes and open 
manholes. 
 
 
IV. (U) Police Response 
 
¶A. Crime Victim Assistance 
 
The Mexican police emergency telephone number is 066, but 
authorities may not respond to a call in a timely fashion, if at 
all. 
 
The Juarez city police force is undersized and underfunded. 
Police training does not meet U.S. standards.  At least 400 
officers, one quarter of the police force, were fired in 2008 
for gross ( drug cartel-related) corruption.  Reporting a crime 
is an archaic, exhausting process in Mexico, and is widely 
perceived by Mexicans to be a waste of time except for the most 
serious incidents or where a police report is required for 
insurance purposes.  A general perception is that most victims 
do not report crimes against them due to the fear of reprisals 
by the criminals, the belief that police are corrupt, or the 
feeling that nothing would come from such reports.  However, 
victims should still report crimes. 
 
The police may require accident or crime victims to accompany 
them to a police station in order to make a report, but bear in 
mind that criminals have impersonated Juarez police officers. 
The police will charge a nominal fee if a police report is 
required for an insurance claim or other purposes. 
 
The American Citizen Services unit of the Consulate General 
(numbers listed below) is available to assist victims. 
 
¶B. Detention by Police 
 
Before you begin driving in Juarez on a regular basis, photocopy 
the following documents for the vehicle, driver, and each 
passenger: 
 
        U.S. Passport ID page 
        Mexican Visa 
        U.S. Driver's License 
        Vehicle Registration (Tarjeta de Circulacion) 
        Proof of Insurance 
        Temporary or Free Entry Permit 
 
If you are stopped by police authorities and do not believe that 
you have done anything wrong, it may be better to give the 
police officer the photocopies rather than your actual documents. 
 
If the officer continues to question you or if Spanish language 
issues make it hard to communicate, then give the following 
statement to the officer: 
 
"No hablo ni entiendo bien el espaqol.  Si usted considera que 
he cometido una infraccisn de transito, expida el recibo de 
multa que la ampara.  Si existe algzn otro problema, por favor 
solicite la presencia de un elemento de policma que hable 
ingles.  Gracias." 
 
This translates as: 
 
"I do not speak or understand Spanish.  If you believe I have 
committed a traffic violation, then give me a ticket.  If there 
is some other problem, please request the assistance of another 
policeman who can speak English. Thank you." 
 
This suggested course of action is not intended to avoid 
responsibility for legitimate traffic violations or infractions 
of Mexican law. 
 
Do not offer "tips" or bribes in any form to police officers 
after a traffic stop.  In the event that the officer should 
suggest anything other than a normal resolution to a traffic 
violation, note the officer's badge number, name tag, or police 
vehicle number, and provide it to the American Citizen Services 
section of the U.S. Consulate General Ciudad Juarez (numbers 
listed below) as soon as possible. 
 
¶V. (U) Medical Emergencies 
 
Call 066 in the event of a medical emergency.  Information on 
medical emergencies abroad, including overseas insurance 
programs, is provided on the Department of State's Bureau of 
Consular Affairs Medical Information for Americans Abroad 
webpage: 
http://travel.state.gov/travel/tips/brochures /brochures_121 
5.html. 
 
¶A. Health Concerns 
 
Ciudad Juarez presents some health concerns regarding food, and 
some travelers have adverse reactions to the pollution and dusty 
environment.  Therefore, health insurance is an important 
consideration while in Mexico.  Though increasing numbers of 
 
Americans obtain health care in Mexico, elective surgery 
facilities may lack access to sufficient emergency support. 
 
¶B. Local Health Care Providers 
 
The Consulate does not recommend any particular health provider 
but lists  
the following for informational purposes only: 
 
Hospital Los Angeles 
Campos Eliseos 9371 
Fracc. Campos Eliseos 
Cd. Juarez 
Telephone - (656) 625-0611 
 
Centro Medico de Especialidades 
Av. de las Americas 201 Norte 
Col. Margaritas 
Cd. Juarez 
Telephone - (656) 686-0400 
Hospital Poliplaza Medica 
Pedro Rosales de Leon 7510 
Cd. Juarez 
Telephone - (656) 617-3200, 617-0465 
 
Hospital Star Medica 
Paseo de la Victoria No 4370 
Fracc. Partido Iglesias 
Cd. Juarez 
Telephone - (656) 227-5700 
 
More information is listed on the website for the American 
Citizen Services section of the U.S. Consulate: 
http://ciudadjuarez.usconsulate.gov/wwwhacs.h tml. 
 
¶C. Air Ambulance Services 
 
For medical transportation to the U.S., you may contact Air 
Ambulance Professionals at: (800) 752-4195.  Other companies are 
listed on the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs 
Medical Information for Americans Abroad webpage: 
http://travel.state.gov/travel/tips/brochures /brochures_121 
5.html. 
 
VI. (U) Travel Precautions 
 
¶A. Preparing Your Vehicle for Long Trips 
 
Prior to road travel, ensure that your vehicle is in good 
operating condition.  Pay particular attention to the engine, 
tires, brakes, head- and taillights, spare tire, jack, horn, and 
fluid levels.  Particularly on long trips to remote areas, try 
to travel in tandem with other vehicles and advise someone of 
your travel plans, including anticipated arrival and departure 
times and contact numbers. 
 
Take the following items on long road trips: (1) cellular 
telephone with charger (although some areas between cities lack 
coverage); (2) an extra spare tire; (3) portable gas can with 
funnel; (4) potable water; (5) non-perishable food items; (6) 
first aid kit; (7) blankets; and (8) fire extinguisher.  You 
will also need an emergency tool kit with the following items: 
(1) flashlight and additional batteries; (2) battery-operated 
radio; (3) extra fan belt/drive belt; (4) extra fuses, spark 
plugs, and light bulbs; (5) duplicate ignition key; (6) 
screwdrivers (regular and Phillips head); (7) socket wrench set; 
(8) pliers; (9) Electrical tape; (10) Jumper cables; (11) 
compressed air tire pump; (12) flares/reflectors; and (13) a 
collapsible shovel. 
 
¶B. Highway Driving 
 
Highway driving can be precarious, especially at night.  Avoid 
travel after dark, and use inter-city toll highways whenever 
possible.  Toll roads are called cuotas in Mexico and are 
indicated by the capital letter "D" printed below the highway 
route number on area maps.  Plan your route ahead of time. 
 
¶C. Firearms 
 
U.S. citizens must leave all weapons in the U.S.  Bringing any 
firearm or ammunition into Mexico is an offense punishable by 
jail time, and small weapons such as pocketknives can result in 
concealed weapons charges if you are detained by the police. 
 
VII. Contact Information for the US Consulate General in Ciudad 
Juarez 
 
¶A. Telephone Numbers 
 
To contact the U.S. Consulate General Ciudad Juarez, call 
 
656-227-3000.  From the U.S. dial 915-534-6060 or 
011-52-656-227-3000.  The Mexico country code is 52, and the 
Ciudad Juarez area code is 656. 
 
Consulate hours are 0800-1645 M-F.  The after-hours Emergency 
Duty Officer telephone number is 044-656-327-7787 (if calling 
from the U.S., dial 011-52-1-656-265-8484). 
 
¶B. The U.S. Consulate General is located at: 
 
                Paseo de la Victoria #3650 
                Fracc. Partido Senecz 
                Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua C.P. 32543 
 
VIII. The point of contact for the OSAC Country Council is Oscar 
Kuri at 656-632-5882 and okuri@celc-tat.com.mx. 
 
 
MCGRATH