09DUSSELDORF47
NRW STATE MINISTER EXPLAINS GERMANY'S INTEGRATION CHALLENGE
Tue Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Dusseldorf
VZCZCXRO6949
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHDF #0047/01 3281130
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241130Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL DUSSELDORF
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHDF/AMCONSUL DUSSELDORF 0264UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DUSSELDORF 000047 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KISL
SUBJECT: NRW STATE MINISTER EXPLAINS GERMANY'S INTEGRATION CHALLENGE 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000047  001.3 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary:  North Rhine-Westphalia's (NRW) Minister for 
Generations, Women, Families and Integration Armin Laschet told 
the Ambassador and Dusseldorf CG November 18 that Germany has a 
multi-faceted integration problem that must be immediately 
addressed.  The Minister noted Germany's long-time reluctance to 
define itself as an immigrant country and discussed how NRW is 
trying to address integration issues.  Germany's challenge is 
singular, Laschet said, it must now "catch up" on integration, 
after having denied for decades that the issue even existed, and 
at the same time pursue a new influx of educated immigrants as 
Germany's population ages and shrinks.  End summary. 
 
 
 
Germany's Fifty-Year Immigration History 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Ambassador asked for Laschet's views on two key 
issues-Germany's shrinking demographics and efforts to integrate 
existing immigrants.  Laschet came into office in 2005 following 
the victory of current NRW Minister-President J|rgen R|ttgers 
(CDU) as the only state minister in Germany with a portfolio 
that includes integration.  Laschet described integration as a 
relatively new topic in German society, particularly for his 
party, the CDU, despite a fifty-year post-WWII history. 
Immigration to Germany, he said, began in 1955 with Italian and 
other Southern European immigrants. Turks came starting in 1961 
--  as so-called guest workers, not migrants - following the 
signing of an agreement between the FRG and Turkey.  In the late 
1980s and early 1990s, Germany received 300,000 to 400,000 
asylum seekers per year, thanks to a liberal asylum law.  After 
the asylum law was tightened in 1993, the numbers dropped 
drastically to 30,000 to 40,000 annually.  Germany passed its 
first immigration law in 2005, which allows highly skilled 
workers to immigrate to Germany.  In 2005, just 600 people came 
under that income-based system.  The conundrum is, Laschet 
noted, that while many Germans believe that there is a large 
flow of immigrants to the country, the truth is, it has slowed 
to a trickle, not nearly enough to help with the country's 
shrinking population  and need for skilled and educated labor. 
NRW alone, he said, currently needs at least 6,000 engineers. 
 
 
 
Two Major Problems: Demographics and Integration 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Two major integration-related issues with which Germany 
must contend are (1) increasing the relatively low number of 
skilled immigrants, and (2) integrating those immigrants already 
in Germany.  The first is a national policy issue, and Laschet 
emphasized that there is no choice but to increase the number of 
skilled immigrants since highly skilled workers like engineers 
and nurses continue to leave the country.  In 2008, for the 
first time, more people left Germany than immigrated to the 
country. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) The second problem, the integration of immigrants who 
have lived in Germany for years, he referred to as "catch-up" 
integration.  According to Laschet, even as it became clear that 
the "guest workers" were here to stay, the German establishment 
put its head in the sand, not encouraging integration nor German 
language education.  While the CDU ignored the problem, the 
Social Democrats (SPD), per Laschet, thought it would not be 
right, given Germany's history, to "force" the children of 
immigrants to learn German.  Now everyone is playing catch-up, 
particularly in NRW, he said.  The figures here are striking, he 
said:  some 38% of the children in NRW have a migrant 
background; in urban areas, as much as 50%.  The majority have 
Turkish migrant backgrounds. 
 
 
 
Education as a Solution to Integration 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Laschet cited then-Interior Minister Wolfgang 
Schaeuble's 2006 affirmation that "Islam is part of German 
society" as the real starting point for integration.  NRW, 
Laschet explained, is pushing ahead with Islamic instruction in 
the public schools.  He confirmed that they will shift from 
government-defined to religious community-defined Islamic 
lessons in public schools, beginning with the 2010 school year. 
He was optimistic that this change will assist with efforts to 
integrate the Muslim population.  At the same time, some 24% of 
four-year old children in NRW -- many of immigrant background, 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000047  002.3 OF 002 
 
 
but by no means all - do not speak German at the mandated level, 
according to Laschet.  They are now being tested at four years 
of age, and those who do not speak adequate German receive two 
years of language assistance in pre-school, preparing them to 
enter elementary school on a level playing field with other 
children.  The hope is that this will eventually sharply reduce 
the number of immigrant children who fall behind or cannot 
qualify for a high quality secondary and post-secondary 
education.  A more far-reaching reform of the education system 
is coming, Laschet explained; both the CDU and the SPD in NRW 
have education reform plans in their election platforms for the 
upcoming May 2010 state parliament elections. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
WEINER