06CAIRO4939
GAMAL MUBARAK DISCUSSES BEIRUT TRIP, UPCOMING
Thu Aug 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0042
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4939/01 2221727
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 101727Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0474
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 004939

SIPDIS

SIPDIS

NSC FOR MIKE SINGH

E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/10/2016
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM LE IS EG
SUBJECT: GAMAL MUBARAK DISCUSSES BEIRUT TRIP, UPCOMING
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORMS WITH CONGRESSMAN ISSA

REF: CAIRO 4335

Classified by Ambassador Francis J. Ricciardone for reasons
1.4 (b) and (d).

¶1. (C) SUMMARY: Gamal Mubarak briefed Ambassador and visiting
Congressman Darrell Issa August 9 on his August 8 visit to
Beirut, at the head of a 70-member Egyptian "solidarity"
delegation. He predicted that the Egyptian Parliament's new
session (beginning in November) will be "the constitutional
reform session." He said that the actual texts of proposed
constitutional amendments are not yet available, as "we still
need to discuss the details during the September NDP party
conference, and then have an open debate in Parliament," but
claimed that the reform agenda is clear from the NDP's
electoral platform. Mubarak complained that "some circles in
Washington" try to "micromanage" the U.S.-Egyptian
relationship by focusing on U.S. assistance to the GOE, and
stressed that, "looking forward, U.S. assistance to Egypt
will not play as significant a role as it has in the past."
END SUMMARY.

-----------
BEIRUT TRIP
-----------

¶2. (C) On August 9, Gamal Mubarak, Assistant SYG of the
National Democratic Party (NDP) and presidential son, briefed
Ambassador and visiting Congressman Darrell Issa on his
August 8 visit to Beirut at the head of a 70-person Egyptian
delegation to "voice solidarity with the Lebanese people."
(Note: The delegation included Minister of Information Anas
el-Fiqqi, Minister of Trade and Industry Rasheed Mohamed
Rasheed, Minister of Health Hatem el-Gabali, several
parliamentarians, newspaper editors, entertainers, as well as
other notable Egyptians. End note.) Mubarak said the
delegation was warmly received by Lebanese President Emile
Lahoud, Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri, and Prime Minister
Fouad Siniora, and that all expressed "outrage" at the
current situation. Observing that the Egyptian group was a
broadly representative "weird combination," Mubarak noted it
included, "all segments of Egyptian society - doctors,
members of syndicates, different political parties, artists,
people whom I disagree with politically, but we were all
speaking with one voice, vis-a-vis our anger regarding the
killing of civilians, and the U.S. position."

¶3. (C) Mubarak termed the situation in southern Lebanon a
"catastrophe," opining that while he "understands the U.S.
position, there is no policy objective that can justify
sacrificing civilian lives." He remarked that Egyptians are
"more angry than they were during the 2000 intifada," and
that President Mubarak "has to play a delicate balance ... he
has taken a position of principle, but simultaneously does
not want to inflame the situation further."

--------------------------------------------- ------------
"CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM SESSION" OF PARLIAMENT TO BEGIN IN
NOVEMBER
--------------------------------------------- ------------

¶4. (C) Queried by Issa on the September NDP party conference
and the new parliamentary session beginning in November,
Mubarak enthusiastically described his expectation that Egypt
will witness the "constitutional reform session" of
parliament over the coming year. Noting that President
Mubarak had received reports from the Parliament and Shura
Council with recommendations for constitutional amendments
(reftel), Mubarak said that the anticipated reform agenda "is
clear ... last year's campaign platform was not simply
slogans ... President Mubarak said exactly what will be
changed, and that will happen in the coming parliamentary
session." Mubarak mentioned that the actual texts of
proposed amendments are not yet available, as "we still need
to discuss the details during the NDP conference, and then
have an open debate in Parliament in November and December,"
but stressed that the agenda is clear from the NDP's
electoral platform.

¶5. (C) Mubarak stated that the upcoming NDP party conference
will focus on political and economic reforms, as well as
public services such as health care, sewage, transportation,
and water. He predicted that the NDP will "review what has
been accomplished over the past 9 months, examining both the
positives and the negatives." Noting that the "reform
process will never end," Mubarak commented, "the skeptics
need to understand that change is happening - the evidence is
there to demonstrate that we are serious. However,
everything depends on what benchmarks are set. If the U.S.
wants the entire region to move to full-fledged democracy

within 2-3 years, you will keep having trouble. Setting
unrealistic objectives serves no one. Rather, it is crucial
to have realistic goals, but to move forward on them. There
will undoubtedly be setbacks, but we will keep working for
change, with a clear vision and an ambitious, but pragmatic,
reform agenda."

--------------------------------------------- ------------
U.S. ASSISTANCE BECOMING LESS "SIGNIFICANT", AND "ADVICE" ON
USG PUBLIC COMMENTS
--------------------------------------------- ------------

¶6. (C) As the discussion turned to U.S. financial assistance
to Egypt, Mubarak's tone became frustrated. "I understand
the nature of things in Washington and Congress. We very
much appreciate the assistance the USG has provided Egypt,
and it has helped us greatly. But, looking forward, U.S.
assistance to Egypt will not play as significant a role as it
used to in the past ... let me give you a friendly message:
assistance is not the central issue some think it is. Some
circles in Washington believe they can stress assistance all
the time, and micromanage the relationship with Egypt based
on whether we will get $50 million here or there, because we
implemented a particular policy or not ... this is not going
to work. This approach is starting to fall increasingly on
deaf ears. You should deal in a more constructive manner
with us, focusing on the more strategic nature of our
relationship, rather than dwelling on micro-issues." Mubarak
particularly stressed Egypt's role in the current Lebanon
crisis: "Think how different things would be if the GOE was
acting differently. The House and Senate need to understand
the delicacy and complexity of regional issues, and the
centrality of Egypt's position."

¶7. (C) Mubarak also offered "a piece of advice" regarding the
Secretary's recent comments on "the birth pangs of a new

SIPDIS
Middle East." He advised, "as a friend, I must tell you that
these types of messages do not work in this region ... it has
totally the opposite effect of what you intend ... That
comment in particular has caused outrage, not just from
people in the street, but from politicians and intellectuals
..."

¶8. (C) On a personal note, Mubarak mentioned that a date has
not yet been set for his wedding to fiancee Khadija el-Gammal.

RICCIARDONE