06CAIRO4611
TFLE01:  EGYPT:  JULY 26 DEMONSTRATIONS
Thu Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4611 2081411
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271411Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0177
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC for Mike Singh 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL EG
SUBJECT:  TFLE01:  EGYPT:  JULY 26 DEMONSTRATIONS 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On July 26, an estimated 1000 Egyptians gathered 
in Cairo's central Tahrir Square to protest Israeli attacks on 
Lebanon and Palestine and to criticize a  perceived lack of response 
on the part of Arab governments.  Police cordoned off the protesters 
and several violent scuffles broke out, although the protest ended 
relatively peacefully with no serious injuries or arrests reported. 
The Muslim Brothers' parliamentary group is asking for permission to 
hold a major rally on August 15, and, together with other 
parliamentary groups, is collecting signatures required to call a 
special parliamentary session to discuss support for the Lebanese 
and Palestinian resistance.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) An estimated 1000 Egyptian demonstrators gathered in Midan 
Tahrir (Liberation Square), in central Cairo between 6 and 9 p.m. on 
July 26.  The demonstrators condemned Israel's killing of Lebanese 
civilians, expressed support for the Hezbollah militia, and urged 
Arab regimes to get tough.  They waved Lebanese and Hezbollah flags, 
carried portraits of Nasrallah, and held up photos of wounded 
Lebanese civilians.  Chanted slogans included, ""Down, down, Hosni 
Mubarak,"" ""Down with the US-Israeli terrorist alliance,"" ""Shame, 
shame: Egyptian soldiers left the battle,"" and ""Where are the Arab 
armies?""  One banner read, ""Iraq, Palestine, Lebanon: who's next?"" 
According to photographs and eyewitness reports, hundreds of police 
were also present.  During the demonstrations a large force of riot 
police formed a cordon around the protesters while baton-wielding 
plainclothes officers scuffled with some demonstrators and 
journalists. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The demonstration was organized days in advance by the 
protest group Kefaya in collaboration with the Wafd, Nasserite, 
Ghad, Tagamma and Labor parties and the Youth for Change movement. 
Online blog postings for the protest asked those attending to bring 
Lebanese and Palestinian flags.  These postings featured a slogan, 
addressed to Arab leaders, reading, ""Your Majesties, Your 
Excellencies... Spit on You!"" According to local Embassy staff, the 
Muslim Brotherhood was not well-representated at the demonstration. 
Despite the long lead time, this demonstration was significantly 
smaller and less violent than the May 2006 protest in support of the 
Egyptian judges.  Those judges had been arrested after filing a 
complaint about government interference in the 2005 Parliamentary 
elections. 
 
¶4.  (U)  July 26 was also the fiftieth anniversary of the 
nationalization of the Suez Canal by former Egyptian president Gamal 
Abdel Nasser.  In recent Cairo demonstrations, Egyptian protesters 
have chanted slogans comparing Hezbollah head Nasrallah to the Arab 
nationalist leader Nasser, while in the press, Nasser has been 
hailed for having ""stood up"" to the Israelis during the Suez Crisis 
and the Six Days War.  Editorials have contrasted Nasser with 
Mubarak, who is accused of being too conciliatory in his dealings 
with Israel.  At the July 26 demonstration, for example, protestors 
denounced Mubarak for comments published in the Egyptian press on 
Wednesday, including the statement that ""those who urge Egypt to go 
to war to defend Lebanon or Hezbollah are not aware that the time of 
exterior adventures is over."" 
 
¶5.  (U)  The Muslim Brothers' parliamentary members are planning to 
request permission from the Minister of Interior for a major rally 
at Cairo's stadium on August 15.  The Muslim Brothers, along with 
NDP and opposition members, also plan to meet Sunday to collect 
signature of 50 percent of parliament members to submit a request to 
the President - according to the constitution - to hold a ""special 
session"" at the parliament to discuss means of supporting the 
Lebanese and Palestinian resistance