04QUITO2861
ECUADOR'S TIP LEGISLATION AND CONFERENCE
Wed Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR'S TIP LEGISLATION AND CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. 2519 
 
     ¶B. 2773 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Ecuador took additional steps forward in 
combating Trafficking in Persons (TIP) over the past week. 
Congress debated the draft of anti-TIP legislation that 
criminalizes TIP, sexual tourism, child pornography, and 
child prostitution.  On October 22, the MFA and United 
Nations co-sponsored a TIP conference, where government 
officials spoke out against trafficking.  The Ambassador's 
October 21 visit to Fundacion Quimera, the NGO that will set 
up the Machala TIP shelter, showed that the organization 
thoroughly understands the problem and is committed to the 
cause.  The police conducted 37 raids from October 7 - 14. 
Also the Ministry of Government (MoG) plans to provide 
alternative employment training to adolescent prostitutes in 
mid-November, and the Burdet-Cedeno couple was sentenced to 
an additional 25 years for a rape related to their ongoing 
child pornography case.  End Summary. 
 
--------------- 
TIP Legislation 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (U) According to media reports and MoG official Carlos 
Jativa, the Congressional Committee on Civil and Criminal 
Legislation has reviewed all anti-TIP bills submitted by 
several congresspeople and the Ministry of Government.  The 
committee combined all proposals into one bill, and Congress 
held the first debate on October 20.  Jativa expects the 
anti-TIP legislation pending in Congress to be passed within 
30 days.  He claimed Minister of Government Raul Baca will go 
to the press if the bill is delayed.  Pertinent facets of the 
bill include the following: 
 
a. The definition of TIP complies with G/TIP's model 
legislation. 
b. Child is defined as a person under 18 years for 
pornography and prostitution. 
c. Penalty of 12 to 25 years for traffickers 
d. Penalties for clients and persons who facilitate the crime 
of sexual tourism with minors under 18. 
e. Penalty of 4 to 25 years for people who produce child 
pornography. 
f. Presumption that a person cannot give consent for TIP and 
sexual exploitation when: 
¶1. the person is under 18 years of age 
¶2. the person has a disease that doesn't allow him/her to 
resist violence or threats 
¶3. the perpetrator takes advantage of a situation of 
superiority over the victim. 
 
¶3. (U) G/TIP is requested to review the legislation which was 
faxed on October 26.  Jativa has told us we can submit 
changes to him, and if the MoG agrees with them, Jativa will 
submit them to Congress. 
 
-------------------- 
MFA's TIP Conference 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The MFA and UN co-sponsored a two-day conference on 
alien smuggling and TIP on October 21 and 22.  Approximately 
50 people attended, of whom 10 were DINAPEN officers (the 
police unit dedicated to protecting children).  Several 
high-level Ecuadorian government officials spoke at the 
meeting.  Director of CONAMU (the National Women's Council) 
Rocio Rosero spoke out against TIP and CSEM.  Minister of 
Labor Raul Izurieta described the evils of child prostitution 
and the circumstances that lead some Ecuadorian families to 
domestically traffic their children as prostitutes.  Attorney 
General Mariana Yepez stated there is a pilot program to 
facilitate minors' testimonies and avoid victimizing them 
again in legal proceedings.  However, most speakers confused 
alien smuggling and TIP, and many discussed issues unrelated 
to TIP for a large portion of their speeches. 
 
---------------------- 
NGO in Machala Gets It 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) On October 21, the Ambassador and PolOff visited 
Fundacion Quimera, a NGO in Machala that has worked on 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors (CSEM) and related 
issues for several years.   The NGO will set up a Machala 
shelter for TIP victims in conjunction with the International 
Labor Organization (ILO), through a grant from the Department 
of Labor (Ref A).  The ILO's headquarters in Geneva should 
give official approval for the project shortly, and the 
shelter should open in January 2005.  The facility will 
accommodate 50 minors who were sexually exploited, and 
management also will educate potential TIP victims.  The 
NGO's leaders were very energized, committed to fighting TIP, 
and understood the problem in depth. 
 
------------ 
Police Raids 
------------ 
 
¶6. (U) From October 7 - 14, DINAPEN conducted 37 raids of 
nightclubs and bars and found 35 minors, who are believed to 
have engaged in prostitution.  Almost all of them were handed 
over to family members.  Twenty-nine of the 35 minors were 
males.  DHS is investigating to determine why so many males 
were found. 
 
----------------------- 
MoG Plans More Training 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) PolOff met with Jativa on October 20.  Jativa's office 
is canvassing a group of 19 adolescent prostitutes to study 
their entry into the trade and better understand their social 
service needs.  He reported that Baca met with the leaders of 
this group on October 15 and that the MoG and ILO are funding 
alternative vocational training sessions for 25 adolescent 
prostitutes and their families.  They will occur by 
mid-November. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Burdet-Cedeno Sentenced to 25 Years 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) According to press reports, a court in Guayas province 
sentenced the Burdet-Cedeno couple on October 19 to 25 years 
for the rape of their ten-year old niece.  The crime occurred 
in conjunction with their child pornography videos.  There 
are three remaining charges against the couple (Ref B). 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The legislation in Congress is a good sign and shows 
the determination of the MoG and many congresspeople to fight 
TIP.  With Jativa's offer to accept our input, we hope 
Ecuador will eventually pass a strong anti-trafficking law. 
The raids and MoG training sessions also show a commitment to 
stopping the crime, prosecuting the perpetrators, and 
attending to victims' needs.  Substantial press coverage of 
the Burdet-Cedeno case has kept the problem in the public eye. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The MFA's conference, however, revealed there still 
is a lack of understanding of the difference between TIP and 
smuggling, and very few new ideas and information were 
presented.  We will continue to meet with government 
officials to discuss their actions and remind them of the 
need to provide as much information as possible for the 
November 15 report. 
KENNEY