04QUITO2868
GUTIERREZ CANCELS NEW YORK TRIP
Wed Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: GUTIERREZ CANCELS NEW YORK TRIP 
 
REF: GUAYAQUIL 1231 
 
¶1.  Summary.  On October 27, President Gutierrez told the 
Ambassador he had canceled his planned early November trip to 
New York in order to work in Ecuador on judicial reform 
projects and programs to spur economic growth.  Gutierrez 
hopes the press will portray his decision as a need to focus 
on important national issues and not as a fear of leaving the 
country in light of impeachment rumors.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In an October 27 meeting with the Ambassador, Gutierrez 
informed her he had canceled his trip to New York.  Gutierrez 
had planned to travel on November 1 to meet with business 
leaders and promote trade with Ecuador. 
 
¶3.  Gutierrez told the Ambassador he envisions judicial 
reform and economic growth to be his legacy.  Gutierrez said 
he plans to work over the Ecuadorian holiday weekend (October 
30 - November 3) and was particularly concerned about 
corruption in the judicial system.  He wants to stop the 
common practice of people filing legal complaints (often 
without much cause) as a means of retaliation. 
 
¶4.  Gutierrez also recognized that the media might portray 
the cancellation of his trip as a victory for the Social 
Christian Party (PSC) in its efforts to impeach him for 
alleged inappropriate use of public funds for campaign travel 
(Reftel).  The Ambassador suggested that if pressed, 
Gutierrez tell the press that she recommended he not travel 
at this time due to elections in the U.S. on November 2. 
Moreover, he had recently met with USTR negotiator Regina 
Vargo to discuss commercial and labor issues and was in 
regular touch with other USG officials (Septel). 
 
¶5.  Comment.  We believe Gutierrez made the right decision by 
staying home to work.  He would have trouble getting the 
meetings he wants on such short notice, with potential U.S. 
interlocutors focused on elections.  He has a full 
international calendar in November with the Ibero American 
Summit, CAN events, and President Fox's visit.  Finally, as 
Ecuador suffers from rampant corruption and grave poverty, 
any dedicated time spent on judicial reform and programs to 
spur economic growth is time well spent.  End Comment. 
KENNEY