05QUITO1447
GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR PARTICIPATES IN TIP FORUM
Mon Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 001447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, WHA/PDA, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR PARTICIPATES IN TIP FORUM 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Four GOE officials spoke at the June 16 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) forum, sponsored by the Embassy 
and Catholic University.  Topics included anti-trafficking 
legislation, underage prostitution, and the government's 
actions.  "Dying to Leave", a video about trafficking, was 
shown, and PAS distributed information packets.  On June 15, 
PolOff met with Congresswomen Myriam Garces and Jaqueline 
Silva, who promised to meet with First Lady Maria Beatriz 
Paret and encourage her to speak out against TIP.  The June 
13 - 24 International Law Enforcement Academy conference has 
provided excellent case-specific training to thirty-two 
police officers, judges, and prosecutors from the Andean 
region.  End Summary. 
 
GOE Officials Speak at TIP Forum 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Embassy and Catholic University sponsored a TIP forum 
on June 16, which featured four GOE speakers.  Consuelo 
Bowen, of the National Commission on Women, focused on the 
government's efforts to combat commercial sexual exploitation 
of minors and on its inter-institutional anti-trafficking 
committee.  The police's National Director of Investigations, 
General Paco Teran, spoke out against TIP and explained 
efforts to stop underage prostitution.  Congressman Hugo 
Ibarra, Vice President of the Committee on Civil and Criminal 
Legislation, discussed the legislation Congress approved on 
June 1 to combat trafficking and the problem of underage 
prostitution.  The MFA's Human Rights Director, Carmen 
Larrea, spoke about the government's work in the last year to 
fight TIP and about what needs to be done to move forward. 
Maria Elena Najera, a lawyer at Catholic University, clearly 
defined trafficking and mentioned the TIP-related 
international agreements Ecuador has signed. 
 
¶3.  The turnout was excellent with 100 people at the standing 
room only event.  The video "Dying to Leave" was shown with 
Spanish subtitles that were funded by WHA/PDA.  The film 
features trafficking victims who relate their experiences, 
warning potential victims about how they were tricked and 
coerced.  PAS distributed information packets to attendees 
including the media, government officials, police officers, 
civil society members, and students. 
 
Congresswomen Pledge Continued TIP Support 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  On June 15, PolOff met separately with Congresswomen 
Myriam Garces and Jaqueline Silva, president of the 
Commission on Women, Children, Youth, and Families.  Both 
have long supported TIP legislation and remain interested in 
the topic.  The congresswomen agreed to raise trafficking 
with First Lady Paret and encourage her to use her role as 
head of the National Institute for Children and Families 
(INNFA) to speak publicly against TIP. 
 
Conference Provides Practical Law Enforcement Training 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5.  Thirty-two police officers, prosecutors and judges are 
attending a two-week International Law Enforcement Academy 
(ILEA) conference on TIP, sponsored by the International 
Organization on Migration.  Attendees came from Ecuador, 
Peru, Colombia, and Bolivia for the June 13 - 24 conference. 
The conference is very case-oriented, has familiarized 
participants with international standards on trafficking, and 
encourages officials to use other legislation where 
TIP-specific legislation is inadequate.  The following themes 
have been discussed in the course:  risk assessment, witness 
protection, pro-active investigative techniques, 
international cooperation, and intelligence gathering. 
 
Six Weeks Left 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  Comment:  The June 13 resignation of Undersecretary of 
Government Juan Carlos Guzman, who handled TIP, and the lack 
of clarity in the ministry as to who will take over the 
portfolio is a new hurdle, but we will use our wide range of 
GOE and other local contacts to keep moving forward.  In 
particular, we will work with the police to push for 
significant investigations into trafficking, and with the 
government to promote an awareness campaign and public 
discussion of the evil of trafficking by a high-level 
official. 
Kenney