05QUITO224
JANUARY TIP UPDATE
Thu Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 000224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: JANUARY TIP UPDATE 
 
REF: GUAYAQUIL 107 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  There have been encouraging signs from the 
Congress that pending trafficking in persons (TIP) 
legislation may pass by the end of February.  The American 
Bar Association (ABA) reviewed its suggested changes to the 
bill with the Embassy and has presented them to key 
congressional contacts.  The GOE's inter-institutional TIP 
committee has met three times in the past two weeks and hopes 
to have a national plan ready for discussion on February 10. 
Ecuadorian police conducted 149 raids from December 9 to 
January 13 and rescued 21 minors who may be trafficking 
victims.  End Summary. 
 
TIP Bill May Pass by End of February 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 25, PolChief and PolOff met with the new 
president of the Congressional Committee on Civil and 
Criminal Legislation, Sandra Sandoval, and PRIAN legislative 
leader Sylka Sanchez to discuss TIP.  Both agreed to make TIP 
legislation a priority.  Sandoval said that the pending 
anti-TIP legislation is in the middle of its second (and 
final) markup.  On January 20, five of the 35 articles in the 
bill were passed before the session ended.  Sandoval said she 
is committed to making changes to the text suggested by 
UNICEF and the ABA before it goes to a final vote, hopefully 
on January 27 or from February 1 - 3.  With no discernible 
opposition, this bill could be law within the next month, 
Sandoval predicted.  President of Congress Omar Quintana told 
the DCM on January 27 that the TIP legislation is at the very 
top of Congress' agenda. 
 
ABA Finished Review of Trafficking Legislation 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3. (U) As part of the G/TIP-sponsored project, the ABA 
visited Quito and Guayaquil from January 17 - 24.  The ABA 
met with the Embassy working group and GOE officials and 
hired three part-time employees to work on the project 
locally.  We discussed proposed changes to the Ecuadorian 
anti-TIP legislation with the ABA.  After taking into account 
Embassy concerns, the ABA presented the information to 
Congressional contacts, who were receptive to making the 
modifications. 
 
Inter-Institutional Committee Making Plans 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) The GOE's inter-institutional committee held its first 
meeting on January 13.  Minister of Government Jaime Damerval 
opened the meeting and expressed his commitment to leading 
the fight against TIP.  PolOffs also attended, explaining the 
importance of trafficking to the U.S. government, our annual 
report to Congress, and our interest in cooperating with the 
GOE to combat TIP.  MFA Director of Human Rights, Ambassador 
Julio Prado, explained to his colleagues the impact of a 
possible sanctions if sufficient action is not taken to 
combat trafficking.  The MFA, the National Women's Council 
(CONAMU), and the Ministry of Government are unofficially 
sharing leadership of the committee.  Also attending the 
meeting were representatives from the Attorney General's 
Office, the National Institute of the Children and Families, 
the police unit dedicated to protecting children (DINAPEN), 
and the following ministries:  Education, Labor, Public 
Health, and Social Welfare. 
 
¶5. (U) The ABA subsequently met with the committee on January 
18 to explain its project and role in coordinating GOE, NGO, 
USG, and IO's efforts to combat TIP to maximize resources and 
results.  The committee met again on January 24 and discussed 
ideas for GOE projects to combat TIP.  At the committee's 
request, the ABA will return on February 10 to give a 
half-day training session including a detail explanation of 
the difference between trafficking and smuggling.  At this 
meeting, each institution will present a written report on 
its efforts to combat trafficking, and the committee will 
discuss a draft national plan presented to all members before 
that date. 
 
Police Conducted 149 Raids Looking for TIP Victims 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. (U) DINAPEN continued to conduct raids on bars and 
brothels.  From December 9 - January 13, DINAPEN conducted 
149 raids and rescued 21 minors who were possible trafficking 
victims.  (Reports were faxed to G/TIP on January 27.)  After 
discussion with DINAPEN, we are not considering boys listed 
on the reports as possible victims.  While there may be boys 
who are trafficking victims in Ecuador, DINAPEN believe the 
boys they find are engaged in drinking or soliciting 
prostitutes themselves. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶7. We are encouraged by these developments.  The 
inter-institutional TIP committee has taken important first 
steps toward drafting a national action plan, address 
prosecution, prevention, and protection issues.  Prospects 
appears good for Congressional action to pass anti-TIP 
legislation, which will give the GOE the legal tools to 
target and arrest traffickers. 
Kenney