05QUITO875
RADIO LA LUNA AND ITS ROLE IN THE ECUADORIAN
Thu Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 000875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/AND, WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PGOV EC
SUBJECT:  RADIO LA LUNA AND ITS ROLE IN THE ECUADORIAN 
CRISIS 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Quito's Radio La Luna has become a focal point 
of anti-government sentiment and action during the last 
several weeks, successfully serving as a vehicle for anti- 
institutional sentiment from all segments of the political 
spectrum and all classes of Ecuadorian society.  Although 
Radio Luna is historically leftist, anti-U.S., and not above 
engaging in blatant disinformation campaigns, it would be a 
mistake to ascribe its recent popularity and leadership role 
exclusively to leftist or foreign elements.  The hostility 
of the Gutirrez administration toward the station only 
served to increase its importance and popularity.   End 
Summary. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
What is Radio La Luna 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Radio La Luna is a small, independent radio station that 
transmits solely in Quito.  It provides a mixture of news, 
opinion, and culture, including music.  Since 1995, it has 
operated under the direction of Paco Velasco, a self-defined 
independent.  In recent years, Velasco and La Luna have 
opposed all governments.  Until recent events, La Luna 
captured an estimated two percent of the Quito listeners. 
Current estimates are that it now listened to regularly by 
over 20 percent of the market. 
 
¶3.  Ideologically, La Luna is decidedly leftist and 
populist.  Run by a small staff, it has a number of 
volunteers.  It has taken a firmly anti-U.S. position, 
opposing the Manta FOL, and Ecuadorian negotiations for a 
free trade agreement.  La Luna has also strongly criticized 
what it perceived as U.S. support for the Gutirrez 
administration.  It has burnished its populist credentials 
by speaking out against institutional corruption. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
La Luna's Newfound Popularity 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  On April 13, Quito mayor Paco Moncayo led a call for a 
provincial wide strike and marches against the government, 
which was met with a lukewarm response.  The evening of 
April 13, La Luna began a discussion and call-in programs to 
consider next steps, which resulted in a call for a 
demonstration in the central Los Shyris area of Quito.  Two 
hours later over 5,000 people had gathered, alerted about 
the demonstration by La Luna and cellular calls and text 
messaging.  This was the beginning of the "cacerolazo" or 
pot-banging demonstrations to express dissatisfaction with 
the political situation.  That and horn-honking have since 
become ubiquitous throughout Quito representing a 
spontaneous rejection of the status quo.  Radio La Luna has 
remained on air 24 hours a day as its talk shows continue. 
 
¶5.  Numerous mainstream media have rallied to support Paco 
Velasco.  A conservative Embassy journalistic contact 
describes Velasco as "leftist, but a good person who through 
his station tries to provide space for democratic and 
cultural expression".  Velasco has also appeared on national 
television, where he describes his goals as ending 
corruption and establishing democratic and representative 
government in Ecuador. 
 
¶6.  During the State of Emergency declared by Gutirrez on 
April 16 La Luna lost telephone service.  The station 
continued its call-in programming using cellular phones and 
blamed the government for cutting the lines and preventing 
their repair.  The station has also lost power on occasion, 
which they also blame on government interference.  President 
Gutierrez' brother, a congressman, has publicly threatened 
to sue La Luna for defaming the government.  The Embassy 
cautioned the GOE against any provocative action against La 
Luna, including shutting it down. 
 
------------- 
Comment 
------------- 
 
¶7.  Although Radio La Luna should not be viewed as having 
created the current unstable political situation in Ecuador, 
its leftist, populist, often inaccurate reporting, and 
disinformation, does add fuel to an already inflammatory 
situation.  It is largely perceived, however, as a 
legitimate vehicle for channeling what many Quiteos across 
a broad political and class spectrum consider legitimate 
discontent.  Those who condemned it in the past as 
presenting radical claptrap are now regular listeners and 
have followed its call to demonstrate.  It will continue to 
influence unfolding events. 
 
Kenney