07QUITO1182
VIDEO OF ECONOMY MINISTER PATINO IMPLIES MARKET
Tue May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #1182/01 1422112
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 222112Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7064
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 6679
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES PRIORITY 0739
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 2563
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ MAY 0606
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 1677
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 2358C O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 001182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC 
TREASURY FOR SGOOCH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/21/2017 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV PREL PINR EC
SUBJECT: VIDEO OF ECONOMY MINISTER PATINO IMPLIES MARKET 
MANIPULATION -- OR DOES IT? 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Linda Jewell for Reasons 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
 ¶1.  (U) Summary.  Recently released excerpts of a video of a 
February meeting between Economy Minister Patino and former 
Economy Minister Rodas imply (but do not confirm) that if 
Patino frightened the international bond market, Rodas could 
have earned $50 million.  Patino and Rodas separately 
asserted that the released portions of the video were taken 
out of context.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Quinto Pazmino, a fired political advisor to Economy 
Minister Ricardo Patino, provided a television station an 
excerpt of a video recording of a February 8 meeting between 
Patino and former Minister of Economy Armando Rodas and two 
U.S.-based financial advisors.  The video first aired on May 
¶21.  The quality of the audio is poor, but a transcript 
produced by the media reads as follows (informal embassy 
translation): 
 
Patino:  But this signifies that you charge a bonus (prima) 
of $150 million or more; you could charge a bonus of $250 
million or so. 
 
Rodas:  We could earn $50 million. 
 
Patino:  $50 million.  For this I would have to announce 
...eh... put fear into the market, if not, no.  If I say: 
"I'll pay you tomorrow," you couldn't do it, or that is, the 
only way that you could earn ... 
 
Rodas:  Exactly... 
 
Patino:  If you want to win over the market (ganar el 
mercado), you have to want that I scare it... 
 
Patino and Rodas Respond in the Media 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
 
¶3.  (U) Both Patino and Rodas, in separate media statements, 
asserted that the aired portion of the video was taken out of 
context.  Rodas called for the release of the rest of the 
video.  President Correa on May 21 publicly reaffirmed his 
confidence in Patino, and asserted that the video had been 
doctored. 
 
¶4.  (U) Patino, who was in Paraguay for a Banco del Sur 
meeting, focused his response on Pazmino's credibility, 
arguing that he was fired for corruption. 
 
¶5.  (U) Rodas asserted that he facilitated a meeting between 
Patino and the financial advisors, who developed a 
"transparent" proposal that could have saved Ecuador $150 
million (he did not elaborate on the proposal).  Rodas also 
argued that the advisors did not hold Ecuador debt (and 
therefore would not have profited from market manipulation), 
but instead would have made money from commissions from 
brokering a deal.  Rodas said Patino told them he would study 
the proposal, but they never received a response.  The 
interviewer asked Rodas the implication of the released 
conversation about scaring the market, but Rodas replied by 
emphasizing that the intent of his proposal was to save 
Ecuador money on the bond market. 
 
¶6.  (U) Pazmino, in his own media appearance, said that he 
was not present at the meeting between Patino and Rodas, and 
did not know if the discussion between them involved legal or 
illegal activities.  Most of his media appearance was devoted 
to arguing that he had been wrongfully dismissed. 
 
Patino Authorized the Video Recording 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
 
¶7.  (U) The meeting between Patino and Rodas took place in a 
hotel rather than Patino's office.  Patino said that he 
authorized the video recording to "discover how some 
international financial entities act in an unethical manner 
with the bonds.8  Rodas said that he did not know the 
meeting was being recorded.  Pazmino said that he obtained a 
copy of the video since the persons who recorded the video 
approached him to obtain payment.  Those persons provided him 
with a copy of the video, and he urged Patino to pay. 
According to Pazmino, Patino never paid for the videos. 
 
Congress Requests an Explanation 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
 
¶8.  (U) On May 22, Ramses Torres, head of the Congressional 
Oversight Committee, called for Patino to appear before 
Congress to explain the meeting he had with Rodas. 
 
Background ) Mixed Signals on Debt, Timely Payment 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
 
¶9.  (U) In the month before the February 8 Patino-Rodas 
meeting took place, Patino had spooked the commercial bond 
market by  suggesting that Ecuador might default or force a 
debt restructuring, and then suggesting that it might 
continue to service its debt.  On February 15, a few days 
after the meeting, Ecuador made a surprising on-time $135 
million interest payment.  On February 12 Vice Minister of 
Finance Fausto Ortiz told the media that Ecuador would make 
the payment, but would take advantage of a clause that would 
allow Ecuador to make the payment up to 30 days late. 
However, on February 14, the Ministry of Economy authorized 
the payment, which was made on time. 
 
¶10.  (C) Ortiz told EconCouns on February 14 that Ecuador was 
making the payment on time because "we have the cash" and 
because delaying the payment would require Ecuador to make 
costly penalty payments.  He did not specify where the cash 
came from or why he was reversing a position that he had 
announced a couple days before.  However, shortly after 
making the February 15 payment, Ecuador received a $250 
million disbursement from the Andean Development Fund (CAF), 
which may have given the government the flexibility to make 
the payment. 
 
¶11.  (U) Since the February payment, rumors have circulated 
in Ecuador and in the foreign financial press that the 
government manipulated the market through its statements and 
subsequent timely payment in order to benefit Venezuelan 
banks, which held a large exposure in insurance instruments 
against an Ecuador default.  A congressional deputy, Gloria 
Gallardo called for Patino to testify as part of a 
congressional inquiry and impeachment process.  However, 
Gallardo was removed from Congress among 56 other deputies 
for unrelated reasons before initiating the inquiry. 
 
Comment 
-- -- -- 
 
¶12.  (C) The implication from the released portion of the 
tape is that if Patino spooked the market, Rodas and or the 
accompanying advisors could have made up to $50 million. 
Those excerpts reinforce a view that was already circulating 
in Ecuador that the government deliberately manipulated the 
bond market with its contradictory statements and actions. 
Up to now, our view has been that the government's 
contradictory actions and comments were most likely due to 
its failure to have a credible plan in place to restructure 
Ecuador's debt, compounded by the government's inexperience 
and incomplete understanding of the consequences of default. 
 
¶13.  (C) At this time we do not have a clear indication of 
what actually transpired at the meeting, given Patino's and 
Rodas's statements that those comments were taken out of 
context.  However, this is the first time that there has been 
a wide-spread story suggesting corruption or malfeasance at 
the top level of the Correa administration, which has defined 
itself as opposing the corrupt practices of prior 
governments.  The government now faces a major challenge to 
its credibility which could have far-reaching implications. 
End comment. 
JEWELL