09QUITO716
CORREA'S INAUGURATION FOR 2ND PRESIDENTIAL TERM
Wed Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0716/01 2242046
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 122046Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0747
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 8309
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3677
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ AUG LIMA 3359
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0508
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 4552
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0046
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 000716 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR PTER OVIP KNUC EC CO CU VE NI
SUBJECT: CORREA'S INAUGURATION FOR 2ND PRESIDENTIAL TERM 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: President Correa's August 10 inauguration 
day schedule was packed, combining swearing-in events with 
the transfer of the rotating presidency of UNASUR (septel). 
The political speeches during the day were heavily 
ideological and meant to ratify the goals of Correa's 
"citizens' revolution."  Correa made one neutral reference to 
the U.S., but also a number of anti-American remarks.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The inauguration ceremony took place on August 10, as 
the government had desired, on the same date that Ecuadorians 
celebrated the 200th anniversary of Ecuador's First Call for 
Independence.  The main event was held at the National 
Assembly building and was attended by high ranking 
Ecuadorians, eight heads of state, other delegations, special 
guests, and members of the diplomatic corps. 
 
¶3. (U) During his inauguration speech, Correa highlighted the 
pillars of his citizens' revolution, the new constitution, 
criticism of the media, and reduction in debt payments.  He 
rejoiced in his unprecedented electoral triumph and the 
support he received from the Ecuadorian people. No opposition 
legislators attended the event. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In regard to foreign relations, Correa made a 
commitment to promote bilateral relations "based on dialogue, 
cooperation, and the development of constructive agendas with 
all the countries of the world, as today we are showing in 
the bilateral agendas with countries such as Peru, Chile, the 
U.S., and the rest of our brother countries of the continent, 
provided that such relations are based on mutual respect and 
respect for our sovereignty."  He also pointed out that his 
government would continue to strengthen South-South relations. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Correa's speech was not lacking in negative 
references to the U.S. and what he alleged were imperialistic 
U.S. interests.  He touched on the U.S. while speaking about 
economic issues, but his remarks became sharper when he 
addressed the Ecuador-Colombia border conflict and the U.S. 
fight against narco-trafficking.  Correa stated, "I hope that 
the installation of military bases on Colombia soil does not 
propose to strengthen the war-prone policy of our neighbor 
government, and combat, not narco-trafficking, but the 
insurgent governments of our American continent."  He pointed 
to what he called a double standard because the GOC was 
arguing that U.S. access to bases in Colombia was strictly a 
Colombian affair, while nuclear programs (presumably meaning 
Iran's) that were considered hostile to "certain centers of 
power" were treated as an issue of global concern. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Referring to the U.S. Forward Operating Location 
(FOL) in Manta, Ecuador, Correa went on to suggest that the 
United States' true motives were being hidden: "A few days 
ago, the last foreign soldier that was in our territory went 
back to his country, and we had the satisfaction of 
announcing to Ecuadorians that we had recovered our 
territorial sovereignty, which in a moment of surrender was 
mutilated in favor of another government, whose goals are not 
necessarily those advocated in public." (Note:  It is not 
accurate that all U.S. military have left Manta -- the last 
of the U.S. presence will depart September 18. End Note.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Correa made a point of celebrating the triumph of 
his citizen revolution with the common people of Ecuador by 
hosting an event for them at a soccer stadium, with 
performances by popular entertainers and political speeches. 
Most of the cabinet was in attendance, as well as Presidents 
Chavez, Zelaya, and Raul Castro.  Correa referred to what he 
termed imperialism, saying that U.S. bases in Colombia were a 
provocation and that if war was wanted, the countries of 
Latin America would be ready and united. Castro's speech 
mentioned that President Obama was a man of good intentions, 
but that no coups had occurred in South American without U.S. 
authorization.  After Castro had spoken for more than ten 
minutes, there were some hisses or whistles from the crowd; 
Correa seemed to notice and made a few motions to the crowd 
for patience.  Chavez spoke about Bolivar, recited a poem, 
congratulated Ecuador, and was otherwise low-key.  Although 
the stadium was arranged so that it only needed to be half 
full, by the end of the speeches many people in the audience 
had left. 
 
OTHER EVENTS WITH OFFICIAL GUESTS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Ecuadorian government offered two luncheons, 
one hosted by President Correa for heads of state and the 
other by Vice President Lenin Moreno for the other 
delegations.  The Ambassador introduced the U.S. delegation 
to Vice President Moreno.  The site for the evening reception 
was a large historic convent, a popular tourist attraction, 
and all visiting delegations were invited to attend. 
Although President Correa arrived very late, the Ambassador 
succeeded in introducing the U.S. delegation to Correa. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Correa's inauguration speech broke no new ground in 
sending mixed signals about his intended relationship with 
the U.S.  On the one hand, he mentioned the U.S. as an 
example of a country with which Ecuador sustained an ongoing 
bilateral agenda for cooperation, and emphasized the need for 
mutual respect between the countries.  On the other hand, his 
speeches throughout the day were peppered with words of 
mistrust and negative references to the U.S. and U.S. 
interests. 
 
HODGES