03ADANA199
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY
Tue Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0199 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
JULY 22, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 22 2003.  Please note that Turkish press 
reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Evrensel / Friction between the villagers 
and Gendarme still continues in Bozova, 
Urfa.  Villagers claim that gendarme 
collected about 10 boys from the village 
school and asked where the villagers keep 
their guns. When boys didn't answer they 
beat the boys.  Some boys claimed that 
their noses were broken after the incident. 
According to the newspaper the incident 
started on June 15 during a wedding 
ceremony. Gendarme heard the villagers 
firing their guns "for fun" during the 
ceremony. They came to the village and 
wanted the villagers to hand their guns in. 
Most of the guns were unauthorized. 
Villagers objected and extra gendarme 
forces came for support.  About 30 
villagers were taken to the nearest 
gendarme station.  Five of the villagers 
were arrested for keeping unauthorized guns 
and five of them were arrested for fighting 
with the gendarme.  On July 10 gendarme had 
come to the village to search for more 
guns. Ahmet Faruk Onsal from AKP, and 
Huseyin Bayindir from CHP, Human Rights 
Commission Members of the Parliament, are 
leading the investigation. 
 
 
¶3. Gunaydin, Bolge, Milliyet / Thirty students 
from different countries are having a 
summer camp at Cukurova University. 
International University Students 
Organization arranges this program. 
Students take Turkish courses, see the 
historical places in the region and have 
fun. Camp ends on July 28. 
 
 
¶4. Gunaydin / Forty-five students from 
different towns of Turkey are having a 
summer camp in Adiyaman.  Students say they 
weren't expecting such a wonderful 
historical beauty in Adiyaman and they will 
come for visits again. 
 
 
¶5. Hurriyet, Bolge,  / In Adana, Yusuf 
Gullerden (50) injured his 7 year old 
adopted disabled girl with a knife. Mother 
Rabia Gullerden complained about her 
husband and asked for support from the 
government officials. 
HART