06AITTAIPEI3726
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN
Wed Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3726/01 3052257
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 012257Z NOV 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2860
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5867
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7087UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus November 1 on the prosecutors' request Tuesday to detain a 
Financial Supervisory Commission member for his alleged involvement 
in corruption.  News coverage also focused on the arms procurement 
bill, which was again blocked by pan-Blue legislators Tuesday; and 
on a "Defense News" article on the U.S. arms procurements.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, front-paged the "Defense News" article and ran a banner 
headline on page two that read "Arms Procurement Bill Blocked Again; 
Top Authorities:  Situation Is Alarming." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentary, an opinion piece in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" defended AIT Taipei Director Stephen 
Young's remarks on Taiwan's arms procurements last Thursday.  The 
article said Young's press conference was in reality a move to stop 
the deep-rooted evils of Taiwan's politicians who tend to monopolize 
the channels of U.S. information.  A separate "Apple Daily" opinion 
piece also urged Taiwan's political parties who intend to take power 
to consider Taiwan's national defense and security and reasonably 
discuss the arms procurement bill.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" lashed out at the pan-Blue camp for its repeatedly attempts 
to block the arms procurement bill in the Legislative Yuan.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Rusty Island Chain and Stephen Young's Remarks" 
 
Chang Tzu-yang, the dean of Nanhua University's Department of 
International Studies, commented in an op-ed piece in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (11/1): 
 
"The press conference hosted by AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young on 
October 26 triggered quite a big stir in Taiwan's political circle, 
with criticism that he was forcefully promoting arms sales and 
interfering in [Taiwan's] domestic politics.  But perhaps this kind 
of comment will neither be able to safeguard national dignity nor 
foster national interests.  The analysis is as follows.  First, the 
comment regarding [Young] intervening in domestic politics was 
somewhat far-fetched.  Young was in reality stepping in to stop the 
deep-rooted evils of Taiwan politicians who tend to monopolize the 
channel of U.S. information. 
 
"Young is clearly aware of Taiwan's political situation, and he 
knows that Taiwan's political figures, following closed-door 
meetings with him, may likely twist his original intention, so he 
said in the very beginning of his press conference that he wanted to 
convey the United States' true message to the Taiwan people via the 
media.  This move was to show respect to the Taiwan people.  In 
addition, Young chose to hold his press conference at the American 
Cultural Center (ACC), which is U.S. property.  His discussion of 
Taiwan's interests, security and their connection with the United 
States at the ACC resembled the U.S. State Department spokesmen who 
discussed the Taiwan issue in a regular State Department press 
briefing.  The nature [of the press conference] was to confine the 
discussion to the matter at issue, which should not be regarded as 
interference.  Young's intention was for Taiwan's interests; even 
though U.S. interests were also involved, his move at least met the 
diplomatic principle of equality and reciprocity. 
 
"Second, there are various interpretations for Young's motives, but 
I believe Young's sense of urgency came mainly from the fact that 
the Bush administration has reset the tune for its China policy.  It 
is already determined that the United States wants to contain China 
strategically, and Washington has already started its action.  This 
is something Young could not say out loud, as he did not want to 
provoke China and encourage Taiwan independence. ... 
 
"In the face of the several-months-long chaos and ceasing of 
function in Taiwan's politics, plus Pyongyang's nuclear test to make 
the situation worse, the United States, which is eager to mend the 
island chains in the West Pacific, can only ask Young to make a big 
move by appealing to public opinion to push Taiwan's ruling and 
opposition parties to work together on arms procurements.  But 
Taiwan seems to have become a rusty link in the island chain, and 
perhaps the United States will have to work harder to polish it." 
 
 
B) "Big Parties Must Behave Like Grown-ups" 
 
Senior political commentator Sun Ching-yu noted in an opinion piece 
in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] 
(11/1): 
 
"... As a representative posted in one of the two sides that make 
business deals, and as one of the two parties which are involved in 
joint military defense, Stephen Young was fully entitled to remind 
Taiwan.  But the same bunch of people who blocked the arms 
procurements even dared to loudly criticize Young for 'making 
remarks out of his capacity [as a diplomat],' for 'diplomatic 
 
intimidation,' and for 'not respecting the dignity of a sovereign 
country.' 
 
"Can the leaders of major parties in a sovereign country break their 
promise without any reason after having assured the United States 
that the arms procurement bill would be passed this fall?  Can the 
legislative caucuses of a sovereign country oppose 'extravagant arms 
procurements' and uphold a 'reasonable arms deal' while repeatedly 
blocking the arms procurement bill and leaving no room for the 
'reasonable arms procurements' to be discussed?  In addition, 'a 
country will not be insulted by others unless it insults itself 
first.'  Can a country which fails to respect its conventions win 
other people's respect?  Is it a dignified move to postpone and act 
unreasonably on one's promise?  ..." 
 
C) "National Defense Starts at Home" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (11/1): 
 
"... There are those in the US who believe in Taiwan and believe in 
its freedom, and these people work hard to convince the military, 
the executive and Congress that Taiwan is worth supporting and, if 
necessary, fighting for.  Then there are those who think that Taiwan 
is expendable.  They think Taiwanese are a jumped-up bunch of 
Chinese who cannot be trusted to run a democracy, let alone to 
defend themselves from the Chinese juggernaut.  To them, Taiwan 
endangers good relations with China and industry and is simply not 
worth the trouble - despite the fact that Taiwan's democracy grew 
under US protection.  There is a strong case to be made, therefore, 
that Young was ordered by his superiors to ignite the pan-blue 
camp's deep anti-Americanism so that the procurement bill would be 
scuttled - providing ammunition to pro-China forces in the US of the 
'unwillingness' of Taiwan to defend itself. 
 
"Whatever the truth of the matter, a clash between pro-Taiwan 
interests in the US and the pan-blue camp was inevitable because 
pan-blue contempt toward the US has always nestled very close to the 
surface.  Never mind that the pan-blue elite are US-educated; the 
Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) has a long and inglorious history of 
relying on US funding, education, technical know-how and military 
support, then denying its own incompetence and its debt to the 
American people and labeling the US 'colonialist' for presuming to 
defend Taiwan against Chinese dictatorship.  What Washington has to 
understand is that KMT hypocrisy and carpetbagging do not represent 
the sentiments of the average Taiwanese, nor even the sentiments of 
the average KMT supporter.  Taiwanese politics is polarized, but 
Taiwanese themselves maintain a civilized polity that is worth 
standing up for.  The other option is to condemn Taiwan to the care 
of a regime that a draft US-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission report has described as a country unlikely to be willing 
to act as a responsible world power. ..." 
 
YOUNG