06BRASILIA2399
SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 84
Tue Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO8727
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #2399/01 3182008
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 142008Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7353
INFO RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4402
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 5916
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 4981
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3243
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 2033
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 3996
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5773
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 1160
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6582
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 1175
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3502
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 5853
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 8601
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 3329
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DOE WASHDC
RUEHC/DOI WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEANAT/NASA HQ WASHDC
RUCPDC/NOAA WASHDC
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL
RUEHRC/USDA WASHDC
RUCPDO/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 BRASILIA 002399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USAID TO LAC/RSD, LAC/SAM, G/ENV, PPC/ENV 
TREASURY FOR USED IBRD AND IDB AND INTL/MDB 
USDA FOR FOREST SERVICE: LIZ MAHEW 
INTERIOR FOR DIR INT AFFAIRS: K WASHBURN 
INTERIOR FOR FWS: TOM RILEY 
INTERIOR PASS USGS FOR INTERNATIONAL: J WEAVER 
JUSTICE FOR ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES: JWEBB 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL: CAM HILL-MACON 
USDA FOR ARS/INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH: G FLANLEY 
NSF FOR INTERNATIONAL: HAROLD STOLBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR EAID TBIO ECON SOCI XR BR
SUBJECT: SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 84 
 
¶1.  The following is the eighty-fourth in a series of newsletters, 
published by the Brasilia Regional Environmental Hub, covering 
environment, science and technology, and health news in South 
America.  The information below was gathered from news sources from 
across the region, and the views expressed do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Hub office or our constituent posts. 
Addressees who would like to receive a user-friendly email version 
of this newsletter should contact Larissa Stoner at 
stonerla@state.gov.  The e-mail version also contains a calendar of 
upcoming ESTH events in the region. 
 
¶2. Table of Contents 
 
Agriculture 
--(3)Dole Food Company Inaugurates Organic Banana Farm in Colombia 
--(4)Colombia: Legume to Counter El Nio 
--(5)Brazil: Delay in Law to Limit Eucalyptus 
--(6)Colombia: Organic Coffee for Japan 
 
Water Issues 
--(7)Colombia: Rodrigo Vivas, Winner of the Sasakawa --Prize for His 
Contribution to the Fight against Desertification 
--(8)Amazon River 'Switched Direction' 
 
Forests 
--(9)Peru: Forest Transparency Workshop Shows Opportunities 
--(10)Brazil: Amazon Deforestation Lowest Since 1991 
--(11)Largest Seizure of Illegally Logged Amazon Rainforest Timber 
Announced By Authorities 
 
Wildlife 
--(12)USFWS Provides Training against Illegal Wildlife Traffic in 
Brazil 
 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
--(13)Argentina: Sabalo Threatened by Overfishing 
 
Science & Technology 
--(14)Brazil: Plant Fibers to Replace Asbestos 
 
Pollution 
--(15)Bolivia: Pilcomayo River Pollution AttractsNew Attention 
 
Energy 
--(16)Brazil and India jin Senegal for Biofuel Production 
--(17)Chilean nergy Supplier to Pursue Renewable Energy Projects 
--(18)Bolivia: Clean Production Practices Increas Efficiency, Lower 
Costs 
--(19)Brazil Bus FirmPowers Fleet on Biofuels 
--(20)Brazil Teams Up Wth NASA for Aviation Fuel 
 
General 
--(21)U.S.-hile Environmental Meetings 
--(22)Chile: Conama ets Sights on New Environmental Superintendent 
--23)WWF: "Ecological Overshoot" Threatens Earth's Rsources 
--(24)Argentina: Plastic Bricks Certifie for Building 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  002 OF 009 
 
 
 
----------- 
Agriculture 
----------- 
 
¶3. Dole Food Company Inaugurates Organic Banana Farm in Colombia 
 
NOV. 06, 2006 - Dole Food Company recently inaugurated a new organic 
banana facility in the La Guajira region of Colombia.  Named the 
"Don Pedro" farm, the USD8 million growing, harvesting, packing and 
shipping facility will employ more than 1,000 local residents.  Don 
Pedro is the first banana farm in Colombia with a suspended cableway 
harvesting system that transports product from the farm directly to 
the packing plants.  The facility also has a state-of-the-art 
irrigation system, advanced fruit cleansing operations and an aerial 
fruit propping system. 
 
Source - US Embassy Bogota 
 
¶4. Colombia: Legume to Counter El Nio 
 
NOV. 06, 2006 - Cratylia argentea, a legume that is resistant to 
prolonged drought and highly nutritious for cattle, could be 
cultivated by Colombian ranchers to counter the effects of the 
climate phenomenon known as El Nio, according to the International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT).  "It is a bush rich in 
protein, with a high capacity for sprouting during dry periods, 
replacing part of the commercial concentrates, and maintaining cows' 
milk production when the weather is too dry or too humid," Carlos 
Lascano, a CIAT expert who has been studying the plant for 15 years, 
told Tierramerica.  He said the legume can adapt to different 
regions of the country, but is particularly useful along the 
Atlantic coast, a cattle-raising region that sees long dry periods, 
which could become worse with El Nio, which is predicted to 
intensify towards the end of the year. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶5. Brazil: Delay in Law to Limit Eucalyptus 
 
OCT. 23, 2006 - Far past the 45 days predicted, the delay continues 
for the parliamentary vote on a bill that aims to stop the expansion 
of eucalyptus in the Brazilian municipality of Sao Luiz do 
Paraitinga, 170 km from Sao Paulo.  This was the report to 
Tierramerica from Marcelo Toledo, an official from the judiciary and 
promoter of the bill. Monoculture of the fast-growing eucalyptus 
tree for the paper pulp industry already covers "more than 10 
percent" of the municipal territory of 73,700 hectares, causing a 
rural exodus, pollution and destruction of historic monuments, he 
said.  The bill was presented Aug. 22 with 540 signatures, 
surpassing the national constitution's required minimum of five 
percent of the local electorate, but lawmakers have yet to vote on 
it. Home to 10,800 people, the mountainous ad forested Paraitinga 
lives from tourism and small farms. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  003 OF 009 
 
 
 
¶6. Colombia: Organic Coffee for Japan 
 
OCT. 23, 2006 - Beginning in February, the indigenous Arhuacos of 
Colombia's northern Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, will export 
annually 15 containers to Japan with 289 tons of Tiwun coffee, which 
the community grows using environmentally sustainable methods. 
Francisco Zalabata, member of the Tayrona Indigenous Confederation, 
told Tierramerica that the commercialization of the coffee will take 
place through an agreement signed Oct. 19 by his group and the city 
of Santa Marta and the Community Trade Network.  Zalabata said Tiwun 
is a special coffee grown by about 350 indigenous families, 
following rules of fair trade, and is considered among those with 
best aroma, taste and texture in the world.  The aim of the network 
in marketing the product, says Zalabata, is to reach the customer 
without intermediaries, so that the economic benefits of exporting 
their coffee go directly to the growers. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
------------ 
Water Issues 
------------ 
 
¶7. Colombia: Rodrigo Vivas, Winner of the Sasakawa Prize for His 
Contribution to the Fight against Desertification 
 
NOV. 04, 2006 - Colombian lawyer and activist Rodrigo Vivas won the 
2006 Sasakawa Prize, awarded annually by the United Nations 
Environmental Program (UNEP) and the Nippon Foundation, for his 
"rainwater harvest" project, to combat desertification.  The award, 
which includes a 200,000-dollar prize, is one of the most 
prestigious environmental laurels in the world.  "The lord of the 
rains", as his friends call him, created the non-governmental 
Fundacion Accion Ambiental (Environmental Action Foundation) six 
years ago, focusing on local issues.  The foundation works with 
farmers to encourage protection of biodiversity, proper water 
management, food security efforts and strengthening of community 
organizations.  Vivas is also executive director of the Consortium 
for Sustainable Hillside Agriculture, CIPASLA, which is active in 23 
rural districts of the Andean region of Colombia.  Click on the link 
below for the complete Q&A. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶8. Amazon River 'Switched Direction' 
 
OCT. 24, 2006 - The world's largest river, the Amazon, once flowed 
from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific - the opposite of its present 
direction, a study shows.  Sedimentary rocks in the central part of 
South America contain ancient mineral grains that must have come 
from the eastern part of the continent.  Geologist Russell Mapes 
says this must mean that about 145-65 million years ago, the Amazon 
flowed east to west. 
 
Source - BBC 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  004 OF 009 
 
 
 
------- 
Forests 
------- 
 
¶9. Peru: Forest Transparency Workshop Shows Opportunities 
 
NOV. 07, 2006 - USAID, U.S. Forest Service and State sponsored an 
Amazon Basin forest transparency workshop in Lima, September 19-22, 
¶2006.  Over 100 participants from governments, industry and NGOs 
found common ground in identifying solutions to improve forest 
governance.  Firms and NGO's exhibited services and technologies 
that aid log tracking, forest certification and mapping of changes 
in forest cover in a novel "Market of Ideas." Bolivian and Peruvian 
community-based NGO's formed a plan to exchange best practices; USG, 
Tropical Forest Trust and other collaborators began planning for a 
new short training course for university faculty in Amazon forestry 
management programs. 
 
Source - LIMA   00004289 
 
¶10. Brazil: Amazon Deforestation Lowest Since 1991 
 
OCT. 27, 2006 - Deforestation in the Amazon rain forest has declined 
to its lowest level since 1991 due to strict enforcement of 
environmental regulations, according to the Brazilian government. 
Preliminary figures released by the environmental ministry showed 
5,057 square miles of the rain forest were destroyed this year -- 
the lowest level since 4,258 square miles were lost in 1991.  The 
numbers released Oct. 26 are estimates based on satellite images. 
The final results are expected before the end of the year.  Last 
year, the rain forest lost 7,250 square miles.  ''It's the second 
year in a row there's a decline, so it's good news and we must 
applaud the government,'' said Paulo Adario, director of 
Greenpeace's Amazon campaign. ''But our preoccupation is that the 
average of annual destruction remains high. More needs to be 
done.'' 
 
Source - NY Times 
 
¶11. Largest Seizure of Illegally Logged Amazon Rainforest Timber 
Announced By Authorities 
 
OCT. 23, 2006 - IBAMA, Brazil's environmental agency, announced the 
largest seizure ever of illegally logged timber from the Amazon 
rainforest.  During a week-long operation -- code named Kojima -- in 
late September, authorities impounded nearly 15,000 cubic meters of 
unlicensed wood in the Amazonian state of Para. The agency said it 
was probably the largest seizure ever in the state.  The Kojima 
Operation follows the three-week Guariba Operation which confiscated 
8,500 cubic meters of sawnwood and logs in the state of Mato Grosso. 
Authorities said the Kojima Operation would continue in the region 
until at least December, according to a report from the 
International Tropical Timber Organization's (ITTO) Tropical Timber 
Market Report. 2006 has seen a marked increase in environmental law 
enforcement in the Amazon.  More than 120 people including 16 agents 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  005 OF 009 
 
 
of the federal environmental protection agency -- have been arrested 
for operating illegal logging and timber smuggling in the Amazon 
rainforest and southern Brazil since the beginning of the year. 
 
Source - Mongabay see also BRASILIA   00002319 
 
-------- 
Wildlife 
-------- 
 
¶12. USFWS Provides Training against Illegal Wildlife Traffic in 
Brazil 
 
NOV. 06, 2006 - A team of four officers from the United States Fish 
and Wildlife Service (FWS), part of the U.S. Department of the 
Interior, provided Brazilian Federal Police with a training course 
to prevent and combat illegal wildlife trafficking over the two week 
period of October 16-27, 2006.  The U.S Delegation was headed by 
special agent Jill Birchell and complemented by special agents Gary 
Young, Marty Hernandez and forensics scientist Dyan Straughan.  The 
course, financed by the Narcotics Affairs Section at the Embassy, 
took place in Bonito located in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso 
do Sul, one of the richest regions of the country in terms of 
Wildlife biodiversity.  Both the United States and Brazilian Federal 
Police believe the exchange of information will help disrupt 
criminal organizations, in both countries, that profit from the 
illegal trade in wildlife. 
 
Source - BRASILIA   00002325 
 
----------------------------- 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
----------------------------- 
 
¶13. Argentina: Sabalo Threatened by Overfishing 
 
NOV. 06, 2006 - The non-governmental organization Proteger 
Foundation revealed on Oct. 30 a nearly secret report by Argentina's 
fisheries agency which admits that the fish known as the sabalo 
(Prochilodus lineatus) is at risk of population collapse due to 
overexploitation.  Proteger, which has denounced the overfishing of 
this species for years, agreed with the forecast, but criticized the 
agency for failing to publicize the official study.  According to 
Proteger, some 70,000 tons of sabalo -- the leading river-fish 
export -- are caught annually, half what was caught 20 years ago 
with a smaller fishing capacity. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
-------------------- 
Science & Technology 
-------------------- 
 
¶14. Brazil: Plant Fibers to Replace Asbestos 
 
OCT. 23, 2006 - Research at the University of Campina Grande, in the 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  006 OF 009 
 
 
eastern Brazilian state of Paraiba, explores the potential uses of 
sisal (Agave sisalana) as a substitute for asbestos, a toxin and 
carcinogen, as a construction material.  The plant, which is grown 
in the semiarid Brazilian Northeast, "is low cost, biodegradable, 
abundant, and is a non-carcinogen renewable resource," research 
coordinator Antonio Farias Leal told Tierramerica.  "Its use would 
help the social and economic development of Brazil's poorer regions, 
thrashed by drought, where no other perennial crop thrives except 
sisal, and where nearly a million people rely on it for survival," 
he said.  Brazil is the world's leading producer of sisal, 
generating about 56 percent of the global total. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
--------- 
Pollution 
--------- 
 
¶15. Bolivia: Pilcomayo River Pollution Attracts New Attention 
 
OCT. 27, 2006 - For centuries, mining and milling wastes from 
Bolivia's Potosi mining district have polluted the Pilcomayo River, 
an important body of water in Bolivia's southwest.  A recent study 
indicated that many agricultural fields and waterways are 
contaminated with heavy metals and arsenic, which may have long-term 
implications for local communities. Past proposals to address the 
river's pollution have generated few results, but a new initiative 
from the USAID-supported Center for the Promotion of Sustainable 
Technologies may change that. 
 
Source - LA PAZ   00002934 
 
------ 
Energy 
------ 
 
¶16. Brazil and India join Senegal for Biofuel Production 
 
NOV. 01, 2006 - In a bid to decrease its dependence on oil and 
produce environmentally-friendly energy, Senegal will cooperate with 
Brazil and India to launch a biofuel production program by 2007. 
Through public-private partnerships, Brazil will provide scientific 
and technological know-how, Indian entrepreneurs will supply the 
capital, and Senegal will offer land and labor.  Biofuels, such as 
bioethanol, biodiesel and biogas, are renewable fuels generally 
produced from agricultural crops or organic matter.  The project is 
part of a plan by the Senegalese government to regenerate its rural 
economy through investment in biofuels to eventually replace the 
country's daily consumption of 33,000 oil barrels.   It was 
announced on 27 October by Farba Senghor, Senegal's minister of 
agriculture, rural hydraulics and food security in a meeting with a 
delegation of Brazilian biofuel experts in Dakar, Senegal. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
¶17. Chilean Energy Supplier to Pursue Renewable Energy Projects 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  007 OF 009 
 
 
 
OCT. 31, 2006 - Chile's principal energy supplier Endesa is 
exploring renewable energy sources through its subsidiary Eco 
Endesa.  Eco Endesa is embarking on projects that would generate 
energy using biomass, small-scale hydroelectric dams and wind power. 
 The projects are part of an initiative by Eco Endesa to invest 
USD50 million in producing over 30 megawatts of renewable energy by 
¶2009.  The investment represents a growing interest in renewable 
energy, which is due in part to transmission cost exemptions and 
discounts granted by the Ley Corta II, a new energy law passed in 
2005 that created numerous incentives to invest in energy.  Eco 
Endesa already has several projects in late phases of development, 
including the USD17 million Canela wind energy park in Region IV, 
and the small-scale hydroelectric dam Ojos de Agua in Region VII. 
Planned to be completed in the next two years, the projects will 
produce just over 9.5 megawatts of power each. 
 
Source - Santiago Times (no link) 
 
¶18. Bolivia: Clean Production Practices Increase Efficiency, Lower 
Costs 
 
OCT. 26, 2006 - Clean production practices introduced by the 
USAID-supported Center for the Promotion of Sustainable Technologies 
have increased efficiency and lowered costs for more than 90 
Bolivian businesses.  [Several] case studies suggest that lower 
production costs provide powerful incentives for firms to modify 
production processes to improve efficiency and cut pollution, 
thereby making them more competitive in domestic and international 
markets.  Companies have also adopted corporate social 
responsibility programs to minimize environmental damage. 
 
Source - LA PAZ   00002903 
 
¶19. Brazil Bus Firm Powers Fleet on Biofuels 
 
OCT. 25, 2006 - South America's largest city might be getting a bit 
greener.  A bus company in Sao Paulo is now powering part of its 
fleet with a new mix of biofuels and diesel in an effort to curb 
emissions and reduce reliance on fossil fuels.  The mix - a blend of 
30 percent biodiesel, 8 percent alcohol and 62 percent petroleum 
diesel - will eventually be used by 1,900 buses, about a quarter of 
Sao Paulo's entire bus fleet, said Paulo Mendes, director of B100, 
which was created by the Itaim Paulista bus company to research 
alternative fuels.  The fuel was developed as part of joint effort 
between B100 and state-run oil company Petroleo Brasileiro SA, known 
as Petrobras.  Brazil has been a leader in the development of 
biofuels, with ethanol providing about 17 percent of the country's 
fuel needs.  Brazil also will start requiring that biodiesel be 
added to regular diesel at a rate of 2 percent in 2008.  By the year 
2013, trucks will have to run on 5 percent biodiesel. 
 
Source -Washington Post 
 
¶20. Brazil Teams Up With NASA for Aviation Fuel 
 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  008 OF 009 
 
 
AUG. 29, 2006 - Brazilian biofuel company, Tecbio, has linked up 
with NASA and US aerospace firm Boeing to develop a biokerosene 
aviation fuel.  The alternative vegetable-oils based fuel to power 
airplanes was invented by Tecbio in 1980 and flight tested in Brazil 
in 1984 before being abandoned.  It attracted fresh interest after 
oil prices rose to record levels this year.  A memorandum of 
understanding was signed in early August.  Based in Fortaleza, 
capital of the northeastern state of Ceara, Tecbio has a biofuel 
project in the state of Piaui, also in northeast Brazil.  Tecbio, 
Brazil's largest biodiesel technology company, is implementing six 
projects and seeking funding for another four. 
 
Source - MercoPress 
 
------- 
General 
------- 
 
¶21. U.S.-Chile Environmental Meetings 
 
NOV. 13, 2006 - Chile and the United States met in Santiago October 
23-24 to review bilateral environmental cooperation under the 
Environmental Chapter of the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and the 
Environmental Cooperation Agreement (ECA).  Talks focused on 
reviewing the successful eight projects implemented under the FTA 
and detailed future areas of cooperation: (1) a national Pollutant 
Release and Transfer Registry (PRTR); (2) reduction of mining 
pollution; (3) capacity building to enforce environmental laws; (4) 
workshop and study tour on voluntary environmental efforts; (5) 
exchange of agricultural best practices; (6) a study tour on 
alternatives to use of methyl bromide; (7) capacity building to 
improve wildlife protection and management; and, (8) a pilot project 
to retrofit diesel buses in Santiago to reduce emissions. 
 
Source - SANTIAGO   00002369 
 
¶22. Chile: Conama Sets Sights on New Environmental Superintendent 
 
OCT. 27, 2006 - A complete overhaul in the administration of 
environmental affairs is on the horizon in Chile, with the proposed 
creation of an Environment Ministry and the announcement of a 
planned Environmental Superintendent in charge of enforcing 
regulations.  National Environmental Commission (Conama) Director 
Ana Lya Uriarte announced on October 25th that immediately after 
adding the final touches to a bill creating the post of Environment 
Minister - currently being debated in Congress - legislators plan to 
author another bill that establishes the functions of the 
Superintendent. Under the current system, individual ministries and 
government agencies are responsible for applying and enforcing 
environmental regulations, under Conama's supervision. The lack of 
an independent enforcement agency has been the source of much 
criticism. 
 
Source - Santiago Times (no link) 
 
¶23. WWF: "Ecological Overshoot" Threatens Earth's Resources 
 
BRASILIA 00002399  009 OF 009 
 
 
 
OCT. 26, 2006 - WWF's 2006 Living Planet Report, the group's 
biennial statement on the state of the natural world, says that on 
current projections humanity will be using two planets' worth of 
natural resources by 2050 - if those resources have not run out by 
then.  It also confirms the trend of biodiversity loss seen in 
previous Living Planet reports.  Already resources are depleting, 
with the report showing that vertebrate species populations have 
declined by about one-third in the 33 years from 1970 to 2003.  At 
the same time, humanity's Ecological Footprint - the demand people 
place upon the natural world - has increased to the point where the 
Earth is unable to keep up in the struggle to regenerate. 
 
Source - MercoPress 
 
¶24. Argentina: Plastic Bricks Certified for Building 
 
OCT. 23, 2006 - Argentina's Housing Secretariat granted 
certification of technical fitness to a prototype of a brick made 
from plastic bottles for use in construction of houses and buildings 
of up to two stories.  "This allows access to official funds for 
housing made with bricks produced from plastic waste," Horacio 
Berretta, director of the Economical Housing Experiment Center in 
the central province of Csrdoba, told Tierramerica.  Berretta 
acknowledged that there are various initiatives for construction 
with alternative materials, but noted that not all obtain 
certification. This recognition permits large-scale manufacture of 
the bricks, beginning with pilot projects in Buenos Aires and in the 
southwest province of Catamarca.  The plastic bricks are lighter 
than traditional bricks, he said. They are more water and fire 
resistant, soundproof, and easy to install. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
Sobel