06CAIRO6889
EGYPT:  MEPI SMALL GRANT REPORTING
Thu Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #6889/01 3201534
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161534Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2600
INFO RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 0521UNCLAS CAIRO 006889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/PI (MMOSER) 
TUNIS FOR MEPI (MULREAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KDEM EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT:  MEPI SMALL GRANT REPORTING 
 
REF: STATE 151114 
 
¶1.  Summary:  In response to reftel, post is pleased to 
report on the following 2005 MEPI-funded Small Grants, all of 
which were awarded to NGOs based in Alexandria: 
 
-- "Decentralization of Educational Tools towards Youth 
Participation in Decision Making Process," implemented by 
Sustainable Development Association (SDA). 
 
--  "Awareness Campaign Against Private Lessons, the Major 
Obstacles in the Educational Reform Process," implemented by 
Egyptian Cognitive Center (ECC). 
 
-- "Generating Women Leaders and Re-vitalizing their Role in 
Society," implemented by the Future Businesswomen 
Association.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  "Decentralization of Educational Tools towards the Youth 
Participation in Decision Making," completed in March 2006, 
achieved the following results: three seminars, including a 
Model United Nations for youth participants from MENA 
countries, reaching a total of 527 students.  One of the 
sessions was organized as a simulation of the 2005 Egyptian 
Presidential Elections to enhance youth participation in the 
political process.  This particular activity was not 
mentioned in the original project proposal.  Grantee was 
effective in attracting media coverage for its activities; 
however, they did not stress that it was MEPI-funded, due, 
they claimed, to "political sensitivities."  Flyers used to 
announce the activities were distributed on Alexandria 
University Campus and succeeded in attracting a large number 
of university students to the events.  This program directly 
supports the MPP Strategic Goal of Democracy and Human 
Rights. 
 
¶3.  Grantee implemented all planned activities in a timely 
manner.  However, the association was also the beneficiary of 
a US Embassy Institutions of Democracy Working Group (IDWG) 
grant for activities similar to the project funded by MEPI. 
The Secretary General of the association emphasized to US 
Embassy officers in Alexandria that the two activities were 
distinct and not duplicative. 
 
¶4.  Grantee is a highly-motivated and generally 
well-organized association with demonstrated ability to 
connect with young, politically astute Egyptians.  New 
funding should be considered for innovative programs, but we 
should coordinate with other possible donors before further 
funding.  The group is attracting funds from EU-based funding 
organizations and may be saturated for funds, measured by 
current capacity. 
 
¶5.  The "Awareness Campaign against Private Lessons Program," 
completed in June 2006, achieved the following results: 
media attention focused on the practice of teachers requiring 
students to pay tutorial fees for "optional" teaching 
sessions that are held outside of class hours.  Media groups 
learned about the problem and ways to counter the phenomenon 
at a conference that also addressed the media's role in 
raising the awareness of the public about the economic, 
educational, and social implications of the policy.  The 
grantee held six "listening" sessions with groups of primary 
school teachers, parents, and Ministry of Education (MOE) 
officials as the issue became a topic of public debate.  A 
final round of six workshops taught parents how to take a 
more active role in their child's education.  Parents learned 
how to assess the cognitive level of their child, manage 
behavior problems, and use stimulating teaching methods to 
assist their children with their lessons at home.  In 
addition, over 300 students joined the discussion by 
participating in an art contest focused on the theme of 
students compelled to take private lessons in order to 
receive passing grades.  A closing conference included 
officials of MOE, university professors, education officials, 
members of the Alexandria Local Council, and editors of 
national newspapers.  Because of the success of this project, 
the chairperson of the association was chosen to be a member 
of the civil activities committee at the MOE, working to give 
NGOs additional space to work freely in schools. 
 
¶6.  Grantee implemented all planned activities in a timely 
manner and has the skills and capacity needed to implement 
larger MEPI projects.  We recommend considering additional 
funding for the grantee, possibly to implement one of the 
conference recommendations, to expand the participation of 
parent committee groups in the basic education support 
process.  Post believes that could be an important project to 
further the role of civil society and community involvement 
in the education system. 
 
¶7.  As a result of the project, education authorities in 
Alexandria now place greater value on the participation of 
community and civil society groups in finding a solution to 
the challenge of private lessons.  This program directly 
supported the MPP Strategic Goal of Education Reform. 
 
¶8.  The "Generating Women Leaders and Re-vitalizing their 
Role in Society," project, completed in June 2006, resulted 
in: issuance of national ID cards to 2,800 underprivileged 
women enabling them to establish a business, receive 
government health and education benefits, etc.; voter 
registration of 2,996 women; advanced leadership training for 
25 women; and workshops for 767 women to raise their 
awareness of their political and social rights guaranteed 
under the law.  Due to the efficiency in implementing the 
project, the National Council for Women in Cairo chose women 
leaders trained in this project to continue their training in 
the "Women's Political Rehabilitation" project administered 
by the Council.  This program directly supported the MPP 
Strategic Goal of Democracy and Human Rights/Building Civil 
Society. 
 
¶9.  Post is satisfied with the reporting provided by the 
grantee, which included the success stories of two of the 
women leaders trained in the project who intend to run in 
local elections. 
 
¶10.  Grantee requested a one-month extension of the project 
to follow-up on the training opportunities granted by the 
National Council for Women to a number of women leaders that 
originally benefited from the project.  The grantee used an 
excess amount of approximately USD 600 for this additional 
activity.  This sum includes an amount of approximately USD 
350, from the USD 3000 allocated by MEPI for conference and 
travel expenses.  The grantee believes that they still need 
formal approval from MEPI Tunis for this request.  The 
grantee wishes to use the remaining funds from the USD 3000 
assigned for conference and travel activities for additional 
activities to conduct three final training workshops for 
administrators of election campaigns. 
 
¶11.  Post greatly appreciates the assistance of MEPI Tunis 
with administering these grants. 
RICCIARDONE