06DAMASCUS5288
Damascus Media Reaction: Palestinian Territories, Peace
Thu Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0012
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #5288/01 3131137
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091137Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2426
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6365
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4164
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2753
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7347
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1375
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4728
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0945
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7080UNCLAS DAMASCUS 005288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Damascus Media Reaction: Palestinian Territories, Peace 
Process, Lebanon, Iraq, US Midterm Elections (11/8) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:   The Syrian press today focused on the deteriorating 
situation in the Palestinian territories in light of the recent 
Israeli escalation, especially in Beit Hanoun.  Papers reported 
Foreign Minister Mouallem's meeting with Khalid Mish'al, Chief of 
HAMAS' Political Bureau, and Dr. Ahmad Bahar, Deputy Speaker of the 
Palestinian Legislative Council, which focused on developments in 
the occupied territories.  FM Mouallem confirmed Syria's support of 
the Palestinian people and their national options, especially the 
formation of a national unity government to strengthen Palestinian 
cohesion. 
Papers also reported that Abdullah al-Ahmar, Assistant Secretary 
General of the Ba'th Party, received Hanna Afif Omera, Member of the 
Politburo of the Palestinian People's Party, and Bassam Zaki Ahmed 
Mosleh, Director General of the Party.  Talks dealt with the tough 
circumstances in which the Palestinian people are living under the 
Israeli occupation and its continuous aggressions and practices 
against the unarmed Palestinian people.  Al-Ahmar underlined Syria's 
support for the Palestinians' resistance and struggle to restore 
their occupied lands, freedom and legitimate rights by establishing 
a sovereign Palestinian state with Jerusalem as capital and 
realizing the Palestinian refugees' right of return.  He also 
confirmed Syria's keenness for Palestinian national unity within the 
framework of the PLO as the only legitimate representative of the 
Palestinian people. 
Headlines featured a sit-in tent at the Yarmouk Camp for Palestinian 
Refugees near Damascus, showing solidarity with the Palestinian 
people of Beit Hanoun in Gaza strip.  Participants held Palestinian 
flags and placards condemning Israeli genocide against Palestinian 
civilians.  They called for continuing resistance until usurped 
rights are restored, appealing to Arab governments to play their 
role in supporting the Palestinian cause. 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
"Foreign Minister al-Mouallem stresses Syria's support for formation 
of a Palestinian national unity government, in a meeting with Khalid 
Mish'al chief of the HAMAS Political Bureau" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 11/8) 
"Al-Ahmar discusses with the Palestinian People's Party party 
relations and Palestinians' suffering under occupation, reiterating 
Syria's concern about Palestinian national unity on the basis of the 
Palestinian Reconciliation Charter" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
11/8) 
"Abbas and Hanieh continue talks on a national unity government. 
The Israeli massacre reaps 360 martyrs and casualties in Beit 
Hanoun" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/8) 
"Participants at the sit-in tent in al-Yarmouk camp for Palestinian 
refugees:  Stop Israeli massacres against the Palestinian people" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 11/8) 
"The 1st International Media Forum on the Golan emphasizes the 
Syrian people's right to resist occupation.  Information Minister 
Mohsen Bilal:  The occupation of Golan is a crime against humanity 
and the ugliest kind of terrorism.... No option for Israel but 
withdrawal to the June 4, 1967 line" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
11/8) 
"The Lebanese democratic gathering breaks off for consultations. 
Berri:  We are still discussing a national unity government. 
Lebanese MP Hassan Fadlallah:  America fears for its project in 
Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/8) 
"Iraqi factions denounce assaults against mosques, holding the Iraqi 
government responsible.  Killing of two US and British soldiers in 
Baghdad and Basra" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/8) 
"US Democratic candidates head towards winning the majority in the 
US Congress" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/8) 
"Americans elect a new Congress and 36 governors.  The death verdict 
against Saddam is Bush's sole weapon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
11/8) 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------------------- 
"A Cause that Cannot Be Ignored" 
-------------------------------- 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(11/8):   "International statements about the need for peace in the 
Middle East appear to be wishful thinking more than a serious effort 
to achieve peace.... 
"The narrow window of opportunity for peace, which Syria has talked 
 
about, can be widened if there is a serious international effort to 
end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands and force Israel to comply 
with UN resolutions.... It is inconceivable to ask Syria to play a 
constructive role as long as its territory is occupied....  The 
Golan is one of the most important issues in Syrian policy.... It is 
a top priority in Syrian policy. 
"Returning the Golan is a clear Syrian message proceeding from solid 
patriotic and national bases and relying on the logic of justice, 
law and UN resolutions and the terms of reference of the 1991 Madrid 
conference, which was launched on the basis of the exchange of land 
for peace.... 
"Syria has explained its position and desire for peace to all 
visiting European delegations.... The ball is now in the court of 
the concerned parties, whether in the United States, which has 
backtracked from the peace process and helped Israel foil it, or in 
the European countries, which are adopting a timid position toward 
the Israeli occupation and frequently taking the side of the 
American position, on the agenda of which there is no such thing as 
peace.... 
"Syria has conveyed facts and requirements of the region objectively 
and transparently to others.  Now it wants clear answers to its call 
to achieve peace and end the aggression and occupation." 
----------------- 
"A Test for Bush" 
----------------- 
Isam Dari, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, commented 
(11/18):  "Results of the midterm election will be decisive for 
President Bush, the Republican Party, and the neoconservative team, 
which is leading the president, the party, the country, and the rest 
of the world to disaster and destruction.... 
"Many Americans have shifted support from the Republican Party to 
the Democratic Party.... The futile terrorist wars that seek to 
impose the American will on the world have burdened the American 
economy.  The taxpayer has found that he is paying taxes not for 
domestic reform or for the development of the economy and the 
improvement of the standard of living.  A large part of the 
taxpayer's money goes to feed preemptive wars promoted and planned 
by the neoconservatives.  Moreover, the coffins returning from Iraq 
and Afghanistan, and the feelings of hatred toward the United States 
in the world, have made the American taxpayer realize, although 
late, that the Bush administration is not only leading the world to 
destruction but also leading Americans to a multifaceted disaster, 
part of which is internal, social and economic and part of which is 
external, represented by growing hatred toward everything American 
-- not only American policies -- by the nations of the world.... 
"It appears that Americans today want to correct this situation, not 
out of love for the Democratic Party or out of a desire to serve the 
world and ask forgiveness from peoples, but in order to make 
domestic accomplishments reflecting on the life of Americans...." 
------------------------------ 
"Awaiting Results of Election" 
------------------------------ 
Ali Qasem, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(11/8):  "Foreign policy dominates the US midterm Congressional 
elections for the first time in decades.... The world is awaiting 
the results of the elections because they will determine the 
performance of President Bush's administration in the next two 
years.... 
"The big mistakes that the US Administration has made, especially as 
seen in Iraq, have given the Democrats the necessary ammunition to 
launch a fierce attack on the Republican Party.... The world will 
soon see if the US voter has realized the deception that the US 
Administration has practiced in international issues, a deception 
that has reflected negatively on Americans...." 
---------------------------------------- 
"Iraq in the US Congressional Elections" 
---------------------------------------- 
Bassam Radwan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(11/8):  "The war on Iraq and the policy of President Bush's 
administration in that country will probably be the decisive factor 
in the midterm elections.... The death sentence against former Iraqi 
President Saddam Hussein came only two days before the 
elections.... 
"Irrespective of the details and circumstances of Saddam's trial and 
the extent of justice in it, the way it ended undoubtedly indicates 
that it is being used to serve Republicans in the midterm 
 
Congressional elections after the Bush administration tried hard to 
evade the price of its military defeats...." 
Corbin