06ISTANBUL2084
ALLIANCE OF CIVILIZATIONS NOT CLASH OF
Thu Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO0794
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHIT #2084/01 3201229
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161229Z NOV 06
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6343
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN PRIORITY 0003
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA PRIORITY 2269UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 002084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL UN TU VT
SUBJECT: ALLIANCE OF CIVILIZATIONS NOT CLASH OF 
CIVILIZATIONS 
 
ISTANBUL 00002084  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  The UN Alliance of Civilizations 
High-Level Group presented its final report on November 13 in 
Istanbul to UNSYG Annan as well as the Turkish and Spanish 
Prime Ministers.  The report focuses on political 
developments, rather than religious or cultural differences, 
as a primary cause of tension between Western and Muslim 
societies, specifically citing the Israel-Palestinian 
conflict and its radicalizing impact across a broad spectrum 
of observers. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The UN Alliance of Civilizations High Level Group 
was convened by UNSYG Annan in September 2005 to produce a 
report on the root causes of tension between Western and 
Muslim societies as well as an action plan for addressing 
those problems.  The report focuses on three "Western 
policies affecting Muslim countries" as well as three "trends 
in Muslim society" as politically-based root causes of 
conflict.  The report's overarching criticism of the West is 
that it tolerates a status quo that is unfair and demeaning 
to Muslims.  The West is taken to task for the 
Israeli-Palestinian issue with the report noting that it 
"remains one of the gravest threats to international 
stability."  Western military operations in Muslim countries 
(Iraq, Afghanistan) are blamed for contributing to a growing 
climate of fear and animosity and helping swell the ranks of 
terrorist groups.  The report also accuses the West of 
applying a double standard in international law and the 
protection of human rights that increases resentment and a 
sense of vulnerability among Muslims, as manifested in the 
Israel-Palestinian conflict. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The report acknowledges that foreign interference is 
not the sole cause of the problems facing much of the Muslim 
world today.  It notes that an internal struggle between 
progressive and regressive forces across a range of social 
and political issues has generated deep divisions within 
those societies and has in some cases led to extremism and 
violence.  It decries religious figures who advocate narrow, 
distorted interpretations of Islamic teachings and 
misrepresent as religious requirements cultural traditions 
such as honor killings, corporal punishment and suppression 
of women.  Finally, the report notes that resistance to 
reform and political repression have deprived many Muslim 
countries of economic and social progress. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The report makes seven principal recommendations: 
--Seek a settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based 
on the establishment of two fully sovereign and independent 
states. 
--Develop a White Paper to objectively review past successes 
and failures and establish the conditions needed to resolve 
this crisis. 
--Convene an international conference to reinvigorate the 
Middle East peace process. 
--Permit peaceful political groups, whether religious or 
secular, to fully participate in politics throughout the 
Muslim world. 
--Political and religious leaders should promote 
understanding among cultures and mutual respect of religious 
belief and traditions. 
--Appoint a High Representative. 
--Establish a Forum for the Alliance of Civilizations under 
UN auspices. 
The report also makes a series of recommendations in the 
fields of media, education, youth and migration designed to 
widen understanding of critical issues, defuse tensions among 
communities and increase cross-cultural understanding. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The report was front page news in all major 
newspapers on November 14, with essentially straightforward 
summaries of the report and the Alliance's recommendations 
translated into Turkish.  Underlying tensions emerged, 
however, at an evening event at the Consul General's 
residence in honor of both Rabbi Arthur Schneier, a member of 
the Alliance, and a visiting delegation from the U.S. 
Commission on International Religious Freedom (CIRF). 
Schneier's description of the Alliance's purpose as 
demonstrating that there was no clash between Christian and 
Muslim civilizations was applauded.  CIRF Commissioner 
Michael Cromartie's description of the CIRF's "mission" to 
various countries to look at religious freedom generated an 
aggressive response from one U.S. educated guest who 
pointedly suggested that the CIRF should perhaps examine the 
United State before looking overseas, a remark seconded by 
others in the audience.  At this point a young NGO leader 
chimed in somewhat sarcastically noting that it was funny 
that a country with "no problems" like Turkey was always 
reforming its laws.  Finally a South American Alliance member 
 
ISTANBUL 00002084  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
was prompted to challenge Turkey's sense of itself as a truly 
tolerant and open nation by welcoming the Pope warmly thus 
demonstrating to the West that the 'Muslim East' also 
welcomed Christians as 'Christian Europe' had welcomed its 
Muslim community. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The Alliance member and several European observers 
later told us they were very disappointed in Erdogan's 
failure to mention the upcoming Papal visit to Turkey in his 
remarks at the press conference following the Alliance's 
presentation of its report.  Characterizing it as "hostile 
avoidance" they criticized Erdogan's planned absence during 
the Papal visit as well as his failure to explain his absence 
and to express his regret at missing the visit during his 
remarks at the press conference. 
JONES