06MANAGUA2450
NICARAGUA: ORTEGA SIGNS CHAMBER OF COMMERCE PLEDGE
Fri Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2450/01 3071917
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031917Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8120
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 002450 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP 
PLEASE PASS TO USTR/MALITO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EIND EINV ETRD NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: ORTEGA SIGNS CHAMBER OF COMMERCE PLEDGE 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary. On November 1, FSLN presidential candidate 
Daniel Ortega became the fourth presidential candidate to 
sign the Nicaraguan Chamber of CommerceQs pledge, entitled 
"Ten Basic Points on Governance and Economic Development." 
Chamber President Jose Adan Aguerri signed on behalf of the 
Chamber.  The document publicly commits the candidates to 
pursue free enterprise policies should they be elected. 
Ortega used the opportunity to refute the accusation that 
an FSLN government would garner remittances destined for 
Nicaraguans.  He also said that he would seek to expand 
trade with other countries in Latin America and the 
Caribbean, such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and 
Venezuela.  Ortega added that he planned to bring the 
government together with the private sector and workers to 
develop a consensus on moving the economy forward.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On November 1, FSLN presidential candidate Daniel 
Ortega became the fourth presidential candidate to sign the 
Nicaraguan Chamber of CommerceQ pledge, entitled QTen Basic 
Points on Governance and Economic Development.  Edmundo 
Jarquin of the MRS signed on October 2.  Eduardo 
Montealegre of the ALN and Jose Rizo of the PLC signed on 
October 24.  Eden Pastora of the AC, who trails badly in 
the polls, was expected to sign on November 2.  In signing 
the ChamberQs ten point document, Ortega pledged to: 
 
-- Transform the institutional judicial framework that 
   governs the powers of the state, to guarantee a 
   climate of judicial security for the country, based 
   on the principles that characterize the democratic 
   rule of law; 
 
-- Guarantee free enterprise and the active participation 
   of the private sector in the development of public 
   policies that permit equal and fair competition under 
   the law and economic policies of the state; 
 
-- Execute policies and commercial strategies that 
   guarantee immediate economic benefit from free trade 
   agreements currently being implemented by the country, 
   and continuing the process of market opening and 
   tariff reduction; 
 
-- Promote the transformation and modernization of public 
   institutions to guarantee government efficiency and 
   reduce the cost of government, with the objective of 
   channeling additional resources toward economic 
   infrastructure to allow the private sector to attain 
   higher levels of competitiveness in national and 
   international markets; 
 
-- Guarantee public order as a means to promote the free 
   exercise of economic activity and the establishment of 
   a stable business climate, with the objective of 
   furthering the development and economic growth of the 
   country, and precluding manipulation and political 
   blackmail in the provision of public services; 
 
-- Promote access to credit, training, and technical 
   assistance to small- and medium-sized enterprises as a 
   real and alternative source of jobs and economic 
   growth; 
 
-- Promote a strategy of education and professional and 
   technical training that guarantees the human resources 
   required by the country, taking into account global 
   trends that affect the world economy, industry, and 
   trade; 
 
-- Develop policies and administrative mechanisms for 
   fair taxation that foster the growth of the income tax 
   system and the reduction of unnecessary charges 
   imposed on business, moving tax collection away from 
   becoming a political instrument of Qfiscal terrorismQ 
   against businesses or the private sector; 
 
-- Strengthen the administration and legal framework for 
   public procurement, with the objective of pursuing 
   greater transparency and efficiency in the management 
   of economic resources; 
 
-- Pursue economic policies that guarantee: 
 
   The free exchange of the cordoba and the avoidance of 
   foreign exchange controls; 
   Free market prices, without state control except for 
   those public services as prescribed by law or the 
   constitution; 
 
   Good domestic and export market performance, without 
   excessive regulation or state control; 
 
   The maintenance of a healthy macroeconomic policy, 
   through the control of the fiscal deficit and the 
   supply of money. 
 
¶3. (U) The Board of Directors of the Nicaraguan Chamber of 
Commerce approved the ten points on September 25, 2006 and 
then presented them to each of the presidential 
candidates.  Chamber President Jose Adan Aguerri signed on 
behalf of the chamber. 
 
¶4. (U) Ortega used the public signing ceremony to denounce 
"dirty campaigning" by competing parties, including the 
accusation that an FSLN government would garner remittances 
destined for Nicaraguans.  He reiterated that an FSLN 
government would not automatically convert remittances into 
cordabas, as others had claimed.  If dollars or euros are 
deposited overseas, he said, then the family members will 
receive dollars or euros in Nicaragua.  He also said that 
he would seek to expand trade with other countries in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, such as Argentina, Brazil, 
Chile, and Venezuela.  In addition, he would pursue social 
programs with Cuba, much as had already been done with 
Mexico and Guatemala. 
 
¶5. (U) El Nuevo Diario reported that Ortega said he would 
bring the government together with the private sector and 
workers to develop a consensus on moving the economy 
forward.  The newspaper quoted him as saying, QWe will 
combat poverty by drawing on all the capacities of 
Nicaraguan producers, business, and the private sector.Q 
TRIVELLI