06PARIS7328
MEDIA WRAP-UP: IRAQ AND U.S. MID-TERM ELECTIONS, VERDICT
Thu Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO4722
RR RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHFR #7328/01 3131342
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091342Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3017
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEHMRE/AMCONSUL MARSEILLE 1435
RUEHSR/AMCONSUL STRASBOURG 0247UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/WE, INR, R 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO OPRC FR
SUBJECT:  MEDIA WRAP-UP: IRAQ AND U.S. MID-TERM ELECTIONS, VERDICT 
IN SADDAM HUSSEIN TRIAL, CHINA'S REACH IN AFRICA.  NOVEMBER 9, 
 
 
PARIS 00007328  001.2 OF 002 
 
¶2006. 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Debate over the impact of the war in Iraq continued to fuel 
widespread speculation prior to November 7 about a "lame duck 
presidency," while most commentary on the results concluded that the 
vote had "punished" President Bush's Iraq policy.  Journalists 
analyzed the verdict in the Saddam Hussein trial in the context of 
the U.S. elections and through the prism of Europe's stance on 
capital punishment.  The media examined the perceived decline of 
French influence in Africa and China's trade increasing partnership 
with Africa on the occasion of the China-Africa Cooperation Summit 
held in Beijing.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
MID-TERM ELECTIONS:  IRAQ POLICY "PUNISHED" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Most French commentators predicted that the vote would be a 
"referendum" on the Administration's Iraq policy, with 
right-of-center Le Figaro's Philippe Gelie arguing that "while the 
Democrats were taking advantage of the Republicans' disarray, the 
fact was they had no miracle solution to offer."  Immediately after 
the first results were available November 7, however, Alain de 
Chalvron argued on FR2 television that "a new phase of the Bush 
Presidency had begun," concluding that "President Bush, who until 
now held all the seats of power, would be challenged by his nemesis, 
Nancy Pelosi."  Left-of-center Le Monde argued that the elections 
were "an electoral rebuke for President Bush" while left-wing 
Liberation characterized the results as a "stinging punishment." 
But for right-of-center La Tribune, "the results were far from a 
landslide, except where Iraq was concerned."  "Americans are ready 
for change," concluded Daniel Vernet in left-of-center Le Monde as 
he defined the framework for "a different presidency" with a 
President "who previously believed himself above the law and who 
would have to learn to negotiate and compromise." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Right-of-center Le Figaro speculated that Secretary 
Rumsfeld's resignation opened the way to "a possible turn-about in 
Iraq," although left-wing Liberation concluded that "nothing had 
changed for Iraq" and that, "for President Bush, the descent into 
hell was only just beginning."  Catholic La Croix argued it was 
"healthy to see America's unilateralism being asked to show some 
modesty" but La Croix also noted that "counterweights such as 
Europe, NATO and the UN were not always up to doing a better job." 
Reacting to President Bush's press conference, regional La Provence 
paid tribute to the President's versatility, "at times proud, 
arrogant, humble or resigned" but always apt to "surprise us."  The 
editorial saluted President Bush for "quickly accepting his large 
personal responsibility for the Republican defeat." 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GUILTY VERDICT IN SADDAM HUSSEIN TRIAL 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) French media devoted widespread coverage to the verdict in 
the Saddam Hussein trial, although official reaction was muted, with 
right-of-center Le Figaro reporting that France simply 
"acknowledged" the verdict while "highlighting its opposition to the 
death penalty."  Left-of-center Le Monde emphasized that "only 
London sided fully with Washington, while European nations rejected 
the death sentence."  A commentary in left-wing Liberation 
criticized France's diplomats for their "humanitarian" concern for 
Saddam Hussein.  Popular right-of-center Le Parisien carried an 
interview with former Socialist Justice Minister Roland Dumas who 
opined that "although France's stance was the right one, it needed 
to speak louder." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Right-of-center weekly news magazine L'Express termed the 
sentence a "Deadly Verdict," echoing the concern in most media 
commentaries that, as left-wing Liberation claimed, the verdict 
"could exacerbate a civil war."  In right-of-center Le Figaro, 
senior political reporter Renaud Girard argued that "sentencing 
Saddam Hussein to death would not save Iraq," an opinion also made 
in Catholic La Croix which insisted that "sentencing a man to death, 
whatever his crimes, would never establish unity in Iraq."  Popular 
right-of-center Le Parisien warned that "many Sunnis might identify 
with Saddam, forgetting he was a dictator."  In right-of-center Le 
Figaro, Pierre Rousselin editorialized on the "limitations of a 
verdict" and questioned whether the trial might not have "aggravated 
the differences between communities in Iraq" instead of "serving 
justice."  Rousselin speculated that "the verdict could help the 
Republicans" and serve to "legitimize, after the fact, a military 
 
PARIS 00007328  002.2 OF 002 
 
¶2006. 
 
operation based on lies."  In right-of-center Les Echos, a report 
entitled, "Bush Rides Saddam's Death Sentence," claimed that 
"Washington could not have hoped for better timing." 
 
----------------------- 
CHINA'S REACH IN AFRICA 
----------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Left-wing Liberation's extensive coverage of the summit for 
Chinese-African cooperation (Focac) held in Beijing on November 4 
led with a quote from World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz from an 
interview with Les Echos:  "China must not make the same errors 
France and the U.S. made with Africa," by sacrificing good 
governance for economic gain.  The high volume of trade between 
China and Africa, which makes China Africa's third largest trade 
partner, led left-wing Liberation to warn: "Why not the first?  It 
is only a question of time."  Left-wing Liberation observed that, 
like the Americans, "the Chinese were stepping into former colonial 
grounds" and concentrating on "oil- and mineral-producing nations," 
without concern for "human rights issues."  But left-wing Liberation 
editorialized that, "the West's own mistakes in Africa did not work 
in favor of its criticism of China, even if Beijing would in time be 
forced to address issues of 'stability' in the African continent." 
Both left-wing Liberation and right-of-center Le Figaro concluded on 
an optimistic note, writing that "the West's accusation that Beijing 
is closing its eyes to the programmed genocide in Darfur may have 
reached its target.  Hu Jintao appealed to President el-Bechir for 
'a fair solution' in Darfur."  Right-of-center Le Journal du 
Dimanche was less upbeat in its commentary, arguing that "China, 
America's ally, only timidly asked the Sudanese representatives to 
'improve the humanitarian situation' in Darfur." 
STAPLETON