06PARIS7451
UNESCO: MAN AND BIOSPHERE COORDINATING COUNCIL PONDERS
Mon Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  11/28/2006 10:03:18 AM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        PARIS 07451

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: UNESCO
    INFO:   POL ECON AMBU AMB AMBO DCM SCI

DISSEMINATION: UNESCOX
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: CHG: AKOSS
DRAFTED: POL: AEHOUCKE, MAPOI
CLEARED: SCI: NJCOOPER, AMB: LOLIVER

VZCZCFRI736
RR RUEHC
DE RUEHFR #7451/01 3241104
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201104Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3221UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
FOR OES - ANDREW REYNOLDS, ANTOINETTE CONDO, BARRIE RIPIN, CHRISTINE 
DAWSON 
FOR IO - JIM DUFTY 
DEPARTMENT PASS NSF FOR ROSE GOMBAY 
DEPARTMENT PASS OSTP FOR GENE WHITNEY 
DEPARTMENT PASS USGS FOR VERNE SCHNEIDER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO SCI SENV EAID SP
SUBJECT: UNESCO: MAN AND BIOSPHERE COORDINATING COUNCIL PONDERS 
FUTURE OF THE BIOSPHERE RESERVE PROGRAM 
 
¶1. Summary. The 19th session of the MAB Coordinating Council focused 
on the need to define the program's future, particularly in the 
context of the formulation of the new UNESCO Medium-Term Strategy 
for 2008-2013. Issues debated included: the need to devise an 
appropriate approach to identifying the different zones within 
biosphere reserves; the need for enhanced cooperation at national 
and regional levels; the evolution of the relationship between 
development and biosphere reserves; and the use of Biosphere 
Reserves to further scientific research. Egypt proposed a new 
international convention for MAB. The U.S., supported by Costa Rica, 
noted the lack of support for such a convention and instead 
encouraged MAB to return to its original mission of science and 
research.  The Spanish Minister of Environment, Ms. Cristina Narbona 
Ruiz, extended Spain's offer to host the Third World Congress of 
Biosphere Reserves in Madrid. The conference will take place in 
early February 2008.  The Council adopted a five-point action plan 
(para 11).  All summary documents pertaining to the overall session 
and presentations can be found at the MAB website: 
http://www.unesco.org/mab/icc/icc19th.shtml. 
 
¶2. The U.S. was represented at the meeting by Ambassador Louise V. 
Oliver and by USUNESCO science officer.  NGO representatives Tom 
Gilbert (Biosphere Reserve Association) and Cathie Adams 
(Sovereignty International) participated as observers, with the 
former serving as a panelist.  In his panel presentation, Gilbert 
stressed that member states need to develop criteria for their sites 
before any effort by the Secretariat to chart next steps for the 
program.  Subsequent to the MAB ICC meeting, the Director of the MAB 
program, Ishwaran Natarajan informed the Mission that he plans to 
enhance cooperation with the U.S. including via UNESCO's New York 
office, a development on which the Mission will report   separately. 
 (Comment:  Mission suggests that IO/UNESCO contact the New York 
office to learn more about their plans regarding MAB.  End Comment.) 
 End Summary. 
 
¶3. In its opening remarks, the MAB Secretariat emphasized the need 
for MAB to adapt to and take advantage of current UN reform efforts, 
the next UNESCO Medium-Term Strategy and Program and Budget (C4/C5) 
exercises, as well as the ongoing Science Review. Regarding the 
Draft C4/C5, the MAB Secretariat proposed focusing on mission 
rationalization and on activities directly benefiting local and 
national stakeholders. The Secretariat called for better 
coordination between high-level MAB meetings and the meetings of 
UNESCO's Executive Board and General Conference. 
 
¶4. In response to the Secretariat's comments, Egypt proposed that a 
committee of experts examine the possibility of an international 
convention for MAB in order to increase the visibility and the 
efficiency of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, and to have a 
normative instrument that would have to be taken into account by 
policy makers. The U.S. expressed strong reservations on this 
proposal. Upon hearing Ambassador Oliver's objections to such a 
convention, Egypt stated that perhaps the discussion reflected a 
misunderstanding of its goals. Egypt noted that it wished to have an 
agreement on strategy to better link programs and to close the 
disparity between work done at the MAB Secretariat and work done by 
national and local networks. Ambassador Oliver emphasized that 
strategy and conventions are "two very different conversations," 
stressing the need for precise clarity when dealing with such 
proposals. 
 
PROGRESS REPORTS IDENTIFY NEEDS 
 
¶5. During the national and regional MAB committee progress reports, 
upcoming challenges and key issues were identified as: exploring the 
linkages between the MAB program and the Millennium Development 
Goals; improving government support; enhancing cooperation at all 
levels; strengthening the role of MAB networking at the national, 
sub-regional and regional levels; enhancing South-South and 
North-South-South cooperation; increasing the role of Biosphere 
Reserves as tools for coping and adapting to climate and 
socio-economic change; increasing the visibility of the program; 
studying the increasing importance of urban issues; and, concerns 
related to marine and coastal ecosystems and their management. 
 
LOOKING TOWARDS THE FUTURE: THE MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGY 
 
¶6. During the Medium-Term Strategy Debate, Israel and the U.S. 
observer (Tom Gilbert) stressed the importance of the scientific 
role of Biosphere Reserves. Israel also highlighted the importance 
of taxonomy initiatives. Russia noted that at the program's 
inception, MAB had 14 international projects and suggested that some 
old programs be revisited. The Secretariat responded by saying that 
old programs could be revisited as long as they can contribute to 
today's MAB and will not expand MAB beyond its available resources. 
The Secretariat evoked a project on renewable energy as a 
possibility, as such a project would relate directly to land use. 
The United Kingdom suggested that some of the Medium-Term Strategy 
Strategic Program Objectives be tied to climate change, with Israel 
countering that it would be better to tie them to global change so 
as not to limit the objectives. 
 
ROLE FOR BIOSPHERE RESERVES IN CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND AS 
SCIENCE LABS 
 
¶7. Three panels provided an appraisal of future challenges for the 
Biosphere Reserve program, particularly in attaining the 2010 
biodiversity target of the Convention on Biological Diversity and 
the MDG-7 (environmental sustainability). 
 
¶8. Panel one explored the role played by Biosphere Reserves as 
learning laboratories for conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity. The Swedish panelist and U.S. panelist (Tom Gilbert) 
suggested the reformulation of zoning schemas of Biosphere Reserves 
to reflect national and local zoning practices.  In his 
presentation, Gilbert also stressed that member states need to 
develop criteria for their sites before any effort by the 
Secretariat to plot future strategy for the program.  Other 
 
SIPDIS 
panelists stressed that the relationship between conservation and 
development needs to be specified for each of the three zones of the 
Biosphere Reserves: core, buffer, and transitional. The idea of new 
types of protected areas, such as "archipelago reserves" and 
ecological corridors linking dispersed protected areas, was put 
forth by the panel. The Swedish panelist highlighted the need to 
increase coordination with the Ramsar Convention and other 
multilateral environmental agreements. In response to the panel 
presentation, Mexico argued that an examination of whether a 
biosphere is actually conserving biodiversity is necessary. Given 
climate change, some reserves may no longer be fulfilling this 
function; therefore, rehabilitation of these reserves may be 
necessary. Argentina called for a clearer identification, as well as 
reasoning, of what type of development is to be permitted in the 
three different zones. 
 
¶9. Panel two addressed the issue of socio-economic, human and 
institutional development in Biosphere Reserves. Panelists proposed 
rethinking the necessary integration of the three functions 
(conservation, development and logistic) of the Biosphere Reserve 
model. A German panelist suggested that an emphasis be put on the 
elaboration of stronger socio-economic criteria in the designation 
of Biosphere Reserves. Panelists identified the urgent need to 
develop interaction between stakeholders at different levels, as 
well as the necessity of developing cooperation among reserves. In 
response to the panel, Chile called for clearer language on the 
types of development to be permitted in each of the three zones and 
asked that the maintenance of conservation remain the key priority 
for Biosphere Reserves. Egypt argued that social and economic 
criteria should be equal to biological criteria in selecting 
Biosphere Reserves. Austria made a proposition concerning Biosphere 
Reserves created before the adoption of the Seville Strategy (which 
says that a reserve must fulfill three functions: conservation of 
biodiversity, sustainable development, and logistical support). 
These "first-generation" Biosphere Reserves fulfill a uniquely 
research function. Austria, with the subsequent support of the 
United Kingdom and Israel, thus proposed creating a new "research" 
category for these Biosphere Reserves. 
 
¶10. Panel three reaffirmed the role of Biosphere Reserves as 
privileged sites for creating and transmitting knowledge. A panel 
proposal presented by the Swedish Chair suggested that UNESCO take 
the lead role in building a global infrastructure for an 
evidence-based approach to ecosystem management, for which 
multi-stakeholder cooperation should exist along with an effort to 
build upon the achievements of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 
Sweden also proposed the creation of a framework for long-term 
ecological and social monitoring and research to develop 
partnerships between the World Network of Biosphere Reserves and the 
scientific community (the MISTRA Institute).  During the ensuing 
discussion, the gap between scientists and policy professionals was 
addressed, as well as the need for more cooperation between all 
levels and actors. 
 
¶11. At the close of the 19th ICC, a provisional five- point roadmap 
for the future was adopted. The document confirmed as priorities: 
developing more efficient coordination with UNESCO's Executive Board 
and General Conference; considering both conservation and 
development in reviewing the criteria for each of the three zones 
(core, buffer, and transitional) within Biosphere Reserves; 
coordinating science, policy, and practice for Biosphere Reserves as 
learning platforms; strengthening MAB and the Biosphere Reserve 
Regional Networks so that they become the main drivers of MAB and 
Biosphere Reserve agendas; and, identifying policy and political 
initiatives to make Biosphere Reserves centers of learning for 
sustainable development. 
 
TWENTY FIVE NEW SITES APPROVED 
 
¶12. The ICC elected new members to the Bureau with Sweden as Chair 
and Russia, Chile, Vietnam, Ethiopia, and Sudan acting as 
Vice-Chairs. The newly-elected Bureau members approved 25 new 
biosphere reserves, with the admittance of the first-ever 
transcontinental reserve, the Intercontinental Biosphere Reserve of 
the Mediterranean located in the Moroccan and Spanish territories. 
The new sites brought the total number of Biosphere Reserves to 507 
located in 102 countries. Debate on the proposed sites concerned 
zoning as certain candidates contain mostly marine and desert areas 
in which there is a lack of terrestrial criteria typically needed 
for zoning. New challenges therefore arise on how to identify each 
of the three zones (core, buffer, and transitional) in such areas. 
 
¶13. The first Michel Batisse Award for biosphere reserve management 
was given to Ms Birgit Reutz-Hornsteiner, from Austria, for her work 
as the manager of the Biosphere Reserve Grosses Walsertal, Austria. 
KOSS