06QUITO2638
ELECTION UPDATE: CANDIDATES ACTIVE BUT VOTERS NOT
Wed Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #2638/01 3052212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 012212Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5591
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 6128
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 2135
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ NOV 0187
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 1111
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 1370
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 002638 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS ALSO TO USOAS AND USAID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM EC
SUBJECT: ELECTION UPDATE: CANDIDATES ACTIVE BUT VOTERS NOT 
FIRED UP 
 
REF: QUITO 2617 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The second round of campaigning is well 
underway, with leftist candidate Rafael Correa seeking to 
re-position himself, using symbolic meetings with authority 
figures to attract centrist voters.  For his part, 
center-right candidate Alvaro Noboa is sticking with the 
formula that led to his surprising come-from-behind victory 
in the first round--doling out charitable donations and 
populist promises of better days for the poor under a Noboa 
government.  Noboa appears confident of his lead in the 
polls, while Correa is complaining of financial difficulties 
and predicting further (unsubstantiated) fraud.  The E-vote 
scandal continues to play out, resulting in the provisional 
arrest of a former OAS election official.  Comments by OAS 
SecGen Insulza from Washington are being interpreted as 
indicating Rafael Bielsa will return to lead the OAS 
observation mission for the second round of voting on 
November 26.  End Summary. 
 
New Polls Expected Soon 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Fresh poll results are expected to become public 
here soon, but were not yet available at the time of this 
report.  The head of Cedatos, one of the more credible of 
polling organizations, told us preliminary results of a poll 
conducted October 28-29, did not vary greatly from the week 
before (which had Noboa leading Correa by a 16-point margin). 
 
E-Vote Scandal Fallout Continues 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Santiago Murray, the former OAS election official 
who acted as spokesman for the Brazilian firm E-Vote, was 
taken into custody by authorities on October 31, according to 
press reports.  E-Vote was contracted by the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal (TSE) to conduct a preliminary quick 
count, but its software crashed late on election night after 
tabulating only 70% of the presidential vote.  Murray was 
arrested on a warrant issued by the 14th criminal court of 
Pichincha at the request of the Public Ministry (Attorney 
General's Office).  He was later transferred to hospital 
after respiratory failure. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The E-Vote failure also led to calls for 
investigation of the TSE for irregularities in the handling 
of the contract (which was awarded late, without endorsement 
from the Solicitor and Comptroller General's office).  The 
Supreme Court declined to rescind TSE member immunity, so the 
investigation has been blocked.  For its part, the Social 
Christian Party (PSC) on October 30 called TSE president 
Xavier Cazar (and PSC member) before its disciplinary 
committee, to explain his actions in the case.  No decisions 
were announced. 
 
Correa Campaign:  Ambassador, Nebot, Church 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) After meeting with the Ambassador on October 26 
(RefTel), presidential finalist Rafael Correa met with 
influential Guayaquil mayor Jaime Nebot on October 27. 
Correa publicized both meetings, apparently seeking to 
moderate his radical anti-establishment image.  After meeting 
with Nebot, Correa pledged his government's support for 
Nebot's autonomy proposal, pending before Congress.  During a 
separate meeting with mayors from Guayas' Santa Elena 
peninsula, Correa promised his government's support for their 
demands for separation from Guayas province. 
 
¶6.  (U) On October 31, Correa held another high-profile 
meeting, this time with the Catholic Church's Episcopal 
Conference, reportedly to describe his plan of government and 
his own Catholic faith.  After the private meeting, Correa 
told the press that he assured the Church leaders he would 
not "use" his religious faith for political purposes, or 
attempt to buy votes with "alms" unlike his rival. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Correa used the media exposure on his Church 
meeting to accuse Noboa of cowardice for ducking a final 
presidential debate, and acknowledged a $160,000 campaign 
deficit entering the second round.  Electoral authorities 
 
revealed that Correa spent $40,763 between October 27-29; 
Noboa spent $54,177 during the same period.  The official 
spending limit for the second round campaign is $687,000, 
which amounts to one quarter of the overall campaign spending 
limit.  An anti-Noboa email circulating here on October 17 
accused Noboa of having spent $6,275 million so far 
(including pre-campaign spending to boost his image), and 
highlighted the 2002 Human Rights Watch report "Harvest of 
Shame" criticizing Noboa's labor practices on banana 
plantations which supply his firm. 
 
Noboa Campaign Promises 
----------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) For his part, Alvaro Noboa told the press that with 
all due respect to Ambassadors, mayors and the Church, he 
would eschew all such meetings and concentrate his campaign 
efforts only on reaching out to the people.  Visiting cities 
in Los Rios province, he proposed to raise the Human 
Development handout to the poor from its current $15/month to 
$35.  He also pledged to provide credit at low interest 
rates, generate employment and trade, and to provide greater 
resources to provinces and municipalities.  He thanked voters 
for their generosity and pledged to continue to respond in 
the same spirit.  He claimed a Noboa government would deal 
harshly with anyone not willing to pay the official wholesale 
price for bananas (note:  Correa had made the same pledge 
earlier and claims Noboa is not paying his contractors the 
full price). 
 
OAS EOM Stays the Course; Correa Renews Attacks 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Press here reported on October 31 that OAS SecGen 
Insulza had strongly affirmed OAS confidence in the OAS 
Election Observation Mission headed by former Argentine FM 
Rafael Bielsa.  "We are perfectly happy with our mission's 
work in Ecuador," Insulza reportedly told local media outlet 
"Ecuavisa."  Asked for comment, Correa reportedly renewed his 
call for Bielsa's removal for "unpardonable acts of omission 
and commission" during the first round of voting.  On October 
31, Correa again called for the removal of the TSE board and 
the Defense Minister, for alleged fraud. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Although the candidates have been as active as 
ever, most Ecuadorians appear to be taking a breather from 
the campaign.  We expect public interest to grow, especially 
if Correa is able to narrow the gap in the polls.  Noboa's 
apparent hope of coasting to victory by avoiding debate and 
trumpeting his lead may not be a smart strategy.  If voter 
disaffection continues or grows, it could become an important 
factor in this election.  Given a choice between these two 
candidates at opposite sides of the political spectrum, we 
expect many voters to reject both, by nullifying their 
ballots.  That form of abstention could easily exceed 30%; 
with both candidates enjoying a reliable hard-core vote of 
about 25%, the relatively narrow range of swing voters that 
will ultimately decide this election will make this election 
less predictable than the polls might indicate. 
BROWN