06BEIJING14216
JULY 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DPRK MISSILE LAUNCHES,
Thu Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0417
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #4216/01 1871103
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061103Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1076
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 4124
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1977
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1018UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 014216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM CH KN IS
SUBJECT: JULY 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DPRK MISSILE LAUNCHES, 
ISRAEL, UNSYG SELECTION 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the July 6 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
-- On DPRK, China expresses grave concern over "what 
happened" and remains in close consultation with all 
relevant parties.  China hopes that all relevant 
parties will remain calm and exercise restraint, 
proceed toward the common goal of peace and stability 
in Northeast Asia and not take any actions that will 
cause further tension. 
 
-- China had nothing to do with the DPRK missile 
launches.  China refuses to state whether it can 
independently verify the DPRK launched missiles on 
July 4/5. 
 
-- China has no plans to cut off aid to the DPRK "so 
far." China is an actively participating in United 
Nations Security Council consultations, which China 
hopes will produce "helpful" results and not further 
escalate tensions. 
 
-- China hopes for an early resumption of the Six- 
Party Talks. 
 
-- China calls on Israel to end its blockade of Gaza 
and calls on the Palestinians to release their 
hostage. 
 
-- China will support a UNSYG candidate from Asia. 
 
DPRK Missile Launches 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. During the regular July 6 press briefing, Foreign 
Ministry spokesperson Jiang Yu responded to a barrage 
of questions on the DPRK's July 4/5 missile launches 
by doggedly sticking to her guidance: China expresses 
grave concern and remains in close consultation with 
all relevant parties.  China hopes that all relevant 
parties will remain calm and exercise restraint, 
proceed toward the common goal of peace and stability 
in Northeast Asia and not take any actions that will 
cause further tension.  China will continue to work 
with relevant parties in its unremitting efforts to 
maintain peace and stability in the region.  Through 
experience, China believes dialogue and consultation 
is the proper way to address problems.  China is 
playing a mediation role and promotes the Six-Party 
Talks.  The Six-Party Talks have been stalled for six 
months and China is in consultation with the relevant 
parties to break the impasse and resume negotiations. 
The basic principle and departure point for China is 
that peace and stability for the Korean peninsula 
should be achieved through dialogue and consultation, 
which serves the common interest of all parties 
concerned.  In this regard, China sides with the 
international community.  China is willing to develop 
friendly relations with all countries.  China and the 
DPRK are friendly neighbors and China has developed 
good relations with all neighboring countries. 
 
¶3. A sampling of the pointed questions from 
journalists that prompted Jiang to repeatedly rehash 
her guidance: How do the missile launches reflect on 
Sino-DPRK relations?  Is China doing enough to 
encourage DPRK to refrain from provocative acts?  Does 
China not agree the DPRK missile launches were 
provocations?  Why does China not condemn the missile 
launches?  Will China support sanctions?  Did the DPRK 
cause China to lose face, given that Premier Wen 
Jiabao and others last week called for the DPRK not to 
launch missiles?  How can China project power if it 
cannot take care of its own backyard?  Has there been 
any damage to Sino-DPRK relations?  Will China take 
any tough actions?  What of A/S Hill's statement that 
China needs to be firm?  Are tensions escalating in 
the region?  What is China's role with the DPRK?  Does 
China have a special relationship with the DPRK? 
Would China accept Japan increasing its missile 
defense capabilities?  Is China's role still relevant 
for the DPRK issue? 
 
¶4. Answering UPI's questions, Jiang refused to confirm 
that China has independently verified that DPRK 
launched any missiles.  She refused to be drawn out on 
what, exactly, China is "gravely concerned" about, 
other than to emphasize China is gravely concerned 
 
BEIJING 00014216  002 OF 003 
 
 
over "what happened."  Jiang said the DPRK missile 
launches have no relation whatsoever to China.  Jiang 
repeated this answer when queried by other news 
organizations whether more DPRK missile launches can 
be expected.  When asked, Jiang said she did not know 
when asked how many nuclear weapons the DPRK has. 
 
¶5. Journalists pursued a line of questions designed to 
assess where China places blame for the current 
tensions, asking: Is it China's position that U.S. 
sanctions are responsible for the missile launches? 
Can the MFA confirm that VFM Wu Dawei remarked that 
U.S. sanctions precipitated the DPRK's actions?  Is Wu 
Dawei's position China's position?   Does Washington 
need to do more to ease tensions?  Which country is 
responsible for the current tensions?  Which countries 
would China like to see remain calm?  What if the 
United States or others used force to pre-empt further 
missile launches?  In response, Jiang said all 
countries are responsible for making efforts for peace 
and stability.  All parties should keep calm and not 
escalate tensions.  Asked whether the DPRK has a right 
to launch missile tests, Jiang said, without 
elaboration, that China made its position clear 
publicly on July 5. 
 
¶6. Asked whether the Six-Party Talks are dead, Jiang 
said China is making active efforts to promote the 
Six-Party Talks.  Everyone knows the reason the Six- 
Party Talks have been suspended for six months.  China 
hopes for an early resumption of the talks.  Through 
dialogue and consultation the parties should strive 
for new progress.  Asked China's position on the 
utility of bilateral talks between the DPRK and the 
United States, Jiang said the Six-Party Talks are an 
effective way to resolve tensions through dialogue and 
China makes unremitting efforts to support that 
process.  As a multilateral forum, the Six-Party Talks 
provide opportunities for bilateral contact.  The Six- 
Party Talks' September 2005 joint statement represents 
an achievement for the most recent stage of the Six- 
Party Talks and all parties should adhere to the 
objectives expressed therein and make progress through 
dialogue. 
 
¶7. Asked whether China consulted with the DPRK 
subsequent to the missile launches, and specifically 
whether someone from the MFA met with the DPRK 
Ambassador to China, Jiang said China is in close 
consultation with all parties concerned.  Asked 
whether the United States asked China to convey a 
message to the DPRK, Jiang said FM Li Zhaoxing 
exchanged views with Secretary Rice on July 5 and they 
agreed to stay in contact.  A/S Hill will arrive in 
Beijing July 7 to strengthen bilateral consultations 
on relevant issues for peace and stability.  FM Li 
also spoke with the Japanese, South Korean and 
Australian foreign ministers, Jiang noted. 
 
¶8. Asked to provide insight into Vice Premier Hui 
Liangyu's planned trip to DPRK, Jiang said the purpose 
of the July 10-15 trip is to celebrate the forty-fifth 
anniversary of the Sino-DPRK friendship and 
cooperation agreement.  There are no plans to alter 
the agreement, signed in 1961.  The DPRK will send a 
concurrent delegation to China led by the Vice Premier 
of the Supreme People's Presidium, July 11-15.  There 
are no changes to previously announced arrangements. 
When asked, Jiang said she had no information as to 
whether China is strengthening security along the DPRK 
border. 
 
¶9. Asked to comment on possible United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) sanctions or other actions, 
Jiang said China takes a responsible attitude and has 
joined UNSC consultations.  The UNSC should craft a 
helpful response that will ease tensions and maintain 
peace and stability.  China is consulting with other 
UNSC members on the form and content of the UNSC 
response. 
 
¶10. Asked if China will consider cutting off aid to 
the DPRK, Jiang said China has no plans "so far" to 
cut off aid to the DPRK.  China and the United States 
have been staying in close contact on the Six-Party 
Talks.  China is willing to make joint efforts with 
the United States for the early resumption of the Six- 
Party Talks.  Asked China's position on regime change 
 
BEIJING 00014216  003 OF 003 
 
 
in the DPRK, Jiang responded China supports the 
principle of peaceful coexistence and non-interference 
in internal affairs. 
 
PRC Mum On Taiwan 
----------------- 
 
¶11. Asked about the regional implications of the DPRK 
missile launches, and specifically the signal it might 
send to Taiwan or other countries about missile tests, 
Jiang said she was not in a position to answer 
questions on cross-strait relations. 
 
Israel-Palestine Conflict 
------------------------- 
 
¶12. Asked by the Turkish press for China's position on 
the situation in Gaza, Jiang said China has grave 
concern and uneasiness over recent developments. 
China calls on Israel to break its blockade at an 
early date, stop military activities immediately and 
act to alleviate the situation.  The Palestinians 
should cooperate and release their hostage.  China 
hopes the international community can work together to 
push both sides back to the negotiating table. 
 
China Wants UNSYG From Asia 
--------------------------- 
 
¶13. The China Daily asked whether the UNSC will 
conduct a straw poll for UN Secretary General 
candidates in July.  In response, Jiang said straw 
polls are part of the informal process within the UNSC 
to assess reactions to various candidates.  China will 
support a candidate from Asia.  Asia will produce a 
candidate with the appropriate capabilities and 
credentials. 
 
Sino-Indian Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶14. Asked about Sino-Indian relations, Jiang said 
border trade opened in Nathula pursuant to China and 
India's 2003 agreement will contribute to the further 
development of bilateral economic and trade relations. 
 
PRC/Japan: East China Sea 
------------------------- 
 
¶15. In response to a question on the status of the 
East China Sea dispute, Jiang said the sixth round of 
talks will be held July 8 and 9.  The talks will help 
stabilize the situation in the East China Sea, serve 
the two sides common interests and gradually resolve 
the dispute. 
RANDT