06BEIJING10895
JUNE 1 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN NUCLEAR  ISSUE,
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4351
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0895/01 1521034
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011034Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7277
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN IMMEDIATE 1344
RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK IMMEDIATE 1228
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS IMMEDIATE 1801
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 1945
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 3776
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0638
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0940
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 1124UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 010895 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO OPS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PARM ECON CH JP KN
SUBJECT: JUNE 1 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN NUCLEAR  ISSUE, 
HAMAS FM VISIT, U.S.-CHINA ECONOMIC  COOPERATION, DPRK FM'S 
VISIT, CHINA-JAPAN DIALOGUE,  DALAI LAMA, INTERNET, JUNE 
4TH, LAI CHANGXING 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the June 1 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
-- China welcomes U.S. gestures and willingness to 
resolve the Iran nuclear issue through dialogue, while 
not supporting the "arbitrary" use of sanctions in 
handling international affairs. 
 
-- Addressing the China-Arab Cooperation Forum, 
Palestinian FM Al-Zahhar stated that the Palestinians 
will earnestly study the Arab Peace Initiative, and 
China welcomes his remarks. 
 
-- Beijing is prepared to promote economic cooperation 
with Washington. 
 
-- During his visit to Beijing, FM Paek raised 
Pyongyang's concerns regarding the Six-Party Talks. 
 
-- The resumption of the China-Japan Security Dialogue 
will help improve bilateral ties and address both 
countries' security concerns. 
 
-- China opposes any country's granting the Dalai Lama 
a platform to engage in separatist activities. 
 
-- The channel for Chinese people to obtain 
information from the Internet is "unimpeded." 
 
-- Asked to comment on the upcoming anniversary of the 
June Fourth Tiananmen Square crackdown, the MFA 
spokesperson remarked that a "conclusion" has been 
reached on the "political incidents." 
 
-- China and Canada remain in contact on the matter of 
fugitive Lai Changxing's repatriation. 
 
-- Kyrgyz President Bakiyev will visit China June 9- 
¶10.  End Summary. 
 
China Welcomes U.S. Gestures on Iran 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  During the regular June 1 MFA press briefing, 
foreign correspondents asked for China's comment on 
Iran's reaction to the U.S. proposal regarding direct 
dialogue with Iran, as well as Secretary Rice and 
Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing's May 31 conversation, 
reported briefly by Xinhua.  Remarking that Tehran's 
reaction is its "own decision," MFA Spokesperson Liu 
Jianchao expressed support for any efforts to achieve 
a political resolution to the Iran nuclear issue. 
China welcomes U.S. gestures and willingness to 
resolve the issue through dialogue.  Direct dialogue 
and building mutual confidence will help create 
conditions for a proper resolution. 
 
¶3.  During Secretary Rice's conversation with FM Li, 
the Secretary expounded on the U.S. position on Iran 
and FM Li reiterated the need to safeguard the 
authority of the international nonproliferation 
regime, according to Liu.  China is prepared to 
maintain close contact with the United States and 
other nations, hoping that through joint efforts the 
parties will reach a "package solution" that is 
acceptable to all countries concerned.  Asked about 
the Iranian FM's reported assertions that Iran will 
not cease its enrichment activities, Liu remarked that 
Washington is in a better position to respond to these 
comments. 
 
¶4.  Questioned about China's stated opposition to 
sanctions and whether it is linked to China-Iran oil 
deals, Liu noted that Beijing does not support the 
 
BEIJING 00010895  002 OF 004 
 
 
"arbitrary" use of sanctions in handling international 
affairs.  A political resolution serves the interests 
of all parties, which, including the United States, 
have all expressed support for a diplomatic solution. 
Liu stressed that maintaining the international 
nonproliferation regime serves the interests of the 
whole world.  While Beijing and Tehran are engaged in 
energy cooperation, China is not pursuing its 
exclusive interests with regard to a resolution to the 
nuclear issue.  China advocates a diplomatic 
resolution to many issues, such as the DPRK nuclear 
issue, and upholds a consistent policy of not 
resorting to sanctions in handling international 
affairs, Liu highlighted.  Perceiving China's stance 
as an attempt to protect its own interests is not 
helpful, he remarked. 
 
China-Arab Cooperation Forum, Palestinian FM Visit 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  Responding to several reporters' questions 
regarding Palestinian Foreign Minister Mahmoud Al- 
Zahhar's participation in the May 31-June 1 Second 
Ministerial Meeting of the China-Arab Cooperation 
Forum in Beijing, Liu noted that FM Al-Zahhar 
addressed the Forum as the head of the Palestinian 
delegation.  Liu confirmed that FM Li will meet Al- 
Zahhar on the afternoon of June 1. 
 
¶6.  Responding to the Xinhua correspondent's question, 
Liu stated that Chinese and Arab delegates agreed that 
relevant UN Resolutions and the principle of Land-for- 
Peace should form the basis of a "just and reasonable" 
resolution to the Middle East conflict.  FM Al-Zahhar 
stated that the Palestinians will earnestly study the 
Arab Peace Initiative.  China welcomes FM Al-Zahhar's 
remarks and views them as a positive signal.  Beijing 
supports any plan, including the Arab Peace 
Initiative, which supports a political resolution. 
China hopes the international community will continue 
to make concerted efforts to encourage the 
Palestinians to proceed from the fundamental interest 
of Middle East peace and adopt a more active approach 
to renouncing violence, accepting existing Israeli- 
Palestinian agreements and resuming talks with Israel. 
The Palestinian Authority is the "legally elected 
government" of the Palestinian people, and this choice 
should be respected, Liu remarked.  China supports the 
Palestinian's right to an independent state.  Beijing 
has never designated Hamas a terrorist organization. 
Chinese economic aid to the Palestinians was not 
raised at the Forum, but taking into consideration 
Palestinians' humanitarian needs, China will continue 
to provide assistance within its own capacity. 
 
¶7.  Asked about the content of the Forum, Liu noted 
that President Hu Jintao addressed the participants 
and that State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan discussed the 
"new partnership."  Participants also signed a Joint 
Communique and designed a future action plan.  In 
addition to political, economic and trade discussions, 
they agreed to cooperate in investment and 
environmental protection as well as expand people-to- 
people exchanges.  Energy cooperation is an important 
component of China-Arab relations, Liu acknowledged. 
 
China-U.S. and China-EU Economic Ties 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Asked by the Dow Jones correspondent whether the 
appointment of a new Treasury Secretary will affect 
U.S.-China economic relations, Liu stated that Beijing 
is prepared to promote economic cooperation with 
Washington.  China will continue to adhere to its 
"consistent principle" in handling the RMB exchange 
rate issue.  Liu noted that EU Trade Commissioner 
Mandelson will visit China June 5-9.  Mandelson will 
 
BEIJING 00010895  003 OF 004 
 
 
meet with Minister of Commerce Bo Xilai and discuss 
IPR protection and the Doha Development Agenda. 
 
DPRK FM's Visit 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  DPRK Foreign Minister Paek Nam Sun met with 
Premier Wen Jiabao and FM Li during the first part of 
his May 30-June 6 visit to China.  FM Paek discussed 
Pyongyang's concerns regarding the Six-Party Talks, 
Liu noted, highlighting that the goal is to achieve a 
nuclear-free Korean Peninsula.  China hopes the 
relevant parties will take a flexible attitude and 
make efforts to resume the Talks.  FM Paek will travel 
to Guangzhou on the afternoon of June 1, Liu noted. 
Asked about a Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) report 
that North Korea has extended an invitation to A/S 
Hill, Liu said he had not seen such reports but stated 
that contact and candid exchanges between Washington 
and Pyongyang is conducive to a resolution of the DPRK 
nuclear issue. 
 
Sino-Japanese Talks 
------------------- 
 
¶10.  The agreement reached by FM Li and Japanese FM 
Aso on the sidelines of the Asia Cooperation Dialogue 
(ACD) to resume the China-Japan Security Dialogue will 
help improve bilateral ties and address both 
countries' security concerns, Liu commented.  China 
hopes the Dialogue will resume at an early date. 
Asked about a possible reinstatement of military-to- 
military exchanges, Liu remarked that Beijing is in 
favor of any actions that help improve Sino-Japanese 
relations.  He predicted that the next round of East 
China Sea talks will occur in the near future and 
expressed the hope that the talks will help narrow 
differences. 
 
Dalai Lama's Trip to Belgium 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Asked to comment on the Dalai Lama's trip to 
Belgium, Liu reiterated Beijing's position that the 
Dalai Lama is a "political exile" engaged in 
activities to "split the motherland."  China opposes 
any country's granting him a platform to engage in 
separatist activities and has made representations to 
the relevant country. 
 
China's Internet "Unimpeded" 
---------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Asked to respond to an International Press 
Institute report on China's media censorship, Liu 
highlighted that China has over 100 million Internet 
users and over 1.3 million online discussion websites. 
The channel for Chinese people to obtain information 
from the Internet is "unimpeded," he maintained, 
arguing that the report's accusations are false. 
Similar to the practices of Western countries, China 
manages the Internet in accordance with the law in 
order to safeguard people's security. 
 
June Fourth Anniversary 
----------------------- 
 
¶13.  Questioned about the upcoming 17th anniversary of 
the June Fourth Tiananmen Square crackdown, Liu 
remarked that a "conclusion" has been reached on the 
"political incidents" that occurred in China at the 
end of the last century. 
 
Li Changxing 
------------ 
 
¶14.  Questioned about the status of fugitive Li 
 
BEIJING 00010895  004 OF 004 
 
 
Changxing, Liu noted that China and Canada remain in 
contact on the matter of Lai's repatriation. 
 
Kyrgyz President to Visit 
------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Liu announced that Kyrgyz President Bakiyev will 
visit China June 9-10. 
RANDT