06BEIJING23814
NOVEMBER 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS,
Thu Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0633
OO RUEHBZ RUEHCN RUEHDU RUEHGH RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA
RUEHRN RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3814/01 3201027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161027Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2147
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 3890
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1118UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 023814 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH JA
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
UNSCR 1718, CHINESE SUBMARINE, PALESTINE, SINO-CANADIAN 
RELATIONS, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS, AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT AND 
PRESIDENT HU TO INDIA AND PAKISTAN 
 
¶1.  Key Points made at the November 16, 2006 Press Briefing 
were: 
 
-- China hopes the Six-Party Talks will resume as soon as 
possible, but has no information on whether State Councilor 
Tang Jianxuan will return to Pyongyang anytime soon. 
 
-- UNSCR 1718 does not specify what constitutes "luxury 
goods" and normal trade between China and the DPRK will 
continue. 
 
-- Reports that a Chinese submarine tailed the USS Kitty Hawk 
are "not factual" and U.S.-China mil-to-mil relations are 
enjoying "good momentum." 
 
-- President Hu will hold bilateral talks with Canadian PM 
Stephen Harper on the margins of the APEC Meeting in Hanoi. 
 
--Chinese and Japanese leaders will meet in Hanoi to discuss 
implementing a joint research project on historical issues. 
 
-- President Hu's visit to India will promote Sino-Indian 
cooperation and outline the future of the bilateral 
relationship.  The China-India border dispute in Arunachal 
Pradesh should be resolved fairly and rationally. 
 
-- President Hu's upcoming visit to Pakistan will broaden 
cooperation and deepen the two country's strategic 
partnership. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  China hopes that the Six-Party Talks will resume as soon 
as possible, Spokesperson Jiang Yu said at the November 16 
regularly scheduled MFA Press Briefing.  China believes that 
the six parties should take this opportunity to resume 
dialogue, she said when asked by a reporter whether talks 
would restart in December.  Jiang had no information on 
whether State Councilor Tang Jianxuan would again visit 
Pyongyang. 
 
Proliferation Security Initiative 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  There has been no change to China's position on the 
Proliferation Security Iniative (PSI), Jiang answered when 
questioned by a Bloomberg reporter on whether China would 
join PSI.  China is opposed to the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction and cooperates with the international 
community through diplomatic efforts on this issue, Jiang 
stated. 
 
UNSCR 1718 
---------- 
 
¶4.  UNSCR 1718 does not specify what constitutes luxury 
goods, Jiang answered when asked what products China would 
ban exporting to the DPRK.  Different countries will make the 
decision according to their specific situations, she said. 
 
Chinese Sub Shadows USS Kitty Hawk 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Claiming that a Washington Times article alleging that a 
Chinese submarine tailed the USS Kitty Hawk near Okinawa was 
"not factual," Jiang said that U.S.-China mil-to-mil 
relations were enjoying "good momentum."  The November 12-18 
visit to Beijing by U.S. Pacific Fleet Admiral Gary Roughead 
promotes trust and bilateral military relations, she said. 
Admiral Roughead will meet with PLA Navy Vice Admiral Wu 
Shengli, AFM He Yafei and Commander of the South China Sea 
Fleet Ge Zhenfeng.  During the visit of the USS Juneau to 
China, she added, the United States and China will hold a 
joint search and rescue exercise in the South China Sea on 
November 11. 
 
UNSCR on Palestine 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  China voted for the UN Resolution on Palestine, Jiang 
stated.  China is deeply concerned over Israeli-Palestinian 
tensions and the deteriorating human rights conditions in the 
region.  Beijing calls on Israel to stop military actions 
against Palestine and on both sides to end the conflict. 
Beijing stands ready to promote a peaceful resolution of the 
 
BEIJING 00023814  002 OF 003 
 
 
issue with both parties through dialogue, she said. 
 
China-Canada Relations 
---------------------- 
 
¶7.  China attaches great importance to its bilateral 
relations with Canada, Jiang said when asked to comment on 
reports that Canada's position on human rights in China was 
the cause of Chinese leaders' refusal to meet their Canadian 
counterparts at the APEC Summit in Hanoi.  President Hu will 
meet Canadian PM Stephen Harper in Hanoi, Jiang explained. 
However, Beijing opposes "irresponsible" remarks on its 
internal affairs, she commented.  China is ready to work with 
Canada to increase mutual cooperation and properly resolve 
differences.  The Chinese Constitution entitles Chinese 
citizens to enjoy a full range of human rights, Jiang 
claimed.  China will participate in a human rights dialogue 
with the international community on the basis of equality and 
stands ready to promote cooperation and exchanges with Canada 
in various fields, she noted. 
 
China-Japan Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶8.  China and Japan will meet at APEC to discuss implementing 
a joint project on research of historical issues, Jiang said 
when asked by a Japanese reporter if it was possible for the 
two countries to reach a consensus on history.  The pledge to 
research historical issues was made during Abe's October 
visit to Beijing, Jiang stated.  China is willing to work 
with Japan to promote stable and healthy relations, she 
added.  When asked by a reporter if President Hu and Premier 
Wen Jianbao would visit Japan, Jiang said Japan has extended 
an invitation for Chinese leaders to visit Tokyo, but 
arrangements are still being made. 
 
African Development 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  China appreciates and supports all efforts to promote 
peace and stability in Africa and welcomes all countries to 
cooperate with and provide assistance to African countries, 
Jiang said when asked if China supported EU involvement in 
African development.  China pursues and independent foreign 
policy and does not interfere with the internal affairs of 
other countries, nor promotes its ideology and values in 
Africa, she said.  The development of Africa depends on the 
efforts of African countries.  The international community 
should pay more attention to the region, she added. 
 
Darfur 
------ 
 
¶10.  China supports sending a UN peacekeeping mission in 
Darfur as long as the Sudanese Government supports the 
mission, Jiang stated.  China believes the UN, the African 
Union and the Arab League have recently made progress on this 
issue, she noted. 
 
President Hu's Visit to India 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  President Hu's upcoming visit to India will be the first 
visit of a Chinese president to that country in 10 years, 
according to Jiang.  The visit will promote Sino-Indian 
cooperation and map the future direction of bilateral 
relations, she added.  The development of both countries 
contributes to world peace and stability.  President Hu will 
visit Mumbai, attend an investment summit and sign economic, 
trade and education agreements, she said.  Jiang had no 
information on whether China and India would also sign energy 
agreements, but stated that more information would be 
forthcoming after the November 20-23 visit. 
 
¶12.  China is consistent and clear on its position on the 
China-India border dispute and wants a solution that will be 
fair and rational to both parties, Jiang answered when asked 
if the dispute in the Arunachal Pradesh region would have a 
negative affect on President Hu's upcoming visit to India. 
China believes the visit will be a success, Jiang said. 
 
President Hu to Pakistan 
------------------------ 
 
¶13.  President Hu's visit to Pakistan will broaden 
cooperation and deepen the strategic partnership between 
 
BEIJING 00023814  003 OF 003 
 
 
China and Pakistan, Jiang stated.  President Hu will meet 
President Musharraff and Prime Minister Aziz, deliver a 
speech on China-Pakistan relations, meet with business and 
youth groups and sign economic, trade, education and cultural 
agreements. 
 
¶14.  China and Pakistan have already signed an agreement 
regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, Jiang said 
when asked by a Reuter's reporter if the countries woul sign 
agreements on nuclear power.  Within th framework of this 
agreement, both sides cnduct mutual and beneficial 
cooperation under IAEA supervision, she said.  At present, 
Chinese and Pakistani cooperation is mainly centered on the 
Chashma Nuclear Power Plant-1.  The first stage of 
development at this plant has been completed and the second 
stage is under construction, she added. 
 
Internet Censorship 
------------------ 
 
¶15.  With Over 123 million subscribers and 788,000 websites, 
China is the second largest Internet user in the world, Jiang 
stated when asked to comment on Beijing's recent move to 
unblock the Chinese Wikipedia site.  China, along with all 
other countries, has clear and consistent laws and 
regulations for managing the Internet, she added. 
Randt