07BEIJING4577
JULY 10 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, U.S.
Tue Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7825
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4577/01 1910946
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 100946Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9738
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0126
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6568
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0342
RUEHNM/AMEMBASSY NIAMEY 0064
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON 4578
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1773
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KS KN BM PK NG IZ AF CH
SUBJECT: JULY 10 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, U.S. 
CHARGES OF SPYING, WEAPONS SALES, BURMA, ZHENG XIAOYU 
EXECUTION, PAKISTAN MOSQUE SIEGE, KIDNAPPING IN NIGER, 
CLIMATE CHANGE, MORE 
 
¶1. Key points at the July 10 MFA Press Conference were: 
 
-- China hopes for a Heads of Delegation meeting in 
"mid-July," but setting a date requires the consent of all 
parties. 
 
-- China calls for immediate corrective action in response to 
reports of an FBI advertisement in San Francisco local 
newspapers requesting information about Chinese espionage 
activities. 
 
-- The spokesman denied hearing anything about United States 
defense officials' complaints of Chinese weapons in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- China supports the UN's efforts and hopes to see stability 
in Burma, but believes the situation does not threaten 
regional stability and should be solved internally. 
 
-- The execution of former State Food and Drug Administration 
head Zheng Xiaoyu demonstrates China's firm commitment to 
fighting corruption. 
 
China Hopes for Delegation Heads Meeting in Mid-July 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. At the July 10 regular MFA press briefing, spokesman Qin 
Gang said China hopes for a Heads of Delegation meeting in 
"mid-July," but setting a date requires the consent of all 
parties.  Qin stressed that it is imperative for all sides to 
fulfill commitments as determined in the Joint Document, when 
asked if China expected the Yongbyon reactor to be shut down 
before a Heads of Delegation meeting could take place.  Asked 
for details on A/S Hill's trip to China, Japan and the ROK, 
the spokesman replied that he had no details.  Qin stressed 
that progress must be realized gradually in response to a 
question of what measures would follow the implementation of 
the initial actions. 
 
¶3. One's health condition is a private issue, said Qin when 
asked if FM Yang had made any comments on Kim Jong-il's 
health after Yang's visit to the DPRK last week. 
 
Espionage Accusations Groundless, Harms Relationship 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. China urges officials to take immediate corrective action 
and refrain from undermining bilateral relations and 
friendship, said Qin responding to reports of an FBI 
advertisement in San Francisco local newspapers requesting 
information about Chinese espionage activities.  China voices 
its indignation and resolute opposition to these groundless 
accusations, Cold War mentality and spreading of the China 
Threat, he added.  China's national security authorities act 
in accordance with law and would never undermine the 
sovereignty, territorial integrity or security of another 
country, Qin stated. 
 
Arms Exports Normal and Minimal 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Qin had not heard anything about United States defense 
officials' calls mentioned by a reporter for China to better 
police its arms exports or the discovery of Chinese weapons 
in Iraq and Afghanistan, but said the majority of weapons in 
the region could not have come from China.  China's serious 
and cautious normal trade in arms is in accordance with 
international obligations and laws and follows China's three 
principles on arms sales, Qin added. 
 
UNSG Burma Advisor Gambari Visit to China 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The UN Secretary General's Special Advisor on Burma 
Gambari visited China July 8-10 at the invitation of the 
Chinese Government and met with EVFM Dai Bingguo and AFM Cui 
Tiankai to discuss issues relating to the country and UN 
mediation efforts.  China supports the UN's efforts and hopes 
to see stability in Burma, but believes the situation does 
not threaten regional stability and should be solved 
internally. 
 
 
BEIJING 00004577  002 OF 002 
 
 
Execution of Former Food and Drug Administration Head 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7. The matter of the Former State Food and Drug 
Administration chief Zheng Xiaoyu's execution is outside of 
the MFA spokesman's realm of responsibility, said Qin when 
asked to confirm the execution.  Qin noted though that the 
case demonstrates China's firm commitment to fighting 
corruption. 
 
Pakistan Mosque Siege, Killing of Chinese Citizens 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8. The MFA has taken note of developments, believes the 
Pakistani Government is capable of handling the issue 
properly and hopes for stability in Pakistan, said Qin when 
asked for comment on Government forces' raid on in the Lal 
Masjid Mosque in Islamabad.  On the issue of three Chinese 
citizens murdered in Pakistan's Northwest Territories, Qin 
stated that China attaches great importance to the issue and 
made immediate representation to the Pakistani Government. 
He reminded Chinese citizens abroad to be aware of such 
dangers and take necessary precautions. 
 
Chinese Citizen Kidnapped in Niger 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Chinese relevant authorities are doing their best to save 
a Chinese citizen taken hostage in Niger, who is currently 
safe, said Qin when asked about the incident.  Responding to 
the reporter's suggestion that the Niger Rebels for Justice 
orchestrated the kidnapping because of the Chinese company 
for which the Chinese citizen works is helping fund weapons 
sales that harm civilians in Niger, the spokesman remarked 
that China-Niger economic cooperation is based on equality 
and is beneficial to both sides and reaffirmed China's 
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of 
other nations. 
 
China an Equal Player in Fighting Climate Change 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10. The cornerstone for international action on climate 
change is the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and China's responsibilities as a developing 
country are based on development level and country situation, 
said Qin in clarifying for reporters the application of tis 
principle to China.  Developed countries should take the lead 
with assistance and technology transfer to enable developing 
countries meet their goals.  China is open and positive 
toward cooperating with the international community.  Asked 
why China led efforts to keep climate change out of the 
discussion at the recent G8 meeting, Qin responded that China 
is ready to work with the developing countries as an equal 
participant and to have a dialogue with the G8 countries on 
an equal footing to deal with issues of climate change and 
sustainable development. 
 
Chinese Exports, Space Development 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶11. China attaches great important to the safety and quality 
of its exports, will take joint efforts to solve recent 
problems and hopes the international community can 
objectively and calmly treat this issue, Qin replied when 
asked about recent controversy in this area.  Asked about a 
Canadian defense paper which mentioned China's developing 
capabilities in space, Qin said MFA officials had already 
commented on the issue and he had nothing more to add. 
RANDT