07BEIJING376
JANUARY 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: EAST ASIA SUMMIT,
Tue Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8587
OO RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0376/01 0161149
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161149Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3885
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6504
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON 0380
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 3921UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ASEAN PTER KN CH
SUBJECT: JANUARY 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: EAST ASIA SUMMIT, 
BILATS WITH JAPAN AND INDIA, SUDAN, IRAN OIL DEAL, DPRK 
TALKS, HUMAN RIGHTS, CANADA, NEPAL, PORTUGUESE PM VISIT 
 
¶1. Key points made at the January 16 MFA press conference: 
 
-- China supports the East Asia Summit (EAS), believes 
ASEAN-Plus-Three is the main venue for regional cooperation 
and discussed the Korean Peninsula during a PRC-Japan-ROK 
trilateral meeting in Cebu, Philippines. 
 
-- Premier Wen discussed UN issues with Japanese PM Abe on 
the margins of the EAS and is planning to visit Japan in 
spring. 
 
-- Premier Wen's bilateral meeting with Indian PM Singh at 
the EAS was productive.  VFM Dai Bingguo will attend border 
talks in India January 17-18. 
 
-- The visit by Special Envoy Natsios was conducive to 
cooperation between China and the United States on Sudan. 
 
-- China has normal trade relations with Iran and its recent 
energy deal is part of those relations. 
 
-- China welcomes a visit by EAP A/S Hill to Beijing but had 
no specifics. 
 
-- China-Canada relations are important but must adhere to 
China's non-interference policy. 
 
-- China is pleased to see progress in Nepal's political 
situation. 
 
-- China welcomes Portuguese PM Socrates' upcoming visit to 
Beijing. 
 
-- Liu had no information on executions in Iraq, the recent 
terrorist raid in Xinjiang or the reported death of 
revolutionary leader Bo Yibo. 
 
East Asia Summit: Wen's Proposal and DPRK 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Premier Wen's Three-Point Proposal was well-received at 
the East Asia Summit (EAS) in Cebu was well-received, Liu 
said.  Wen's proposal emphasized development, prosperity and 
mutual benefit.  It was well-received by the attending 
countries.  The DPRK nuclear issue was discussed in 
trilateral meetings between China, the Republic of Korea and 
Japan.  Liu stressed that cooperation between these countries 
is very important to greater regional stability and 
cooperation.  China believes the Six-Party Talks are the best 
way to resolve issues on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
¶3. In response to questions regarding the East Asian Summit, 
Liu said China holds a supportive attitude towards the 
organization and the cooperation it fosters in various field, 
but sees ASEAN-Plus-Three as the main cooperation mechanism 
in the region. 
 
Japan Relations Critical 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. A reporter asked Liu to elaborate on PM Wen's comments 
that China-Japan relations are at a critical stage.  Liu said 
both sides should take a long-term perspective, properly 
handle historical issues, abide by the Three Political 
Documents and uphold the One-China Policy.  China is ready to 
promote better relations with Japan through mutual 
cooperation.  Liu mentioned that Wen is planning a trip to 
Japan in the spring, but no dates have been set. 
 
Wen, Abe Discuss UN Issues 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5. In a bilateral meeting, Wen and Japanese PM Abe discussed 
UN reform.  China supports proper and necessary UN reform, 
especially when it empowers smaller countries such as the 
developing nations in Africa.  Commenting on reports that Abe 
called for Japan and NATO to strengthen relations, Liu said 
that such developments are good for the stability of the 
region. 
 
China-India Talks, Dialogue With Pakistan Welcomed 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. The bilateral meeting between Chinese PM Wen and Indian PM 
Singh in Cebu was productive and increased mutual trust, 
bilateral cooperation and harmonious development.  PRC 
Special envoy Dai Bingguo will attend the 9th round of border 
 
BEIJING 00000376  002 OF 003 
 
 
talks in New Delhi on January 17-18 to explore solutions to 
the issues. Commenting on reports that Pakistan and India 
have agreed on further dialogue, Liu said China, as a 
neighbor of both countries, welcomes progress and hopes the 
countries can handle their differences peacefully through 
negotiation and diplomacy. 
 
Sudan and Hu's Visit to Africa 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. When asked whether China-United States cooperation on the 
Sudan issue will increase in the wake of Special Presidential 
Envoy Natsios' visit to Beijing, Liu said the visit was 
conducive and both countries would work to find a political 
solution to the issue.  Asked to provide details of President 
Hu's upcoming trip to Africa, Liu said the visit is still 
being planned.  Details will be released when they are fixed. 
 Asked whether Hu would visit Sudan, Liu added that China is 
concerned with the situation in Sudan and has made concerted 
diplomatic efforts to solve the issue.  Any solution must 
respect Sudan's sovereignty. 
 
China-Iran Energy Deal 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked to comment on a deal between CNOOC and Iran to 
develop natural gas fields in Iran, Liu responded that China 
has normal trade relations with Iran, an OPEC member state. 
This deal is conducive to China and Iran as they are energy 
consumers and producers.  The reporter noted that the deal is 
opposed by U.S. Congressman Tom Lantos. 
 
DPRK Talks in Beijing? 
---------------------- 
 
¶9. When asked about a potential visit by EAP A/S Hill or 
possible talks in Beijing between the United States and the 
DPRK over financial sanctions, Liu replied that China 
welcomes Hill.  Liu had no specifics about such a visit or 
possible financial talks.  He debunked a media report that 
the DPRK approached Beijing to buy the new Chinese fighter 
bomber. 
 
Critical Human Rights Report 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10. Following up Liu's response at a previous press 
conference criticizing a Human Rights Watch (HRW) report as 
biased and politically motivated, a reporter from an America 
news agency asked Liu what ulterior motives HRW might have 
and why China has not invited the organization to view the 
situation first-hand.  Liu responded that China welcomed 
human rights dialogues based on equality and respect with a 
host of countries and multinational organizations, but would 
not establish a dialogue with an NGO.  He said some 
organizations see China with colored glasses and suggested 
the report asked HRW why they harbored such bad will towards 
China. 
 
Canada 
------ 
 
¶11. A reporter asked Liu to comment on Canada's recent 
criticism over China's human rights situation, the extension 
of Canadian citizenship to the Dali Lama and the upcoming 
visits by Canadian Ministers.  China attaches importance to 
bilateral relations with Ottawa, believes relations are 
mutually beneficial and hopes to strengthen them, Liu said. 
He warned that relations must be fair and carried out in 
accordance to the policy of non-interference and safeguarding 
Chinese territorial integrity. 
 
Nepal 
----- 
 
¶12. Liu said China was pleased to see progress in Nepal, 
responding to a request for comment on the establishment of 
an interim parliament and ratification of interim 
constitution in Nepal.  China hopes the peaceful reforms will 
continue, promote stability throughout the region and benefit 
the Nepalese people. 
 
Portuguese PM's Visit 
--------------------- 
 
¶13. Asked why the MFA had not made an official announcement 
of Portuguese Prime Minister Socrates' impending visit to 
 
BEIJING 00000376  003 OF 003 
 
 
Beijing January 30 to February 4, Liu said no dates had been 
set.  China welcomes PM Socrates to Beijing.  Portugal is an 
important partner to China, especially as it takes the EU 
rotating presidency in the second half of 2007.  China hopes 
to discuss increasing China-EU cooperation during the visit. 
 
Iraqi Executions 
----------------- 
 
¶14. When asked to comment on the recent executions of other 
officials in Iraq, Liu said only that China hopes for peace 
and stability, Iraqi self rule and prosperity for the Iraqi 
people. 
 
Xinjiang Terrorist Raid 
----------------------- 
 
¶15. Asked to provide an update on the terrorist raid in 
Xinjiang earlier this month, Liu said some suspects have been 
arrested, others are still at large and their whereabouts are 
unknown.  Liu referred specific questions to the Public 
Security Bureau. 
 
Revolutionary Leader Bo Yibo's Death 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶16. Liu had no comment about the reported death of former 
Politburo member and revolutionary leader Bo Yibo, the father 
of current Commerce Minister Bo Xilai. 
RANDT