07BEIJING2076
MARCH 28 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: SPOKESPERSON  SLAMS
Wed Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7696
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2076/01 0871250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281250Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6255
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002076 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: MARCH 28 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: SPOKESPERSON  SLAMS 
SECOND REPUBLIC CONSTITUTION, CHEN'S STATEMENT  ON 
MAINLAND-TAIWAN-US COOPERATION 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 28 Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- In response to a planted question, spokesman Yang 
Yi stated strong opposition to a Second Republic 
Constitution, calling it a plot to "freeze the 
Constitution" and push through "one country on each 
side" separation. 
 
-- Chen Shui-bian's recent call for Taiwan-Mainland- 
United States cooperation to safeguard peace is a ploy 
to hide Chen's separatist activities. 
 
-- Yang would not confirm a visit by (LY speaker) Wang 
Jin-pyng to the Mainland. 
 
-- The Mainland's policy toward performers from Taiwan 
has not changed. 
 
-- The Mainland hopes economic issues such as sand 
exports, tourism and other issues can be resolved 
through dialogue.  End Summary. 
 
Second Republic Constitution 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesman Yang Yi 
voiced strong opposition to National Taiwan University 
scholar Chen Ming-tong's draft Second Republic 
Constitution in response to a planted question from a 
Xinhua reporter.  Yang slammed the movement as part of 
Chen Sui-bian's "de jure Taiwan independence" plot 
seeking to "trick" the Taiwan people and the 
international community through efforts to "freeze the 
Constitution" and push through "one country on each 
side" separation.  The Mainland is seriously concerned 
about these developments and will never allow Taiwan 
independence forces to split Taiwan from China. 
 
¶3.  Asked by a CCTV reporter about Chen Shui-bian's 
recent statement that Taiwan, the Mainland and the 
United States should cooperate to ensure peace and 
prosperity in the Asia-Pacific, Yang replied that such 
talk is a ploy to hide Chen's separatist activities, 
which are the greatest threat to peace.  Only curbing 
Taiwan independence activities can truly safeguard the 
peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific region. 
 
¶4.  Responding to a Mainland reporter's question about 
changing the name of the "national language," Yang 
said both sides should be on high alert. 
 
Visit by KMT Official 
--------------------- 
 
¶5.  Asked about media reports that (LY Speaker) Wang 
Jin-pyng plans to travel to the Mainland in April as a 
"public opinion leader," Yang said China welcomes all 
people who agree with the "1992 consensus" and oppose 
Taiwan independence to visit the Mainland in the 
appropriate capacity and at the appropriate time. 
China supports exchanges of views on cross-Strait 
issues with these visitors.  Regarding the upcoming 
KMT Forum, Yang said both parties are still consulting 
and details will be released soon.  The Economic and 
Cultural Forum inaugurated last year is an important 
outcome of talks held between party leaders and plays 
an important role in promoting trade cooperation, 
peace and the stable development of cross-Strait 
relations, Yang said. 
 
Trade Concerns 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  In response to a claim that the State 
Administration of Radio, Film and Television (SARFT) 
introduced new regulations restricting Taiwan 
performers' career development on the Mainland, Yang 
said performers from outside the Mainland, including 
Taiwan, have always needed authorization from SARFT to 
join Mainland programs.  Yang said he was unaware of 
any change in this policy. 
 
¶7.  Asked by a Taiwan reporter for comment on the 
"severe effect" on Taiwan's construction industry of 
the Mainland's ban on sand exports to Taiwan, Yang 
replied that the Mainland hopes that the Taiwan 
authorities and non-governmental trade organizations 
 
BEIJING 00002076  002 OF 002 
 
 
on both sides of the Strait can adopt flexible, 
practical and effective methods to reach a consensus 
on the issue.  On Taiwan's request for WTO 
consultations on agriculture, Yang played up increased 
sales of Taiwan agricultural products to the Mainland 
and said establishment of a cross-Strait economic 
mechanism would expand and deepen exchanges and 
cooperation. 
 
¶8.  Regarding a proposal to issue identity documents 
that facilitate Taiwan residents' business, schooling 
and residence in the Mainland, Yang said the relevant 
Mainland agency is expected to adjust the validity of 
Taiwan documents to make them valid for a period of 
five years.  Yang stated that China actively promotes 
Mainland tourism to Taiwan and delaying the process of 
expanding tourism equates to not being responsible to 
Taiwan's tourism sector and its people. 
RANDT