07BEIJING2812
APRIL 26 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BDA, DPRK-BURMA,
Thu Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7877
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2812/01 1161117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261117Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7278
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0297
RUEHWN/AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN 0218
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 3963
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4094
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON 4556UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 002812 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MNUC KS KN CA FR BM ET
SUBJECT: APRIL 26 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BDA, DPRK-BURMA, 
ARRESTS IN XINJIANG AND TIBET, SAINT LUCIA-TAIWAN, 
ETHIOPIA, CANADA FM VISIT, JAPAN FORCED LABOR, ABE TO U.S., 
VIRGNIA TECH SHOOTING, VATICAN, OLYMPIC BOYCOTT 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 26 MFA Press Conference made by 
MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao were: 
 
-- Relevant parties are still making contact and 
consultations in an effort to solve the BDA issue. 
 
-- The MFA has taken note of reports of the arrests of United 
States citizens in Tibet where the case is under 
investigation, and the MFA is "following relevant reports and 
checking with relevant authorities" regarding reported 
arrests of American citizens in Xinjiang. 
 
-- The MFA denounced attempts by the Taiwan authorities to 
split the motherland and called on St. Lucia to abide by the 
One China Principle. 
 
-- General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection 
and Quarantine issued an invitation to the FDA on April 23 to 
investigate pet food contamination. 
 
-- China has sent a joint working group of members from the 
Ministry of Commerce, MFA and Sinopec to Ethiopia to assess 
and strengthen security efforts. 
 
BDA Issue, DPRK-Burma Resume Relations 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  At the April 26 regular press briefing, MFA Spokesman Liu 
Jianchao reiterated previous statements that the BDA funds 
transfer issue has not been completely resolved.  Liu 
remarked that the relevant parties are still making contact 
and consultations and will continue to make efforts to solve 
the issue.  Asked for comment on the reestablishing of 
diplomatic relations between the DPRK and Burma, Liu said the 
MFA welcomes the improvement in their bilateral relationship. 
 
AmCit Arrests in Tibet, Xinjiang 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Responding to a question on reports that four United 
States citizens have been detained by the Public Security 
Bureau in Tibet for revealing a "free Tibet" banner at the 
Mt. Everest base camp, the spokesman said the MFA has taken 
note of the reports and the case is currently under 
investigation.  Liu stated that foreign citizens should 
respect Chinese law and not engage in activities sensitive to 
national unity and security.  When asked about reports that 
American citizens were detained this week in Aksu, Xinjiang 
and whether the United States Embassy had been granted 
consular access to the detainees, Liu replied that the MFA is 
following relevant reports and checking with relevant 
authorities. 
 
¶4.  Asked for comment on a United States Congressional report 
just released describing deteriorating lives of people in 
Tibet and Xinjiang, the spokesman expressed his confusion 
regarding the "accusations," maintaining that China has made 
arduous efforts in past years to promote economic development 
and improve people's lives in the two Autonomous Regions.  He 
added that the "organization mentioned" by the reporter 
should research the topic objectively and fairly. 
 
Saint Lucia Should Abide by One China Principle 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  Responding to reports that the Caribbean nation of St. 
Lucia will resume official diplomatic ties with Taiwan, Liu 
denounced the attempts by the Taiwan authorities to split the 
motherland and called on St. Lucia to abide by the PRC and 
Saint Lucia's joint communique which "clearly" demands 
adherence to the One China Principle. 
 
Food Contamination: FDA Invited to China 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  FDA officials are welcome to visit China for the purpose 
of carrying out consultations and inspections on the issue of 
melamine-contamination of pet foods made in China.  According 
to Liu, the General Administration of Quality Supervision, 
Inspection and Quarantine issued an invitation to the FDA on 
April 23. 
 
Ethiopia Attack and Kidnapping 
------------------------------ 
 
BEIJING 00002812  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶7.  China has sent a joint working group of members from the 
Ministry of Commerce, MFA and Sinopec to Ethiopia after the 
recent attack and kidnapping of Sinopec workers to assess and 
strengthen security efforts with local authorities.  Although 
Liu noted it is the host country's responsibility to provide 
security for such development projects, he said China will 
seek to reinforce work and cooperation in this regard not 
only in Ethiopia. 
 
Canada FM to Visit China 
------------------------ 
 
¶8.  The MFA welcomes the upcoming visit of Canadian FM MacKay 
and hopes it will play a positive role in the bilateral 
relationship.  He added that FM MacKay would meet with the 
foreign minister and other leaders.  When asked about the 
case of recently convicted Uighur-Canadian Huseyin Celil in 
Urumqi on terrorism charges and the Canadian Embassy's lack 
of consular access to Celil, Liu said he could not confirm 
the issue would be discussed.  However, Liu stressed that the 
issue was a Chinese internal affair and Canada should not 
interfere. 
 
Forced Labor Lawsuit in Japan, Abe to Visit U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶9.  Asked about a forced labor lawsuit filed in Japan by 
Chinese citizens and whether Chinese citizens could seek 
wartime reparations despite the reporter's assertion that 
China had agreed not to do so, the spokesman called the issue 
a "serious political question" concerning "one of the most 
serious crimes" committed by Japan during World War II. 
Neither Japan nor China can make unilateral explanations of 
items or principles included in the Joint Statement on which 
the two sides' post-war relations are based, said Liu.  He 
expressed hope that the issue will be properly handled in 
accordance with this principle. 
 
¶10.  Asked about the possibility of China being a topic of 
discussion during Abe's upcoming visit to the United States, 
Liu said the issue is between the United States and Japan. 
However, Liu added that if China is discussed he hopes the 
two sides will reach "right conclusions."  When asked for 
comment on the possibility of the United States selling F-22 
fighter jets to Japan, Liu replied that the MFA has taken 
note of the relevant reports and hopes that "relevant 
arrangements will have no unhelpful impact on the situation 
in Northeast Asia." 
 
Condolences, Not Criticism, After Shooting 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  Prodded by a UPI reporter on criticism in CCP- and 
Government-sponsored media of the United States gun culture 
and treatment of Asian-Americans following the Virginia Tech 
shooting, Liu held that the views expressed were those of the 
authors not the Chinese Government.  He stressed the Chinese 
people and Government's condemnation of the atrocity and deep 
condolences to the victims and bereaved. 
 
Greenhouse Gases 
---------------- 
 
¶12.  Responding to a reporter's suggestion that China would 
soon become the world's single largest polluter, the 
spokesman stated that developed countries must bear primary 
responsibility for greenhouse gas emissions.  As a developing 
country, China is ready to take specific measures to address 
the problem and has already made positive efforts such as 
emission reduction goals stipulated in the 11th Five-Year 
Plan. 
 
Vatican Cannot Interfere in China's Internal Affairs 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶13.  While China hopes to improve relations with the Vatican, 
the Vatican should not interfere under the name of religion 
in the internal affairs of China, said Liu when asked if the 
Vatican would have a say in choosing the new chairman of 
China's state-sanctioned Catholic Church. 
 
Suggestions of Olympic Boycott 
------------------------------ 
 
BEIJING 00002812  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶14.  Opposition to the success of the 2008 Olympic Games is 
against the will of the people of the world, said Liu when 
asked for comment on reports that French Presidential 
candidate Segolene Royal would "not rule out" a boycott of 
the Games in protest of China's human rights record on issues 
such as Darfur. 
RANDT