07BEIJING7084
NOVEMBER 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PRESS FREEDOM,
Tue Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4551
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #7084/01 3171026
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131026Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3417
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 0337
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0719
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 0158
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 0350
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON 4647
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1646UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 007084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH JA IR BM
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PRESS FREEDOM, 
BURMA, IRAN, EAST CHINA SEA 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 13 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- Reports that China is building a database with information 
on foreign journalists are "completely false."  No such 
database is being constructed. 
 
-- The recent visit of UN Special Envoy Gambari to Burma 
resulted in progress.  China will continue to play a 
supportive, constructive role in the region. 
 
-- Unilateral sanctions on Iran will "do no good."  China has 
urged Iran to respond to the concerns of the international 
community and hopes the situation can be resolved by dialogue 
and consultation. 
 
-- China has an "open attitude" towards constructive plans 
and proposals regarding the East China Sea, and hopes China 
and Japan can reach agreement during consultations in Tokyo 
November 14. 
 
-- China "agrees with the purpose" of the 1997 Ottawa 
Convention to Ban Landmines, although it did not sign it. 
 
-- VISITS: Vice Premier Hui Liangyu will visit Algeria, 
Cyprus and Spain November 18-29, and will attend the fourth 
meeting of the ChinaSpain Forum.  The International Food 
Safet Forum, co-hosted by the ministry of Health, th World 
Health Organization and the Administration of Quality 
Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine, will meet November 
26-27 at Diaoyutai State Guesthouse to discuss food safety. 
Senior officials from more than 40 countries and dozens of 
international organizations will attend. 
 
No Database of Foreign Reporters 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. The reports that China is building a database of 
information on foreign journalists in advance of the Olympics 
are "completely false," and no such database is being 
constructed, said MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao at the November 
8 regular MFA press briefing.  The Beijing Organizing 
Committee of the Olympic Games and the International Olympic 
Committee are working together on this issue and are in 
agreement, and China is ready to welcome thousands of 
registered journalists in advance of the Olympics. 
Unregistered reporters will also be welcomed once they 
complete the necessary formalities. 
 
China's Position on Burma 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. Accusations that China has been "making remarks" about 
Burma while taking no action are "groundless."  Burma is an 
ASEAN member, and a stable, developed, prosperous Burma is in 
the best interest of China and all of Asia.  The problems in 
Burma are internal in nature. The problems are complex, and 
as such it should not be assumed that one or two visits will 
solve the issue.  Progress was made during UN Special Envoy 
Gambari's recent visit, and China will continue to play a 
supportive, constructive role in the region. 
 
Sanctions on Iran Will Do No Good 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4. China has been in close consultations with the United 
States on Iran.  China upholds the principles of 
nonproliferation and has urged Iran to respond to the 
concerns of the international community..  The situation will 
best be resolved through dialogue and consultation. 
Sanctions, especially unilateral sanctions, will "do no good" 
to resolve the situation. 
 
East China Sea Consultations 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. China and Japan will hold the eleventh round of 
consultations on the East China Sea in Tokyo November 14. 
MFA Director General for Asian Affairs Hu Zhengyue will 
represent China and meet with Japanese Asian and Oceanian 
Affairs Bureau Director General Kenichiro Sasae. China has an 
"open attitude" towards constructive plans and proposals and 
hopes the two sides can reach agreement. 
 
Landmines 
--------- 
 
BEIJING 00007084  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6. China "agrees with the purpose" of the Ottawa Convention 
to Ban Landmines.  While China did not sign the treaty, they 
have kept cooperation and communication with signature 
countries.  China is a signatory to the Amended Landmine 
Protocol of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, 
and is willing to strengthen cooperation with all parties. 
 
Soft Power 
---------- 
 
¶7. Asked about China's growing "soft power," the spokesman 
responded that China depends on communication and deals with 
issues in a "fair and objective manner."  During the 17th 
Party Congress, President Hu Jintao made it clear that China 
will continue to peacefully develop.  China is ready to 
coordinate with other countries on this matter, as well as on 
the issue of mutual environmental protection. 
 
Taiwan in the UN 
---------------- 
 
¶8. Asked about a proposed  bill in the U.S. Congress to allow 
Taiwan into the UN, the spokesman responded that there is 
only one China in the world, and Taiwan is a part of it.  The 
Government of the PRC is the only legitimate government 
representing the whole of China. 
 
Yang's Visit to Iran 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. FM Yang Jiechi's visit to Iran to discuss regional and 
international issues has just started. No meetings have taken 
place at this time, but more information will be provided 
following the meetings. 
 
Six Party Talks Update 
---------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked for an update on the Six Party Talks, the spokesman 
responded that all parties are working to ensure 
denuclearization. 
 
Ecuadorian President Correa's Visit 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Asked for specifics regarding the visit of Ecuadorian 
President Rafael Correa, the spokesman responded that he will 
meet with Chinese President Hu Jintao and Chairman of the PRC 
Standing Committee Wu Bangguo to discuss bilateral issues and 
issues of regional and international interest.  Correa will 
also visit Xi'an and Shanghai. 
 
Upcoming Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶12. VISITS: Vice Premier Hui Liangyu will visit Algeria, 
Cyprus and Spain November 18-29, and will attend the fourth 
meeting of the China-Spain Forum.  The International Food 
Safety Forum, co-hosted by the ministry of Health, the World 
Health Organization and the Administration of Quality 
Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine, will meet November 
26-27 at Diaoyutai State Guesthouse to discuss food safety. 
Senior officials from more than 40 countries and dozens of 
international organizations will attend. 
PICCUTA