07BEIJING2799
SECRETARY PETERSQ MEETING WITH COMMUNICATIONS
Thu Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7504
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2799/01 1160531
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260531Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7256
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHDC
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHFMIUU/COMDT COGARD WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BEIJING 002799 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EB/TRA/AN ENGLE AND HORWITZ 
STATE ALSO FOR CA/VO 
STATE PASS USTR FOR STRATFORD, ALTBACH, CELICO 
TRANSPORTATION FOR X1, X40 
TRANSPORTATION FOR OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL AVIATION - OPPLER 
AND GLANTZ 
TREASURY FOR DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF TAIYA SMITH 
TREASURY FOR AMBASSADOR HOLMER 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/ISA - HAARSAGER, WINSHIP, CUSHMAN 
USDOC FOR ITA/OCEA/MCQUEEN 
USDOC FOR ITA DAS KASOFF 
NSC FOR TONG, SHRIER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT ELTN SENV PREL CVIS OVIP SECRETARY PETERS CH
SUBJECT: SECRETARY PETERSQ MEETING WITH COMMUNICATIONS 
MINISTER LI:  MARITIME AND HIGHWAY TRANSPORT; VISA CONCERNS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Secretary of Transportation Mary E. Peters 
and Chinese Minister of Communications Li Shenglin agreed that 
a bilateral agreement on safe transportation of hazardous 
materials could and should be concluded in the very near 
future.  Secretary Peters outlined cooperation with China or 
Chinese companies in areas such as port operations and 
addressing port congestion issues, and welcomed ChinaQs 
interest in cooperation to prevent ocean pollution.  Minister 
Li welcomes continuing cooperation on highway safety issues 
and urged scientific and technological cooperation towards 
that goal.  He requested further cooperative efforts on 
transportation statistics.  He urged that the United States 
simplify visa application procedures for ship crew members. 
Secretary Peters noted improvementQlready accomplished in 
 
SIPDIS 
visa processing and that Treasury Secretary Paulson has 
created a visa-related working group within the Strategic 
Economic Dialogue (SED).  Secretary Peters also advocated 
changes to ChinaQs regulations to allow greater market access 
for American-made Harley-Davidson motorcycles.  End summary. 
 
Maritime Transportation and 
the Bilateral Relationship 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) At a Saturday, April 14 meeting, Minister of 
Communications Li Shenglin repeatedly underscored the 
important role of maritime transportation in fostering 
development of the bilateral trade and economic relationship.Qe lauded extant cooperatQbetween the United States 
Department of Transportation and the Ministry of 
Communications as a solid foundation for future cooperation. 
Secretary Peters cited the bilateral Maritime Agreement as an 
 
SIPDIS 
excellent example of the cooperation to which the Minister 
referred.  That agreement had brought substantial benefits to 
China and the United States by balancing interests.  She noted 
the role of Chinese shipper COSCO as a welcome partner in 
addressing each nationQs respective transportation needs.  She 
also pointed out that advance notification is a maritime 
transportation issue on which further should be done.  Issues 
relating to United States West Coast port congestion have been 
a topic of bilateral discussion, and cooperation regarding 
East Coast ports is already going well, with COSCOQs role in 
Boston Harbor approvingly noted.  The Secretary further noted 
prior exchanges of information about use of the St. Lawrence 
Seaway to help address port congestion problems. 
Opportunities to work together very productively are before 
us. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Minister Li concurred, and vowed that his Ministry 
will continue to support development of healthy cooperation in 
the maritime sector, including increasing cooperation on port 
issues.  He noted that some Chinese companies are now involved 
in port construction projects in the United States and 
appealed to the Secretary to render assistance to Chinese 
enterprises involved in such cooperation.  The Secretary later 
replied that Chinese firms are welcome in American ports and 
other areas of transportation.  She emphasized that as the two 
nationsQ demand for transportation grows, many opportunities 
will arise for American and Chinese companies to work 
cooperatively to meet that demand. 
 
Hazardous Materials Agreement Imminent 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Minister Li said that close and detailed exchanges by 
the two sides had yielded consensus on the main contentQr a 
bilateral agreement on safe transportation of hazardous 
materials.  Time had proven insufficient to finalize the 
agreement for signing at this April 14 meeting, but the 
Minister expects the agreement can be signed very soon.  He 
noted that transportation safety encompasses issues of concern 
to all of society.  The APEC Transportation Ministers 
 
BEIJING 00002799  002 OF 005 
 
 
Conference in August 2006 had put forward good 
recommendations.  China attaches great importance to 
cooperation with the United States on transportation of 
dangerous goods and urges completion of necessary procedures 
of conclusion of the bilateral agreement as soon as possible. 
Secretary Peters regretted that the Memorandum of 
 
SIPDIS 
Understanding on safe transportation of hazardous materials 
was not ready for signing yet, but said she was encouraged at 
progress to date and her certainty that the agreement can be 
finalized in the near future. 
 
Maritime Pollution Prevention 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Minister Li recommended that bilateral cooperation be 
strengthened in the area of prevention of pollution of the 
seas.  A recently concluded Qsister portsQ agreement between 
Shanghai and Los Angeles includes prevention of maritime 
pollution as an agreed area of cooperation.  The Ministry of 
Communications will fully support those two ports 
environmental protection work.  The rapid increase in maritime 
transportation of oil, oil products and chemicals has caused 
maritime pollution.  China has adopted some effective measures 
to address the problem.  China knows the United States is very 
experienced in combating maritime pollution including through 
use of advanced technologies.  China proposes inclusion (note: 
the MinisterQs comment and translation thereof did not make 
explicit whether he meant inclusion in the bilateral agreement 
on safe transportation of hazardous materials; end note) of 
cooperation against maritime pollution, such as exchanges of 
personnel and workshops on the topic.  Secretary Peters 
expressed appreciation for the Minister having raised the 
topic of cooperation against maritime pollution and for the 
ports of Los Angeles and Shanghai including environmental 
protection as part of their sister ports agreement.  Maritime 
pollution is indeed an issue that will require more time and 
intention in the future, and exchanges of personnel and 
technology may be part of the means to cooperate in such an 
important undertaking.  The Secretary added that ballast water 
contamination is a particular concern of the United States, 
especially with respect to the Great Lakes, and could be an 
area of exchange and cooperation with China. 
 
Highway Cooperation 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Secretary Peters recalled her 2005 visit to China as 
Federal Highway Administration Administrator and acknowledged 
the role of Department of Highway Director General Zhang 
Jianfei in facilitating discussions during her visit to five 
cities.  The discussions had been very helpful and through 
such cooperation, both sides can learn to build roads more 
quickly.  The Secretary expressed particular interest in 
opportunities to invest in toll roads and how might one 
encourage more private investment in toll roads in the United 
States.  Highway safety is a high priority for the United 
States as it is for China.  The National Transportation Safety 
Board of the United States and ChinaQs National 
Development and Reform Commission will sign a cooperation 
agreement on highway safety later this year.  The United 
States and China can work together to improve road safety and 
reduce traffic deaths. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Many Chinese practices in construction and management 
of motorways have in fact been learned from the rich 
experience of the United States, Minister Li replied.  The 
United States is ranked first in the world for length of 
roadways, and China is ranked second.  More exchanges and 
collaboration on road construction and management are 
necessary.  The Minister proposed expert groups on road 
construction and management be established for bilateral 
exchange activities.  The same should be done for highway 
 
BEIJING 00002799  003 OF 005 
 
 
safety issues.  The Ministry of Communications and the 
Ministry of Public Security are jointly responsible for road 
safety.  The Ministry of Communications seeks to reduce 
traffic accidents through improved road safety design and 
improved training for drivers.  China is very eager to 
cooperate with the United States in traffic safety.  The 
United States has rich experience in areas such as advanced 
technological treatment of roads that are prone to high 
accident rates and application of new materials to road 
construction and traffic safety that are of interest to China. 
 
More Under Existing MOUs 
------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) Minister Li referred to the December 2003 Memorandum 
of Understanding on Cooperation on Science and Technology in 
Transportation.  He recommended that liaison officers be 
designated by both sides to expand bilateral cooperation 
pursuant to this MOU in the areas of technologies related to 
treatment of asphalt pavement and intelligent traffic systems 
(ITS), i.e., technologies related to coordination of roads and 
vehicles. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Minister Li also referred to the December 2003 
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation on Transportation 
Statistics, saying that initial good cooperation thereunder 
had stood still since a 2005 shift of responsibility for 
transportation statistics within the United States Department 
of Transportation.  The Ministry of Communications hopes that 
this statistical cooperation can be resumed. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Responsibility for transportation statistics had 
indeed been moved within DOT in 2005, the Secretary replied. 
She will inquire to determine whether something was lost in 
that organizational transition.  The United States certainly 
wishes to cooperate on road safety issues.  Tremendous 
opportunities exist to improve roadways through science and 
technology and ITS.  These opportunities include looking at 
the vehicle - infrastructure interface.  Highway safety is 
very important to the Secretary and to DOT. 
 
United States Visas 
------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Introducing his final topic as Qlast but not least, 
Minister Li requested that United States visa application 
procedures for ship crew members be simplified.  China 
recognizes that visa procedures were modified after 9-11 due 
to counterterrorism concerns.  China recognizes that such 
measures are necessary for security and China has been very 
cooperative with respect to measures adjusted by the United 
States.  At an APEC meeting in August 2006, China expressed 
full support for measures for security at sea.  Still, one 
needs to think about facilitation of maritime transportation, 
hence this request to simplify visa application procedures for 
ship crew members.  Secretary Peters highlighted in reply that 
progress has already been made on visa issues.  Treasury 
Secretary Paulson has requested that visa issues be addressed 
 
SIPDIS 
in a group established for that purpose in the Strategic 
Economic Dialogue.  In China, the United States Embassy and 
Consulates General issued more than 351,000 visas last year, 
an increase of more than ten percent.  The United States will 
continue to work on improving the processing of visa 
applications. 
 
Business Advocacy:  Harley-Davidson 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Secretary Peters introduced her final topic by 
noting that she is an avid motorcyclist who regularly climbs 
aboard a Harley-Davidson motorcycle made in the United States. 
She hopes to be able to ride a Harley-Davidson in China and 
 
BEIJING 00002799  004 OF 005 
 
 
knows that concerns about potential noise or pollution 
restrict motorcycle usage in parts of China.  She wishes to 
discuss with the Ministry of Public Security in the future how 
Harley-Davidson motorcycles could be deployed for law 
enforcement purposes.  Minister Li said Harley-Davidson 
representatives had called on the Ministry of Communications 
in March 2007 to express their concerns.  At present, for a 
variety of reasons, motorcycles are not allowed on Chinese 
motorways.  The Ministry of Communications cannot unilaterally 
solve this.  The Minister proposed that both sides explore 
alternatives to motorway operations and expressed his firm 
belief that Harley-Davidson products will have a broad market 
in China in the future. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Minister Li said China will do its utmost to 
address issues raised by Secretary Peters and expressed his 
appreciation for the understanding and responses she had 
expressed on issues he had raised.  A good platform has been 
established for further cooperation in the Strategic Economic 
Dialogue, and the Minister looks forward to continuing 
exchanges on issues of interest or concern on the occasion of 
the next SED. 
 
United States Participants 
-------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U)  United States Government participants in this hour- 
long meeting on Saturday, April 14 were: 
 
Secretary of Transportation Mary E. Peters 
 
SIPDIS 
Ambassador Clark T. Randt, Jr. 
Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs 
Andrew Steinberg 
Deputy Chief of Staff Simon Gros 
Assistant to the Secretary for Policy Jana Weir 
Assistant to the Secretary for Public Affairs Sarah Echols 
Special Assistant to the Secretary for Scheduling and Advance 
Brooke Evans 
Embassy Special Assistant to the Ambassador Michael Crain 
Embassy Minister-Counselor for Economic Affairs Robert Luke 
Embassy United States Coast Guard Representative Captain 
Bernard Moreland 
Embassy Economic Section Trade and Investment Policy Unit 
Chief Eric Madison 
Embassy Economic Section Deputy Chief Christopher Beede (note 
taker) 
Embassy Economic Officer Kamal Latham 
Embassy Economic Officer Brian Klein 
Embassy Economic Officer Michael Pignatello 
 
¶15.  (U)  Chinese Government participants in this meeting, 
with the exception of Zhang Guangxun, all came from the 
Ministry of Communications (MOC): 
 
Minister of Communications LI Shenglin 
MOC Vice Minister WENG Mengyong 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Director General 
JU Chengzhi 
MOC Department of Comprehensive Planning Director General DONG 
Xuebo 
MOC Department of Highway Director General ZHANG Jianfei 
MOC Department of Water Transport Director General SONG Dexing 
MOC Maritime Safety Administration Director General LIU 
Gongchen 
MOC Rescue and Salvage Bureau Director General SONG Jiahui 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Deputy Director 
General LI Guangling 
MOC Department of Science, Technology and Education Deputy 
Director General LI Zuping 
MOC Secretary of the Minister PEI Wanfa 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Director REN 
Weimin 
 
BEIJING 00002799  005 OF 005 
 
 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Director CUI 
Jingyan 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Deputy Director 
ZHANG Hongbin 
Ministry of Public Security Deputy Director ZHANG Guangxun 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Program Official 
LI Juguang 
MOC Department of International Cooperation Program Official 
SHI Xiaojie 
 
¶16. (U) Secretary PetersQ delegation has cleared this report 
of meeting. 
 
RANDT