07BEIJING2543
APRIL 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, PM
Tue Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7813
OO RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2543/01 1071059
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171059Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6956
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0079
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0074UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 002543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SENV MNUC ASEAN KS KN SU CU JA MN SN
SUBJECT: APRIL 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, PM 
WEN VISIT TO JAPAN, SUDAN, VIRGINA TECH SHOOTING, CUBAN FM 
IN BEIJING, AID TO AFRICA, ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES, VISITS 
 
 
 ¶1. Key points at the April 17 MFA Press Conference made by 
MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao were: 
 
-- The Banco Delta Asia issue is close to being resolved but 
the DPRK still "needs confirmation" before moving ahead with 
the implementation of the initial actions. 
 
-- The MFA has noted reports of activity at Yongbyon but gave 
no information on the matter. 
 
-- Premier Wen's visit to Japan was "very successful" and 
established a historically important consensus on political, 
economic and cultural issues. 
 
-- China is pleased with the consensus reached between Sudan 
and the United Nations on Darfur. 
-- China conveyed condolences to the United States and 
victims of the Virginia Tech shooting. 
 
-- China and Cuba agreed to greater exchanges on diplomatic 
policy and personnel during the visit of Cuba's foreign 
minister. 
 
-- Other countries have no need to counter Chinese aid to 
Africa. 
 
-- Liu deflected questions on China's role in climate change, 
trade in endangered hardwoods and export of genetically 
modified rice. 
 
-- Visits: Monaco Prince Albert II will visit China April 
24-27, Singapore FM George Yeo April 23-26 and AFM Cui 
Tiankai will attend the 13th ASEAN-China Senior Officials 
Consultations in Huangshan, China April 23-25. 
 
Six-Party Talks, BDA and Initial Actions 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  At the April 17 regular press briefing, MFA Spokesman Liu 
Jianchao blamed failure to resolve the Banco Delta Asia case 
on "technical issues."  In response to questions, he stated 
that the BDA issue is close to being resolved but the DPRK 
still "needs confirmation of the relevant questions" before 
moving ahead with implementation of the initial actions. 
China hopes the process can be concluded as soon as possible. 
 Liu denied that the Six-Pary Talks had lost momentum when 
the April 14 deadline passing without action from the DPRKand said the resolve 
of all parties to push forward the Talks 
remains unchanged.  He reaffirmed China's intention to work 
hard in implementing the February 13 Joint Document.  He did 
not say when the Talks might restart. 
 
¶3.  Asked about reported activity around the DPRK's Yongbyon 
nuclear facilities, Liu confirmed the MFA had noticed such 
reports but had no specifics on the matter.  When asked for 
information on an upcoming Chinese delegation visit to the 
DPRK led by Deputy Head of CCP Central Committee 
International Department Liu Hongcai, the spokesman referred 
the reporter to the CCP Central Committee for details. 
 
PM Wen's Japan Visit "Very Successful" 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The spokesman described as "very successful" the 
historically significant consensus reached on political, 
economic and cultural issues during PM Wen's "ice-thawing" 
visit to Japan.  He said the two sides also exchanged ideas 
on Korean peninsula issues and energy cooperation.  Asked 
about reports that Japan refused to agree to language for the 
joint communiqu that opposed Taiwan independence, Liu 
responded that, in the three political documents 
re-establishing diplomatic relations, Japan has already 
agreed not to support Taiwan independence.  The two sides 
also agreed to cooperate in promoting the East China Sea as a 
place of peace and prosperity.  On the issue of DPRK 
abduction of Japanese citizens, China expressed its sympathy 
and hope that Japan and the DPRK could address the issue 
through dialogue on the basis of equality and mutual respect. 
 
¶5.  Asked to confirm Japanese media reports that China and 
Japan agreed to set up a military hotline, Liu responded that 
he had not heard specific news regarding a hotline.  However, 
consensus had been reached to hold strategic dialogue between 
the two countries' militaries and to establish a yet-to-be- 
specified mechanism to address crises between the two sides. 
 
Sudan Makes Deal with UN 
------------------------ 
 
BEIJING 00002543  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶6.  China is pleased with the consensus reached between Sudan 
and the United Nations on the Darfur issue.  The success 
proves that dialogue and consultation are effective for 
resolving conflicts, said Liu, stressing the international 
community should help Sudan in a way suitable to Sudan. 
Challenged by a UPI reporter as to why China is contributing 
only USD 10.4 million in humanitarian aid while investing 
billions in Sudan for China's own gain, Liu asserted that 
China's investment and cooperation with Sudan contributes to 
the human rights situation, economic development, peace and 
stability of Sudan. 
 
Virginia Tech Shooting 
---------------------- 
 
¶7.  Foreign Minister Li expressed China's shock and 
condemnation of the shootings at Virginia Tech and already 
conveyed China's condolences to the victims and the United 
States in a message to Secretary Rice.  China has not found 
any overseas Chinese students among the injured, Liu said in 
response to questions, and noted that the identity of the 
shooter is still under investigation. 
 
China-Cuba FM Agreement 
----------------------- 
 
¶8.  China attaches great importance to Cuba FM Perez Roque's 
visit to China and hopes the agreement signed between both 
countries' foreign ministries will increase policy 
understanding and promoted bilateral ties.  The agreement 
calls for greater cooperation and consultation between 
foreign ministries on policy issues and more frequent 
exchanges of diplomatic personnel and ideas. 
 
No Need to Counter Chinese Aid to Africa 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  In response to a question on the Italian Prime Minister's 
reported call for the EU and Japan to coordinate aid to 
Africa aid to curb China's influence there, Liu said he does 
not understand why other countries would want to counter such 
efforts.  China welcomes all countries, especially developed 
countries, to join hands and assist in the development of 
Africa. 
 
Global Warming as Security Threat? 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Asked for the MFA's reaction to reports that global 
warming and climate change are security threats, Liu replied 
that development should be the primary question in discussing 
global warming.  The responsibility of developed nations in 
causing global warming over the past 300 years should be 
emphasized when proposing solutions.  China maintains a 
responsible attitude toward global warming and climate change 
and is willing to discuss the issue. 
 
Illegal Hardwood Imports 
------------------------ 
 
¶11.  China's strictly regulated timber imports are an 
important part of international trade and are not related to 
illegal logging in various regions, Liu said countering a 
recent Greenpeace report criticizing China's rising illegal 
hardwood imports from countries such as Papua Guinea.  China 
places importance on this issue while conducting trade on the 
basis of mutual benefit and encourages Chinese enterprises to 
follow all related regulations and laws. 
 
GM Rice Scares Unwarranted 
-------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Responding to a question about rising Chinese 
agricultural exports, expanded genetically modified (GM) 
crops and agricultural exports to non-GM importing countries, 
Liu said China is in consultation with the relevant countries 
and specific questions should be directed to the Ministry of 
Commerce or the General Administration of Quality 
Supervision. 
 
Visits: ASEAN, Monaco, Singapore 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  At the invitation of President Hu, Monaco Prince Albert 
II will visit China from April 24-27.  At the invitation of 
the Chinese Government, Singapore FM George Yeo will visit 
China from April 23-26 and attend the 2007 Central China 
 
BEIJING 00002543  003 OF 003 
 
 
Expo.  The 13th ASEAN-China Senior Officials Consultations 
will be held in Huangshan, China from April 23-25.  AFM Cui 
Tiankai, and other leaders will attend and discuss 
China-ASEAN relations and international and regional issues 
of common interest. 
RANDT