08BEIJING1416
APRIL 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TORCH RELAY, DALAI
Tue Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7726
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1416/01 1061006
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151006Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6488
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO IMMEDIATE 1903
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU IMMEDIATE 3820
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI IMMEDIATE 4527UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SOCI PHUM CH JA
SUBJECT: APRIL 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TORCH RELAY, DALAI 
LAMA, CARREFOUR BOYCOTT, ETC. 
 
¶1.  Key points at the regular April 15 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- Past successful legs of the Olympic Torch Relay have come 
about through cooperation with the relevant countries; any 
disruptions in future legs of the torch run will show the 
"true nature" of Tibetan separatist forces.  China hopes that 
other countries can understand that the "torch escorts" are 
merely seeking to safeguard the "safety, purity and dignity" 
of the Olympic Games. 
 
-- The barriers for dialogue with the Dalai Lama are on his 
side, rather than on the Chinese Government's side. 
 
-- The violent acts in Lhasa were masterminded by the "Dalai 
Clique."  China hopes that other nations can recognize the 
true nature of the Dalai Lama and not support him by holding 
meetings or discussions with him. 
 
-- Calls for a boycott of French brands and companies 
following the disrupted Paris Torch Relay "have reason" 
behind them.  China hopes that France can make efforts to 
repair the relationship. 
 
-- China hopes to have dialogue on a variety of topics to 
help solve problems through dialogue during the EU3-plus-3 
(P5-plus-1) meeting in Shanghai.  Media access has been 
arranged for the relevant countries. 
 
-- China condemns CNN commentator Jack Cafferty's comments 
that the Chinese people are "goons and thugs." 
 
-- China will safeguard journalists' freedom to report within 
the bounds of Chinese law.  Journalists should respect 
Chinese law and increase mutual trust by reporting in a fair 
and balanced manner. 
 
-- China maintains a "prudent attitude" towards the death 
penalty, which is only applied in a small number of cases to 
people who have committed serious crimes. 
 
-- VISITORS: EU Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso will 
visit China April 24-26.  South African Foreign Minister Dr. 
Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma will visit China April 19-26. 
 
Torch Run: Success Comes From Cooperation 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  At the regularly-scheduled MFA press briefing April 15, 
MFA Spokesperson Jiang Yu said that the Olympic Torch Relay 
has been smooth, and is a reflection of the hopes and 
aspirations of the people who support the Olympics. 
Regarding the upcoming India portion of the relay, Jiang said 
that prior successes have been achieved through cooperation 
with the relevant parties, and cooperation in India will 
likewise result in success.  Should there be any disruption, 
she added, it will show "the true nature of the separatists." 
 Asked about Japan and other nations denying entry to the 
"torch escorts," Jiang said that the practice of escorting 
the torch is in keeping with past Olympic Games.  The torch 
escorts are all volunteers, are not law enforcement 
officials, and are merely seeking to safeguard the "safety, 
purity and dignity" of the Olympic Games.  China hopes that 
all countries can understand this and cooperate.  Asked a 
follow-up question regarding India's preparation for the 
torch relay, Jiang said that there has been close 
cooperation, and China hopes that India takes effective 
measures. 
 
Dalai Lama Dialogue: Barrier Is On His Side 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. China has exerted "maximum patience" in dealing with the 
Dalai Lama, Jiang said, and the barrir to dialogue is on his 
side rather than on te Chinese Government's side.  Jiang 
expressedhope that the Dalai Lama can "give up his sabotage 
and take concrete actions."  Jiang was unwilling to confirm 
details of a March 19 letter sent by the Dalai Lama to Hu 
Jintao asking for the resumption of dialogue, saying only 
that she hadn't heard of it. 
 
Dalai Lama Meetings 
------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about potential meetings between the Dalai Lama and 
representatives from other nations, including U.S. Under 
Secretary Paula Dobriansky, Jiang said that the violent acts 
 
SIPDIS 
in Lhasa were clearly masterminded by the "Dalai Clique," and 
as such she expressed hope that other nations can "make a 
distinction between right and wrong" and recognize the true 
 
BEIJING 00001416  002 OF 003 
 
 
nature of the Dalai Lama.  Noting that the Dalai Lama is a 
splittist seeking to undermine national unity, Jiang 
expressed hope that the United States and other nations would 
not support him. 
 
Carrefour Boycott: Negative sentiments "have reason" 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5. Asked about calls for a boycott of Carrefour department 
stores and other French brands and companies following the 
disruption of the Olympic Torch Relay in Paris, Jiang said 
that the Chinese people have been expressing their views and 
sentiments within the bounds of the law, and that all of 
these sentiments "have reason" behind them.  Noting that 
friendship between two countries requires that both sides 
make joint efforts, she said that other countries cannot do 
things that are unacceptable to Chinese people and expressed 
hope that the French would "cherish" their relations with 
China and make good efforts to repair the relationship. 
 
¶6. The purpose of the EU 3-plus-3 (P5-plus-1) Political 
Directors meeting on Iran in Shanghai is to implement the 
joint statement agreed upon in March.  China hopes to have in 
depth discussion on a variety of topics to find a way to 
solve the current problems through dialogue.  Asked a follow 
up question regarding media access to the meeting, Jiang said 
that arrangements have been made with the media 
representatives from the relevant countries, and that further 
questions should be directed to the U.S. press 
representatives. 
 
Government Hand in Pro-China Demonstrations? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Asked whether overseas demonstrations showing support of 
China were orchestrated by Chinese embassies abroad, Jiang 
said that demonstrations to oppose separatism and anti-China 
activities "express their just voice."  She then asked, "Do 
you think these need to be organized by the Chinese 
Government?" 
 
CNN Comments were "Shocking" 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8. China was shocked by comments from CNN commentator Jack 
Cafferty that the Chinese are "goons and thugs," and condemns 
these "vicious remarks."  Cafferty "used his microphone to 
insult the Chinese people," which violate both journalist and 
human ethics and hurt the feelings of the Chinese people. 
She solemnly requested that he take back his remarks and 
apologize. 
 
Protecting the Freedom of Reporters 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Asked if journalists would be granted free access to Tibet 
after May 1, Jiang noted that in the past access to Tibet 
only required "a few formalities," and that the current 
restrictions stem from the violent criminal acts in the area. 
 Journalists should keep close contact with the relevant 
authorities within the Tibetan Autonomous Region regarding 
travel to Tibet.  Asked a more general question regarding 
non-interference with journalists, Jiang responded that China 
will protect the interests of journalists within keeping with 
the law.  She expressed hope, however, that journalists will 
abide by Chinese law, and will increase mutual trust by 
reporting in a fair and balanced manner. 
 
Walkout in Ireland 
------------------ 
 
¶10. Asked whether it was appropriate for the Chinese 
Ambassador to Ireland to walk out of the Green Party 
Conference when Irish Environment Minister and party leader 
John Gormley raised the subject of Tibet, Jiang said that 
Sino-Irish relations are enjoying good momentum, with 
multiple recent exchanges of high level visitors.  Tibet is 
an internal matter, and is recognized by the international 
community as an inalienable part of China. 
 
Death Penalty: Prudent Attitude 
------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Asked a question about a recent report that states that 
China's execution rate is the highest in the world, Jiang 
said that there are currently more countries with the death 
penalty than without.  Current conditions do not allow China 
to abolish the death penalty, but China maintains a "prudent 
attitude" on the subject and as such the death penalty is 
 
BEIJING 00001416  003 OF 003 
 
 
only applied to a small number of people who have committed 
serious crimes. 
 
¶12.  A survey by the Financial Times stating that a majority 
of Europeans see China as the largest threat to world 
stability "does not reflect the voice of China," Jiang said. 
China maintains a philosophy of peaceful development, and 
China's own peaceful development has aided the development of 
other countries.  As such, the international community should 
judge China fairly. 
 
¶13. Deputy Foreign Minister Wang Yi and his Japanese 
counterpart met April 14-15 to exchange views on 
Sino-Japanese relations and issues of mutual interest.  In 
particular, the two discussed preparations for Chinese 
President Hu Jintao's upcoming visit to Japan, as well as 
issues related to the East China Sea.  Both sides will make 
continued efforts, Jiang said. 
 
¶14. Asked a question regarding a plan to change an 
Iran-India-Pakistan pipeline into an Iran-Pakistan-China 
pipeline, Jiang said she had not heard the reports. 
Regarding comments from Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf 
that China and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) 
can join hands with NATO to solve the problems in 
Afghanistan, Jiang again said she had not heard of it.  She 
added that the actions of the SCO are performed within the 
framework of the three founding pillars of the SCO, one of 
which is regional stability and counterterrorism cooperation. 
 As such, China is ready to cooperate with Pakistan to fight 
terrorism. 
 
¶15. VISITORS: EU Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso 
will visit China April 24-26.  South African Foreign Minister 
Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma will visit China April 19-26. 
RANDT