08BEIJING4252
NOVEMBER 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: FOOD SAFETY, SED, TIBET,
Tue Nov 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3478
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4252/01 3230950
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180950Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0918
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 0526
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0445
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 0162
RUEHBZ/AMEMBASSY BRAZZAVILLE 0001UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON EFIN IN TW CH RS CU PE CO SO
 
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: FOOD SAFETY, SED, TIBET, 
STEALING SPACE TECHNOLOGY, APEC MEETINGS, PIRACY 
 
BEIJING 00004252  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 18 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- The United States should lift recently announced restrictions on 
Chinese imports "sooner rather than later." 
 
-- China hopes the United States will "retain" the Strategic 
Economic Dialogue (SED) in the next administration. 
 
-- China's position on the Tibet issue is "clear and resolute" and 
any attempt to split China is "doomed." 
 
-- The "so called story" that China steals space technology from the 
United States "has ulterior motives." 
 
-- President Hu Jintao will meet with leaders from the United 
States, Russia and Columbia during the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) summit in Peru.  The spokesperson had no 
information regarding a possible meeting between Hu and former KMT 
Chairman Lien Chan. 
 
-- "Relevant Chinese government departments" are "conducting rescue 
work" aimed at freeing the crew of a Chinese fishing vessel which 
was taken hostage by Somali pirates on November 14. 
 
Food Safety 
----------- 
 
¶2. The United States should lift recently announced restrictions on 
Chinese imports "sooner rather than later," said Qin Gang at the 
November 18 regularly scheduled MFA press conference.  China 
"regrets" that "after China had dealt with the crisis," the United 
States "took unilateral measures."  The United States should "take 
China's concerns seriously" because they will "impact trade."  China 
took the recent melamine crisis "seriously" and "took effective 
measures" to solve the problem, said Qin.  China's examinations of 
exports are "very strict" and problematic products will be "recalled 
and destroyed." China hopes that the United States will "be 
objective and take a calm view" of the situation.  Asked about the 
opening of Food and Drug Administration offices in China, Qin said 
that China "hopes the arrangement will help the two countries to 
strengthen cooperation on food safety." 
 
Strategic Economic Dialogue 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. China hopes the United States will "retain" the Strategic 
Economic Dialogue (SED) which is an opportunity to discuss "long 
term issues."  The SED "enhances mutual understanding and trust," 
said Qin.  The spokesperson said he is "not sure how Barack Obama 
will view the issue" but the United States should attach great 
importance to maintaining the bilateral relationship with China "no 
matter which party is in power."  Qin added that this is the message 
which Obama gave to President Hu Jintao during their phone call. 
 
Meeting of Tibetan Leaders in Dharamsala 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. China's position on the Tibet issue is "clear and resolute," said 
Qin when asked to comment on the meeting of Tibetan exiles in 
Dharamsala, India.  Any attempt to separate Tibet from China is 
"doomed."  Qin added that the Tibetan government in exile is "not 
recognized by any other government in the world."  China has "taken 
note" that the Indian government has "repeatedly reiterated" that it 
"forbids separatist activities on its territory.  China "hopes and 
believes this commitment will be honored." 
 
Space Technology 
---------------- 
 
¶3. The "so called story" that China steals space technology from the 
United States "has ulterior motives" and is made "in vain," said the 
spokesman when asked about Shu Quansheng's guilty plea for violating 
arms control laws. 
 
APEC Bilateral Meetings 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. President Hu Jintao will meet with leaders from the United 
States, Russia and Colombia during the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) summit in Peru, said Qin.  The spokesman said 
specific arrangements are "still under discussion" and suggested 
that reporters "check the APEC website" for more updated 
information.  Asked whether Hu would meet with former KMT Chairman 
Lien Chan during the meeting, Qin said that he did not have any 
relevant information. 
 
Somali Pirates 
 
BEIJING 00004252  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
-------------- 
 
¶5. "Relevant Chinese government departments" are "conducting rescue 
work" aimed at freeing the crew of a Chinese fishing vessel which 
was taken hostage by pirates from Somalia on November 14, said the 
spokesperson.  China "condemns all piracy and abductions at sea," 
said Qin.   China is ready to "help solve the problem" based on the 
agreement of the Somali government and UN resolutions. 
 
Aircraft Carrier 
---------------- 
 
¶6. Chinese defense policy is "defensive in nature," said Qin when 
asked whether China plans to build an aircraft carrier.  Qin 
referred the reporter to the Ministry of Defense for further 
comment. 
 
Troops to Afghanistan 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked whether China would consider sending troops to Afghanistan, 
Qin referred the reporter to a recent statement on the issue 
published on the MFA's website.  Qin reiterated that China supports 
the efforts of the Afghan people to "maintain peace, promote 
economic development, and materialize peaceful reconstruction." 
However, China does not send troops abroad except as part of UN 
peacekeeping missions and won't send any to Afghanistan. 
 
Congo Rebels 
------------ 
 
¶8. China expresses "growing concern" over the "deteriorating 
situation" in the Congo, said Qin in response to a question 
regarding reported rebel dissatisfaction with Chinese activities in 
that country.  China hopes that the people of the Congo can "use 
peaceful means" to maintain peace and stability.  Chinese businesses 
in the Congo work under the principle of "mutual gain and joint 
benefit" and conduct humanitarian work in the country in addition to 
mining.  China hopes that the "mutually beneficial" relationship 
will "continue to move forward." 
 
Meeting Between Hu and Fidel 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. Qin said that China and Cuba are "discussing" a potential meeting 
between Hu and Fidel Castro while Hu is in Cuba.