08BEIJING3875
CORRECTED COPY: October 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN ARMS
Thu Oct 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2116
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3875/01 2831150
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091150Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0374
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6754UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAGR EFIN PHUM PTER CH KN JP KS TW
 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY: October 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN ARMS 
SALES, FINANCIAL CRISIS, GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, NORTH KOREAN MISSILE 
TESTS, HU JIA, MILK CRISIS, RULES FOR FOREIGN JOURNALISTS, 
COUNTERFEIT CHINESE MICROCHIPS IN U.S. WEAPONS, PAKISTAN PRESIDENT 
ZADARI 
 
¶1.  Key points at the October 9 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China hopes that the two U.S. presidential candidates will 
understand the importance of properly handling the Taiwan issue, 
adhere to the "One China" policy, abide by the three Sino-U.S. Joint 
Communiques and oppose Taiwan independence. 
 
-- The spokesperson reiterated China's commitment to "strengthening 
coordination and cooperation with other countries" in the effort to 
"safeguard the stability of international financial markets and the 
healthy and sound development of [China's] economy." 
 
-- Regarding the fate of the 17 Chinese nationals held at Guantanamo 
Bay, China hopes that the United States will take the issue 
"seriously" and repatriate these "terrorism suspects" to China 
"shortly." 
 
-- The spokesperson could not confirm reports of North Korean 
missile tests in recent days. 
 
-- Responding to reports that Hu Jia may receive the Nobel Peace 
Prize, the spokesperson pointed out that Hu Jia committed the crime 
of "subverting the state", and he added that the prize "should be 
awarded to the right person." 
 
-- The Chinese government will "strengthen supervision over food 
safety," and the spokesperson expressed his belief that "foreign 
consumers will regain their confidence in Chinese food products." 
 
-- The "policy of opening up won't change," and China will continue 
to facilitate the work of foreign journalists. 
 
-- The spokesperson expressed "surprise," "shock," and disbelief 
when questioned about reports of counterfeit Chinese microchips in 
U.S. weapons. 
 
-- Pakistani President Zadari will visit China at the invitation of 
President Hu Jintao from October 14 to October 17. 
 
Taiwan Arms Sales 
----------------- 
 
¶2. At the October 9 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson Qin 
Gang reiterated China's "clear, solemn and resolute opposition" to 
the recently announced U.S. decision to sell arms to Taiwan.  Asked 
to comment on the expressions of support for the sale from both U.S. 
presidential candidates, the spokesperson stressed that the Taiwan 
issue is a "core issue" that forms an "important political 
foundation" in U.S.-China relations.  The nearly 30 years of 
U.S.-China diplomatic ties, he said, "proves that when the Taiwan 
issue can be properly handled, our political foundations can be 
safeguarded and our bilateral relations can go smoothly." 
"Otherwise," he continued, "Our bilateral relations will experience 
difficulties, twists and turns."  Noting that "all aspects of U.S. 
society attach importance to its relations with China," the 
spokesperson urged the United States to "cherish the important 
political foundation" of the Taiwan issue in U.S.-China relations. 
"China hopes," he said, "that the two U.S. presidential candidates 
will understand this and adhere to the 'One China' policy, abide by 
the Three Joint Communiques, oppose Taiwan independence and 
contribute to bilateral relations." 
 
Financial Crisis 
---------------- 
 
¶3. Noting China's position that the "international community should 
work together" to "overcome the difficulty" of the global financial 
crisis, the spokesperson reported that China's central bank "and 
other authorities" are maintaining "close communication and contact" 
with authorities in other countries.  The spokesperson added that 
China seeks "to continue to strengthen coordination and cooperation" 
with other countries to "safeguard the stability of international 
financial markets and the healthy and sound development of our 
economy." 
 
Guantanamo Uighurs 
----------------- 
 
¶4. Asked for comment on this week's U.S. court rulings on the fate 
of 17 Uighurs detained at Guantanamo Bay, Qin stated that China's 
position of "demanding that the U.S. repatriate these terrorist 
suspects to China" remains unchanged.  Stressing that the 17 
"terrorism suspects" are members of the East Turkestan Islamic 
Liberation Movement, he added that China "hopes the U.S. will take 
this issue seriously and repatriate these 17 people (sic) to China 
shortly."  Questioned about concerns of some that the Uighurs may 
face torture if they return to China, the spokesperson characterized 
 
BEIJING 00003875  002 OF 002 
 
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY: October 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN ARMS 
SALES, FINANCIAL CRISIS, GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, NORTH KOREAN MISSILE 
TESTS, HU JIA, MILK CRISIS, RULES FOR FOREIGN JOURNALISTS, 
COUNTERFEIT CHINESE MICROCHIPS IN U.S. WEAPONS, PAKISTAN PRESIDENT 
ZADARI 
 
such concerns as coming from a "biased mind," and added that "China 
is a country under rule of law" whose relevant authorities "forbid" 
torture.  After the suspects return, Qin continued, Chinese 
judiciary authorities will "deal with them according to law." 
 
North Korean Missile Tests 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5. Responding to a request for comment on reports that North Korea 
had tested short-range missiles in recent days, as well as for 
comment on reports of South Korean military officials' concern over 
the possibility that North Korea may be developing nuclear warheads, 
the spokesperson stated that he had read the "relevant reports" but 
"cannot confirm" the reports. 
 
Hu Jia and Nobel Peace Prize 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. Asked for comment on reports that jailed Chinese dissident Hu Jia 
might receive the 2008 Nobel Peace Prize, the spokesperson reminded 
the audience that Hu Jia "committed the crime of subverting the 
state and has been convicted."  Stating that awarding Hu the prize 
would constitute a "rude interference in China's affairs," Qin 
voiced his hope that award sponsors would avoid "doing such a thing 
that could affect relations with China and damage their image in the 
hearts of the Chinese people."  The Nobel Peace Prize, he said, 
should be "awarded to the right person."  Awarding the prize to a 
person such as Hu Jia, he said, would "be against the purpose" of 
the Prize.  "If they are looking for a Chinese person to award this 
prize," Qin added, "I believe there are thousands of Chinese 
people." 
 
Milk Crisis 
----------- 
 
¶7. Asked to respond to reports that the Government of Brazil has 
decided to ban all food products from China because of the milk 
scandal, the spokesperson said that China understands any 
government's desire to safeguard the safety and health of its 
citizens.  Nations should take the issue of tainted Chinese dairy 
products seriously, Qin said, while at the same time remaining 
"realistic" and keeping a "sober mind."  Adding that the "next step" 
for Chinese authorities will be strengthening supervision over food 
safety, the spokesperson expressed belief that foreign consumers 
will see the Chinese government's actions and "regain their 
confidence in Chinese food products." 
 
Rules for Foreign Journalists 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked if a final statement had been issued regarding reporting 
rules put in place for foreign journalists covering the Olmpics, 
the spokesperson reiterated that China's "policy of opening up won't 
change," and that China "will continue to facilitate foreign 
journalists' work." 
 
Counterfeit Chinese Microchips in U.S. Weapons 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶9. Asked to comment on a Business Week report that counterfeit 
microchips from China may have jeopardized the safety of some U.S. 
military equipment, Qin, expressing his "surprise" and "shock" at 
such questions, stated that he had neither read nor heard of such 
reports. 
 
Visit: Pakistani President Zadari 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. The spokesperson announced that Pakistani President Zadari will 
visit China from October 14 to October 17 at the invitation of 
President Hu Jintao.  In addition to meeting with President Hu, 
President Zadari will also meet with Premier Wen Jiabao, Wu Bangguo 
and Jia Qinglin. 
PICCUTA