08BEIJING4702
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, ISRAEL
Wed Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7722
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4702 3660842
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310842Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1669
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 004702 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, ISRAEL 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "The U.S.-China relationship is the greatest attempt in all of 
history" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/31): "In the past 30 years, the U.S.-China 
relationship has become the most important bilateral relationship in 
the World. This relationship is an example of a peaceful coexistence 
to the entire world. The relationship shows that two different 
ideologies, and frequent sources of confrontation, does not 
necessarily mean that one side must win over another side, or that 
the rising of a newly emerging country does not necessarily indicate 
the decline of an 'old-power' country. On the contrary, the joining 
hands of these two countries will be a powerful driver for the 
World's prosperity.  The development of U.S.-China relations can be 
described as an experiment and a test. First, this is a great 
attempt at the peaceful coexistence of different ideologies; second, 
within the same international system, this is a great attempt at the 
peaceful coexistence of a newly-emerging country and an 'old power' 
country. Third, the development of the relationship has provided a 
new model to developing and developed countries on how cooperation 
between the two can help solve the World's issues. What will be the 
theme in the 21 century? The answer greatly depends on what the 
U.S.-China relationship looks like." 
 
b. "Better Sino-U.S. ties are in both nations' interest" 
 
Tao Wenzhao, a researcher with the Institute of American Studies 
under the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, commented on the 
official English-language newspaper China Daily (12/31): "Bilateral 
ties between China and the United States have developed over the 
past 30 years along a generally tortuous but "forward moving" road. 
...As the World's largest developing and developed countries, China 
and the U.S. should value the hard-won fruits in bilateral ties and 
do their utmost to press ahead with the momentum of their healthy 
development. The two nations should first have enough respect for 
each other's concerns, especially concerns over their core 
interests. ... The continued U.S.-Taiwan military cooperation and 
arms sales to the island will forever hang like Damocles' Sword over 
a final settlement of the vexed Taiwan question. At the same time, 
the U.S. should also handle the Tibet issue in a cautious manner, as 
it is also one that relates to China's core national interest. ...To 
push forward bilateral development, the two countries should 
continue to enhance mutual trust. ...Also, the two countries should 
strengthen mutual coordination on major international and regional 
issues. ... 
It is believed that bilateral ties will move toward a higher plateau 
with efforts from both sides." 
 
¶2. ISRAEL 
 
"Israel is making an unpreventable mess in the Middle East" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/31): "Any buildings that represent the 
strength of Hamas in the Gaza strip have been destroyed by the 
Israelis.  The prediction that an all-out war in the Middle East is 
going to happen has circled around the region. International media 
has become more sentimental about the chaos criticizing Bush's 
policy that favors Israel, the European congress who honors Israel, 
the Arabian politicians and Hamas leaders. International media 
indicates that the recent conflict has made the situation more 
complicated and difficult. A former U.S. Secretary of State opined, 
'the Israel - Palestine issue is an issue that is likely 
un-resolvable.' Arabian media has condemned Israel's violence and 
discussed the unified actions of Arabian countries and the West's 
ignorance of the Gaza disaster. Voice of American reported that most 
of analysts believe that finding a resolution for the Middle East 
issue will be a hard task for Obama." 
 
RANDT