08BEIJING1490
APRIL 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TORCH RELAY, DALAI
Thu Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0607
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1490/01 1081146
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171146Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6697
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6686
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 4532
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1909UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SOCI PHUM CH JA
SUBJECT: APRIL 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TORCH RELAY, DALAI 
LAMA, CNN APOLOGY, ETC. 
 
¶1.  Key points at the regular April 17 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The torch relay in Pakistan was "warm and grand," and  the 
people of India have "shown their enthusiasm for the relay." 
 
-- The Beijing Olympic Committee will arrange a specific 
media group to cover the Mount Everest leg of the torch 
relay, which will then provide the "signal" free of charge. 
 
-- The Dalai Lama side "has shown no positive response," and 
thus "seriously undermined the basis for contact and 
dialogue" with the Chinese Government. 
 
-- The Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region "will make 
an assessment of the situation and decide in accordance with 
local conditions" when to allow press back into Tibet. 
 
-- Regarding commentator Jack Cafferty's comments, CNN should 
"take the issue seriously, take back its vicious remarks and 
make an apology to the people of China." 
 
-- There has been a "new development" which shows "the 
political will to move ahead on the (Six-Party Talks) 
process." 
 
Why no Torch Relay Protests in Non-democratic Countries? 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶2.  At the regularly-scheduled MFA press briefing April 17, 
MFA Spokesperson Jiang Yu said the 2008 Olympic torch relay 
has allowed more Asian countries to experience the "fun and 
joy" of the torch relay.  Jiang characterized the torch relay 
leg in Pakistan as "warm and grand," and said the people of 
India have "shown their enthusiasm for the relay."  She said 
she expects the Indian Government will take effective 
measures to ensure a safe and smooth relay.  Jiang 
emphatically disagreed with a reporter's comment that there 
is a message in the fact that all democratic countries in 
which the torch relay has thus far occurred have had "major 
protests," while events have run smoothly for the legs run in 
non-democratic countries.  Jiang said the torch relay is an 
inappropriate venue to pursue political goals and 
specifically noted that the "so-called peace and nonviolence" 
of the "Tibetan independence forces" has been exposed to the 
world for the "deceit and true nature of their violent 
activities." 
 
¶3.  Repeatedly emphasizing that the torch relay is a Beijing 
Olympic Committee (BOCOG)-lead issue, the spokesperson did 
not clearly comment on a Japanese media question which 
implied Japan had refused a PRC request to allow PRC security 
officials to run escort for the torch relay in Nagoya next 
week.  Jiang twice delivered incoherent answers regarding 
foreign press coverage of the Everest leg of the torch relay, 
but said that BOCOG will "organize the group (of media) for 
the official signal for the video pictures," and would in 
turn "provide the signals free of charge to the media." 
 
Dalai Lama Side Not Showing Sincerity for Dialogue 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. The PRC has shown "maximum sincerity and patience," Jiang 
averred, while the Dalai Lama side "has shown no positive 
response," and thus "seriously undermined the basis for 
contact and dialogue."  Jiang twice delineated three 
activities the "Dalai Lama clique" must cease in order to 
show their sincerity for dialogue: 1) efforts to split the 
motherland; 2) efforts to sabotage the Olympics; and 3) 
instigation of violent activities.  "Only on this basis can 
we have the dialogue again," she said. 
 
Foreign Press Challenges in China 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Jiang said China welcomes the world press to come cover 
the Beijing Games.  "We will honor our commitment for the 
Games and facilitate the coverage of foreign media in China," 
she claimed, but then continued, "At the same time, we hope 
that during their reporting work, they can uphold the 
principles of objectiveness, balance and fairness." 
 
¶6. Responding to a reporter's query on the apparent 
indefinite delay of a May 1 commitment to allow reporters 
back into Tibet, Jiang said the Government of the Tibet 
Autonomous Region "will make an assessment of the situation 
and decide in accordance with local conditions." 
 
¶7. Jiang reported that MFA Information Department Director 
General Liu Jianchao "launched solemn representation" to the 
 
BEIJING 00001490  002 OF 002 
 
 
CNN Beijing Office Director last evening.  Jiang called the 
CNN apology "insincere" and said CNN commentator Jack 
Cafferty's comments were an effort to "sow discontent between 
the Chinese Government and people."  "We cannot accept it 
(the apology) at all," she said, and called on CNN to "take 
the issue seriously, take back its vicious remarks and to 
make an apology to the people of China." 
 
Lawyers not allowed to see Hu Jia for Appeal? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  An Agence France Presse reporter pressed Jiang twice for 
clarification on the Hu Jia case, claiming Hu had been denied 
the right to see a lawyer to assist in his appeal.  Jiang 
repeatedly claimed China is a country governed by law, that 
Hu's case had been dealt with in accordance with Chinese law 
and that any further questions should be addressed to 
judicial authorities.  Jiang said that as an official of the 
Chinese Government, she had "no right to interfere with 
judicial affairs." 
 
¶9.  A New York Times reporter queried Jiang on the 
whereabouts of a Tibetan who works for the state-run TV 
station in Qinghai, Jamyang Kyi, who, "according to wire 
reports and his family," has been missing since April 1. 
Jiang said she had not heard of the case, but emphasized that 
Chinese law "fully protects freedom of speech" and claimed, 
"Only if someone goes against the law will they be punished 
by the law." 
 
Six Party and P5 Plus 1 Talks 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked about the outcome of United States-DPRK talks in 
Singapore and the implications for the schedule of Six-Party 
Talks, Jiang admitted there had been a "new development" 
which shows "the political will to move ahead on the 
process."  China will "follow the relevant situation and make 
suggestions for the proper resumption of talks at the proper 
time." 
 
¶11. Jiang also reported that the P5 plus 1 political 
directors agreed to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue by 
diplomatic channels.  Jiang called the talks "in depth and 
candid" and said the countries agreed to enhance diplomatic 
efforts to seek a "long-term and comprehensive proper 
solution" of the Iranian nuclear issue. 
PICCUTA