08BEIJING4327
CHINA'S ECONOMY: HOPING FOR THE BEST IN THE
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8997
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4327/01 3301048
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251048Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1063
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 004327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR OIA CWINSHIP AND TTYANG 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD EAGR PREL ZK CH
SUBJECT: CHINA'S ECONOMY: HOPING FOR THE BEST IN THE 
WEST 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Government officials and 
businesspeople in Western China's Xinjiang and Ningxia 
minority autonomous regions do not yet see a large 
impact from the slowing economy, and although they are 
concerned, some are also hopeful that their unique 
development circumstances may provide some protection. 
Resource-based industries are seeing limited immediate 
impact so far, and weakening export demand is expected 
to have less effect given exports' smaller role in 
local economies.  Although details of the Central 
Government's fiscal stimulus package remain unclear, 
local officials in Xinjiang hope for an investment-led 
boost in an economy where infrastructure already plays 
an important role. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) COMMENT: The size of the economies in 
Xinjiang and Ningxia are relatively small (among 
China's 31 provincial-level administrative entities, 
Xinjiang's GDP ranks 25th and Ningxia's 29th). 
Xinjiang and Ningxia also have few export-oriented 
businesses and rely heavily on Central Government 
fiscal transfers and investment associated with 
China's Great West Development Strategy.  Although 
this provides some cushion from a global economic 
slowdown, Ningxia and Xinjiang are also large oil, 
coal, and mineral producers and their poor rural 
populations rely on outside sources of income that may 
be threatened by slower economic growth.  Although our 
contacts have not seen a large-scale return of migrant 
workers to date, the slowing economy's full impact may 
not be fully apparent until the Chinese New Year 
holiday in late January when migrant workers return 
home and may or may not return to jobs elsewhere in 
China.  Increased infrastructure investment itself may 
boost overall economic growth in Ningxia, Xinjiang, 
and other inland provinces, but other measures focused 
on supporting consumption and livelihoods of lower 
income populations are also important to monitor given 
the government's increasing concerns about social 
stability. END COMMENT. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Economic Downturn's Impact: Limited So Far 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Emboffs visited the Ningxia Hui Autonomous 
Region October 15-17 and the Xinjiang Uighur 
Autonomous Region November 10-14.  Xinjiang officials 
said there were ongoing government meetings about the 
economy and the government's fiscal stimulus package. 
They provided a generally sanguine picture on the 
impact of the global and domestic economic downturn. 
Wang Guoming, Director of the Xinjiang Poverty 
Alleviation Office, claimed that the Xinjiang economy 
was not suffering yet and that new construction 
projects were starting almost weekly and many 
companies from coastal and central China were still 
investing in energy and infrastructure projects. 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to Habai Matai, Vice Director of 
Xinjiang's Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation 
Bureau, the broader economic outlook for Xinjiang was 
largely unchanged and the local impact would be less 
than other provinces.  Habai Matai said that worsening 
economic circumstances in Central Asian economies such 
as Kazakhstan were hurting trade, and that many 
Xinjiang-Central Asian joint venture and construction 
projects are on hold.  But Habai Matai also noted that 
trade with many Central Asian countries was still 
small, and that poor business environments, 
particularly in Tajikistan, limited China's trade and 
investment in the region.  Zhu Zi'an at the Xinjiang 
Development and Reform Commission (XJDRC) said 
Xinjiang's trade with the United States, particularly 
exports, dropped dramatically over the last year.  But 
according to Zhu, Xinjiang firms are generally not 
internationally oriented and are therefore not as 
likely to be hurt by a slowdown in the global economy. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In an October 16 meeting with the Ningxia 
Development and Reform Commission, local government 
 
BEIJING 00004327  002 OF 004 
 
 
economists said RMB appreciation was hurting exports, 
but that the impact on Ningxia will be small.  They 
also commented that in the long term RMB appreciation 
will force companies to be more competitive and 
contribute to rebalancing the economy toward domestic- 
led, cleaner growth.  Ma Zongyu, an economist with the 
Ningxia Statistical Bureau, was also concerned about 
the global economy and the impact on exports, but said 
China, and especially Ningxia, is not yet a completely 
open economy so the impact may be limited.  He said 
Ningxia in particular is likely to suffer less and he 
was still confident about overall growth prospects. 
(Note: In a recent news report, however, officials 
paint a more difficult picture of Ningxia's economic 
prospects. End Note.) 
 
¶6. (SBU) According to XJDRC's Zhu, real estate in 
Xinjiang did not start to boom until about six months 
ago, and is now probably at its peak.  Because the 
financial sector is less developed in Xinjiang, 
according to Zhu, speculation has been much less, and 
prices have only increased 25 percent.  Average real 
estate prices are relatively inexpensive and roughly 
equivalent to those in Zhengzhou City, Henan and 
Changsha in Hunan.  In Karamay, according to city 
officials, real estate has been stable; it did not 
boom and now is not expected to fall.  Karamay 
residents, according to officials, mostly did not buy 
apartments as speculative investments. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Business Perspectives: Despair, Hope, and Opportunity? 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Dr. Liu Gang, Deputy CEO at TBEA, a Xinjiang- 
based electrical power equipment and cable 
manufacturer with operations in Liaoning, Sichuan and 
Shandong, noted growing inventories among his 
competitors and said the slowdown in the real estate 
market is hurting demand for TBEA products used for 
wiring and structural reinforcement.  Liu expects the 
impact of the global and domestic economic slowdown on 
TBEA will be delayed.  Liu explained that TBEA, unlike 
textile firms, is not as susceptible to as lower 
overseas demand.  Liu also hopes that government 
fiscal expenditures on railroads and power generation 
will help boost business.  But he is also concerned 
that a longer 3-5 year prolonged slowdown is also 
possible, in which case TBEA would be hurt by reduced 
demand for power consumption.  Liu also said that 
TBEA's solar power business was seeing a sharp drop in 
demand from the United States and Europe, although 
some of the impact is being moderated by long-term 
contracts. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Liu claimed that TBEA is not laying off any 
workers, and is using this period to restructure its 
workforce by hiring graduates in engineering and 
technical fields.  The company will reduce hiring this 
year and recruit at fewer, higher quality universities. 
Liu said he expects to have more choice this year for 
top students than in the past. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Emboff also spoke to a computer security 
software salesperson whose company was expanding its 
business in Xinjiang.  He said the economy does not 
present a big problem yet for his company because it 
has a large domestic market share.  He explained that 
as large companies face tighter competition in a 
tougher economic environment they actually try to 
expand market share and hire more sales people.  But 
administrative and support staff faced possible job 
loss if his company moves to cut costs, he added.  A 
small processed food wholesale distribution manager in 
Urumqi told Emboff that business is very bad and that 
consumers are not spending, but Emboffs did not hear 
or see other signs of falling consumption in Urumqi or 
Karamay. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Rural Migrant Labor: Okay for Now 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Nurmuhanmad, Director of the Xinjiang 
Agriculture Bureau's Foreign Economic Cooperation 
 
BEIJING 00004327  003 OF 004 
 
 
Department, said the Xinjiang government is working to 
raise rural incomes and address poverty by moving 
labor (laodongli zhuanyi) out of the agriculture and 
into service and industry jobs either in towns or 
cities.  Poverty Alleviation Office officials in 
Xinjiang and Ningxia conduct training programs to 
prepare rural residents to take advantage of 
employment opportunities in coastal cities.  The 
Ningxia Poverty Alleviation Office also links 
graduates of its vocational training programs with 
prospective employers in coastal cities. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) According to Wang Guoming of the Xinjiang 
Poverty Alleviation Office, the remittances from 
migrants workers from Xinjiang working in major 
coastal urban areas are significant, and add to 
housing construction and consumption in Xinjiang rural 
communities.  Xinjiang migrant workers, according to 
Wang, mostly work in restaurants or run small 
individual businesses selling raisons or other 
Xinjiang products.  Wang surmised that these jobs 
involve non-discretionary spending that is less likely 
to suffer from lower demand as the economy slows. 
Xinjiang Foreign Affairs Office contacts said they had 
not heard news of migrant workers from Xinjiang 
loosing jobs or returning to the region.  In Karamay, 
according to city officials, most migrant workers are 
engaged in manual labor and construction work, as well 
as services and small individual businesses (getihu). 
They claim that an unemployment wave (shiyechao) is 
not net yet evident. 
 
¶12. (SBU) As part of Ningxia's effort to raise rural 
incomes, the Region's Labor Bureau also buys train 
tickets and makes arrangements for rural residents to 
travel to Xinjiang each fall to pick cotton, according 
to Ningxia Poverty Alleviation Office officials. 
Farmers from Ningxia as well as Sichuan, Gansu, 
Shaanxi and elsewhere earn 3000-4000 RMB for a two 
week stint per year, and cotton harvest wages are 
rising due to the dearth of workers.  (Note: According 
to Railway Bureau passenger statistics an estimated 
663,000 temporary cotton workers worked in Xinjiang 
during the 2008 harvest.  End Note.) 
 
¶13. (SBU) Despite the current shortage of temporary 
cotton laborers and increasing wages, a number of 
contacts said falling cotton demand and mechanization 
may threaten this source of supplemental rural income 
in the future.  Officials at Xinjiang's Agriculture 
and Animal Husbandry bureaus worried that the demand 
for Xinjiang-produced cotton will fall as textile 
factories close in coastal China as well as other 
export markets such as Pakistan.  They explained that 
Xinjiang produces one-third of China's cotton, and 
one-half of Xinjiang farmers' income is from cotton 
production.  They also noted that the impact will 
likely be greatest in Uighur-dominated Southern 
Xinjiang, the source of most of Xinjiang's cotton. 
(Comment: The cotton sector is heavily subsidized. 
Although demand is slumping, the government is looking 
to protect the cotton sector by raising the floor 
price for state cotton procurement and increasing 
cotton purchases for the national cotton reserve.  End 
Comment.) 
 
¶14. (SBU) According to Wang Gongjun, Brigade Leader of 
the 136th Construction and Production Corps (CPC, or 
"bingtuan") Farm near Karamay, over the next few years 
his brigade will gradually stop using migrant cotton 
pickers during the harvest season as they increase 
mechanization.  Wang claimed that other CPC cotton 
farms across Xinjiang are moving in the same direction, 
but officials at the Xinjiang Construction and 
Production Corps Development and Reform Commission 
said that the mechanization process will be gradual 
and require more time to play out across the region. 
(Comment: Although the numbers of migrant workers who 
supplement their income by picking cotton in Xinjiang 
is small compared to those working in factories, over 
time this trend could have an impact on rural 
communities in a number of poor inland provinces. End 
Comment.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
BEIJING 00004327  004 OF 004 
 
 
Infrastructure: Waiting For the Next Gravy Train 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Contacts in Xinjiang highlighted the 
important role that Central Government infrastructure 
investment and state-owned enterprises play in the 
economy, especially given the smaller role of foreign 
direct investment.  In Ningxia, Agricultural and Animal 
Husbandry Bureau officials also highlighted the 
importance of Central Government fiscal transfers that 
Ningxia receives as a minority region.  The Ningxia 
Development and Reform Commission's Yu Dengbo said 
Ningxia also benefited from the Great West Development 
Strategy, particularly in the areas of infrastructure, 
environmental programs, and education.  He explained 
that Central Government fiscal transfers comprise 30 to 
40 percent of the Region's government budget. 
 
¶16. (SBU) A number of contacts said they expected the 
Central Government stimulus package to boost 
infrastructure investment further, and also cited 
rural and social safety net expenditures as a likely 
target for more funding.  Karamay's Vice Mayor Zhao 
Wusheng said he hoped a number of nearby 
infrastructure projects planned or under way (e.g., 
train lines and highway upgrades linking Karamay to 
cities to the South and North) would get more funding, 
along with education and other social programs.  Zhao 
also said he thought more funding would go to central 
and western china development strategies. 
 
RANDT