08BEIJING3497
U.S. Presidential Paralympics Delegation Meeting with
Tue Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8348
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3497/01 2530839
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 090839Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9806
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 003497 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO OFFICE VETERANS AFFAIRS WASHDC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MASS KOLY OVIP CH NK IR TW
SUBJECT: U.S. Presidential Paralympics Delegation Meeting with 
Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping 
 
(U) This cable is Sensitive But Unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) September 8, 2008; 10:40 am; Diaoyutai State Guesthouse, 
Beijing, China. 
 
¶2. (U) Participants: 
 
UNITED STATES 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs James B. Peake 
Ambassador Clark T. Randt, Jr. 
Kirk Bauer, Executive Director, Disabled Sports USA 
Jean Driscoll, Paralympic Gold Medalist 
LTC. Gregory Gadson, United States Army 
Kevin Szott, Paralympic Gold Medalist 
Trischa Zorn, Paralympic Gold Medalist 
Michael Crain, U.S. Embassy Beijing 
Eric Barboriak, Embassy Political Officer (notetaker) 
Jim Brown, interpreter 
 
PRC 
Vice President Xi Jinping 
Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei 
Assistant Foreign Minister Liu Jieyi 
Director General Zheng Zeguang, MFA North American and Oceanian 
Affairs Department 
Deputy Director General Deng Hongbo, MFA North American and Oceanian 
Affairs Department 
Assistant to Vice President Xi Jinping Zhong Shaojun 
MFA notetakers 
Zhang Yu, interpreter 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Vice President Xi Jinping said the attendance of U.S. 
Presidential Delegations to the Olympic and Paralympic Games 
demonstrates U.S. support for China's efforts to host these events. 
Secretary Peake congratulated China on hosting the Paralympics and 
offered condolences for the loss of life and property in the 
aftermath of the May 12 earthquake centered in Sichuan Province. 
Vice President Xi stated that China's successful hosting of the 
Paralympics should have a positive effect on the situation of people 
with disabilities in China.  Both the United States and China should 
adhere to the three Sino-American communiques and must "properly 
handle sensitive issues and issues of concern to both sides" so that 
U.S.-China relations will continue to prosper, Vice President Xi 
said.  Taiwan "is the core issue of our bilateral relationship." 
Noting that we are "now at a critical juncture" and that 
cross-Strait relations are moving in a positive direction, Vice 
President Xi stated that China hopes the United States does not sell 
advanced weapons to Taiwan, and that Taiwan should not join 
international organizations where state sovereignty is a 
prerequisite.  End Summary. 
 
Olympics Congratulations/Earthquake Condolences 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (SBU) In his welcoming remarks, Vice President Xi stated that 
President Bush's attendance with his family at the Olympics Opening 
Ceremony, the attendance of the Presidential Delegation led by 
Secretary of Labor Chao at the Olympics Closing Ceremony, and the 
participation of the Presidential Delegation led by Secretary Peake 
in the Paralympics Opening Ceremony demonstrate the support of the 
U.S. Government and the American people for China's efforts in 
hosting the Olympic and Paralympic Games, support that China very 
much appreciates.  Vice President Xi offered condolences for loss of 
life and property and encouragement in rebuilding in the aftermath 
of Hurricane Gustav. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Secretary Peake complimented the Chinese Government on 
hosting a magnificent Opening Ceremony and said the Chinese 
Government can be rightfully proud of its efforts in hosting the 
Paralympic Games.  Secretary Peake offered "condolences and 
congratulations" on China's efforts to deal with the May 12 Sichuan 
earthquake, adding that both countries have faced major challenges 
from natural disasters. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Vice President Xi stated that the Chinese Government and 
people appreciate the good wishes and assistance offered by the 
United States and its people in the wake of the Sichuan earthquake. 
He said that China "has won victory in the first stage of work" in 
rescue and disaster assistance and now is in the midst of organizing 
a post-earthquake rebuilding plan that should be completed within 
three years.  Vice President Xi pointed out that because China must 
deal with typhoons four to five times per year, it has accumulated 
experience and knowledge that may be helpful to the United States in 
dealing with the effects of hurricanes, adding that the United 
 
BEIJING 00003497  002 OF 003 
 
 
States and China should exchange information and develop cooperation 
in this area. 
 
Meaning of the Olympics and Paralympics 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Vice President Xi said that China's success in hosting the 
Olympics is in promoting the Olympic Spirit.  By fulfilling China's 
100-year-old dream to host the Olympics, China not only hosted a 
sports event, but provided an opportunity for the world to build 
mutual understanding.  He said that China's goal is to host the 
Olympic and Paralympic Games with "equal splendor."  Vice President 
Xi said that the Olympic Spirit stresses "peace and progress," but 
the Paralympic Spirit stresses "humanitarianism and care for 
people."  He said the success of the Paralympic Games should promote 
efforts to improve the life of people with disabilities. 
 
Situation of Disability in China 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Vice President Xi said that 83 million of the over 600 
million people with disabilities in the world live in China.  Though 
China made great efforts in the lead-up to the Paralympic Games, it 
must do more to help people with disabilities.  A successful 
Paralympic Games will play an important role in raising the general 
public's awareness of disability issues, which, he said, should help 
open a "new chapter" for people with disabilities in China.  During 
visits in Beijing, he said he witnessed "obvious changes" and 
improvements in the situation of the disabled, noting many 
community-based approaches and the involvement of over 100 
organizations in helping people with disabilities. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Vice President Xi noted that China has been sending teams 
to participate in the Paralympic Games since 1982, and in the Athens 
Games, China achieved great success, winning the most overall and 
gold medals.  He hopes that such success continues in the Beijing 
Paralympic Games and that the "never give up" and "self-supporting" 
attitude of the Paralympic athletes will be an inspiration to people 
with disabilities and the rest of society.  Vice President Xi wished 
success to the U.S. team and noted already the stiff competition 
during the events has resulted in China not winning a number of 
events it had been expected to dominate. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Secretary Peake agreed that the Paralympic Games set an 
important example that demonstrates individuals can rise above 
disability and be successful in achievements, adding that he is 
particularly impressed by the performance of the 300 Chinese 
athletes participating in the Games. 
 
U.S.-China relations 
-------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Vice President Xi stated that U.S.-China relations have 
been growing steadily and that the two sides have kept "in close 
contact" through many high-level visits and working-level exchanges. 
 He said the Senior Dialogue and Strategic Economic Dialogue have 
"produced good results" and helped to expand bilateral cooperation. 
Vice President Xi noted that the two sides have had "effective 
consultation" on international and regional issues, including the 
Six-Party process and consultations on Iran.  He said the United 
States and China have treated each other as "partners" on trade and 
economic issues. 
 
¶12. (SBU) China attaches great importance to a "constructive, 
cooperative" relationship with the United States, and "now, at this 
critical juncture," both sides must remain committed to enhancing 
bilateral ties through adherence to the three communiques, Vice 
President Xi said.  In addition, the United States and China must 
"properly handle sensitive issues and issues of concern to both 
sides."  Through this approach, the United States and China will 
have a "stable, sound, continuously-growing and dynamic" 
relationship. 
 
Taiwan 
------ 
 
¶13. (SBU) Vice President Xi said Taiwan "is the core issue of our 
bilateral relationship."  He noted positive developments in 
cross-Strait relations and said that China is working to solve 
problems and issues through "practical means."  The promotion of 
people-to-people, cultural and economic exchanges has been effective 
in improving cross-Strait relations, which he said, are "heading in 
a direction" that serves to maintain peace and stability across the 
Strait and in the Asia-Pacific region. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Vice President Xi said the PRC's one China policy is 
unchanged and that China appreciates that the United States has 
maintained its commitment to the one China policy and the three 
 
BEIJING 00003497  003 OF 003 
 
 
communiques.  He stated that Taiwan should not be allowed to join 
international organizations for which state sovereignty is a 
prerequisite, a position China has stated repeatedly.  "In no way," 
he added, should "a wrong signal be sent to Taiwan independence 
supporters and separatists" on this issue.  Vice President Xi said 
China hopes the United States will not sell advanced weapons to 
Taiwan.  By adhering to this approach, he said, U.S.-China bilateral 
relations will grow in a manner that serves the interests of both 
peoples and the interests of stability in the world. 
 
¶15. (U) The delegation cleared on this cable. 
RANDT