08BEIJING4442
DECEMBER 4 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DALAI LAMA AND FRANCE, INDIA
Thu Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8892
OO RUEHAG RUEHCN RUEHDF RUEHGH RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4442/01 3392310
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 042310Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1228
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6780
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0241UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004442 
 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PARM ECON EFIN ETRD CH FR IN PK SU
JA, KS 
 
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 4 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DALAI LAMA AND FRANCE, INDIA 
AND PAKISTAN, SIX-PARTY TALKS, SUDANESE PRESIDENT BASHIR 
 
¶1. Key points at the December 4 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China hopes to "repair" its relationship with France, but urges 
France to "take seriously the feelings of the Chinese people" with 
regard to the planned meeting between French President Nicolas 
Sarkozy and the Dalai Lama. 
 
-- Both India and Pakistan are China's "friendly neighbors" and 
China urges both countries to "step-up dialogue" in order to ensure 
that stability returns to the region. 
 
-- "Active preparation" for the upcoming round of Six-Party Talks is 
taking place. 
 
-- China hopes the relevant parties concerned with the International 
Criminal Court (ICC) indictment of Sudanese President Bashir will 
engage in "dialogue" in order to "properly handle the issue." 
 
Dalai Lama and France 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. China has repeatedly stated its position regarding French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy's planned meeting with the Dalai Lama, 
said MFA spokesperson Liu Jianchao at the December 4 MFA press 
briefing when asked about the potential impact of the meeting on 
Sino-French relations.  Liu said China's position was "clear," and 
that China has always viewed its relationship with France from a 
"long-term and strategic perspective." Liu added that China hopes to 
"repair" its relationship with France, but that France must "take 
seriously the feelings of the Chinese people" on this issue.  He 
noted that the planned meeting had "raised strong dissatisfaction 
amongst the Chinese public" and that China hopes France will "make 
the right choice" and "create conditions" for an improvement of 
relations. He added that the Chinese public must "remain calm" 
despite its dissatisfaction. 
 
¶3. When asked about the impact on Sino-French trade relations, Liu 
responded that China "attaches great importance" to business 
relations with France, and that these relations are "closely 
related" to China's "strategic partnership" with France. 
 
India and Pakistan 
------------------ 
 
¶4. When asked whether China was in close contact with the Pakistani 
government in the wake of the Mumbai terror attacks, Liu responded 
that both India and Pakistan are China's "friendly neighbors," and 
that both countries should "step-up dialogue" in order to ensure 
that stability returns to the region.  Liu added that China "firmly 
opposes" acts of terrorism such as those carried out in Mumbai. 
When asked to respond to a comment made by the Indian Foreign 
Minister Pranab Mukherjee that a country had the right to respond to 
such a terror attack, Liu said that China "takes note" that Indian 
leaders have made "remarks," but that it hoped the two countries 
would diffuse the current situation through "dialogue and 
consultation."  Responding to question about Iranian President 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's comments regarding China's vulnerability to 
similar attacks, Liu wondered why President Ahmadinejad would make 
such comments, and said that China will do all it can to "step-up" 
its international cooperation to combat terrorism. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶5. When asked to comment on the upcoming round of Six-Party Talks, 
Liu said that China has already proposed a date for the talks, and 
that "active preparation" is taking place. 
 
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6. When asked about the possible International Criminal Court (ICC) 
indictment of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, Liu noted that 
China "attaches great importance" to Security Council resolutions, 
but that it also "respects relevant principles" of "sovereignty and 
territorial integrity."  As for the ICC prosecution of President 
Bashir, Liu said China hopes the relevant parties will engage in 
"dialogue" in order to "properly handle the issue." 
 
RMB exchange rate depreciation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. When asked to comment on why the Renminbi (RMB) exchange rate 
depreciated when it was expected to rise during the Strategic 
Economic Dialogue (SED) now taking place in Beijing, Liu explained 
that, since 2005 when China adjusted its exchange rate policy, the 
 
BEIJING 00004442  002 OF 002 
 
 
RMB exchange rate has become more "flexible and interactive," and 
now depends on the market.  He added that China will continue to 
"adopt the floating exchange rate system" in the future. 
 
Belgian journalist 
------------------ 
 
¶8. When asked to comment on a Chinese Government report concluding a 
Belgian journalist was not attacked in Henan province as he had 
claimed, Liu said that the MFA and Henan provincial authorities are 
continuing to investigate the issue, and that it was hoped the 
situation would be "properly handled." 
 
EU food ban 
----------- 
 
¶9. Commenting on a question about the recent EU ban on soy-based 
infant food products from China due to melamine contamination, Liu 
said that China "attaches great importance" to food safety, and that 
it expects to undertake "effective communication" with relevant 
countries on this issue. 
 
EU anti-dumping ruling 
---------------------- 
 
¶10. When asked whether the recent EU anti-dumping ruling might be 
related to the ongoing Sino-EU tension over the Dalai Lama, Liu had 
no substantive response but did indicate his hope that overall 
relations with the EU would not be damaged.   For more specific 
information about the ruling, Liu referred journalists to the 
Ministry of Commerce. 
 
Presidential Appointment 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. When asked to comment, Liu said that President-elect Obama's 
choice of New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson for Secretary of 
Commerce was an "internal affair" of the United States. 
 
Doha Round 
---------- 
 
¶12. When asked to speculate on whether there would be a breakthrough 
in the Doha Round of trade liberalization talks before the end of 
the year, Liu said that China's high-level participation at the 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and G-20 meetings last 
month sends a "strong signal" that China "promotes" the Doha Round, 
and that it is sincere about playing "an active and constructive 
role" on this issue. 
 
China-Japan-ROK Leaders' Meeting 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶13. Liu announced that Premier Wen Jiaobao will attend the upcoming 
China-Japan-ROK Leaders' Meeting to be held December 13 in Fukuoka, 
Japan.  During the meeting, it is expected that the three leaders 
will exchange views on "cooperation" and discuss "regional and 
international issues." 
 
RANDT