08BEIJING2030
May 27 MFA Press Briefing: Upcoming South Korean President
Tue May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3707
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2030/01 1481059
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271059Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7517
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0674
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1941
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9006UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM EAID KS KN CH
SUBJECT: May 27 MFA Press Briefing: Upcoming South Korean President 
Visit, Six-Party Talks, Human Rights, Sichuan Earthquake Aid 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 27 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- South Korean President Lee arrives in China for a state visit May 
27 and both countries aspire to bring their relationship to a "new 
level." 
 
-- VFM Wu Dawei will meet chief Six-Party Talks negotiators this 
week and China hopes "other relevant parties" can have "effective 
communications" at the bilateral level. 
 
-- China has made "great progress" on human rights and relief 
efforts after the Sichuan earthquake demonstrated that the Chinese 
Government puts its people first. 
 
-- During the U.S.-China Human Rights Dialogue China reiterated its 
position that disputes should be settled in a constructive manner 
with no double standards. 
 
-- Earthquake relief pledges currently total 1.9 billion RMB (USD 
275 million); foreign rescue teams have all left and China expresses 
its "sincere thanks." 
 
South Korean President in China on State Visit 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. At the May 27 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesperson Qin 
Gang said ROK President Lee Myung-bak would arrive in China the same 
day for a state visit.  China and South Korea are important partners 
and Chinese leaders look forward to deep and extensive discussion 
with Lee of major regional and international issues.  Both countries 
aspire to bring their bilateral relationship to a new level.  The 
U.S.-ROK military partnership is "left over from history" and we 
cannot approach today's security issues with an outdated mentality. 
Countries that share the same security interests should strengthen 
exchanges and build mutual trust to safeguard jointly regional 
security, Qin stated.  China stands ready to work with South Korea 
and other nations in this regard. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶3. Qin said VFM Wu Dawei will meet in Beijing the chief Six Party 
Talks negotiators from the United States, North Korea, South Korea 
and Japan, and exchange views on how to advance the Six-Party Talks. 
 He said that China hopes "other relevant parties" can have 
"effective communications" at the bilateral level, so that the 
parties can implement the second phase of the Six Party process in a 
comprehensive and balanced way.  Asked when the DPRK will deliver 
its nuclear declaration, Qin said China hopes that the Six-Party 
Talks will continue to make progress as quickly as possible.  He 
noted that there have been recent "frequent exchanges" between the 
United States and North Korea.  China believes this is "very good 
and conducive" and hopes the two sides will continue this momentum. 
China would like to play a constructive role in this regard, said 
Qin.  With strengthened mutual trust in the region, parties involved 
can reach a consensus on the "framework" of a Northeast Asia 
security mechanism. 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶4. With respect to criticism from the international community of 
China's human rights record, Qin said China had made "great 
progress," and that citizens' rights and interests are protected by 
law.  The Sichuan earthquake demonstrated that the Chinese 
Government is putting its people first and sparing no efforts, he 
said.  March disturbances in Lhasa were criminal acts of violence, 
including looting and arson, Qin stressed, and the Chinese 
Government will deal with the criminals responsible according to the 
law.  Qin questioned what percentage of the "international 
community" these "biased-minded" countries actually represented. 
 
U.S.-China Human Rights Dialogue 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Qin said that in the U.S.-China Human Rights Dialogue, led by 
Chinese MFA International Organizations Director General Wu Hailong 
and U.S.  State Department Assistant Secretary for Democracy, Human 
Rights, and Labor David J. Kramer, China reiterated its position 
that disputes should be settled in a constructive manner with no 
double standards in line with the principle of mutual respect.  Wu 
reportedly told Kramer that he is fully confident of the human 
rights situation in China.  Kramer reportedly said the United States 
stands ready to work with China to settle disputes in a constructive 
way, and that progress has been encouraging.  Qin said that Kramer 
expressed sympathy and condolences regarding the Sichuan earthquake 
and spoke highly of China's performance in the disaster's aftermath, 
demonstrating the Chinese Government's respect for human rights. 
Kramer also met with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, Assistant Foreign 
 
BEIJING 00002030  002 OF 002 
 
 
Minister Liu Jieyi and other officials during his visit, said Qin. 
 
Sichuan Earthquake Aid Efforts 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. So far, 155 governments and NGOs and "eight dozen" international 
organizations have donated to earthquake relief efforts.  The value 
of aid pledges currently totals 1.9 billion RMB (USD 275 million), 
and the MFA has already received roughly one third of that amount. 
Fifty-four governments and civil organizations have also donated 
materials including over 210,000 tents.  Foreign rescue teams have 
"all left for home" and China sends its "sincere thanks" for their 
help. 
 
PICCUTA