08BEIJING686
FEBRUARY 26 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECRETARY RICE VISIT,
Tue Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7247
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0686/01 0571158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261158Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5333
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000686 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR KOLY ETRD CH JA RS SU SR BM
KS, KN, TW, XA 
 
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 26 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECRETARY RICE VISIT, 
CHINA'S VATICAN POLICY, REACTION TO "88 GENERATION'S" CALL TO 
BOYCOTT OLYMPICS, JAPANESE DUMPLING ISSUE 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 26, 2008 MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
-- The spokesman reported that both Secretary Rice and FM Yang 
stressed the importance of the consensus President Bush and 
President Hu had reached on the bilateral relationship. 
 
-- Yang stressed to Secretary Rice that Taiwan is China's biggest 
concern and expressed appreciation for her statements against 
Taiwan's UN referendum and in support of a one China policy, said 
Liu. 
 
-- Both sides expressed their satisfaction with DPRK 
denuclearization developments and a desire to press ahead with the 
Six-Party Talks. 
 
-- China believes the Iran nuclear issue should be left to 
diplomatic negotiations to "sort out." 
 
--China wants to develop Vatican relations as long as the Vatican 
severs official relations with Taiwan and does not "interfere in 
domestic matters in the name of religious affairs." 
 
--China is opposed to the politicization of the Olympic Games and 
views its policy towards Burma as mutually beneficial and conducive 
to a peaceful and democratic resolution. 
 
-- Chinese and Japanese law enforcement cooperation to investigate 
the poisoned dumpling issue continues. 
 
U.S. Secretary of State Rice's Visit 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. During the February 26 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson 
Liu Jianchao reviewed Secretary Rice's meeting with Foreign Minister 
Yang.  Both Secretary Rice and FM Yang stressed the importance of 
the consensus President Bush and President Hu had reached on 
bilateral relations as the groundwork for promoting the 
relationship, said Liu. 
 
¶3. According to Liu, FM Yang noted the upcoming 30th anniversary of 
the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States 
and China and said "major progress has been made in the U.S.-China 
bilateral relationship."  Both sides should look to develop 
"long-term and strategic interests," Yang noted during the meeting, 
said Liu.  Yang stressed to Secretary Rice that the issue of Taiwan 
is China's biggestconcern and expressed appreciation for her 
staements aginst Taiwan's UN referendum and insupport of a one 
China policy, Liu said.  Yang added that he hoped that the United 
States would "take all necessary measures" to prevent Taiwan 
independence, safeguard cross-strait stability and work towards 
common strategic interests, stated Liu. 
 
¶4. According to Liu, Secretary Rice said that U.S.-China relations 
had a "sound tradition" and highlighted cooperation on bilateral and 
global issues. Commenting on the benefits of the bilateral economic 
relationship, Secretary Rice characterized the Strategic Economic 
Dialogue as "fruitful," said Liu.  She expressed appreciation for 
China's role in issues such as Darfur and added that the United 
States opposes the politicization of the Olympic Games, reported 
Liu.  Reiterating the United States adherence to a "one China 
policy," she stated that the United States opposes the Taiwan 
referendum because it would be "no good to any party," continued 
Liu. 
 
¶5. Both sides expressed their satisfaction with DPRK 
denuclearization developments and a desire to press ahead with the 
Six-Party Talks.  Secretary Rice and FM Yang also exchanged views on 
nuclear issues, Iran and Darfur, said Liu.  He added that Secretary 
Rice will also have meetings with President Hu Jintao, Premier Wen 
Jiabao, and State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan. 
 
¶6. In response to questions about the resumption of a U.S.-China 
Human Rights Dialogue and establishment of a direct military 
telephone line, Liu confirmed that both had been agreed upon but the 
arrangements had not been finalized. 
 
Iran Sanctions Proposal 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. In response to a question about China's position on the U.S. 
draft sanctions resolution against Iran in the UN Security Council, 
Liu said that China believes it should be left to diplomatic 
negotiations to "sort out this issue."  China hopes all members of 
the UN Security Council will continue their consultations, he 
continued.  China's main goal in the matter was to "create 
conditions for the proper resolution" and "resume talks between 
relevant countries," Liu stated. 
 
China-Vatican Relations 
 
BEIJING 00000686  002 OF 002 
 
 
----------------------- 
 
¶8. Responding to a follow-up question from last week's press 
briefing on China-Vatican "contact," Liu said that China wants to 
improve the China-Vatican relationship according to two fundamental 
principles: that the Vatican sever "so-called diplomatic relations 
with Taiwan" and will not "interfere with China's internal affairs 
in the name of religious affairs."  In line with these principles, 
according to Liu, "there have been contacts." 
 
Olympic Boycott 
--------------- 
 
¶9. Asked China's response to the Burmese organization 
"88 Generation's" call for a boycott of the Olympic Games, Liu said 
he wasn't familiar with this specific organization, but affirmed 
China's "friendly policy" towards Burma.  Liu characterized China's 
Burma policy as "beneficial to the Burmese and Chinese people" and 
"conducive to the democratic process as well as peace and 
reconciliation in Burma."  Liu said that China is firmly against any 
"politicization of the Olympics." 
 
China-Japan Police Cooperation on the Dumpling Issue 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶10. When asked for confirmation about whether or not the Vice 
Minister from the Ministry of Public Security went to "the scene" to 
guide the poisoned dumpling investigation, Liu stated that the 
Deputy Chief of the Japanese National Police Agency and Vice 
Minister Meng Kongwei from the MPS met in China to exchange views on 
the matter.  Both sides place great significance on the matter and 
hope for a conclusion to the investigation as soon as possible, Liu 
said. 
 
Hu Jia's Arrest, Repatriated Tibetan from Nepal 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶11. In response to a question about whether or not human rights 
activist Hu Jia's arrest had a connection to the Olympics or was 
related to politics, Liu stated that China operates according to the 
rule of law and that anyone who violated Chinese law would be 
punished.  Liu was not familiar with the case of the Tibetan 
repatriated from Nepal but stated that the international community 
needs to "strengthen cooperation on illegal immigration."