09BEIJING1549
JUNE 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DPRK, CENSORSHIP SOFTWARE, NEW
Tue Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4771
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1549/01 1602311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 092311Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4411
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0506
RUEHVB/AMEMBASSY ZAGREB 0095
RUEHLC/AMEMBASSY LIBREVILLE 0110
RUEHSL/AMEMBASSY BRATISLAVA 0073
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH KN KS BR GB RS LO GB
 
SUBJECT: JUNE 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DPRK, CENSORSHIP SOFTWARE, NEW 
ORLEANS MAYOR 
 
BEIJING 00001549  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 9 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China hoped all parties would "proceed from the interests of 
denuclearization and strengthening peace and stability" on the 
Korean Peninsula to avoid a deterioration of the situation. 
 
-- Asked directly whether the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and 
Mutual Assistance between China and North Korea was still in effect, 
the spokesperson responded that all parties should work toward the 
denuclearization of the peninsula and prevent the escalation of the 
situation. 
 
--"Green Dam-Youth Escort" software was designed to "filter and 
block" unhealthy, violent and pornographic content, said the 
spokesperson. 
 
-- New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin and some members of his staff had 
been placed under "medical observation" in Shanghai because 
passengers on his flight had "confirmed cases of H1N1." 
 
 
North Korea Nuclear Test and American Journalists 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. China "firmly opposed" the North Korean nuclear test of May 25, 
said spokesperson Qin Gang at the June 9 regularly scheduled 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs press briefing.  China hoped all parties 
would "proceed from the interests of denuclearization and 
strengthening peace and stability" in the region to avoid a 
deterioration of the situation, he added.  China called on all 
parties to remain "restrained and calm" to aid in the resumption of 
the Six-Party Talks.  China was ready to "join hands with others," 
stay in close communication and make contributions toward the 
resolution of the issue.  Asked directly whether the Treaty of 
Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance between China and 
North Korea was still in effect, Qin avoided a direct answer and 
simply responded that all parties should work toward the 
denuclearization of the peninsula and prevent the escalation of the 
situation.  Regarding the two American journalists in the custody of 
North Korea, Qin said that the United States and North Korea should 
work to "properly resolve the issue."  South Korean Six-Party Talks 
envoy Wi Sung-lac was in China to discuss the Korean nuclear issue 
and other issues with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and Vice Foreign 
Minister Wu Dawei. 
 
Green Dam Censorship Software 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3. Western media has reported that beginning July 1, all PCs sold in 
China must be loaded with software, brand named "Green Dam-Youth 
Escort" that will block certain websites.  Critics warn that the 
software will provide government Internet censors even more control 
over Internet content.  The MFA spokesman said "Green Dam-Youth 
Escort" software was designed to "filter and block" unhealthy, 
violent and pornographic content.  The spokesperson demanded to know 
whether the journalist asking the question knew about the software 
and whether he himself had children.  "If you had children," said 
Qin, "you would understand" the concerns of parents regarding 
unhealthy content online.  The Internet in China was "open" and the 
Chinese government sought to continue the development of the 
Internet.  The Chinese Internet was also "administered according to 
law to prevent the spread of harmful content." 
 
Mayor of New Orleans Quarantined 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin and some members of his staff had 
been placed under "medical observation" in Shanghai because 
passengers on his flight had "confirmed cases of H1N1," said the 
spokesperson.  Nagin and his staff were in stable and sound 
condition and the MFA is in close contact with the Shanghai 
authorities regarding the case.  Qin Gang said that he would like to 
"send his greetings to Mayor Nagin." 
 
Liu Xiaobo Detention 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. Asked about the detention of author and democracy activist Liu 
Xiaobo, Qin responded that "China was a country ruled by law and 
relevant authorities were handling the situation according to law." 
U.S. politicians should "respect the facts and international norms 
and stop interfering in China's internal affairs so as not to damage 
bilateral relations." 
 
 
BEIJING 00001549  002 OF 002 
 
 
Dalai Lama in Paris 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. China expressed "strong dissatisfaction and firm opposition" to 
the Paris municipal government's "obstinately disregarding China's 
position" by bestowing on the Dalai Lama honorary citizenship.  The 
move "aroused the great indignation of the Chinese people" and could 
damage Paris' relations with Chinese cities and the China-France 
bilateral relationship.  Qin warned that China-France relations had 
suffered due to the Tibet issue in the past but had been improving 
due to the efforts of "farsighted people on both sides."  China 
hoped France would remove obstacles to the relationship and urge 
Paris to take corrective measures so as not to "go further down the 
wrong track."  The Tibet issue was related to China's core interests 
of territorial integQ5OQ_erased "disappointment"nterprises and 
could have "great repercussions," said Qin.  The Chinese government 
always supported Chinese enterprises seeking foreign investment and 
the Rio Tinto-Chinalco agreement served the goal of mutual 
development.  Chinese enterprises would continue to carry out 
investment and cooperation overseas, said Qin.  "We hope prices for 
international mining resources can remain stable and the 
international market fully open," he added. 
 
Gabon President's Death 
----------------------- 
 
¶9. China mourned the loss of a "great friend," Gabon President Omar 
Bongo, said Qin.  Bongo was an excellent leader and prestigious 
politician who made significant contributions to Africa, said Qin. 
China sent its deep condolences to the Gabonese people.  China 
cherished its friendship with Gabon and stood willing to work with 
Gabon to improve friendship and cooperation. 
 
Air France Disaster Aftermath 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10. In the aftermath of the missing Air France flight, the Chinese 
government provided "positive assistance" to the families and 
companies of the nine Chinese citizens confirmed aboard, said Qin. 
The Chinese Ambassador to France also urged France to implement 
compensation for families of those onboard.  The MFA and Chinese 
Embassies and Consulates continued to keep a closeqOYChina hoped that Burma would ensure the safety of Chinese citizens 
there. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶12. Chinese president Hu Jintao would visit Russia to attend a 
conference among leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China as well 
as a meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization from June 
14-18.  Hu would also visit Slovakia and Croatia from June 14-18. 
Thai Foreign Minister Nitya Pibulsonggram will visit China from June 
10-11. 
 
PICCUTA