09BEIJING2061
MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARIES' CHU AND LOCKE VISITS TO CHINA,
Mon Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1375
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2061/01 2010907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200907Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5282
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002061 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARIES' CHU AND LOCKE VISITS TO CHINA, 
U.S. POLICY, DALAI LAMA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. SECRETARIES' CHU AND LOCKE VISITS TO CHINA 
 
"The two U.S. Secretaries: visit to China under a 'green cloak'" 
 
The independent Chinese weekly business newspaper distributed in 
major cities throughout China, Economic Observer (Jingji Guanchabao) 
(07/20): "The main agenda of Secretary Locke's visit to China was 
cooperation on new energy.  His intension of using the technology in 
market exchanges was very obvious.  Secretary Chu expressed earlier 
that the U.S. Government will impose a "carbon tariff" on the 
governments that have not yet implemented the mandatory measures of 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  The carbon tariff will openly 
and directly take China and other developing countries' wealth and 
put it into the treasury of developed countries, all in the name of 
environmental protection. 
 
An officer from the Chinese Ministry of Commerce says that the 
approval of the American Clean Energy and Security Act will disturb 
the international trade orders and bring a trade war. The analysts 
think that the purposes of the two Secretaries' visits to China are 
to sell American products, especially its advanced clean energy 
technologies, by utilizing their good relations in China.  Lin 
Boqiang, head to the China Centre for Energy Economics Research in 
Xiamen University, agrees with this view.  He explains that, after 
all, China is the biggest market for the application of clean 
energy. But Lin says that America should put their focus on 
providing China with more technologies and capital assistance rather 
than purely "selling their technologies".  Lin points out that 
developing countries faced many problems in their development 
process, including environmental and income disparity issues, 
therefore, they may make their own choices in the area of energy 
consumption. 
 
China sets itself against the approval of the "carbon tariff" Act. 
Chinese spokesman for the Ministry of Commerce, Yao Jian, expressed 
on July 15, that the "carbon tariff" policy is against the basic 
rules of WTO and the tendency of trade protectionism lies behind 
this Act under the cover of environment and energy issues, which may 
result in serial trade revenge. It is bad for the recovery of global 
economy." 
 
¶2. U.S. POLICY 
 
"Don't let space be full of the smell of gunpowder" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/20): " Although the 'Apollo mission to the 
moon' has gained praise, it is a cold war product and it stems from 
the need to control the world.  The military is the origin of the 
science of space exploration.  After the Apollo Mission, America's 
space plans had more clear targets.  After the Cold War, America's 
absolute advantages in space exploration increased its ambitions in 
taking its hegemony into space. According to the American way of 
thinking, in the 21 century, the one who controls space can control 
the world. 
If America had put its strong advantages in scientific technologies 
into solving the problems that the entire world is facing, such as 
sea water desalination and global warming, it would have gained 
tremendous achievements.  However, unfortunately, like all the 
hegemonic countries in history, the U.S. wouldn't make this choice. 
America is developing large scale space weapons, which strengthen 
the military space competition among global power countries and 
seriously threatens the peaceful usage of space resources.  It can 
be forecast that, with more countries being involved in space 
resource exploration, there will be more voices against space 
hegemony and militarization. The international society will more 
urgently call for a mechanism that can effectively prevent space 
militarization." 
 
¶3. DALAI LAMA 
 
"Indian media claims that Obama is interested in meeting the Dalai 
Lama" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/20): "Meeting with the Dalai Lama is a 
conventional method used by western politicians to put pressure on 
China and to interfere in the internal issues of the Chinese. 
According to the Times of India, the Obama administration is in 
contact with the Dalai to prepare for a meeting during the Dalai's 
U.S. visit between September and October. Chinese experts respond 
that the U.S. and China have had good bilateral relations since 
Obama took office.  If Obama really steps on this "red line" [meet 
with Dalai], it will inevitably lead to tensions between the U.S. 
 
BEIJING 00002061  002 OF 002 
 
 
and China.  Whether Obama will meet with the Dalai Lama is a widely 
controversial topic in the U.S.  Some analysts say that Obama is 
seeking China's support to combat the global financial crisis. Obama 
doesn't want to aggravate Beijing. However, during the past 10 
years, the U.S. has offended China on the issues of Dalai Lama many 
times. 
 
Professor Yin Hong from Renmin University told Global Times that 
President Obama was in contact with the Dalai during his election. 
The two sides have exchanged support for each other via letters. 
Besides, there are anti-China pressures in the U.S.  It is very 
likely that Obama will meet with the Dalai, but the location of 
their meeting may not be in the White House.  Yin continues that 
when the Dalai met with the German Premiere and French President, it 
brought tension to their bilateral relationship with China.  If 
Obama doesn't learn from Germany and France's experiences, bilateral 
ties between the U.S. and China will be tense for at least two 
months.  Hang Liping, from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 
says that Obama may wait until he finishes his Asian trip this 
November.  Obama is not willing to see China's cold back at the APEC 
meeting in Singapore this November." 
 
 
GOLDBERG