09BEIJING983
APRIL 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: NORTH KOREA, THAILAND, HUMAN
Tue Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9124
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0983/01 1041042
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141042Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3419
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0375
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6890
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI 0798
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 0536
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000983 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH KS KN JA IN PK PE FI
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: NORTH KOREA, THAILAND, HUMAN 
RIGHTS ACTION PLAN, INDIA 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 14 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China has "taken note" of North Korea's statement that it will 
boycott the Six-Party Talks.  All parties should work together to 
promote the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
 
-- China is "closely following the situation" in Thailand, a country 
that is a "friendly neighbor of China." 
 
-- The recently released National Human Rights Action Plan "makes 
clear China's objectives and measures" to "safeguard human rights in 
China for the next two years." 
 
-- China seeks "to have practical cooperation in every field with 
South Korea on the basis of equality." 
 
-- Asked whether China blocked a proposed Asia Development Bank loan 
to India because it included money for disputed territory, the 
spokesman said that "China supports the Asia Development Bank" and 
the "positive role" it plays for development countries. 
 
North Korea Reaction to UN Security Statement 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. China has "taken note" of North Korea's statement that it will 
boycott the Six-Party Talks, said spokesperson Jiang Yu at the April 
14 regularly scheduled MFA press briefing.  "Under the current 
circumstances," said Jiang, all parties should work together to 
promote the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.  China hopes 
that all parties will "proceed from their overall interests and 
exhibit restraint in order to resume the Six-Party Talks.  Regarding 
the potential adjustments to sanctions proscribed in UN Security 
Council Resolution 1718, Jiang said the "relevant committee will 
handle the issue."  The Six-Party Talks have "played an important 
role" in the promotion of denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, 
establishing trust and building a regional security mechanism. 
Jiang noted that the recent Security Council statement "supports the 
Six-Party Talks" and "calls for its resumption."  Asked whether the 
MFA could guarantee that Chinese companies are not engaging with 
North Korean companies in violation of relevant UN regulations, 
Jiang said that the question was "a very serious one" and that "as a 
permanent member of the UN Security Council," China has the 
"responsibility of upholding all Security Council resolutions."  The 
spokesman was "not aware" of reports that a Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference delegation is currently in North 
Korea, but said that "China will continue its cooperation with North 
Korea." 
 
Thailand Riots 
-------------- 
 
¶3. China is "closely following the situation" in Thailand, a country 
that is a "friendly neighbor of China."  China hopes that Thailand 
will stabilize and enjoy "harmonious development," said Jiang. 
 
China Human Rights Action Plan 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. The recently released National Human Rights Action Plan "makes 
clear China's objectives and measures" to "safeguard human rights in 
China for the next two years" said the spokesperson. China "does not 
use human rights to interfere in the affairs of other countries," 
said Jiang.  China's report on the human rights situation of the 
United States is "intended to remind the United States of its 
flaws."  China is ready to "promote human rights through dialogue." 
China also hopes that "relevant countries can be aware of China's 
achievements in human rights and not interfere." 
 
Korea and the Rise of China 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. Asked about statements by Korean government officials on the rise 
of China, Jiang said that China will cooperate with South Korea to 
combat the financial crisis.  China seeks "to have practical 
cooperation in every field with South Korea on the basis of 
equality." China's rise will "not pose a threat to others but 
provide an opportunity for cooperation." 
 
India ADB Loan 
-------------- 
 
¶6. Asked whether China blocked a proposed Asia Development Bank loan 
to India because it included money for disputed territory, Jiang 
said that "China supports the Asia Development Bank" and the 
 
BEIJING 00000983  002 OF 002 
 
 
"positive role" it plays for development countries.  China will 
"continue to make contributions" to the bank, said Jiang.  The 
border issue with the India is "pending" and China is willing to 
seek a "fair and reasonable resolution acceptable to both sides." 
 
Journalist Travel to Tibetan and Earth Quake Areas 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7. The policy of an "open Tibet has not changed" said Jiang when 
asked whether journalists are banned from visiting the region. 
Jiang said that interested journalists should "apply with local 
authorities" in order to visit.  Asked separately about foreign 
journalist access to areas affected by the Sichuan earth quake, 
Jiang said that she had "noted" that some foreign journalists had 
traveled to Sichuan.  The MFA is working with local authorities to 
organize a trip to the affected area, said Jiang. 
 
Pakistan and Terrorism 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked about Pakistan's efforts to combat the Taliban, Jiang said 
that China "always supports Pakistan's efforts to strike against 
terror." 
 
China-Peru FTA 
-------------- 
 
¶9. The Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between China and Peru is 
"currently in the national ratification process," said Jiang.  The 
agreement is the first FTA to be signed between China and a Latin 
American country and will help "combat the financial crisis." 
 
Somali Pirates 
-------------- 
 
¶10. China is working to "support and take part in" the fight against 
pirates.  China has sent vessels to the region and will follow UN 
resolutions and "strengthen cooperation." 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶11. Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan Richard 
Holbrooke will visit China from April 15-16.  Albanian Prime 
Minister Sali Berisha will visit China from the April 17-21. 
Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen will visit China from April 
19-22. 
 
WEINSTEIN