09BEIJING576
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S DIPLOMACY, RUSSIA, GAZA, TIBET
Thu Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0335
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0576/01 0640929
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050929Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2703
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000576 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S DIPLOMACY, RUSSIA, GAZA, TIBET 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. CHINA'S DIPLOMACY 
 
"What concepts does China have that would change the world?" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/05): "Recently, 'the summit on Chinese and 
western intellectuals' to discuss China's model and its 
international influence was held in Paris. For the past 30 years, 
several Chinese concepts, such as being 'practical and realistic', 
'harmony' and 'people's well-being being the most important' etc. 
have not only changed China but have also had an influence in the 
world. 'Be practical and realistic' is a typical Chinese concept. It 
coincides with a European concept during The Enlightenment; 'reason 
and logic'. This concept, being practical and realistic, has made 
China one of the countries that have had the least ideological 
prejudices in the world. 
 
China has prioritized its people's well-being and stability. This 
has enabled China to realize continuous development over three 
decades, something that has never happened in China before now. 
China's model has flaws, but all the achievements it has made have 
well established the global influence of China's model. 'Being 
practical and realistic' helps China not to blindly accept the 
West's concept of democracy. For the last 500 years, the West has 
taken the lead in the international political and economic order. 
This needs to be changed. The system of powers being dominated by 
Western countries is no longer working. None of the global issues 
can be solved based on the West-led world order or the Western 
influential system of today. China's rising process will be one 
where China's standards and model will take shape." 
 
¶2. RUSSIA 
 
"Russia waits for the U.S.' move" 
 
The official intellectual publication Guangming Daily (Guangming 
Ribao)(03/05): "Recently, president Obama wrote a letter to the 
Russian president. This move is taken to be an olive branch from 
Washington to Moscow. The U.S. government has made a new judgment 
concerning the U.S.-Russia relationship. What's more, Obama has 
suggested that the U.S. and Russia jointly restrain Iran from 
developing long range missiles. However, due to accumulated rancor, 
in the short term, the two can hardly reach any common views. The 
tension between the two countries was directly related to the Bush 
administration's policy on Russia. The U.S. attitude on the 
anti-missile deployment will be crucial to solving the tension. 
Russia has no cards to play. The U.S. has all the cards. Distrust is 
still deeply rooted between the U.S. and Russia. The financial 
crisis has been an opportunity for the Obama administration to erase 
the unilateral influence of the Bush administration concerning the 
bilateral relationship." 
 
¶3. GAZA 
 
"Difficulties and hope in Gaza's reconstruction" 
 
The official intellectual publication Guangming Daily (Guangming 
Ribao)(03/05): "The reconstruction of Gaza has become an effective 
means for the U.S. and Europe to make Hamas obey and to promote the 
Palestine-Israel peace talks. The existing difficulties are: how to 
put money in the right hands, how to spend the money and how to 
solve the political disputes behind the money. Two preconditions 
have to be met: first, Palestine has to reach reconciliation among 
its various parties and set up a joint government. Second, Gaza must 
realize a long-term cease fire. The reconstruction of Gaza is one 
proof that shows the Israel-Palestine issue is complicated. However, 
the general trend is peaceful development and the reconstruction has 
brought a ray of hope to the stalled Israel-Palestine talks." 
 
¶4. TIBET 
 
"Wrong stance on Tibet hinders ties with China" 
 
The official English-language newspaper China Daily commented 
(03/05): "This year marks the 50th anniversary of the quashing of 
the Dalai Lama-led revolt in the Tibet Autonomous Region and 
subsequent beginning of democratic reform....However, some 
Westerners; long harboring ill intentions towards China have taken 
advantage of the Tibet issue in order to force their misconceptions 
upon China. It is known that the Tibet issue is in essence not an 
issue of ethnicity, religion, or human rights, but of several 
Western infringements on China's sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and core national interests. Western nations should recognize that 
Tibet is an inalienable part of China and stop intervening if they 
want to remain on good terms with China....It is impossible for any 
 
BEIJING 00000576  002 OF 002 
 
 
Western country to not interact with China. However, it is 
impossible for the West to cooperate with China unless it develops 
an objective and unbiased stance on Tibet." 
 
PICCUTA