09BEIJING953
APRIL 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DPRK LAUNCH, IRAN DIALOGUE,
Thu Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4789
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0953/01 0992308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 092308Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3374
INFO RUEHAST/USOFFICE ALMATY 0003
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0146
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0369
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000953 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PARM EFIN KNNP KCRM CH KS KN FR IR
TW, XC, KZ, PP 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DPRK LAUNCH, IRAN DIALOGUE, 
XINJIANG, TIBET, LIMMT SANCTIONS, TAIWAN SHIP HIJACKING, CYBER-SPY 
ATTACK, ANTI-DUMPING SUIT, BO'AO FORUM 
 
BEIJING 00000953  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 9 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China believes "pressure will not help" the situation in North 
Korea, "diplomatic efforts" need to be continued and all parties 
should "exercise calmness, restraint and caution." 
 
-- China "takes note of" North Korea's announcement of having 
launched a satellite, as opposed to a missile. 
 
-- China maintains an "open attitude" toward proposals encouraging 
negotiation and dialogue with Iran. 
 
-- Regarding LIMMT, China opposes the United States "invoking 
domestic law" to impose sanctions on a Chinese company. 
 
-- Regarding the Taiwan fishing vessel hijacked by Somali pirates, 
China has contacted authorities in Taiwan to express its 
"willingness to assist" with the ship's rescue. 
 
-- Sino-French relations are in "recovery," and three former French 
leaders will visit China in April. 
 
-- China urges American media to "prudently" handle "erroneous 
accusations" alleging that Chinese cyber-spies hacked into the U.S. 
electric grid.  The spokesperson claimed the White House had denied 
the report. 
 
-- Former President George W. Bush will attend the Bo'ao Forum for 
Asia (BFA) April 17-19 in Hainan. 
 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶2. As a starting point, all relevant parties should work to 
"safeguard peace and stability" on the Korean Peninsula to "enhance 
understanding and mutual trust and to build harmony," said 
spokesperson Jiang Yu at the April 9 regular MFA press conference in 
response to a question about Senator McCain's recent comment that 
China should strengthen its stance against North Korea and push for 
stronger international sanctions through the UN Security Council 
(UNSC).  Jiang Yu added that "pressure will not help" the situation, 
"diplomatic efforts" need to be continued and all parties should 
"exercise calmness, restraint and caution." 
 
¶3. When asked if China would support a new UNSC resolution on North 
Korea or prefer a UNSC statement, Jiang Yu replied that China's 
position is that the UNSC should proceed with the "appropriate 
response" to safeguard "peace and stability" in the region.  She 
added that China has engaged in "communication and coordination" in 
"bilateral and multilateral channels" and hopes the issues can be 
"properly handled through dialogue and consultation." 
 
¶4. China "takes note" of North Korea's announcement of having 
launched a satellite, replied Jiang Yu when asked if China believed 
a satellite or a missile had been launched. 
 
P5+1 Statement on Iran 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. When asked about the recent statement issued by the P5+1 
announcing EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana's intention to 
invite the Iranian Government to engage in dialogue, Jiang Yu said 
China maintains an "open attitude" toward proposals encouraging 
negotiation and dialogue and hopes that a "long-term comprehensive 
resolution" of the issue can be found. 
 
Executions in Xinjiang 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. Jiang Yu referred a journalist to local authorities when asked 
about the recent execution of two Uighurs for an attack on border 
police in Xinjiang last August that left 17 dead.  She added that 
China processes such cases "in accordance with the law" and that in 
China "everyone is equal before the law." 
 
Death Sentences in Tibet 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. The arson attacks that occurred during the March 14, 2008 Lhasa 
incident "undermined the safety, life and assets of local people" 
and "threatened law and order," said Jiang Yu when asked about the 
four Tibetans recently sentenced to death for starting deadly fires 
during last year's unrest in the region.  She pointed out that the 
 
BEIJING 00000953  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
convictions were handed down in "strict accordance with the Chinese 
legal system" and that the legal rights of those convicted were 
"fully granted."  She asserted that their "ethnic habits and dignity 
were fully respected" and that "judicial authorities in China have 
always handled cases according to law." 
 
LIMMT Sanctions 
--------------- 
 
¶8. China has "taken note" of the sanctions imposed on LIMMT Economic 
and Trade Co. Ltd. and the indictment by a New York grand jury of 
the Chinese metals company and its manager, Lee Fangwei, said Jiang 
Yu.  She added that China's nonproliferation policy is clear, 
consisting of "strict and effective export controls."  China opposes 
the U.S. "invoking domestic law" to impose sanctions on a Chinese 
company. 
 
Hijacking of Taiwan Fishing Vessel 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶9. China takes the hijacking of the Taiwan fishing vessel "very 
seriously" and has been in touch with the "relevant authorities" as 
well as various Chinese Embassies to "safely rescue" the boat and 
crew, said Jiang Yu.  China has also contacted authorities in Taiwan 
to express its "willingness to assist" with the incident.  Jiang Yu 
added that the MFA Consular Department has issued a warning for 
Chinese vessels to avoid dangerous waters in the area, and that 
China "opposes international piracy, in accordance with relevant UN 
resolutions." 
 
Former French Leaders to Visit China 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. Three former French leaders will visit China in April, said 
Jiang Yu.  Former French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin will 
attend an economic and trade fair, while former French President 
Jacques Chirac will meet with Chinese leaders at the invitation of 
the Institute for Foreign Affairs.  Bernard Accoyer, the President 
of the National Assembly of France, will also visit China in April 
at the invitation of the National People's Congress (NPC).  Jiang Yu 
added that Sino-French relations were in "recovery" and that the 
joint PRC-France press release, issued during the G-20 summit in 
London, signaled the "ushering in of a new era" in bilateral 
relations between the two countries.  When asked about Chinese 
leaders' potential visit to France this year, Jiang Yu said she had 
no additional information. 
 
Cyber-spy Attack on U.S. Electric Grid 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Jiang Yu urged American media to "prudently" handle "erroneous 
accusations" alleging that Chinese cyber-spies hacked into the U.S. 
electric grid.  Jiang claimed the White House had denied the 
report's veracity.  When asked about the U.S. Government's 
reportedly spending USD 100 million in six months on responding to 
cyber attacks, Jiang Yu said that China, too, was a victim of cyber 
crime and that it was "willing to enhance its cooperation with the 
international community" to fight this problem. 
 
U.S. Steel Industry Anti-dumping Suit 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. When asked about an anti-dumping suit filed by the U.S. steel 
industry against China, Jiang Yu referred the journalist to the 
Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM). 
 
"Settlement Currency" and ASEAN 10+3 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. The spokesperson referred to "competent authorities" a question 
about China's decision to allow exporters in five cities to invoice 
in renminbi (RMB).  She added, however, that at the upcoming 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 10+3 meetings in 
April in Thailand, financial cooperation will be discussed.  She 
pointed out that such cooperation between 10+3 countries had 
achieved "great breakthroughs" and that due to the large foreign 
exchange reserve collectively held by the 10+3 countries, the 
region's ability to "withstand financial risk" was "enhanced." 
 
Bo'ao Forum 
----------- 
 
¶14. Premier Wen Jiabao will give a keynote speech at the Bo'ao Forum 
 
BEIJING 00000953  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
for Asia (BFA) April 17-19 in Hainan, said Jiang Yu.  She added that 
many foreign leaders will attend the forum, entitled "Asia: Managing 
Beyond Crisis," including President Zardari of Pakistan, President 
Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, President Gnassingbe of Togo, Prime 
Minister Bayar of Mongolia, Prime Minister Thein Sein of Burma, 
Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung of Vietnam, Prime Minister Matti 
Vanhanen of Finland, Prime Minister Sali Berisha of Albania, Prime 
Minister John Key of New Zealand, Prime Minister Somare of Papua New 
Guinea and the Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand.  Former President 
George W. Bush and former Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan will also 
attend. 
 
Official Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶15. Jiang Yu announced that President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan will 
visit China April 15-19 at the invitation of President Hu Jintao and 
that Prime Minister Somare of Papua New Guinea will visit China 
April 14-19 at the invitation of Premier Wen Jiabao.  Jiang Yu added 
that China and Kazakhstan are "friendly neighbors and strategic 
partners," stating that during President Nazarbayev's visit, he will 
attend the Bo'ao Forum and that the two countries will sign a series 
of "cooperative agreements." 
 
WEINSTEIN