09BEIJING1395
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, GEITHNER'S VISIT, PELOSI'S
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2537
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1395/01 1460931
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260931Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4141
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001395 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, GEITHNER'S VISIT, PELOSI'S 
VISIT 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. NORTH KOREA 
 
"20 Chinese experts are polled on North Korean nuclear issue" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/26): "Qing Hua University professor Sun 
Zhe believes, "North Korea's nuclear test is blackmail in nature. 
North Korea took advantage of the current situation; the former 
South Korean president had just committed suicide, the U.S. 
Ambassador to Japan had just arrived at his post and there is a lack 
of North Korean expertise, in order to further its strategic 
advantages, in the Obama administration's team.  In spite of the 
military power and growth showcased by the nuclear test, the test 
itself is not enough to threaten powerful countries.  What's more, 
military power alone cannot solve any global issues.  North Korea's 
behavior is disrespectful to the world.  However, because the test 
was conducted from inside North Korea, the U.S., China and the 
international society can't take any countermeasures.  China should 
be aware that its North Korean policy should not continue unchanged. 
 China doesn't have a pre-established stance on possible sanctions 
by the UN against North Korea.  China will see who leads the voting 
and look to what most countries' opinions are." 
 
Shen Dingli of the international affairs institute of Fudan 
University says, "North Korea's development of nuclear weapons is 
also inevitable.  North Korea's neighboring countries all have 
nuclear weapons. Russia, China, even the U.S. has nuclear weapons 
within the region; they provide nuclear protection to Japan and 
South Korea.  China doesn't support North Korea's developing nuclear 
weapons but should not take their having nuclear weapons as an 
obstacle to normal bilateral relations." 
 
Ren Xiao who is also from Fudan University commented, "North Korea 
is trying to upgrade its position in the negotiations.  The test 
symbolizes that its military, its strength, has risen."  Ding Gang 
of People's Daily said "Many people believe that North Korea's 
nuclear test indicates the failure of the U.S.' nuclear policy. 
However, this is not the case; the test is an obvious result of 
America's connivance.  How come after these years of the Six-Party 
Talks, other parties have taken side roles and had to lay their hope 
on the final resolution between North Korea and the U.S.?  Resolving 
the North Korea issue, a legacy of the Cold War, still depends on 
the U.S."" 
 
¶2. GEITHNER'S VISIT 
 
"Does Geithner's visit to China give up their 'complaint 
diplomacy'?" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(05/25): "The 
attitude of Geithner, who will visit China, deserves our attention. 
At a Senate hearing Geithner defended the decision by the U.S. not 
to label China as a 'currency manipulator'.  He stated that China's 
exchange rate policy, over the last few years, has obviously 
changed.  It seems that this proves what the experts predicted, that 
Geithner's attitude during his trip to China would be moderate. 
During the visits of previous American Treasury Secretaries, they 
always complained about the RMB exchange rate, the large trade 
deficit and the IPR issue. They liked to pressure China.  However 
the international situation has changed.  It seems inappropriate for 
Geithner to continue the 'compliant diplomacy' of the U.S.  Chinese 
analysts also indicate that Geithner is coming to China with a goal 
in mind. He may want to learn about why China always has been able 
to realize its economic growth goals; he may want to learn from 
China.  Looking at the current situation, enhancing U.S.-China 
economic coordination and better dealing with the financial crisis 
will be the most important task of Geithner's visit to Beijing." 
 
¶3. PELOSI'S VISIT 
 
"U.S. senior officials pay a collective visit to China this week" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/25): "The leader of the American House of 
Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, has arrived in China for a week of 
visits with Chinese officials. A week of American visits has begun. 
After Pelosi there will be the U.S. envoy to the Sudan, Secretary of 
Treasury Geithner and the U.S.-China Working Group Delegations. 
Chinese experts suggest that these visits show that the U.S. needs 
China's help in more and more issues.  This old-China policy needs 
to change.  The Obama administration is making efforts to set the 
tone for the new U.S.-new-China policy.  The U.S. and China will 
conduct direct dialogues on climate change, the Sudan issue and the 
 
BEIJING 00001395  002 OF 002 
 
 
economic crisis.  The intensity of the U.S. officials' visit to 
China is higher than their visit to any other one of China's allies. 
 The visit fully manifests the numerous conversations that the U.S. 
needs to have with China.  In recent years, the most severe 
criticism by the U.S. against China has come from the Congress. 
However, at a press conference recently, Pelosi refused to answer a 
question concerning China's human rights issue.  This is the second 
time that a U.S. official has intentionally spoken about the issue 
in a casual way.  It looks like Washington hopes to speak with China 
in a moderate way given the difficulties of the financial crisis. 
The U.S., by sending both its most pro-and anti-China officials, is 
obviously stepping up its study of China.  The intensity of the 
visits by U.S. officials to China clearly conveys the message that 
'the U.S. needs China.'" 
 
PICCUTA