09BEIJING3361
MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE CHANGE, AFGHANISTAN, WAR ON TERROR
Wed Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #3361 3500901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160901Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7254
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 003361 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE CHANGE, AFGHANISTAN, WAR ON TERROR 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1.  CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
"The final stand-off in Copenhagen: China has resisted 
Anglo-American pressure" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(12/16)(pg A4): "By now, developing 
countries and developed countries don't give in to each other's 
wishes, especially when there is no sign of a loosening of the 
developed countries' stance on long-term financial aid and reduction 
goals.  This type of confrontation has lowered all the parties' 
expectations for the final result.  In the past two days, the 
jointly posed public challenges by developed countries against 
China, from their reductions promise, their reductions measurement 
to their inspection standards, have been largely distant from their 
praise two months ago about China's great efforts towards reduction. 
 Xie Zhenhua, the Deputy Director of the National Development and 
Reform Commission and the head of Chinese delegation to Copenhagen, 
said that China's voluntary mitigation actions are open, transparent 
and legally protected.  Their statistical evaluation system and 
accountability measures are in place and will be announced to the 
public and the world.  However, China will by no means accept the 
international requirement that reductions be measurable, reportable 
and verifiable." 
 
¶2. AFGHANISTAN 
 
"Getting involved in Afghan affairs is helpful for improving China's 
image" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/16)(pg 14): "Many American elites believe 
that China has strategic designs in Afghanistan.  There is also 
speculation in China about the U.S.' intentions in Afghanistan. 
These speculations and suspicions will surely harm the bilateral 
relationship and lead to a new Cold War.  But in fact, getting 
involved in Afghan affairs will help China take a crucial step 
towards becoming a responsible big country.  First, Afghanistan has 
both a strategic meaning and an economic meaning for China.  A 
stable and efficient Afghan government will ensure China's strategic 
interests and its economic interests, like opening a corridor to 
Central Asia, its energy and coal mines.  Second, right now China's 
international influence is increasing along with its rising national 
strength.  If China does not do anything about the Afghanistan 
issue, the international society's expectation on China will turn 
into worry and speculation, which will harm China's image.  Third, 
China's ignorance over the Afghanistan issue will offer more excuses 
to those who criticized China for only caring about economic issues, 
in those countries where China demand resources, and not about 
political issues.  Fourth, China's help could gain the trust of the 
United States and other NATO countries who have become tired of the 
Afghanistan war.  In this way China can have a better say in 
negotiations concerning its core interests within these countries. 
Finally, getting involved in Afghan affairs can meet the U.S. 
request for strategic reassurance with China, removing deeply-rooted 
bilateral suspicions." 
 
¶3. WAR ON TERROR 
 
"New U.S. counterterrorism strategy is being tested" 
 
The official intellectual publication Guangming Daily (Guangming 
Ribao)(12/16)(pg 8): "One of the most prominent changes in Obama's 
new Afghanistan strategy is that its goal in the War on terror has 
been downgraded, from a thorough elimination of the Taliban to 
removing camps of the Al Qaeda near the Pakistan-Afghanistan borders 
while the Karzai government remains un-ousted.  Quite a few American 
officials have doubts about whether Obama's new strategy can work. 
The Karzai government, which just went through a corruption scandal, 
has quite a low reputation.  It seems that, for Karzai, right now 
the campaign against corruption is more important than the war on 
terror.  What's more, Afghanistan's security continues to 
deteriorate although the United States and its allies repeatedly 
send more troops.  Under pressure from the military, Pakistani 
President Asif Ali Zardari is struggling to maintain his authority, 
and as his approval rating falls, he is fighting for his political 
life.  This increases the uncertainties of Obama's new 
counterterrorism strategy.  If the United States sends troops to 
Pakistan in search of Al Qaeda operatives, the Pakistani people will 
be infuriated and the United States will face a much larger war in 
Pakistan and Afghanistan, which is not what Obama wants." 
 
GOLDBERG