09BEIJING847
MEDIA REACTION: G-20
Tue Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4635
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0847 0900605
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310605Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3184
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000847 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: G-20 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
G-20 
a. "'Hawk' voices shouldn't become main stream in China" 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (03/31): "Since the start of the Olympic 
 
torch relay last year, the Chinese public has gotten braver in 
expressing their feelings to the world.  Some regard this as 
parochial nationalism and some see this as the increase of 
irrational "hawk" voices. These voices are absolutely sincere 
voices. China needs someone who can speak for the benefits of the 
nation, for China at present and for China in the future. However, I 
[the author] worry that when these "hawk" voices gain more praise; 
these 'hawkish' voices will become the only major feature of Chinese 
public opinion. 
A mature country, including China, needs to have diverse voices. 
These voices can bring a country vigorous strength for development 
and stronger social endurance.  No matter if the voices represent 
"hawk" [tough] opinions or "dove"[soft] views, as long as these 
voices concern the interests of China and its people, or the future 
of China, they should be considered as part of the Chinese public 
opinion.  We allow different voices to be heard in China, which 
enable both Chinese policy makers and foreign countries to know 
China more completely. But encouraging the "hawk" voices doesn't 
mean that China is turning to extreme nationalism.  The main stream 
in China is developing in a peaceful way. Diverse voices and 
opinions are very beneficial to China's development. Various public 
opinions are better than purely "hawk" or "dove" public opinions." 
 
b. "G-20 distorts the global picture" 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (03/31):  "Changes to the current global 
picture are risky for the era. British Premier Brown expressed his 
pessimistic view about the G-20 Summit in this way; he doesn't want 
the G-20 to become the London Submit of 1933, reflecting on the [the 
London Economic Conference] summit that took place 76 years ago, and 
he hopes that the G-20 doesn't lead to "another World War". The 
media has different opinions about China's role in the G-20. 
Meanwhile disagreements about the possible topics at G-20 have 
become heated.   A researcher from China's Institute of Contemporary 
International Relations says that the financial crisis has lead to a 
new round of card shuffling and that the G-20 will reflect the shape 
of the new international chess board. 
American media said that China is trending towards economic 
nationalism.  A researcher from the Chinese Academy of Social 
Sciences responded that, as a member of the G-20 it is normal to 
clearly state one's ideas about the need for reform in the 
international currency system.  We shouldn't relate this need for 
reform to economic nationalism.  In fact this reflects the economic 
and hegemony mentality of western countries. The current 
international currency system has holes and lacks financial 
supervision. China offered this suggestion to protect its own 
benefits and to protect the safety of the international economic 
system. 
Concerning the statement "terminating the U.S. unilateral control"; 
Jia Qingguo, from Peking University, argues that even though 
America's standing has been affected by the financial crisis, that 
it is still too early and that it will take time to change America's 
dominant global position. America still enjoys significant political 
and economic influence.  Currently, there is no other country that 
could take over America's global position. 
Jia points out that China's active involvement in the G-20 is to 
promote international co-operation. China hopes to be able to 
contribute more in this capacity. China will gain support and 
respect at the G-20. Another expert from Bank of China says that 
China's voice should not be heard too loudly or too importantly. 
When we hear China's voice, we should consider China's policies." 
Piccuta