09BEIJING3159
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA-U.S. RELATIONS, TAIWAN
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5615
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3159/01 3270951
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230951Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6921
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003159 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA-U.S. RELATIONS, TAIWAN 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1.  CHINA-U.S. RELATIONS 
 
a.  "China should show the United States the direction of its 
military development" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(11/23)(pg 14): "Obama's recent visit to China 
will finally decide the United States' China policy.  If the two 
countries want to establish a stable military relationship, the 
United States needs to accept China's role as a future military 
power and China needs to insist on a permanent defensive military 
strategy, in which it would neither challenge the United States' 
core interests nor seek regional or international hegemony.  China 
should make a greater effort to communicate more confidently and 
openly with the United States and other countries, explaining to 
them that China's core national interests require an increased 
military strength.  China has no need to cover this up and should be 
able to be open about its large weapons development plans with other 
countries.  Once China talks frankly about the fact that its 
military modernization is irreversible and the only choice is for 
other countries to accept China's rising military strength, 
suspicions about China will disappear as will the 'China threat 
theory.'" 
 
b.  "There is still a potential flash point in Sino-U.S. relations" 
 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(11/23)(pg 10): 
"President Obama's visit to China was significant in its 
contribution to the growing maturity in the China-U.S. relationship, 
which has been redefined as a partnership to jointly deal with 
common challenges.  This partnership will include 'strategic 
reassurance'; mutual respect of each other's development model and 
culture; and cooperation on regional and global issues.  However, 
Obama's proactive China policy still lacks popular support in the 
United States, and the anti-China faction in the U.S. is still 
strong.  Partisan strife, conflicts between the administration and 
Congress, and the influence of special interests group will all make 
China a victim of domestic political struggles in the United States. 
 In addition, the U.S. is walking a fine line on the Taiwan and 
Tibet issues, which could hurt China-U.S. relations." 
 
c.  "We should avoid one-way thinking in China-U.S. energy 
cooperation" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(11/23)(pg 2): 
"China-U.S. energy cooperation is a trend the two countries should 
make an effort to develop in an equally beneficial and sustainable 
way.  With this goal in mind, the United States and China should 
avoid one-way thinking about technology imports and new energy 
exploration.  China should pursue new energy exploration based on 
its own needs.  Despite focusing on renewable energy cooperation in 
the China-U.S. joint statement, China should emphasize cooperation 
on coal bed gas based on the realities and needs of China. 
China-U.S. technical cooperation in the energy sector should not 
turn into a one-way division of labor and technology transfer - i.e. 
the United States conducts the research and development, while China 
provides back-up support and then spends millions of dollars to buy 
the technologies.  This practice runs counter to the principle of 
equality and should not continue.  China should also remain sober 
about the concept of a low carbon economy.  Both the United States 
and China, when their economies start to recover, will be inclined 
to combat global warming through technology replacement and energy 
cooperation." 
 
¶2.  TAIWAN 
 
"Blue and green camps in Taiwan have different interpretations of 
Obama" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(11/23)(pg 6): 
"After the United States and China issued the joint statement, the 
'blue camp' in Taiwan came to the conclusion that the current period 
is the best time for U.S.-Mainland-Taiwan relations in 60 years. 
However, the 'green camp' concluded that the statement means the 
U.S. is going to give up on Taiwan.  Many observers believe the 
China-U.S. joint statement is an important indication of an 
adjustment in the United States' policy on Taiwan.  Fu Quan, a 
well-known Taiwan expert, said that in the past the United States 
has opposed both 'Taiwan independence' and 'unification,' and 
supported a continuation of the status quo.  However, now the United 
States opposes 'Taiwan independence,' but will tolerate 
 
BEIJING 00003159  002 OF 002 
 
 
'unification.'  The fact that the United States did not mention the 
'Taiwan Relations Act' and the three communiqus, which is rare, has 
made many pro-independence activists in Taiwan very nervous. 
Professor Xiu Chunping at the Institute of Taiwan Studies at the 
China Academy of Social Sciences argued that the United States and 
China have an increasingly common view on the Taiwan issue. 
However, it is not realistic to expect the United States to 
immediately make a complete U-turn.'" 
 
 
HUNTSMAN