09BEIJING677
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, TIBET, ASIAN
Mon Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0296
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0677/01 0750922
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160922Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2900
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000677 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, TIBET, ASIAN 
AMERICAN 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"U.S. and China talk about cooperation amid noises" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(03/16): "On March 
15th, Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi ended his visit to 
Washington. He received an above average treatment by President 
Obama. However, there were criticisms against China from both 
Capitol Hill and the Pentagon. The main goal of Minister Yang's 
visit was to prepare for the meeting of President Hu Jintao and 
President Obama next month in London, according AFT reports. The 
'Obama era' began with an optimistic trend in the U.S.-China 
relationship. Chinese experts indicate that the U.S. has exaggerated 
the 'spy ship' incident. It shows that the politics of the U.S. 
involve various factors and divergences. The U.S. Department of 
Defense feels that its intentions have yet to be reflected because 
the Department of State has been leading the bilateral relations 
since Obama took office. Thus the 'Hawk party' has produced the 
incident. Although the U.S. and China have had their small 
frictions, both must accept the fact that the U.S. and China are in 
the same boat. The Hu-Obama meeting will first establish the fields 
of cooperation between the U.S. and China in the following couple of 
years. The two countries will begin with the field of climate change 
which is easier to begin with." 
 
¶2. TIBET 
 
a. "Playing the Dalai card leads the West to lose the support of 
young people on China" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/16): "Recently, Chinese young men have 
continuously pointed their attention toward Tibet related issues. 
They support democracy and human rights protection in Tibet. They do 
not oppose the Western slogans of democracy, freedom, and human 
rights. However, they realize that the West lacks a basic 
understanding about Tibet. The West supports the Dalai because of 
its strategic considerations rather than because of objective facts. 
Western strategists who have claimed they care about freedom, 
democracy and human rights in Tibet, ignored the achievements for 
the past 50 years in Tibet and support Tibet returning to a feudal 
serf system. Chinese young people have realized that what the West 
cares most about is not the Dalai, freedom, democracy or human 
rights in Tibet. The West cares most about disturbing China's focus 
on 'building the well-being of society', 'realizing its socialism 
modernization' and delaying China's peaceful development." 
 
b. "The carefully concealed interference statement" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(03/16): "On the 
1st anniversary of the March 14th 2008 turmoil, Tibet did not 
experience any confrontations, as were suggested by the Dalai's 
clique. However, the U.S. and the EU congresses have successively 
passed Tibet related resolutions which criticize China's suppression 
of Tibet. In fact, the dialogue between the central government and 
the Dalai has never stopped. However, the nature of the issue in 
Tibet is a conflict of sovereignty and independence. The timing of 
these two resolutions is delicate. The Tibet issue continues to 
deteriorate, especially when certain international forces express 
their support of the Dalai's exiled clique. Moves, such as this, 
have urged the Dalai's ambition to grow, have led him to misjudge 
the situation and have created new conflicts. What's more, the 
content of the two resolutions were not different from their earlier 
Tibet-related resolutions. They have only made the issue the focus 
of attention again. This behavior has once again shown that the 
West's voice is the center of power; and expressed the West's 
elitist mentality. Therefore the two resolutions are just carefully 
concealed interference statements. If they really care about Tibet 
as they claimed, they should peacefully wait for Tibet's own 
choice." 
 
¶3. ASIAN AMERICANS 
 
"Asian Americans competitiveness makes many Americans to respect and 
to fear them" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/16): "There is a popular saying in the 
U.S. society that if you want to know which university is a popular 
university, you should look at how many Asian students there are on 
campus. Asian Americans are described as the model race in American 
society. However, they always feel that they can never become 
 
BEIJING 00000677  002 OF 002 
 
 
American. On Campus, many white students try to avoid Asian 
students. During the financial crisis, Asian Americans are being 
considered the scapegoat for the crisis. The typical image of 
successful Asian Americans are: hardworking, diligent and a little 
bit stiff. Asian Americans are like the 'new Jewish people' in 
American society. An American report in 2007 showed that Asian 
Americans are the richest group in American society. Asian Americans 
are not as aggressive as African Americans on social equality 
issues. They are treated as 'economic giants but political dwarfs.' 
This situation began to change when Chinese Americans began to take 
positions in the State of California. The Obama cabinet also has 
nominated several Chinese Americans as members. Most Americans have 
the prejudice that 'Asian Americans are not American.' When Asian 
Americans insist on their traditional culture, they will have 
conflicts with the White culture. However, in recent years, Chinese 
Americans are experiencing a positive change from 'being looked down 
upon' to 'feeling somewhat equal.' It is not likely that large-scale 
xenophobia will happen again. But Asian Americans will encounter 
more occasions under which they feel unequal." 
 
PICCUTA