09BEIJING3490
MONITORING G/TIP FY 08 GRANT PROGRAM
Wed Dec 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7617
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3490/01 3640125
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300125Z DEC 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7459
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EAP/CM SPATCH; EAP/RSP; G/TIP JZINN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM SMIG KTIP KCRM KWMN CH
SUBJECT: MONITORING G/TIP FY 08 GRANT PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 112160 
 
 1.(SBU)  Summary:  On December 3, 2009 EmbOff met with the 
Beijing University Women's Law Studies and Legal Aid Center 
(LAC) Director Guo Jianmei to discuss the progress of the 
G/TIP-funded program to enhance awareness in China about 
rescuing, restoring and assisting victims of trafficking 
through training of legal and criminal justice professionals 
and women's groups.  After reviewing the scope of the LAC's 
work, Embassy Beijing assesses that there is adequate 
staffing and resources to carry out the G/TIP-funded 
project's objectives although insufficient funding from their 
U.S. partner has forced them to modify their planned training 
session.  LAC staff also assured the Embassy that the recent 
dissolution of ties between the LAC and Beijing University 
would not jeopardize the LAC's contributions to the program. 
End summary. 
 
Performance Assessment 
------------------------- 
 
2.(SBU)  December 3, Embassy officials met with Guo Jianmei, 
Beijing University Women's Law Studies and Legal Aid Center 
(LAC) Director to conduct an overview of LAC's use of a FY 08 
G/TIP grant.  Also attending the meeting were Deputy Director 
Li Ying, International Exchange and Project Coordinator Lin 
Lixia, and LAC lawyer Zhang Weiwei.  Guo highlighted the 
LAC's role in facilitating communication among women's groups 
throughout China and providing a database for contacts and 
information.  Also discussed were the LAC's plans to write a 
quarterly newsletter specifically geared toward trafficking 
issues and plans to make a documentary of trafficking victims 
telling their stories for broadcast on China's national 
television network, CCTV.   After reviewing the scope of the 
LAC's work as described in the grant proposal and its 
progress on related projects, Embassy Beijing assesses that 
there staffing and resources are adequate to carry out the 
G/TIP-funded project's objectives, although insufficient 
funding from their U.S. partner has forced them to modify 
their planned training session. The LAC's reputation as a 
recognized leader in the NGO community, good working 
relationships and access to resources in China make it a 
viable candidate for funding consideration. 
 
Funding and Training Workshop Budget 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) The FY 08 G/TIP grantee, University Enterprises, 
Inc. (UEI), is a Sacramento based firm that is partnered with 
LAC to carry out a trafficking training program in China. 
Guo noted that University Enterprises, Inc. had agreed to 
transfer $26,000 USD to LAC had set up a bank account to 
facilitate the transfer.  However, as of December 15, 2009, 
UEI had yet to release any funds to the LAC.  Guo explained 
that the delay in the transfer was at the request of the LAC 
and was because LAC did not wish its ongoing efforts to sever 
ties with Beijing University to affect the money transfer. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  According to Guo, UEI had set aside approximately 
$1,000.00 to fund a training program in Kunming, Yunnan 
Province but added that the sum was insufficient to pay for a 
planned 3-day training program.  As a result, LAC was 
compelled to truncate the training to 2 days, thereby forcing 
participants to work into the evening on both days to make up 
for the time lost.  The list of invitees had also been cut 
from 40 to approximately 25.  Li indicated that this decision 
was directly due to the limited budget provided by UEI.  The 
LAC acknowledged the project goal to have 40 attendees for 
the Year 1 training and pledged to work with Yunnan women's 
federation leaders and their contacts at UEI to reach that 
goal. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Lin had drawn up a list of potential attendees which 
she provided to EmbOff.  That list complied with the grant 
requirements to reach out to legal and criminal justice 
professionals as well as security and social welfare 
departments and community and aid station workers.  It is 
noteworthy that the proposal stated that the attendees for 
the Year 1 training program would be "selected from those 
regions heavily affected by human trafficking, such as Yunnan 
Province."   The LAC maintained that, until the funding issue 
was resolved, it would be best to wait before extending 
invitations to attendees beyond Yunnan. 
 
Training Materials and Casebook 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Lin could not comment on the status of the training 
manual or other materials currently being written by Dr. Ren 
Xin at UEI HQ in Sacramento.  Guo was waiting for the 
materials to arrive so they could be translated into Chinese 
 
BEIJING 00003490  002 OF 002 
 
 
in time for the training.  UEI had not yet provided a 
projected arrival date for the material.  (Comment: This fact 
could indicate a possible lack of adequate communication from 
UEI to the LAC and should be monitored in subsequent 
follow-up visits. End comment.)7. (SBU)  The plan outlined in 
the UEI grant proposal  would require training attendees to 
submit in advance of the training trafficking casework that 
would be compiled into a casebook .  The consensus among the 
LAC staff was that no one would attend the training with such 
a demand because the issue of human trafficking was 
politically sensitive and no one would be willing to submit 
anything in writing that could be construed as exposing 
China's failure to control human trafficking.  To overcome 
this predicament, the LAC proposed having staff members take 
notes throughout the training about individual cases 
discussed that could later be turned into a casebook. 
 
Dissolution of Ties with Beijing University 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) In late November 2009, Beijing University officials 
instructed the LAC to focus on academic research and stop 
taking on legal casework or disassociate from the university. 
 Guo believed the most effective engine to drive forward 
legal advocacy and reform is through casework.  As a result, 
the LAC is in the process of disassociating from the 
university and is looking to affiliate itself with another 
outside entity.  Neither Guo nor her staff saw this break 
with Beijing University as slowing or stopping their work on 
the human trafficking program. 
 
GOLDBERG