09BEIJING1171
MGSF01 H1N1 INFLUENZA OUTBREAK - CHINA SITREP # 2
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3051
RR RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHPB RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1171/01 1200945
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300945Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3758
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP/ISA/AP//
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC//J2/J3/J5//
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI//J00/J2/J3/J5//UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 001171 
 
HHS FOR OGHA 
CDC ATLANTA FOR CCID, AND PASS TO FLU COX AND MOUNTS AND COGH BLOUNT 
AND KELLY 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFLU AEMR ASEC CASC KFLO TBIO KSAF KPAO PREL PINR
AMGT, MG, EAGR, HHS, CH 
SUBJECT:  MGSF01 H1N1 INFLUENZA OUTBREAK - CHINA SITREP # 2 
 
REF: A) BEIJING 1135  B) BEIJING 1132 
      C) STATE 42349   D) STATE 41768 
 
(SBU) SUMMARY:  On April 28, both President HU Jintao and Premier 
WEN Jiabao made highly-publicized statements, ordering  "stepped up" 
quarantine and inspection measures and "enhanced prevention and 
control" procedures, as well as emphasizing the need for 
transparency at all levels of government.  The World Health 
Organization (WHO) raised the pandemic alert status to Phase five on 
April 29.  The Government of China will observe a national holiday 
on Friday (May 1).  As of the time of this report, there are no 
confirmed cases of infection by the H1N1 influenza A virus in humans 
or livestock.  Throughout the country, however, entry processing and 
screening procedures at airports and other large facilities continue 
to be strengthened, and Beijing and other cities have designated 
specific hospitals to deal with suspected H1N1 infections.  Media 
reporting has been fairly straightforward with a focus on government 
actions and positive cooperation with other countries.  Articles on 
front page of Chinese dailies however, also indicated official 
Chinese concern over reports that the virus had originated in China. 
 On April 29, Embassy Beijing convened an influenza outbreak 
sub-group of the Emergency Action Committee (EAC) and hosted a 
planning digital video conference (DVC) with Consulates in 
Guangzhou, Shanghai, Chengdu, and Shenyang participating.  A warden 
message was sent to the American citizens community on April 29 and 
the mission websites were revised to reflect updated guidance and 
official USG resources.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶1. (U)  The World Health Organization (WHO) China Representative 
Hans Troedsson reported on April 28 that while an "unspecified 
number" of suspected H1N1 are cases currently being investigated in 
China, to date, there still are no confirmed cases of infection by 
the virus in humans or livestock.  The Ministry of Health said on 
April 29 that the previously-reported case (REF A) of over 100 
primary school children in Shaanxi Province falling ill had been 
"contained," and that authorities have now ruled out any connection 
with the H1N1 virus outbreak. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In what appears to be a drastic departure from the central 
government's handling of the SARS epidemic in 2003, President Hu 
Jintao on April 28 called for "stepped up" efforts by all levels of 
government in response to outbreak.  Specifically, Hu cited the need 
to maintain a "people-first" policy, to "monitor closely" the 
situation, and to "take prompt and comprehensive measures."  Premier 
WEN Jiabao later that same day issued similar guidance to the State 
Council and authorized an eight-point plan for responding to the 
H1N1 outbreak as follows: 
 
---- Relevant government departments should follow latest 
developments on the disease around the world, and step up 
cooperation with foreign countries, as well as Taiwan, Hong Kong, 
and Macao; 
 
-- A joint prevention and control mechanism, including the Ministry 
of Health (MOH), Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), and General 
Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine 
(AQSIQ), should be established to make emergency plans and monitor 
the entire disease prevention process; 
 
-- Local entry-exit inspection and quarantine authorities should 
enhance practices for examination and disinfection of people and 
vehicles coming back from disease-plagued countries, to prevent the 
entry of the illness; 
 
-- The government should promptly issue travel notices for citizens 
going abroad, according to the disease's newest information 
worldwide; 
 
-- Health authorities should enhance monitoring on unknown pneumonia 
and influenza cases, set up an instant-reporting system, and treat 
people promptly using early detection; 
 
-- Supervision should be tightened on farms, slaughterhouses, and 
agricultural and sideline products markets, and on pork-related 
 
BEIJING 00001171  002 OF 004 
 
 
products; 
 
-- Anti-disease medicine and clinical treatment apparatus should be 
well-prepared, and research on the disease-infection model, and the 
vaccine and clinical treatment should be enhanced; 
 
-- The government should report to the public the latest news 
promptly, and better-publicize disease facts. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC) issued 
updated its guidance regarding increased surveillance to nationwide 
airports on April 29.  The guidance sets procedures to direct all 
international flights from affected areas to designated gates at 
each airport for inspection and quarantine practices to be employed 
for suspected H1N1 cases, and to screen other passengers from 
flights arriving with one or more suspected cases.  The guidance 
also requires airlines to train crew and staff on safety practices, 
and local civil aviation officials to devise a localized emergency 
communications system for reporting suspected cases.  According to 
contacts at Beijing offices of U.S. airline carriers, this guidance 
is being applied as follows: 
 
--parking the arriving aircraft from affected areas separately, and 
establish separate passenger flow channels; 
 
-- sterilizing aircraft and waste products from the aircraft; 
 
-- advising crew members to observe passengers, contact the Ministry 
of Health and the Health and Quarantine Bureau (H&Q) of the 
Exit-Entry Administration to notify them of sick passengers prior to 
arrival at the airport, and separating and treating ill passengers 
immediately; 
 
--Upon arrival at the gate, H&Q officials board the aircraft to 
survey the situation; 
 
-- check all passengers seated within three rows in front and three 
rows behind the individual suspected to be infected will have their 
temperature checked by H&Q; (NOTE:  U.S. CDC China Director 
indicates that this designation is arbitrary and unlikely to be 
effective in containing the infection, especially given the 
movements of passengers while the flight is in progress, and the air 
circulation systems in use onboard.  END NOTE). 
 
--The individual suspected to be infected will then be escorted off 
the aircraft, and after all required CIQ formalities are 
accomplished, will be transported to a designated hospital for 
evaluation and any necessary treatment up to and including 
possibility of quarantine, should infection by H1N1 influenza virus 
be confirmed; 
 
--All remaining passengers and crew will be required to fill out a 
"Contact Card," to be distributed by H&Q (similar to H&Q cards that 
used to be required from passengers), and upon confirmation that all 
necessary required information is included, all passengers will be 
allowed to deplane as usual; 
 
--Should two or more passengers present symptoms of infection by 
H1N1, the entire plane will be checked, quarantined, and then 
possibly transported to a designated hospital. 
 
As of April 30, the affected carriers operating international 
flights arriving in Beijing are American Airlines, Continental 
Airlines, Delta Airlines, Northwest Airlines, United Airlines, 
Cathay Pacific Airlines, Air France, Asiana Airlines, Air China, Air 
Nippon Airlines, and Scandanavian Airlines.  However, in Shanghai, 
for example, these procedures have only been applied to AeroMexico 
flights.  These procedures do not apply to flights both originating 
and terminating domestically. 
 
¶4. (U)  Shanghai was the only city receiving direct flights arriving 
from Mexico this week.  Aeromexico operates two flights each week to 
Shanghai Pudong Airport, arriving on Thursdays and Sundays at 6:00 
 
BEIJING 00001171  003 OF 004 
 
 
AM.  The flights (both Aeromexico Flight 98) start in Mexico City, 
transfer in Tijuana, and then fly direct to Shanghai.  Shanghai 
ESTHOFF reports that Mexican Consulate officials were on hand for 
the arrival today (April 30) and according to Mexican officials, 
procedures went smoothly.  The enhanced airport measures were in 
place, the plane taxied to a remote gate, all passengers were 
screened using a body temperature scanners and cargo was inspected. 
No passengers were quarantined or found to exhibit flu-like 
symptoms.  Passengers were briefed about the enhanced arrival 
procedures during the flight.  Shanghai airport authorities have 
been working directly with Aeromexico to ensure that procedures 
continue to run smoothly.  Additionally, the arrival garnered 
considerable media attention, with local press resources reporting 
that 17 "3G" wireless global eyes were installed so that the 
temperature and other checks could be conducted. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Beijing Municipal Government has designated three 
local hospitals as suitable to handle suspected H1N1 infections. 
The three hospitals are You'an, Ditan, and Peking Union Hospitals, 
which are in geographically-disperse locations around the city.  The 
Post Medical Unit has toured one facility and is scheduled to tour 
the other two next week.  In addition, local expat-oriented Beijing 
United Hospital is in discussions with local health authorities on 
whether it may be listed as an additional designated hospital.  To 
date, no Chinese facility is equipped yet to confirm the current 
strain of H1N1 in-country; however, this might change next week as 
laboratory test kits from U.S. Centers for Disease Control (U.S. 
CDC) arrive.  The physical presence at U.S. CDC in Atlanta of a 
leading Chinese CDC epidemiologist Dr. Zijian FENG, who has been 
designated the primary liaison for information sharing, has already 
enhanced the communications process between the two counterpart 
agencies.  Additionally, U.S. CDC China Director Dr. Jeff McFarland 
maintains daily contact with MOH and Chinese CDC officials in 
Beijing, providing them with the latest information available to 
U.S. CDC. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Chinese media reaction has been generally straightforward 
and factual.  Many national media publications such as Global Times 
published articles refuting reports that the H1N1 virus had origins 
from pigs in Fujian province.  Reports also were quick to show the 
Chinese government's response to the H1N1 outbreak by reporting on 
the monitoring of the flow of people and goods from the Americas, 
such as, the increased airport checks and denying travelers 
exhibiting flu-like symptoms to enter. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Mission China continues to receive, evaluate, and share 
information among the Embassy and Consulates.  A warden message was 
sent out to all registered American citizens early on April 29, and 
the front pages of mission websites were revised to reflect updated 
guidance and official USG resources.  Also on April 29, CDA Piccuta 
met with the Influenza Outbreak Working Sub-Group of the Emergency 
Action Committee (EAC) to review Tripwire 2, adjust operations 
mission-wide, and conduct preliminary planning for changes that may 
occur in the medium- and long-term.  Later the same day, Embassy 
Beijing and Consulates in Shanghai, Guangzhou, Chengdu, and 
Shenyang, held a digital video conference (DVC) to coordinate 
actions, exchange information, and establish a reporting mechanism 
for providing information on conditions in all consular districts. 
Post's response to the H1N1 influenza outbreak will be an agenda 
item at a monthly "open" Country Team meeting on May 4, which will 
be open to all interested Embassy personnel and American family 
members. 
 
¶8. Post has received detailed reporting from Shanghai, Guangzhou, 
Shenyang, and Chengdu and will consolidate the information received 
into the next situational report. 
 
¶9. U) COMMENT:  One week into the current H1N1 influenza outbreak 
and as China heads into a three-day weekend, Chinese authorities by 
and large have put out the "right" signals on how officials at all 
levels of government should be viewing the crisis.  It appears that 
since the international criticism levied at China during and after 
the SARS crisis of 2003, concrete lessons have been learned on how 
to respond to potential outbreaks, and on the importance of 
 
BEIJING 00001171  004 OF 004 
 
 
maintaining transparency in the process.  The U.S. CDC China 
Director has been in daily contact with counterparts at the Chinese 
CDC, and has expressed confidence that national authorities, for the 
time being, are doing all within their power to contain the 
situation.  However, as the outbreak progresses through the weekend 
and perhaps in the weeks to come, the Chinese Government may 
reassess its posture.  END COMMENT. 
 
PICCUTA