10BEIJING104
JANUARY 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:  CHINA'S INTERNET, HAITI
Thu Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7732
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0104/01 0140946
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 140946Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7608
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2277
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0164
RUEHVI/AMEMBASSY VIENNA 0274
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 5018
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1450
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0001
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 0019
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000104 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MNUC ETRD CH TW IR IN JA AU
SUBJECT: JANUARY 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:  CHINA'S INTERNET, HAITI 
EARTHQUAKE, P5+1, CADMIUM JEWELRY 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 14 MFA press briefing were: 
 
--"China's Internet is open and the Chinese Government encourages 
the development and application of the Internet and creates a 
favorable environment." 
 
--"China's law prohibits cyber attacks, including hacking" and China 
"welcomes international Internet businesses to China." 
 
-- The Chinese government expresses its "condolences and sympathy to 
Haitian government and the people of Haiti" for the devastation 
caused by the earthquake on January 12. 
 
--The Chinese government has learned that four Chinese peace keepers 
and four Ministry of Public Security officials remain under the 
rubble in Haiti. 
 
--Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei will not be able to attend the P5+1 
meeting in New York on the Iranian nuclear issue due to "scheduling 
reasons." 
 
Internet with Chinese Characteristics 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  "China's Internet was open and the Chinese Government encouraged 
the development and application of the Internet and created a 
favorable environment" for the Internet in China, MFA spokesperson 
Jiang Yu said in response to the first of a barrage of questions 
about Google's announcement that it was considering withdrawing from 
China due to censorship and cyber attacks.  Jiang said that "China's 
law prohibited cyber attacks, including hacking" and that China 
"welcomed international Internet businesses to China."  China had 
"explained its position" to the U.S. government.  Asked if the U.S. 
Secretary of State's public comments regarding Google possibly 
withdrawing from the Chinese market would damage bilateral 
relationships Jiang reiterated that Chinese government "made its 
position clear" to the United States. 
 
¶3.  When asked to acknowledge that "YouTube" was blocked in China, 
Jiang said she was unaware of the issue and could not offer 
confirmation, but emphasized that the "Chinese government 
administered the Internet according to the law" adding there were 
"explicit stipulations on what could be spread over the Internet." 
Another journalist asked if the Chinese government was responsible 
for cyber attacks against the email accounts of human rights 
activists, and Jiang replied that "Chinese law prohibited any form 
of cyber attacks, including hacking" but avoided a follow-up 
question on whether Chinese government hackers would be held 
accountable to the same laws. 
 
¶4.  Responding to questions focused on how hackers would be 
punished,  why Google decided to consider withdrawing from China and 
how China would investigate alleged cyber attacks, Jiang referred 
journalists to the "relevant authorities."    When one journalist 
noted that, despite repeated attempts, no one seemed able to 
identify the "relevant authorities" Jiang suggested that journalists 
could fax their questions to the MFA, which would relay them to the 
competent authorities.  Jiang acknowledged that journalists might 
"encounter difficulties" but offered to assist and said her office 
would provide the phone number for the still unnamed competent 
authorities. 
 
Chinese Response to Earthquake in Haiti 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Jiang responded to several questions about the earthquake 
recovery effort in Haiti.  The Chinese government expressed its 
"condolences and sympathy to the Haitian government and the people 
of Haiti" for the devastation caused by the earthquake on January 
 ¶12.  The Chinese government had learned that four Chinese peace 
keepers and four Ministry of Public Security officials remained 
under the rubble in Haiti and their condition was unknown.  Other 
Chinese personnel in Haiti were safe.  The Chinese government was 
concerned for "Chinese citizens and compatriots from Hong Kong, 
Macao, and Taiwan" in Haiti.  China's peace keeping antiriot unit 
which was previously deployed in Haiti was assisting recovery 
efforts.  China was "keeping a close eye on the situation and would 
spare no effort to protect the safety of overseas Chinese" in Haiti. 
 "The Chinese government placed great store on the safety of 
overseas Chinese no matter where they were and the government would 
spare no effort to help" overseas Chinese.  When asked about how 
China obtained information on the situation in Haiti when China and 
 
BEIJING 00000104  002 OF 003 
 
 
Haiti had no diplomatic relations, Jiang replied that China used 
various channels to get information and coordinated with relevant 
authorities to conduct rescue work.  (Note:  Haiti has diplomatic 
relations with Taiwan, not the PRC) Jiang confirmed that the Chinese 
government held an inter-ministerial meeting on the morning of 
January 14 regarding the earthquake in Haiti and the "MFA would 
coordinate and assist other parties to make proper arrangements for 
overseas Chinese in Haiti."  Jiang replied to a question about 
whether China and Taiwan were coordinating their rescue and relief 
effort in Haiti by noting that China was ready to assist any "Taiwan 
compatriots" should they need assistance. 
 
Chinese Participation in P5+1 Meeting 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  When asked whether China would attend the P5+1 meeting on the 
Iranian nuclear issue planned for January 16 in New York City, Jiang 
said the relative parties were "staying in close communication and 
coordination" on the specifics of the meeting but that due to 
"scheduling reasons" Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei would not be 
able to attend.  China supported the "peaceful resolution" of the 
Iranian nuclear issue and encouraged all sides to be "flexible" to 
seek a proper resolution of the issue. 
 
Cadmium in Jewelry 
------------------ 
 
¶7. Jiang answered a question about reports that children's jewelry 
made in China was found to contain cadmium by first noting that the 
MFA was not the office responsible for such matters and then by 
stating that the Chinese government "attached great importance to 
the safety of China's products" and particularly its exports. 
 
Currency Exchange Rate 
---------------------- 
 
¶8.  "Maintaining the stability of the Renminbi is not only important 
for China's economic development but also for world economic 
development" Jiang said in response to a question about incoming EU 
Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht's criticism of China's currency 
policy. 
 
Forum for East Asia and Latin America Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶9.  Jiang confirmed that Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi would attend 
the Forum for East Asia and Latin America Cooperation Fourth Foreign 
Ministers meeting in Tokyo on January 16 and 17.  The Forum played 
"an important role" as the "only official multilateral dialogue 
between East Asia and Latin America" to enhance cooperation between 
the two regions.  The Fourth Foreign Ministers meeting would focus 
on responding to the global financial crisis, the environment and 
social inclusiveness.  Jiang said the "release of the Tokyo 
declaration" would "inject dynamism" into the future of the forum. 
China "attached great importance" to the forum and would work with 
other parties for the "stable development of relations between 
countries."  Yang would hold bilateral meetings on the evening of 
January 16 and the morning of January 17 with the foreign ministers 
from Argentina, Japan, Mexico, South Korea and other nations.  Jiang 
said additional information would be released later. 
 
 
Chinese Engineers Prosecuted in India 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Jiang said that the MFA and Chinese Embassy in New Delhi would 
help the Shandong Electric Company "safeguard the lawful rights and 
interests" of three engineers from the Shandong Electric Company who 
were prosecuted in India following the collapse of a chimney they 
helped construct in September 2009. 
 
Indian Diamond Traders Arrested in China 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Jiang confirmed that 21 Indian diamond traders were arrested in 
Shenzhen on January 8, and the Indian Embassy had sent someone to 
visit them.  China would "guarantee their legitimate rights and 
interests according to the law." 
 
Kim Jong-Il Visit to China 
-------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00000104  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶12.  When asked about reports that Kim Chong-il might visit China, 
Jiang replied that she had no information regarding any future 
visit. 
 
Chinese Nationals Detained in Afghanistan 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Jiang said she had no information about reports that two 
Chinese nationals were detained in Afghanistan carrying 810,000 
Euros in cash.  If the reports were true "China would seek to 
protect and guarantee their rights and interests." 
 
Climate Meeting 
--------------- 
 
¶14.  Jiang said she did not have information on China's request for 
a meeting with Brazil, South Africa and India to discuss the 
Copenhagen summit and environmental issues. 
 
Liberian Visit to China 
----------------------- 
 
¶15.  Jiang announced that, at the invitation of Yang Jiechi, 
Liberian Foreign Minister Olubanke King Akerele would visit China 
from January 20 to 25. 
 
Chinese Visit to Indonesia 
-------------------------- 
 
¶16.  Jiang announced that State Councilor Dai Bingguo would visit 
Indonesia and Brunei from January 21 to 26 at the invitation of 
Indonesian Coordinating Minister for Political, Law, Security 
Affairs Widodo Adi Sutjipto. 
 
HUNTSMAN