10BEIJING150
MEDIA REACTION: GOOGLE, HAITI, U.S. POLICY
Wed Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2686
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0150 0200907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200907Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7685
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000150 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: GOOGLE, HAITI, U.S. POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. GOOGLE 
 
"China should enhance the building of its information sovereignty" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(01/20)(pg 2): "Information freedom without 
supervision can only be realized in smaller countries.  If this 
happens in China, it will probably indicate fatal danger.  The 
Google incident occurred at the perfect time.  It serves as a 
reminder to the majority of Chinese people of this danger.  In the 
whole process of this incident, Google was the initiator and the 
U.S. government was an active supporter.  Meanwhile, the U.S. media 
is leading Western media to force China to give in.  However Google 
has overestimated its influence in China, where it is only a search 
engine, and one that is far behind Baidu.com.  The incident has 
warned China that China should definitely not let its information 
control fall into the United States' hands.  If any of China's 
information sovereignty is missing, it will be used as weapons 
against China.  Another incident at the same time was also worthy of 
our vigilance.  As of January 13, the U.S. upgrade of its GPS system 
has greatly influenced China Telecom's CDMA signals.  This means 
that the U.S. military has the ability to cut off China's civilian 
and military systems which rely on their GPS system.  This is a huge 
information security concern for China.  No matter the Google 
incident or the GPS system issue, both of them show that China 
should enhance its information sovereignty." 
 
¶2. HAITI 
 
"Many countries speculate that the U.S. 'occupies Haiti'" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(01/20)(pg 16): "The world's opinions, 
especially those at the two sides across the Atlantic Ocean, are 
having a fierce debate over the good and bad concerning 
international aid.  The U.S. has denied the emerging criticism that 
it's occupying Haiti.  Professor Lu Minghua at Nan Jing University 
said that the U.S.'s influence in Haiti is so large that no other 
strength could restrict it, thus the U.S. is most vulnerable to 
suspicion.  Its activities in Haiti have gone far beyond the scope 
of disaster relief.  The U.S. allocation of a number of troops made 
it more like a military action, through which the U.S. could 
announce its presence and deter left-wing forces in Latin America. 
The U.S. may not have any intention to occupy Haiti, from a 
practical point of view, but it did not bother to explain this to 
European countries.  The U.S. is used to giving orders on issues 
that it believes fall 'under its own roof' and thinks it doesn't 
need to explain this to others.  Xu Shicheng, a researcher at China 
Academy of Social Science, said that the U.S.' disaster relief 
activities in Haiti are very necessary, but it is also obligatory 
for the United States to explain its real intention to the world." 
 
¶3. U.S. POLICY 
 
"Why has Obama's first year been anticlimactic?" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(01/20)(pg A2): "In his first year in 
office, Obama's 50% support rate has surprised many people who were 
initially optimistic about his administration's ruling [ability to 
lead].  Despite his endeavors to save the market and the positive 
diplomatic changes he has made, it is indeed difficult for Obama, an 
inexperienced young politician, to take over such a big mess.  Obama 
seems to have been rather ill-prepared for the troublesome situation 
at home and abroad.  The lack of clear judgment and a calm ruling 
mindset has also caused Obama to be too hasty when making decisions. 
 His medical reform plan is proof of this.  Besides, being too eager 
to change has made his economic stimulus plan lacking the necessary 
details.  In a sense, his ruling has been too flexible which has 
brought him a lot of trouble.  In political life, flexibility is 
often a double-edged sword.  While a flexible way of doing things 
can help coordinate complex relations and even break some diplomatic 
difficulties, being too flexible may be confusing or may reduce the 
sense of trust, which is not conducive for building mutual trust 
relationships with other leaders or systematically implementing his 
'New Deal.'  In the mean time, it is important to maintain a good 
Sino-U.S. relationship.  In many ways, it is essential for the U.S. 
to strengthen its cooperation with China.  The Obama administration 
needs to maintain a clear mind on issues like economic and trade 
frictions, and arms sales to Taiwan, and should not run the risk of 
losing the majority because of the minority." 
 
HUNTSMAN