10BEIJING432
FEBRUARY 23, 2010 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-PRC RELATIONS,
Tue Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1378
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0432/01 0542300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 232300Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8213
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHNM/AMEMBASSY NIAMEY 0070
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0208
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0813
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1478
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 7061
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 5048
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 2155
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV 0038
RUEHVB/AMEMBASSY ZAGREB 0098
RUEHVI/AMEMBASSY VIENNA 0285UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000432 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM KN NG DA UN CH IR JA PK IN ZA IS
HR, UP 
 
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 23, 2010 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-PRC RELATIONS, 
IRAN, DPRK, CLIMATE, PAKISTAN, GAO ZHISHENG 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 23, 2010 MFA press briefing were: 
 
--China looks to the United States to take credible measures to undo 
the damage to U.S.-PRC relations following arms sales to Taiwan and 
President Obama's meeting with the Dalai Lama. 
 
--China hopes relevant parties will show flexibility and resolve the 
Iran nuclear issue through diplomatic means. 
 
--Google's public accusations of PRC interference in its operations 
in China are groundless and accusations of Chinese government 
involvement are irresponsible and driven by ulterior motives. 
 
-- China believes that realizing the denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula is a fundamental interest of all relevant countries and 
its position will not change in response to recent tension with the 
United States. 
 
U.S.-China Relations 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  China had made stern representations to the United States about 
President Obama's meeting with the Dalai Lama and arms sales to 
Taiwan and looked to the United States to take credible measures to 
"undo the damage" caused to the bilateral relationship, spokesperson 
Qin Gang said at the February 23 regularly scheduled MFA press 
conference.  The spokesperson did not have any information on 
whether recent bilateral tensions would affect President Hu Jintao's 
participation at the April Nuclear Security Summit in Washington. 
The spokesperson also said officials from both countries were 
already in contact to make preparations for the U.S.-PRC Human 
Rights Dialogue. 
 
Iran Sanctions 
-------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked for comment on potential new sanctions against Iran, Qin 
stated that the PRC hoped relevant parties would cooperate with the 
IAEA, show flexibility, step up diplomatic efforts to promote 
dialogue and work for a comprehensive resolution of the Iran nuclear 
issue through diplomatic means. 
 
East China Sea 
-------------- 
 
¶4. China's position on territorial claims in the East China Sea was 
consistent and unequivocal.  China and Japan had reached a 
principled consensus and China would affirm and uphold that 
consensus, Ma declared in response to a question on the China-Japan 
territorial dispute in the East China Sea. 
 
Whereabouts of Gao Zhisheng 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  In response to an inquiry on the whereabouts of lawyer and 
rights activist Gao Zhisheng, Qin stated that he did not know the 
whereabouts of Gao, and when pressed later in the briefing to 
confirm whether Gao was still alive, Qin reiterated that he did not 
have any information about Gao. 
 
Google 
------ 
 
¶6.  Google's public statement of January 20 on Chinese interference 
in its operations was groundless, according to Qin.  The PRC 
administered the Internet according to the law and its position 
would not change, according to Qin, who added that Chinese law 
prohibited computer hacking.  Asked about reports that the hacking 
was traced back to Shanghai Jiaotong University and Lanxiang 
Vocational School in Shandong province, Qin referred to statements 
by each school denying involvement.  Such reports were groundless 
and accusations of PRC government involvement were irresponsible and 
driven by ulterior motives, Qin stated. 
 
Sanctions on U.S. Companies 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Qin stated that China would carry out its pledge to sanction 
U.S. companies involved in arms sales to Taiwan.  When pressed to 
 
BEIJING 00000432  002 OF 003 
 
 
state when the sanctions would commence and what sectors would be 
targeted, Qin declined to provide additional information. 
 
Denuclearization of Korean Peninsula 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  Asked whether recent tension in U.S.-China relations would 
affect China's position on North Korea, Qin stated that realizing 
the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and safeguarding peace 
and stability in Northeast Asia was in the fundamental interest of 
all relevant countries.  In response to a separate question on 
whether reports that the PRC had urged the DPRK to open up its 
economy and focus on economic development were accurate, Qin 
responded that such reports were not consistent with facts and ran 
counter to the PRC's diplomatic principle of non-interference in the 
internal affairs of other states.  Qin also denied reports that Kim 
Jong-Il's son, Kim Jong-Un, secretly had visited China, stating 
categorically that there had been no such visit. 
 
OXFAM 
------ 
 
¶9.  In response to a question on OXFAM's activities in China, Qin 
stated that he was not aware of any issue involving OXFAM.  China 
welcomed NGOs to support China's modernization drive, but all NGOs 
must operate according to Chinese laws. 
 
Niger Coup 
---------- 
 
¶10.  China was following recent political unrest in Niger closely, 
took note of recent UN, African Union and ECOWAS efforts to mediate 
the dispute, and called on all parties to resolve differences 
through dialogue. 
 
Copenhagen Accord 
----------------- 
 
¶11.  Qin confirmed that Premier Wen Jiabao had sent a letter to 
Danish Prime Minister Rasmussen January 29 that indicated that the 
PRC "positively evaluated" and supported the Copenhagen Accord 
resulting from the UN Climate Change Conference.  Rasmussen had sent 
a reply letter to Premier Wen February 12 that applauded the 
positive outcome of the UN Climate Change Conference and expressed 
appreciation of Premier Wen's "important, constructive role" at the 
Conference, according to Qin. 
 
Resignation at UNFCCC 
--------------------- 
 
¶12.  Qin praised outgoing Executive Secretary of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change Yvo de Boer, stating that 
China supported de Boer's work as Executive Secretary, and adding 
that China hoped de Boer would continue his efforts to combat 
climate change in his new post. 
 
Pakistan FM Qureshi Visit 
------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Qin confirmed that Pakistan FM Qureshi met FM Yang Jiechi 
February 22 and Premier Wen Jiabao February 23.  In the Yang-Qureshi 
meeting, FM Yang had called for China and Pakistan to maintain 
positive momentum in the development of bilateral relations and FM 
Qureshi had pledged to work with the PRC to enhance cooperation in 
various fields.  Asked to comment on FM Qureshi's February 23 public 
statement welcoming China to play an intermediary role in resolving 
the India-Pakistan dispute, Qin stated that Pakistan and India were 
both important countries in South Asia and that sound Pakistan-India 
relations were conducive to regional peace and development.  China 
welcomed improvements in Pakistan-India relations as well as efforts 
to resolve the dispute through dialogue and negotiation. 
 
Zambia President Visit 
---------------------- 
 
¶14.  Zambian President Rupiah Banda would make his first visit to 
China at the invitation of President Hu Jintao from February 24 to 
March 4.  During the visit, President Banda would meet President Hu, 
NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo and Premier Wen Jiabao.  The two sides would 
 
BEIJING 00000432  003 OF 003 
 
 
discuss the bilateral relationship and sign a business cooperation 
agreement that would further promote friendship between the 
countries, according to Qin. 
 
Israel Deputy Prime Minister Visit 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Qin confirmed that Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Moshe ya'Alon 
would visit China for an in-depth broad exchange with State 
Councilor Dai Bingguo on issues of mutual interest.  Qin added that 
China hoped that parties in the Middle East would take measures to 
restore mutual trust and make positive efforts to advance peace 
talks. 
 
Ambassador Bosworth Visit 
------------------------- 
 
¶16.  Qin stated that U.S. Special Representative for North Korea 
Policy Bosworth would visit Beijing February 24 and discuss the 
Six-Party Talks and other issues of mutual interest with PRC Special 
Representative for the Six-Party Talks Wu Dawei.  Asked to comment 
on potential U.S.-DPRK meetings, Qin stated that China supported 
efforts conducive to the early resumption of the Six-Party Talks, 
but that he could not confirm any plans for U.S.-DPRK interaction. 
 
 
Ukraine Presidential Inauguration 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶17.  PRC Minister of Agriculture Han Changfu will attend Ukrainian 
President-elect Victor Yanukovich's inauguration February 25 as 
President Hu's special envoy. 
 
Croatian Foreign Minister Visit 
------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Croatian Minister of Foreign Affairs and European Integration 
Gordon Yang will visit China from February 28 to March 4 at the 
invitation of FM Yang Jiechi. 
 
HUNTSMAN