10BEIJING43
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, CHINA POLICY
Mon Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4590
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0043/01 0110955
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110955Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7556
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000043 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, CHINA POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"U.S. - China strategic partnership irreversible and increased 
differences inevitable" 
 
The official Communist Youth League China Youth Daily (Zhongguo 
Qingnianbao)(01/11)(pg 5): "Since the beginning of 2010 U.S.-China 
relations have, just like the weather in the Northern hemisphere, 
been rapidly cooling off.  The trade protectionist barrier that the 
U.S. built and their arms sales to Taiwan have both aroused the 
strong dissatisfaction of the Chinese people and government. 
Recently many American media and think tanks have become concerned 
about Sino-U.S. relations in the coming year.  However, more 
insightful American intellectuals believe that the divergences and 
contradictions between the two countries won't influence the general 
trend of the two country's strategic cooperation.  Li Cheng, the 
Director of the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations at the 
Brookings Institute, said that there is little basis for recent 
predictions by U.S. media and think tanks that U.S.- China relations 
will deteriorate.  The overall Sino-U.S. relations situation is: the 
degree of interdependence between the two countries is so high, and 
the scope of exchanges so wide that the two countries must, and can, 
work together to resolve their problems.  The pessimistic 
predictions about Sino-U.S. relations will only negatively influence 
the two people.  Therefore the two countries should encourage and 
lead their people in having constructive discussions while, 
meanwhile, making an effort to prevent nationalism and protectionism 
from getting in the way of their respective foreign policies." 
 
¶2.  CHINA POLICY 
 
a. "China in the eyes of the world: five myths and their 
genealogies" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(01/11)(pg A6): " It is easy for people 
to believe certain theories about things they do not understand and 
cannot avoid.  China's rise in national strength and international 
status is such a reality shrouded by myth.  The world is often 
distracted and confused by these myths.  There are five myths about 
China: first, the China-threat theory - taking China as imaginary 
enemy in order to extend their hostility against socialist countries 
during the Cold War and looking for excuses for the increased U.S. 
military presence in Asia.  Such 'threats' are in fact the 
international order defined by the one-sided wish of the U.S. and 
its allies.  China should focus on building a transparent, open and 
constructive international image that helps remove the world's 
speculations about China's threat. Second, 
China-triggers-resources-crisis theory - it is unfair to use the 
excuse of limited natural resources to restrict developing 
countries' development.  China should present the world with more 
examples of its contributions to efficiently consuming resources and 
its efforts in promoting sustainable development. Third, the 
China-collapse theory - the best response to this theory is China's 
sustained economic development and social stabilities; fourth, 
China's-responsibility theory - it is in fact a theory that appears 
to be kind on the outside but one which has careful calculations in 
its core.  With the precondition of China's independence, what kinds 
of international responsibilities should China take on that would 
not be regulated or dominated by certain countries, but which could 
be shared through equal negotiations among all countries? Finally, 
Chinese-model theory - China should make unremitting efforts to 
explore its own road to bring peace and prosperity to its people. 
China does not pursue any kind of good-looking 'China model' but 
rather the 'China experience' which is able to solve its own 
problems." 
 
¶3. FINANCIAL CRISIS 
 
b. "'Rescue' the United States or balance the economy?" 
 
The independent Chinese weekly business newspaper distributed in 
major cities throughout China, Economic Observer (Jingji 
Guanchabao)(01/11)(pg 42): " Unless the power which represents the 
rural and grassroots interests of China replaces the coastal urban 
elites and becomes the dominant force, China will continue to 
represent the Asian exporting countries which maintain the vitality 
of the U.S. economy.  Meanwhile, the U.S. government hopes to win 
precious time by investing in the green economy and taking a leading 
role in the international economy's newly-emerging industries.  In 
this way, the U.S. will be able to deal with the current global 
economic crisis and the decline of American power.  This is also the 
Obama administration's long-term plan.  The U.S. consumer market on 
which China relies is collapsing.  The U.S. treasury bonds which 
China has to buy in large quantities are risky.  If China transforms 
 
BEIJING 00000043  002 OF 002 
 
 
its development model and balances the domestic demand and exports, 
it can not only get rid of this dependence, but also help producers 
of other Asian countries and regions get rid of their risk.  More 
importantly, if other developing countries can carry out a similar 
transformation and strengthen trade relations among developing 
countries, they can be each other's consumers, which will bring the 
developing world independent and balanced economic growth, thereby 
creating a new era.  The Chinese Government's priority is that it 
should transform the self-confidence away from economic recovery and 
into a kind of courage, to dare to disregard the obstacles imposed 
by those interest groups who uphold the current imbalanced growth 
patterns and to promote the redistribution of wealth, which has long 
been delayed, to increase the individuals' income and their 
consuming capability." 
 
HUNTSMAN