05ANKARA3134
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JUNE 3, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Rice Gives Turkey Support For EU - Sabah 
Rice Gives Turkey Strong EU Support - Aksam 
Athens' EU Support for Turkey Won't Change - Milliyet 
The Guardian: Turkey May Be Victim of French EU Vote - Sabah 
Anti-Syria Journalist Killed in Bomb Attack in Beirut - 
Sabah 
Serbian President Promises to Catch Karadzic, Mladic - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Edelman: Those Who Undermine US-Turkey Relations Should be 
Countered - Zaman 
Rice: A United Europe Including Turkey Will Benefit All - 
Yeni Safak 
European Press Says EU Constitution is Dead - Zaman 
French, Dutch Rejections of Constitution a Veto for EU 
Leaders - Yeni Safak 
Kasir Assassination Shakes Lebanon - Radikal 
Zebari Assures Rice on Role of Sunnis - Cumhuriyet 
A War-Like Day in Iraq: 12 Killed, 37 Wounded - Cumhuriyet 
400 Palestinians Released by Israel Return Home - Cumhuriyet 
US `Bought' Gitmo Detainees from Tribes in Afghanistan - 
Cumhuriyet 
China-Russia Finalize Border Agreement - Cumhuriyet 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Edelman Addresses US-Turkish Business Council Meeting:  US 
Ambassador Eric Edelman told the US-Turkish Business 
Council's annual conference in Istanbul that trade relations 
between Turkey and the United States are not at the same 
level as the political and security relationship between the 
two allies, papers report.  Edelman criticized excessive red 
tape, corruption, and a `bureaucratic mentality' in Turkey, 
and reiterated the need for reforms.  He noted that US 
investment levels in Turkey have remained low when total US 
foreign direct investment around the world continues to be 
strong.  Edelman complained that these `fundamental 
realities' are holding back trade and investment between the 
two countries.  Ambassador Edelman warned against 
`misguided' ideas, such as public calls earlier this year 
for boycotts of US companies in Turkey.  Edelman said that 
such ideas should be `countered and contradicted.'  He also 
commented on the recent visit to north Cyprus by US 
Congressmen, and noted that the Bush Administration is 
making good on its commitment to ending the isolation of 
Turkish Cypriots. 
 
Secretary Rice Supports Turkey's EU Bid:  Turkish media 
 
SIPDIS 
report Secretary Rice's remarks in support of Turkey's EU 
membership drive at a press conference at the US-EU 
ministerial meeting in Washington.  `A Europe that is 
outward-looking, not inward-looking, is extremely important 
to completing Europe's integration and Europe's unity -- and 
that includes Turkey,' Rice said.  Rice noted that the US 
has been working with the  EU and NATO in supporting efforts 
for democratization in Central and Eastern Europe, and urged 
Europe to continue on that path: `Everyone, including 
Turkey, has a stake in a Europe that is united around common 
values,' the Secretary remarked. 
 
US State Department Official Evaluates Turkey's EU Chances: 
"Milliyet" reports from Washington on a background briefing 
by an unidentified senior US State Department official, who 
assessed the impact of the rejection of the European Union 
constitution in referenda in France and the Netherlands on 
Turkey's chances of joining the European bloc.  `Whether 
Turkey will become a full EU member depends ultimately on 
the extent to which Turkey can transform itself,' the US 
official said.  The official warned against developments 
which may lead to a Europe that closes its doors to new 
candidates that show themselves fit for EU membership.  The 
US official noted that in Poland in 1988, only `humorists' 
and `banned dissidents' were talking about their country 
becoming a member of the European Union and NATO. 
`However,' the official said, `what was once seen as humor 
has become a reality today, because the Poles have managed 
to reform themselves.' 
 
Edogan to Attend `American Davos':  Prime Minister Erdogan 
is to attend the Sun Valley Conference, to be held July 6-10 
in Sun Valley, Idaho, "Hurriyet" reports.  The conference, 
billed as `an American Davos,' brings together some 200 
American business owners and CEOs with world leaders. 
 
Erdogan Reshuffles Cabinet:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan 
on Thursday announced a reshuffle in his cabinet after 
Agriculture Minister Sami Guclu, Public Works Minister Zeki 
Ergezen, and State Minister for Women's Affairs Guldal Aksit 
resigned from their posts.  Erdogan said they had been 
replaced by Mehmet Mehdi Eker, Faruk Nafis Ozak and Nimet 
Cubuk.  Papers comment that Erdogan has partially reshuffled 
his cabinet, while leaving key ministers at their posts, and 
that the changes were not surprising, as the sacked 
ministers had drawn criticism that they were unsuccessful. 
 
"First Prosecution For Statement on Armenain Claims":  An 
Ankara prosecutor has for the first time brought charges 
against someone for expressing the view that there were 
massacres of Armenians in Anatolia in 1915.  If the 
defendant, lawyer Medeni Ayhan, is convicted for expressing 
these views, it will represent the first implementaion of 
Article 312 of the revised penal code, which envisages 
criminal penalties for `those who defend views that are 
contrary to the these of the state.'  The charges against 
Ayhan under Article 312 also include his alleged statement 
that `I am from the Kurdish nation and speak as a citizen of 
Kurdistan.'  But also included in the prosecution's case are 
Ayhan's alleged comments on the Armenia question: `The 
Ottoman Empire, along with the Hamidiye Regiments and the 
Committee for Union and Progress, had a role in the massacre 
of 1.5 million Armenisans in 1915.'  If Ayhan is convicted 
and sentenced for his comments on the Armenian issue, it 
could open the way for cases to be opened against many 
others who defend views contrary to the official version of 
events. 
 
Syria Tests Missiles:  International wire services cite a 
`New York Times' story reporting Israeli officials as 
claiming that Syria tested three Scud missiles last week, 
including one that broke up over Turkey's southern province 
of Hatay.  The missiles were fired last Friday from northern 
Syria in the first such tests by Syria since 2001.  The 
tests were part of a Syrian missile development project 
using North Korean technology and designed to deliver air- 
burst chemical weapons, the report says. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: The EU Constitution 
 
"After Holland" 
Yilmaz Oztuna commented in the conservative "Turkiye" (6/3): 
"After the French and the Dutch referenda results, it seems 
that the United Kingdom will skip the process altogether. 
From now on, the EU will have to focus on the nation-state 
system rather than a confederation.  In fact, this serves as 
a more appropriate basis for the EU vision.  The essence of 
the European Union envisages economic welfare and peace 
among its members.  Interference in the affairs of nation- 
states are not part of it. . The EU certainly will continue 
to function, but the major focus will be given to the 
individual nation-states rather than the constitution.  This 
process will only help Turkey become a member within shorter 
period of time than expected.  However, it is up to Turkey 
to use this historic shift to its advantage.  Turkey can't 
afford to miss the chance presented by these developments." 
 
"France and the Netherlands Strike a Blow Against the EU'" 
Erhan Basyurt commented in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(6/3):  "The rejection of the EU constitution by the French 
and Dutch people damaged the future of Europe more than it 
damaged Turkey's EU membership prospects.  As a matter of 
fact, there is no direct connection between the rejection of 
the EU constitution and Turkey's membership.  Regardless of 
whether the EU constitution is ultimately ratified, Turkey 
will start negotiations with the EU on October 3.  Nine 
countries have approved the constitution so far.  Most 
likely the UK, Denmark, and Poland also will say `no' to the 
constitution.  The future of the EU constitution process 
will be shaped at the upcoming EU summit.  The members will 
search for a solution at the summit.  It is obvious that the 
EU has been damaged by the `no' votes, but the European 
`culture of reconciliation' will undoubtedly produce new 
solutions to overcome the crisis." 
 
"Back to the Nation-State" 
Haluk Ulman observed in the economic-political "Dunya" 
(6/3): "The rejection of the EU Constitution by France and 
the Netherlands clearly indicates that the nation-state 
system is not finished, even in Europe.  Despite efforts by 
the EU officials to play down the results of the last two 
referenda, a single European entity with one president, one 
capital, and a unified political system now appears to be an 
almost impossible goal. . It is obvious that both French and 
Dutch voters are asking for the right to determine their own 
future.  They want to have a direct say over their own 
political, economic, and social needs.  In effect, they are 
advocating a return to the nation-state system." 
 
EDELMAN