05ANKARA3084
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Erdogan Thanks US Delegation for Efforts for Turkish Cyprus 
- Hurriyet 
US Delegation's Cyprus Visit a Gesture for Turkish Cypriots 
- Sabah 
New Penal Code Endangers Press Freedom in Turkey - Aksam 
Iran Tests New Missile - Aksam 
Cheney: War in Iraq May End in 2009 - Sabah 
Watergate Scandal's `Deep Throat' Former FBI Official - 
Sabah 
World Trade Organization to Handle Boeing-Airbus Dispute - 
Hurriyet 
New French PM Villepin a Friend of Turkey - Milliyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
`TRNC PM': US Delegation's Visit a `Kiss of Life' for 
Turkish Cyprus - Radikal 
Erdogan: US Delegation's Visit to `TRNC' Very Significant - 
Zaman 
Whitfield Urges Papadopoulos to End Sanctions on North 
Cyprus - Yeni Safak 
Whitfield: Papadopoulos Reluctant to Reunite Cyprus - 
Cumhuriyet 
Nicosia Fumes As Americans Visit North Cyprus - Radikal 
60 Percent of Dutch Likely to Reject EU Constitution - 
Cumhuriyet 
Two Centuries of Russian Presence to End in Georgia - Zaman 
Israel to Demolish 88 Palestinian Settlements in East 
Jerusalem - Cumhuriyet 
Bush Finds Amnesty International Report `Absurd' - Yeni 
Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan Receives Whitfield Delegation:  Turkish dailies give 
extensive coverage to meetings of US Congressmen in Ankara 
following their visit to north Cyprus on Monday.  On 
Tuesday, Prime Minister Erdogan received Ed Whitfield, co- 
chairman of the Turkey Caucus in the US House of 
Representatives, and his accompanying delegation.  Robert 
Wexler, the other co-chair of the Caucus, joined the 
delegation for the meeting with Erdogan.  `The visit of the 
US Congressmen to Turkish Cyprus will have a positive impact 
on the Cyprus peace process,' Erdogan said, adding that 
Turkey wanted a `lasting and fair' solution on Cyprus. 
Erdogan also thanked the US delegation for making a 
`significant' trip to northern Cyprus directly from Turkey. 
Whitfield said the delegation's visit to north Cyprus was a 
symbolic step toward the removal of the international 
isolation of the Turkish Cypriots.  Responding to a 
question, Erdogan said he viewed the US Congressional 
delegation's visit to northern Cyprus as an indication of 
new `openings' to Turkish Cyprus by Washington.  Asked about 
his upcoming state visit to the United States next week, 
Erdogan said that Iraq, Cyprus, Afghanistan, the Middle East 
and the fight against international terrorism will be 
discussed during his meetings with the Americans.  Erdogan 
later told his ruling AK Party group that Turkey-US 
relations continued as before within the scope of a 
strategic partnership. 
 
Ankara Reiterates Support for `Proliferation Security 
Initiative':  The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) released a 
statement Tuesday to mark the second anniversary of the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), which was put into 
practice by 11 countries in May 2003.  Turkey joined the PSI 
in December 2003.  The MFA said that Turkey will continue 
supporting activities under the security initiative against 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). 
`Turkey is aware of the importance of international 
cooperation in the fight against terrorism, and will 
continue its efforts on this issue,' the MFA said.  The PSI 
is a response to the growing challenge posed by the 
proliferation of WMD, their delivery systems, and related 
materials worldwide, "Milliyet" reports, adding that Turkey 
plans to lead a military exercise related to PSI in the 
Eastern Mediterranean in 2006.  The paper regards the MFA 
statement as an effort by Turkey to please Washington on the 
eve of Prime Minister Erdogan's upcoming visit to the US. 
 
Turkey Soon to Expand Customs Union Agreement With EU: 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said on Tuesday that Turkey 
will expand its customs union (CU) agreement with the 
European Union (EU) before an EU summit on June 16 in a way 
that will include new member states, including Cyprus. 
Analysts expect Turkey to add to the protocol a political 
declaration saying that the inclusion of the Republic of 
Cyprus in the CU agreement does not imply official 
recognition of Nicosia by Ankara.  The EU has made clear 
that Turkey must sign the protocol in order to begin 
accession talks on October 3, 2005. 
 
Controversial Penal Code Takes Effect:  Turkey's new penal 
code, a controversial bill that includes restrictions on the 
press and enhanced prison sentences for journalists, took 
effect on June 1, papers report.  The new code brings 
restrictions on the reporting of organized criminal 
activities and news stories that contradict official 
policies.  Reports claim that the law provides increased 
prison terms for individuals who openly criticize the state, 
the parliament, the judiciary, or the military.  The new 
code also eases penalties on those who open or manage 
illegal Koran courses, though that controversial provision 
may face a veto by President Sezer.  The law increases 
penalties for `honor killings,' rape, torture, and street 
theft. 
 
Erdogan to Visit Lebanon:  Prime Minister Erdogan plans to 
visit Lebanon June 15 as the official guest of Prime 
Minister Najip Mikati following an earlier visit to the 
United States, "Yeni Safak" reports.  Erdogan will attend 
the `Arab Economic Summit' in Beirut during his visit, which 
is seen as a contribution to the Middle East peace process. 
 
Rabbani Claims Former Afghan Warlord Massoud Killed by US: 
Former Afghan President Burhaneddin Rabbani said in an 
interview with the Islamist-oriented "Yeni Safak" that the 
September 11 attacks were not organized by Osama bin Ladin, 
and that the United States might have engineered the killing 
of Afghan warlordAhmad Shah Massoud, leader of the Northern 
Alliance.  Rabbani claimed that the Taliban was established 
by former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto with 
support from `the US and its partners.' 
 
General Buyukanit Due in Greece:  Turkish Land Forces 
Commander General Yasar Buyukanit is to visit Athens on June 
22, papers report.  Buyukanit will address Greek military 
students at the War Academy in Athens, where a Turkish flag 
was found desecrated in a room where Turkish officers were 
being hosted as part of an exchange program in April.  The 
visit will be the first ever by a Turkish Land forces 
Commander to Greece. 
 
Pakistan's Aziz in Ankara:  Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz of 
Pakistan arrived in Ankara on Tuesday on a state visit. 
Aziz is scheduled to meet with Prime Minister Erdogan, 
President Sezer, Parliament Speaker Arinc, and Foreign 
Minister Gul on Wednesday. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: The EU Constitution 
 
"One Threat Has Passed" 
Erdal Safak commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (6/1): 
"With the French `no' vote, the heart of the European 
Constitution stopped beating.  Today's referendum in the 
Netherlands will render it brain-dead.  Some believe that 
the June 16 EU summit will mark the official end of the 
European Constitution, while others expect the process to 
continue until the last referendum is held.  The address of 
the last referendum is of course Britain.  British PM Blair 
is expected to make the most of this time, since Britain is 
also going to take charge of the EU presidency as of July 1. 
. A growing number of editorials in the British press seems 
to agree on one thing: the referendum result marked the 
failure of French-German leadership and paved the way for 
the `British model.'  The British model basically envisages 
the EU as an economic union.  This makes things a lot easier 
for Turkey.  But there is more good news for Turkey coming 
from Paris.  Chirac has appointed the pro-Turkish Villepin 
for the Prime Ministry instead of Sarkozy, an advocate of 
privileged partnership.  . We can be calm about France, 
because Paris is likely pursue a low profile in the period 
ahead.  There seems to be no other option available for 
France in the EU at this point.  As "The Financial Times" 
has suggested, the main question is not about who will be 
the new members of the EU, but rather whether France will be 
allowed to remain as a member." 
 
"The Impact of the French Referendum" 
Melih Asik argued in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (6/1): 
"While Europe is in chaos after the referendum result in 
France, the Turkish Prime Minister and Foreign Minister 
remain calm.  They repeatedly emphasize that `the result of 
the referendum will not affect Turkey's membership process.' 
If they are thinking that `Europe wouldn't have agreed to 
Turkey's membership anyway,' then yes, Turkey won't be 
affected.  Otherwise, one has to be very ignorant to believe 
that Turkey won't be affected.  Turkey's prospective 
membership was one of the five reasons the French people 
rejected the constitution.  The main reason for the 
rejection was the fear of an increase in unemployment 
because of cheaper labor being brought in from Turkey.  In 
short, Turkey's membership will affect Europe's decision, 
and to think that this result is not going to affect Turkey 
is just insane." 
 
EDELMAN