05ANKARA3490
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, June 1-15,
Mon Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 17 ANKARA 003490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, June 1-15, 
2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. Published by The Messenger, Georgia's English Language 
Daily, on Wednesday, June 1: 
 
     TITLE:  Georgians working in Greece are "Slaves, 
     donkeys, and housekeepers" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  According to the newspaper Rezonansi, over 
     150,000 Georgians legally live in Greece.  However, the 
     newspaper reports that twice as many live in the 
     country illegally. 
 
     According to the article, the majority of Georgian 
     illegal immigrants living in Greece fall victim to 
     human trafficking due to their vulnerable status.  "95 
     percent of the illegal migrants are women, including 
     children, and 5 percent are men.  The majority of men 
     are young," according to the paper.  The article also 
     mentions that many Georgians are serving prison 
     sentences in Greece, either due to their illegal status 
     or because of the crimes they have committed. 
 
     According to their sources, while there are several 
     ways of entering Greece, 90 percent of the illegal 
     immigrants entered the country through either Turkey 
     and Bulgaria.  Some Georgians cross the border on foot, 
     and some hide on buses.  The paper adds that although 
     some arrive in the country legally, they stay after 
     their one month visa has expired.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3. Published by the Journal of Turkish Weekly 
(www.turkishweekly.net) on Thursday, June 2: 
 
     TITLE:  New Program Seeks to Halt Human Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The International Organization for 
     Migration (IOM), in close cooperation with the Turkish 
     government yesterday launched a campaign to fight 
     against human trafficking in Eastern Europe, Turkey, 
     and the former states of the Soviet Union. 
 
     The coordinated campaign aims to rescue and protect 
     potential and current victims of human trafficking who 
     are entering Turkey especially from Moldova and 
     Ukraine. 
 
     IOM Chief of Mission in Turkey Marielle Sander-Listrom 
     delivered a speech yesterday to introduce the new 
     campaign which will be conducted through the media. 
 
     As a part of the media campaign, a free "157" emergency 
     hotline to help rescue victims of human trafficking 
     will be publicized through TV commercials. "In order to 
     protect human rights we will air public service 
     announcements on TV for the free 157 emergency hotline 
     because we know that the victims watch TV in their free 
     time, and this is the best way to reach them," said 
     Lindstrom. 
 
     "Human trafficking is a problem that crosses 
     international borders.  This campaign embraces a 
     comprehensive, regional approach to prevent human 
     trafficking," she added. 
 
     Besides TV spots, Turkey will distribute small handouts 
     or passport supplements to those who enter Turkey 
     through main border gates.  Besides telling about the 
     157 emergency lines, these supplements will include 
     warnings about human trafficking. 
 
     Similar handouts will also be distributed in Ukraine by 
     nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to those planning 
     to visit Turkey and groups at risk of falling prey to 
     human trafficking.  Distribution will be carried out 
     especially at the ports of Odessa and Crimea, and the 
     Antalya and Istanbul airports. As a part of the 
     campaign, billboard advertisements were also erected at 
     those airports. 
 
     The campaign, which includes public education, the 
     training of public institutions for the application of 
     related laws, and giving direct medical and 
     physiological assistance to victims, is funded by a 
     $700,000 U.S. grant.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by Hurriyet on Thursday, June 2: 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The NSC Secretary General's office 
     completed the writing of the new National Security 
     Policy Document.  Upon instructions of Prime Minister 
     Erdogan the document was made shorter and limited to 25 
     pages. The current version of the document is hundreds 
     of pages with its attachments. 
 
     The document will be taken up at the June 21 NSC 
     meeting.  Officials are discussing whether or not it 
     should be made public. 
 
     Topics in the document as follows include:  Internal 
     threats: Fundamentalism, separatism and extreme left 
     are the most important elements threatening internal 
     security of the country; Regional Differences: Economic 
     difficulties, difference of development levels among 
     regions and unemployment are internal threats as well. 
     They result in crimes of pick pocketing and purse 
     snatching as well as provocative acts as witnessed in 
     Trabzon and Mersin; External Threats:  For the first 
     time in this document external threats are not numbered 
     in rank but 12 mile problem with Greece, Iran and Iraq 
     and Cyprus issues were mentioned among concerns; 
     Asymmetric threats: International drug smuggling, 
     international terrorism and human trafficking were 
     mentioned among these threats.  END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by TurkishPress.com on Friday, June 3, 2005: 
 
     TITLE:  Ukrainian President Yushchenko:  Political 
     Relations Between Turkey and Ukraine Should Be Improved 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Moscow (AA) - Ukrainian President Viktor 
     Yushchenko said on Friday that the trade volume between 
     Turkey and Ukraine exceeded 2 billion dollars, 
     stressing that the political relations should also be 
     upgraded. 
 
     In an exclusive interview with the A.A. prior to his 
     official visit to Turkey, scheduled for 7th-8th June, 
     Yushchenko said that Turkey was really a special 
     partner for Ukraine in respect of political and 
     economic relations. 
 
     Yushchenko said that Ukraine favored further 
     improvement of bilateral relations with Turkey, adding 
     that "we are getting ready to submit proposals to 
     Turkey to help solve clashes in international hot 
     spots, because we endorse a coordinated operation in 
     this area.  More than 2-billion dollars of trade volume 
     between our two countries gives us, the politicians, 
     the responsibility to upgrade our political relations." 
 
     "Turkey's and Ukraine's political willingness to 
     integrate with Europe is identical.  We hope to joint 
     he EU soon, like Turkey," said Yushchenko. 
 
     -UKRAINE ERSPECTS CRIMEAN TATARS- 
 
     Referring to the Crimean Tatars, Yushchenko said:  "we 
     respect Crimean Tatars who have ties with Turkey.  We 
     meet all the expenses of Crimean Tatars who proceed to 
     Ukraine from Central Asia.  We thank for the support of 
     Turkey extended to us to enforce some social, economic 
     and humanitarian assistance programs for Crimean 
     Tatars." 
 
     -ECONOMIC RELATIONS- 
     Yushchenko said that the contributions of Turkish 
     investors to Ukrainian economy was significant, adding 
     that "we have lots of things to do in economic area, 
     i.e. elimination of double taxation and the 
     liberalization of trade.  We must also discuss the 
     common projects which we could undertake with our 
     Turkish partners in Iraq.  We can also work together in 
     transportation and energy fields.  Turkey can be an 
     amazing partner for Ukraine as an alternative route in 
     respect of transportation of oil and natural gas 
     resources." 
     Noting that Ukraine decreased customs duties 
     significantly, President Yushchenko added that 
     Ukrainian liberalized its laws in the banking sector 
     and made possible to open foreign banks in Ukraine. 
 
     -LIBERALIZATION OF VISA POLICY- 
     When reminded of the problems which Turkish businessmen 
     faced in Ukraine such as getting a visa, as well as 
     problems in banking sector, Yushchenko said that 
     Ukraine is trying to liberalize further its visa 
     policy. 
 
     "I am looking forward to meet Turkish officials to 
     discuss the visa issue.  But we must also try to 
     counter international drug and human trafficking," he 
     said.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by International Herald Tribune on Saturday, 
June 4: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkey's president uses veto on Koran courses 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Ankara.  President Ahmet Necdet Sezer of 
     Turkey on Friday vetoed an amendment to the country's 
     new penal code that would reduce penalties for teaching 
     unauthorized courses on the Koran. 
 
     The move could reignite tension between the government, 
     which has Islamic roots, and the country's fiercely 
     secular establishment. 
 
     The provision was part of a package of amendments 
     pushed by the governing Justice and Development Party, 
     a conservative movement with Islamic roots. 
 
     The article, which would have allowed those convicted 
     of opening and running illegal educational institutions 
     to pay a fine rather than face a jail term of up to 
     three years, resulted in accusations that the 
     government of Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan was 
     condoning religious fundamentalism. 
 
     Islamic activists in Turkey often run clandestine 
     schools teaching the Koran, where-free from government 
     control-they are accused of indoctrinating students in 
     hard-line fundamentalism. 
 
     Sezer, a secularist who has often clashed with the 
     Erdogan government, said he had returned the amendment 
     to Parliament for reconsideration because the measure 
     would encourage "the opening of illegal educational 
     institutions." 
 
     The principle of secularism "is the cornerstone of the 
     values on which the Turkish Republic is founded," he 
     said. 
 
     If the measure passes for a second time without 
     changes, Sezer must approve it.  He can, however, ask 
     the constitutional court to annul the legislation. 
 
     The provision was introduced by the party as a last- 
     minute change to a package of penal code amendments 
     during a parliamentary debate last week. 
 
     The main opposition boycotted the session and asserted 
     that the governing party had an Islamic agenda, even 
     though it has disavowed its roots. 
 
     Turkey's new penal code, which the vetoed package was 
     intended to amend, took effect Tuesday. 
 
     The code improves women's rights and imposes tougher 
     penalties for rape, torture, human trafficking and 
     "honor killings," in which women are killed by 
     relatives for actions deemed to tarnish the family 
     name. 
 
     But the code has come under attack from journalists and 
     human rights groups, who say its provision to jail 
     those found guilty of offenses such as insulting state 
     institutions or harming national security will curb 
     freedom of speech.  END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  Reported by CNN Turk and Haberturk on Wednesday, June 1: 
     BEGIN TEXT: A 157 Hotline was inaugurated as a human 
     trafficking hotline by the IOM in order for foreign 
     women who are forced into prostitution in Turkey to 
     seek help. 
 
     The IOM determined that only in the past five months 81 
     foreign women were brought to Turkey to e used in the 
     prostitution sector.  This is the figure that the IOM 
     could reach. 
 
     Women, particularly from Russia and the Commonwealth of 
     Independent States, from now on will be able to call a 
     hotline (157) in order to escape from organized crime 
     that takes her passport away and forces her into 
     prostitution. 
 
     The promotional footage for introduction of the hotline 
     began to be shown on TV in Russia, the Ukraine and 
     Moldova.  Callers will be able to talk Russian-, 
     Romanian-, Turkish- and English-speaking professional 
     advisors.  If the caller is in danger, the hotline 
     officials immediately inform the police. 
 
     During the two weeks following the inauguration of the 
     hotline, 3000 calls came in, but only three of them 
     were women who were in real danger.  Police helped all 
     three.  From today on, the hotline will begin a more 
     comprehensive campaign. 
 
     Marielle Sander Lindstrom, Turkey representative of 
     IOM, is hopeful about the cooperation with the GOT. 
     The IOM thinks that with this campaign Turkey will be 
     dropped from the Black List on the human trafficking 
     issue. 
 
     According to data furnished by IOM, in May 81 women 
     were kidnapped in Turkey.  Following were the provinces 
     where the kidnapping incidents occurred: 
 
     Istanbul:  36 
     Antalya:   16 
     Ankara:    14 
     Artvin:     6 
     Kusadasi:   4 
 
     The citizenship of the 81 women who were kidnapped was: 
 
     Ukrainian:  23 
     Moldovan:   19 
     Uzbek:      10 
     Russian:     9 
     Romanian:    6 
 
     Twelve of the 81 kidnapped women were younger than 18 
     and 
     47 of them were between 19-25 years of age.  The 
     Hotline 157 aims at providing psychological, medical 
     and direct support to these women. 
 
¶7.  Published on Habervitrini (www.habervitrini.com) on 
Thursday, June 2: 
 
     TITLE:  These two beauties will prevent forced 
     prostitution 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Hotline 157, which was established by 
     the IOM to fight human trafficking at the international 
     level, became operation. 
 
     Selin Unal, representative of IOM, made a press 
     announcement at Ataturk Airport and introduced the 
     Hotline 157 for victims.  Unal said, "The IOM jointly 
     promotes with Turkey a Hotline 157 for emergency help. 
     This is a line for victims to call.  A brochure for 
     promoting the hotline is being prepared in Turkish, 
     English and Romanian.  Within the framework of the 
     project, which has an annual budget of $700,000, 
     financed by the U.S. and Turkey, Turk Telecom 
     established a toll free 157 hotline.  A victim can call 
     this hotline 24 hours a day and seven days a week and 
     she will be directed immediately to police or the 
     gendarmerie." 
 
     Unal went on, "The campaign, which was inaugurated for 
     victims who came in particular from countries such as 
     Moldova, Ukraine and Romania and who were forced to 
     work by people with bad intentions, aims at saving 
     these people.  Almost all victims, referred to as 
     modern slaves, are women and are used primarily in the 
     sex trade.  The campaign aims at providing medical, 
     psychological and direct support to victims.  It began 
     at borders including Ataturk Airport, Antalya and 
     Trabzon airports.  Currently this hotline is being 
     operated by the IOM and will be transferred to a 
     Turkish NGO in November.  Hotline 157 will be promoted 
     in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics as 
     well, and at the same time it will be helpful in visa 
     and repatriation of immigrants." 
 
     IOM officials noted that Turkey was one of the top 
     destination countries for human trafficking victims. 
     They determined that there were 266 victims of human 
     trafficking in Turkey in 2004.  This figure is only a 
     small portion of the actual number of victims.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶8.  Published by Radikal on Thursday, June 2: 
 
     TITLE:  Human Trafficking Hotline 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey, along with IOM, is inaugurating in 
     Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Republics and Turkey 
     a special campaign in the fight against human 
     trafficking.  First, it will promote the Hotline 157 
     that became operation a while ago.  Victims of human 
     trafficking who are forced to stay or work will be able 
     to call this toll free line around the clock. 
     Volunteers are working at the hotline where responders 
     speak Turkish, Russian and Romanian.  END TEXT. 
 
¶9.  Published by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty 
(www.rferl.org) on Friday, June 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Middle East:  U.S. Trafficking Report 
     Criticizes Four Gulf Allies 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The State Department report lists four 
     U.S. allies in the Persian Gulf region-Saudi Arabia, 
     Kuwait, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates-as among 
     the least responsive to the trafficking problem. 
 
     It says they are main destinations for sex slaves and 
     forced laborers, mainly women and children, from 
     countries including Iran, Afghanistan, and the former 
     Soviet Union. 
 
     U.S. officials today stressed that the 14 worst-ranked, 
     or "Tier-3," countries have three months to improve 
     antitrafficking efforts or face sanctions.  U.S. 
     Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice told reporters she 
     hopes the report will result in increased cooperation. 
 
     "We trust that this year's report will raise 
     international awareness of the crime of trafficking, 
     and spur governments across the globe to take 
     determined actions against it," Rice said.  "All states 
     must work together to close down trafficking routes, 
     prosecute and convict traffickers, and protect and 
     reintegrate victims into society." 
 
     The State Department report examined the situation in 
     150 countries.  It said an estimated 600,000 people are 
     trafficked across international borders annually, most 
     of whom are women and children.  It cited problems of 
     poverty and organized crime in countries victimized by 
     trafficking as well as the need for richer countries, 
     including the United States, to address demand for 
     trafficked people. 
 
     The State Departments' senior advisor on human 
     trafficking, John Miller, said sex slavery is a 
     particular problem.  "When we look at slavery 
     worldwide, we believe sex slavery is the largest 
     category of transnational slavery," Miller said.  "It 
     is intrinsically linked to prostitution, and we find 
     that where prostitution is encouraged, the number of 
     victims increases.  That is why to combat sex slavery 
     we are urging a greater focus on demand, educating and 
     dissuading the so-called customers." 
     The report also included a "watch-list" of states 
     deemed to be of concern for trafficking but not subject 
     to sanction.  Those countries include Armenia, 
     Azerbaijan, Russia, Uzbekistan, Ukraine, and Slovakia. 
     The U.S. report cited a number of tragic cases from 
     this region.  It mentioned a 17-year-old orphan from 
     Uzbekistan named Lusa whose abduction was engineered by 
     her aunt.  She was sold to a prostitution ring in Dubai 
     and when she was "no longer useable," was sent to a 
     psychiatric center, the report said.  Government 
     officials and an Uzbek nongovernmental organization are 
     negotiating her release. 
 
     Another case mentioned a young Belarusian woman from 
     Minsk named Svetlana, who was trafficked to Turkey. 
     She died attempting to escape.  But the U.S. State 
     Department's Miller says Belarusian and Turkish 
     authorities worked to prosecute those responsible for 
     her death. 
 
     "There is a bright spot in this too-common tragedy. 
     Belarusian and Turkish authorities cooperated this year 
     to arrest and charge those responsible for Svetlana's 
     death, which I think brings out the bad things that are 
     happening but also how there is-there are 
     counterattacks going on," Miller said. 
 
     U.S. officials downplayed the threat of sanctions tied 
     to the report but said it could be effective as a 
     "naming and shaming" countries linked to human slavery. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶10.  Published by Turks.US on Saturday, June 4: 
 
     TITLE:  US Issues report on Human Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The US annual report on Human Trafficking 
     was issued by the State Department on Friday.  Turkey 
     was on the list of governments who do not fully comply 
     with the US minimum standards, but are however, making 
     significant efforts to bring themselves in line with 
     those standards. 
 
     The list is an extensive one with seventy seven 
     countries with US minimum standards: 
 
     TIER ONE:  Countries whose governments fully comply 
     with U.S. minimum standards:  (LIST OF COUNTRIES) 
 
     TIER TWO:  Countries whose governments do not fully 
     comply with the minimum standards, but are making 
     significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance 
     with those standards:  (LIST OF COUNTRIES) 
 
     TIER TWO SPECIAL WATCH LIST:  Countries whose 
     governments do not fully comply with the minimum 
     standards, but are making significant efforts to bring 
     themselves into compliance and meet one of the 
     following conditions: 
 
     a)  The absolute number of victims of severe forms of 
     trafficking is very significant or is significantly 
     increasing. 
 
     b)  There is a failure to provide evidence of 
     increasing efforts to combat severe forms of 
     trafficking in persons from the previous year. 
 
     c)  The determination that a country is making 
     significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance 
     with minimum standards was based on commitments by the 
     country to take additional future steps over the next 
     year.  (LIST OF COUNTRIES) 
 
     TIER THREE:  Countries whose governments do not fully 
     comply with the minimum standards and are not making 
     significant efforts to do so:  (LIST OF COUNTRIES). 
     END TEXT. 
¶11.  Published by Washington Post on Saturday, June 4: 
 
     TITLE:  Saudis Rebuked on Forced Labor 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The United States yesterday names Saudi 
     Arabia and three other Persian Gulf Arab allies as 
     having among the world's worst records in halting human 
     trafficking, a rebuke that could subject the countries 
     to sanctions if they do not act quickly to address U.S. 
     concerns. 
 
     The finding, in an annual report issued by the State 
     Department, places Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab 
     Emirates and Saudi Arabia in the same category as such 
     countries as Cuba, Burma, North Korea and Sudan.  Human 
     rights activists said the inclusion of such close 
     allies in the war on terrorism suggests that the 
     administration is beginning to eliminate from its human 
     rights policy what some have dubbed the "Middle East 
     exception." 
 
     Last year, the State Department also faulted Saudi 
     Arabia for the first time for its lack of religious 
     tolerance. 
 
     The report said as many as 800,000 people, many of them 
     women and children, are trafficked across international 
     borders as sex workers and forced laborers in a modern- 
     day slave trade.  This is the fifth annual report, 
     which was mandated by an act of Congress at the 
     instigation of an unusual coalition of feminists and 
     Christian evangelical groups.  President Bush 
     frequently denounced sexual slavery to motivate his 
     evangelical base during the 2004 campaign.  In the 
     report, the Gulf Arab states were cited primarily for 
     practices that allowed the abuse of domestic servants 
     and laborers who came to the Middle East primarily from 
     Asia. 
 
     The report said the Saudis, for example, lack laws 
     criminalizing most trafficking offenses, and there is 
     little evidence of whether employers are ever 
     prosecuted.  Many of the foreign laborers in Saudi 
     Arabia work as domestic servants, and they are not 
     covered by Saudi labor laws. 
 
     In Saudi Arabia, "we have domestic workers being 
     brought in from many countries into domestic servitude, 
     child beggars, a lot of beatings, reports of beatings, 
     and rape-very difficult to get shelter, no 
     convictions," said John R. Miller, the senior adviser 
     for human trafficking. 
 
     "Trafficking in human beings is nothing less than a 
     modern form of slavery," Secretary of State Condoleezza 
     Rice said.  "The United States has a particular duty to 
     fight this scourge because trafficking in persons is an 
     affront to the principles of human dignity and liberty 
     upon which this nation was founded." 
 
     Rice has made promotion of democracy and freedom a 
     central tenet at the State Department.  A senior 
     department official said she was involved in the 
     decision making on where to rank individual countries 
     and had directed analysts to make recommendations based 
     on the criteria laid out in the law establishing the 
     report. 
 
     Tom Malinowski, Washington advocacy director for Human 
     Rights Watch, said the inclusion of the Gulf states in 
     this year's report was significant:  "It is another 
     positive sign that the administration is willing to be 
     honest and straightforward about the shortcomings of 
     its allies in the Arab world, including Saudi Arabia." 
 
     Other countries listed as poor performers in stopping 
     trafficking include Bolivia, Cambodia, Ecuador, 
     Jamaica, Togo and Venezuela.  An additional 27 
     countries, including China, India and South Africa, 
     were placed on a watch list, meaning they have 
     significant problems but the governments appear to be 
     making an effort to combat them. 
     Countries that are listed as poor performers can lose 
     non-humanitarian, non-trade-related assistance from the 
     United States, or be deemed ineligible to take part in 
     cultural and educational exchange programs.  But 
     countries can avoid sanctions if they begin to take 
     actions to address U.S. concerns in the next few 
     months. 
     Two years ago, Turkey and Greece, two NATO allies, fell 
     into the bottom category, but they have since improved 
     their standing.  Equatorial Guinea and Venezuela have 
     been sanctioned since the reports began. 
 
     "The purpose of the law is not to sanction," Miller 
     said.  "It is to get progress in freeing the victims 
     and throwing the traffickers in jail."  END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  Published in Sabah on Sunday, June 5: 
 
     TITLE:  "SNATCH & RUN" IMMIGRATION IN THE U.S. REPORT 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The State Department human trafficking 
     report noted that Turkey was a transit and destination 
     country for women and children kidnapping for sexual 
     exploitation. 
 
     The State Department issued its fifth such report and 
     in the Turkey portion of the 2005 report it was noted 
     that women, men and children were kidnapped for being 
     forced into labor.  It was stated, "There has been 
     increased evidence that Turkish citizens were kidnapped 
     for sexual exploitation and forced labor." 
 
     It was also noted that most of the victims were brought 
     from Eastern Europe and former Soviet Republics and in 
     particular from Moldova, Ukraine, Russia, Azerbaijan, 
     Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, Romania, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan 
     and Belarus. 
 
     In the report Turkey is in Tier 2 "watch list." 
 
     It was stated, "The GOT has not been implementing fully 
     the minimum standards necessary for eliminating the 
     problem.  But it shows a serious effort toward this 
     end."  END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  Published by Radikal on Saturday, June 4: 
     TITLE:  Prostitution Information Line Jammed 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Curious Turks jammed the 157 Helpline, for 
     foreigners forced into the country or into 
     prostitution.  More than three thousand people called 
     the helpline in two weeks, and only three people were 
     in real danger. 
 
     The Foreign Ministry created a new diversion with the 
     phone calls to the 157 Helpline.  The line, starting 
     its operation last month, was called by more curious 
     Turks than the needy.  The more than 3,000 calls jammed 
     the line and the necessary service wasn't given.  The 
     Ministry determined that only three of the calls were 
     for real reasons.  Due to the curiosity, the phone 
     calls were forwarded to tapes in Russian, Romanian and 
     Ukrainian. 
 
     The Ministry's goal is to prevent infringement of 
     foreigner's human rights, and is signing agreements to 
     solve the problem at its base to prevent illegal human 
     trafficking and to facilitate the return of those 
     people. Viktor Yushchenko, the leader of Ukraine, one 
     of the most important source countries will sign one of 
     these agreements during his official visit to Turkey 
     from 6-8 June.  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  Published by the Journal of Turkish Weekly on Monday, 
June 6: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkey must Fight Human Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey is a transit and destination 
     country for women and children trafficked primarily for 
     sexual exploitation, the U.S. State Department said in 
     its human trafficking report released on June 1. 
 
     The report claimed that some men, women, and children 
     are also trafficked for forced labor.  "There has been 
     increasing evidence of the internal trafficking of 
     Turkish citizens for forced labor and sexual 
     exploitation.  Most victims come from Eastern Europe 
     and the former Soviet Union, including Moldova, 
     Ukraine, Russia, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, 
     Romania, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Belarus," the 
     report added. 
 
     The report went on to claim that the Turkish government 
     does not fully comply with the minimum standards for 
     the elimination of trafficking.  However, it is making 
     significant efforts to do so. 
 
     US:  It's too early to see results of Turkish counter- 
     trafficking campaign. 
 
     Concerning the new program in Turkey that aims to fight 
     against human trafficking, the U.S. State Department 
     report said, "The government publicly launched its 2005 
     counter-trafficking campaign, which is too recent to 
     show results." 
 
     The International Organization for Migration (IOM), in 
     close cooperation with the Turkish government, last 
     week launched a campaign to fight human trafficking in 
     Eastern Europe, Turkey, and the former states of the 
     Soviet Union.  The coordinated campaign aims to rescue 
     and protect potential and current victims of human 
     trafficking, who are entering Turkey especially from 
     Moldova and Ukraine.  As a part of the media campaign, 
     a free "157" emergency hotline to help rescue human 
     trafficking victims will be publicized through TV 
     commercials.  Besides TV commercial spots, Turkey will 
     distribute small handouts or passport supplements to 
     those who enter Turkey through main border gates.  As 
     well as informing people about the 157 emergency lines, 
     these supplements will include warnings about human 
     trafficking.  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  Published by Iran Focus (www.iranfocus.com) on Monday, 
June 6, 2005: 
 
     TITLE:  Human trafficking not being combated in Iran: 
     US State Dept 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Iran is a source, transit, and destination 
     country for women and girls trafficked for the purposes 
     of sexual and labour exploitation, according to the 
     2005 annual Trafficking in Persons Report released by 
     the United States' Department of State. 
 
     The DoS Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in 
     Persons noted that "the Government of Iran does not 
     fully comply with the minimum standards for the 
     elimination of trafficking." 
 
     "Internal trafficking of women and girls for sexual 
     exploitation and children for forced labor also takes 
     place," it said, adding that such practices are fueled 
     by an increasing number of vulnerable groups, such as 
     runaway women, street children, and drug addicts. 
 
     In April, a number of government officials and security 
     officers were arrested during raids on at least five 
     houses used as brothels in and around the town of Neka 
     (northern Iran). 
 
     Many runaway girls, some as young as 13, were being 
     forced into prostitution by several organized 
     prostitution rings.  A number of officers from Iran's 
     notorious State Security Forces (SSF), commanders of 
     the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, and heads of a 
     number of local government departments and institutions 
     were among those rounded up in the raids. 
 
     The girls were also arrested pending judicial 
     sentencing. 
 
     The DoS report said that Iran should also take steps to 
     enhance protection measures for trafficking victims, 
     including ensuring those who are punished for 
     trafficking are not victims. 
     "Women and girls are trafficked to Pakistan, Turkey, 
     and Europe for sexual exploitation.  Boys from 
     Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan are trafficked 
     through Iran to Gulf states, where they are ultimately 
     forced to work as camel jockeys, beggars, or laborers," 
     the report also noted. 
 
     "Afghan women and girls are trafficked to Iran for 
     sexual exploitation, and for sexual and labor 
     exploitation in the context of forced marriage," it 
     added.  END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  Published by BakuToday.net on Monday, June 6: 
 
     TITLE:  U.S. Report on Trafficking Puts Armenia on 
     "Watch List" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The U.S. Department of State has urged 
     Armenia to show more consistency and commitment in its 
     fight against human trafficking.  In its annual report 
     published last week the U.S. Department of State has 
     put Armenia on a "watch list" deemed to be of concern 
     for trafficking. 
 
     The countries on the "watch list" that also includes 
     Azerbaijan, Russia, Uzbekistan, Ukraine and Slovakia 
     are not subject to sanctions unlike 14 countries-mainly 
     from Asia and Africa-that could face sanctions as worst 
     offenders for failing to combat human trafficking. 
 
     In particular, the U.S. Department of State report 
     reads:  "Armenia is more a source than a transit 
     country for trafficking.  Women and girls from Armenia 
     are mainly trafficked as sex slaves to the United Arab 
     Emirates and Turkey." 
 
     According to the U.N. data, more than a 1,000 women, 
     most of whom are victims of trafficking, are exploited 
     as prostitutes in the UAE and Turkey." 
 
     The report says that although the Armenian government 
     makes efforts to combat this phenomenon, it still does 
     not achieve the results that may meet even the minimum 
     requirements. 
 
     U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said she hopes 
     the report will result in increased efforts to stop the 
     trafficking of people. 
 
     "We trust that this year's report will raise 
     international awareness of the crime of trafficking, 
     and spur governments across the globe to take 
     determined actions against it," she said.  "All states 
     must work together to close down trafficking routes, 
     prosecute and convict traffickers, and protect and 
     reintegrate victims into society." 
 
     Armenia appeared on the "watch list" because it failed 
     to present proof last year of its commitment to combat 
     human trafficking appropriately. 
 
     Despite the increasing number of trafficking-related 
     cases examined by the courts, punishments remain 
     inappropriately mild and the size of fines low. 
 
     In particular, the report indicates that article 132 of 
     the Criminal Code prohibits human trafficking and sets 
     four to eight years in prison for this crime. 
 
     But the Armenian Government mainly applies article 262 
     that sets a milder punishment. 
 
     The State Department particularly points out that only 
     one out of 16 cases examined by Armenian courts in 2004 
     resulted in the application of article 132, while 
     article 262 was applied in the rest. 
     The usual jail terms in sentences passed in trafficking 
     cases in Armenia are 6 months to 2 years, there are 
     cases that are dismissed or in which the criminal gets 
     away by paying a fine.  These punishments, says the 
     report, are incommensurate with the gravity of the 
     crime. 
 
     The report says that Prosecutor Office members 
     criminally assisted people involved in trafficking and 
     frontier guards accepted bribes to facilitate their 
     movement. 
 
     The government failed to investigate and institute 
     criminal cases against those officials involved in 
     trafficking, says the report. 
 
     Investigative Journalists NGO head Edik Baghdasarian 
     said in an RFE/RL interview that he possesses 
     information reported by victims of trafficking 
     themselves that some workers of the Prosecutor Office 
     accepted bribes from pimps in Dubai. 
 
     In particular, Baghdasarian claims that Prosecutor's 
     office worker Arestakes Yeremian is involved in this 
     business. 
 
     But Yeremian denied the accusations in a RFE/RL talk. 
 
     Chairman of the Intergovernmental Anti-Trafficking 
     Commission Valery Mkrtumian admits that Armenia's 
     appearance on the "watch list" is a retrogression for 
     the country. 
 
     Regarding the involvement of officials in this 
     business, he said: "There are different sources.  We 
     can form a certain opinion based on information 
     provided by NGOs or other organizations.  But we do not 
     know any name of an official involved or assisting in 
     this crime." END TEXT. 
 
¶17.  Published in The Daily Star (www.dailystar.com.lb) on 
Tuesday, June 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Yushchenko puts energy exports and visas on 
     agenda for Turkey visit 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Kiev:  Ukrainian President Viktor 
     Yushchenko said Monday that freeing up the visa regime 
     and greater energy cooperation between Ukraine and 
     Turkey would be high on the agenda for his visit to 
     Turkey where he was due to arrive later in the day. 
 
     "We are ready to seriously review our visa regime, 
     including with Turkey," Yushchenko was quoted as 
     telling the Turkish media through his press service. 
 
     Yushchenko was due to leave for Turkey on a three-day 
     trip to Ankara and Istanbul, where he was to meet with 
     his counterpart Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Prime Minister 
     Recep Tayyip Erdogan as well as local business leaders. 
 
     Ukraine earlier this year withdrew visa requirements 
     for European Union passport holders, and Yushchenko 
     said Kiev was considering similar measures for other 
     countries. 
 
     "In parallel, we have to answer the question of 
     security against international terrorism, the narcotics 
     trade and human trafficking," he said.  This is why I 
     am eagerly awaiting discussions with the Turkish side 
     about a reciprocal liberalization of the visa regime." 
     Cooperation in the energy sector is another priority 
     item in talks between the two countries, which both 
     have large portions of the Black Sea coastline. 
     Ukraine, on the sea's northern coast, hopes to supply 
     electricity exports to energy-hungry Turkey in the 
     south. 
 
     "We are ready to present a project for electricity 
     exports," Yushchenko said.  Turkey, for its part, could 
     ensure oil and gas transport to Ukraine from 
     "alternative regions," he said.  Currently, Ukraine 
     receives most of its oil and gas from Russia and 
     Turkmenistan. 
 
     Ukraine is also interested in boosting Turkish 
     investment, which now funds some 331 businesses in the 
     ex-Soviet republic.  The two sides will also discuss 
     cooperating in Iraq reconstruction projects, Yushchenko 
     said. 
 
     Yushchenko and his wife Kateryna were to spend Monday 
     and Tuesday in Ankara and Wednesday in Istanbul.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶18.  Reported in Cumhuriyet on Tuesday, June 7: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  According to the UN, around 2 million 
     people live as refugees around the world. 
 
     Reporting from a refugee conference in Antalya, the 
     daily wrote that each year 1 million people emigrate 
     through illegal means because of economic, organized 
     crime-related reasons and regional wars, political 
     chaos and conflicts. 
 
     According to UN figures, each refugee pays 
     approximately $3500 to organizers and thus the total 
     figure reaches about $9billion. 
 
     The daily wrote that Turkey has been a destination 
     country for illegal immigration and human trafficking. 
     The daily also wrote that reps from 16 countries 
     attended the meeting in Antalya and it was stated that 
     Turkey in the past was a transit country. 
 
     Omer Aydin, Deputy Department Head of Smuggling and 
     Organized Crime, TNP, who hosted the conference, said, 
     "International organized crime rings are organizing the 
     refuge smuggling that stems from reasons such as 
     economic, social and political (hardships) with (hopes 
     of) finding a job and applying for asylum. END TEXT. 
 
¶19.  Reported by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty on Tuesday, 
June 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Ukraine's Yushchenko In Turkey 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  7 June 2005-Ukrainian President Viktor 
     Yushchenko is in Ankara for talks today with Turkey's 
     President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and parliament speaker 
     Bulent Arinc. 
 
     Yushchenko met with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
     shortly after arriving late on 6 June for the three-day 
     official visit.  There were few immediate details of 
     their meeting. 
 
     Before leaving Ukraine, Yushchenko had said he expects 
     to review visa requirements with Turkey during his 
     visit.  Ukraine earlier this year withdrew visa 
     requirements for European Union passport holders and 
     Yushchenko said he is considering similar measures for 
     other countries. 
 
     Agreements involving the fight against terrorism, 
     drugs, and human trafficking are expected to be signed 
     during the visit.  END TEXT. 
 
¶20.  Published by Zaman on Wednesday, June 8: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkey Determined to Prevent Human Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey has been elevated to a category 
     along with countries that show intensive effort to 
     eliminate human trafficking according to the U.S. State 
     Department Human Trafficking Report for 2005, issued on 
     June 3. 
 
     In a release by the U.S. State Department on the report 
     issued on June 3, 2005, it stated that although Turkey 
     has not yet met all the minimum standards on this 
     issue, it has been involved in intensive efforts toward 
     this end.  Turkey was elevated to Tier 2.  In the 2004 
     report, Turkey was in Tier 2, Watch List. 
     In this group there are countries which do not meet all 
     the minimum standards in eliminating human trafficking, 
     but which show major effort in this field, as well as 
     countries where the number of human trafficking victims 
     increased significantly or a country where there has 
     been a drop in human trafficking or a country makes 
     commitments about the developments to be recorded in 
     the future.  END TEXT. 
 
¶21. Published in Radikal on Wednesday, June 8: 
     TITLE:  Human Traffickers to Be Sorry 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey has been elevated to a category 
     along with countries that show intensive effort to 
     eliminate human trafficking according to the U.S. State 
     Department Human Trafficking Report for 2005, issued on 
     June 3. 
 
     In a release by the U.S. State Department, it was 
     stated that in 2004, Turkey was in Tier 2 Watch List 
     and that as a result of its intensive work in the fight 
     against human trafficking, it has been elevated to the 
     next group. 
 
     The U.S. has shown the Hotline 157, which was 
     inaugurated for helping human trafficking victims, as a 
     major step taken for this end. END TEXT. 
 
¶22.  Published by Kiev Interfax-Ukraine on Tuesday, June 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Ukraine, Turkey Sign Cooperation Agreements 
 
     BEGIN FBIS-TRANSLATED TEXT:  Ukraine and Turkey have 
     signed cooperation agreements in science and 
     technology, the energy sector and railway 
     transportation during the official visit of Ukrainian 
     President Viktor Yushchenko to Turkey.  They also 
     signed an agreement on readmission. 
 
     [Passage omitted:  who signed the agreements] 
 
     The Ukrainian State Committee for Nuclear Regulation 
     and the Turkish state agency for nuclear energy signed 
     a memorandum of understanding on technical cooperation 
     and exchange of nuclear regulation information.  The 
     memorandum was signed by Ukrainian Foreign Minister 
     Borys Tarasyuk. END FBIS-TRANSLATED TEXT. 
 
¶23.  Reported by Anadolu Ajansi on Tuesday, June 7: 
 
     TITLE:  U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT ''TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
     REPORT'' -TURKEY UPGRADED 
     BEGIN TEXT:  ANKARA (A.A) - 07.06.2005 - Turkey was 
     upgraded to the category of ''countries that make 
     significant efforts to combat human smuggling'', 
     according to U.S. State Department Trafficking in 
     Persons Report. 
     Turkish MFA said that in the report which was issued on 
     June 3rd, 2005, Turkey was upgraded to the ''Second 
     Group'' which expends intensive efforts on this issue 
     even if it has not yet fully complied with the minimum 
     standards to combat human trafficking. 
     Under the ''2004 U.S. Human Trafficking and Victims 
     Law'' which the State Department presented to the 
     Congress, Turkey had been included in ''second Group- 
     Follow Up List,'' which was added to the report as 
     fourth category. 
     The Turkish MFA announcement said Turkey was upgraded 
     to a higher group due to its efforts to combat human 
     trafficking in the past year. END TEXT. 
¶24.  Reported by Anadolu Ajansi on Wednesday, June 8: 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Jandarma captured 53 illegal immigrants 
     who wanted to cross the border in the Buyuk Altiagac 
     village of Meric, Edirne. 
 
     They were on a minibus with the license plate 34 BV 
     ¶4521.  The 27 illegal immigrants were from Pakistan, 
     Iraq, Mauritania and Palestine. 
 
     Meanwhile, 26 people were captured in the Seren Village 
     of Meric.  They were from Mauritania, Somali, 
     Palestine, Tunus and Algeria. 
     V.A. was sent to the prosecutor for "human 
     trafficking."  A total of 53 illegal immigrants were 
     sent to the Edirne Police for deportation.  END TEXT. 
 
¶25.  Published by Aksam on Saturday, June 4: 
     TITLE:  "BAD REPORT FROM THE U.S. ON TURKEY" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  In the U.S. State Department's Human 
     Trafficking Report it was stated that Turkey was a 
     transit and destination country in the women and 
     children trafficking in particular for sexual 
     exploitation. 
 
     The Department issued its 5th report.  The report on 
     2005 noted that some women and children were kidnapped 
     for being forced into labor.  Turkey was on Tier 2 
     Watch List.  It was stated, "The GOT does not fully 
     implement the minimum standards to eliminate human 
     trafficking but it shows serious effort." END TEXT. 
 
¶26.  Published in Cumhuriyet on Wednesday, June 8: 
 
     TITLE:  WOMEN WHO ARE IGNORED 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A "Women Trafficking: A Serious Human 
     Rights Violation" conference was held in Trabzon with 
     contributions from the EU Commission.  It was stressed 
     that the ultimate solution to the problem was the fight 
     against poverty. 
 
     Liza Pate, the representative from the EU Commission 
     Turkey delegation, address the conference at the Grand 
     Zorlu Hotel.  Pate noted that although Turkey recorded 
     progress recently, there were still some shortcomings. 
 
     Pate said, "When one looks at the various source, 
     transit or destination countries where there is in 
     human trafficking, one sees that in most of the cases 
     major organized crime networks and other illegal 
     organizations were involved."  Pate stated that in 
     order to prevent this, victims should be given 
     sufficient protection and assistance and that all types 
     of sexual violence should be defined as crime and there 
     should be judicial cooperation. 
 
     Aspa Plakantonaki, Greece Project Coordinator for 
     Medecins Du Monde, said that many people disappeared in 
     towns in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as former 
     Soviet Republics, and added, "These disappearances were 
     neither because of an illness (epidemic?), nor a war. 
     They became the victims of human trafficking.  What is 
     most bothersome is the fact that this man-made disaster 
     can be preventable.  But unfortunately the world is 
     ignoring these women." 
 
     Nazan Sati, representative of the International Blue 
     Crescent Humanitarian Assistance and Development 
     Foundation, said that they produced emergency 
     humanitarian assistance, as well as projects on social 
     and economic development, on improvements, education 
     and health.  She noted that they implemented them at 
     national and international level. 
 
     Journalist Ahmet Sefik Mollamehmetoglu stressed that at 
     the root of the human trafficking and immigrant 
     smuggling problems lays the unequal world system.  He 
     said, "All these economic, social, cultural and 
     historical reasons lead to human trafficking and 
     immigrant smuggling.  As long as these reasons continue 
     to exists, so will these violations." END TEXT. 
 
¶27.  Published in Milliyet on Saturday, June 4: 
 
     TITLE:  "PROSTITUTION IGNORED IN RETURN FOR BRIBES" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The U.S. Administration noted that Turkey 
     was both a transit and a destination country in women 
     and children trafficking.  It noted that along with 
     those who arrive from the former Soviet Republic, 
     Turkish citizens, too, were kidnapped for sexual 
     exploitation or forced employment. 
     In the most recent State Department Human Trafficking 
     report the U.S. listed Turkey among Tier 2 countries 
     that do not meet minimum necessary standards to prevent 
     human trafficking.  The report also noted that the GOT 
     showed significant effort to meet these standards.  It 
     emphasized that there was progress in training security 
     forces and on automatic deportation of those who were 
     smuggled into Turkey. 
 
     In the U.S. report it was also stated that there were 
     increasing data that Turkish citizens (too) were 
     kidnapped in the country for forced labor or sexual 
     exploitation. 
 
     The report pointed to the fact that most of the women 
     and children brought to Turkey were from Moldova, 
     Ukraine, Russia, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, 
     Romania, Kazakhstan and Belarus. 
 
     The report noted that no Turkish official was detained 
     or investigated in 2004 for human trafficking. 
 
     It stated, "There have been reports that officials in 
     charge of law enforcement were permitting illegal 
     prostitution in return for bribes." END TEXT. 
 
¶28.  Published by Radikal on Monday, June 13: 
 
     TITLE:  The Hotline that Saves Women from the Hands of 
     Dealers: 157 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The 157 hotline established by the IOM to 
     save the victims of human trafficking has begun to 
     produce early results. 
 
     A Moldavian victim was saved when she called the 
     hotline from a hotel room in Antalya.  She also made 
     her dealer to be captured. 
 
     Until now the IOM worked with the MFA and the Interior 
     Ministry but from now on it will seek the support of 
     NGOs nationwide. 
 
     Marielle Sander Lindstrom, the IOM Turkey Mission 
     Chief, explained to "Radikal" the early results from a 
     week-old 157 hotline. 
 
     She noted that Ukraine, Moldova and Turkey were 
     prominent countries in human trafficking.  She said 
     that the 157 hotline would resolve  this traffic among 
     the three countries. 
 
     She noted that the Moldavian woman who called the 
     hotline from an Antalya hotel, made the police 
     encounter another woman as well when they walked into 
     her room.  She said, "We learned that the other woman 
     was not a victim but a dealer.  Unfortunately being a 
     dealer becomes more common among women.  Women are 
     deceiving other women and our job becomes more 
     difficult.  We both save the victims and make dealers 
     get captured.  When an information comes to 157 
     hotline, immediately 155 police hotline is activated. 
     Police go to the site.  The Moldavian victim currently 
     is in the shelter in Istanbul.  The woman dealer is in 
     jail." 
 
     Turkey became a full member of IOM in November 2004. 
     The IOM is impressed with the Turkish authorities' 
     efforts to determine and help victims of human 
     trafficking.  But it cannot tell how many victims of 
     human trafficking exist in Turkey. 
 
     The Turkish security forces determined 262 victims of 
     trafficking, including 239 foreigners, in 2004. 
 
     She pointed to the fact that the fight against dealers 
     got more intense this year.  She added that IOM reps in 
     Ukraine, Moldova and Turkey got together with NGOs with 
     the inauguration of the 157 hotline and began a joint 
     struggle. 
 
     Media ads have a very special place in this fight. 
     With the help of a 30 second ad in Russian on 
     television broadcast in Moldova, both the assistance in 
     Turkey and the support line in Moldova will be 
     introduced. END TEXT. 
 
¶29.  Published by Milliyet on Monday, June 13: 
     TITLE:  Princess in Ankara 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  After 71 years a member of the prominent 
     Swedish Royal family will visit Turkey. Swedish Crown 
     Princess Victoria will give messages of support to 
     children, women and human rights. 
 
     Victoria Ingrid Alice Desiree, the first princess for 
     whom a special law was adopted in order for her to 
     assume the throne after her father King Carl 16 of 
     Sweden, will arrive in Turkey today for a two-day 
     official visit. 
 
     Victoria will attend a dinner hosted by Prime Minister 
     Erdogan and participate in programs that her country 
     supports such as improving the situation of women and 
     children, as well as improving human rights. 
 
     Princess Victoria will present funds raised by Swedish 
     companies doing business in Turkey, to the UNICEF 
     Turkey representative at the Swedish National Day 
     reception this evening. 
 
     Princess Victoria will present scholarships to two 
     Turkish students for them to study human rights law in 
     Sweden tomorrow morning.  Scholarships will be given 
     for the first time in the memory of Anna Lindh, who was 
     known for her support for Turkey's EU membership during 
     her tenure as the Foreign Minister from 1998 to 2003, 
     when she was assassinated. 
 
     At the ceremony for the scholarship, information will 
     be provided on the women's shelter to serve human 
     trafficking victims that opened in Ankara with Sweden's 
     contributions. 
 
     Princess Victoria's visit will be the first Swedish 
     Royal Family visit in 71 years.  There has been 
     intensive diplomatic traffic between the governments of 
     the two countries.  Her grandfather King Gustav Adolf 
     visited Turkey 71 yeas ago as a crown prince and posed 
     to photographers with Ataturk.  Now Princess Victoria 
     will give a similar pose with Prime Minister Erdogan. 
 
     Princess Victoria is known to be the first princess to 
     prove to the world that gender equality is valid for 
     assuming the throne as well. 
 
     The 1000-year-old Swedish Royal Family had declared 
     only boys as crown princes in the last 300 years.  With 
     a constitutional amendment when Victoria was two, the 
     rule was changed and the eldest child, without gender 
     discrimination, was allowed to assume the throne. 
 
     Victoria, who was born in 1977, is the eldest of the 
     three children of the King.  With the help of the 
     amendment, Victoria had the right to assume the throne 
     before her brother. 
 
     The Princess studied at state schools in Sweden.  She 
     also studied at Yale University in the U.S. 
 
     Princess Victoria will also become the commander-in- 
     chief of the Swedish army when she assumes the throne. 
     The world was interested in her when she received basic 
     military training for three weeks in 2003.  Swedish 
     public opinion is divided over whether Princess 
     Victoria should marry Daniel Westling, a sports 
     trainer.  They have been together for three years. END 
     TEXT. 
 
MCELDOWNEY