05MUSCAT904
US-EU IRAQ CONFERENCE: DELIVERABLES
Mon Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Muscat
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MUSCAT 000904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID EIND ECON IZ MU
SUBJECT: US-EU IRAQ CONFERENCE: DELIVERABLES 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 103222 
 
     ¶B. MUSCAT 874 
     ¶C. STATE 93742 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Oman's attendance at the US-EU 
International Conference on Iraq will be determined upon the 
return of the Foreign Minister, perhaps during the week of 
June 11.  The MFA's Arab Affairs chief indicated to the Dutch 
(EU representative) that Oman would like to see the draft 
communique, if possible, and suggested that a Sunni Arab 
delegation from Iraq also be invited to offset their lack of 
representation in the ITG.  The chief also indicated that 
Oman may wait until a not-yet-scheduled visit by the Iraqi FM 
to disburse its Madrid Conference pledge.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Embassy delivered ref A points to the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs June 5 reiterating the request for 
high-level Omani representation at the U.S.-EU International 
Conference on Iraq, and encouraging the restoration of full 
diplomatic ties and disbursement of Oman's Madrid Conference 
assistance pledge.  The political adviser to the MFA Under 
Secretary indicated to A/DCM that the Ministry is aware of 
 
SIPDIS 
our strong interest in the conference, but is awaiting the 
return to Oman of Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs 
Yusuf bin Alawi before offering a response.  Just as the 
Minister had previously indicated to the Ambassador, however, 
the adviser hinted that Bin Alawi may be on other travel 
during the June 21-22 conference dates. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Dutch DCM Sander Janssen separately provided us a 
read-out of his June 5 demarche (on behalf of the EU 
Presidency) to MFA Arab Affairs Department Chief Ambassador 
Ahmed al-Harthy, which followed along the lines of ref C. 
Al-Harthy asked a number of questions to clarify the aims and 
structure of the conference, other attending states, and for 
a copy of the draft communique if one currently exists. 
Al-Harthy reportedly also expressed concern that the ITG was 
the only Iraqi entity invited.  Given the low Sunni Arab 
participation in the elections, he wondered if a Sunni 
delegation could be formed that might also participate in 
Brussels. 
 
¶4. (SBU) On the question of disbursing Oman's Madrid 
Conference pledge, Ambassador al-Harthy assured the Dutch 
that the Sultanate would make good on its commitment, though 
he did not know the exact amount of the pledge.  As the 
Minister had previously indicated to us, al-Harthy mentioned 
that Oman had invited the Iraqi FM to visit Muscat, and would 
prefer to use that occasion to disburse its funds.  But while 
the invitation has been formally extended, al-Harthy said a 
Zebari visit has yet to be formally scheduled.  As for Omani 
participation at the conference, Ambassador al-Harthy 
likewise told the Dutch that the question would be resolved 
when the Minister returns to Muscat (which we expect to be 
sometime during the week of June 11). 
BALTIMORE