05NAIROBI2583
SOMALIA -- PUBLIC STATEMENT IN RECOGNITION OF CIVIL
Thu Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS NAIROBI 002583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/E AND AF/RSA 
STATE PASS AID 
FOR AFRICA/SOMALIA WATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL MOPS SO KE UNSC
SUBJECT: SOMALIA -- PUBLIC STATEMENT IN RECOGNITION OF CIVIL 
SOCIETY 
 
REF: (A) NAIROBI 2488, (B) NAIROBI 2516 
 
¶1. (SBU) Reftels outline recent events in the attempts of 
the Somali Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) to 
relocate from Kenya to Somalia.  Notable among these has 
been a surge to the fore of civil society players in 
Mogadishu, including members of the business community, 
NGOs, women's organizations, and ordinary citizens.  These 
entities and individuals have managed to steal a march on 
the politician/warlords of the Parliament, Cabinet, Prime 
Ministry and Presidency, and force the start of 
demilitarization of the capital. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Department approved the following public 
statement for release in Nairobi.  Post released the 
statement on June 21, 2005.  It (a) acknowledges the actions 
that the Somali people resident in the capital have taken; 
(b) stresses that the TFIs can only earn legitimacy from the 
Somali people, and (c) urges members of the TFIs to relocate 
to Somalia, agree to a national plan for relocation and 
security, begin the process of establishing governance, and 
resolve their remaining differences. 
 
¶3. (U) BEGIN TEXT PUBLIC STATEMENT: 
 
U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT 
 
For Immediate Release 
 
June 21, 2005 
 
The  United  States welcomes Somali-led efforts to  relocate 
the Somali Transitional Federal Institutions to Somalia. 
 
We  note  the  significant actions taken by members  of  the 
business  community,  non-governmental  organizations,   and 
ordinary   citizens  in  recent  weeks  to  facilitate   the 
demilitarization   of   Mogadishu.    In   particular,    we 
acknowledge the central role played by Somali civil  society 
in pushing for real and lasting security reform in Somalia. 
 
We are impressed by these individual and collective efforts, 
led  by  the  women of Mogadishu, to assist those  of  their 
countrymen  in putting down their weapons and  returning  to 
the  broad base of Somali society.  We are heartened by  the 
sincere  desire of the Somali people to facilitate the  non- 
violent return of effective governance to Somalia. 
 
The  Somali  reconciliation process is at a critical  stage. 
It  is imperative that a viable national plan for relocation 
and  security be formally agreed upon by a broad  quorum  of 
the  members of the Transitional Federal Institutions.  This 
will  create the platform from which good governance can  be 
delivered and the Transitional Federal Institutions can earn 
legitimacy from the Somali people. 
 
Large  segments  of  Somali society have  made  clear  their 
belief  that reconciliation and reconstruction, led  by  the 
Transitional  Federal Institutions, must begin  in  earnest. 
We  therefore  urge all members of the Transitional  Federal 
Institutions  to relocate to Somalia and begin  the  gradual 
process of establishing governance. 
 
The   United  States  strongly  urges  all  members  of  the 
Transitional  Federal Institutions and other Somali  parties 
to   continue  their  efforts  towards  reconciliation   and 
inclusive dialogue.  As with any democracy, the will of  the 
people   cannot  be  ignored.   All  Somali   parties   must 
demonstrate their continued commitment to the peace  process 
and resolve any remaining outstanding differences within the 
framework of the Transitional Federal Institutions. 
 
END TEXT 
 
ROWE