05SANAA1729
CAMPAIGN TO COMBAT EARLY MARRIAGE IN YEMEN SEEKS
Wed Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 001729 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID KWMN PHUM SOCI KMCA KMPI YM
SUBJECT: CAMPAIGN TO COMBAT EARLY MARRIAGE IN YEMEN SEEKS 
USG SUPPORT 
 
¶1. Summary.  Pol/Off attended an Oxfam-sponsored presentation 
on early marriage in Yemen on June 7. Yemeni researchers 
presented results from a national study on the prevalence, 
causes, and societal consequences of early marriage.  Oxfam, 
in conjunction with Save the Children - Sweden, plans to 
launch a public awareness campaign on the negative 
consequences of early marriage and to lobby for a new law 
establishing a minimum age of 
marriage.  The campaign will be waged by local NGOs in 
cooperation with ROYG agencies, and with technical and 
financial support from a variety of international 
organizations and foreign missions.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
Prevalence of Early Marriage 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. The study concluded that early marriage (defined as below 
18 years) is prevalent in Yemen and exacerbates gender 
inequality and poverty.  Researchers, under the auspices of 
the Women's Studies and Development Center, found that 52.1 
percent of Yemeni women are married at an early age, compared 
with only 6.7 percent of men. 
 
¶3. Poverty leads the list of root causes of early marriage, 
but moral concerns also play a significant role.  Limited 
access to educational and job opportunities means many 
families consider female members an economic drain, 
encouraging many to pass on the financial responsibility to a 
husband at the earliest opportunity.  The study also found 
that many rural families are concerned with protection of 
their moral integrity.  These families believe early marriage 
prevents their daughters from getting into trouble in their 
teenage years, hence preserving familial honor and 
reputation. 
 
¶4. Researchers also concluded that early marriage perpetuates 
the destructive cycle of inequality and poverty.  Girls who 
marry before 18 years old are more likely to be impoverished, 
poorly educated, and lack access to basic healthcare. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Alliance Against Early Marriage 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Oxfam and Save the Children - Sweden are working to create 
an alliance of local NGOs, international aide organizations, 
foreign missions and ROYG agencies.  The group hopes to 
partner with the ROYG and local media outlets to launch a 
public awareness campaign on the negative health and economic 
consequences of early marriage, as well as to lobby for a law 
to raise the minimum age of marriage in Yemen.  Oxfam plans 
to officially kick off on July 11, International Population 
Day, when the Women's National Committee will present these 
research findings to a large gathering of ROYG officials. 
 
¶6. Comment: Oxfam has requested USG support for the campaign 
against early marriage.  Several international organizations 
have already joined the alliance, including UNDP, ILO and the 
German Development Service (DED).  The Oxfam-led group 
appears well organized and committed.  Utilizing this study, 
Oxfam and the other partners are developing a comprehensive 
plan.  Acutely aware of the sensitive nature of early 
marriage in a conservative society, the group is committed to 
helping local NGOs and ROYG agencies take the lead in this 
effort.  Media training is a potential area for USG 
contribution.  Instruction to improve basic reporting skills 
and understanding of women's issues would significantly 
increase the effectiveness of the media campaign.  Pol/Econ 
will coordinate with PD to evaluate training options.  End 
Comment. 
Khoury