05TAIPEI2702
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 002702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary: While the major Chinese-language dailies in 
Taiwan June 21 continued to focus on local politics and 
the Taiwan government's action to protect its fishermen 
from being chased and detained by Japanese government 
ships, former National Security Council Deputy 
Secretary-General Antonio Chiang commented in "Apple 
 
SIPDIS 
Daily" on the remarks by Georgetown University's 
Institute for the Study of Diplomacy Professor Robert 
Sutter in "Pacific Forum" the other day in which Sutter 
said U.S. diplomatic intervention played a critical 
role in the direction of Taiwan's political 
development.  According to Chiang, the United States 
has become more and more explicit and direct in the way 
it interferes in Taiwan's affairs, and this poses a 
great challenge to the strong establishment of a Taiwan- 
centered identity.  End summary. 
 
"The Intervention of Big Brother U.S." 
 
Former National Security Council Deputy Secretary- 
General Antonio Chiang noted in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (6/21): 
 
". Over the past two years, Washington has gradually 
abandoned its ambiguous position and has been becoming 
clearer and clearer about its policy toward Taiwan.  In 
order to prevent both sides of the Taiwan Strait from 
having any misunderstandings [regarding] Washington, 
[and] especially in an effort not to let Taiwan hold 
any unrealistic illusions [about Washington], the words 
that Washington uses [when speaking to Taiwan] sounds 
less and less polite; they even have gone beyond the 
normal courtesy kept by a diplomat. 
 
"When it comes to the private channels, the American 
Institute in Taiwan (AIT) plays an important role. 
Despite its low-profile manner, the AIT does a very 
thorough job in passing messages [on behalf of 
Washington to Taipei].  Washington has emphasized 
repeatedly that AIT Director Douglas Paal works on 
behalf of the U.S. government and not for himself. 
[Such emphases have been made] because Taipei has some 
veiled criticisms about Paal's style. 
 
"Paal's role is in fact a tiring but thankless one 
because his job is usually not rewarded with fruitful 
results.  Paal is usually responsible for delivering 
unpleasant messages to Taipei.  Quite a lot of people 
in Taipei hope that Paal will leave his position 
earlier [rather than later], believing that another 
person assigned by and representing Washington would 
have a better understanding of Taiwan's situation. 
 
"Washington, however, believes that Paal does a good 
job and that only he can effectively implement 
President George W. Bush's policy, so it wants him to 
stay for a while. 
 
"Reliable sources said more than ten U.S. intelligence 
units have called meetings in the first half of 2004 to 
discuss Taiwan's situation.  Their conclusions were 
that [President] A-bian is a politician who tilts 
heavily towards Taiwan independence.  In order to leave 
him no room for using tricks in shortcuts and finesse, 
[they believe] the United States must constantly 
express a clear and firm position and they must let A- 
bian know that the U.S. intervention will do him no 
good. 
 
"[Georgetown University's Institute for the Study of 
Diplomacy Professor] Robert Sutter is well-versed in 
the Taiwan affairs.  Even though he is now teaching in 
Georgetown University, he still maintains a close 
relationship with the U.S. government.  Sutter seems to 
be over self-confident about Washington's Taiwan 
policy, but his remarks did reflect the attitude of 
many people in Washington toward Taiwan and their 
evaluation toward A-bian. 
 
"Nonetheless, the way that the U.S. big brother 
intervenes in Taiwan's affairs has become more explicit 
and more direct, which will pose a great challenge to 
the [establishment of a] Taiwan-centered identity." 
 
PAAL