09SHENYANG208
MIGRANT LABOR MARKET SNAPSHOT: CRACKS IN THE
Fri Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shenyang
VZCZCXRO3681
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHSH #0208/01 3240247
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200247Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL SHENYANG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8923
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHENYANG 000208 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PLAB PGOV SOCI CH
SUBJECT: MIGRANT LABOR MARKET SNAPSHOT: CRACKS IN THE 
SYSTEM 
 
(U) This Cable is Sensitive but Unclassified. Please handle 
accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A recent visit to a major labor market in 
Shenyang shows that despite government and NGO efforts to 
increase protections for migrant workers, an underclass of 
mostly unskilled migrants continues to exist here. 
Individuals in this situation have difficulty finding 
temporary work, going weeks or more between jobs. Several 
workers complained about forced 14-hour workdays, despite 
having agreed to a monthly rate based on an 8-hour workday. 
Others complained of difficult living conditions and having 
lodging and food subtracted from wages even after having 
employers orally agree to provide free room and board. 
Health care is a major problem for migrant workers, 
notwithstanding the rules dictating that employers purchase 
coverage for their employees. Furthermore, when migrants are 
hurt on the job, the boss generally picks the cheapest 
treatment; no matter what the long-term consequences or the 
doctor's expert opinion might be. End Summary. 
 
Hard Times 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) On November 12, Poloff visited Little Bird, a 
well-known non-profit organization that helps migrant workers 
find work and, through a network of volunteer lawyers and 
other specialists, helps protect migrant workers' rights. The 
following day Poloff visited a nearby labor market where 
predominantly migrant laborers seek short-term work. Near the 
market, an obviously drunk young man dressed in thick, dirty 
clothes passed Poloff, prompting our sardonic locally 
employed staff (LES) to quip "Can you feel the change in the 
atmosphere?" Nearby, twenty men milled around a railing 
overlooking a scenic pond, attempting to keep warm in the 
snow and cold, while another crowd of men surrounded two 
cars, apparently bargaining for work. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Originally outdoors but now housed in a spacious, 
smoke-filled building, the market is more than 20 years old. 
On one wall an electronic board advertises potential jobs and 
phone numbers. However, as one hopeful laborer pointed out, 
the advertisements never change. To the right of the job 
bulletin board are the Heping District Migrant Workers Civil 
Rights Maintenance Center, the Heping District Migrant 
Workers Labor Skills Training Center, and the Luyuan Labor 
Union AIDS Control Center. The doors to all were locked at 
11:00 A.M., three and a half hours before the market's close. 
Upon entering the market, Poloff was immediately surrounded 
by a group of workers who identified themselves as migrants. 
Several asked Poloff and the accompanying LES if they were 
hiring, and in the course of a 40-minute conversation with 
one group, other workers approached, asking the same. The 
laborers were all eager to make money to return home for 
Chinese New Year, still three months away. Most were from 
rural areas of Liaoning Province. However, people from Jilin, 
Heilongjiang, Shandong, Anhui, Sichuan, and other provinces 
come to the market looking for work as well. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Fewer than a hundred migrants were in the building, 
giving it an empty feel. The accompanying LES said that when 
he last visited the market several years ago, there were 
about 800 people.  However, the prior visit, during the 
state-owned enterprises restructuring era, occurred during 
the summertime--high season for seeking employment. At this 
time of year, he said, the only people looking for work are 
those who still don't have enough money to go home to reunite 
with family. Most of the migrants were men, though one of the 
few women was among the most open. She and another talkative 
worker, a Liaoning native recently returned from a six-year 
stint working in Shanghai, explained that the market was 
usually quite busy. The market opens at 7:00 and closes at 
2:30, so it was relatively late in the day. The several 
inches of snow on the ground may also have kept the numbers 
down, they opined. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Many of the laborers were in their mid-40s or older; 
all were unskilled, most wore army jackets, and all 
complained that finding work was difficult, taking at least 
several weeks, and sometimes more than a month for temporary, 
low-quality work with few social protections. For example, 
the woman explained that she had taken a job in a brick 
factory where she and the employer had agreed to an 8-hour 
day and RMB 1000-per-month salary. Instead, she was forced to 
work 14-hour days. Another man complained that he had agreed 
to work for 8 hours a day for RMB 1000 a month,  with housing 
and food included, but instead lived in an unheated garage 
with the cost of food coming out of his wages. Several others 
complained of similar problems. None of the workers had 
signed a contract, and all said that while they understood 
 
SHENYANG 00000208  002 OF 003 
 
 
they were free to leave, others would no doubt readily take 
their jobs. The only people who get to sign contracts, the 
woman explained, are the young and the educated.  The worker 
returned from Shanghai offered a striking example of the 
difficult situation he faces back home in Shenyang. Prior to 
being laid off from his job at the Baoshan Steel Plant, he 
made between RMB 2000-3000 a month, including free housing 
and food. Even with the higher cost of living in Shanghai, "I 
only had to spend money for clothes and for things I liked," 
he said, adding that he had more disposable income in 
Shanghai and that wages here are too low.  Despite the 
complaints, these workers said they willingly take jobs 
without protections. As the woman explained, after a certain 
amount of time without work, people take any job so they can 
eat. 
 
 
The Kind of Help We Can Do Without 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The migrants Poloff encountered in the market appear 
to fall through the cracks. According to them, they receive 
no money from the government, have no shelters to turn to, 
and do not have the type of problems that established 
organizations are equipped to address. The same talkative 
woman and others explained that while there are soup kitchens 
for homeless Shenyang residents, hungry migrants have no 
place to turn. The social assistance programs are geared 
primarily towards resident beggars and the homeless. In order 
to receive help from the Social Assistance Center, people 
must show an ID card and give the location of their household 
registration. They must also say why they are seeking help 
and give contact information for their relatives, making it 
easy for the municipal groups to verify that they are 
unqualified migrants. In the end, they believe they have to 
rely on themselves. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The migrants we met had heard of Little Bird but 
said they did not find the group particularly helpful. They 
complained that the kinds of work Little Bird is able to find 
is not suitable for them because of their lack of required 
skills. While Little Bird can be helpful in claiming back 
wages, the migrants believed the NGO to be of no help in 
enforcing oral agreements to work no more than a set number 
of hours without receiving extra pay. In fact, a former 
employee who worked at Little Bird as recently as this summer 
said that to his knowledge no migrant had ever approached 
Little Bird with such a complaint. In his view, it would be 
extremely difficult to collect evidence to prove overwork 
with no extra pay. Many of the migrants are also members of 
the Luyuan Labor Union - a union that helps laborers claim 
back wages. As with Little Bird, the union is of little use 
because claiming back wages is not the primary problem - 
getting a job to start with and having contract agreements 
honored for both hours worked and wages are the primary 
concerns. 
 
¶8. (SBU) During Poloff's visit to Little Bird, Ms. Lu Yanli 
explained that the major problem facing migrant labor these 
days is finding work and her impression was that people were 
generally able to do so within a few weeks. She also had a 
positive view of the protections both the Shenyang city 
government and the Liaoning Provincial government provided 
migrants, particularly as they relate to securing wages in a 
timely fashion and receiving health care for work-related 
injuries. She also said that recent rules passed ensuring 
that migrant laborers and locally-hired individuals receive 
the same pay for the same work offer further protections and 
said she knew of no recent complaints of disparate wages. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Lu's impressions do not necessarily contradict those 
of the migrants we met at the market, but in some ways they 
provide evidence of that migrants form an underclass, perhaps 
small, living life with little or no protection. The migrants 
with whom we spoke did not complain about unequal pay with 
non-migrant laborers because they perform jobs that only 
other migrants in similarly precarious situations would do. 
Nor is delinquent pay the issue. Being paid to scale for the 
stated number of contract hours is the chief problem. And as 
far as health care goes, the migrants we talked to simply 
laughed bitterly when asked if they had such coverage. 
 
¶10. (SBU) A recent experience from our LES assistant offers a 
prime example of the lack of health coverage for migrants. 
While waiting for a medical exam, our LES saw a migrant 
worker enter the clinic with a broken foot. (He had fallen 
from a 9-foot ladder.) When the doctor suggested surgery, the 
worker looked up at a well-dressed man, presumably his boss, 
shook his head no, and settled for a plastic cast despite 
warnings that pressure from the swollen foot against the cast 
 
SHENYANG 00000208  003 OF 003 
 
 
could cause permanent damage. When the worker was asked if he 
had insurance, the boss intervened to say he did not. The 
physician subsequently told our LES he had seen many similar 
cases, despite the fact that employers are required to buy 
both medical and work-related injury insurance. And, the 
doctor added, when migrants are hurt, the boss always picks 
the cheapest treatment, no matter what the long-term 
consequences or the doctor's expert opinion might be. 
 
WICKMAN