02ANKARA8358
AK PARTY TO FORM NEW TURKISH GOVERNMENT WITH ABDULLAH GUL AS PRIME MINISTER
Sat Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2002
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 008358 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2012 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS PINR TU
SUBJECT: AK PARTY TO FORM NEW TURKISH GOVERNMENT WITH ABDULLAH GUL AS PRIME MINISTER 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 8310 
     ¶B. ANKARA 8165 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch; reasons: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (U) Nov. 16 President Sezer gave the mandate to form the 
new Turkish government to AK Party number two Abdullah Gul 
(ref A), who announced he will submit his proposed cabinet 
list to Sezer Nov. 18.  We expect the government to be in 
office a week to ten days thereafter.  Gul bio in para 5. 
 
 
¶2. (U) To underscore to both the Turkish Establishment and 
voters that he remains firmly in charge of AK Party and will 
dominate policy-making, party chairman Erdogan held a 
concurrent press conference to announce AK's one-year 
emergency action plan.  It was clear from TV coverage, which 
focused on Erdogan, not on Gul's visit to the presidency, 
that the country understands.  It is the general expectation 
that AK will pursue amendments to the constitution and other 
legal remedies to allow Erdogan to become P.M. in several 
months (ref B). 
 
 
¶3. (U) The party program, which will become the new GOT's 
program, calls among other things for: 
 
 
--intensified efforts to reach EU standards of democracy; 
 
 
--continued close work with the IMF; 
 
 
--rapid action to combat unemployment (the number one voter 
issue in Turkey), make the budget process more efficient and 
more comprehensive (i.e., bring all but municipal budgets 
under the central budget authority); 
 
 
--transparency in Turkish governance (Erdogan pointedly 
announced that the program is downloadable from AK's web site 
"so that everyone in Turkey can see how well we stick to our 
program"). 
 
 
¶4. (C) In the follow-on question and answer period Erdogan, 
who has now departed to pay a flying visit to northern 
Cyprus, in underscoring AK's intention to be pragmatic and 
open-minded on the UN plan to reach a Cyprus settlement, 
acknowledged the need for compromise on both sides.  (Note: 
in a private meeting with us Nov. 15, AK Party number three 
and probable speaker of Parliament Bulent Arinc criticized 
the culture of nay-saying in the Turkish MFA with regard to 
Cyprus and other regional issues.  End note.) 
 
 
¶5. (C) Gul bio: 
 
 
--Abdullah Gul was born in 1950 into a poor but pious 
working-class family in Kayseri in the Anatolian heartland 
(father was a lathe operator).  Graduated from Istanbul U. 
economics faculty.  Served as an associate professor of 
industrial engineering at Sakarya U.  Has the title of 
Associate Professor of Economics.  In the 1980's employed as 
an economic expert at the Islamic Development Bank in Jiddah. 
 Entered Parliament in 1991 with the Islamist Refah Party of 
Necmettin Erbakan.  Served as a State Minister with foreign 
policy responsibilities (in effect an internal shadow FonMin 
given Refah's distrust of coalition partner and FonMin Tansu 
Ciller) in the 1996-97 Erbakan-led government.  Stayed with 
Erbakan in Fazilet Party, which was formed after Refah was 
banned, but then launched a reformist movement and  narrowly 
lost a direct challenge to Erbakan's hand-picked Fazilet 
leader Recai Kutan for the party chairmanship.  A founder of 
AK Party in 2001.  Speaks Arabic and fluent English. 
Married, three children. 
 
 
--Gul is a long-time, close contact of Embassy Ankara.  He 
has an excellent understanding of the American mind and of 
U.S. foreign policy priorities.  For years he served as a de 
facto spokesman -- judged to be reasonable and open-minded by 
Western and Islamist interlocutors -- for Refah and Fazilet 
and has been an influential and moderate voice for 
Islam-oriented politics in Turkey.  A number of long-standing 
embassy contacts has told us consistently that the 
relationship between Gul and party chairman Erdogan is 
complex.  He is loyal to Erdogan but has his own ambitions 
and occasionally in comments to us has chafed at his 
subordination to the more rough-edged Erdogan.  Both came 
through the Erbakan movement ranks together with Gul 
representing the more technocratic stream.  While Erdogan is 
far and away the most popular figure in AK, Gul has strong 
grass-roots and parliamentary support of his own and has 
built a formidable network of relations with politicians of 
all stripes, bureaucrats, academics, and journalists. 
 
 
--Gul has an obliging (mulayim) and courteous character 
stemming from his modest and very pious upbringing.  His 
faith in Islam is rock solid, as is his courage of 
convictions: Gul is no pushover.  Comfortable with 
intellectual and political give-and-take, he nevertheless 
maintains his principles and is sincere in the belief that 
Turkey must accept women in Islamic headscarves as full 
participants in society.  His wife passed the university 
entrance exam but was denied matriculation owing to her 
wearing of an Islamic headscarf; she currently has a case 
against the Turkish government on this issue before the 
European Court of Human Rights.  He also firmly believes in 
the need to redress the current imbalance in 
civilian-military relations, privately telling us 
forthrightly that if pushing this kind of democratic reform 
would be considered "destabilizing" by the Kemalist 
Establishment, "then so be it."  This kind of comment, 
combined with Gul's knowledge of the system and his smooth 
manner, leads some Kemalist circles to fear that he would 
succeed in implementing an Islamist agenda effectively.  Gul 
has the serene but focused temperament (huzur) similar to 
that of late president Turgut Ozal.  At the same time he is 
untainted by the corruption surrounding the Ozal family and 
government. 
PEARSON