04ANKARA2360
TURKISH MFA REQUESTS U.S. ACTION AT UN, U.S. HELP
Wed Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002360 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/27/2014 
TAGS: CY GR PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH MFA REQUESTS U.S. ACTION AT UN, U.S. HELP 
FOR TURKISH CYPRIOTS 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, E.O. 12958, reasons 1.4 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  In an April 27 meeting with DCM, Turkish 
MFA Deputy U/S Ilkin requested that the U.S. push the UNSC 
for a Presidential Statement placing blame on the Greek 
Cypriots for failure to reach a Cyprus settlement.  He also 
asked that the U.S. make concrete gestures toward Turkish 
Cypriots.  End Summary. 
 
 
April 28 UN SYG Briefing 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Ilkin noted that the SYG will brief the UNSC April 
28, although it is not clear whether there will be a UNSC 
debate.  Ilkin pointed out that after Cyprus negotiations in 
Copenhagen and the Hague, the UNSC issued Presidential 
Statements blaming the Turkish Cypriot side.  This time, 
Turkey wants the UNSC to show "evenhandedness" and issue the 
same type of statement directed at the Greek Cypriots. The 
Turks want the U.S. to work in the UNSC to get a statement 
including the "realities" of what happened and the same kind 
of assessment of blame as previous statements.  Turkey also 
hoped there might be an informal UNSC discussion which would 
provide an opportunity for the GOT to express its view. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ilkin, stressed that the Turks want to get something 
tangible on the record blaming the Greek Cypriots or their 
leadership while the memories of the referendum and events 
leading up to it are still fresh.  Ilkin worries that 
memories will be short and the window for getting this on the 
record will close. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) In a follow-up conversation, Cyprus Department Head 
Bilman hoped a statement would include the fact that Turkish 
Cypriots said yes to the UN plan, while the Greek Cypriots 
said no; and a declaration that there is now a new situation 
on the island and the Turkish Cypriots' isolation should end. 
 
 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Ilkin said the Turks hope to use the statement to 
garner EU support for lifting the embargo on the "TRNC" and 
taking other measures to support Turkish Cypriots. 
 
 
U.S. Gesture to Turkish Cypriots 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Ilkin requested that the U.S. make "even a small 
gesture" toward Turkish Cypriots.  The Turks think this will 
encourage other countries to follow.  Ilkin said that this 
would also "influence our modalities" of dealing with the 
Greek Cypriots.  (Bilman later explained this means 
improvements in the lot of Turkish Cypriots might enable the 
Turks to reach out to Greek Cypriots.)  Ilkin added that he 
is not seeking recognition for the "TRNC", but rather a 
symbolic but concrete gesture toward Turkish Cypriots, e.g., 
in the area of transportation.  Ilkin said that the EU's new 
regulation on the Green Line would be the first indication of 
the EU attitude toward Turkish Cypriots after the referendum. 
 
 
¶7.  (C) DCM responded that the U.S. is actively considering 
and discussing ways to ameliorate the Turkish Cypriots' 
situation.  However, many of the issues involved are 
technical and require careful consideration.  The U.S. is 
also engaged with the EU in this effort, including a 
just-concluded visit by PDAS Ries to Brussels.  At the UN, 
the U.S. is already working to have the SYG's report reflect 
settlement efforts by Turkey and Turkish Cypriots.  DCM told 
Ilkin that the real prize for Turkey is getting a date to 
begin accession negotiations in December, and it needs to 
keep its strategy focused on that objective. 
EDELMAN