05ANKARA4260
SYRIAN DFM VISITS ANKARA, FM GUL REPORTEDLY FEELS "USED"
Fri Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221607Z Jul 05C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2015 
TAGS: PREL TU SY SYRIA
SUBJECT: SYRIAN DFM VISITS ANKARA, FM GUL REPORTEDLY FEELS "USED" 
 
REF: ANKARA 4079 
 
(U) Classified by CDA Nancy McEldowney, E.O. 12958, reasons 
1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Syrian DFM al-Muallim met with FM Gul in 
Ankara July 22 to discuss Iraq, the Israel Palestine peace 
process, and a possible upcoming "unofficial" visit to Turkey 
by Bashar Asad (reftel).  One MFA official told us privately 
that the discussions were difficult and inconclusive; another 
emphasized the strong message Gul and MFA U/S Tuygan 
delivered on Iraq.  After the meeting, Gul expressed anger at 
the way the Syrians are "using" the Turks and is looking for 
an indirect way to turn off the Asad visit.  How PM Erdogan 
will react remains unclear.  End Summary. 
 
DFM Al-Muallim Comes With "Important Message" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) MFA spokesperson Tan confided to Charge privately 
that the Syrians had insisted that DFM al-Muallim visit 
Ankara July 22 to deliver an "important message."  Tan 
asserted to Charge that the MFA has been uncomfortable with 
Syrian handling of the visit.  Tan claims the MFA wants to 
keep the visit quiet, but has been frustrated by Syrian press 
leaks, which he said forced the MFA to  announce al-Muallim's 
visit.  Al-Muallim plans a press conference at the Syrian 
Embassy in Ankara later July 22. 
 
FM Gul: "Syrians Are Using Us" 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) According to Tan, who was present at the Gul meeting 
with al-Muallim, the latter raised Iraq, Israel/Palestine 
peace, and the Asad visit.  On Iraq, al-Muallim gave Gul a 
non-paper (e-mailed to EUR/SE July 22) detailing Syria's 
supposed efforts to control the Syria/Iraq border. Tan 
claimed Gul told al-Muallim to "listen to what the Americans 
tell you," adding there would be serious consequences if 
Syria did not.  Al-Muallim protested that Syria was doing all 
it could to control the border. 
 
¶4.  (C) Al-Muallim urged the Turks to play a more active role 
in the Israel/Palestine peace process (NFI).  (Tan's reaction 
to Charge was "we do not need them to tell us that.")  On the 
Asad visit, Al-Muallim only told Gul it would be some time 
over the next several weeks. 
 
¶5.  (C) Tan described Gul as "upset" after the meeting.  He 
told Tan he was angry, saying several times the Syrians are 
"using" Turkey.  Tan told Charge Gul wants the visit turned 
off, but feels cornered and cannot directly say no.  Tan 
claims the Turks will try to propose arrangements they 
believe the Syrians will not accept. 
 
Another Take 
------------ 
 
¶6. (C) Under instruction from MFA U/S Ali Tuygan, Middle East 
DDG Safak Gokturk provided a debrief of the al-Muallim's 
meetings to PolMilCouns.  After the Gul meeting (that Gokturk 
also attended), Tuygan hosted a working lunch.  Gokturk's 
account of the discussion was largely consistent with Tan's: 
 
-- On Iraq, Gokturk said Gul had asked al-Muallim that if 
Syria desires a stable and united Iraq, it must choose 
whether it wants to simply wait to blame the US if it doesn't 
succeed, or to work for a successful political transition. 
If the process in Iraq fails, Syria will also be blamed, Gul 
warned.  Both Gul and Tuygan argued strongly that no matter 
what measures the SARG has taken on the border, it needed to 
take more visible steps to allay both US and Iraqi 
suspicions.  Gokturk assessed that Damascus was open to 
working with the ITG and the USG on a border cooperation 
framework, but the Syrians were looking for some reciprocal 
benefit for themselves. 
 
-- On Israel/Palestine, Gul warned al-Muallim, who said Syria 
wanted to restart negotiations with Israel, that Turkey is 
ready to play a role but complained that Turkish efforts in 
the past year when asked by one side or the other "have not 
been utilized."  If Turkey is asked again, Syria should come 
up with "concrete responses."  Al-Muallim tried to contrast 
US pressure on Syria to expel Palestinian extremists and the 
PA President's recent request that the SARG press these 
groups to join the peace effort.  Polmilcouns observed that 
these approaches were consistent -- both the USG and the PA 
believe Syria retains influence with these groups. 
 
-- On Asad's visit, Gokturk said al-Muallim reminded the 
Turks that PM Erdogan had extended the invitation last year. 
 
¶7.  (C) Comment:  Despite this readout from two MFA sources, 
we cannot predict how PM Erdogan will react to al-Muallim's 
visit.  We would note that Gul and PM Erdogan are locked in a 
serious, if partially hidden, rivalry.  Gul has consistently 
used channels to foreigners to deprecate Erdogan and to make 
himself appear more reasonable while continuing to rely 
heavily on foreign policy advisor Ahmet Davutoglu, who has 
been the catalyst for Turkey's rapprochement with Syria.  End 
Comment. 
MCELDOWNEY