05DUSHANBE1648
TAJIKISTAN:  CIVIL AND GOVERNMENT AVIATION AUTHORITIES
Mon Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dushanbe
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  DUSHANBE 001648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR T, EUR/CACEN, SA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  10/10/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS IR KN TI
SUBJECT: TAJIKISTAN:  CIVIL AND GOVERNMENT AVIATION AUTHORITIES 
SUPPORT PSI 
 
REF: DUSHANBE 16...

C O N F I D E N T I A L DUSHANBE 001648 SIPDIS STATE FOR T, EUR/CACEN, SA E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2015 TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS IR KN TI
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: On October 6, Under Secretary Robert Joseph met with Head of the Tajikistan Department of Civil Aviation Khamroyev Firuz and Tajik Air Force Chief of Staff General-Major Safaraliev. The Tajiks reiterated their support for ridding the world of the scourge of terrorism and the transfer of weapons of mass destruction. The Tajiks highlighted the challenges they face, given their lack of capacity to deter movement through their country.
¶2. (C) U/S Joseph noted, during his initial remarks, U.S. efforts to foster a regional approach to stop the transfer of WMD, missile, and related materials between Iran and North Korea. He pointed out that Central Asian countries lay at the crossroads of such transfers. He promoted working together in the areas of info sharing, denial of overflight rights and inspection. Mr. Joseph provided a map of air routes used by the North Koreans and Iranians and a list of aircraft tail numbers.
¶3. (C) Firuz noted Tajik aviation control is divided between civil aviation and government aviation. Each element has norms and procedures that follow international standards. He said Tajikistan is a sovereign state that continues to make sure all flights in, out, and over conform to international standards. Controlling WMD- and missile-related traffic is the responsibility of all nations. The Department of Civil Aviation controls civil air and customs; government aviation controls air space and security. Firuz introduced General-Major Safaraliev as the primary officer responsible for government aviation.
¶4. (C) Safaraliev said the military speaks differently and normally with a glass of "white tea" (vodka). He said he had only found out that day about the meeting and was not really prepared to talk. He added that soldiers simply follow agreements and orders made by the President. Since the President has agreed to cooperate, he would follow his orders.
¶5. (C) The Under Secretary offered to share information and conduct action with low visibility. He pointed out that overflight clearance and the searching and seizing of cargo are within the rights of sovereign states.
¶6. (C) Firuz initially expressed concern should Tajikistan deny overflight or force the landing of an aircraft wrongly accused of caring illegal materials, but appeared satisfied with U.S. Joseph's response to his questions. He pointed out that North Korea and Iran would send diplomatic notes charging Tajikistan with inappropriate action. U/S Joseph noted that nothing is 100 percent guaranteed, but that is included in the task of stopping this type of trade. He added that the sharing of information and working relationships build confidence. U/S Joseph compared action against aircraft to Tajikistan's sovereign right to monitor and search trucks carrying cargo across its borders.
¶7. (C) Firuz asked how they can develop the expertise to conduct inspections. He noted that Tajikistan does not have WMD and it will be difficult to develop the right expertise. In addition, the Tajiks asked how to understand and properly deny materials that have duel use purposes. U/S Joseph reiterated the need for building working relations and it all started with sharing information.
¶8. (C) The Tajiks concluded by expressing support for the initiative to stem the trade of proliferation-related materials within the framework of international law.
¶9. (U) U/S Joseph cleared this cable. HOAGLAND NNNN