05LIMA3847
CHANGING TACTICS:EXPLOSIVE DEVICES FOUND IN
Tue Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L LIMA 003847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/31/2015 
TAGS: SNAR ASEC PREL PE
SUBJECT: CHANGING TACTICS:EXPLOSIVE DEVICES FOUND IN 
ERADICATION FIELDS 
 
Classified By: SUSAN KEOGH, NAS DIRECTOR, Embassy Lima. Reason 1.5 (d) 
 
¶1. (C)   Summary:  Between August 27-31, a total of 9 
explosive devices were found by police and CORAH eradicators 
in the field during operations in the Santa Rosa area near 
Santa Lucia.  One CORAH worker was hit and hospitalized when 
he triggered a device but the injuries were not 
life-threatening.   This is the latest adjustment in tactics 
by the cocaleros in the Santa Lucia -Upper Huallaga area, who 
have mounted particularly violent and militant opposition to 
eradication.  Cocaleros in this region previously attacked 
police helicopters.  Police state they have found leaflets 
with instructions on how to prepare such booby traps 
indicating narco-terrorism may be involved.  Operations are 
continuing with a commitment from the PNP to deploy 
explosives teams with canines to sweep eradication areas 
prior to and during operations.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  On August 27, at the ongoing eradication operation 
in the area of Santa Rosa, near Santa Lucia in the Upper 
Huallaga, a CORAH worker sustained injuries to the face and 
chest as a result of a small explosive device detonating. 
The explosive device had been planted near the roots of the 
coca plant that the worker was attempting to extract.  He was 
evacuated via helicopter to Santa Lucia and subsequently to 
Pucallpa hospital for medical treatment.  The injuries were 
not life-threatening and he is recovering.   On the same day, 
the CORAH workers found another explosive device that went 
off but caused no injury.  A subsequent sweep of the area 
revealed 4 additional explosive devices and a booby trap 
utilizing a shotgun. 
 
¶3.  (C)   On August 30,  3 similar explosive devices were 
located in the same general eradication area.  NAS has asked 
the PNP to hold these devices for expert analysis.  They 
appear to contain dynamite and are operated by a battery that 
triggers an explosion when disturbed by contact.  While it is 
speculative to say cocaleros in league with narco-terrorists 
are responsible, the police report they have found leaflets 
with instructions on how to prepare such devices.   We are in 
close contact with the police to ascertain who is responsible 
for planting these booby traps. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Eradication is continuing apace in the Santa Rosa 
area.   In coordination with NAS, the PNP is assigning 
explosives teams with canines to the operations.  Areas to be 
eradicated will routinely be swept prior to and during 
operations.    DIRANDRO will continue to incorporate DIRCOTE 
(anti-terrorist police) and DINOPES Special Ops police to 
support eradication and interdiction efforts.  On September 
5, the 6,000 hectare mark was passed for eradication. 
 
¶5.   (C)   Comment:  In a clear break from the past, elements 
linked to coca cultivation and production in the Upper 
Huallaga - cocaleros, narco-traffickers and subversive groups 
- are changing tactics to counter more aggressive eradication 
on the part of the Peruvian Government.  In recent memory, 
cocaleros have not sabotaged their fields in this way.  The 
ambush on NAS helicopters in April was the opening salvo in a 
stepped up campaign to drive out government presence from 
this area of increasing coca cultivation.  Direct links 
between Sendero Luminoso and narco-trafficking continue to 
emerge: police confirm destroying numerous cocaine-base 
laboratories and adjacent fields owned by individuals with 
links to SL. 
 
¶6. (C)  Comment continued:  As we continue to successfully 
eradicate and carry out interdiction operations in socially 
conflictive areas, aggressive actions such as the explosive 
devices are expected to increase.    Threat assessments and 
increasing security measures will continue in our efforts to 
protect personnel and equipment.   The information about 
instructions for making the crude explosive devices leads to 
the conclusion that Sendero Luminosa may be giving the 
example and motivating the cocaleros.  In the past, 
aggressive actions such as laying explosive devices would 
likely have resulted in the suspension of operations and we 
are encouraged by the police resolve, which we believe will 
continue under despite current changes in the police 
leadership. 
 
STRUBLE