05PARIS8544
MFA CAUTIOUS ON UNSCR 1644, SYRIA/LEBANON NEXT
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 008544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2015 
TAGS: PREL PTER SY LE FR
SUBJECT: MFA CAUTIOUS ON UNSCR 1644, SYRIA/LEBANON NEXT 
STEPS 
 
 
Classified By: Political Minister-Counselor Josiah Rosenblatt, reasons 
1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: MFA DAS-equivalent for Syria/Lebanon Herve 
Besancenot welcomed the UNSC's unanimous adoption of UNSCR 
1644, but expressed concern that international efforts to 
pressure Syria are losing momentum while the SARG is 
increasingly emboldened that it can wait out the U.S. and 
France over the next few years.  Besancenot affirmed that the 
Council should be ready to seek targeted sanctions on senior 
Syrian officials as soon as UNIIIC finds Syria in 
non-compliance with UNSCR 1636, but speculated that the 
expected Belgian successor to Mehlis would take time before 
making bold moves.  Besancenot described the Saudi position 
on pressuring Syria as wavering, while Egypt remains firm. 
He also described Lebanese PM Siniora as in a weak position, 
and stressed the need to avoid a Hizballah/Amal withdrawal 
from the GOL.  End summary. 
 
SYRIA PLAYING FOR TIME 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) During a December 17 discussion with poloff, MFA 
DAS-equivalent for Egypt/Levant Herve Besancenot commended 
unanimous UNSC adoption of UNSCR 1644 as a good outcome.  At 
the same time, he expressed concern that the compromises 
necessary to achieve consensus on 1644 and pending departure 
of UNIIIC Chief Mehlis had bolstered the impression that 
international efforts on UNSCR 1559 and 1595/1636 were losing 
momentum.  As a result, the SARG was increasingly emboldened 
in its efforts to "play for time" and wait out the U.S. and 
France for the next few years.  In Besancenot's view, the 
Syrians viewed Chirac as having personally "driven" the 
Syria/Lebanon file, and were well aware that the French 
president has been weakened domestically and would be gone 
from the scene after the 2007 presidential elections.  He 
opined that the Syrians had made a similar calculation 
vis-a-vis the U.S., which Damascus viewed as bogged down in 
Iraq and unprepared to make a military strike against Syria, 
again making the "playing for time" option possible. 
Meanwhile, the UNIIIC investigation could take until 2006 or 
2007 until it reached conclusive results. 
 
¶3. (C) Besancenot agreed with poloff on the importance of 
insisting on Syrian cooperation with UNIIIC and not letting 
the SARG "play for time."  He opined that UNIIIC would 
inevitably find Syria in non-compliance, over SARG red-lines 
on questioning Syrian Military Intelligence Chief Asif 
Shawkat or Mahir al Asad, and agreed that the Council should 
be ready to impose sanctions, without pre-empting UNIIIC.  In 
Besancenot's view, sanctions should target senior SARG 
officials, through measures such as travel restrictions or 
assets freezes, without punishing the Syrian population at 
large.  Besancenot questioned, however, how long it might 
take UNIIIC to make a finding of non-compliance; he 
speculated that Mehlis' likely successor, a Belgian 
magistrate (NFI), would likely seek time to settle in before 
launching bold moves, such as calling for further arrests or 
finding Syria in non-compliance. 
 
SAUDI SUGGESTS CHOOSING STABILITY OVER TRUTH; EGYPT STAYS FIRM 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Besancenot suggesting growing pessimism on the Saudi 
side on Syria/Lebanon developments.  He cited a discouraging 
conversation which French Ambassador in Beirut Emie had just 
had with his Saudi counterpart, who was pessimistic and 
suggested that the U.S. and France might need to make 
compromises with Damascus.  Besancenot said the Saudi 
Ambassador concluded that the international community might 
have to choose between the "truth" and "stability" -- 
meaning, we all know that Hariri could not have been killed 
without Bashar Al-Asad's knowledge, but there is no 
alternative in Syria to Bashar.  (In an aside, Besancenot 
expressed personal agreement with the view that there is no 
alternative to Bashar, and noted that he had met with 
representatives of the Syria Reform Party (RPS), including 
Amcit Farid Ghadry, last October.  Besancenot said he found 
the RPS representatives disconnected from Syria and unable to 
articulate a coherent political program.)  In contrast to 
Saudi Arabia, Besancenot described Egypt's position towards 
Syria as quite firm, and said Mubarak was very tough with 
Shara during the latter's recent visit to Cairo.  When asked 
by Shara what Syria needed to do, Besancenot said Mubarak 
responded bluntly that Syria needed to do one thing: 
cooperate. 
 
¶5. (C) Besancenot added that prior to the Tueni 
assassination, the GoF had been encouraging Sa'ad Hariri to 
return to Lebanon, while the Saudis had been advising him to 
stay put.  In the GoF view, Sa'ad could not stay out of 
Lebanon forever, but in the wake of the Tueni assassination, 
now was not the time to return.  Meanwhile, the French 
embassy in Beirut had reinforced its already tight security 
considerably in the days since Tueni's murder. 
 
SINIORA/HIZBALLAH 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Besancenot described PM Siniora as being in a very 
weak position, and cautioned against pressuring him too much 
in the wake of the Hizballah/Amal's suspension of 
participation in the GOL.  Besancenot stressed the need to 
avoid a Hizballah/Amal formal withdrawal from the GOL, which 
could have dangerous consequences.  He conceded that, after a 
brief period of moving in the direction of burnishing its 
Lebanese nationalist credentials, Hizballah had swung back in 
the direction of serving its Syrian and Iranian masters, 
perhaps reflecting the hardening positions in Tehran and 
Damascus.   On the issue of Hizballah disarmament, Besancenot 
clarified that the GoF was not advocating inaction, and 
insisted that the GoF continued to urge Siniora to take 
measures which could help advance implementation of UNSCR 
1559, including via his public statements. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: Besancenot's comments are consistent with 
long-standing MFA caution on Syria/Lebanon, and the tendency 
here to see the glass as "half-empty" when it comes to 
sustaining international pressure on Damascus.  Though 
Besancenot seemed to overestimate the SARG's ability to wait 
out the international community and underplay the SARG's 
declining credibility in the wake of the latest Mehlis report 
and Tueni assassination, he was reassuringly firm when it 
came to the topic of pursuing sanctions in response to Syrian 
non-compliance with UNIIIC. End comment. 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
Hofmann