05PANAMA1976
PANAMA PLEDGES SUPPORT ON NICARAGUA
Thu Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 001976 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PM POL CHIEF
SUBJECT: PANAMA PLEDGES SUPPORT ON NICARAGUA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William Eaton for reasons 1.4 (b)&(d) 
 
¶1. (C)  SUMMARY:  On September 29, Panamanian President 
Torrijos told WHA DAS Fisk and Ambassador Eaton that he 
shares our concerns about developments in Nicaragua and 
urged the U.S. to maintain a broad range of contacts and 
channels with the entire spectrum of Nicaraguan political 
parties and players.   During a follow-on meeting, Foreign 
Minister Lewis reaffirmed Panama's commitment to seek an 
indictment of former Nicaraguan President Aleman in 
Panamanian courts for corruption.  He pressed the U.S. to 
pursue similar legal action in the United States and 
pledged full continued GOP cooperation with any U.S. 
investigators or judicial process against the former 
President.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C)  During a breakfast meeting September 29, 
Panamanian President Torrijos expressed his 
government's concerns about political developments 
in Nicaragua and their possible destabilizing impact 
on the region.  He urged the United States to maintain 
a broad range of contacts across the entire political 
spectrum in Nicaragua. We cannot write off a generation 
of young radicals, including the Sandinistas, who might 
later potentially be national leaders and future partners 
with the U.S., he said.  The lack of such sustained 
contacts in the past with some elements of his party, the 
PRD, made it more difficult for him today to manage the 
elements that the U.S. had shunned and, as a result, are 
now nervous about his pro-US policies and philosophy. 
Lewis, following the meeting with Torrijos, privately 
acknowledged GOP frustration with its outreach efforts 
to Daniel Ortega and the elements of the FSLN loyal to him. 
The Foreign Minister, while echoing Torrijos's general 
statement on the need to engage the FSLN and the need for 
a genuinely democratic left in Nicaragua, conceded that 
that would not emerge through Ortega. 
 
¶3. (C)  In a separate meeting, WHA DAS Dan Fisk and 
Ambassador Eaton briefed Foreign Minister Samuel Lewis 
on the Deputy Secretary's upcoming trip to the region 
and urged Panama to press for an indictment of former 
Nicaraguan President Aleman for money laundering in 
Panama.  Lewis committed to seek an indictment but 
pointed out that, under the Panamanian Constitution, 
the responsibility for issuing indictments rests with 
the Attorney General, not the executive branch. 
Nevertheless, he pledged to push hard but discreetly to 
energize Attorney General action on the case.  He pointed 
out that similarly bold legal action in the United States 
would send a powerful message to Aleman, his family and 
also the Nicaraguan people. Lewis also reaffirmed GOP 
interest in cooperating with U.S. law enforcement and 
prosecutors in the Aleman case.  He said that the GOP 
remains willing to share information and evidence with 
DOJ and U.S. attorneys.  Lewis also clearly conveyed his 
view that GOP is waiting for the U.S. to show more vigor 
in pursuing a case against Aleman. 
 
¶4. (C)  Comment:  Lewis Navarro may not have been aware 
that a judge has agreed to hold a 23 November 
preliminary hearing where the government's attorney will 
present the government's case and the defense given a 
chance to respond.   At this point the judge decides 
whether to proceed or dismiss the case.  If the judge 
decides to proceed, other hearings would follow.  Embassy 
is looking into the judge's past record, given corruption 
problems with the Panamanian court system.  Both Torrijos 
and Lewis were very interested in Deputy Secretary 
Zoellick's upcoming visit to the region and want to be 
helpful in supporting democracy and stability in Nicaragua. 
EATON