05WELLINGTON642
NATIONAL SHAPING UP AS GENUINE CHALLENGER TO
Tue Aug 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

230257Z Aug 05C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 WELLINGTON 000642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP, EAP/RSP, EAP/EP, INR/EAP 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA AND MICHAEL GREEN 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISA LIZ PHU 
PACOM FOR J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/22/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NZ
SUBJECT: NATIONAL SHAPING UP AS GENUINE CHALLENGER TO 
LABOUR,S HOLD ON POWER IN NEW ZEALAND 
 
REF: A. WELLINGTON 594 
 
     ¶B. WELLINGTON 566 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Katherine Hadda, 
for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1.  (SBU) This is the first in a series of cables about where 
New Zealand's political parties stand in the run-up to 
September 17 general elections. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Badly battered in the 2002 campaign, New Zealand's 
main opposition party, the National Party, has reclaimed 
enough public support to pose a genuine threat to the Labour 
Government's hold on power. Although Labour has begun to 
regain the ground that it lost in the polls in recent months, 
the September 17 general election is still too close to call. 
 
¶3.  (C) The Party most favored by business and farmers, 
National is fighting the campaign on key domestic issues, 
advocating center-right policies such as tax cuts and lighter 
regulation in a bid to meet the needs and desires of what the 
Party has called "mainstream New Zealanders." In taking this 
approach, National is deliberately painting itself as the 
alternative to a Labour Government that often targets its 
interventionist social and economic policies to specific 
sectors of society.  By portraying the Government as arrogant 
and out of touch with the interests of ordinary voters, 
National's message is especially designed to woo working and 
middle-class Kiwis who might otherwise vote Labour. 
 
¶4.  (C) National's spike in the polls in May, following a 
string of embarrassing revelations of Government 
mismanagement and public discontent over Finance Minister 
Cullen's budget, caused genuine alarm in the Labour camp.  In 
response, Labour has cast National as the party that is out 
to destroy public services in order to benefit wealthier New 
Zealanders. The Government has recently begun to announce a 
string of spending initiatives designed to benefit many 
voters who might be attracted to National's platform. This 
has put more pressure on National to deliver a tax cut plan 
that will appeal to the majority of voters without appearing 
to cut health, education, and other key services. 
 
¶5.  (C) Despite considerable pressure from the media and the 
Government, National decided to hold its tax plan close to 
its chest until August 22, the day after the formal start of 
campaigning.  It did so largely in an attempt to prevent 
Labour from copying those ideas which would win support in 
the polls.  National also wanted to avoid the mistakes of the 
last election, when it announced a string of new initiatives 
virtually up until Election Day, confusing many voters.  But 
the anticipation surrounding National's delayed announcement 
allowed the Government and media to narrow the issues of the 
campaign.   What should be a race about the proper role of 
government has instead largely boiled down to one issue: 
taxes. Should significant numbers of voters not favor its 
plan, National is unlikely to win next month. 
 
¶6.  (C) The delayed announcement of the tax cut plan has also 
confirmed some voters' view of National as sneaky and having 
a hidden agenda.  Labour has worked to raise similar 
questions in the minds of voters by questioning National's 
relationship with the United States and its true intentions 
regarding New Zealand,s anti-nuclear stance (reftels). 
 
¶7.  (C) Ironically, while National is considered more 
favorably disposed than Labour toward the United States, not 
all members of the Party share their leaders' desire for a 
review of New Zealand's nuclear policy.  Some, even if they 
generally like us, harbor some suspicions of US policies.  In 
addition, the Party's need to avoid the appearance of being 
in the United States' pocket will constrain its ability to 
argue publicly for a re-evaluation of the relationship even 
if elected to power. End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
National's Message 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Since rising to leadership in October 2003, Brash 
has moved the National Party further to the political right 
than it was under his predecessor, Bill English. On the 
economic side, this has translated into a greater emphasis on 
free market policies such as lower tax rates for both 
individuals and businesses, minimized business regulation, 
and flexible labor markets.  On social issues, the Party 
emphasizes the importance of supporting traditional families 
with policies that let them make their own decisions. 
 
----------------------- 
The prosperity argument 
----------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) As in other countries, domestic issues trump all in 
New Zealand's elections.  In recent years, New Zealanders 
have voted for whomever they perceive offers the best 
prospect for personal financial prosperity. Seizing on this 
as a challenge that only the center-right can meet, 
National's campaign focuses heavily on economic issues. 
Although earlier in the year Nationals' foreign affairs 
spokesman Lockwood Smith had told us New Zealand's five-year 
economic expansion would hurt National's election bid, recent 
signs of an imminent slowdown will have put a spring in the 
Party's step. National also points to Brash's long-term 
experience as New Zealand's central banker as proof of the 
party's financial capability. 
¶10. (SBU) National,s major theme - that economic growth is 
necessary if New Zealand is to achieve first-world levels of 
health care and education - is largely similar to that 
espoused by the Labour Government. But National argues 
Labour's economic redistribution policies are inefficient, 
overly reliant on state involvement and light on personal 
responsibility.  Instead, National argues, the country needs 
greater individual freedom and fiscal responsibility through 
tax cuts on personal and corporate income.  It has also 
called for welfare reform and reduced government bureaucracy 
in education and other areas-.  National has also introduced 
proposals such as tax credits for childcare that it argues 
will maximize parents' choices instead of forcing them to 
rely on state programs. 
 
------------------------- 
It's the Tax Cuts, Stupid 
------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) A recent poll shows 62 percent of people believe 
they are paying too much tax. National is betting that tax 
reform will prove to be the defining issue of the election 
and believes that it can work this sense of public 
dissatisfaction to its advantage.  It is confident that this 
will resonate with the electorate more than the targeted 
spending packages that Labour has favored.  Widespread pubic 
disaffection for Labour,s last budget, which - despite a 
hefty surplus - provided only limited tax relief beginning in 
three years -- seemed to vindicate National's reading of the 
public mood. 
 
¶12. (SBU) National avoided announcing the details of its much 
anticipated tax plan until August 22, presumably to avoid 
having Labour steal its thunder.  (It didn't entirely work: 
recognizing its vulnerability on the tax issue, Labour 
announced on August 19 its own targeted plan -- a retooled 
and expanded version of its "Working for Families" 
subsidies.)  The Party has pledged to cut taxes by a total of 
NZ$9.4 billion (US$6.5 billion) over the next three years. 
The first year would see decreases in personal taxes by 
lifting tax rate thresholds.  (The current highest rate of 
39% kicks in for annual salaries equivalent to only $45,000 
US.)  Corporate tax reductions would kick in during the 
second and third year of the plan, providing there is room in 
the budget for this. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) National's decision to put personal tax reductions 
ahead of business demonstrates how crucial lower- and 
middle-class voters are for its campaign.  Sensitive also to 
Labour's claims that the tax cuts will mean massive 
reductions in public services, National has pledged not to 
decrease any current spending on health, education, or 
superannuation (pensions).  It says it will finance the plan 
through cutting Government spending by 2% and slowing down 
the rate of future spending. 
 
¶14.  (C) To some extent National has been a victim of its own 
success, in that Kiwis were so hyped on the idea of tax cuts 
that National's delay in announcing the plan made the Party 
seem secretive and possibly dishonest.  It has also drawn 
attention away from other aspects of National's policy, so 
that if the plan fails to excite voters National has little 
chance of winning the election.  It remains to be seen 
whether National's plan as announced will do the trick. 
 
--------------------- 
Curb the "brain drain" 
--------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) National argues that, despite the benefit of the 
best international trading conditions New Zealand has enjoyed 
for many decades and despite reasonable levels of economic 
growth as a consequence, most New Zealanders are, in real 
terms, no better off. National frequently cites low 
comparative income levels as an underlying reason for the 
flight of talented New Zealanders to Australia and other 
countries, commonly referred to as the "brain drain." 
 
¶16. (SBU) National argues that immediate tax reform would 
encourage New Zealanders to stay in the country.  Lowering 
corporate taxes would also encourage more overseas investment 
in New Zealand, lifting salaries.  These issues - income 
levels and the sense that the most talented of New Zealanders 
are more inclined to leave the country rather than stay - 
resonate with voters. But National's confidence that it could 
appeal to New Zealand's ever increasing educated middle class 
with this approach took a beating when the Government 
announced it would abolish interest on student loans. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Race Relations and "Mainstream New Zealand" 
----------------------------------------- 
¶17. (SBU) Following Brash,s "nationhood" speech to a Rotary 
Club at Orewa in early 2004, where he expressed opposition to 
Maori racial separatism in New Zealand, National temporarily 
received the biggest one-off gain, 17 percent, in the history 
of New Zealand,s most well-known political poll. Though the 
sentiments expressed in the Orewa speech differed little from 
established National Party views, the ensuing nation-wide 
support the Party received after delivery, largely a result 
of timing and effective spin, indirectly provoked changes of 
emphasis in Labour's policy agenda. The themes of the Orewa 
speech continue to resonate with many New Zealanders, 
particularly the middle class, and is for National a key 
component of its claims that it is the only Party 
representing "mainstream New Zealanders."  One of National's 
most popular billboard is a picture of Helen Clark underneath 
the word "Iwi" (the Maori word for tribe) alongside one of 
Don Brash underneath the word "Kiwi." 
¶18. (SBU) Overall, National says that Labour has been, and 
continues to be, excessively concessionary when it comes to 
Maori claim settlements stemming from the 1840 Treaty of 
Waitangi. National says it will set a deadline of 2010 to 
settle all claims.  It has also taken a resolute line against 
consultation with Maori on resource management issues, any 
program it can plausibly call race-based, some Treaty 
settlements and official deference to Maori spiritual and 
cultural values. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
National's Vulnerabilities: Anti-nuclear policy at issue 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶19. (C) Foreign relations rarely command center stage in a 
general election campaign. But Labour is determined to take 
advantage of National,s perceived vulnerability regarding 
New Zealand's 1987 legislation that bans nuclear-powered and 
nuclear-propelled ships from its harbors (reftels). National 
has done a relatively poor job of deflecting these charges. 
By simply repeating that it does not have plans to change the 
law and would not do so absent a referendum, the Party has 
begged the question of why it would even call for such a 
vote. This has made it easier for Labour to convince voters 
that National has a hidden agenda. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Seeking a return to traditional alliances 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (C) National is publicly committed to multilateralism, 
but it places greater preference on New Zealand's 
relationships with traditional allies - the United States, 
the United Kingdom and Australia -- than does Labour. 
National maintains that these traditional alliances, 
especially with the United States and Australia, have 
unnecessarily deteriorated under the present Labour 
Government, leaving New Zealand dangerously isolated. 
National is mindful, however, of the anti-American sentiment 
that has seized many New Zealanders.  Party officials have 
quietly told us that they seek to address this, but are 
equally honest that to do so will be very difficult. It's 
worth noting that even Party stalwarts such as former PM Jim 
Bolger would not want to see New Zealand totally remove its 
nuclear policy.  (NB: We will report septel on the campaign's 
implications for U.S. foreign and defense interests.) 
 
¶21. (C) National has been very critical of the Government's 
spending on military capability. However, it has not 
committed to any defense spending above the Government's 
recently pledged $4.6 billion Defence Sustainability 
initiative. National recognizes that the military cannot 
absorb anything more than this over the shorter term.  The 
Party's strategists also realize that the Party is vulnerable 
on defense issues: Labour has made a lot of hay during the 
campaign trumpeting the fact that Don Brash indicated some 
months ago that he would have sent troops to Iraq. 
 
------------------- 
Background on Brash 
------------------- 
 
¶22. (U) Dr. Don Brash served as New Zealand,s central banker 
for 14 years (1988 - 2002). After studying at the University 
of Canterbury, he gained a PhD in Economics at Australian 
National University in 1966. He was an economist at the World 
Bank for five years, general manager of Broadbank Corporation 
for 10 years, managing director of the New Zealand Kiwifruit 
Authority from 1982-1986 and managing director of the Trust 
Bank Group from 1986-1988. Brash became leader of the 
National party in October 2003 following an internal coup 
that toppled former leader Bill English. Since becoming 
Leader of the Opposition, Brash and National have enjoyed an 
upswing of public support with party membership doubling 
under his leadership. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶23. (C) Although most Kiwi politicians believe the 
anti-nuclear law is a third-rail issue, it is unlikely to 
greatly affect the election outcome. Even if National were 
believed to be planning to repeal the nuclear-powered-vessels 
part of the law, that alone would probably not cost it the 
support of swing voters.  Potential National voters are far 
more likely to be drawn to the Party because of their 
concerns over the size and role of the state - doubts about 
the government's managerial competence; political 
correctness/Treaty of Waitangi issues, and especially taxes 
and spending patterns. 
 
¶24. (C) In addition to the tax issue, it is likely that the 
fortunes of National will increasingly be tied to how the 
country responds to Brash as a possible prime minister. As 
the election becomes increasingly presidential in style and 
substance, there will inevitably be closer comparisons made 
between him and the Prime Minister as leaders. This may be a 
problem for National. According to National Party strategist 
Peter Keenan (protect), the Party regards Brash's lack of 
political experience as both his greatest asset and 
vulnerability. 
 
¶25.  (C) Clark is a tested leader who is widely considered as 
capable and experienced.  Although she is not widely seen as 
likable, to date she maintains a comfortable lead over Brash 
in polls asking voters to name their "preferred Prime 
Minister."  Cerebral and awkward, Brash is still untested, 
and -- as three recent debates have proven -- is not as 
comfortable on the stump as his opponent Clark.  On the other 
hand, as a political novice who entered politics in 2002, 
Brash does not carry the sort of obvious political baggage 
that the highly experienced Clark carries after her many 
years as a politician. New Zealanders are conventionally wary 
of career politicians, and this may work in Brash's favor in 
the end.  End comment. 
 
Burnett