05WELLINGTON58
MP TAMIHERE CLEARED IN FIRST OF TWO
Mon Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/20/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM NZ
SUBJECT: MP TAMIHERE CLEARED IN FIRST OF TWO 
INVESTIGATIONS; HITS THE COMEBACK TRAIL 
 
REF: 04 WELLINGTON 909 
 
Classified By: ACTING DCM KATHERINE B. HADDA, FOR REASONS 1.4(B,D) 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Beleaguered Labour MP John Tamihere has 
begun his political rehabilitation, offering a "state of the 
nation" speech January 19 that attacked the "separatist" 
Maori party, defended Labour's economic policies, and 
eschewed the left-right division of unions and business 
leaders in favor of pragmatic solutions.  Following a 
two-month investigation, a report released December 21 
cleared Tamihere of charges related to tax liabilities on a 
"handshake" payment provided by his previous employer, the 
Waipareira Trust.  However, an investigation by the Serious 
Fraud Office (SFO) on related issues is outstanding, and it 
is unlikely that Tamihere will be returned to Cabinet in the 
near future.  End summary. 
 
"I Am A Maori and They Have Stolen My Name" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) This was Tamihere's first public speech since 
resigning as Minister in November.  Playing on his appeal to 
more right-wing Labour voters, Tamihere decried the old 
ideologies of left and right, extolling unions and business 
leaders to focus on working concepts instead of archaic 
stereotypes of the "boss as bad" and "unions as lazy 
lefties."  While the bulk of the speech focused on 
election-year themes - immigration, economic development and 
the on-going Constitutional Inquiry - Tamihere spoke most 
sharply on race issues.  He attacked the newly formed Maori 
Party as "tribalists" who "advocate grievance and 
victimhood."  He also expressed frustration that the educated 
academics who run the Party have allied with the new 
"checkbook" elite -- Maori made rich by Governmental Treaty 
of Waitangi settlements.  "I am a Maori and they have stolen 
my name," Tamihere said.  (Note: Popular Maori Party 
co-leader Dr Pita Sharples was chosen to stand against 
Tamihere on October 25 (reftel) and Tamihere's Tamaki 
Makaurau seat is seen as vulnerable in the upcoming 
election.) 
 
Still Out in the Cold 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Following a two-month investigation, a report released 
December 21 cleared Tamihere of charges related to tax 
liabilities on a "handshake" payment provided by his previous 
employer, the Waipareira Trust, finding that tax liability 
rested with the Trust.  But the report found that Tamihere 
did not declare his receipt of income on the Ministerial 
register, and has referred this issue to the Commissioner for 
Inland Revenue.  Tamihere's political future remains 
uncertain, as an investigation by the Serious Fraud Office 
(SFO) into eight allegedly false invoices signed by Tamihere 
is still underway.  If the SFO finds Tamihere innocent, the 
way would be clear for him to resume his role of strong 
advocate for Maori issues.  This could be helpful in the 
run-up to the 2005 election, in which all seven 
Maori-designated Parliament seats will be hotly contested. 
 
¶4. (U) PM Helen Clark sent Tamihere a strong signal with her 
Cabinet reshuffle on December 20, when she reassigned his 
portfolios on a permanent basis.  All is not lost, however, 
and following the first report's release Clark publicly 
stated that Tamihere has "a strong future", hinting that he 
can expect a portfolio after the 2005 general election. 
Clark offered a surprisingly high level of solidarity with 
Tamihere, noting that Tamihere has been the most-investigated 
MP, and hinting that this may be the result that the 
Opposition fears his strong appeal to Maori and non-Maori 
Labour voters. 
 
Confession Is Good For the Soul 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  Throughout the initial scandal and the 
subsequent inquiry, Prime Minister Clark consistently applied 
the same rigorous moral standard to Tamihere that she has to 
other Ministers who have violated her cardinal rule of "No 
scandal."  But although she sent Tamihere to the backbenches 
to serve his time, Clark has kept dangling the possibility of 
his future rehabilitation into the Cabinet.  At the same 
time, demonstrating the political mettle that has kept her 
firmly in control of the Labour Party for the past ten years, 
Clark has maintained a sufficient distance from Tamihere that 
should he be found to have committed an impropriety, neither 
she nor the Party will suffer. 
 
¶6.  (C) Tamihere's speech, with its folksy comments softening 
Union "ownership" of the Labour party and controversial 
comments on Maori separatism, demonstrates clearly his 
ability to attract voters who are generally supportive of 
Labour but put off by the party's left-wing, 
politically-correct agenda.  For this reason, Labour Party 
leaders are no doubt keeping their fingers crossed that 
Tamihere's political rehabilitation will hold throughout the 
upcoming election campaign. 
Swindells