06AMMAN5486
TFLE01: GOJ BACKS U.S. EFFORTS WHILE SEEKING TO
Thu Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Amman
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAM #5486/01 2011441
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 201441Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY AMMAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2484
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 005486

SIPDIS

SIPDIS

E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/20/2016
TAGS: PREL PGOV LE IS RU JO
SUBJECT: TFLE01: GOJ BACKS U.S. EFFORTS WHILE SEEKING TO
DEFUSE RISING PUBLIC ANGER

REF: AMMAN 5396

Classified By: Ambassador David Hale for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)

¶1. ( C ) Summary: The GOJ wants to work with the U.S.
toward a long-term improvement in southern Lebanon, but is
under strong public pressure, from all sectors of society, to
call publicly for an immediate ceasefire. End summary.

Attacks in Arab Media Sting
---------------------------

¶2. (SBU) Newspaper headlines on July 20 focus on U.S. and
British &opposition8 to a ceasefire. Al-Jazeera and other
Arabic channels have given prominent play in recent days to
attacks on the two Kings Abdullah and on President Mubarak
for their public criticism of Hizballah.

¶3. ( C ) Jordanian leaders are especially frosted by a
campaign of personal attacks directed at the King and FM
Khatib. In a prime-time Al-Jazeera broadcast on July 18, the
King was described as a traitor to Arabs and a lackey of the
U.S. and Israel. A Lebanese newspaper, al-Safir, described
Khatib as having acted as the &Israeli Foreign Minister8
during the Cairo extraordinary meeting. He told Ambassador
he believed the Syrian government planted this item.

GOJ Supportive of U.S. Efforts, But Feeling the Heat
--------------------------------------------- -------

¶4. ( C ) Jordanian officials, feeling the pressure of public
opinion, have stepped up public calls for a ceasefire while
privately sharing our view that time is needed to create an
environment conducive to a durable, peaceful outcome.
Jordan,s official news agency, covering Khatib,s meeting
July 19 with visiting Russian Deputy FM Sultanov, quoted
Khatib as:

--affirming Jordan,s support for full Lebanese government
control over all Lebanese territory

--calling for international support for Palestinian President
Abbas

--stressing the importance of a Palestinian-Israeli solution
that provides for a Palestinian state and for Israel,s
security needs.

(Khatib told Ambassador that Sultanov had no ideas or
proposals for bringing the Lebanon or Gaza situations under
control.)

¶5. ( C ) The Palace media shop announced that the King and
Secretary Rice spoke on July 19, and that the King stressed

SIPDIS
the &necessity to intensify international efforts in this
phase to work to realize an immediate ceasefire and end the
Israeli military escalation.8 He underscored the importance
of the U.S. role in achieving this aim.

¶6. ( C ) In private, the GOJ seeks continued coordination
with Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and the U.S., but both Foreign
Minister Khatib and the director of the King,s office,
Bassem Awadallah, have registered with us the importance of
focusing public diplomacy on support for a ceasefire and
tangible help for the Lebanese people. FM Khatib told
Ambassador July 20 the GOJ is working behind the scenes to
block efforts to convene an Arab Summit.

Public Mood
-----------

¶7. ( C ) Meanwhile, Jordanians across a broad spectrum )
from the scotch-sipping elite, to trade unionists, to the
Islamists ) complain to us, some emotionally, of U.S.
passivity. Faris Breizat of the Center for Strategic and
International Studies told emboff that the polling numbers he
expects to obtain next week will give Hizballah positives in
the 90 percent range. There is a feeling that under the
present circumstances, festive events are inappropriate; for
example the annual Jerash Cultural Festival has been
cancelled for the first time since the 1982 conflict in
Lebanon. The Egyptian Embassy cancelled its national day
reception.

The Scotch-and-Soda Set
-----------------------

¶8. ( C ) At an Embassy reception July 19, one businessman
told the Ambassador Israeli operations in Lebanon constituted
&genocide8 and accused the U.S. of supporting this genocide
by standing aside (this comment may have stemmed from
generous helpings at the open bar.) An FSN from one of

Amman,s leading families said upper-crust Jordanians trying
out a newly-opened spa at the Dead Sea talked mostly in
abusive terms of President Bush. A staffer from Queen
Rania,s office complained to emboff July 18 that the U.S.
was like a gang member who &helps hold the victim down8
during a gang rape.

¶9. ( C ) Musa Keilani, a columnist with family ties both to
the security establishment and to the old guard among the
Muslim Brotherhood, lamented that he and others &who used to
speak out in support of co-existence8 with Israel must now
keep their mouths shut, for fear their friends and families
will brand them &traitors.8 The popularity of King
Abdullah and his government was bleeding away because of the
conflict, Keilani said.

Labor Leaders
-------------

¶10. ( C ) Mazen Maytah, the president of Jordan,s labor
union federation, told polcouns July 19 that he personally
agreed with the King that Hizballah had harmed Arab
interests by starting &this adventure,8 however, his
membership strongly backs Hizballah. Fathallah Omrani,
president of the textile workers, union, who collaborates
closely with Embassy on migrant laborer issues, told polcouns
that his members view Israel as the aggressor, admire
Hizballah for offering &resistance when no Arab governments
will,8 and are angry about the Jordanian King,s statement
July 17 condemning Hizballah.

Islamists to Stage More Demonstrations
--------------------------------------

¶11. ( C ) The GOJ granted a permit to the Muslim
Brotherhood,s political arm, the Islamic Action Front, to
stage a demonstration Friday, July 21, which we expect will
be larger than the non-IAF rally on the same site last Friday
(reftel.) Other, spontaneous post-prayer rallies are also
likely. Intelligence officials are confident they will
remain orderly and controlled. The Emergency Action
Committee met July 20 (septel) to review the situation and
agreed to reiterate standing guidance on avoiding public
places after Friday prayers.

Hale