06AMMAN5745
TFLE01 - REACTIONS TO QANA TRAGEDY
Mon Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Amman
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAM #5745 2121122
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 311122Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY AMMAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2752
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 005745

SIPDIS

SIPDIS

E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/31/2016
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC IS LE JO
SUBJECT: TFLE01 - REACTIONS TO QANA TRAGEDY

Classified By: Ambassador David Hale for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)

King Decries Qana "Massacre"
----------------------------

¶1. (C) Contacts and press express anger over the Qana attack,
but are still digesting the Secretary's success in gaining a
48-hour suspension of airstrikes and prospects for
comprehensive action in the Security Council. In most
respects, it is business as usual in Amman but we are
monitoring security closely. End Summary.

¶2. (SBU) King Abdullah described the Qana attack publicly
as an "ugly crime" and a "massacre," clearly feeling he
needed to get in step with public opinion, which is outraged
across the spectrum, from elites to the man in the street,
and from liberals to Islamists. Until the announcements that
Israeli air strikes would be suspended, Jordanians were
blaming the U.S. for the continued violence, focusing in
particular on media reports of accelerated arms shipments to
Israel and of alleged U.S. efforts to block an unconditional
ceasefire. Newspaper headlines describe &the second Israeli
massacre in Qana8 and front pages feature full-page color
photos of dead infants. It will take time to see what impact
the USG's latest diplomatic efforts will have on public
opinion.

Evaporation of Support for Engagement with Israel
--------------------------------------------- ----

¶3. (C) A wide range of contacts who normally support
engagement with Israel tell us that they and others like them
can no longer sustain such a position with friends and
relations; in some cases they claim to have personally turned
against the concept of engagement. Some of this emotion will
dissipate if the regional situation returns soon to something
like normal. Several leading op-ed columnists call into
questions Jordan's relationship with Israel, and call for the
closure of Israel's Embassy in Amman.

Demonstration Planned
---------------------

¶4. (SBU) According to media, the authorities have granted a
permit for a protest march the afternoon of July 31 in the
Shmeisani neighborhood, a traditional venue for such events.
The Jordanian police and intelligence services report no
attempts to stage demonstrations at the Embassy or other
places of U.S. interest, but we are nevertheless discussing
with the authorities additional security contingency
planning, and are monitoring the situation closely.
Demonstrations were lighter Friday, July 28 than the previous
week, possibly because the GOJ refused to grant permits.

In Most Respects, Business as Usual
-----------------------------------

¶5. (SBU) Most of our contacts relate their deep unhappiness
with events in Lebanon, but continue relationships with us as
usual. One econ contact declined to meet with emboffs
because of Qana, but we were able to get our business done
with his superior, who received us as usual.

¶6. (SBU) Jordanians have cancelled some cultural and festive
events. Other festivities took place as usual. High school
students who passed their national standards tests celebrated
last weekend as they do every year with happy, noisy
processions of cars all over west Amman.

¶7. (SBU) USAID Amman's Mission Director spoke at a
well-attended aid event in Madaba late July 30, (post Qana)
and was received normally -- a sign we can continue with
judiciously chosen and controlled public events focused on
our aid relationship, for now.

Comment
-------

¶8. (C) If the USG's latest diplomatic initiatives are unable
to prevent a full resumption of hostilities, we expect
deterioration in attitudes here toward the U.S., from an
already very low base. This would put further pressure on
King Abdullah but he shows no sign of wavering in his support
for the U.S. approach.

Visit Amman's Classified Web Site at
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/
Hale