06BEIRUT1444
MGLE01:  A/S HILLEN'S DINNER WITH LEBANESE
Mon May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO7834
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHLB #1444/01 1281242
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 081242Z MAY 06 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3414
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0547
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/COMSOCCENT MACDILL AFB FL
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIRUT 001444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DORAN/WERNER/SINGH 
PARIS FOR ZEYA 
LONDON FOR TSOU 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/07/2016 
TAGS: KDEM LE PGOV PM SY
SUBJECT: MGLE01:  A/S HILLEN'S DINNER WITH LEBANESE 
POLITICAL LEADERS 
 
BEIRUT 00001444  001.4 OF 003 

Classified By: Ambassador Jeffrey D. Feltman.  Reason:  Sections 1.4 (b 
) and (d). 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) On May 3, the Ambassador hosted a dinner at his 
residence for visiting PM A/S Hillen.  The guests represented 
a diverse range of international and Lebanese political 
figures, all united by their common interest in Lebanon's 
security situation and relationship with the United States. 
During the three hour exchange, MP's Farid el Khazen and 
Mosbah el Ahdab argued that Lebanon needed to move forward on 
security and other reform issues despite ongoing regional and 
internal problems.  Khazen specifically cited the LAF's 
inability or unwillingness to carry out the council of 
minister's order limiting Palestinian arms outside the camps. 
 Shi'a MP Ali Osseiran said that fundamental regional 
political issues needed to be resolved first, and while 
honoring American intentions, questioned whether the U.S. 
would make a long term commitment to Lebanon.  The 
Ambassador, A/S Hillen and UNSYG Personal Representative Geir 
Pedersen responded that the United States and the 
international community will remain committed to Lebanon over 
the coming years because of shared values and strategic 
interests based on freedom, prosperity and security.  They 
urged at the same time, however, that the Lebanese, who have 
done so much in the past year and a half, should not miss 
their reform opportunities because of internal disagreements. 
 End Summary. 
 
Lebanese Participants: 
Simon Karam, former Lebanese Ambassador to the United States 
Mosbah el Ahdab, Member of Parliament 
Ali Osseiran, Member of Parliament 
Geir Pedersen, Personal Representative of the UN Secretary 
General to Lebanon 
Anwar el Khalil, Member of Parliament 
Boutros Assaker, Secretary General of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
Farid el Khazen, Member of Parliament 
Michael Young, Editorial Page Editor, The Daily Star 
 
US Participants: 
PM A/S John Hillen 
Ambassador Feltman 
DCM Christopher Murray 
LTC Kaz Kotlow, US Army, Office of Defense Cooperation 
LTC Benjamin Crockett, Defense Attache 
Major Reginald Robinson, US Air Force, PM Foreign Affairs 
Officer 
Matthew Lehrfeld, Special Assistant to A/S Hillen 
Matt Pilcher, Embassy Notetaker 
 
MOVING THE LAF FORWARD, 
AROUND HIZBALLAH 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) During his introductory remarks, A/S Hillen noted 
that his visit to Lebanon was part of a follow-up to Prime 
Minister Siniora's April visit to Washington, and that the 
United States wanted to explore ways to build a strong 
strategic relationship with Lebanon, especially by assisting 
Lebanon in capacity building of its security services to 
improve Lebanese security and stability.  Anwar el Khalil 
agreed that capacity building was important, and that the 
Lebanese armed services would benefit enormously from U.S. 
training programs.  But, he said, Lebanon's crippling debt 
hindered the ability to provide the necessary manpower, 
equipment, and training for the armed forces. 
 
¶3.  (C) Then, in a question that sparked an hour-long debate 
among the guests, columnist Michael Young asked what kind of 
military reform would be possible with Hizballah, and if 
plans to integrate Hizballah into the armed forces were 
really feasible or desirable.  The Ambassador asked Young if 
he thought this plan was seriously under consideration. 
Young responded that he didn't think it was now, although it 
was likely sometime soon.  Pedersen pointed out that 
Hizballah might not be the obstacle to security reform, 
including U.S. security assistance, that many people 
automatically assume.  He pointed to the April 27 as-Safir 
newspaper interview with Hizballah Secretary General Hassan 
Nasrallah, in which Nasrallah said that Hizballah did not 
oppose U.S. military assistance to Lebanon.  According to 
Pedersen, Hizballah -- whatever its other agendas -- is 
focused on the defense of Lebanon, and is pragmatic enough to 
accept assistance from the U.S. if it improves Lebanon's 
defense capacity. 
 
¶4.  (C) Aoun bloc MP Farid el Khazen argued that Hizballah is 
only a distraction. (JQZ>Q;tate an agreement on Hizballah's status, but that can 
never be achieved while the LAF remains weak.  He said that 
the main issue isn't even the LAF's capacity, however, but an 
"ability to act."  He pointed to a recent cabinet decision 
two months ago that gave the Palestinians six months to 
dismantle military bases outside of the refugee camps, and 
said that the LAF has done nothing in the interim to carry 
out this order. 
 
¶5.  (C) Pedersen responded that the agreement on limiting 
arms outside the camps should be resolved diplomatically, not 
by force, especially given that the government still has four 
more months before its self-imposed deadline.  Khazen agreed, 
but said that the LAF still has a role to play in the 
meantime.  "They need to take steps to show they're serious. 
They should surround the (Palestinian) military bases, and 
block the roads going in and out so they can't get more 
weapons.  They're not even doing this."  Mosbah el Ahdab and 
Michael Young said that the LAF couldn't afford a military 
confrontation with Hizballah and the Palestinians, however. 
Khazen countered, "I'm not talking about a military attack. 
Give the political process time to work.  But the army needs 
to back up the government's decree to show they're serious." 
Ahdab agreed, and suggested to Khazen that Aoun should raise 
these questions publicly.  'OK.  We will," Khazen smiled. 
 
PROMOTING INTEGRATION 
AND REFORM 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) The Ambassador asked Anwar el Khalil what role the 
parliamentary committee for defense could play in promoting 
security improvements and reform.  Khalil, the committee's 
chair, said that they have the ability to introduce 
legislation, and that they are currently conducting a 
strategic review to see how they can improve coordination 
among Lebanon's security services.  A/S Hillen said that 
"jointness," the coordination of US military service 
branches, has greatly improved the efficacy of the U.S. 
military, but that it was something that Congress forced on 
the Pentagon in the 1980's in the face of deep-seated 
opposition from the armed services themselves and a powerful 
secretary of defense.  A/S Hillen said it was important that 
the legislature take the lead in reform efforts, "Very few 
institutions are self-reforming," he said. 
 
"FORTUNE FAVORS THE BOLD" 
PROMOTING U.S.-LEBANESE PARTNERSHIP 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) As the conversation turned to presidencies, both 
Lebanese and American, MP Ali Osseiran said that he supported 
President Bush and his vision for the Middle East, but that 
the U.S. needs to do more if we want to realize the "freedom 
agenda."  "Fortune favors the bold," Osseiran said, and 
argued that the United States needs to solve major, 
international disputes in the Middle East, namely the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, before we can expect progress 
on democratization, security sector or economic reform.  He 
also said that the Lebanese were wary of the United States, 
and worried that our attention would drift, the 
administration would change hands, and the United States and 
international community would abandon Lebanon to the 
appetites and agendas of its larger, more powerful neighbors. 
 "Fix the fundamentals first," Osseiran said, "you must have 
a Palestinian state.  Then we can go forward." 
 
¶8.  (C) A/S Hillen responded that the United States is 
building a strong partnership with Lebanon for its own sake. 
The actions of the Lebanese people and government over the 
past year and a half have showed that Lebanon is the very 
model for the President's vision of democratization in the 
Middle East.  And while this is an important foundation for a 
bilateral relationship between the U.S. and Lebanon, it is 
also central to American security -- something that will not 
change when a new administration takes office in 2009.  A/S 
Hillen said that ultimately it will be up to the Lebanese to 
see many of these reforms through, but that they can count on 
long term support from the United States while they do so. 
 
¶9. (C) The Ambassador agreed, and said that the actions of 
the Lebanese people had made a lasting, positive impression 
on the United States.  But he said it would be dangerous to 
allow complex, ongoing issues like the Palestinian - Israeli 
peace process to forestall necessary reform efforts in 
Lebanon. "There is nothing about 'Palestine' that should keep 
you from fixing Electricite du Liban.  You shouldn't hold 
Lebanon hostage to these issues," he said.  Geir Pedersen 
added that for the first time in nearly thirty years, Israel 
has no designs of Lebanon, and given this opportunity, 
Lebanon's leaders have a responsibility to promote whatever 
reform efforts they can.  A/S Hillen reminded the guests that 
President Bush is the first U.S. President to back the 
concept of a Palestinian state. 
 
"FARID FOR PRESIDENT" 
--------------------- 
 
¶10.  (C) Osseiran said that these reforms were impossible, 
that Lebanon has to remember it is part of the Arab world, 
and that they could not move forward on any kind of reform 
while faced with a "belligerent Israel."  "Lebanon is still a 
battlefield for foreign powers!" Osseiran cried.  Farid el 
Khazen, obviously exasperated, leaned around the table and 
pointed his finger at Osseiran "It's not!  There are two 
battlefields in the Middle East.  Iraq is one, 
Israel-Palestine is the other.  And we're not involved with 
either one.  We've been neglected before, but now we have the 
full attention and support of the international community. 
It's our responsibility to work together and take advantage 
of it!"  The conviction of Khazen's remarks rendered everyone 
silent for a moment.  Then Mosbah el Ahdab raised his hand 
and declared, "Everyone, I would like to take this 
opportunity to nominate Farid el Khazen for President of 
Lebanon," a suggestion that was received with laughter and 
applause from around the table. 
 
¶11.  (C) Anwar el Khalil said that Khazen's point was 
serious, though.  "We need to focus on what can unite us." 
Khalil warned that it would be disastrous to lose the present 
opportunities while locked in internal political 
disagreements.  "We need Beirut 1," he said, "but we'll lose 
it if we can't make any political progress." 
 
THE SYRIAN ELEPHANT IN THE CORNER 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Michael Young agreed these were all important 
issues, but wondered why no one had yet mentioned Syria. 
Indeed, Damascus had received scarcely a word of mention from 
the Lebanese guests during the entire night.  "If the Prime 
Minister wants to improve the Lebanese army, it's about 
getting them out of Syrian control.  Syria's the main issue 
and we need to talk about it," Young said. Osseiran said that 
Syria wasn't such a great obstacle, an explanation that 
Ambassador Simon Karam wasn't ready to accept.  "Look," said 
Karam, "we could tell Ehud Olmert that we are ready for 
relations and they'd have an Ambassador here within a week. 
Syria still won't give us an embassy; why do you think that 
is?" 
 
¶13.  (U)  This cable has been cleared by A/S Hillen. 
FELTMAN