06CAIRO1297
SCENESETTER FOR DEFENSE MINISTER TANTAWI'S VISIT
Wed Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 001297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MASS IS EG
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR DEFENSE MINISTER TANTAWI'S VISIT 
TO WASHINGTON 
 
Classified by DCM Stuart Jones for reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  During his March 5-10 visit to Washington, 
Defense Minister Tantawi will seek Administration support for 
the current level of FMF funding.  Tantawi feels that any USG 
concerns about the pace of democratic reform should be kept 
distinct from the mil-mil relationship, which he considers 
the cornerstone of the bilateral relationship.  He will 
emphasize MoD's support for the U.S.'s regional priorities. 
Tantawi may seek financial or technical assistance for the 
Border Guard Forces posted on Egypt's border with Gaza and 
may also ask the U.S. to press Israel to allow Egypt to place 
another battalion in the Sinai to counter smuggling and other 
cross-border threats.   End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  FMF:  Maintaining the status quo on Egypt's FMF is 
first and foremost on Tantawi's agenda.  He was sobered by 
last year's debate over the potential removal of the earmark 
and was disappointed that neither the Secretary of Defense or 
State sent a letter to Congress on Egypt's behalf.  Expecting 
another difficult debate over FMF this year, Tantawi believes 
that the battle will be easier if he can persuade USG 
officials to speak out on Egypt's behalf.  During the 2005 
appropriations debates, MoD officials stressed repeatedly 
that maintaining the earmark on FMF was a matter of honor 
because it symbolizes the value the USG places on the 
relationship. They noted, for example, that there was no 
similar threat to the earmark for Jordan or Israel and said 
that denying Egypt the earmark would signal a downgrade in 
the relationship. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Regional support:  To justify maintaining the 
current level of FMF, Tantawi will explain how Egypt supports 
the USG's regional priorities, including in Afghanistan, 
Iraq, Palestine, and Sudan.  MoD's contributions include: 
staffing a field hospital in Bagram, Afghanistan; donating 
arms and ammunition to Afghanistan; posting two MoD engineers 
in Kabul to advise on reconstruction efforts;  assigning a 
MoD officer to the Joint Task Force Horn of Africa; and 
training over 400 members of Iraq's security forces.  MoD is 
also committed to regional peacekeeping operations and has 
posted 796 troops and 20 observers with the UN Mission in 
Sudan and 33 civilian monitors and 18 MoD medical specialists 
in Darfur. 
 
¶3.  (C) Gaza border:  Tantawi may highlight MoD's 
increasingly important role in maintaining stability along 
the border with Gaza.  Since the August deployment of 750 
professional border guards to the Sinai, smuggling 
interdictions have increased.  Although the troops are poorly 
equipped and in need of additional training, they have 
handled security incidents with restraint.  For example, when 
members of the Al Aksa Martyrs Brigade broke through the wall 
separating Gaza and Egypt on January 4, the Border Guard 
Forces worked with police to apprehend (with only a minimal 
use of force) the nearly 1,000 Palestinians who entered Egypt 
illegally.  Most of the Palestinians were returned to Gaza 
immediately, and only four remain in prison in Rafah pending 
trial.  MoD officials have said they would like U.S. 
financial or technical support for their efforts on the 
border.  In October 2005, they submitted a proposal 
requesting 300 million.  We suggest that this request 
deserves scrutiny; the Egyptians do need help controlling the 
border.  Tantawi or his advisors may raise this again in 
Washington.  Because of concerns about the fragile state of 
border security and the ongoing smuggling problem, Tantawi 
has pressed Israel to agree to the placement of an additional 
battalion in the Sinai.  Tantawi asked both Vice President 
Cheney (during their early January meeting) and LTG Dayton 
(later in January) to urge Israel to agree to the additional 
battalion.   He also raised it with Israeli Defense Minister 
Mofaz in February, but MoD contacts said that Mofaz was 
unresponsive. 
 
¶4.  (C) MoD management:  On the internal front, Tantawi and 
his advisors have been unreceptive to suggestions that the 
Defense Ministry consider a transformation plan, as is done 
in the U.S. military.  Tantawi and his advisors have declined 
numerous offers of briefings on transformation as it impacts 
staffing, doctrine, training, and equipment.  Decision-making 
at the Ministry is hierarchical, with Tantawi's personal 
approval required for nearly all decisions, including, for 
example, who will attend low-level training.  Although we can 
continue to encourage the Ministry to reevaluate its 
procedures in light of changing national and regional 
dynamics and modern practices, absent a change in leadership, 
it is unlikely that MoD will act. 
 
¶5.  (C)  International Medical Center:  One sensitive issue 
on the slate is whether the treatment of third country 
patients at the FMF-funded International Medical Center (IMC) 
violates Section Three of the Arms Export Control Act of 
¶1976.  Because the USG funded the IMC for the treatment of 
members of the Egyptian military and their families, State is 
exploring whether the IMC's treatment of third country 
patients is illegal.  One of Tantawi's advisors is working 
with post to collect the information needed to make this 
determination.  Tantawi will not raise this issue himself in 
any meetings. 
RICCIARDONE