06HELSINKI1058
PUTIN AT THE OCT. 20 EU HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
Tue Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO1712
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHHE #1058/01 2901330
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 171330Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2617
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0003C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 001058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/17/2016 
TAGS: PREL PHUM ENRG ETRD PGOV EUN MOPS FI RU SU
SUBJECT: PUTIN AT THE OCT. 20 EU HEADS OF GOVERNMENT 
INFORMAL - A PREVIEW 
 
 
Classified By: POLCHIEF GREGORY THOME FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: The October 20 EU Heads of State or 
Government Informals will feature two main components: 
(1) the informal EU leaders' sessions, where principals 
will discuss migration, Darfur, innovation and energy; 
and (2) a dinner with Russian President Putin, which 
will focus on energy issues and the "EU-Russia Strategic 
Partnership."  GOF officials tell us that under the 
rubric of the Strategic Partnership, EU leaders intend 
to raise human rights and the situation in Georgia.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Finland will host the Informal Meetings of the 
EU Heads of State or Government in Lahti, Finland on 
October 20.  In keeping with its efforts to return to 
the "informal spirit" of EU informals, the Finnish 
Presidency does not plan for the meetings to produce 
formal conclusions.  And in a significant departure from 
past practice, the Finns have invited Russian President 
Vladimir Putin to attend a dinner with EU Heads of State 
and Government following the informal meetings, 
ostensibly for an off-the-record discussion of energy 
and general economic issues. 
 
The Informals: Migration, Darfur, Energy, Innovation 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶3. (SBU) According to Johan Schalin, the Finnish Prime 
Minister's Special Advisor on Foreign Policy, the 
informal meetings of EU leaders will focus primarily on 
four topics: migration, the EU's operation in Darfur, 
innovation and energy.  Regarding migration, Schalin 
acknowledged that unhelpful divisions emerged within the 
Union during the September JHA informals, and that 
finding a common EU response will remain very difficult, 
given that border control is still a MS competency. 
However, he added, the heads of state recognize they 
must make a political statement emphasizing that illegal 
migration is a problem the EU must face together.  On 
Darfur, the UK will also make a brief presentation on 
the deteriorating situation on the ground and the 
urgency of rehatting the current African Union/ESDP 
mission under a robust UN mandate. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Regarding external energy relations, Schalin 
confirmed that the meeting will focus on security of 
supply, climate change, rising prices and laying the 
foundation for the development of a common EU energy 
policy.  Leaders will likely focus on what principles 
should form the basis of the EU's energy relations with 
Russia -- an exchange of views that will serve as the 
basis for discussion with Putin over dinner the same 
day. (see para 7). 
 
¶5. (SBU) Innovation policy discussions will also feature 
prominently in Lahti.  Worried that the EU is lagging 
behind its competitors, Heads of State will discuss 
possible barriers to competitiveness including the lack 
of a harmonized patent system, relatively low levels of 
research and development investment in some EU countries 
and a scarcity of venture capital.  Schalin highlighted 
the patent issue in particular, noting that language 
policy has hindered progress since member countries 
cannot agree in which language patent applications 
should be filed. 
 
My Dinner With Vladimir: Energy, Strategic Partnership 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
¶6. (SBU) Following the "official" portion of the 
informals, the Finnish Presidency will host a dinner 
with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss energy 
and the EU-Russia Strategic Partnership.  Regarding 
energy security, the EU will stress to Putin that it 
wants to construct a framework of binding energy 
agreements that would promote a transparent, balanced 
environment for doing business and that would facilitate 
open markets and western investment in energy 
production. 
 
¶7. (C) In addition to energy, pressure has been building 
to address human rights and the situation in Georgia 
with Putin.  The Presidency is gathering a list of human 
rights topics from the MS and will take the lead in 
raising each at the dinner.  In order to avoid too 
unwieldy a session and "because Putin knows what we 
think" about most issues, emphasis will be placed on 
simply making mention of EU concerns, rather than 
lengthy condemnations or critiques.  (Certain MS, 
however, will take the floor on certain issues, Schalin 
noted, offering no specifics.)  As regards Georgia, 
Schalin noted that while Commission President Jose 
 
HELSINKI 00001058  002 OF 002 
 
 
Manuel Barroso will make a statement of EU concerns, the 
EU leaders are mindful that only one of the antagonists 
will be present and the goal is to "lower the 
temperatures" on both sides. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶8. (SBU) There has been much speculation of unhappiness 
in the Finnish -- and, increasingly, Brussels-based -- 
press regarding the GOF's decision to invite Putin to 
the Lahti informals.  However, if the Finns and other EU 
leaders stick to the script they've outlined, the event 
could prove a useful forum for reminding Russia that the 
world is closely watching how it develops its energy 
policy and how it conducts itself on human rights.  We 
will follow up with our contacts during and after the 
informal to see how much the EU leaders diverge -- or 
how much their cagey interlocutor causes them to diverge 
-- from their stated goals.  End Comment. 
WARE