06MANAGUA854
PLC EAGER FOR GOOD RELATIONS WITH USG, BUT NOT
Tue Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0854/01 1082248
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 182248Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6005
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0618
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000854 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/17/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM NU
SUBJECT: PLC EAGER FOR GOOD RELATIONS WITH USG, BUT NOT 
WILLING TO SUBMIT CANDIDATE TO PRIMARIES 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0738 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0709 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 0807 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Senior representatives of Nicaragua's Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) have informed Ambassador that the 
party is willing to "negotiate and make sacrifices" to 
achieve Liberal unity and defeat the Sandinista Front (FSLN), 
but are adamant that Jose Rizo is the chosen presidential 
candidate of the PLC, and the party will not submit this 
position to multi-party primaries.  The representatives told 
Ambassador on April 17 that the PLC may allow the vice 
presidential and deputy candidates to be chosen via 
primaries.  The group, which included emissaries from parties 
allied with the PLC as well as Maria Fernanda Flores, PLC 
leader Arnoldo Aleman's wife and "personal representative," 
varied the professed strength of their support for their 
convicted leader, but all indicated that saving Nicaragua 
from Sandinismo is more important than sidelining Aleman. 
The Ambassador reiterated that we cannot maintain friendly 
relations with a party controlled by a convicted felon; if 
the PLC desires good relations with us, it needs to separate 
from Aleman, reform its leadership structure, and hold 
multi-party primaries.  The Ambassador declined the PLC,s 
suggestion that, rather than supporting multi-party 
primaries, the Embassy help broker negotiations among these 
parties (a deal which could well seal Rizo,s candidacy, with 
the possibility of Eduardo Montealegre as his running mate). 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador and Emboffs met with PLC representatives on 
April 17 at PLC president Jorge Castillo Quant's invitation 
to discuss the Ambassador's multi-party primary proposal (ref 
B).  The PLC spun the meeting in the press in advance as a 
make up session between the party and the USG.  Indeed, the 
true theme of the meeting was how to achieve "Liberal unity" 
in general, as the PLC officers made clear from the beginning 
that they would not submit their presidential candidate to 
multi-party primaries.  The tone of the meeting was generally 
cordial, though the inevitable topic of Arnoldo Aleman's role 
in the party caused visible tension.  PLC attendees included 
Jorge Castillo Quant, PLC president; Jose Rizo, PLC 
presidential candidate; Wilfredo Navarro, PLC first vice 
president; Noel Ramirez, PLC secretary; Leonel Teller, PLC 
spokesman; Rene Herrera, PLC magistrate on the Supreme 
Electoral Council (CSE); Oscar Moncada, PLC National Assembly 
deputy; Maria Fernanda Flores de Aleman; and representatives 
from PLC-allied parties. 
 
RIZO IS OUR CANDIDATE 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) The PLC representatives were adamant that the party 
has selected Jose Rizo as its presidential candidate via 
internal "primaries" and that this position is no longer open 
for negotiation with potential allies.  Wilfredo Navarro 
commented that consensus would be very difficult to achieve 
on the proposed supervisory committee between political 
entities with such an "imbalance" of power, the PLC towering 
over all other parties.  Noel Ramirez allowed, however, that 
the party may be willing to open the vice presidential and 
departmental deputy positions to primaries.  (Comment: The 
proposal to allow the deputy positions to be determined by 
primaries instead of the personal selection of Aleman and his 
circle of lackeys is new.  End Comment.)  Ultimately, 
Castillo Quant agreed to formally respond to the Ambassador's 
letter with a counter-proposal detailing the positions the 
PLC is willing to compete. 
 
AMBASSADOR: WE CANNOT SUPPORT A PARTY CONTROLLED BY ALEMAN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (C) Eventually the discussion led to Aleman's role in the 
PLC, and the Ambassador repeated that, while we respect 
Liberal ideology and the PLC as an institution, we cannot 
maintain friendly relations with a party controlled by a 
convicted felon.  Thus, if the PLC seeks positive relations 
with us, it needs to separate from Aleman, reform its 
leadership structure, and hold multi-party primaries.  The 
Ambassador also declined Ramirez, suggestion that, rather 
than supporting multi-party primaries, the Embassy help 
broker negotiations among these parties -- a deal which could 
well seal Rizo,s candidacy, with the possibility of Eduardo 
Montealegre as his running mate. 
 
 
¶5. (C) After a tense moment of silence, Maria Fernanda -- 
bedecked with flashy gold jewelry that shone against the 
backdrop of a deep tan cultivated during her Holy Week 
vacation at the beach -- declared that her husband is 
suffering from a "political persecution" and claimed that his 
sentence has not been "confirmed."  She insisted that Aleman 
will not run for any government office and pleaded, "let us 
breathe."  Maria Fernanda commented that the PLC had 
demonstrated its political dominance in the March 5 Atlantic 
Coast elections, despite the fact that Aleman is "imprisoned" 
and disparaged by the USG.  Ambassador countered that the PLC 
had witnessed a decline in voter support from the previous 
Atlantic Coast elections and suffered a complete failure in 
the 2004 municipal elections. 
 
¶6. (C) Other PLC representatives defended Aleman as a symbol 
of the party, although only Maria Fernanda refuted his 
conviction.  Teller mentioned "mistakes" during Aleman's 
tenure, but opined that the Liberals did not have the luxury 
of maintaining division in the ranks, no matter their 
personal feelings regarding Aleman.  Likewise, the 
representatives of the minor Liberal parties claimed that 
Aleman is willing to &compromise for the sake of unity8 and 
that the Liberals must focus on the primary goal of defeating 
the FSLN.  Notably, Jose Rizo did not join the Aleman debate, 
only repeating his desire for "good relations" with the USG 
and the need to join forces to confront the FSLN. 
 
HERRERA CONCERNED ABOUT MONTEALEGRE'S CHALLENGE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) Rene Herrera complained about the USG's alleged 
preference for Liberal challenger Eduardo Montealegre.  He 
claimed that Montealegre's image as the "gringo candidate" 
will hurt him in the polls and could damage the PLC if 
Montealegre eventually joins with the party as its vice 
presidential candidate.  Herrera admitted that PLC deputy- 
hopefuls will likely defect to Montealegre's camp if they are 
not selected by the PLC, and that this division will further 
weaken the party.  He also lambasted the National Assembly 
deputies that support Montealegre for not backing an 
"authentic interpretation" of the Electoral Law (ref C), 
claiming that Montealegre is caving in to a Sandinista 
takeover of the CSE in exchange for the CSE's approval of his 
alliance's name change.  (Comment: Herrera's rant likely 
reveals a visible concern over  Montealegre's strength.  End 
Comment.) 
 
USG POSITION ON ALEMAN HAS NOT CHANGED 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (U) After the meeting concluded, the Ambassador provided a 
statement to a gaggle of reporters, indicating that we had 
been invited by the PLC to discuss the primary proposal.  He 
repeated that the USG has no quarrel with Liberalism as an 
ideology, clearly underscoring that the USG,s position on 
Arnoldo Aleman is clear and unchanged. 
 
COMMENT: WORRIED, BUT STILL NOT WILLING TO LET GO OF ALEMAN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) The meeting was part of Embassy,s strategy to exhaust 
all possible efforts to arrange multi-party primaries, which 
could have led to Liberal unity without Arnoldo Aleman,s 
control and likely a candidate not as malleable as Rizo.  Not 
surprisingly, the PLC leadership declined to participate in 
the primaries.  In the PLC,s efforts to balance allegiance 
to Aleman with the necessity to cultivate friendly relations 
with the USG and achieve Liberal unity before the elections, 
it was evident that Aleman,s influence prevails.  Maria 
Fernanda's presence was a clear sign that Aleman is still 
pulling the PLC's strings, even though PLC members have 
admitted privately that they feel the PLC cannot win the 
elections without USG support and if they have to compete 
against Montealegre.  To counter the PLC,s  and media,s 
twisting of the outcome of this meeting, the Ambassador will 
visit ALN-PC headquarters and meet with Eduardo Montealegre 
and his party leadership.  The event will allow the 
Ambassador to note that the ALN-PC is the only party that 
welcomes multi-party primaries, and to reiterate our position 
that a PLC under Aleman,s control is a non-starter. 
 
TRIVELLI 
TRIVELLI