06MANAGUA2599
NICARAGUA: ZOILAMERICA NARVAEZ VOWS TO CONTINUE
Wed Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO1891
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #2599/01 3332232
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 292232Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8301
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0029
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 002599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/OAS, G/IWI, S/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/28/2016 
TAGS: KDEM KWMN NU PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: ZOILAMERICA NARVAEZ VOWS TO CONTINUE 
FIGHT FOR JUSTICE 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: Zoilamerica Narvaez, the stepdaughter of 
Nicaragua's president-elect Daniel Ortega and daughter of 
future first lady Rosario Murillo, remains committed in her 
quest to bring justice to the case of alleged sexual abuse by 
her stepfather during the 1980s, and of the failure of the 
Nicaraguan government to provide due process.   She is 
exploring options for taking her case beyond the Inter- 
American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), engaging with 
women's non-governmental organizations, and is working on a 
book with Fresno Pacific University in California.  Narvaez 
believes that the lack of justice in her case has emboldened 
other sexual abusers and encouraged violence against women in 
Nicaraguan society to proceed with impunity.  She also holds 
the view that Ortega, who lacks a clear mandate and will be 
pressured to deliver on his myriad campaign promises, will 
attempt to put on his best pro-democracy face to allay 
jitters by foreign investors, extend his honeymoon with the 
electorate, and deprive skeptics of ammunition to use against 
him.  She predicts, however, that his return to a position of 
power will eventually lead him to abuse it.  END SUMMARY 
 
ELECTION RESULTS CAME AS NO SURPRISE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C)  Polcouns and poloff met with Zoilamerica Narvaez and 
her husband Alberto Araica on November 20 to discuss the 
results of the Nicaraguan election and her plans to continue 
her struggle to bring her case of years of sexual abuse by 
stepfather/president-elect Daniel Ortega to justice.   Given 
the divisions among the anti-Ortega camp and the difficulties 
with the issuance of national/voter (cedulas) that prevented 
tens of thousands of people from going to the polls, Narvaez 
said she was certain two 
weeks before the  November 5 election that Ortega would win 
and had resigned herself to this outcome. 
 
THE POWER BEHIND THE THRONE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) Although proceeding with her case against the 
Nicaraguan government will be further complicated under an 
Ortega presidency, Narvaez asserted she is prepared to 
persevere.  Zoilamerica expects that her mother, Rosario 
Murillo, will play an influential role in the Ortega 
presidency, echoing a common perception that she was the 
"real power" during the campaign and will continue to 
dominate Ortega.  Narvaez was uncertain, however,  of 
Murillo,s popularity among the pro-Ortega camp, noting that 
Murillo "has serious issues" with Bayardo Arce, Lenin Cerna, 
and vice president-elect Jaime Morales.  She remarked that 
Murillo represents the FSLN,s moderate, intellectual faction 
and International Affairs Secretary Samuel Santos is within 
her group. 
 
BEST BEHAVIOR DURING HONEYMOON, BUT DRUNK WITH POWER 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) Based on Narvaez,s knowledge of Ortega's history and 
past behavior, she opined that he will likely begin his term 
playing by the rules and putting up a good front to silence 
skeptics, while going through the motions of hewing to his 
conciliatory peace and reconciliation rhetoric to maintain 
the support of his FSLN followers.  She does not believe he 
will win over any converts.  She thinks he may be able to 
extend his honeymoon to a year, but once it becomes apparent 
that he is unable to deliver on his unrealistic campaign 
promises, whatever support or goodwill he enjoys now will 
evaporate.  Narvaez remarked that "power can act like a drug 
and aphrodisiac" and that Ortega will be unable to resist the 
temptation to abuse power for political and personal gain, 
including preying on other young adolescent females. 
 
NO RECONCILIATION WITHOUT REDEMPTION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Despite Narvaez,s previous setbacks in moving her 
legal case forward in the Inter American Commission on Human 
Rights (IACHR) -- now further complicated by Ortega's win and 
the challenge of gaining sufficient financial backing for 
legal expenses -- she intends to  continue her pursuit of 
justice on multiple fronts.   Narvaez firmly believes that 
backing down now would be tantamount to a victory for abusers 
and would embolden others to continue the cycle of violence 
against women.  She still harbors hope that she will have a 
day in court to hold her stepfather accountable for his 
sexual crimes against her during her childhood and adolescent 
years.  She mentioned efforts to bring her case to the United 
Nations, possibly the International Court of Justice or the 
International Criminal Court in The Hague. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Playing  on Ortega's campaign slogan of peace and 
reconciliation, Narvaez has challenged him to repent and face 
justice, proclaiming there can be no reconciliation without 
redemption or justice.  She shared her plans to confront 
Ortega on the subject at a Catholic mass.  Narvaez also 
recounted how in a meeting with the Nicaraguan women's NGO 
Red de las Mujeres Contra la Violencia (Network of Women 
against Violence) just prior to the November 5 election, "A 
pardon should not be a condition to cover up 
crimes committed against women."  Narvaez added that the 
Women,s Network has offered to represent her in her case 
before the IAHCR. 
 
A VOICE FOR OTHER VICTIMS OF ABUSE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) Rather than remaining a silent victim, Narvaez  is 
seeking to step up the work of her foundation 
"Sobrevivientes" (Survivors) to raise awareness of the 
problem of sexual abuse and violence and lack of justice in 
addressing it, as well as help others who are affected by 
domestic and sexual violence.   A Mennonite herself, she was 
positive about her collaboration with the Mennonite-founded 
Fresno Pacific University in California which is sponsoring 
her to do research and write a book about her experiences. 
She believes the publicity surrounding the publication will 
help promote her cause.  The book project will enable her to 
be eligible for a student visa, and she plans to spend time 
in California.  She expressed gratitude toward the United 
States for supporting her case, specifically the efforts of 
Embassy Managua.  Narvaez gave no indication that she has 
been threatened, noting that although she has been harassed 
in the past for speaking out against Ortega, she has not 
recently received any threats from FSLN members. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Narvaez has come a long way in her efforts to heal 
herself while continuing to seek justice for herself and 
other abuse victims.  We can best help her by linking her to 
civil society groups and pro-bono lawyers who would be 
willing to assist her in her search for justice.  Now that 
the opportunity to write a book has emerged, we believe she 
will in a better position to influence public opinion both in 
Nicaragua and abroad. 
 
 
 
TRIVELLI