06MANAGUA2625
ALN EMERGES AS DEMOCRATIC ALTERNATIVE
Mon Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2625/01 3381453
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 041453Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8352
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: ALN EMERGES AS DEMOCRATIC ALTERNATIVE 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2615 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2567 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 2548 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 2470 
     ¶E. MANAGUA 0556 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance's (ALN) 
second place finish to the FSLN in the November 5 
presidential elections broke a 16-year political party 
duopoly in Nicaragua and thrust to the forefront an 
organization committed to democratic change.  The election 
results and recognition by the Liberal International have 
given the ALN the political and moral momentum to claim the 
status of the principal opposition party to the FSLN.  Along 
the way, however, the ALN most overcome continuing challenges 
from the Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC), separatist 
tendencies from its constituent organizations, and internal 
opportunists seeking to form new pacts for power and personal 
benefit.  End Summary. 
 
Psychological and Practical Benefits of Montealegre 
Second-Place Finish 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) After the elections, ALN contacts were disappointed 
by the FSLN victory, but optimistic that the young party will 
be able to take the reigns from the PLC as the principal 
opposition force in the country.  ALN presidential candidate 
Eduardo Montealegre's second-place finish shattered the 
16-year pattern of poor third-party performances and proved 
that the ALN is a vital national force capable of mounting a 
campaign and defending its votes.  The ALN's success caused 
considerable upheaval and soul-searching in the PLC, even as 
Montealegre reaffirmed his position that the ALN will not 
ally with a PLC controlled by party boss and convicted money 
launderer/embezzeler Arnoldo Aleman.  Many local PLC leaders 
began questioning which party represents the future of 
Liberalism in Nicaragua. 
 
¶3. (U) On November 11, Liberal International officially 
inducted the ALN into its ranks, sending another signal that 
the international community regards Montealegre and the ALN 
as the legitimate standard bearers of Liberalism in 
Nicaragua.  (Note: The PLC was expelled in 2005 over the 
Aleman case.  End Note.) 
 
¶4. (C) As the "second power" in Nicaragua, the ALN will enjoy 
the authority under the Electoral Law to name officials in 
the Departmental and Municipal Electoral Councils (CEDs and 
CEMs).  ALN director Eliseo Nunez stated on November 25 that 
the ALN will obtain 76 CEM and eight CED presidencies 
(slightly less than half) when the electoral bodies are 
restructured six months before the 2008 municipal elections. 
(Note:  After Nunez' comments, Montealegre announced that the 
ALN will support changes to the Electoral Law that 
professionalize the assignment of electoral officials.  End 
Note.)  PLC spokesman Leonel Teller disputed Nunez' claim, 
based on the PLC's superior results in the National Assembly 
deputy elections, but CSE officials informed OAS and EU 
observers on separate occasions that the CSE will use the 
presidential vote results to determine which party is the 
"second power." 
 
ALN Surges on the Atlantic Coast 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (U) PLC leaders repeat ad nauseum that their party has a 
stranglehold on the rural vote, especially on Nicaragua's 
remote Atlantic Coast (Ref D).  In just eight months, 
however, the ALN managed to make dramatic gains on the Coast. 
 In the RAAN, the ALN increased its percentage of the vote 
from 5.4% to 18.31%, and in the RAAS, ALN support doubled 
from 15.4% to 30.71%. 
 
¶6. (U) Comment: While a significant percentage of the ALN 
increase came at the expense of the PLC, most of the votes 
came from the indigenous Yatama party.  Yatama leaders 
formally allied with the FSLN, but dissidents, such as 
Comandante Blas, broke away and joined the ALN with most 
Yatama voters.  The ALN was less successful, however, in 
making inroads into deep-rural, PLC strongholds in the 
northern departments, where the PLC radio stations bombarded 
residents with its Montealegre smear campaign, including 
announcing just days before the election that Montealegre had 
withdrawn his candidacy under U.S. Embassy pressure.  End 
Comment. 
 
Internal Threats to ALN Unity 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) The ALN is an alliance comprised of several parties 
and movements, some elements of which have made separatist 
noises for personal benefit or to maintain party identity. 
ALN deputy candidate and titular president of the Nicaraguan 
Resistance Party (PRN) Salvador Talavera announced on 
November 7 that he would seek to form an independent caucus 
of PRN members in the new National Assembly.  On September 
15, Talavera betrayed the ALN and signed an agreement with 
the FSLN while refusing to renounce his ALN candidacy.  Even 
though he is running on a national slate of ALN candidates, 
Talavera claimed that he owes the ALN "nothing," only the 
people who elected him.  According to Salvador Talavera's 
brother, Jose Angel Talavera, who was elected to the Central 
American Parliament on the ALN ticket, the FSLN threatened to 
send Salvador to jail for abusing his former wife unless he 
"cooperated" with the FSLN.  (Comment: The FSLN likely 
honeyed the threat with a substantial cash bribe that 
Talavera needed to pay off his considerable debts.  End 
Comment.) 
 
¶8. (C) The ex-Resistance members that could presumably join 
Talavera's caucus are: Indalecio Rodriguez, Pedro Joaquin 
Chamorro, and Talavera from the ALN; Brooklin Rivera and Elia 
Maria Galeano from the FSLN; and Maria Auxiliadora Aleman and 
Adolfo Calero from the PLC.  (Comment: None of these deputy 
candidates is likely to join a caucus headed by Talavera, who 
many -- including his own brother Jose Angel -- now regard as 
a traitor.  The formal formation of a caucus requires a 
minimum of four deputies.  End Comment.) 
 
¶9. (C) Another threat to ALN unity may come from a principal 
component of the Alliance: the Conservative Party (PC). 
During a meeting with polcouns, PC president Azalia Aviles 
reported that, according to PC statutes, the party deputies 
must form their own caucus in the National Assembly if 
possible.  (Note: the PC has five deputies-elect, enough to 
form a caucus.  End Note.)  Polcouns urged Aviles to discuss 
the matter with Montealegre, as a public break with the ALN 
would be a severe blow to the Alliance.  On the margins of 
Montealegre's November 28 breakfast meeting with A/S Shannon 
(Ref A), Aviles informed polcouns that for now the 
Conservative Party will remain as part of the ALN caucus in 
the National Assembly, but told her on December 2 that many 
PC members feel marginalized by Montealegre and are pushing 
for a separate caucus. 
 
Comment: Building a Party for the Future 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10. (U) In addition to reaffirming that the ALN will not join 
or ally with a PLC controlled by Arnoldo Aleman, Montealegre 
continues to portray the ALN as a party that supports 
democratic development, both for Nicaragua and internally. 
On November 23, he announced that ALN deputies will not be 
allowed to take any other role in the party leadership 
structure and must "dedicate themselves fully to legislative 
work."  On other occasions, Montealegre has pledged to 
support democratic reforms at the expense of the majority 
political parties' power. 
 
¶11. (C) Montealegre and other ALN leaders will have to both 
work on maintaining unity among the constituent groups and 
resist old-school operatives (such as Nunez) who would use 
the ALN's new clout to perpetuate the patronage systems 
traditionally enjoyed by the majority parties.  If they fail, 
the independent voters and other constituencies (such as the 
evangelicals - see Ref C) that supported the ALN will quickly 
become disillusioned. 
BRENNAN