06MANAGUA2062
PLC MUNICIPAL OFFICALS FRUSTRATED WITH PARTY
Tue Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2062/01 2621945
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 191945Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7615
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0771
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2026 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL
SUBJECT: PLC MUNICIPAL OFFICALS FRUSTRATED WITH PARTY 
MANAGEMENT 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
1.(C)  Summary:  In a recent meeting with the Ambassador 
and polcouns, a group of mayors and vice mayors from the 
Liberal Constitutionalist Party (PLC) expressed their 
frustration with  Arnoldo Aleman's continued dominance of 
their party and the current division of the center right. 
The local politicians complained of poor treatment at the 
hands of Aleman and his advisers, noting that those who 
step out of line or challenge Aleman are being threatened 
and persecuted.  To some, the PLC's use of heavyhanded 
tactics has caused them to lose respect for the PLC 
leadership.  The Ambassador supported their willingness to 
risk losing the support of their party to defend democracy, 
and suggested that those who feel personally threatened 
should file complaints with Nicaragua's Permanent Human 
Rights Commission (CPDH).  The politicians differed over 
how to work within the PLC to reduce Aleman's influence -- 
some advocating for a complete break with the party and 
all-out support for Eduardo Montealegre, others still 
holding out hope that the PLC is salvageable.  End Summary. 
 
Mayors Offer Gloom and Doom Forecast for Ortega Presidency 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) During a 13 September meeting, a group of PLC 
mayors and deputy mayors discussed their concerns about a 
potential victory by Daniel Ortega in November's election, 
and deliberated the possibilities of uniting the center 
right parties.  The politicians were unanimous in their 
frustration with Ortega's top-ranking poll position and 
complained that the determination of the Nicaraguan Liberal 
Alliance (ALN) and PLC to field opposing candidates accords 
Ortega the opportunity to outpace his competitors.  They 
noted that Ortega, on the other hand, has largely remained 
free of public entanglements with opponents, presents a 
consistent and coherent message, and enjoys the backing of 
highly disciplined supporters.  The officials agreed that 
they are more concerned about Ortega's chances in this 
election than in previous ones because this is the most 
divided his opponents have been.  One mayor criticized the 
Right for not doing enough to highlight the negative 
effects of the Sandinista government of the 1980s, and said 
that young people were generally unaware of FSLN misdeeds 
during that time.  They stated that, if victorious, Ortega 
would take steps to solidify his political position, 
including by further manipulating the electoral code in his 
favor. 
 
¶3.  (C) The mayors also cited several problems with the ALN 
and Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS).  Several among 
the group noted that the ALN is struggling to make inroads 
in some areas because the inclusion of the Conservatives in 
Eduadro 
Montealegre's alliance alienates many due to longstanding 
resentment toward that party. 
They noted that while the MRS ostensibly provides voters 
with a leftist alternative, in reality the party is only 
weakly represented throughout the country. 
 
 
Upset With PLC Leadership. . . 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) The officials complained about Aleman's continued 
dominance over the PLC and generally agreed that his 
continued association with the party hurts its image.  Many 
of those present voiced their discontent with the way that 
they have been treated by Aleman and other party leaders. 
They noted that PLC members who step out of line or 
challenge Aleman are persecuted.  One politician explained 
how the PLC often imposes additional bureaucratic obstacles 
to make life more difficult for those deemed insufficiently 
loyal; others suspect some of their Alemanista subordinates 
of acting as snitches.  Several of the politicians 
commented that they received only minimal financial support 
from the party and at times have had to leverage their own 
resources to fund their campaigns.  One mayor noted that 
during one campaign he had to mortgage his mother's house 
and the PLC never repaid him for his expenses.  These 
heavyhanded tactics have soured their perceptions of PLC 
leadership.  The Ambassador suggested that those who felt 
personally threatened file complaints with the CPDH. 
 
. . . But Divided Over Solutions 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Although nearly unanimous in their opposition to 
Aleman and frustration over the ALN-PLC division, the 
officials differed in how best to overcome these 
obstacles.  Some among the group advocated a break with the 
party and all-out support for Eduardo Montealegre.  Others, 
however, favored redoubling efforts to change the party 
from within.  Most of the politicians saw unification of 
the ALN and PLC as the best way to reduce Aleman's power 
and defeat Ortega in the elections.  Nevertheless, none of 
the officials proposed a detailed vision of what a unified 
center-right might look like (i.e. under Rizo or 
Montealegre).  Some appeared to assume that the PLC will 
remain the flagship of the Right.  While the Ambassador 
warned that a PLC still affiliated with Aleman is 
undemocratic, members of the group hesitated to challenge 
the caudillo.  Some claimed that the absence of Aleman and 
his family members from recent rallies and other functions 
already shows his willingness to diminish his presence. 
One official made the dubious claim that a united front 
between Rizo, Jose Antonio Alvarado, and Montealegre would 
increase the odds of dealing with Aleman after the 
election, as all three have previously challenged the 
caudillo.  (Comment:  Throughout his political career, 
Aleman has deftly played people against each other.  Aleman 
would stand a good chance of political survival by doing 
this with the members of any alliance that did not first 
agree to marginalize him.  End comment.) 
 
Rizo Cannot Tackle Aleman 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C)  In the absence of a strong and clearly defined 
proposal to clean out the PLC ahead of the elections, the 
Ambassador made a clear case for taking such steps 
earlier rather than later.  He drove home the point of the 
continued existence of the pact between the PLC and FSLN by 
pointing out that Aleman has recently praised the FSLN 
mayor of Managua and that Aleman's godfather is Ortega's 
running mate.  The Ambassador also pointed out that the 
choice of Rizo as a candidate demonstrates Aleman's 
continued grip on power.  Rizo has been unable to deliver 
on his promises to marginalize Aleman, which raises 
questions of his committment and/or ability to clean up 
the party.  In addition, Rizo is politically weak.  Poll 
after poll shows that he remains a significant distance 
behind Montealegre, and some polls even show that he may be 
hardpressed to defeat Ortega in the event of a second round 
between the two of them.  The Ambassador underlined that a 
race between Rizo and Ortega does not offer voters a 
democratic option, but is rather "a choice between 
mafiosos." 
 
Keep Up the Good Fight 
 - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) The politicians concluded the meeting by 
reaffirming their committment to pushing for a freer PLC 
and sought clarification on what the Embassy could to to 
support them.  Citing their tough political situations, 
several sought help with visa assistance, while others 
expressed interest in receiving financial aid to assist 
with campaign and organizational expenses.  The Ambassador 
praised the officials for their steadfastness to their 
cause, reassuring them that their actions are important for 
promoting healthier democracy in Nicaragua.  He redirected 
visa inquiries to the consular section, and promised that 
the Embassy will continue to strongly support the mayors' 
efforts to clean the PLC of its corrupt elements.  He also 
promised to explore the possibility of providing limited 
monetary support for small projects in specific 
municipalities. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Comment: The mayors' committment to clean up the 
PLC's act is commendable, but the movement appears limited 
by its size and lack of focus.  The mayors indicated that 
they had formed an association called Alcaldes Patrioticos 
(Patriotic Mayors), but one noted that the body had only 16 
members of which only a few are willing to take a more 
active role.  They are further constrained by a lack of an 
overarching agreement over whether it is best to leave the 
PLC or reform it from within.  Many seem hesitant to break 
with the party -- one mayor was late in arriving for the 
meeting as he had first decided to stop by PLC 
headquarters.  The mayors have requested a follow up 
meeting with the Ambassador to include additional 
 
politicians who are dissaffected with Aleman's control of 
the party. End Comment. 
TRIVELLI