06MANAGUA2611
ELECTION OUTCOME -- THE WAY FORWARD
Fri Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0037
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2611/01 3351602
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 011602Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8322
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0834
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: ELECTION OUTCOME -- THE WAY FORWARD 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 02518 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 02521 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) INTRODUCTION/SUMMARY:  Sandinista Liberation Front 
(FSLN) President-elect Daniel Ortega realizes that our 
recognition of his minority government is critical to the 
continuation of our assistance programs, much-needed foreign 
investment, and to some degree, the policies of the 
international financial institutions (IFIs) and their 
instruments vis a vis Nicaragua.  Clearly, Ortega needs us 
much more than we need him, but he also faces the 
expectations of his populist base and his authoritarian 
allies, who will press him to lead Nicaragua in their 
direction.  How Ortega juggles these contradicting demands 
and fulfills his promises to the Nicaraguan people will 
largely determine his success or failure.  In his comments to 
the press, via domestic and foreign intermediaries, and in 
his recent meetings with other Central American presidents 
and with Assistant Secretary Thomas Shannon, Ortega has 
signaled his desire to work with us. 
 
¶2.  (C) Assistant Secretary Shannon's November 27-28 visit to 
Managua allowed him to convey to President-elect Ortega from 
the start that our government will speak with one voice and 
adhere to one policy.  A/S Shannon's and the Ambassador's 
joint meetings with Ortega, President Bolanos, opposition 
political leaders, and civil society leaders, and the 
Assistant Secretary's remarks to the press, allayed fears 
that the U.S. will somehow abandon Nicaragua's democracy and 
its people.  Indeed, our bilateral interests remain 
unchanged: keeping Nicaragua on the democratic path, ending 
the Ortega-Aleman pact's control of the political, electoral, 
and judicial systems; ensuring cooperation in combating 
corruption and terrorism and narcotics, arms, and people 
trafficking; resolving outstanding property claims cases; 
and, implementing fiscally responsible, free market policies 
-- including cooperation on advancing CAFTA.  This cable 
outlines these interests, our leverage via programs and other 
resources, and the markers and red lines to monitor and 
assess the bilateral relationship.  Ambassador met with FSLN 
International Relations Secretary Samuel Santos on November 
30 to follow up on our plans, and outline our programs and 
their parameters to members of Ortega's transition team in 
December.  END INTRODUCTION/SUMMARY. 
 
USING OUR LEVERAGE 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) Our bilateral relations and assistance programs are 
largely governed by a series of laws, agreements or 
requirements -- U.S. legislation including the annual Section 
527 property waiver; Title III of the Libertad Act; the 
annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP), Human Rights, Religious 
Freedom, and counter-terrorism and counter narcotics (INSCR) 
reports/related legislation; Temporary Protected Status (TPS) 
extensions; the text of CAFTA-DR; and our Millennium 
Challenge Compact (MCC) indices.  Thus, our continued 
assistance should reflect the degree to which the Ortega 
government remains within these parameters. 
 
OVERRIDING MARKERS AND RED LINES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) Our mission's first objective is protecting U.S. 
citizens in country and the foreign nationals who work for 
us.  Any systematic legal/administrative harassment of our 
diplomatic mission, its operation and its employees or of 
U.S. citizens residing in Nicaragua would be unacceptable, 
and potential grounds to take action vis-a-vis our assistance 
programs and overall bilateral relationship.  Similarly, 
while we expect Ortega will maintain close ties with leftist 
allies like Muammar Khadaffi, Fidel Castro, Hugo Chavez, who 
will press him to lead Nicaragua along a populist, 
authoritarian path, we must impress upon him that if he 
places Libyan, Venezuelan or Cuban officials in strategically 
sensitive government ministries, as advisers to the police or 
military, or as educators or public health workers whose main 
objective is to indoctrinate Nicaraguans against the United 
States and democracy, we will deem these actions hurtful to 
our interests and our assistance programs. 
 
FOREIGN POLICY CONCERNS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) We can expect the Ortega government will shift 
Nicaragua's foreign policy towards the left, e.g., not 
support our positions on Cuba or Palestine, and probably 
differ with us over Iraq, Iran and North Korea.  The issue 
will be more a matter of degree of differentiation and 
activism on these fronts, and the FSLN government's 
willingness to play a constructive, responsible role.  Early 
clarity on our red lines will be essential.  If a moderate 
Sandinista assumes the leadership of the Foreign Ministry 
(MFA), we can expect more fluid engagement on these issues, 
and in some cases, we may be able to persuade the MFA to 
abstain in particularly contentious votes in international 
fora. 
 
KEEPING NICARAGUA ON THE DEMOCRATIC PATH 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) Keeping Nicaragua on the democratic path includes 
helping it strengthen and consolidate its democracy, 
guaranteeing space for and strengthening of pro-democratic, 
non-FSLN/Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC)-"Pact" parties 
and civil society (NGOS like the Movimiento por Nicaragua 
(MpN), Etica y Transparencia (ET), and IPADE; private sector, 
and religious organizations, and academe); enacting electoral 
reforms that depoliticize the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) 
and guarantee voter rights and cedulation/national identity 
cards to all eligible Nicaraguan citizens; ensuring the 
non-partisan defense of human rights -- including freedom of 
expression and an independent media -- and in the exercise of 
rule of law; and, depoliticizing and reducing the 
Ortega-Aleman pact's control of Nicaragua's electoral and 
judicial systems. 
 
ERODING THE ALEMAN-ORTEGA PACT, PROMOTING GOOD GOVERNANCE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) We can expect that Ortega will attempt to maintain 
the leverage he has gained from his pact with convicted money 
launderer/PLC caudillo Arnoldo Aleman, while he will also 
court Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) leader Eduardo 
Montealegre, who has gained a seat in the National Assembly. 
With Ortega's victory, the FSLN will control every sector of 
the government except the National Assembly, and even there, 
its influence will predominate.  While the FSLN will be 
unable to pass constitutional reforms or other laws requiring 
a 2/3 majority vote without the support of other parties, it 
could combine its votes with either the PLC or the ALN to 
surpass the 56-vote threshold required to legislate 
constitutional reforms. (Note: According to the CSE's final 
official results, the FSLN obtained 38 Assembly seats, the 
PLC 25, the ALN 22 (plus Montealegre's and President Bolanos' 
seats), and the MRS 5 seats.  End Note.) 
 
--Markers: Ortega/FSLN relationship with Aleman/PLC in their 
parties' positions on legislation, prosecutorial/defense, 
court cases, regulatory standards, CSE electoral policies, 
and the appointment of new Supreme Court justices, the 
Attorney General (Procurador General),  Chief Public 
Prosecutor (Fiscal General), and Controller General. 
 
--Red Lines: Actions that further consolidate FSLN-PLC Pact 
interests to the detriment of Nicaragua's democracy and its 
people, e.g. a new Assembly board (junta) that reflects the 
Pact rather than the Assembly's new pluralism; the 
appointment of unqualified, biased, and/or corrupt judges or 
other officials on the basis of partisan interests; passage 
of legislation that erodes efforts to combat corruption, 
including the release of Aleman or broad amnesty; and, 
holding hostage legislation required by the IFIs to meet 
Nicaragua's commitments to international instruments.  These 
actions would contradict the FSLN's campaign pledges to abide 
by the rule of law and fight corruption. 
 
COOPERATION IN COMBATTING CORRUPTION, TERRORISM, NARCOTICS, 
ARMS, AND PEOPLE TRAFFICKING 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) The new government's level of cooperation in 
combating corruption and terrorism, and narcotics, arms, and 
people trafficking, will be a crucial determinant in our 
bilateral relations and the future of our programs. 
 
--Markers:  Continued cooperation between the U.S. military 
and law enforcement with the Nicaraguan military and police; 
GON/military/National Assembly action on MANPADS destruction; 
GON/law enforcement/military/legislative/judicial and 
executive branch support of 
counter-narcotics/counterterrorism/TIP efforts including 
support for the new counter-narcotics/anti-corruption vetted 
unit and appropriate laws, regulations, and their 
enforcement. 
 
--Red Lines: No traction on further MANPADS destruction 
and/or lack of proper security to maintain the stocks or 
sales of stocks to unfriendly nations or agents; efforts to 
derail vetted unit operations; ignoring obligations to take 
actions against individuals and organizations that support 
terrorism, decline in efforts to combat TIP (prevention, 
protection of victims, prosecution of perpetrators, or 
allowing the problem to grow; drop in counter-narcotics 
cooperation, seizures, failure to jail, try, and sentence 
traffickers; and considerable influence and involvement by 
other military, intelligence or law enforcement forces 
hostile to the United States. 
 
PROGRESS ON PROPERTY CLAIMS RESOLUTION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) Adequate progress in the new government's resolution 
of outstanding U.S. citizen property claims is another vital 
marker.  Indeed, much of our assistance is tied to the GON's 
cooperation on this matter. 
 
--Markers: Reasonable progress in resolving outstanding U.S. 
citizen property claims, including those properties in the 
hands of the Nicaraguan military; GON actions to 
deter/penalize further confiscations; and, the selection of a 
qualified, non-partisan property superintendent. 
 
--Red Lines: Slippage in the number of cases resolved in 2007 
527 waiver period as a result of the lack of government 
cooperation, or the passage of legislation or implementation 
of regulations that hinder progress; the failure of GON to 
prevent/deal with new confiscations; or, signs that the FSLN 
government starts to de-link its responsibility for the 
actions or inactions of the new property superintendency and 
the lack of resolutions by claiming it is an independent 
entity. . 
 
FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY, FREE MARKET POLICIES, CAFTA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) We will also monitor the Sandinista government's 
adherence to fiscally responsible, sound macroeconomic, free 
market policies -- including its cooperation, or lack 
thereof, on advancing CAFTA. 
 
--Markers: Continued reduction of the budget deficit through 
rising revenues and fiscal prudence; policies designed to 
keep inflation in check and a stable currency; positive net 
foreign and U.S. investment on an annual basis; positive 
trajectories for both imports from and exports to the United 
States; excellent relations with international financial 
institutions and donors; and continued support from the 
executive and legislative branches of government for a 
growing bilateral trade and investment relationship with the 
United States. 
 
--Red Lines: The appearance of serious trade and budget 
imbalances as the result of bad policy; hiding/fabricating 
economic date; a reluctance to publicize or be associated 
with CAFTA successes, while emphasizing minor successes with 
countries that publicly oppose the United States; 
deteriorating relations with donors; scapegoating 
international financial institutions, the WTO, or CAFTA for 
economic problems that arise; or a request to renegotiate a 
significant portion of CAFTA with the United States. 
 
BOLSTERING CIVIL SOCIETY, THE OPPOSITION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  (C) We believe that much of our assistance in the future 
should be directed towards bolstering civil society, 
including democratically committed NGOs and foundations like 
Movimiento por Nicaragua (MpN), JUDENIC, Etica y 
Transparencia (ET), IPADE, Pro Justicia, the IEEPP, Hagamos 
Democracia, and the Permanent Human Rights Council (CPDH), 
among others.  In turn, these groups will help strengthen 
Nicaragua's new democratic parties and perhaps encourage the 
traditional FSLN and PLC parties to reform.  (Note: Post will 
submit ideas/proposals in this regard septel.  End Note. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
- - - - - 
 
¶12.  (C) Ambassador met with FSLN International Relations 
Secretary Samuel Santos on November 30 to follow up on our 
plans and outline our programs and their parameters to 
members of Ortega's transition team in December (septel). 
TRIVELLI