06MANAGUA1180
REARRANGING THE DECK CHAIRS ON THE TITANIC: RIZO
Fri Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0018
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1180/01 1531708
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 021708Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6447
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0688
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN TPIERCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KDEM KCOR NU ECON
SUBJECT: REARRANGING THE DECK CHAIRS ON THE TITANIC: RIZO 
CAVES TO FEAR, ALEMAN PRESSURE 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: Fear and ambition got the better of Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) presidential candidate Jose Rizo, 
who set aside his earlier commitment to withdraw his 
candidacy and join Eduardo Montealegre if PLC caudillo 
Arnoldo Aleman and the party's leadership did not remove 
undesirable National Assembly candidates and the Aleman 
family refused to end its hegemony over the party.  Thus, by 
the May 31 deadline, five presidential candidates and their 
legislative slates were registered to run in the November 5 
elections: Herty Lewites (MRS); Eden Pastora (Alternativa por 
El Cambio); Daniel Ortega (FSLN); Jose Rizo (PLC); and 
Eduardo Montealegre (ALN).  The fact that Rizo could neither 
successfully challenge Aleman nor abandon the PLC and join 
Montealegre has apparently convinced financier Carlos Pellas 
and several other members of his "capital set" once and for 
all that the PLC is not a viable option and that he should 
exclusively back Montealegre.  END SUMMARY. 
 
REARRANGING THE DECK CHAIRS ON THE TITANIC 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) On May 31, fear and ambition got the better of PLC 
presidential candidate Jose Rizo, who set aside his earlier 
commitment to withdraw his candidacy and join ALN candidate 
Eduardo Montealegre.  In meetings with Ambassador and other 
Embassy officials over the past week, Rizo and his envoys 
insisted that Rizo would ultimately "do the right thing": 
either convince Aleman and his family to step aside and 
remove undesirable candidates from the party list, or 
withdraw his and running mate Jose Antonio Alvarado's 
candidacies and join Eduardo Montealegre's alliance. 
However, the saga ended on May 31 with Rizo's decision to 
remain with the PLC.  Thus, by the May 31 deadline, five 
presidential candidates and their slates registered before 
the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE): Herty Lewites (MRS); 
Eden Pastora (Alternativa por El Cambio); Daniel Ortega 
(FSLN); Jose Rizo (PLC); and Eduardo Montealegre (ALN).  A 
summary of events follows: 
 
MAY 11 - A BOLD IDEA 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) Rizo confidante/AMCHAM VP Terencio Garcia met with 
polcouns and expressed his and Rizo's frustration over 
Aleman's continued hold over the PLC.  Polcouns suggested 
that Rizo could demonstrate his leadership by rallying PLC 
politicians disgruntled with Aleman's control to press the 
caudillo to step aside and allow the party to reform its 
leadership.  She noted that if successful, these steps could 
lead to an alliance with Liberal dissident Eduardo 
Montealegre, who has publicly stated his interest in a broad 
alliance if the conditions are right.  Polcouns added that if 
the effort failed, Rizo could still ally with Montealegre 
under the ALN umbrella.  Garcia was receptive to the idea and 
promised to raise it with Rizo. 
 
MAY 12: RIZO PROPOSES TO CHALLENGE ALEMAN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) Terencio Garcia shared with Ambassador and polcouns 
Rizo's plan to convince Aleman and his family to distance 
themselves from the PLC, reform CEN leadership, and to 
appoint suitable legislative candidates, meaning that 
Aleman's daughter Maria Dolores -- along with U.S. visa-less 
politicos Eduardo Mena and Donald Lacayo -- would be removed 
from the party slate. 
 
MAY 19: RIZO APPEARS COMMITTED 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Garcia reiterated to Ambassador and polcouns that 
Rizo was committed to challenging Aleman.  He shared that 
Rizo and Alvarado would hold a press conference by the middle 
of the following week to challenge Aleman if he insisted on 
an unsuitable list of National Assembly candidates and 
refused to step aside. 
 
MAY 24: WEAK-KNEED RIZO BALKS AT DRASTIC MEASURES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) In Ambassador's early morning meeting with Jose Rizo 
and Jose Antonio Alvarado (at their urgent request), Rizo and 
Alvarado appeared unwilling to go far enough to break Arnoldo 
Aleman's hold on the PLC.  The reluctant pair admitted that 
 
the press conference they had planned to hold to challenge 
Aleman had slipped and might not occur at all (Note: The 
conference never materialized, although Rizo made a few 
half-hearted references following the PLC's May 28 convention 
regarding the need to modify the candidate list.) 
 
¶7. (C) Ambassador reiterated that the U.S. will consider the 
PLC a viable, democratic party only if Aleman publicly 
resigns from the leadership of the party, the PLC forms a 
list of National Assembly deputy candidates who are not part 
of the Aleman family or his inner circle, the party replaces 
its current directorship (CEN), and it no longer meets at 
Aleman's El Chile residence.  Rizo replied that sidelining 
Aleman must be done gradually and suggested that he might 
succeed in convincing Aleman to allow him to appoint 
"palatable" deputies to lead the Assembly list and relegate 
Aleman family members plus his inner circle to Parlacen, 
where they will exercise little influence.  Ambassador 
replied that this action would not resolve the problem. 
 
¶8.  (C) Alvarado supporter Ariel Granera, who met later in 
the morning with polcouns, agreed that Rizo and Alvarado 
should go public and challenge Aleman in a press conference. 
However, Granera also argued that sidelining Aleman would 
"take time."  According to Granera, Aleman and Ortega have 
already agreed that Ortega will win the presidency and they 
have determined which FSLN deputies and "Arnoldista" PLC 
deputies will win seats in November. 
 
MAY 27: RIZO AND ALVARDO GET COLD FEET 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) Rizo and Alvarado met again with Ambassador, this 
time fretting over their lack of progress in convincing 
Aleman to step aside and to agree to a suitable slate of 
Assembly and Parlacen candidates.  Ambassador urged them to 
persevere for the good of their country. 
 
MAY 30: HOPE FOR A RIZO-MONTEALEGRE MERGER UNDER ALN BANNER 
- - - - - - -  - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) Rizo confidante Terencio Garcia shared with 
Ambassador, DCM, and polcouns that Rizo and Alvarado were now 
poised to ally with Montealegre, with or without the PLC. 
Garcia recounted that, as a result of a marathon meeting of 
Rizo, Alvarado, and others, Rizo had sent a letter of 
ultimatum to the PLC's CEN and Aleman via Bishop Abelardo 
Mata.  In the letter, whose terms Garcia claimed are 
non-negotiable, Rizo set the deadline of midnight May 30 for 
the CEN and Aleman to agree to the following terms: 
 
--Aleman and all of his family must immediately and 
publicly withdraw from the party. 
 
--The CEN must replace undesirable Assembly candidates with 
individuals who are honest and qualified. 
 
¶11.  (C) According to Garcia, Rizo and Montealegre -- who had 
met earlier in the morning -- had agreed to collaborate in 
either of the following political scenarios: 
 
--Scenario One:  Aleman and his family retreat from the party 
leadership and the CEN agrees to remove undesirable 
candidates (visa revocation cases like Donald Lacayo and 
Eduardo Mena and Aleman daughter Maria Dolores) from its 
slate of Assembly candidates.  If this scenario occurs, Rizo 
and Montealegre will follow the terms of a May 9 proposed 
alliance brokered by former El Salvador President Calderon 
Sol.  (Note: The terms included the following: Eduardo 
Montealegre would run as Rizo's VP candidate and Jose Antonio 
Alvarado would head the Assembly slate.  Montealegre would be 
given 20 Assembly seat slots, and the PLC and ALN would 
negotiate possible government positions.  End Note.) 
 
--Scenario Two:  Aleman refuses to leave the PLC; the CEN 
supports Aleman's position (CEN president Jorge Castillo 
Quant is the first national deputy candidate).  If this 
scenario prevails, Rizo and Alvarado will resign from the PLC 
and join Montealegre's alliance.  Alvarado will be accorded 
the VP slot or an Assembly position and Rizo will be given a 
position that recognizes his merits.  Rizo would also be 
given four to five deputy positions for his followers. 
 
¶12.  (C) Garcia added that if either scenario materialized, 
the parties would sign a document of alliance.  He noted that 
it would be helpful if the Ambassador served as guarantor of 
 
the agreement.  Ambassador declined, and offered instead to 
observe the signing and keep a copy of the signed document. 
According to Garcia, Rizo and Alvarado would next meet with 
the CEN to explain their position.  Journalist/politico Jaime 
Arellano -- who attempted for days to convince Rizo and 
Montealegre to form an alliance -- shared similar details 
with polcouns of the Rizo-Montealegre meeting, mentioning 
that the second scenario appeared to be the most likely to 
occur. 
 
¶13.  (C) Montealegre contacts, including chief of staff 
Edmundo Leal, confirmed these discussions, but they were 
skeptical that Rizo's determination would prevail over 
Aleman's, or that Rizo would resign and join Montealegre's 
alliance.  Leal was adamant that Alvarado was problematic, 
noting that the ALN would not accept him to run as its vice 
presidential candidate; to eliminate this possibility, 
Montealegre had already named Conservative Fabricio Cajina to 
the position. 
 
MAY 31 - RIZO FOLDS CLOSE TO THE ZERO HOUR 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - 
 
¶14.  (C) Rizo and Alvarado met early in the morning with the 
PLC CEN to present their position.  According to Arellano who 
was present at many of the discussions, Rizo and Alvarado 
next submitted a letter of resignation to the CEN.  However, 
the CEN was unwilling to sideline Aleman, and later called on 
Aleman and Rizo's and Alvarado's wives to persuade them to 
reconsider their resignation.  Note: We never saw the letter, 
nor did Montealegre; we warned Montealegre to avoid falling 
into a "Chavez trap.")  By mid-afternoon, the rumor mill was 
working overtime, with some contacts claiming that Aleman had 
pre-empted Rizo's and Alvarado's resignations by replacing 
them with Francisco Aguirre Sacasa and Maria Auxiliadora 
Aleman. 
 
¶15.  (C) When it became clear that Rizo might indeed keep his 
word and withdraw his candidacy, Aleman brought in PLC 
heavyweights to press Rizo to reconsider -- including 
desvisado/Fiscal General Arguello Poessy.  According to 
Senior Bolanos adviser Frank Arana, Rizo's and Alvarado's 
wives were also trotted in to convince them to remain with 
the PLC.  (Note: Many of the meetings were held in the 
residence of Aleman's father-in-law Flores Lovo, who took the 
first plane out of Miami after learning of the Panama judge's 
May 17 detention order of him and a number of Aleman family 
members.  End Note.) 
 
¶16.  (C) In an effort to appease Rizo, Aleman made a few 
minor "concessions" to Rizo: "downgrading" daughter Maria 
Dolores from the second to the fourth position on the 
National Assembly list and moving "desvisados" Noel Ramirez 
and Eduardo Mena from the National Assembly list to the 
Parlacen list.  The CEN also agreed that from now on all of 
their meetings will be held at PLC headquarters rather than 
at Aleman's El Chile residence. 
 
¶17.  (C) Around 6 PM, PLC candidates Jose Rizo and Jose 
Antonio Alvarado retracted their supposed commitment to 
withdraw from the PLC and join the Montealegre alliance and 
they registered their candidacies soon thereafter.  Leading 
PLC candidates are the following (brief bios will follow 
septel): 
 
National Candidates: 
Jorge Castillo Quant (CEN President) 
Francisco Aguirre Sacasa 
Enrique Quinonez 
Maria Dolores Aleman 
Guillermo Osorno (Camino Cristiano) 
Noel Pereira Majano 
Jose Castillo Osejo 
Martha McCoy 
Roberto Sarrias 
Carlos Carache 
 
Managua Candidates: 
 
Wilfredo Navarro 
Leopoldo Navarro 
Miguel Melendez 
Ana Julia Balladares 
Maria Auxiliadora Aleman 
Adolfo Calero (PRN) 
Orlando Mayorga 
 
Guillermo Montenegro 
Fernando Avellan 
 
Parlacen Candidates: 
 
Maria Haydee Osuna 
Noel Ramirez 
Fabio Gadea 
Diana Urbina 
Adolfo Garcia 
Blanca Rojas 
Eduardo Mena 
Leonel Panting 
 
¶18.  (C) According to Montealegre's chief of staff, Edmundo 
Leal, Rizo called Montealegre to convey his decision to 
remain in the PLC.  Montealegre confirmed to DCM that he had 
indeed talked to Rizo and Rizo had thrown in the towel. In 
Arellano's view, Rizo's fears of the risks he would face if 
he left the PLC prevailed over his desire to do the right 
thing.  Rizo rationalized his decision by claiming that he 
could not disappoint his many followers who had entrusted 
their confidence in them (read: people who would find no 
place in Montealegre's alliance). 
 
ALN LIST REFLECTS ITS DIVERSITY 
- - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - 
 
¶19.  (C) Montealegre's alliance was the last to register -- 
around 9:30 PM.  Montealegre underscored the fact that the 
ALN is the option that offers young leaders, new faces, and a 
varied alliance of Liberals and other political streams that 
is determined to win and transform the country.  Commenting 
on Rizo's decision to remain with the PLC and the minor 
concessions Aleman granted to Rizo, Montealegre likened these 
efforts to "rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic," a futile 
effort.  Principal ALN candidates are the following (brief 
bios will follow septel): 
 
National Candidates: 
 
Maria Eugenia Sequeira 
Jamileth Bonilla 
Salvador Talavera (PRN) 
Jorge Matamoros (PC) 
Indalecio Rodriguez 
Azalia Aviles (PC) 
Miguel Lopez Baldizon (APRE) 
Eduardo Chamorro 
Delia Arellano (Camino Cristiano) 
 
Managua Candidates: 
 
Pedro Joaquin Chamorro (Violeta Chamorro's son) 
Pedro Solorzano 
Ramiro Silva 
Carlos Garcia 
Adolfo Martinez 
Luciano Garcia 
Adolfo "Popo" Chamorro 
 
Parlacen Candidates: 
 
Eliseo Nunez, Jr. 
Alejandro Solorzano 
Comandante Max 
Enrique Gasteazoro 
Ariel Montoya 
 
VIEWS AFTER THE FALLOUT 
- - - - - -  - - - - - - 
 
¶20.  (C) Montealegre and his followers were disappointed but 
not surprised that Rizo ultimately caved to Aleman.  They 
also expressed relief that the political landscape is now 
clearer.  Leal commented to polcouns that Rizo's waffling did 
not go unnoticed by the public, adding that Rizo's lack of 
courage will advantage Montealegre's campaign as it 
demonstrates that the PLC remains beholden to Aleman and the 
Ortega-Aleman pact.  A number of private sector supporters of 
Rizo shared with us their frustration over Rizo's decision to 
remain in the PLC; some may renounce their support for him. 
Similarly, Senior Foreign Affairs Adviser Minister Ariel 
Granera, who fervently supported Alvarado's candidacy, 
acknowledged to DCM that his support for Alvarado had been a 
mistake.  Financier Carlos Pellas, who had been urging Rizo 
 
and Alvarado to "close the deal" with Montealegre, confided 
in DCM his frustration with Rizo and indicated he would not 
support him. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶21.  (C) Rizo's sincerity can be questioned, and even if his 
intentions were genuine, clearly he is too weak to stand by 
his stated principles.  On the positive side, the fact that 
Rizo could neither challenge Aleman nor abandon the PLC and 
join Montealegre may have convinced financier Carlos Pellas 
that the PLC is not an option and that he should back 
Montealegre instead.  However, the path to the presidency 
will not be easy for Montealegre, as he and his team will 
also face accusations of corruption. 
 
¶22.  (C)  The PLC continues its crusade to besmirch 
Montealegre by alleging that he unduly profited from the 2001 
issuance of bonds (CENIS) to facilitate the takeover of 
failed banks by sounder financial institutions, in one of 
which he has been a minority shareholder.  Also, they imply 
that as finance minister and Central Bank Board member when 
the bonds were renegotiated in 2003, Montealegre is in part 
responsible for the large total domestic debt Nicaragua 
bears.  The media immediately glommed on to Montealegre's 
selection of former Transport Minister Pedro Solorzano, whom 
the PLC has accused of mismanagement and corruption during 
his tenure as Transport minister, particularly regarding the 
cost overruns and significant delays in major donor-funded 
highway construction projects. 
TRIVELLI