06SANJOSE1841
COSTA RICA DEFENDS EMBASSY MOVE TO TEL AVIV
Fri Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1841/01 2302313
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 182313Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5874
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 0046
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 0038
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0004
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 0009
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 0015
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SAN JOSE 001841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND NEA/IPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/18/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IS XK CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA DEFENDS EMBASSY MOVE TO TEL AVIV 
 
REF: A. A) FRISBIE-SHAPIRO TELCON 8/15/06 
     ¶B. B) SAN SALVADOR 2017 
     ¶C. C) WHA-SAN JOSE EMAIL 8/16/06 
 
Classified By: CDA Russell L. Frisbie for reason 1.4 (d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a public ceremony marking his 
administration,s 100 days in office, President Oscar Arias 
explained that his government,s decision to move its embassy 
from Jerusalem to Tel Aviv was not a slap to Israel, but was 
consistent with Costa Rica,s "respect" for UN resolutions 
and international law. The GOCR expects the decision will 
improve relations with moderate Arab states.  The sudden 
timing took many by surprise.  FM Stagno informed a stunned 
Israeli charge of the move the evening of August 15, 
stressing that Arias himself had made the decision, but the 
entire GOCR concurred.   Stagno also asked the Israelis to 
inform the USG; the newly-arrived Israeli Amb-designate 
briefed Ambassador Langdale.  Stagno subsequently insisted to 
the Ambassador on August 17 that the GOCR really was waiting 
for the right moment, had consulted closely with President 
Saca in El Salvador, and had refrained from acting until the 
violence in Lebanon was over.  We suspect that the decision 
to move the Embassy was timed more to Arias,s 100-day marker 
than to anything else, and it provided another opportunity 
for Don Oscar to burnish his involvement in global issues. 
Arias could employ his stature more effectively in this 
hemisphere, particularly in Cuba.  We will continue to nudge 
him in that direction. END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------- 
THE PUBLIC EXPLANATION 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Costa Rican President Oscar Arias used a special 
August 16 public cabinet session marking his 
administration,s first 100 days in office to defend and 
explain his government,s short-notice decision to move its 
embassy in Israel from Jerusalem to Tel Aviv.  Arias couched 
the decision as consistent with Costa Rica,s "respect" for 
UN resolutions and international law, and as "rectifying" an 
"historical error" (the move of the GOCR embassy to Jerusalem 
in 1982) which had "damaged" Costa Rica internationally and 
"deprived" Costa Rica of  wider "friendship with the Arab 
world."  The President stressed that the decision was not 
intended to insult Israel, a "brave and admirable nation," 
but rather to confirm to international law and expand Costa 
Rican relations with as many nations as possible.  After the 
ceremonial cabinet session, Arias reiterated to the media, ". 
. . as a small country which bases its foreign policy on 
international law and human rights, Costa Rica must comply 
with UNSC resolutions."  He blamed himself for not moving the 
embassy during his first administration, but explained that 
he did not want to "open another front" during the Central 
American peace process. 
 
¶3.  (U) The MFA,s 13-page legal brief defending the decision 
on the basis of UNGA and UNSC resolutions dating back to 
1947, echoed Arias,s comments.   The brief (transmitted to 
Costa Rican diplomats around the world) concluded (informal 
translation): 
 
"This decision was necessary in light of Costa Rica,s 
historic attachment to international law, and in particular 
in light of: 
 
-- the legality of UNSC resolutions; 
-- the inadmissibility of seizing territory by force; 
-- the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention and 
other basic principles protecting human rights; 
-- the illegality of administrative measures taken to modify 
the legal status of Jerusalem contrary to UNSC resolutions; 
-- the need to preserve the special status of Jerusalem; and 
-- the need to wait for the final determination of the status 
of Jerusalem." 
 
------------------ 
THE PRIVATE ACTION 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  (C) Although the GOCR had been preparing for this 
decision for some time (as evidenced by how swiftly the MFA 
issued its detailed legal brief), the suddenness of the 
decision took many, including us, by surprise.  MFA contacts 
told Pol/C and Poloffs on August 16 that "Don Oscar" himself 
had made the decision, with little advance coordination. 
 
¶5. (C) How the Israelis themselves were informed by the GOCR 
is illustrative.  Amb.-designate Ehud Eitam called on 
Ambassador Langdale the evening of August 15 to explain (Ref 
A).  Eitam said his Charge had been summoned by FonMin Bruno 
Stagno a few hours earlier, without explanation.  Stagno told 
the Charge that Arias himself had made the decision, although 
the "entire" GOCR agreed.  Costa Rica had "paid dearly" with 
the Arab world for having its embassy in Jerusalem, Stagno 
continued, adding that Arias would make the announcement on 
August 16.  Eitam said that his Charge, taken aback, noted 
the "very bad" timing of the decision, coming less than 48 
hours after a fragile calm had begun in south Lebanon.  Costa 
Rica seemed to be punishing Israel just as it was pursuing 
peace.  Stagno countered that the GOCR had planned to move 
the Embassy for some time; this was in fact part of Arias,s 
election platform.  Costa Rica in fact had waited until the 
Hezballah-Israeli violence was over, and was now giving the 
GOI advance notice.  According to Eitam, Stagno also asked 
the Israelis to inform the U.S. 
 
¶6.  (C) Eitam called the GOCR decision "very grave." 
Hezbollah would claim the Embassy move as a victory, making 
it appear to be a "prize for terrorism."  He said the Israeli 
Embassy had expected the GOCR decision at some point in the 
future, but they were caught completely off guard by the 
timing.  The GOI had just expressed support for Costa Rica,s 
seat on the UNSC in 2008, and Costa Rica,s small Jewish 
community had backed Arias,s election.  Even a call from 
Shimon Peres proved fruitless.  Arias reportedly told Peres 
he "could not back out" of his campaign pledge, according to 
Eitam.  The GOI now feared that El Salvador, with the last 
remaining embassy in Jerusalem, would be 
under enormous pressure to follow suite and move to Tel Aviv 
(Ref B). 
 
¶7.  (C) FM Stagno maintained to the Ambassador on August 17 
that there had been no meaningful international blowback from 
the GOCR,s decision.  There was no good time to make the 
decision, so Arias wanted to act early in his administration. 
 Stagno insisted the GOCR really was waiting for the right 
moment, had consulted closely with President Saca in El 
Salvador, and had refrained from acting until the violence in 
Lebanon was over.  The government had briefed the legislative 
assembly, he added, so that the entire GOCR concurred, and to 
avoid a potential constitutional challenge from the 
legislature,s three Jewish members.  (Arias summoned all the 
faction leaders the evening of August 15 to advise them of 
his decision.)  The Ambassador stressed USG concern with how 
the GOCR handled the decision and especially with the lack of 
prior consultation, especially given the Secretary,s deep 
involvement in brokering the cessation of hostilities and 
UNSCR 1701.  He urged Stagno and the GOCR to work more 
closely with the USG on issues of strong mutual interest. 
 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
¶8.  (C) We suspect that the decision to move the Embassy was 
timed more to Arias,s 100-day marker than to anything else. 
This was an "easy" executive branch decision he could add to 
his (short) list of achievements thus far, and it provided 
another opportunity for Don Oscar to remain involved in 
global issues.  Arias,s stature, advocacy for human rights 
and defense of international law would be employed more 
effectively in this hemisphere, however, particularly in 
Cuba.  We will continue to nudge him in that direction. 
FRISBIE