06SANJOSE58
COSTA RICA'S RESPONSE ON THE JANUARY 9 MEETING ON
Mon Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SAN JOSE 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/09/2016 
TAGS: PREL SMIG ECON ES NU HO EC DR CO GT CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA'S RESPONSE ON THE JANUARY 9 MEETING ON 
U.S. IMMIGRATION PROPOSALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 2995 
 
Classified By: DCM Russell L. Frisbie for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
-------- 
¶1.  (C) Foreign Minister Tovar told us he would not sign a 
Mexican-authored communique on U.S. immigration proposals 
merely as a gesture of solidarity, especially if the document 
is "confrontational."  End Summary. 
 
Costa Ricans Have Their Own Immigration Problems 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶2.  (C) Per reftel, Charge delivered the demarche to Foreign 
Minister Tovar on January 6, 2006.  Tovar, having been 
apprised of the subject of the meeting, had called in the 
Costa Rican ambassador to Nicaragua who happened to be in 
town.  The Costa Ricans see parallels between the illegal 
immigration problem in the U.S. and the southward migration 
of Nicaraguans, who are now believed to number 500,000 in 
Costa Rica out of a total population of 4 million. 
 
¶3.  (C) Tovar said he was not happy about having to go to the 
meeting in Mexico because he did not know the specifics of 
the Mexicans, objections to the U.S. immigration proposals 
and he did not want to be pressured to sign a document that 
might be confrontational.  He suspected that the Mexicans 
were motivated by their own elections, feeling a need to take 
a tough stance on behalf of their expatriate population. 
 
¶4.  (C) Tovar agreed that immigration law was a matter of 
national sovereignty, and he wondered aloud whether the 
Mexicans, objections had any &international legal basis.8 
He said that the Nicaraguan government is always complaining 
about how its citizens are treated in Costa Rica and even 
threatened to take Costa Rica to the Inter-American Human 
Rights Commission after a Nicaraguan citizen was mauled and 
killed by a Rottweiler while police stood by. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶5.  (C)  Costa Ricans cannot support a position that can 
later be used against them by the Nicaraguans.  Tovar and 
Costa Ricans in general appreciate the need to protect a 
country,s borders against illegal immigrants.  But Tovar, a 
lawyer, is interested in whether the Mexicans base their 
objections to H.R. 4437 on some supposed contravention of 
international law.  Short of that, he likely would not be 
supportive of the Mexicans.  But if the Mexican communiqu is 
sufficiently benign, Tovar could well bow under pressure from 
the other foreign ministers present. 
LANGDALE