07MANAGUA401
MANAGUA MAYOR EYES AMBASSADORIAL POSTING IN ROME,
Tue Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO6478
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0401/01 0441904
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 131904Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9078
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0949
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 0095
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR KDEM NU PREL ECON EPET EINV IR
SUBJECT: MANAGUA MAYOR EYES AMBASSADORIAL POSTING IN ROME, 
CRITICIZES ORTEGA GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: 2006 MANAGUA 2453 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Managua Mayor Dionisio Marenco confirmed to 
the Ambassador that he may become Nicaragua's Ambassador to 
Italy, although the timeline is unclear.  The Sandinista 
(FSLN) mayor, who is interested in establishing sister city 
relationships with U.S. cities, will also consider the 
Wisconsin-Nicaragua partnership as a possible source of 
assistance for Managua.  Pleased with the Ambassador's 
appreciation for Managua's support for the new Embassy 
compound, Marenco offered to help with any outstanding 
requirements.  Marenco believes that the Ortega government 
has lost sight of its campaign promises of zero unemployment 
and hunger, and instead, factions within the new government 
are engaged in an internal power struggle.  He is proud of 
his role in securing Nicaragua's  oil deal with Venezuela. 
Marenco is opportunistic, personable and pragmatic, and 
reportedly holds presidential ambitions, which could explain 
why he is rather critical of Ortega's performance thus far. 
End Summary. 
 
Italy in Mayor's Plans? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) Managua Mayor Dionisio "Nicho" Marenco confirmed to 
the Ambassador over breakfast on February 12 that he may 
become Nicaragua's Ambassador to Italy, although he did not 
fix a timeline.  To start, Marenco, whose ancestors he claims 
come from Italy's Liguria and Piedmont regions, will travel 
to Rome on February 25 to meet with his "friends," the Mayor 
of Rome, Walter Veltroni, and the Italian Foreign Minister, 
Massimo D'Alema to seek additional support for Managua. 
Marenco explained that Rome has donated a number of garbage 
trucks to Nicaragua's capital city and that he will request 
additional assistance in waste management as current capacity 
is about half of what it should be.  He will also explore the 
possibility of Italian investment in constructing a 
Managua-Granada metro-rail to ease highway congestion between 
the two cities. 
 
Mayor Seeks Sister City Ties, Offers Help for New Embassy 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- -  - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) The Mayor noted his interest in establishing sister 
city relationships with U.S. cities, mentioning Los Angeles, 
Miami, and Washington, D.C. as possibilities.  Marenco 
recounted that in the 1980s he studied English for one summer 
at Michigan State University, adding that he maintains close 
ties with people he met at the time and that several 
relatives live in the United States.  The Ambassador, who 
suggested the Mayor also consider the Wisconsin-Nicaragua 
partnership as a possible source of assistance for Managua, 
thanked Marenco for his support for the construction of the 
new U.S. Embassy compound.  Appearing pleased by the 
recognition, Marenco offered to help with permits or any 
other outstanding requirements, remarking that he looks 
forward to the projected inauguration of the new Embassy on 
July 4. 
 
Not Much Praise for Ortega Government 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- 
 
¶4.  (C) Marenco commented that the Ortega government appears 
to have gotten off track, losing sight of its campaign 
promises of zero unemployment and hunger.  Instead, factions 
supporting the new government are engaged in an internal 
power struggle.  He related his frustration over the Ortega 
administration's lack of institutionalism, half jesting that 
to meet with President Ortega one must knock on the door of 
his residence because the current presidency maintains no 
formal lines of communication.  Marenco warned that drought 
in some areas of Nicaragua and a poor coffee harvest, plus 
the inflation typically associated with the start of the 
rainy season in May, could soon test Ortega on the economic 
front unless he starts to focus on the real problems on hand. 
 At least Ortega made the right decision in choosing Arturo 
Cruz to represent him in Washington, opined Marenco, who 
added that he had highly recommended Cruz. 
 
Taking Credit for Venezuelan Oil Deal 
- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) According to Marenco, another bright spot is 
Nicaragua's oil deal with Venezuela, which Marenco reminded 
the Ambassador, he had initiated over a year ago.  Marenco 
expects that Nicaraguan oil company PETRONIC will probably 
replace the Sandinista-leaning Municipal Association of 
Nicaragua (AMUNIC) in the management of the oil deal, which 
under concessional terms, will provide up to 10,000 barrels 
per day of diesel and bunker fuel to subsidize public 
transport and power generation.  Estimating that the 
Venezuelan oil will cover about 1/3 of Nicaragua's daily 
consumption requirements, Marenco explained that Nicaragua 
must pay Venezuela 60% of the cost in 90 days and the 
remaining 40% in 25 years at very favorable terms.  He has 
also proposed an increase in gas prices at the pump to help 
offset the fuel subsidies for public transport; however, many 
Sandinistas reject this idea as it would hurt the middle 
class. 
 
Better to Steer Clear of Iran 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) While Marenco acknowledged that Chavez' rhetoric is 
at times problematic, he asserted that, unlike Nicaragua's 
relationship with Iran, its relationship with Venezuela is 
advantageous.  In his view, Nicaragua should steer clear of 
the Middle East, a region with different values and 
complicated conflicts that have nothing to do with Latin 
America.  He recounted how in the midst of the Iran-Iraq war 
he had traveled to Iran as part of a Sandinista government 
delegation.  Another Nicaraguan delegation arrived in Baghdad 
the day after his group left Tehran, part of Ortega's effort 
to facilitate talks between Iraq and Iran.  The visits were a 
disaster; neither side was pleased with Nicaragua's 
engagement. 
 
Bio 
- - - 
 
¶7.  (C) Marenco, who comes from a Conservative family, 
graduated from the Central American University in the 1960s, 
where he met Daniel and Humberto Ortega, and later received 
an MBA from Harvard-associated INCAE.  Reportedly, Eden 
Pastor used Marenco's home as a launching point for his 
attack on the National Palace in August 1978.  During the 
1980s Sandinista era, Marenco held various positions, 
including the ministries of Internal Commerce, 
Transportation, and Planning.  Before becoming mayor of 
Managua, Marenco ran Channel 4, the Sandinista TV station. 
On his third marriage, Marenco is in his early 60s and 
underwent quintuple bypass heart surgery in 2000 in Miami. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Marenco is opportunistic, personable, and pragmatic, 
and is loosely aligned with Rosario Murillo's camp.  He 
reportedly holds presidential ambitions, which could explain 
why he is rather critical of Ortega's performance thus far. 
Whether his interest in serving as ambassador to Rome signals 
a change in plans -- or perhaps a desire to distance himself 
from Daniel's regime to avoid flak and better position 
himself for 2011 -- remains to be seen. 
TRIVELLI