07MADRID1021
SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY RICE'S JUNE 1 VISIT TO
Fri May 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXRO6681
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHMD #1021/01 1451127
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 251127Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2628
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 MADRID 001021 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

TO THE SECRETARY FROM AMBASSADOR EDUARDO AGUIRRE; ALSO FOR 
EUR DAN FRIED, E-ES, KEN MERTEN, EUR/WE 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/30/2016 
TAGS: OTRA PREL SP
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY RICE'S JUNE 1 VISIT TO 
MADRID 

Classified By: Ambassador Eduardo Aguirre for reasons 1.4 b & d. 

Summary 

¶1. (C) Dear Secretary Rice: I welcome you to Spain on behalf 
of our 367 American and Spanish colleagues serving the United 
States at Mission Spain. Your visit is a milestone in our 
work, together with you, to overcome the differences over 
Iraq with the Spanish government and convince them that 
further strengthening cooperation coincides with Spain,s 
national interest. At the same time, your visit can serve as 
a catalyst to encourage Spain to become an even more active 
)- but responsible -- member of a Transatlantic partnership, 
marked by cooperative efforts on our shared values, including 
counter-terrorism and promoting democracy, freedom and human 
rights throughout the world. This means that you will need 
to speak frankly to the Spanish government about Cuba, 
despite their desire to avoid the issue. The issue need not 
be the central one in a rich agenda on a wide variety of 
fronts in which we work closely with Spain; however, Cuba 
must be an element of your discussions on democracy, and 
Spain,s own special responsibility as a democracy leader 
that has successfully undergone the transition from 
dictatorship to thriving democracy. Your discussions will 
also include Kosovo, Afghanistan, Spain,s OSCE Chairmanship, 
Russia, Iran, Iraq, Latin America and the Middle East. 
Moratinos will raise a thorny child-custody case involving a 
Spanish woman currently jailed for contempt of court in New 
Jersey. Your interview with the Spanish press will provide 
an opportunity to reach out to the Spanish people and 
underscore the significant value of our alliance and convey 
our views on issues on which we differ. We see this visit as 
a great opportunity to advance our relations with Spain, and 
the Spanish government shares this view. END SUMMARY 

¶2. (C) The Spanish government has long awaited your first 
visit as Secretary of State and views it as a sign of the 
importance of strong U.S.-Spain relations. They will use your 
visit to counter criticism that the Zapatero government has 
shattered the transatlantic relationship. Per the Spain 
strategy you approved two years ago, we have sought to move 
this government away from visceral and reflexive anti-U.S. 
policies and sentiments, carving out areas in which 
Zapatero,s government can offer support for the President,s 
broad global agenda. We have made clear to the Zapatero 
government that the price of our willingness to publicly 
promote good bilateral relations is real contributions on 
world issues. While we have made some positive headway, the 
Zapatero government has not hesitated on occasion to pursue 
an agenda counter to our own when deemed in the Socialist 
party,s domestic political interest. Your visit should 
encourage Spain to be an even more active member of a 
transatlantic partnership that works cooperatively in pursuit 
of shared values on freedom, democracy, human rights and 
development. XXXXXXXXXXXX

¶18. (C) Two important bilateral issues fall in the judicial 
area. Moratinos has said he will raise with you the child 
custody involving Spanish citizen Maria Jos Carrascosa who 
is currently jailed for contempt of court in Bergen County, 
New Jersey for failure to return her child to the US as 
required by a New Jersey court decision. During this 
political season in Madrid, the case has become a cause 
celebre, with pictures of Carrascosa ) viewed as a mother 
separated from her child - in handcuffs entering the New 
Jersey prison. The GOS agrees that this is a case for the 
courts and both governments agree that mediation of the 
dispute is the appropriate response. However, Moratinos for 
political reasons has to show the government is doing 
something about the case. On our side, you should note 
continued USG concern about the court case against the three 
US servicemen charged with alleged &war crimes8 in the case 
of the death of Spanish TV camerman Jose Couse in the 
Palestine Hotel in Baghdad in 2003. The GOS has been helpful 
behind the scenes in getting the case appealed by the Spanish 
Prosecutor. The case now moves to the appeals tribunal of 
the National Court, which will rule on the substance of the 
charges. We want continued vigilance and cooperation by the 
GOS until the case is dropped. 

¶19. (C) Moratinos holds you in very high regard and values 
the contacts that he has had with you. Your efforts and 
those of other senior USG officials, along with mine, to help 
guide Moratinos on key issues such as handling Russia in the 
OSCE and on the full range of Middle East issues, can prove 
effective. The more outreach the better, as we try to play 
to his desire to have a role on major issues while helping to 
direct some of these efforts toward policies that work to 
support US global objectives. 

¶20. (U) You may want to congratulate Moratinos on the 
upcoming celebration of the 50th anniversary of the 
Commission for Cultural, Educational and Scientific Exchange 
between the United States and Spain (the Fulbright 
Commission) and express how you look forward to hearing more 
about the events planned to take place in Washington to 
commemorate this major milestone. The Spanish Fulbright 
Commission, the second largest in Europe, is a truly 
binational organization with the majority of funding provided 
by the Spanish central government, as well as regional 
autonomous communities and private sector entities. 

¶21. (C) In all, you will find a rich agenda with Spain, which 
your visit can advance substantially. Again, welcome to 
Madrid. We are looking forward to your visit on June 1. 
AGUIRRE