07MANAGUA241
A BLOW TO DEMOCRACY: LIBERALS DELIVER MORE POWER
Fri Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO0274
OO RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0241/01 0262246
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 262246Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8840
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000241 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: A BLOW TO DEMOCRACY: LIBERALS DELIVER MORE POWER 
TO ORTEGA 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0179 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0175 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 0081 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Nicaraguan National Assembly approved on 
January 24 a series of reforms to Law 290 -- which defines 
the roles of the ministries and other executive institutions 
-- that grant more authority to the Presidency and reduce 
transparency by considerably reducing civilian controls over 
the military and police.  After a series of compromises that 
de-fanged the reforms to some degree, the reforms were 
approved by Sandinista Front (FSLN) and Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) lawmakers, with the opposition 
Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) remaining largely silent. 
Only a handful of deputies opposed the reforms from the PLC, 
ALN and Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) caucuses.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Despite our efforts to convince the parties to oppose 
the fast tracking of President Daniel Ortega's proposed 
reforms to Law 290 (reftels), the PLC and ALN allowed the 
reforms to pass without review in commission after the FSLN 
acceded to some compromises over the extent of the 
President's authority.  Some of the most damaging provisions 
-- such as granting extensive powers to "citizen councils" 
controlled by the Presidency, giving the President direct 
control over the National Police, and reducing the Minister 
of Defense's role in the formulation of defense and security 
policy -- were removed, but the end result still represents a 
considerable erosion of civilian checks and balances. 
 
La Chayo's "Citizen Councils" are Approved 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) The reforms submitted by the FSLN included provisions 
to create citizen councils -- an idea contributed by the 
Sandinistas' ideological brothers in Venezuela, Cuba, and 
Libya -- that would be managed by the Presidency and have 
budgets and power at the level of cabinet ministries.  The 
Liberals allowed the creation of the councils, but with the 
caveat that they be subordinated to the ministries and not 
draw funds from the national budget.  (Comment: The councils 
will be managed by Ortega's wife, Rosario Murillo.  Contacts 
have observed that, despite the official prohibition against 
using government funds, Murillo will not have difficulty 
funding the councils with support from Venezuela, Libya, and 
other sponsors.  Because these councils will not receive 
funds from the national budget, they will not have to depend 
on the National Assembly to operate.  End Comment.) 
 
Role of Defense and Government Ministers Reduced 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (U) FSLN changes to Law 290 would have reduced the 
Ministry of Defense to a shadow, redistributing powers to the 
Presidency and military.  The Liberals modified the proposals 
so that the Minister of Defense remains in charge of 
"directing" the formulation of national defense policy, 
rather than merely "contributing."  The Ministry will also 
retain the lead role in representing the government in 
international organisms that deal in defense policy and in 
formulating aerial navigation regulations.  Significantly, 
the Defense Information Directorate (DID) intelligence 
service was officially returned to the control of the Army, 
and the Ministry was reduced to collaborating (instead of 
directing) the development of the national defense budget 
with the Army. 
 
¶5. (C) We met with Dr. Juan Umana, Ortega's designated 
interim caretaker for the Ministry of Defense (ref C) on 
January 18 to voice our concerns over the proposed Law 290 
reforms.  Umana admitted that the Ministry is a "shell" with 
"few professionals" that will "not likely receive any 
significant budget increases" under the new administration. 
He argued that the reforms merely reflect "reality" since the 
Ministry was never given the resources to fully implement the 
authority granted to it under Law 290.  We argued that a 
preferable solution would be to strengthen the civilian 
authority and continue on the path to modernization in the 
defense sector established by previous governments. 
(Comment: Umana's comment that the reforms reflect "reality" 
is largely accurate.  The Army has jealously guarded its 
privileges, including management of the DID and control of 
the military budget.  End Comment.) 
 
¶6. (U) The Ministry of Government also suffered a similar 
reduction in authority, although the Liberals insisted that 
the Nicaraguan National Police (NNP) report directly to the 
Minister of Government instead of the President. 
Nevertheless, the President will now have the right to 
receive public security information reports directly; audit 
the NNP budget; appoint officials down to the level of Deputy 
Director General; approve, reduce, or increase the number of 
positions in the NNP and regulate salaries; and request the 
resignation of the top officials on the advice of the 
Director General.  All of these powers were previously 
allocated to the Minister of Government and enabled the 
Ministry to exercise its authority over the NNP. 
 
Voices in the Desert 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) Javier Melendez, Director of the Institute of 
Strategic Studies and Public Policy, attended the plenary and 
was disappointed with the lack of opposition from the ALN and 
PLC.  After two-hour discussions with IEEPP on January 19, 
both parties had pledged to propose the fast-tracking of the 
reforms.  Melendez witnessed a heated debate among the PLC 
deputies during the session, but the caucus ultimately 
followed Aleman's orders to support the reforms.  The ALN did 
not oppose Ortega's fast-track request and, according to 
Melendez, only made half-hearted attempts to modify the 
reforms.  Colleagues of Melendez close to ALN deputy and 
party leader Eduardo Montealegre pleaded with Montealegre to 
at least table a proposal to keep military budget oversight 
under the authority of the Ministry of Defense.  Montealegre 
reportedly responded that he did not want to "provoke" the 
military.  (Note: Melendez witnessed uniformed lobbyists from 
the armed forces actively working the plenary.  End Note.) 
 
¶8. (U) A few deputies did speak out against the reforms.  ALN 
deputy Pedro Joaquin Chamorro read a prepared statement 
lamenting the decay of civilian oversight and the transfer of 
authority to unaccountable organizations controlled by the 
Presidency.  PLC deputy Carlos Noguera broke with his caucus 
to denounce the reforms and argue that Law 290 should not be 
modified.  Victor Hugo Tinoco, representing the MRS, argued 
for the need of civilian control over the military and 
commented that the reforms are a setback to years of 
modernization and professionalization in the defense sector. 
Deputies Alejandro Bolanos (ALN), Monica Baltodano (MRS) and 
Enrique Saenz (MRS) also spoke out against the reforms and 
proposed modifications. 
 
Comment: Does Ortega Have Any Opposition? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) This scenario has become very familiar: every time the 
PLC shows some will to oppose the FSLN's plans, Ortega uses 
his control of the court system to force convicted PLC leader 
and ex-President Arnoldo Aleman to bring his party back into 
line.  Discontent within the PLC is growing, but so far has 
not proved sufficient to break Aleman's stranglehold.  We 
will continue to foster resistance to the Ortega-Aleman pact 
with moderate PLC deputies. 
 
¶10. (C) The ALN's lack of action was a more unexpected 
disappointment.  Melendez commented that the ALN lacks a 
coherent agenda, vision, and leadership.  He believes that 
Montealegre fears that active opposition from the ALN will 
prompt Ortega to support the PLC's aspirations to prosecute 
Montealegre for his alleged participation in the Cenis 
banking scandal.  Moreover, many of the ALN's deputies are 
new, inexperienced and untested and unable to effectively 
respond to the FSLN's legislative blitzkriegs.  We are 
exploring ways to respond to ALN requests for professional 
assistance. 
TRIVELLI