07OSLO658
PM STOLTENBERG´S RUSSIA TRIP: GRADUAL GAINS IN THE
Mon Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Oslo
VZCZCXYZ0039
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNY #0658/01 1691139
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 181139Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY OSLO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5859
INFO RUEHXP/ALL NATO POST COLLECTIVE
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI 7923
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 3970
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 3146C O N F I D E N T I A L OSLO 000658
SIPDIS
SIPDIS
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2017
TAGS: PREL RS NO
SUBJECT: PM STOLTENBERG´S RUSSIA TRIP: GRADUAL GAINS IN THE
NORTH
REF: A: OSLO 614
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Kevin M. Johnson for reasons 1.4 b and d 

¶1. (SBU) Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg,s June 7-10 visit to Russia produced progress on Norwegian priorities in the Barents region. Despite some controversial statements on missile defense and some public criticism of Russia,s human rights record, Stoltenberg,s visit was primarily characterized by some successes for Norway,s High North priorities, including resolution of a small part of Norway,s disputed sea-border with Russia and new Russian commitments on safety and economic development of the Barents Sea region. This result will likely encourage the government to continue Norway,s enthusiastically positive approach to Russia, downplaying tensions over security matters within NATO and other negative aspects. 

Murmansk: Nuclear safety and Economic Development --------------------------------------------- ----------

¶2. (U) Prime Minister Stoltenberg began his trip in Murmansk, becoming the first Norwegian Prime Minister to visit this city. In Murmansk, Stoltenberg reaffirmed Norway,s commitment to continue joint efforts with Russia on nuclear cleanup and safety and in stimulating economic development and trade between northern Norway and the Kola Peninsula. Stoltenberg also donated equipment for oil spill cleanup and announced that with support from Russia in the International Maritime Organization, Norway had been successful in establishing new shipping lanes off Norway,s Barents coastline designed to ensure safety at sea and protection for the environment. Stoltenberg also received a copy of a recently completed map of nuclear facilities on the Kola Peninsula, financed by Norway. 

Moscow and St. Petersburg: Border Agreement --------------------------------------------- ---

¶3. (U) Stoltenberg then continued to Moscow, where he met with President Putin and Prime Minister Fradkov. In Moscow, Stoltenberg came to an agreement with PM Fradkov on the maritime border in the Varangerfjord, a small step in eventual agreement on the maritime border in the Barents Sea. He also signed a new visa agreement with Russia, making travel and trade easier. Stoltenberg concluded his visit by participating in the St. Petersburg Economic Forum, helping Norwegian business leaders, including Helge Lund, the CEO of Statoil, arrange a meeting with President Putin. He also participated in a panel discussion in which he obliquely criticized Russia,s respect for human rights and democracy. Speaking before an audience including President Putin and Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbajev, Stoltenberg said that &states in the east must fully respect democracy and human rights to become stable cooperative partners with the West. These are not western values, but universal values8. Up until these remarks Stoltenberg had not given human rights a high profile, including during his previous meetings with Putin and Fradkov.

Stoltenberg Criticizes Missile Defense
----------------------------

¶4. (C) Perhaps the most controversy of the visit was generated by a quote on missile defense Stoltenberg made while in Murmansk. Stoltenberg called on the U.S. and Russia to discuss missile defense, and said it was important for both sides to reduce harsh rhetoric and to avoid a new arms race. He continued to say that Norway has all along been skeptical of missile defense plans and would not allow missile defenses in Norway. Russian suspicions of the Vardoe radar site in northern Norway and false complaints about its supposed use in U.S. missile defense plans were a staple of past meetings of Norwegian and Russian leaders and continue to be a sub theme of Russian complaints about U.S. missile defense plans at NATO. However, during this visit the radar was not directly raised by either side. 

And Gets Criticized
------------------

¶5. (U) Norwegian media reaction to Stoltenberg,s statement was critical, with editorials in Norway,s largest paper castigating Stoltenberg for expressing his criticism of U.S. missile defense plans while in Russia, while not even mentioning Putin,s strong threats against NATO. The paper stated that the PM,s criticism of the U.S. on such a sensitive issue, without any balancing criticism of Russia, creates an impression of Norwegian servility towards Russia and shows that Norway is intimidated. The paper called for the PM to speak out against Putin,s harsh rhetoric, and make clear that Russia does not have veto power over missile defense plans in NATO countries. The editorial also stated that U.S. plans are no threat to Russia and that if the PM needs to criticize missile defense because of internal governmental reasons he should do so in another place than Russia. The Prime Minister,s office and the MFA have claimed that the PM,s comments reported in international media were taken out of context and that he intended to promote dialogue and make clear that Norway would not be used for any missile defense systems. See ref a for more the GON approach to Missile Defense. 

Likely Results: Confirmation of Norways Current Russia Policy --------------------------------------------- -------------

¶6. (C) In a summary to the press before he returned to Norway, Stoltenberg highlighted his satisfaction with reaching an agreement over the border in Varangerfjord. He also called for more frequent contacts with Russian leadership and invited President Putin to Norway. The border agreement, Statoil,s meeting with Putin and the positive developments on nuclear safety in the Barents were all key successes for Norway,s High North priorities. These successful results will likely encourage the GON,s natural inclination to avoid criticism of Russia and to stress their interest in co-operative projects in the North. This does not mean that the GON is unaware or unconcerned about the developments in Russia. We hear frequent private expressions of concern from lower-level members of the Defense Department and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs over Russia,s new aggressiveness and Russia is a topic which will continue to generate media and public interest. However, the GON appears determined to continue its course of downplaying disagreements in order to focus on its goal of close cooperation with Russia in the Barents region and make progress in its high priority High North policy. Elite opinion, including in the MFA, also includes sympathy for the worn argument that Russian misdeeds are often reactions to mistakes by the west, and in particular the U.S. Whitney