08BRASILIA97
AMBASSADOR REVIEWS BILATERAL ISSUES WITH BRAZILIAN
Thu Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO5031
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0097/01 0171222
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 171222Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0870
INFO RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0209
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 7617
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 5705
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 1492
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1553
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0252C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 000097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR P, E, G, EEB, INL, IO, AND WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2018 
TAGS: PREL ENRG SENV SOCI SNAR UNSC BR
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR REVIEWS BILATERAL ISSUES WITH BRAZILIAN 
U/S EVERTON VARGAS 
 
REF: A. BRASILIA 0084 
 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 0085 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR CLIFFORD M. SOBEL, REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  The Ambassador, joined by PolCouns 
(notetaker), met with Ministry for External Relations (MRE) 
Under Secretary for Political Affairs Everton Vargas on 
January 11 to raise Kosovo independence (ref A) and possible 
Brazilian participation in UNAMID (ref B).  Vargas was joined 
by chief of staff Antonio Salgado, North America desk 
director Joao Tabajara, and an officer from the International 
Organizations division.  During the meeting, Vargas and the 
Ambassador also discussed the proposed defense cooperation 
agreement (septel), the FDR Award, the move of two key MRE 
officials to Geneva, climate change negotiations, biofuels 
cooperation, pending agreements on diplomatic property and 
counternarcotics cooperation, U.S. visas for Brazilian 
participants in MINUSTAH, and upcoming high-level visits.  In 
a brief one-on-one discussion, Vargas informed the Ambassador 
that the GOB would be consulting with India on a strategy for 
approaching the USG jointly regarding UN Security Council 
Reform.  End summary. 
 
FDR Award 
--------- 
 
¶2. (U) Vargas began by commending the Ambassador for the FDR 
Award recently given to three Brazilians--one of whom was 
Vargas' son, a diplomat trainee at the MRE's Rio Branco 
Institute--for papers written on the United States.  (Note: 
Vargas' son was selected by a panel of experts who read each 
paper without knowing who the author was.  End note.) 
Commenting on the large number of Brazilianists in the United 
States, Vargas lamented that lack of Americanists in Brazil, 
adding that the MRE program on the United States is weak.  He 
said he has been thinking of sponsoring a meeting of U.S. and 
Brazilian academics to promote exchange on the two countries. 
 
Key MRE Officials Moving Out 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In response to the Ambassador's question, Vargas 
confirmed that U/S for Economic Affairs Roberto Azevedo and 
FM Amorim's Chief of Staff (and Azevedo's wife) Maria 
Nazareth Azevedo would both be heading to Geneva soon, the 
former as Brazil's ambassador before the WTO, the latter as 
ambassador to the UN in Geneva.  Vargas went on to say that 
these moves reflect a broader philosophy of FM Amorim to move 
younger diplomats into key positions.  At a meeting in of 
Brazil's ambassadors held the previous week in Brasilia, 
Amorim had explained to them the importance of "renovating" 
Itamaraty's presence through the appointment of this younger 
generation of diplomats. 
 
Climate Change 
-------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador asked if Vargas was indeed going to the 
Major Economies Meeting in Hawaii at the end of January. 
Vargas confirmed he would be going, along with Climate Change 
Envoy Amb. Sergio Serra, Ministry of Environment Secretary 
for Climate Change and Environmental Quality Thelma Krug, 
Ministry of Science and Technology's General Coordinator for 
Global Climate Change Jose Domingos Gonzalez Miguez, and the 
new chief of the MRE Division for Environmental Policy and 
Sustainable Development Andre Odenbreit Carvalho.  He 
stressed that stories in the press suggesting he might not go 
were untrue; he had never considered not going.  (Note: MRE 
subsequently told ESTH Counselor that the delegation will 
not/not require Portuguese interpretation.  End note.) 
 
¶5. (C) Vargas described the USG participation in Bali as 
"very constructive" despite the U.S. negotiators' "tough 
instructions."  He said the Indians brought similarly tough 
issues to the table in the G-77 discussions.  But he feels 
there is no other alternative to these all-party talks, and 
noted that MRE Director of the Department of the Environment 
Luiz Alberto Figueredo Machado will chair the next segment of 
the negotiations under the Convention.  He concluded that, 
while the MEM process cannot replace the Convention, this 
kind of additional dialogue is useful. 
 
Biofuels 
 
BRASILIA 00000097  002 OF 003 
 
 
-------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Ambassador asked about progress on our biofuels 
cooperation.  Vargas confirmed that he hoped he and U/S 
Jeffery could hold a Steering Committee meeting on February 
29 in Washington (rather than March 7 as proposed by US). 
This timing would ensure a report could be made to the 
Secretary and FM Amorim when they meet.  The Ambassador asked 
 
SIPDIS 
about the naming of Brazilian private sector members to the 
advisory group.  Vargas said it had been done already.  When 
the Ambassador noted that, as of January 9, at least one 
proposed Brazilian member was still not sure if they would be 
invited, Vargas gave instructions to his staff to find out 
where the invitations stood.  Vargas added that the MRE has 
proposed a March 3 meeting between Vargas and U/S Dobriansky 
on the U.S.-Brazil Common Agenda. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Ambassador asked about the long-pending 
reciprocal visit of U.S. scientists to Brazil.  Vargas agreed 
it needs to happen quickly, and asked Salgado to make sure 
they propose a date, preferably one before March.  He said he 
would like to co-host with the Embassy a meeting of the U.S. 
and Brazilian scientists at Itamaraty to discuss next steps 
following their visit.  To the Ambassador's suggestion that 
the Ministry of Science and Technology might be prepared to 
take the lead on this initiative, Vargas said that only the 
MRE is in a disinterested position that allows it to convene 
all of the various GOB entities involved. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Ambassador raised the importance of looking 
toward the next group of countries in which to undertake 
biofuels cooperation under the MOU.  Vargas said he was 
concerned about announcing engagement of new countries 
without first have clear results from our initial 
collaboration.  He said he has asked for an assessment of 
concrete results our work has had.  He added that he did not 
want to rush into new countries, but only select them after 
careful prior consultation.  The Ambassador suggested that, 
nonetheless, the next Steering Committee meeting would be an 
opportunity to share information on which countries each side 
saw as potential candidates. 
 
Pending Agreements 
------------------ 
 
¶9. (U) The Ambassador raised the pending Letter of Agreement 
on counternarcotics cooperation.  Vargas said he was 
following it closely and that it had just gone to the legal 
office that day (note: lower levels in Itamaraty had led us 
to believe it was already in the legal office before the 
Christmas holidays.  End note.)  Vargas raised the property 
agreement, confirming that it was in the president's office 
and that he had asked them to rush their analysis so it could 
go the President for signature.  He said that MRE had already 
drafted a reply diplomatic note, and would send it as soon as 
the decree was published. 
 
MINUSTAH Visas 
-------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Vargas raised with the Ambassador the MRE's concern 
that an expedited process in Port-au-Prince for MINUSTAH 
forces to obtain visas had been ended, making it impossible 
for them to take R and R in the United States.  The 
Ambassador promised to look into it. (Note: Post has since 
looked into the issue with Embassy Port-au-Prince and is 
looking for ways to accommodate Brazilian participants prior 
to departure from Brazil.  End note.) 
 
Upcoming Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶11. (C) Vargas asked if dates had been set for a visit by the 
Secretary to Brazil.  The Ambassador said he understood that 
 
SIPDIS 
March 14 and 15 were being discussed in Washington, as part 
of a larger trip to the region.  Vargas said that, if the two 
stops planned were still Brasilia and Salvador, it would be 
best to do Brasilia first, as he does not believe President 
Lula ever receives foreign visitors on Saturday.  Vargas 
proposed a February 11 for a visit by U/S Burns, saying that 
he felt it important for the two to meet prior to the 
Secretary's visit.  He said that, if the February 11 did not 
 
SIPDIS 
work, he was free the rest of that week, as well. 
 
 
BRASILIA 00000097  003 OF 003 
 
 
UN Security Council Reform 
-------------------------- 
 
¶12. (C) In a one-on-one sidebar after the meeting, Vargas 
told the Ambassador that Brazil was working with India on a 
strategy for engaging the United States on the issue of UN 
Security Council reform. 
 
SOBEL