08DUBLIN602
IRISH ESTABLISH CABINET COMMITTEE TO REVIEW
Mon Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDL #0602/01 3081828
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 031828Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9544
INFO RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2543C O N F I D E N T I A L DUBLIN 000602 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM EAIR ECON MARR EI
SUBJECT: IRISH ESTABLISH CABINET COMMITTEE TO REVIEW 
RENDITIONS ALLEGATIONS AND OTHER HUMAN RIGHTS CONCERNS 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 571 
     ¶B. DUBLIN 134 
     ¶C. 07 DUBLIN 919 
     ¶D. 07 DUBLIN 916 
     ¶E. 07 DUBLIN 899 
     ¶F. 07 DUBLIN 898 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) The Irish government has established a Cabinet-level 
committee to review Ireland's human rights policies ) and 
has given the committee a mandate to approach the incoming 
U.S. administration to review concerns about renditions, the 
detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, and intensive 
interrogation techniques.  The Committee will also consider 
strengthening the powers of the police to inspect aircraft 
transiting Ireland, possibly via ICAO.  Clearly a sop to the 
Green Party, which is in trouble over budget cuts and is 
threatening to block Ireland's signing the new bilateral 
pre-clearance agreement, the establishment of this committee 
will increase noise levels for a short time, but things 
should soon return to normal.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Cabinet-Level Committee Established 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On October 29, the Government of Ireland established 
a Cabinet-level committee to review Ireland's human rights 
policies - including a mandate to approach the transition 
team of the incoming U.S. Administration to review Irish 
concerns about renditions, the detention facility at 
Guantanamo Bay, and intensive interrogation techniques which 
are considered torture (such as waterboarding).  The 
Committee will also review appropriate authorities to ensure 
that the national police force (Garda) and airport 
authorities have sufficient powers to search and inspect all 
aircraft transiting Ireland, perhaps through strengthening 
the Air Navigation and Transport Acts.  Finally the committee 
will report on Irish Ministry of Justice actions to improve 
Garda training in basic human rights. 
 
¶3.  (U) The committee will be composed of two Green Party 
Ministers ) Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural 
Resources Eamon Ryan and Minister for Environment, Heritage 
and Local Government John Gormley - and three Fianna Fail 
Ministers - Minister for Foreign Affairs Micheal Martin, 
Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform Dermot Ahern, 
and Minister for Transport Noel Dempsey. 
 
----------------- 
Sop to the Greens 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Reports indicated that, in part, this new initiative 
is based on pressure from Green Party Ministers to make 
progress on human rights commitments made in the pre-election 
coalition manifesto, "Programme for Government," which 
undertook to thwart renditions through effective enforcement 
of the Criminal Justice (United Nations Convention Against 
Torture) Act, 2000 and the Geneva Conventions Acts, 
1962-1998. 
 
¶5.  (U) Amnesty International publicly welcomed the aircraft 
search provision, declaring it a "massive victory" for human 
rights in Ireland.  However, the head of Amnesty 
International Ireland, Colm O'Gorman, stated that he wants to 
see the "action behind the words" from the government on the 
issue. 
 
¶6.  (C) Since the issue of renditions broke in 2004, the 
Irish have accepted assurances they received from President 
Bush and Secretary Rice in that year that no renditions had 
taken place through Ireland.  Top Irish officials, including 
the Prime Minister, have declared that they would take the 
USG at its word and not pursue inspections of U.S. aircraft 
transiting Shannon and Dublin Airports without sufficient 
probable cause.  As recently as December 2007, then Prime 
Minister Bertie Ahern and then Foreign Minister Dermot Ahern 
categorically rejected Opposition and Irish Human Rights 
Commission calls for random inspections of U.S. aircraft 
(Refs E and F).  Current Prime Minister Brian Cowen, then 
Minister of Finance, supported this position.  (Note:  From 
2003 to the end of 2007, 1,059,383 U.S. troops transited 
Shannon airport on 8,698 flights.  End note.) 
 
¶7.  (C) Irish Foreign Affairs Political Director Rory 
Montgomery told the Embassy November 3 that this action was 
designed by the government to assuage the Green Party/junior 
coalition partner ) and demonstrate that the Greens still 
have influence at the Cabinet table ) after the Greens came 
under fire from party members in the wake of the recent 
austerity budget (Ref A), particularly for its support of 
Fianna Fail in defending cuts in the education sector.  At 
the October 29 Cabinet meeting, the Government sought 
approval to sign the U.S.-Ireland Preclearance Agreement (Ref 
C).  Green Party ministers refused, complaining that they 
were getting beaten up over the budget cuts and had nothing 
to show for their time in government.  They linked approval 
of the Preclearance Agreement to actions on renditions and 
other human rights concerns about which their core supporters 
are neuralgic, according to Montgomery. 
 
¶8.  (C) Montgomery continued that the Cabinet secured Green 
Party approval for the Preclearance Agreement signing by 
agreeing to set up the ministerial-level committee to look 
into human rights concerns.  In addition to the three 
elements of the committee's mandate, the committee was also 
tasked with approaching ICAO to examine whether the Chicago 
Convention could be changed to better facilitate aircraft 
inspections.  However, Montgomery considered this a real 
"non-starter." 
 
¶9.  (C) Montgomery went on to say that he expects the 
government to discuss the committee and its work in upcoming 
parliamentary sessions.  He stated that Foreign Minister 
Martin would make it clear that there were no new allegations 
leading to the establishment of the committee and that the 
government stands by the USG assurances on renditions that it 
has already received. 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (C) The new committee seems intent on pressing its views 
of renditions, Guantanamo, and torture with the new 
administration, but it expects a welcoming reception 
regardless of who wins the presidential election.  The 
establishment of the committee was clearly a sop to a 
beleaguered Green Party and expectations are low that it will 
actively engage U.S. interlocutors.  We should expect a bit 
of noise on this issue in the weeks ahead, but it should soon 
die down. 
 
FOLEY