08DUBLIN166
IRISH PRIME MINISTER AHERN TO RESIGN MAY 6; NO
Wed Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO1391
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0166/01 0931523
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 021523Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9017
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITY
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST PRIORITY 0706C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 DUBLIN 000166 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2018 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EI
SUBJECT: IRISH PRIME MINISTER AHERN TO RESIGN MAY 6; NO 
CHANGE ANTICIPATED IN U.S.-IRISH BILATERAL RELATIONS 
 
REF: DUBLIN 114 
 
DUBLIN 00000166  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas C. Foley; reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern announced 
April 2 that he will resign May 6 after almost 11 years as 
both head of government (Taoiseach/Prime Minister) and the 
head of his political party, Fianna Fail.  Saying that he was 
stepping aside because the attention paid to the Mahon 
Tribunal investigations into his financial affairs (reftel) 
was becoming a distraction from the more important work of 
governing, he nonetheless emotionally reiterated that he 
never took any "corrupt payments" and that his resignation 
was a personal decision not driven by the Tribunal 
proceedings.  Ahern stressed that he still planned to address 
a Joint Session of Congress on April 30.  Officials in the 
Taoiseach's office say that whoever is Taoiseach will attend 
the May 7-9 investment conference in Northern Ireland. 
Ahern's resignation will trigger a vote for the new Fianna 
Fail party leader, who (if the governing coalition remains 
intact -- as seems likely) will become the new Prime 
Minister.  The heir apparent is Deputy Prime Minister 
(Tanaiste) and Minister of Finance Brian Cowen. 
 
¶2.  (C) Summary, continued.  The Taoiseach's bombshell 
announcement caught Ireland by surprise.  Through the day on 
April 2, there have been many kind words for Ahern's 
accomplishments, particularly regarding the Irish role in the 
Northern Ireland peace process and Ireland's "Celtic Tiger" 
economic growth.  We do not anticipate that new Fianna Fail 
leadership portends any change in U.S.-Irish bilateral 
relations, including Irish support for important U.S. foreign 
policy initiatives, such as the use of Shannon airport for 
troop transits to and from Iraq and Afghanistan.  Once the 
dust settles on this historic day in Dublin, we expect the 
Irish Government to resume business as usual.  End summary. 
 
------------- 
AHERN RESIGNS 
------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Irish Taoiseach (Prime Minister) Bertie Ahern 
announced April 2 that he will tender his resignation as 
Taoiseach to President Mary McAleese on May 6.  Flanked by 
Deputy Prime Minister (Tanaiste) and Minister of Finance 
Brian Cowen and other ministers from the governing coalition 
at a 10:00 AM press conference on the steps of the Dail 
(Parliament), Ahern stated that he will also resign as the 
head of the Fianna Fail political party, the largest party in 
the Irish governing coalition.  (Note:  Ahern will retain his 
seat as a Member of the Dail (lower house of Parliament). 
End note.)  While Ahern informed Cowen of his decision the 
evening of April 1, he reportedly notified other members of 
his cabinet only slightly earlier in the day at their 
regularly scheduled breakfast meeting.  Journalists were 
notified of the press conference only thirty minutes before 
it took place. 
 
¶4.  (C) During his 12-minute speech an obviously emotional 
Ahern thanked all the people who had put their trust in him 
over the years, particularly his family and constituents.  He 
said the work he was most proud of was helping to bring peace 
to Northern Ireland and in overseeing the economic rise of 
Ireland into one of the richest countries in Europe. 
Referring to the long-running Mahon Tribunal investigation 
(reftel), Ahern maintained that he had never taken a "corrupt 
payment" and that the "constant barrage of commentary" was 
distracting the government from its task of governing.  He 
said that Ireland was facing "uncertain economic times" and 
the electorate would soon cast their vote on the Lisbon 
Treaty referendum, so it was important that government be 
allowed to function normally.  Ahern pointed out that the 
decision to resign was his and not precipitated by recent 
revelations in the Mahon Tribunal.  (Note: Damaging recent 
testimony by his former private secretary stated that 
payments into his personal bank accounts in the early 1990s 
were made in British pounds rather than Irish punts; a fact 
Ahern has strenuously denied in Tribunal testimony.  An 
article in The Irish Times on March 29 noted that Ahern's 
transactions under scrutiny by the Tribunal totaled 452,800 
British pounds.  End note.)  Ahern continued, saying it was, 
"always my intention to review my position as Taoiseach and 
leader of Fianna Fail in the aftermath of next summer's local 
and European elections," but noting that he had decided to 
bring the date forward to eliminate the distraction. 
 
--------------- 
 
DUBLIN 00000166  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
COALITION STAYS 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  In a nod to the other parties in the current 
coalition government (Fianna Fail, the Green Party, and the 
Progressive Democrats) Ahern singled out John Gormley (leader 
of the Green party) and Mary Harney (leader of the 
Progressive Democrats) during his resignation announcement. 
Green Party leader John Gormley was seen directly behind 
Ahern in the televised press conference.  Both Gormley and 
Harney told the press later in the day that they and their 
parties have no intention of leaving the coalition.  They 
both intend to hold their ministerial positions to 2012, when 
the next general election is due to be held. 
 
---------- 
WHO'S NEXT 
---------- 
 
¶6.  (U) According to officials in the Taoiseach's office, 
Ahern's resignation will trigger a vote among Fianna Fail 
Members of Parliament (TDs) to elect a new party leader.  The 
Party vote could occur as early as May 7, when the Irish 
Parliament is scheduled to resume business after Ireland's 
May 5 Bank Holiday.  Once the Fianna Fail TDs choose a new 
leader, they will put that leader forward to the entire 
Parliament as the new Prime Minister.  The final vote could 
occur shortly thereafter. 
 
¶7.  (C) Assuming that the current coalition of Fianna Fail, 
the Green Party, and the Progressive Democrats remains 
intact, whoever is elected as the new leader of Fianna Fail 
will become the next Prime Minister.  The odds-on favorite is 
Brian Cowen, who in news reports throughout the day on April 
2, refused to be drawn out on his anticipated bid for Fianna 
Fail leadership, saying that it was "Bertie Ahern's day." 
Nevertheless, government and political contacts assure the 
Embassy that Cowen is 99% sure to get the nod.  Foreign 
Minster Dermot Ahern is seen as the only likely contender, 
and many wonder if he is willing to risk being weakened 
within the party by a loss to Cowen. 
 
¶8.  (C) Cowen, a protege of former Prime Minister Albert 
Reynolds, is expected to keep the coalition together upon 
assuming the Taoiseach office.  Cowen was the principal 
architect of the current governing coalition following the 
May 2007 elections.  Many observers, however, expect Cowen to 
"clean house" by replacing up to half the Fianna Fail 
ministers in the government with colleagues of his own 
liking. 
 
------------------------------ 
IMPACT ON U.S.-IRISH RELATIONS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (U) Ahern stated in his announcement that his decision to 
leave on May 6 took into account his invitation to travel to 
the U.S. to address a Joint Session of Congress on April 30 
and a state visit by the Prime Minister of Japan in early 
May.  He noted during his press conference that the address 
before Congress will be "one of the proudest moments of my 
political career." 
 
¶10.  (C) Ahern's resignation should have no impact on 
Ireland's support for the Northern Ireland Investment 
Conference.  Martin Fraser, the senior most Northern Ireland 
advisor in the Office of the Taoiseach, told the Embassy that 
whoever is Taoiseach on May 7-8 will participate in the 
conference, especially since it will give the Taoiseach a 
chance to talk with British Prime Minister Gordon Brown on 
the margins.  Similarly, Irish Foreign Affairs Political 
Director Rory Montgomery told the Embassy that government 
support for U.S. military flights through Shannon airport 
will not change, nor will its desire to conclude a general 
and commercial aviation pre-clearance and pre-inspection 
agreement with the U.S. 
 
------------- 
LISBON TREATY 
------------- 
 
¶11.  (C) Montgomery and other government officials stated 
that the resignation will not derail or delay the Irish 
referendum on the Lisbon Treaty, proposed for early June. 
Montgomery noted that Foreign Minister Dermot Ahern was due 
to propose a bill today in the Parliament that would launch 
the Referendum process.  Montgomery stressed his belief that 
Bertie Ahern was sincerely worried that his loss of 
credibility would hurt the government as it led a campaign to 
get the Treaty approved, and that this weighed as a factor in 
favor of Ahern's leaving his post prior to the referendum. 
 
DUBLIN 00000166  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Comment:  The overwhelming initial reaction in 
Dublin has been shock and surprise.  In general, commentators 
have praised Ahern for his role in the Northern Ireland peace 
process and the success of the "Celtic Tiger."  Irish 
President Mary McAleese praised Ahern for his accomplishments 
in bringing prosperity to Ireland and peace to Northern 
Ireland.  As for U.S.-Irish bilateral relations, we do not 
anticipate that new Fianna Fail leadership portends any 
change in Irish support for important U.S. foreign policy 
initiatives.  Once the dust settles on this historic day in 
Dublin, we expect the Irish Government to resume business as 
usual. 
FOLEY