08ISTANBUL499
PUBLIC INTELLECTUALS URGE VIGOROUS ERGENEKON
Wed Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO4487
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHIT #0499/01 2610824
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 170824Z SEP 08
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8479
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TU PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU PRIORITY
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISTANBUL 000499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL TU
SUBJECT: PUBLIC INTELLECTUALS URGE VIGOROUS ERGENEKON 
PROSECUTION 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1194 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1217 
     ¶C. ANKARA 1223 
     ¶D. ANKARA 1337 
     ¶E. ANKARA 680 
     ¶F. PORTICO 19 FEBRUARY 2008 
     ¶G. 04 ANKARA 6000 
 
Classified By: CONSUL GENERAL SHARON A. WIENER FOR REASONS 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary. Conversations with professors at various 
Istanbul universities reveal a fear among the left-wing 
intelligensia that the ruling Justice and Development 
Party (AKP) and Turkey's military establishment have arrived 
at a modus vivendi that, in order to protect the interests 
of both, will result in a detrimental limitation of the 
so-called "Ergenekon" prosecution. End summary. 
 
A Public Call for Vigorous Investigation 
---------------------------------------- 
¶2. (U) On August 14, a statement appeared in several national 
papers, signed by some 300 artists, journalists, academics 
and civil society actors, regarding the so-called "Ergenekon" 
 indictment (Refs A-D). In relevant part, the statement 
reads: "Despite its shortcomings and some of its 
controversial 
aspects, the indictment includes very important accusations 
and documents, and by deepening the investigation, 
democracy can benefit from a chance that was missed after the 
Susurluk and Semdinli incidents" (Ref D). The statement 
further "calls upon all of Turkey's institutions, both 
civilian and military, to show the necessary determination to 
keep the case alive and follow it to reveal the rest of 
Ergenekon's connections." 
¶3. (C) Comment. The "Susurluk incident" of 1996 arose out of 
a fatal car accident, as a result of which it was learned 
that the Deputy Chief of the Istanbul Police was intimately 
involved with organized crime figures. The "Semdinli 
incident" 
of 2005 involved a bombing in the eponymous town, officially 
attributed to the PKK but widely believed to have been 
committed by Turkish Jandarma provocateurs. As noted in Ref D, 
"Both cases evaporated without serious legal consequences for 
those allegedly involved." End Comment. 
¶4. (U) Many Turks view the Ergenekon prosecution as the AKP's 
response to the (recently terminated) AKP closure case (Ref 
C). We accordingly met with three signatories of the 
statement, senior professors at local universities, to find out why they 
think the AKP might not have the "necessary determination to 
keep the case alive and follow it": Sevket Pamuk, Professor of 
Economics and Economic History at Bogazici University (and 
older brother of Nobel Prize-winning author Orhan Pamuk); 
Halil Berktay, Professor of History at Sabanci University; 
and Murat Belge, Professor of Comparative Literature at 
Istanbul Bilgi University. All have extensive teaching 
experience at major U.S. universities and are very well- 
regarded in their fields of endeavor. All are self-described 
"leftists" with little sympathy for the social policies of 
the center-right the AKP, but recognize that for the time 
being there is in Turkey no serious alternative to the AKP. 
As They begrudgingly support the AKP, in the hope that its 
success will lead to EU accession for Turkey and thus firmly 
ground Turkey in the West. 
¶5. (C) All three professors stated that they, like many of 
their co-signers, were concerned that the AKP and the Turkish 
military had already or might in the future strike a deal, 
whereby in exchange for the AKP not pursuing the Ergenekon 
investigation "all the way," the military would cease or 
moderate its attacks on the AKP policies. 
Ergenekon Rooted in Turkey's "Love-Hate" Relationship with 
the West 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶6. (U) Professor Berktay offered a detailed exposition of the 
historical underpinnings of the Ergenekon conspiracy. 
According to Berktay, since the 19th century Turkey and 
before 
it the Ottoman Empire has had a "love-hate" relationship with 
the West. Even Ataturk, he said, the great Occidentalist, 
tolerated a certain degree of anti-Westernism within Turkish 
nationalism, believing it necessary for the creation of a 
 
ISTANBUL 00000499  002 OF 003 
 
 
unified Turkish identity. According to Berktay, Turkish 
nationalists chose independence over liberty and eventually 
the Western values of liberty and human rights came to be 
seen 
as a treasonous plot to divide Turks. During the cold war, 
this anti-Western strain was suppressed, because Turkey had 
to make common cause with the West. However, with the fall of 
Communism, and with Europe's increasingly vocal demands that 
Turkey honor human rights (particularly minority rights), this 
 "bruised and defiant" Turkish anti-Western nationalism was 
revitalized. 
¶7. (U) According to Berktay, this anti-Western nationalism 
found a receptive host in the Turkish military which, from 
the time of Demirel and Ciller (in the mid-1990s), and under 
justification of the war against the PKK, started to claim a 
priority in setting national policy. Throughout the 1990s, 
said Berktay, the military was backing an "increasingly 
puerile and absurd series of coalitions," in an attempt to 
maintain its position. When the AKP came to power in 2002, 
Ergenekon "came into its own," and its influence reached to 
the very top ranks of the military. In 2005, in response to 
the de-emphasis of the National Security Council (Ref G), the 
military leaders began to hold weekly press conferences, 
expostulating on all kinds of policy questions - acting, said 
Berktay, as an alternative government. The media magnified 
this "national line" and the Ergenekon nucleus was able to 
operate under this "umbrella." 
¶8. (U) Shortly after the military's aborted "e-coup" of 
April, 
2007, Prime Minister Erdogan met with then-JCS Chairman 
Buyukanit. The purpose of that meeting has never been made 
public, and speculation in the press runs the gamut from 
innocent to conspiratorial (such as the theory of former 
minister Fikrei Saglar that the PM blackmailed Buyukanit with 
a file of extraordinary spendings by his wife). Ten weeks 
later, the AKP achieved a stunning victory in the general 
elections and, said Berktay, "the wind went out of the sails" 
of the nationalists, and the military began "delinking" 
itself 
from Ergenekon. 
¶9. (U) On June 24, 2008, six weeks before the August 1 High 
Military Council (YAS) meeting at which General Basbug was 
expected to be named as Buyukanit's successor, Erdogan met 
with Basbug. A short official statement after the meeting 
said the two discussed the fight against terrorism and "some 
issues that recently came to the agenda." Press speculation 
is that those issues included the closure case, Ergenekon, 
and Basbug's future. 
The Theory: High-Level Military Involvement in Semdinli... 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶10. (C) Berktay's theory is that Erdogan had proof of 
Basbug's involvement in the Semdinli incident of November 
2005, and used it to force the military to stop protecting 
Ergenekon supporters within the military. As evidence that 
Buyukanit, Basbug and Erdogan reached an accommodation, 
Berktay points to two extraordinary occurrences: First, the 
military permitted civilian authorities to arrest two four 
star generals living on a military compound (Refs A, D). (The 
military had for years refused to assist civilian prosecutors 
investigating Ergenekon, asserting that the military justice 
system had sole jurisdiction over any crimes committed by 
military personnel.) Second, in its August 1 meeting, YAS 
failed (for the first time in 12 years) to expel any officers 
 for anti-secular activities. And, of course, notes Berktay, 
the Constitutional Court (which includes among its 
members at least one former military officer) decided not to 
ban the AKP. 
¶11. (C) While Berktay recognizes that it may not be in the 
best interests of the AKP to pursue the Ergenekon 
investigation to the bitter end, he believes that neither 
Turkish democracy, nor the AKP itself, can survive "another 
cover-up." Thus, the investigation must be pursued 
sufficiently far, and obtain sufficiently detailed 
confessions, that such extreme nationalism will not rise up 
again. Berktay is cautiously optimistic that this outcome 
will be achieved. 

... But A Simpler Theory Fits the Facts 
--------------------------------------- 
¶12. (C) Comment. Berktay's theory that the Ergenekon 
conspiracy reached the highest levels of the TGS (cf. Ref. F) 
suffers from the common fault that a simpler explanation 
accounts for the known facts: It is in the mutual interests 
 
ISTANBUL 00000499  003 OF 003 
 
 
of the AKP and the Turkish General Staff to find a modus 
vivendi (Refs B, E). While many in the military undoubtedly 
loathe the AKP, they surely recognize, in light of the wide 
public support that the party enjoys, that closing it would 
be but a temporary victory. And, given the military's ongoing 
spat with the People's Republican Party (CHP), the military 
does not currently have any alternative to the AKP. At the 
same time, the humiliation to the military of having many of 
its officers, including two retired four star generals, 
sentenced to long prison terms for coup plotting would be 
unbearable; indeed, such a result probably would be 
unacceptable as well to a wide swath of the voting public, 
which reveres the military. 
¶13. (C) Comment Continued. The AKP, for its part, has a great 
desire to neutralize the military in the AKP's fight against 
the traditional ruling elite. Such a victory likely would be 
viewed by the AKP as well worth the cost of limiting 
Ergenekon 
convictions to lower-level conspirators. As long as the 
outcome of the case is not seen to be a complete sham, most 
Turks likewise probably would be more than happy to see the 
Ergenekon investigation resolved in a manner analogous to 
that in which the AKP closure case was resolved: With 
penalties imposed but without mortal harm done. End comment. 
WIENER