08MANAGUA720
DEMARCHE DELIVERED: NICARAGUA PERSISTS ON
Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0023
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0720/01 1581732
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 061732Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2718
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/05/2018 
TAGS: PGOV NU
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: NICARAGUA PERSISTS ON 
COUNTER-MERIDA 
 
REF: STATE 57540 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  On June 5, Nicaraguan Foreign Ministry 
officials offered rebuttals to points contained in the USG 
rejection of the Nicaraguan Counter-Merida proposal. 
Regarding the USG position that Nicaragua could not receive a 
credit or loan guarantee as a member of the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, the officials pointed out 
that since the Nicaraguan proposal is a regional proposal 
covering all of Central America, other Central American 
countries that are not HIPC members should be able to receive 
the credit or loan guarantee.  The officials also continued 
to press for a "small group" meeting between the U.S., 
Honduras, and Nicaragua to discuss further security 
cooperation.  The officials concluded the meeting by pressing 
for more resources for Central American security and law 
enforcement initiatives, claiming that without such resources 
Nicaragua and other Central American countries would be 
forced to focus their resources on other priorities such as 
food security.  End Summary. 
 
Proposal Is Regional, HIPC Not A Problem 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (C) On June 5, PolChief delivered reftel demarche points 
to the Nicaraguan Foreign Ministry International Legal 
Advisory Division's Director of Democratic Security Carlos 
Vicente Ibarra, Director of North American Affairs Renee 
Morales, and North American Political Specialist Gregorio 
Torrez. When presented with the demarche points, Ibarra asked 
for more time to prepare a formal, official response but 
offered some "informal reactions" to the USG rejection of the 
Nicaraguan security (Counter-Merida) proposal.  Ibarra first 
pointed out that although the USG characterized the 
Counter-Merida proposal as Nicaraguan, in fact the proposal 
is regional and has support from other Central American 
countries such as Honduras. In response to the USG position 
that Nicaragua is unable to receive credit as a member of the 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, Ibarra 
said that other Central American countries who are not HIPC 
members would theoretically be able to receive the credit or 
loan guarantee. 
 
Small Groups Work Better 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) Ibarra then asked whether the demarche represented the 
USG's final response to Nicaragua's previous request to have 
a "small group meeting" between the U.S., Nicaragua, and 
Honduras to discuss the security proposal.  PolChief replied 
that although the demarche clearly addressed the USG response 
to Nicaragua's security proposal, continued security 
cooperation with Honduras and other Central American 
countries can be conducted through SICA meetings.  In 
response, Ibarra argued that a small group would be able to 
find more opportunities for cooperation and stressed the 
importance of holding such a meeting soon, lest the "door be 
closed" on this window of communication. 
 
Central America Needs More 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (C) North American Affairs Director Renee Morales added 
that the Government of Nicaragua (GON) is concerned that 
Nicaragua would only be receiving a small portion of the 
security funding proposed under the Merida Initiative.  She 
asserted that the GON is closely following the progress of 
the Merida Proposal through Congress and noted that Nicaragua 
will only receive less than $10 million USD.  Ibarra 
contrasted this to Nicaragua's security proposal, in which 
the GON calculated that Central America needs $953 million in 
resources to fully implement and fund the initiatives 
contained in the proposal.  "Financing is crucial," he 
continued, "for without sufficient financing Nicaragua and 
other Cental American countries may have to focus on other 
priorities, such as food security."  Morales assured 
PolChief, however, that the GON would ready for the SICA 
coordination meeting in Washington on Monday June 9 and hoped 
that it will be a productive session.  Ibarra pointedly 
remarked that the USG response to the Nicaraguan proposal is 
a "new element" in the situation that must be analyzed and 
factored into GON participation in the meeting. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: The GON clearly will not back down from their 
Counter-Merida proposal without a fight.  We can imply from 
the GON's inability to mention any other strong supporters of 
their proposal besides Honduras, though, that the GON has not 
found widespread support for their concept.  We believe, 
however, that the GON's view may be indicative of an overall 
perception by Central American countries that the Central 
American portion of the Merida Initiative is inadequate for 
the region's actual security needs.  In order to prevent the 
GON's Counter-Merida proposal from gaining any more traction 
amongst Nicaragua's neighboring countries, we strongly 
recommend that the Department share the points arguing 
against the GON proposal with other Central American posts. 
TRIVELLI