08MANAGUA1096
MICROFINANCE CONCERNS DOMINATE ECONOMIC ROUNDTABLE
Fri Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO7011
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1096/01 2352257
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 222257Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3084
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 001096 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC AND EEB 
TREASURY FOR SARA SENICH 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/MSIEGELMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/22/2028 
TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD PREL PGOV NU
SUBJECT: MICROFINANCE CONCERNS DOMINATE ECONOMIC ROUNDTABLE 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0932 
 
Classified By: DCM Richard Sanders for reasons 1.4 b & d. 
 
Summary 
------- 

¶1. (C) Participants in Ambassador Trivelli's farewell 
Economic Roundtable on July 29 expressed alarm that President 
Ortega's rhetoric and economic policies are now showing 
visible and negative effects on the economy.  In particular, 
Ortega's tirade in July against microfinance institutions 
(MFIs) seems to have fed violent protests in northern 
Nicaragua, raising lending risk to that segment of the 
economy and the cost of credit to poor farmers and small 
merchants nationwide (Reftel).  Prominent bankers report that 
rising country risk has caused some international bankers to 
rescind lines of credit.  One participant described 2008 as a 
"transition year," predicting that by the end of the year 
investor appetite for Nicaragua will be all but gone. 
Participants agreed that the investigation into a government 
bank bailout will continue to cast a pall over the political 
landscape as municipal elections in November draw closer.  A 
list of roundtable participants may be found in Paragraph 11. 
 End summary. 
 
Microfinance Protests 
--------------------- 

¶2. (C) Ambassador Trivelli's farewell roundtable took place 
in the midst of a gathering political storm surrounding 
microfinance institutions in Nicaragua.  Gabriel Solorzano, 
President of FINDESA (Nicaragua's second-largest MFI), 
provided a synopsis of the events in Nueva Segovia which 
began with peaceful protests.  Emotions fed by President 
Ortega's tirade in July against microfinance institutions 
culminated in violent protests, fires, and even the 
kidnapping of a local branch manager of a prominent MFI 
(Reftel).  While the violence in Nueva Segovia has ceased, 
the political initiative to label MFIs as usurious and tools 
of foreign "neoliberals" and "imperialists" is likely to 
continue.  To date, police have made no arrests. 
¶3. (C) According to Solorzano, two individuals were primarily 
responsible for stirring up a group of agricultural workers 
in two or three northern departments.  One of them is a 
long-time FLSN party member who is now a mayoral candidate 
for the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance in the city of Ocotal. 
The other is in arrears on debt owed to several MFIs.  He 
stands accused of borrowing $650,000 with either fake 
collateral or collateral already pledged to support other 
loans.  In response to the protests, a number of MFIs have 
offered to restructure loans to stressed clients, but no 
protesters have shown interest to date. 
 
¶4. (C) Meanwhile, the FSLN propaganda machine has hammered 
away, accusing the international community of lending to 
Nicaragua at exorbitant rates.  In 2007, President Ortega 
launched a political initiative he called "Zero Usury," under 
which he promised small- and medium-sized businesses "just 
and fair" credit through a new rural development bank and 
Venezuelan credit schemes.  Recently, however, Ortega has 
focused most of his criticism on MFIs, most of which are 
nongovernment organizations funded by international donors. 
Ironically, Ortega's rhetoric and resulting political 
protests will only force MFIs in Nicaragua to tighten credit 
requirements and raise rates to compensate for increased 
country risk. 
 
¶5. (C) As an alternative to MFIs, the FSLN propaganda machine 
is pushing ALBA-CARUNA (an FSLN savings and loan cooperative 
now funded by Venezuela under the Bolivarian Alternative for 
the Americas) as a viable alternative to "usurious" MFIs. 
Government and FSLN officials claim that ALBA-CARUNA can lend 
to poor farmers and others who lack collateral or steady 
income with an interest rate of 8.0%.  This rate is close to 
prime and unsustainable in an economy experiencing 20% annual 
inflation.  However, Solorzano reports that nearly all MFI 
clients in Nueva Segovia have declined to switch to 
ALBA-CARUNA, a fact that he interprets as strong evidence of 
the value that the market places on current MFI lending 
practices.  Solorzano points out that at an average interest 
rate of 26% -- despite high administrative costs normally 
associated with serving this sector -- MFIs in Nicaragua 
offer the second lowest interest rate in Latin America.  In 
Peru, MFIs charge around 55% and in Mexico 100%. 
 
¶6. (C) One roundtable participant commented that Ortega's 
fear of losing support from his political base is obsessive, 
particularly in Nueva Segovia.  If Ortega doubts that people 
will support him, he may create chaos to put the opposition 
off balance and make it look helpless.  (Comment: Since the 
roundtable, protests against MFIs have dissipated.  Central 
Bank President Antenor Rosales announced that the government 
would propose legislation governing the sector. We expect 
protests to reappear should Ortega find it politically 
convenient.  End comment.) 
 
Macroeconomic Woes 
------------------ 

¶7. (C) Luis Rivas, General Manager of BanPro (Nicaragua's 
largest bank), said that rising country risk caused a 
corresponding decrease in international lines of credit to 
Nicaraguan financial institutions.  One example is the 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (BCIE), which 
reduced its lines of credit to Nicaraguan banks by 25%. 
Moreover, no institution (except the Nicaraguan Institute for 
Social Security) is currently investing in government bonds. 
Part of the problem is that the Board of Directors of the 
Central Bank cannot approve government bond issues for lack 
of a quorum after three of its members resigned.  (Note: 
Local press report that the government has nominated three 
new board members.  End note.)  One participant described 
2008 as a "transition year," predicting that by the end of 
the year investor appetite for Nicaragua will be all but gone. 
 
¶8. (C) The head of a prominent think tank said the FSLN has 
been extremely inefficient in managing the government budget. 
 Moreover, the FSLN is keeping Venezuelan assistance 
off-budget as much as possible.  Amounting to as much as 50% 
of its oil import bill ($400-500 million a year), these 
sizable expenditures may be injecting considerable liquidity 
into the economy and thus fueling inflation.  One roundtable 
participant speculated that rising liquidity from Venezuelan 
assistance could cause inflation to reach 30% by the end of 
the year, a figure that a number of independent economists 
have also predicted.  Another economist reasoned that 
liquidity caused by Venezuelan assistance is partially offset 
by slow execution of the official budget and, therefore, 
inflation would not reach 30%. 
 
CENIs 
----- 

¶9. (C) Roundtable participants agreed that the government's 
investigation into a 2000-01 bank bailout financed by bonds 
(known as CENIs) is politically driven.  Among the 39 
individuals that the government is considering indicting for 
fraud, theft, money laundering, and other crimes against the 
state, four will undoubtedly remain prime political targets: 
Eduardo Montealegre (running for Mayor of Managua), Jaime 
Chamorro (owner of La Prensa, the largest daily newspaper and 
the most vocally opposed to Ortega's government of the major 
media), Noel Sacasa (former Central Bank governor), and 
Esteban Duque Estrada (former Finance Minister).  As one 
participant put it, the issue is being manipulated to 
&align8 a political objective, that is, the defeat of 
Montealegre in the mayoral race for Managua on November 9, 
¶2008. 
 
Comment 
------- 

¶10. (C) We found these prominent private sector 
representatives to be unusually outspoken in this farewell 
roundtable event with Ambassador Trivelli.  They exhibited 
great anxiety not only about short-term prospects in 
Nicaragua, but also the medium- to long-term economic 
outlook, as President Ortega's populist polices begin to 
visibly impact the trajectories for investment and economic 
growth. 
 
Roundtable Participants 
----------------------- 

¶11. (C) Following is the list of Nicaraguan participants 
(please protect): 
 
-- Mario ALONSO, former Central Bank President. 
 
-- Roberto BENDANA, President of Cafe Don Paco and former 
head of the Competitiveness Commission in the Bolanos 
Administration. 
 
-- Duilio BALTODANO, President of Cisa Agro, an agricultural 
commodities trader and distributor of agricultural inputs and 
equipment. 

-- Alejandro MARTINEZ Cuenca, President of the International 
Foundation for Global Economic Challenge.  Martinez Cuenca is 
also an economist, a businessman, and an FSLN member.  He was 
Ortega's Minister of the Economy in 1980s. 
 
-- Luis RIVAS, General Manager of Banpro, Nicaragua's largest 
bank and largest holder of CENIs. 
 
-- Mario SALVO, Technical Director of El Eskimo, a dairy 
processor, and former Minister of Agriculture in the Bolanos 
Administration 
 
-- Gabriel SOLORZANO, President of FINDESA, the second 
largest microfinance institution in Nicaragua (whose largest 
shareholder is Deutschbank). 
CALLAHAN