08MANAGUA1374
NICARAGUA: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON FREE TRADE ZONE
Wed Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO9316
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1374/01 3172117
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 122117Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3369
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 001374 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR/QUESENBERRY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2018 
TAGS: ECON EINV ETRD PREL NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON FREE TRADE ZONE 
COMMISSIONER 
 
Classified By: Classified by Ambassador Robert J. Callahan, E.O. 12958, 
 1.4 (b)(d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  The Ambassador met General (retired) Alvaro 
Baltodano on November 3 to get acquainted and encourage 
bilateral cooperation on bilateral trade and investment. 
Baltodano assured the Ambassador that Nicaragua would 
participate in the "Pathways to Prosperity" meeting to be 
held in Panama in December, but did not know how the 
delegation would be composed.  Despite Ortega's calls to 
renegotiate "asymmetries" in CAFTA, Baltodano believes that 
Nicaragua should pursue improvements through the existing 
framework of the agreement.  He acknowledged the difficulties 
caused by President Ortega's harsh rhetoric against the 
United States and global capitalism, but asserted that Ortega 
recognizes the value of foreign investment and support. 
Baltodano outlined an economic development plan for Nicaragua 
focusing on major infrastructure projects, but offered no 
basis for how it would be implemented.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador met General (retired) Alvaro Baltodano 
on November 3 to get acquainted and encourage bilateral 
cooperation on bilateral trade and investment.  Baltodano 
heads the Free Trade Zone (FTZ) Commission.  Nicaragua's FTZs 
are populated primarily by apparel manufacturers who export 
to the United States under CAFTA.  Baltodano also heads 
ProNicaragua, a quasi-government investment promotion agency. 
 His relationship with President Daniel Ortega dates to the 
mid 1970s, after Ortega was released from prison.  Baltodano 
is known to have a close, personal relationship with Ortega; 
he served as Ortega's campaign manager in the 2001 
presidential election.  Baltodano is able to reach Ortega on 
the telephone on short notice, and has been known to 
influence Ortega's thinking, at least on tactical issues. 
 
Pathways to Prosperity 
---------------------- 

¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador noted that Nicaragua was the only 
country invited to the "Pathways to Prosperity" inaugural 
event, held on the margins of the U.N. General Assembly 
meeting in New York in September, which failed to 
participate, and inquired as to Nicaragua's interest. 
Baltodano assured the Ambassador that Nicaragua would 
participate in the ministerial to be held in Panama in 
December.  He was not sure how the Nicaraguan delegation 
would be composed, but said that he planned to go.  He 
requested a written invitation.  (Note: The Ambassador had 
already written to General Baltodano and Minister of Trade, 
Industry, and Development Orlando Solorzano informing them 
that the Government of Panama will send formal invitations. 
We are following up to make sure this happens. End Note.) 
 
CAFTA 
----- 

¶4. (C) Baltodano agreed with the Ambassador that Nicaragua 
benefits greatly from CAFTA.  He stated that he does not 
believe that CAFTA needs to be renegotiated, despite Ortega's 
calls to renegotiate "asymmetries."  Baltodano does think, 
however, that Nicaragua can improve its lot within the 
framework of the agreement.  In particular, he wants a 
relaxation of the application of the one-for-one agreement 
(allowing a set amount of third country fabric in apparel 
exports to the United States) and, for what remains, he would 
like to replicate the less generous two-for-one agreement 
recently achieved by the Dominican Republic.  He referred to 
his October meeting to discuss these matters with U.S. Trade 
Representative and Department of Commerce officials in 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Harsh Rhetoric 
-------------- 

¶5. (C) Baltodano acknowledged the difficulties caused by 
President Ortega's harsh rhetoric against the United States 
and global capitalism, but asserted that Ortega recognizes 
the value of foreign investment and foreign assistance.  He 
cited Ortega's supportive positions with respect to ITG/Cone 
Denim's $100 million investment in a denim plant, the $175 
million Millennium Corporation Account project in the 
departments of Leon and Chinandega, and U.S. assistance to 
the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) in the aftermath 
of Hurricane Felix.  That said, Baltodano confessed that his 
job is not to inform the President of his mistakes, but 
rather to solve problems as they arise.  In this vein, he 
prefers to separate politics from trade and investment 
matters as much as possible, but realizes that this is not 
always possible.  The Ambassador recognized Baltodano's 
successful efforts to support ITG/Cone Denim, a satisfied 
U.S. investor by all accounts. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Baltodano asserted that Ortega afforded him the 
political space he needed to attract foreign investors to 
Nicaragua.  At this time, Baltodano's greatest challenge is 
replacing the recent loss of some apparel manufacturers.  He 
is talking to Benneton (U.S.) among other companies to fill 
the void.  (Note: For the first time since Nicaragua created 
free trade zones in early 1990s, employment has dropped as a 
result of companies departing for Southeast Asia. End Note.) 
 
¶7. (C) The Ambassador noted ever growing concern in the 
international community over narrowing political space in 
Nicaragua and harassment of democracy oriented 
non-governmental organizations.  Baltodano told the 
Ambassador that he thought President Ortega's meeting with 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) a few weeks previous 
went well.  There were no confrontations.  (Comment: Our 
assessment is a bit different.  In the meeting, Ortega 
essentially held court and the NGOs listened.  Accused of 
money laundering and political interference, donors country 
NGOs relations with the government have deteriorated 
significantly in recent months. End Comment.) 
 
¶8. (C) EconOff commented that bilateral relations seemed to 
be suffering from more than just harsh rhetoric.  Relations 
with individual ministries and agencies had deteriorated 
across the board.  Nicaraguan ministry and agency officials 
often do not respond to our inquiries and initiatives, and 
often erect barriers to cooperation.  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, for example, had invited 42 Nicaraguan technical 
staff to attend thirteen fully paid-for training events 
dealing with sanitary and phytosanitary standards.  None 
received permission to travel.  (Note: After considerable 
lobbying on the part of the previous ambassador, two 
individuals did receive permission at the last minute to 
attend two training events in June and July.  We received 
calls from them over the weekend to make arrangements for 
Monday travel.  As a consequence, the participants missed at 
least one day of their respective programs. End Note.) 
Failure to attend such training events limits Nicaragua's 
ability to take advantage of CAFTA and develop an 
agricultural industry.  Baltodano expressed an interest in 
seeing the list of applicants who had been denied.  The 
following evening at the Embassy's U.S. election night 
reception, the Ambassador handed the list to him; Baltodano 
promised to follow up. 
 
Economic Development Plan 
------------------------- 

¶9. (SBU) Baltodano outlined his economic development plan for 
Nicaragua.  The plan revolves around building infrastructure, 
managing water resources, and promoting certain industries, 
such as agriculture and tourism.  The infrastructure portion 
focuses on the construction of a deep water port on the 
Atlantic at Monkey Point, investment in geothermal and hydro 
power plants, and road construction.  None of his ideas are 
new, and he offered no reason as to why they would be 
implemented, now. 
 
Comment 
------- 

¶10. (C) Baltodano is a voice of reason within the Ortega 
government, at least on economic issues; he guards engagement 
with us on political matters. 
CALLAHAN