08MANAGUA1414
NICARAGUA: ATTORNEY GENERAL ESTRADA
Mon Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1414/01 3291615
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 241615Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3422
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN - CWEBSTER, AKRAAIMORE 
STATE FOR EEB/IFD/OIA - HGOETHERT 
L/CID - JKOVAR, CHOLLAND 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/24/2018 
TAGS: EINV EFIN EIND ECON ENRG EU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: ATTORNEY GENERAL ESTRADA 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 1120 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 460 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 803 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 450 
     ¶E. MANAGUA 880 
     ¶F. MANAGUA 1052 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan, reason: 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Attorney General Hernan Estrada is the 
Government of Nicaragua's (GON) lawyer and a close advisor to 
President Daniel Ortega.  While Estrada is known to us as the 
point person on U.S. citizen property claims, he also is the 
lead government official on protecting the assets and natural 
resources of the state, reviewing international contracts and 
agreements, and fighting corruption.  Estrada also acts as a 
politically partisan defender of FSLN policies in local and 
international fora.  Although he presents himself as one of 
the intellectual elite of the Sandinista party, Estrada 
operates more like a foot soldier following orders and at no 
time allows any daylight to show between his views and the 
prevailing party line.  Under pressure, he can be arrogant, 
difficult and evasive.  With a sharp legal mind and few 
ethical inhibitions, he relies on intimidation tactics and is 
likely to interpret what others say (or do not say) to his 
advantage.  End Summary. 
 
LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Attorney General Hernan Estrada is one of the most 
powerful and influential officials in the GON.  As the 
government's lawyer, he carries the rank of minister and 
enjoys direct access to President Daniel Ortega.  He advises 
Ortega on a wide range of issues related to government 
affairs and politics.  While Estrada is the lead official on 
resolving U.S. citizen property claims, he has a myriad of 
other legal responsibilities.  By law, the Attorney General 
is charged with defending and protecting the assets and 
natural resources of the state, representing the state in 
national and international court cases, acting as a legal 
advisor to the executive branch, defending human rights, 
fighting corruption and malfeasance within the government, 
and reviewing contacts and international agreements signed by 
the executive branch.  In practice, Ortega almost always 
delegates authority to Estrada to sign contracts on behalf of 
the government. 
 
BROAD AUTHORITY 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Legal scholars say that President Ortega has had 
Estrada engage in closer political control over the work of 
the government lawyers than recent attorneys general.  An 
example of this is his authority over the administrative 
procedures and compensation deliberations on all property 
claims.  Previously, the attorney general reviewed and signed 
final settlements, or "finiquitos," but did not get involved 
in negotiations or ruling on claims.  Late in 2007, in a 
shocking development, Estrada exercised broad authority to 
review and dismiss property claims previously accepted as 
legitimate.  This included 48 claims for a lack of 
documentation and 98 U.S. claims under Decrees 3 (1979) and 
38 (1979) for political reasons (Ref A).  On principle, we 
have not accepted these dismissals, but we did contact U.S. 
claimants to inform them of the dismissals and their right to 
appeal. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Today, no one would argue with the assertion that 
Estrada exercises full control over government institutions 
dealing with property claims, including the Office of the 
Property Superintendent, the National Confiscations Review 
Commission (CNRC), the Office of Assessment and 
Indemnification (OCI), the Nicaraguan Institute for 
Territorial Surveying (INETER), as well as the national and 
all regional public property registry offices.  None of these 
agencies/offices are allowed to pursue settlements 
independently of the attorney general, although Estrada has 
been willing to delegate a bit more authority in recent 
months.  The Property Superintendent, Yara Perez, a militant 
Sandinista and a particularly difficult adversary, was 
Estrada's Assistant Attorney General before he named her 
Superintendent.  She still takes her orders from Estrada. 
 
OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Estrada has been a key player in pursuing GON 
interests on a wide range of sensitive issues outside of 
property claims.  Since 2007, he has worked with the Ministry 
of Energy and Mines and the Investment Promotion Agency to 
resolve contractual issues surrounding offshore oil and gas 
concessions to two U.S. firms.  He signed new contracts with 
one of the U.S. firms and is currently reviewing contracts 
for the other (Ref B). 
 
¶6. (SBU) In 2007 and 2008, after Ortega threatened the 
electric utility, Estrada challenged the government's 
contract with Union Fenosa, the Spanish company operating the 
national utility, forcing the firm to renegotiate contracts 
with suppliers.  One result was that the government acquired 
a 16% stake in the local Union Fenosa subsidiary, which came 
with a seat on the board. 
 
¶7. (SBU) In 2008, Estrada led the government's efforts to 
pressure Barcelo Hotels and Resorts (Spain), owner of 
Nicaragua's flagship tourist resort (Montelimar), to pay a 
$1.5 million fee for failing to honor a sales agreement to 
pay more to the government should the hotel's occupancy rate 
rise above a predetermined level (Ref C).  Barcelo enlisted 
the support of the Spanish government and dug in its heels, 
maintaining that because it had invested in the construction 
of more rooms, the resort never reached the occupancy rate 
specified in the contract. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Also in 2008, Estrada led a GON negotiation team at 
one point for the refinancing of medium-term government 
bonds, known as CENIs, with two of the largest local banks. 
His high pressure tactics included challenging one of the 
banks (majority U.S.-owned) regarding the title to its 
principal office holding and both banks by attempting to have 
a local judge sequester the CENIs, which were bearer bonds 
(Ref D).  In the end, the banks agreed to cut the interest 
rate by 30% and extend the redemption date (Ref E).  (Note: 
Ironically, this is exactly what opposition leader Eduardo 
Montealegre did as Finance Minister, and for which the Ortega 
government has threatened criminal prosecution.  End Note.) 
 
HATCHET MAN 
----------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Beyond his legal responsibilities as Attorney 
General, Estrada frequently serves as political hatchet man 
in the defense of FSLN policies.  For example, he publicly 
asserted that famous Nicaraguan singer and former FSLN member 
Carlos Mejia Godoy could not sue the FSLN for unauthorized 
use of his song, "La Consigna (The Insignia)," because 
Godoy's music "belonged to the Nicaraguan people, just like 
works that one might find in the national archive" (Ref F). 
At one point, Estrada threatened to shut down the national 
newspaper "La Prensa" for reporting that six members of the 
Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC), an 
internationally recognized terrorist organization, entered 
Nicaragua to celebrate the 29th anniversary of the Sandinista 
Revolution.  Several members of the private sector have told 
us that Estrada is normally "the muscle" when they negotiate 
with or receive bad news from the GON. 
 
 
MOVING AGAINST NGOS 
------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) During the 133rd meeting of the Organization of 
American States' International Human Rights Commission 
(CIDH-OEA) in Washington on October 27, Estrada, as 
representative of the GON, answered questions concerning 
government audits, investigations, and intimidation of 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) based on trumped up 
allegations of corruption and money laundering.  Despite the 
fact that his government was in the midst of taking action on 
multiple fronts to stifle or even close local NGOs, 
especially those engaged in fostering democratic institutions 
and values, he categorically stated with a straight face that 
"there is no government persecution against NGOs that exists 
in Nicaragua.  There are no restrictions against the freedom 
of expression.  Any accusations are nothing more than a 
campaign to discredit the government during the Nicaraguan 
municipal elections." 
 
BLURRING THE LINE BETWEEN PARTY AND STATE 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Like other agencies and ministries in the 
Nicaraguan government today, Estrada makes sure that his 
office actively supports the political objectives of the 
FSLN.  At the conclusion of the October Property Working 
Group meeting, for example, EconOff witnessed FSLN supporters 
preparing for a political campaign rally inside of the 
Attorney General's Office, in fact recruiting officials to 
participate. 
 
¶12. (SBU) During a November 13 visit to the Nicaraguan Center 
for Human Rights to investigate acts of political violence 
that occurred as a result of civil protests against the 
wholesale fraud that took place during the November 9 
municipal elections, Estrada again donned the red and black 
colors of the FSLN, publicly warning with biblical reference 
(Luke 21:6), "If Commander (Ortega's rank as a Sandinista 
Revolutionary) Ortega would make a call to his supporters, 
there will 'not be left one stone on top of another' when it 
came to press that opposed the government.  Thank God he has 
not done so."  Within days, 40 masked men invaded and 
destroyed three radio stations in the city of Leon commando 
style, and roving Sandinista gangs ransacked the parked 
vehicles of two local broadcast stations in sporadic street 
violence.  On November 19, a smiling, friendly Estrada took 
pains to explain that his statement should not be construed 
as a threat, as it was widely perceived to have been in the 
press. 
 
BIOGRAPHY 
--------- 
 
¶13. (U) Dr. Hernan Estrada Santamaria was born on October 21, 
1957 in Chinandega, a city in northwestern Nicaragua.  He 
graduated from the Universidad Autonoma de Nicaragua in Leon 
(UNAN-Leon) in 1980 with a law degree, and quickly became a 
practicing lawyer and notary public.  During the first 
Sandinista government, Estrada worked for the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (it has been rumored that he is a possible 
replacement for Foreign Minister Samuel Santos), including a 
concurrent appointment as Ambassador to East Germany and 
Austria.  In 1990, he established his own law firm, Abogacia 
Estrada, retained by public and private sector clients alike. 
 Ironically, several U.S. citizen claimants whose property 
was confiscated in the 1980s employed Estrada as their 
lawyer.  On January 10, 2007, inauguration day, President 
Ortega appointed Estrada as Attorney General. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Estrada is married to Vilma Roman, a cousin of 
Comandante Jaime Wheelock Roman.  As Minister of Agriculture 
and Agrarian Reform after the Sandinista revolution in 1979, 
Wheelock supervised the wholesale confiscation of private 
property in Nicaragua.  In all, the government took control 
of or redistributed more than 28,000 properties.  Estrada and 
Roman have two sons, one is married to an Austrian citizen 
and currently lives in Austria.  Estrada speaks Spanish, 
German, and very limited English. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶15. (C) Although Estrada prides himself as one of the 
intellectual elite in the FSLN, he operates more like a foot 
soldier following orders and at no time allows any daylight 
to show between his views and the prevailing party line. 
Under pressure, he can be arrogant, difficult, and evasive. 
Unless a counterpoint is forcefully made, he may simply 
ignore it, pretending that his argument has carried the day. 
With a sharp legal mind and few ethical inhibitions, he 
relies on intimidation tactics and is likely to interpret 
what others say (or do not say) to his or the GON's 
advantage.  Securing agreement on contentious issues may be 
difficult.  However, when he wants, as he undoubtedly will at 
least at the beginning of the bilateral review scheduled for 
December 11-12, he can be a smiling, effusive, and charmingly 
welcoming individual. 
 
CALLAHAN