08MANAGUA922
TERRITORIAL RESTRUCTURING OF AUTONOMOUS REGIONS
Fri Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO1407
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0922/01 2002257
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 182257Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2917
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//J2/J3/J5// PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MANAGUA 000922 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLS PASS TO USAID LAC 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN GREENE AND NYMAN 
DEPT FOR DRL G. MAGGIO 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA - EMERSON 
DEPT FOR USOAS 
NSC FOR V ALVARADO 
SOUTHCOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/08/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ECON KDEM NU
SUBJECT: TERRITORIAL RESTRUCTURING OF AUTONOMOUS REGIONS 
FAVORS SANDINISTAS 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 416 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 865 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY: There are two proposals pending 
introduction into the National Assembly (NA) that would carve 
out two new regions or departments from the North Atlantic 
Autonomous Region (RAAN) and its southern counterpart, the 
RAAS.  Liberal deputies allegedly authored both proposals on 
grounds that the western parts of both regions are 
ethnically, culturally, and economically more tied to the 
neighboring departments than to their coastal capitals. 
Besides supporting these proposals, the president of the 
Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN)-allied indigenous 
Yatama party, Brooklyn Rivera, also seeks to capitalize on 
them to push for reforms to the Law of Autonomy (Law 28) that 
governs both regions.  Rivera would like to see greater 
autonomy and indigenous control in what would remain of the 
two regions.  Liberals on the Atlantic Coast, however, oppose 
both proposals on grounds that Rivera is manipulating the 
deputies in order to consolidate his personal control of the 
region.  Many indigenous groups are also suspicious of 
Rivera's motives, believing that such reforms would grant 
Rivera and President Daniel Ortega virtually unfettered 
access to the regions' rich natural resources.  END SUMMARY 
 
Reforms Needed to Law of Autonomy 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Law 28, the law that established the North and 
South Atlantic Autonomous Regions, was passed by the first 
Ortega Administration over 20 years ago, many believe as an 
effort to placate the regions, indigenous inhabitants after 
years of conflict with Ortega,s then-administration.  The 
law, which created two zones from the larger Zelaya 
territory, as well as the department of Rio San Juan, 
formalized indigenous leadership structures at the regional, 
territorial, and communal levels with elected leaders.  In 
addition, land and resources were recognized as communal. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Over the past 15 years, there has been a steady 
influx of "mestizos" -- non indigenous people of 
Spanish-speaking origin -- into these vast sparsely populated 
territories seeking cheap land for agriculture and 
cattle-raising.  Immigrants brought with them the concept of 
private property and, thus, have sought to "purchase" land 
from local communities or have simply moved in and staked out 
property.  Today, particularly in the western reaches of the 
RAAN and RAAS, mestizos greatly outnumber indigenous groups 
whose members are predominantly concentrated along the major 
rivers and the Atlantic coast line, having largely ceded the 
inland territory to immigrants. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Given that Law 28 designated both regions as 
communal property, the issue of property rights -- private 
vs. communal -- is contentious and complicated in the RAAN 
and RAAS.  Indigenous communities have struggled for years 
for more formal recognition and definition of their communal 
lands and to stop, or better regulate, the encroachment of 
mestizos.  In this regard, the indigenous structures 
formalized in Law 28 create an overlapping maze of 
authorities, decision-makers, and claimants.  This confusion 
of land ownership and titling and the myriad of communal, 
territorial, and regional bodies that potential investors 
must work through has been an important contributor to the 
regions' slow economic development (Ref A). 
 
Current Political Reality Favors Liberal Parties 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) As the demographic mix of the RAAN and RAAS has 
shifted, so, too, has the political balance.  Most of the 
mestizo immigrants from Nicaragua's western departments vote 
Liberal.  As a result, indigenous political parties and 
movements have been slowly losing ground over the years.  The 
current incarnation of the largest indigenous political 
movement, Yatama, is closely aligned with Sandinista 
President Ortega's FSLN.  The personal popularity of Yatama 
president Brooklyn Rivera -- who is widely reported to fancy 
himself "king of the indigenous peoples" -- has fallen 
sharply over the past two years due to his close alliance 
with Ortega, the national and regional government's 
collective bungling of post-Hurricane Felix relief efforts, 
and the violence orchestrated by these same authorities on 
April 4 in the RAAN capital of Puerto Cabezas over possible 
election delays.  Aware that his only currency with Ortega is 
his ability to control the Atlantic Coast, specifically the 
RAAN, Rivera is interested in fashioning solutions that would 
allow him to maintain his grip upon the region while 
maintaining a facade of support for indigenous rights. 
 
RAAS Proposal - Playing into Rivera's Hands? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) National Assembly deputy Francisco Jarquin, who, 
until recently, was allied with Eduardo Montealegre's Vamos 
Con Eduardo (VCE) movement, is the primary advocate for a 
plan to carve out a new department composed of four 
municipalities -- Nueva Guinea, El Ayote, El Rama and Muelle 
de Los Bueyes  -- from the western portion of the RAAS. 
Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) deputy Francisco Aguirre 
Sacasa is also backing this proposal.  According to Jarquin, 
these municipalities are populated by mestizos who vote 
Liberal and who have more in common -- culturally and 
economically -- with their neighboring departments to the 
west than with the RAAS' coastal population.  He also 
emphasizes that the new territory would be incorporated as a 
department, not a region, precisely to facilitate the 
ownership of private property.  Jarquin also admits -- as 
does RAAS Regional Council President Lourdes Aguilar -- that 
these four municipalities have never participated in Regional 
Council elections, as mandated by Law 28.  As such, Jarquin 
stresses that the inhabitants' interests are therefore not 
represented by the regional government. (COMMENT:  When 
pressed about why these important commercial and population 
centers had never been incorporated into regional elections, 
Aguilar simply shrugged and admitted it was a problem.  END 
COMMENT) 
 
¶7.  (C) While Jarquin, who hails from Muelle de Los Bueyes, 
is pushing for the separation of a new department based on 
commercial, cultural, and ethnic differences, Aguilar and 
other Liberal leaders in the RAAS capital of Bluefields are 
strongly opposed to the idea and are convinced that Rivera -- 
who also favors the separation of these four municipalities 
-- is manipulating Jarquin.  According to Aguilar, Liberal 
Bluefields mayor Luis Gutierrez, and VCE mayoral candidate 
Harold Baccon, removing these Liberal municipalities would 
have several negative effects on the RAAS: 
 
- It would sever a large portion of the RAAS' Liberal voter 
base, increasing the proportion of Yatama -- and, by proxy -- 
Sandinista votes in the remaining RAAS; 
 
- it would reduce the remaining RAAS percentage of the 
national vote from 10 percent to two percent, jeopardizing 
the RAAS' representation in the National Assembly, which has 
historically been Liberal; and, 
 
- it would economically isolate Bluefields from the rest of 
the country. 
 
¶8.  (C) Although the RAAS, as a region, would lose its 
economic engine if these four municipalities were separated, 
Rivera appears willing to accept this "compromise" for two 
reasons.  First, if the alternative to separation would be 
inclusion on the Regional Council, Liberal representation on 
the council would immediately increase by 12 votes (each 
municipality enjoys three votes), shifting power -- and 
control -- on the council away from Rivera.  Second, Rivera 
is advocating that, in exchange, the remainder of the RAAS be 
left alone to govern itself using a reformed Law 28, which 
Rivera himself drafted, that strengthens indigenous control. 
Despite Rivera's supposed strong advocacy for indigenous 
rights and communal property, some of Rivera's strongest 
opponents remain the indigenous groups themselves -- 
including the Mayangna and Rama Indians of the RAAS -- who 
claim that Rivera is playing the indigenous card to further 
his own political and economic ends. 
 
RAAN Proposal - Same Question 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) In the RAAN, PLC National Assembly deputy Victor 
Duarte is also advocating the creation of a territorial 
entity that would include the western and northern RAAN 
municipalities of Siuna, Bonanza, Rosita and Mulukuku. 
Unlike Jarquin's proposal, however, Duarte prefers the new 
territory be classified as a "region" versus a "department," 
placing him at loggerheads with Rivera.  The primary 
advantage, as Duarte sees it, is that regional status bestows 
additional budgetary support through the parallel governor 
and Regional Council structures set up under Law 28.  As a 
department, these autonomous governance structures -- and the 
accompanying budget -- would not be available.  When pressed 
about the possibility of Rivera exerting more influence than 
he does today in this area of the RAAN if the new territory 
were set up as a region -- especially if his Law 28 reforms 
are approved -- Duarte remarked, "At least the region would 
get more money, and we (Liberals) would also see some 
benefit."  Duarte was equally dismissive of the strengthened 
communal property language in Rivera's proposed reforms that 
would theoretically apply, commenting that, "98 percent of 
the population is mestizo and we already have private 
property." 
 
¶10.  (C) Consulted on the issue, ecumenical and Miskito 
leaders in the RAAN coastal cities of Puerto Cabezas and 
Waspam expressed firm opposition to Duarte's proposal, 
claiming that Rivera is manipulating Duarte.  The proposal, 
leaders claim, would weaken the economic strength of the 
region, deepening the region's poverty and making its 
inhabitants even more vulnerable to Rivera's machinations. 
Leaders warned that Rivera is sending teams of his Yatama 
supporters to communities throughout the region to promote 
regional separation and his Law 28 reforms, claiming "greater 
empowerment" for the Miskito communities.  While the 
communities are inherently suspicious of Rivera, the leaders 
lamented that most residents have little formal education and 
virtually no knowledge of the proposed reforms. 
 
¶11.  (C) Of greater concern to both Duarte and coastal 
Miskito leaders is President Ortega's May 5 Presidential 
Decree to create Special Development Regimes (SDRs) in four 
municipalities in the RAAN and the northern department of 
Jinotega (Ref B).  Whereas the high Liberal voter 
concentration in the proposed new region would still assure 
strong Liberal representation in any form of elected 
government, the directors or "sindicos" of the SDRs would be 
appointed directly by President Ortega to oversee government 
development programs.  Duarte is concerned that, even if his 
wish for a separate region were realized, any elected 
government -- be it governors or regional councils under 
autonomous law or municipal mayors under national law -- 
would be side-lined by the sindicos because they would 
control the purse strings. 
 
Rivera's Dream 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶12.  (C) Rivera envisions a purely indigenous government with 
complete control over the regions' resources.  In a detailed 
presentation, Rivera spells out many reforms and changes to 
Law 28, including the abolition of the municipal government 
structure to be replaced by an indigenous community model. 
These community structures would form part of larger 
indigenous territories which, in turn, would form autonomous 
regions (the RAAN and the RAAS).  Rivera also seeks to create 
a third regional-equivalent structure called "Wanky Wihta 
Buka Was" that is comprised of several non-contiguous 
geographic territories.  Consulted about this new structure, 
RAAN Miskito leaders clarified that the indicated territories 
coincide with the region's richest resource concentrations 
and that Rivera intends to set himself up as "cacique" -- 
chief -- of the region to control these resources (septel). 
Rivera's plan would divide each region into two components - 
Indigenous Territories and Multiethnic Districts.  The 
multiethnic Districts -- where the remaining mestizos would 
presumably reside -- would, according to Rivera's vision, 
still be subject to national law, giving the impression they 
will be isolated Liberal pockets within the region and 
therefore less of a threat to Rivera's new kingdom. 
 
Comment - Likely Outcome 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13.  (C) It is likely that some version of both the RAAS and 
RAAN proposals will pass, most probably, according to both 
bill sponsors, after November's municipal elections.  The 
proposals should gain Liberal support due to the obvious 
benefit of concentrating and granting more control to the 
Liberal vote in new departments / regions. Reclassification 
as a department, in the case of the RAAS, would help 
facilitate private property ownership.  Likewise, the FSLN 
would support the proposals because separating the Liberal 
portions of the RAAN and RAAS would strengthen President 
Ortega's hold on the region through his alliance with 
Brooklyn Rivera. 
 
¶14.  (C) Through the lens of political and economic self 
interest, both the Liberals and FSLN can justify their 
support for the proposals.  Whether or not these proposals 
are in the best long-term interest of either democracy or the 
indigenous populations, however, may be an entirely different 
matter.  Controlling the region -- especially under the guise 
of empowering the indigenous by reforming Law 28 -- would 
give Rivera and Ortega virtually unfettered access to the 
regions' rich natural resources.  Indeed, well placed sources 
fret constantly about Rivera's interest in resource 
extraction from the two autonomous regions.  For example, he 
reportedly holds significant timber interests in the area 
affected by Hurricane Felix last September and is extracting 
timber despite a restrictive ban on timber harvesting.  Law 
28 reform could set well up Rivera as a virtual one-man 
political show and local economic robber baron on the 
Atlantic Coast, undermining both the principles of elective 
democracy and fundamental elements of indigenous law. 
TRIVELLI