08MANAGUA1187
NICARAGUA LABOR: MINIMUM WAGE BATTLE CONTINUES
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO8539
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1187/01 2661608
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 221608Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3187
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 0372
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//J2/J3/J5//
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 001187 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN KRAAIMOORE 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA EMERSON 
DEPT FOR DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2018 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV PHUM ETRD EINV NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA LABOR: MINIMUM WAGE BATTLE CONTINUES 
 
REF: MANAGUA 578 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: After several rounds of the most recent 
semiannual tripartite minimum wage negotiations, there is 
still no consensus on the next increase, and no one seems 
interested in ending the negotiations any time soon. 
Business leaders are willing to accept an 11.7% increase on 
top of a 15% increase granted in January and their ability to 
remain competitive in the face of rising labor costs; labor 
union representatives now demand a 35% increase to recover 
lost purchasing power from high food and fuel costs; and the 
government proposes a 13% increase to maintain jobs. With the 
GON offer finally tabled, labor union leaders aligned with 
the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) are beginning 
to cave; however, there is still no agreement and the process 
will most likely continue until after the November Municipal 
elections to avoid any distracting labor-government 
confrontations.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Background: Nicaraguan Minimum Wage Law 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Nicaragua Minimum Wage Law (Law 625) was pushed 
through the National Assembly in June 2007 by the FSLN 
deputies without permitting substantial modifications by the 
opposition.  The law establishes the minimum wage according 
to occupations, including, construction, free trade zones, 
financial services, domestic/service, and others.  It 
stipulates that the minimum wages for these occupations will 
be reviewed every six months by the National Commission of 
Minimum Wage, a tripartite body that includes business, labor 
and government representatives. The Commission's mandate is 
to discuss appropriate adjustments to the minimum wage that 
reflect inflation and economic growth as reported by 
Nicaragua's Central Bank.  Once there is agreement among the 
business, labor, and government representatives, then the new 
minimum wage can take immediate effect or can be retroactive 
to the start of negotiations. If no agreement is reached 
through the tripartite negotiations after two months of 
meetings, then the GON has 30 days to unilaterally declare 
the new minimum wage.  To date, there have been three 
convocations of the National Commission of Minimum Wage, and 
the next statutory convocation is scheduled for November 
¶2008. 
 
Round One: Business Budges a Bit 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Federation of Nicaraguan Business Associations 
(COSEP) and the FSLN-affiliated Small Business Association 
(CONAPI) initially proposed an 11.29% increase to the minimum 
wage during the first round of the current semiannual 
tripartite negotiation that began the first week of August. 
Business representatives raised their offer to 11.73% after 
heated meetings with labor leaders, but have held firm at 
that level for the past month.  COSEP and business leaders 
would not be willing to raise minimum wages above 12% and 
defend their position by claiming that it is "tied to (the 
formula in) the Nicaraguan minimum wage law" and an increase 
above 12% "is inconsistent with technical criteria." 
 
 
Round Two: Divided Unions 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU) Although there was consensus between FSLN and 
non-FSLN labor unions after the first round of the annual 
tripartite negotiation, as second round opened, the 
FSLN-affiliated labor unions were divided over the percentage 
increase they should demand from the private sector. The 
FSLN-allied National Front of Workers (FNT), led by Luis 
Barbosa, and by National Assembly member and President of the 
Health and Social Security Committee Gustavo Porras, demanded 
a 53% increase to help workers fight rising inflation and the 
loss of purchasing power. Meanwhile, the FSLN-allied Central 
Trade Union of Sandinista Workers (CST), led by Roberto 
Gonzalez, demanded a 25% increase in the minimum wage with a 
20% government subsidy for staples.  The lack of consensus 
among the union representatives prolonged the second round of 
negotiations and delayed the presentation of government's 
offer.  Porras, in particular, has been manipulating the 
tripartite process for his own political purposes. 
Throughout negotiations, he would suddenly leave the 
negotiation room to hold impromptu press conferences, in 
which he has bashed Nicaragua,s business community and 
claimed to be the main labor spokesperson. 
 
Round Three: Government Gives Little Ground 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (SBU) On August 25, 2008, the GON, aware of its own 
budgetary constraints as a major employer, but also a 
self-proclaimed defender of Nicaragua's workers, offered a 
compromise that would raise the current minimum wage by 13%. 
GON representatives argued that its 13% offer, in addition to 
the January 2008 15% increase, would represent an overall 28% 
increase in the minimum wage for the year.  Ivan Acosta, the 
Secretary General of the Ministry of Finance and Public 
Credit, defended the GON proposal by arguing that a larger 
increase would raise unemployment and threaten economic 
stability. 
 
Round Four: Unions Cave, GON Seeks Business Agreement 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (SBU) Since the GON tabled its compromise, Labor Minister 
Jeaneth Chavez has been absent from subsequent meetings and 
sent a lower ranking deputy to represent the government in 
these negotiations. Union leaders decried the absence of the 
main GON negotiator as evidence that there was no firm 
agreement. Porras, who is both a labor leader and Nicaraguan 
government official, rejected the GON's offer, claiming that 
it was not "serious and responsible" and that the GON's next 
offer would be more reasonable.  However, Porras went on to 
unilaterally propose a 35% increase, significantly lower than 
labor's 53% starting point. Meanwhile non-FSLN-affiliated 
union leader, Emilio Marquez Acuna, took a harder line by 
remarking that the GON offer "signals contempt and 
indifference" toward the labor force of Nicaragua. 
 
¶7. (C) Embassy business contacts involved in the tripartite 
negotiations said that after the GON announced its compromise 
offer, Labor Ministry officials secretly contacted them 
outside of the tripartite process to try to reach an 
agreement.  The terms of GON-proposed agreement between 
business and government would primarily benefit the GON, by 
allowing it to paint the Nicaraguan business community as 
hostile to labor.  Our business contacts tell us that they 
would not support the one-sided GON proposal, nor would they 
walk out of the negotiations in protest again, as they have 
previously in the last two negotiations. However, they 
continue to believe that the semiannual negotiation process 
is "an unnecessary, never-ending, political 
three-ring-circus" that gives labor unions a "bully pulpit 
against business" and ultimately, scares-off foreign 
investment in Nicaragua because of the unpredictable labor 
costs. 
 
Final Decision: After the Election? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Union representatives, led primarily by Porras and 
Barbosa, were adamant in their demands for a 53% increase in 
the minimum wage until the FSLN-controlled GON made its 
offer.  Now Porras, and other FSLN-affiliated labor leaders, 
seem to be walking back.  Business leaders are still not 
willing to raise wages more than 12% at the expense of losing 
their cost advantages and increasing inflation.  Despite 
Ortega's rhetoric, the GON is unable to move much closer to 
the union position because of its own limited budget for 
government employees.  Our contacts tell us that the 
tripartite negotiations will continue until September 24th, 
when the GON begins its statutory 30-day period to 
unilaterally declare the next increase to minimum wages. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 

¶9. (C) Soaring food and fuel prices are fueling the heated 
debate at the Nicaraguan National Commission on Minimum Wage. 
 These same economic issues are also at play with potential 
voters in the 2008 Municipal Election.  We believe that in 
this pre-election environment, the FSLN-controlled government 
will further put off declaring a new, unilateral minimum wage 
increase until after the November municipal elections.  This 
allows the GON to avoid any embarrassing labor confrontations 
or be perceived as treating workers unfairly.  Union leaders, 
so far, have not threatened to strike. However, there is a 
significant division between FSLN-aligned unions that want to 
be more sympathetic to the GON position and non-FSLN-aligned 
unions that are willing to take a harder line, similar to the 
division that occurred during this summer's transportation 
strike (see REFTEL).  We note that under a non-FSLN 
administration in an election year, a similar discrepancy 
between labor demands and the GON would have resulted in 
well-organized labor demonstrations and strikes. 
CALLAHAN