08MANAGUA1151
NICARAGUA: ANOTHER SETBACK FOR PRESS FREEDOM,
Wed Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO0062
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1151/01 2542041
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 102041Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3144
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//J2/J3/J5// PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MANAGUA 001151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN KRAAIMORE 
DEPT FOR WHA/PPD TPICKEREL 
DEPT FOR INR/AA AEMERSON 
DEPT FOR DRL GMAGGIO 
NSC FOR CGARCIA 
USDOC FOR4332/ITA/MAC/WH/MSIEGELMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2018 
TAGS: PHUM PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: ANOTHER SETBACK FOR PRESS FREEDOM, 
POPULAR PUNDIT TAKEN OFF AIR 
 
REF: A. 08 MANAGUA 989 
     ¶B. 08 MANAGUA 955 
     ¶C. 08 MANAGUA 866 
     ¶D. 08 MANAGUA 823 
     ¶E. 07 MANAGUA 669 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert Callahan for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
 SUMMARY 
- - - - - 
 
¶1.  (C)  For the second time in five months, outspoken 
political commentator Jaime Arellano was removed from the 
television airwaves after the owners of the independent 
television station Channel 2 succumbed to government pressure 
to cancel his morning talk show, "El Dos en la Nacion" (Two 
in the Nation).  The move is widely seen as the Ortega 
Administration's latest attempt to silence and intimidate its 
critics, control the media, suppress freedom of expression, 
and consolidate its power.  The Sandinista official media, 
namely Channel 4, Radio Ya, and its new weekly tabloid "El 
19," have accused Arellano along with other media adversaries 
of "sowing hatred" and being part of a "neoliberal plot of 
corruption" against the Nicaraguan people.  The Citizen Power 
Councils (CPCs), meanwhile, have been dispatched throughout 
Managua, mounting a "prayer campaign" against the media and 
journalists under the slogan "love is more powerful than 
hate."  The cancellation of the Arellano show for the second 
time in less than a year also indicates that the Ortega 
government's communications strategy, developed by First Lady 
Rosario Murillo to use fear to scare media outlets into 
self-censorship, appears to be working.  END SUMMARY 
 
ADIOS, EL PINGUINO (GOODBYE MR. PENGUIN) 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Conservative-oriented political pundit Jaime 
Arellano, nicknamed "el pinguino" (the penguin), hosted a 
long-running popular morning talk show featuring prominent 
Nicaraguan intellectuals, politicians, economists, analysts, 
and others to debate, and analyze the Nicaraguan political 
situation.  After Channel 10 (a station with ties to the 
Sandinista-operated Channel 4) took his show "El 10 en La 
Nacion" (Ten in the Nation) off the air in April, he moved 
over to Channel 2, considered the most independent TV station 
in Nicaragua, where he continued the same program under the 
new name of "El 2 en la Nacion." On August 22, the owners of 
Channel 2, Octavio Sacasa and Martha Pasos de Sacasa, 
announced the cancellation of Arellano's show.  According to 
multiple contacts, the decision was take under explicit 
threats from the Ortega Administration that Channel 2 would 
lose its broadcasting license, which is due to expire January 
30, 2009, if they did not remove Arellano.  (NOTE: They had 
previously told InfoOff that it was one of their top-rated 
programs. END NOTE.)  In an official statement released 
August 27, Channel 2 excused the cancellation by claiming 
that Arellano's commentary was too inflammatory and asserting 
that the best defense for freedom of expression is to protect 
its "ethical practice" as a "social responsibility." 
Although Channel 2 recognized the need for constructive 
criticism and the freedom to question government policies 
that affect the people, it justified its decision to cancel 
Arellano's show on the grounds that "violence, whether verbal 
or physical, and insults, cannot be praised, from wherever 
they may come."  Furthermore, Channel 2 asserted that it was 
not a media of the opposition because it represented no 
political party, rather it was an impartial, objective outlet 
without partisan or ideological bias or affiliation.  The 
statement made no mention of government pressure or any 
influence it may have had on the station's programming 
decision. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Arellano often generated controversy for his 
confrontational style and tendency to pontificate.  He has 
been equally critical of the Constitutional Liberal Party 
(PLC) as he has of the Sandinista National Liberation Front 
(FSLN).  Despite his aggressive style, his show served as a 
vigilant watchdog over Nicaragua's political and economic 
situation, highlighting government corruption and 
politicization of the judiciary, frequently railing against 
President Daniel Ortega's intentions to install a 
dictatorship and perpetuate himself in power.  Even those who 
disagree with Arellano's style are alarmed by the Channel 2 
decision, seeing it as an act of self-censorship and a 
dangerous precedent for Nicaraguan press freedom.  Several 
sources consulted predict that Carlos Fernando Chamorro, who 
hosts another popular program on Channel 8 and is highly 
respected for his investigative journalism, will be the next 
significant television program forced off the airwaves.  They 
also worry that Channel 2 is facing a similar fate as 
Venezuela's RCTV, an opposition media that was forced to shut 
down last year. 
 
ANOTHER ACT OF INSTITUTIONAL TERRORISM? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In a passionately delivered press conference held 
the morning of August 25 at opposition-affiliated Radio 
Corporacion, Jaime Arellano asserted that he did not resent 
the owners of Channel 2 for their decision, stressing that 
while he had the right to put his own life on the line by 
criticizing the government, he did not have the right to 
expect others to share this risk.  Arellano explained that 
members of the Channel 2 team were being harassed for their 
association with his morning show.  He lamented that the 
Channel 2 decision had advanced the Ortega government's 
strategy of "institutional terrorism" to intimidate media 
owners.  Arellano has been the target of death threats in the 
past, and now feels particularly exposed to violence. 
Pro-government Citizen Power Council (CPC) groups had staged 
protests outside Channel 2 for several days prior to the 
cancellation of Arellano's show and also gathered outside 
Radio Corporacion during Arellano's August 25 press event. 
Nevertheless, he exhorted his audience not to succumb to fear 
and blackmail, and vowed to continue to fight for democracy. 
He also announced his intention to present his case to the 
Inter-American Commission for Human Rights and the National 
Press Club in Washington, DC.  Liberal National Assembly 
deputies Eduardo Montealegre and Enrique Quinonez, running 
together on the PLC-Vamos con Eduardo ticket for the Managua 
mayorship, accompanied Arellano at his press conference, and 
voiced their solidarity in defense of democracy. 
 
¶5.  (C) Many critics of the Ortega government expect that 
these assaults on the independent media, including the threat 
of pulling broadcasting licenses from television and radio 
stations, will continue.  The fact that the Ortega 
Administration has demonstrated its intent to wield its power 
to renew or cancel a broadcasting license, or control the 
frequencies radio stations are allowed to access, is 
troubling to journalists and media owners, and hangs over the 
entire media sector like a "sword of Damocles."  A number of 
radio station owners are opting for self-censorship rather 
than risk losing their media space.  Radio 15 de Septiembre, 
a conservative radio outlet and defiant opponent of the 
Ortega government, is also facing the expiration of its 
license in January.  Dora Maria Tellez, an activist within 
the dissident Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) and former 
Sandinista militant, told poloff that by caving in to the 
Ortega government's pressure, Channel 2 was falling into a 
trap set by Ortega and Murillo.  This would also embolden 
similar attacks on other outlets and Nicaraguans who dare to 
criticize the government's actions,  The removal of one of 
the strongest voices of opposition--Arellano--from TV 
demonstrates the use of fear and intimidation is working and 
signals that "no one was off limits."  Furthermore, it 
represents one more in a series of incremental infringements 
on press freedom and freedom of expression accumulating since 
Ortega assumed office 20 months ago (Refs. A, B) and reflects 
that Murillo's communications strategy to exert full control 
over the media is in full operation (Ref. D.) 
 
COMING TO THE DEFENSE OF PRESS FREEDOM 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) Concerned about the "chilling effect" that the 
Channel 2 precedent sets, and that it could pave the way for 
increased government control of the media environment, and in 
anticipation that licenses for other radio and television 
channels are soon due to expire, a number of Liberal National 
Assembly deputies are now attempting to push through a bill 
that would automatically renew media broadcasting licenses 
for ten years.  This proposed reform to the Law for the 
Defense of Freedom of Expression, introduced by Eduardo 
Montealegre, has been sitting at the Commission for 
Education, Culture, Sports, and Social Communications Media 
since July 2007.  At the same time, however, there is also a 
move underway to overhaul the telecommunications legislation, 
known as Law 200, which resides with the Committee on 
Infrastructure. 
 
¶7. (C) According to media reports, FSLN deputies are 
maneuvering to block or delay the passage of law on freedom 
of expression by arguing that related media freedom issues 
will be covered under the more comprehensive 
telecommunications law.  This is clearly a ploy to use the 
cover of the legislative process to exert greater control 
over media, because by the time the larger more complex 
telecommunication law passes, it will already be too late for 
some outlets whose licenses will have by then already 
expired.  Furthermore, with Mario Valle -- a nominally 
independent deputy who consistently votes with the FSLN -- 
heading the commission with jurisdiction over media issues, 
the deck appears to be stacked against those legislators 
striving to defend an independent media.  Civil society 
organizations, such as Movimiento por Nicaragua, are calling 
on the deputies to enact the law to extend media licenses. 
Although the private sector typically avoids commenting on 
political matters, the Superior Council of the Private Sector 
(COSEP) and the Nicaraguan American Chamber of Commerce 
(AMCHAM) issued a joint public statement and press release on 
September 3 in support of the law to extend licenses and 
strongly affirming the need to protect freedom of expression 
as a right guaranteed by the Nicaraguan constitution. 
Montealegre told the Ambassador on September 8 that the 
Liberals have reached agreement to bring the issue of media 
licenses to the full National Assembly in the coming weeks 
and to hold a quick vote on a law to provide extension of the 
licenses.  Terms of the legislation are still being worked 
out. 
 
 
IS LOVE STRONGER THAN HATE ? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) In addition to using legal mechanisms to curtail 
media freedom, the Ortega Administration is increasing the 
use of its quasi-official media outlets and the Citizen Power 
Councils (CPCs) to discredit the opposition and media as 
"peddlers of hate and confrontation."  Arellano was the first 
target of this campaign.  Just prior to the cancellation of 
the Arellano show, on August 20, CPC squads, initially women 
from Managua barrios and self-proclaimed "Christians of the 
base" began congregating in front of Channel 2, La Prensa, 
and El Nuevo Diario, to protest against hate and "pray" for 
peace.  They echoed the official government complaints 
against the opposition media and implored the "end of 
hatred." One protester accused Arellano of "spreading hate 
and poison" against the Nicaraguan people, saying that he 
never even talks about politics.  Sporting white T-shirts 
emblazoned with the slogan "Love is Stronger than Hate" and 
the CPC symbol, written in Murillo's trademark pink font, 
they carried simple white crosses and signs with biblical 
quotes, playing religious music and hymns.  These groups have 
now set up permanent camps at all the major traffic circles 
in Managua, contributing further to the government's 
intimidation campaign.  Commenting on the CPC prayer circles, 
prominent Catholic bishop Monsignor Bernardo Hombach 
expressed his regret that religion was being politicized in 
an attempt to discredit the opposition media but doubted that 
these protesters had much credibility with the general 
public.  This latest use of the CPCs is in keeping with 
Murillo's communications strategy to exert greater control 
over the opposition media (Ref. B). 

¶9.  (SBU) CPC operatives also congregated outside the Radio 
Corporacion offices during the Arellano press conference. 
Some fear that the CPC campaign combined with the negative 
media treatment emanating from Sandinista-controlled outlets 
could spark violence.  They dismiss the CPC groups protesting 
for prayer and love at the traffic circles around Managua as 
a feeble attempt to sow fear, and discredit anyone critical 
of the government.  Though we note that, with all major 
traffic circles "occupied" by CPCs, it would be difficult for 
opposition groups to mount the large-scale protests seen in 
June and July, CPC elements have demonstrated a willingness 
to engage in violence when confronting opponents. Because the 
police does not grant multiple permits for demonstrations in 
the same space, the CPC prayer campaign has also served to 
preempt other forms of protests. 
 
¶10. (C) While the CPCs were "praying" for peace, love, and 
reconciliation. official Sandinista outlets continued to 
berate and discredit Arellano as both corrupt and a "fat 
devil."  As if to justify the absence of Arellano from the 
airwaves, the FSLN's newly minted official tabloid style 
weekly, "El 19" (named in honor of the July 19 victory of the 
Sandinista Revolution), devoted a full page article accusing 
Arellano of being a political agitator and denouncing him for 
stealing money from the Nicaraguan Institute of 
Telecommunications (TELCOR) during his previous employment 
with the Bolanos Administration. (NOTE: The official media 
have also added Arellano to their long-running television 
attack ad against Eduardo Montealegre and Jaime Chamorro, 
director of the leading center-right daily La Prensa, whom 
they have incessantly accused of corruption and being part of 
a neoliberal plot to steal from the Nicaraguan people.  In 
another ominous sign of an increasingly weakened media, these 
partisan attack ads are no longer confined to Channel 4, and 
are now appearing on a variety of other "independent 
channels." END NOTE.) 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶11.  (C)  The National Assembly appears to be taking the 
latest threat to press freedom seriously and there is some 
optimism that it will pass legislative reforms to better 
protect freedom of expression.  However, the FSLN's control 
over the Assembly's mechanics, continued infighting among the 
Liberals, and a focus on the municipal elections pose serious 
obstacles to the effort.  More ominously, the FSLN's effort 
to intimidate and pressure independent media and silence its 
critics, combined with its more aggressive use of official 
communication channels to discredit opponents, has placed a 
dark cloud over the media climate.  The Channel 2 decision 
indicates that the media can be pressured, and perhaps 
manipulated, into self-censorship.  By silencing one of the 
government's fiercest and most tenacious critics in Arellano, 
the government is sending a message to other media outlets 
that they could be the next target. 
CALLAHAN