09BAKU169
IRANIAN SCHOOLTEACHER RELATES STUDENT PROTESTS AND
Wed Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Baku
VZCZCXRO8910
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHKB #0169/01 0630852
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 040852Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAKU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0855
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BAKU 000169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 3/3/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM SCUL SNAR AJ IR
SUBJECT: IRANIAN SCHOOLTEACHER RELATES STUDENT PROTESTS AND 
AFTERMATH 
 
Classified By: POLECON COUNSELOR ROB GARVERICK, REASONS 1.4 (B and D) 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (C) An Iranian schoolteacher from XXXXXXXXXXXX told Iran 
Watcher that the vast majority of Iranians (but not 
necessarily the regime) want good relations with the United 
States, though most are too caught up with their daily 
problems to focus on this.  She described Iranian 
intellectuals as "controlled" and "voiceless."  She described 
the strict restrictions on teachers and students in Iranian 
schools, noting that teachers are required to report any 
students who showed signs of criticism or dissent from the 
official line, "otherwise both student and teacher will be 
punished."  She recounted in detail massive student protests 
in Tabriz in 2006, during which thousands of protesters 
demanded the right to use the Azeri language in schools and 
offices, and to have some courses taught in Azeri.  She said 
that hundreds were arrested, and claimed that the authorities 
required parents to pay fines of 10,000 or 20,000 dollars per 
child (depending on social class) to obtain release of their 
kids.  Suspected student leadership figures are still in 
prison, she added.  Noting the shrewdness of this and other 
regime tactics, she dolefully observed that "Iran will never 
be changed from within."  For those who can, emigration to 
the West is an answer; many of those who can't turn to 
cynicism and/or narcotics.  End Summary. 
 
Iranians Want Good Relations With the USA... 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX, a recently retired Iranian middle-school 
teacher from XXXXXXXXXXXX, met with Baku Iran watcher on February 
26, shortly before departing for a visit to her sister in the 
United States (her first visit there).  Echoing comments we 
have heard from many other Iranians, she asserted that 
"ninety percent" of Iranians want good relations with the 
United States; "only the regime doesn't want this," she said. 
 She averred that "most Iranians are caught up in the 
challenges of their daily life and don't think much about 
politics."  She described sentiments within her own extended 
family of ten well-educated adults as illustrative "some say 
it's best to be apolitical, some say we should focus on ways 
to use the system to our advantage and make money, some say 
the current situation is terrible and will never improve, and 
we should emigrate." 
 
But Are Largely Voiceless 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX described the Iranian intellectual class as 
"controlled," "frustrated," and "voiceless."  "Nobody in Iran 
has a free voice," she asserted.  She noted that she taught 
history, literature, and geography "but was never able to 
express alternative opinions or tolerate open discussions by 
students...those who speak out are beaten."  Her lectures and 
reading materials were approved in advance, and any sharp 
questioning or challenge by students of the material she 
taught had to be reported "or I would be punished."  She 
added that any critical or untoward statements or sentiments 
expressed openly by students could lead to punishment of both 
teacher and student. 
 
A Student Protest, and its Repression 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX described the outbreak of widespread student 
protests in Tabriz and other towns in 2006 as illuminating 
both continued dissatisfaction and independent thought among 
students, and the authorities shrewd and ruthless tactics in 
suppressing it.  She explained that although the protests 
were sparked by the appearance in a Tehran newspaper 
depicting a cockroach speaking in Azeri (vice Persian), they 
rapidly evolved in to demands for permission for the use in 
conversation of the Azeri language in Iranian Azerbaijan 
schools and offices, and the teaching of Azeri (as well as 
Farsi), and its use in some courses.  According to XXXXXXXXXXXX, 
several thousand students joined these protests, which 
continued for several days before being violently repressed. 
 
¶5.  (C) She said that several hundred high school and middle 
school students were arrested, including many from her 
school.  She said that those arrested were divided by the 
authorities into three categories: Leader/organizers, 
middle-class and above "followers," and lower class/poor 
"followers."  According to XXXXXXXXXXXX, most of the suspected 
leaders/organizers were subjected to harsh treatment and 
remain imprisoned to this day.  Families of middle class 
"followers" were told that their children would not be 
released until fines of approximately $20 thousand dollars 
per child were paid.  Families of lower class and poor 
families were told they must pay approximately $10 thousand 
dollars each to free their children. 
 
¶6.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX said that these fines placed a huge economic 
burden on many families, some of whom had to sell their homes 
and valued possessions in order to raise the necessary funds: 
"Tabriz was full of parents going crazy trying to borrow 
money."  She opined that this was an effective means of 
student repression "as the students feel guilty for the 
punishment they have caused for their families," and the 
parents urge them not to get involved in politics again. 
 
Hopes for Emigration, Nostalgia For The Shah 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX said flatly that, as a result of shrewd 
repression tactics, a climate of fear, and constant 
propaganda, Iranian society is "brainwashed," and "impossible 
to change from within."  Emigration is the answer for many of 
those who can, she said, while those who can't become cynical 
opportunists or sink into fatalism and/or self-indulgence. 
She blamed this atmosphere for what she depicted as high and 
rising narcotics use "much greater than during the days of 
the Shah."  She expressed deep regret for the Shah's 
departure, adding that "many of us think that you took him 
away from us."  She commented positively on recent BBC 
productions on the Shah, which she had watched (Note: 
Presumably she saw these in Iran, but that was not made 
clear.  End Note). 
 
¶8.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX son is XXXXXXXXXXXX currently 
fulfilling his military service.  While doctors are very 
respected, she noted that income is low and professional 
jealousies and restrictions common.  She said that her son 
intends to emigrate to Canada, the U.S. or elsewhere in the 
West as soon as possible after finishes this service.  XXXXXXXXXXXX promised to contact Iran watcher for a further meeting when 
she next returns to Baku. 
 
DERSE