09CAIRO1503
FM ABOUL GHEIT ON MUBARAK VISIT, MB, STRATEGIC
Tue Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #1503/01 2161053
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 041053Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3334
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 001503 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR FO; NSC FOR SHAPIRO AND KUMAR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/03/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KIRF EG
SUBJECT: FM ABOUL GHEIT ON MUBARAK VISIT, MB, STRATEGIC 
DIALOGUE 
 
REF: A. STATE 73829 
    ¶B. CAIRO 1467 C. CAIRO 1059 D. CAIRO 814 Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).
¶1. (C) Key Points: -- FM Aboul Gheit said Egypt's main goal for the upcoming Washington visit was to build "rapport" between the two presidents, emphasizing Egypt's "strategic" relationship with the U.S. and continuing discussion of key regional issues. -- The Muslim Brotherhood remains a "challenge" to stability in Egypt, according to Aboul Gheit. Ambassador noted the importance of rapid GOE action on key human rights issues. -- Aboul Gheit agreed that next steps on Strategic Dialogue follow-up (ref A) will include senior experts-level follow up on multilateral human rights and nuclear issues, as well as launching a civil society dialogue component. Mubarak Visit: "Rapport" the Goal ----------------------------------

¶2. (C) Egyptian FM Aboul Gheit told Ambassador August 3 that President Mubarak's goal is to build "rapport" with President Obama during his upcoming visit to Washington. He noted that Mubarak had "only two brief encounters" with President Obama, adding that their meeting in Cairo in June had come at a time when Mubarak was distracted and grieving after the sudden death of his young grandson. Aboul Gheit reviewed the "ups and downs" of U.S.-Egypt relations over the years, but noted that the relationship in the end is "strategic," and was now in a position to strengthen. MB "Challenge" and Human Rights -------------------------------

¶3. (C) Aboul Gheit lamented what he characterized as a recent history of "endless lectures and public quarrels," claiming it stemmed from a lack of understanding of Egypt's circumstances. "We confront many dangers," he explained, "and challenges to stability and progress." Aboul Gheit said the Muslim Brotherhood is a key example of these challenges. "Look at what they have done in Gaza, forcing women to wear (the veil)!" Pointing theatrically to his (Coptic Christian) Deputy Assistant Minister for North American Affairs Amin Maleika, Aboul Gheit asked "will he be forced to emigrate, will my wife and daughters be forced to wear the hijab?" The GoE, he said, must stop those who produce this "incitement."

¶4. (C) Ambassador acknowledged Egypt's many challenges, but said human rights would remain a critical component of the U.S.-Egypt dialogue, and something that would undoubtedly be on the agenda in Washington. She urged quick action in a number of areas in which Egypt itself had identified problems. Specifically, she noted ID cards for Bahais, a public endorsement from President Mubarak of the work of the quasi-governmental National Human Rights Council (ref D), and amnesties or release for several figures being held on expression-related charges. More broadly, she noted the importance of action to end the State of Emergency by passing a comprehensive counter-terrorism law in the upcoming legislative session (ref C). Aboul Gheit promised to "help" advance these goals. Strategic Dialogue Follow-up ----------------------------

¶5. (C) Ambassador noted that the U.S. and Egypt agreed during Strategic Dialogue discussions in June to hold experts-level follow up consultations on multilateral human rights and nuclear issues, and suggested those discussions begin soon. Aboul Gheit agreed that there would be opportunities to do this in coming weeks. Ambassador also raised the previously discussed idea of an ESF-funded civil society dialogue, noting she had preliminary discussions in Washington on this. Aboul Gheit said he would fully support such a dialogue, as well as government-to-government dialogue on human rights. Comment -------

¶6. (C) Aboul Gheit's well-worn rhetoric and less than subtle invocation of the MB's "challenge" to Egypt's stability reflects recent harsh public statements and a tough GoE crackdown on MB activity (Ref B) as elections draw nearer. It was offered as well to discourage expectations that Egypt would be taking significant action of political reform anytime soon. End comment. SCOBEY