09CARACAS107
OPPOSITION LACKLUSTER WHILE STUDENTS MARCH FORWARD
Wed Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO6954
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHCV #0107/01 0281430
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281430Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2493
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 CARACAS 000107 

SIPDIS 

HQSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
DEPARTMENTPASS TO AID/OTI (RPORTER) 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2029 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM VE
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION LACKLUSTER WHILE STUDENTS MARCH FORWARD 
WITH "NO" CAMPAIGN 

CARACAS00000107  001.2 OF 003 


Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR FRANCISCO FERNANDEZ, 
FOR REASON 1.4(D) 

¶1.  (C)  Summary:  The opposition has been slow to counter 
President Chavez's proposed constitutional referendum to 
remove term limits, relying largely on highly-publicized, 
sporadic student protests to rally support to vote "No." 
Opposition parties lack resources in the wake of the November 
2008 state and local elections and are focusing on trying to 
administer the governorships and mayoralties that they won 
last year.  In the absence of a concerted opposition effort 
to defeat the proposed amendment to eliminate term limits, 
Chavez's well-funded and persuasive "Yes" campaign is 
dominating the amendment debate.  Moreover, opposition 
leaders appear to be overly confident that the voters who 
rejected Chavez's failed constitutional reform package in 
December 2007 and supported opposition candidates in key 
states in November 2008 will reject his proposed 
constitutional amendment on February 15.  They also appear 
resigned to focus on future elections -- municipal council 
elections in late 2009, parliamentary elections in late 2010, 
and the presidential election in 2012 with the vague hope 
that Chavez's popularity will be undermined by economic 
problems.  End Summary. 

------------------------------------------ 
OPPOSITION:  BROKE, TIRED AND DISORGANIZED 
------------------------------------------ 

¶2.  (C)  Christian Democrat (COPEI) Deputy Secretary General 
Alejandro Vivas told poloffs January 26 that the opposition 
is broke after the long campaign season preceding the 
November 2008 state and local elections.  He also said many 
of the new opposition governors and mayors are focusing on 
governing, particularly given their difficult transitions 
into office, many of which were stripped bare by their 
Chavista predecessors.  He also complained the National 
Electoral Council (CNE) is "censoring" opposition campaign 
commercials on TV, and that media outlets felt pressured to 
self-censor rather than risk government sanctions.  The 
opposition had tried to run subtle criticisms of indefinite 
reelection -- including scenes of a baseball player batting 
and missing the ball repeatedly, but refusing to be struck 
out -- but CNE officials persuaded private broadcasters to 
pull the spots. 

¶3.  (C)  Vivas also lamented the previous week's spate of 
heavily publicized violence between police and student 
protesters, calling it a "lost week" for the opposition's 
campaign.  He noted that Chavez is trying to link student 
activists to the opposition, diminishing their past ability 
to transcend the sharp partisan divide and appeal to 
independent "ni-ni" voters and to disaffected "Chavista
lites."  Vivas said opposition parties find it difficult to 
work with student groups, which he said lacked coordination 
and political experience.  He noted that even with student 
volunteers, the "No" campaign sorely lacks sufficient 
election monitors beyond traditional opposition strongholds. 

¶4. (C)  Former Miranda Governor and key "No" campaign 
organizer Enrique Mendoza told the Charge and PolCouns in 
early January that the opposition was unable to connect with 
the lower socio-eocomic classes that made up the majority of 
Chavez's support.  He was also concerned that voter fatigue 
would come into play, and that the opposition's support base 
was more prone to the fatigue than Chavista supporters who 
might feel that their government hand-outs were in jeopardy. 
Mendoza also said the opposition's very successful effort to 
get out upper class urban supporters in November had given 
the opposition false hopes that its middle and upper middle 
class support base was just as large as the lower classes who 
support Chavez.  Mendoza pointed out that the opposition was 
making an important tactical error as a result, and was 
focusing what few efforts being made on that base as opposed 
to trying to expand its reach to disaffected voters in 
Chavez's base.

¶5.  (C) Opposition advisor Diego Arria told PolCouns January 
26 that he was disappointed in the efforts on the part of the 
opposition.  Arria explained that the opposition's coalition 
had fallen by the wayside and each camp was trying to protect 
the gains their parties' made in November as opposed to 
unifying behind the "No" vote.  Arria opined that the 
military had an important role to play in protecting the vote 
(the military is charged with security of polling stations). 
Arria also stated that he and a group of opposition leaders 
had thought about publishing an open letter immediately prior 
to February 15 reminding the military of their vital role in 
protecting the elections.  PolCouns warned Arria that such a 
move seemed close to inciting rebellion, and no interruption 
of democracy would be tolerated by the USG and the 
international community. 

¶6.  (SBU)  There is no clear leader of the "No" campaign. 
Former consensus opposition presidential candidate and 
Maracaibo Mayor Manuel Rosales and former Chacao Mayor 
Leopoldo Lopez have traveled to various states to rally "No" 
voters.  PrimeroJusticia (PJ) announced January 22 its plan, 
dubbed "Your Ten for Venezuela," which encourages each 
opposition voter to bring ten other voters to the polls on 
February 15 who might otherwise abstain.  In addition, 
opposition parties continue to dispute electoral conditions 
as much as they do the political implications of eliminating 
termlimits.  Enrique Marquez of Un Nuevo Tiempo (UNT) 
publicly accused the GBRV of violating the CNE's campaign 
regulations by using state resources and institutions to 
support the "Yes" campaign.  He also argued that CNE 
President TibisayLucena violated electoral laws by extending 
the length of the voting day by two hours.  COPEI's Enrique 
Naime criticized these irregularities and the refusal of the 
CNE to open the electoral registry when he went to the CNE 
January 21 to register his party in favor of the "No" vote.

-------------------------------------- 
STUDENTS, CIVIL SOCIETY MARCH FOR "NO" 
-------------------------------------- 

¶7.  (C)  Civil society groups, including Sumate and the 2-D 
Movement, began campaigning in favor of "No" in mid-January 
after six weeks of near silence.  A series of nationwide, 
hastily planned student protests generated considerable local 
media attention the week of January 19 as numerous 
confrontations erupted between student marchers and the 
police.  As of January 22, pro-opposition daily El Nacional
reported that 50 protesters had been injured in clashes with 
the police and National Guard.  The week concluded peacefully 
January 23 when opposition parties and civil society groups 
joined students to protest against the referendum and 
commemorate 51 years since the overthrow of former dictator 
Marcos Perez Jimenez. 

¶8.  (C)  A student leader from EasternUniversity in Bolivar 
State told poloff January 16 that there was good coordination 
among student activists at each of the university's five 
regional campuses, and that activists outside the capital 
were taking their cues from what leaders in Caracas were 
doing.  He added that the students had received positive 
feedback for their "anybody can be president" campaign and 
that they were planning closely with the opposition parties 
to provide election witnesses for February 15.  An 
advertising executive told poloff that "No" supporters will 
run creative, non-partisan spots that underscore the 
importance of choice and change starting February 5. 

------------------------------------------ 
POLLSTER WARNS OPPOSITION IS LOSING GROUND 
------------------------------------------ 

¶9.  (SBU)  The director of prominent polling firm 
Datanalisis, Luis Vicente Leon, told the local media January 
26 that Chavez's intense "Yes" campaign over the past four 
weeks has consolidated support for the amendment among more 
disaffected groups within Chavismo.  He noted that the 
expansion of the amendment's language to remove all official 
term limits, the use of public spaces and state-owned media, 
Chavez's warnings of civil unrest in the wake of a "Yes" 
loss, and the specific language of the amendment itself has 
bolstered "Yes" support.  Leon assessed that the opposition 
had lost the gains it had made in November in electoral 
support, but said his polling indicates support for the 
referendum was still split enough to allow a potential "Yes" 
win. 

¶10.  (C)  Pollster Alfredo Keller told the Charge and 
PolCouns in early January that due to the success of this 
campaign, the President's supporters perceived they had two 
choices -- abstention or voting yes.  As a result, the 
opposition had to be wary of get-out-the-vote campaigns 
targeted at Chavez supporters.  Contrary to conventional 
wisdom, Keller believes such a campaign would increase the 
"Yes" vote by forcing potential abstainees to vote.  Keller 
also derided the opposition's lack of preparation, noting 
that he spent two weeks after Christmas trying to find 
someone in the opposition willing to forego their vacations 
to discuss his polling results. 

------- 
COMMENT 
------- 

¶11.  (C)  So far, Venezuela's democratic opposition, with the 
notable exception of university students, has failed to 
campaign hard against President Chavez's proposed amendment 
to eliminate term limits.  The relative absence of "No" 
campaign materials around Caracas stands in stark contrast to 
the ubiquity of an intense and sophisticated pro-government 
"Yes" campaign linking the elimination of term limits with 
protecting Chavez's social programs.  Moreover, opposition 
leaders appear to be overconfidently assuming that Venezuelan 
voters who came out in droves in November and turned down 
Chavez's constitutional reform package in December 2007 will 
do the same with the amendment proposal on February 15. 
Opposition parties may also be saving their energy -- and 
resources -- for the municipal council elections in the 
second half of 2009 and parliamentary elections in 2010. 
They do not appear to be taking to heart the extent to which 
Chavez continues to consolidate his personal power at the 
expense of democratic institutions. 

CAULFIELD