09DUBLIN38
FURTHER INFORMATION ON IRELAND'S ACCEPTANCE OF
Thu Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO2765
RR RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0038/01 0221736
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 221736Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9717
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0016C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000038 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2019 
TAGS: PREL PREF PTER CU EI MX
SUBJECT: FURTHER INFORMATION ON IRELAND'S ACCEPTANCE OF 
GUANTANAMO DETAINEES 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 707 
     ¶B. DUBLIN 019 
 
Classified By: CDA ROBERT J FAUCHER. REASONS 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  Ireland has resolved inter-ministerial 
differences and publicly signaled its readiness to accept 
Guantanamo detainees as part of a collective EU response to a 
clear U.S. roadmap leading to Guantanamo's closure.  Ireland 
is ready to consider resettlement of at least one or two 
detainees.  An official message of encouragement and support 
from the U.S. could encourage Ireland to take a more generous 
stance.  End Summary. 
 
Ahern:  A New Context 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Irish Justice Minister Dermot Ahern told the press 
January 21 that Ireland would be willing to resettle 
Guantanamo Bay detainees if a common EU approach were found. 
In his statement, Ahern welcomed the priority that the 
President gave to closing Guantanamo and declared that the 
President's suspension of military trials of Guantanamo 
detainees had created "a new context."  Ahern stressed that 
any Irish move should be part of a united and positive 
response at the EU level to a request made by the new 
administration for help in bringing about Guantanamo's 
closure.  He added that EU Foreign Ministers are expected to 
discuss the issue at their January 26 EU General Affairs and 
External Relations Council (GAERC) meeting in Brussels. 
 
Aylward:  One or two 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Justice Ministry Secretary General Sean Aylward 
(protect) told the Embassy January 22 that Ahern's statement 
was not really a reversal of Ahern's previously stated 
opposition to accepting any detainees.  He explained that 
Ireland felt strongly that, by accepting detainees while 
Guantanamo was still opened, Ireland would have only 
encouraged/enabled continued use of Guantanamo.  The 
President's announced intention to close Guantanamo provided 
the incentive Ireland needed to re-consider whether it would 
accept detainees and created the cover Ireland required to 
defuse any "hysterical anti-American reaction" caused by the 
appearance of detainees in Ireland. 
 
¶4.  (C) Ireland will only accept detainees as part of an 
all-EU approach, according to Aylward.  There will be no 
bilateral deal outside of an EU context, he stressed.  The 
U.S. should expect Ireland to accept a small number of 
detainees, perhaps only one or two, proportionate to the size 
of Ireland's population.  Ireland's sour experience with 
resettling two Palestinian extremists connected to the siege 
of the Church of the Nativity has taught Ireland that it does 
not have the capacity to handle large groups of such persons, 
Aylward added.  If this process moves forward, Ireland would 
also want to ensure that whomever it selects also wishes to 
stay in Ireland.  Aylward stressed that Ireland would not 
work through any of the NGOs currently trying to place the 
detainees, and he termed "counter-productive" the pressure 
from U.S. Congressman Delahunt to accept the detainees 
promoted by NGOs such as Amnesty International.  (Note: 
Delahunt sent a November 8, 2008 letter to Ahern urging 
Ireland to settle Uzbek national Oybek Jabbarov.  End Note.) 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Aylward stated that the EU needs an exact 
date/roadmap for closure in order to prepare a collective 
response.  He thought the positions of several countries were 
changing, the Danes and Swedes in particular.  He warned that 
many in the EU would find it galling if the United States 
were to refuse to accept any of the detainees.  Aylward 
suggested that a message in the near future from the 
Secretary to Prime Minister Cowen that notes Ireland's 
helpful stance on Guantanamo could significantly relieve any 
Irish hesitancy on this issue. 
 
Montgomery:  Political Cooperation 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Irish Foreign Ministry Political Director Rory 
Montgomery (protect) told the Embassy January 22 that, 
although there has been some discussion among ministries, no 
formal proposal has been placed before the Cabinet.  Prime 
Minister Cowen has requested a paper on the issue of 
Guantanamo detainees, Montgomery pointed out, demonstrating 
Ireland's willingness in principle to consider accepting 
detainees.  Two issues must be clear, Montgomery added: (a) 
the EU/Ireland will need a clear U.S. roadmap that leads to 
closure, and (b) Ireland must coordinate its response with 
 
DUBLIN 00000038  002 OF 002 
 
 
its EU partners. 
 
¶7.  (C) Montgomery stated that at the January 26 GAERC, 
Guantanamo will be raised as an agenda point under "any other 
business."   He noted that the January 22 COREPER agreed that 
the EU needs to provide a positive and public response to the 
President.  He did not expect a formal conclusion but thought 
there would be a very positive (but legally non-binding) 
Presidency statement following the Foreign Ministers' 
discussion.  Ireland will make the following points at the 
GAERC: 
 
-- The EU has long called for the closure of Guantanamo and 
should welcome the President's decision but expect the 
closure process to be complex. 
 
-- Ireland is positively disposed to helping out but there 
should be an EU political commitment to share the burden of 
the detainees. 
 
-- All EU member states should keep this issue on their 
agendas of bilateral meetings with U.S. officials. 
 
Comment 
---------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Comment.  Now that inter-ministerial differences have 
been settled (reftel), Ireland is steeling itself to move 
into a leadership role on this issue within the EU.  U.S. 
official encouragement now would likely produce a more 
generous Irish response at these early stages. 
FAUCHER