09HELSINKI52
FINLAND: VISIT OF AFGHAN NATIONAL SECURITY
Thu Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO0242
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHHE #0052/01 0431325
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 121325Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4800
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0080
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 4746
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 8668
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0963C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2019 
TAGS: MARR FI PREL
SUBJECT: FINLAND: VISIT OF AFGHAN NATIONAL SECURITY 
ADVISOR, FEB 2-5 
 
Classified By: CDA Michael Butler for reasons 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY.  Afghanistan's National Security Advisor, 
Zalmai Rassoul, offered his government's appreciation for 
Finland's assistance during a visit from February 2-5. In 
meetings with the Foreign and Defense Ministers and other 
government officials, Rassoul listed as the top problems in 
Afghanistan government corruption and insufficient progress 
on development and reconstruction (and the frustration among 
the populace with many promises and few results).  He 
described security as an urgent priority, and said that 
countries considering increasing their contributions should 
support training for the Afghan National Security Forces 
(stressing that to achieve stability, an increase in security 
was more pressing than a reduction in poverty).  Rassoul 
referred to the great optimism and high expectations 
surrounding the new U.S. Administration, and to a desire for 
a "stronger partnership" with the Europeans.  He returned 
repeatedly to the centrality of bringing security to Helmand 
Province, pointing to the Taliban, the narcotics trade and 
the importance of an election there the populace would 
consider legitimate.  Rassoul stated that the situation in 
Afghanistan is not as bad as generally perceived or as 
portrayed in the media.  The Finns welcomed Rassoul's visit, 
and the State and Department of Defense visit February 11-13, 
as opportunities to provide a clearer picture of the 
situation in Afghanistan to government officials, 
parliamentarians and media opinion-makers opportunities, and 
to combat negative press coverage of Afghanistan as the 
Parliament considers government proposals on a temporary 
troop increase and development assistance.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Rassoul offers Afghanistan's thanks 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Doctor Zalmai Rassoul, Afghanistan's National Security 
Advisor, visited Finland from February 2-5.  He met with the 
Foreign and Defense Ministers, advisors to the President and 
the Prime Minister, and the Chairman of the Parliamentary 
Defense Committee.  He visited the Finnish Defense Forces 
International Center for an overview of Finnish crisis 
management and peacekeeper training, and gave a speech to the 
Atlantic Council.  As described by Finnish officials to 
PolChief on February 10, Rassoul,s purpose for the visit was 
to convey thanks for Finland,s support.  In expressing 
appreciation, Rassoul repeatedly emphasized that the number 
of troops Finland contributes is not paramount, but the fact 
of Finland's presence in Afghanistan.  In a speech to the 
Atlantic Council, Rassoul expressed gratitude when noting 
that Afghanistan is the largest recipient in Asia of 
Finland's development assistance. 
 
Points raised by Rassoul 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) RENEWED LEADERSHIP FROM THE U.S.  To Finnish officials 
Rassoul referred to the great optimism and high expectations 
in the Afghan government surrounding the new U.S. 
Administration.  Rassoul expressed satisfaction with the 
Vice-President's (then )elect) visit.  He shared with the 
Finns one message from the Vice-President to President 
Karzai: that it would be better to be less vocal regarding 
civilian casualties. (NOTE: Rassoul also described bombings 
by U.S. unmanned aerial drones as "efficient." END NOTE.)  To 
the Atlantic Council Rassoul said he hoped a renewed 
commitment from the U.S. would be matched by a strong 
commitment from other allies, in NATO, Europe and around the 
world. 
 
¶4. (C) SECURITY IS PARAMOUNT. In meetings with the Finnish 
officials, Rassoul listed as the top problems in Afghanistan 
government corruption and insufficient progress on 
development and reconstruction; he emphasized Afghans' 
frustration with the international community's numerous 
promises to bring development, and the few results.  However, 
Rassoul said that security is the over-riding concern, and 
any increases in contributions would best be directed at the 
"Afghanisation" of the security sector, i.e., training for 
the Afghan National Security Forces; to achieve stability, 
Rassoul said an increase in security was more pressing than a 
reduction in poverty.  While he stressed the importance of 
security, Rassoul also told the Finns that the situation was 
not as bad as portrayed in the media; he provided a detailed 
description of the security situation in the provinces, 
sometimes district-by-district. 
 
¶5. (C) HELMAND, HELMAND, HELMAND. Rassoul repeated returned 
to the importance of Helmand Province, stressing that all of 
 
HELSINKI 00000052  002 OF 002 
 
 
the major challenges facing Afghanistan are found there: 
Taliban, the drug trade, and the upcoming elections.  On the 
latter, Rassoul stated that the situation there was "most 
acute." He asserted that only "three or four areas are under 
control" and his concern is that election results in Helmand 
might not be seen as legitimate if ISAF and the Afghan 
Government cannot bring greater control to the province. 
Rassoul stated that to ensure the legitimacy of the elections 
additional ISAF troops were needed. 
 
¶6. (C) PAKISTAN.  With Finnish officials Rassoul returned 
repeatedly to concerns about and problems in the tribal 
areas.  To the Atlantic Council Rassoul referred to a 
"revitalized terrorist offense, originating from terrorist 
sanctuaries outside Afghanistan's borders."  He told the 
Council that Pakistan "is practically engulfed in terrorist 
violence."  Regarding the civilian government, Rassoul was 
quite blunt with Finnish officials about how Pakistan 
tolerated the Taliban.  Though critical of the government, 
the Finns also described Rassoul as "generally happy" with it 
(describing it to the Council as "a partner interested in 
peace"), although he described it as weak. Rassoul said he 
hoped the Pakistan government would exert more control over 
the security structures, but expressed doubts about whether 
and when this might happen. 
 
¶7. (C) OTHERS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD. Rassoul described India as 
an "important partner" of Afghanistan; he pointed to 
approximately 1.3B USD in Indian assistance, something he 
said concerns the Pakistan government. Regarding China, 
Rassoul spoke broadly about Chinese concerns about Uighur,s 
as a source of instability in the region.  (NOTE: The prior 
Administration requested that the GoF accept Uighur 
detainees.  The GoF never acted on the request. END NOTE.) 
Rassoul spoke of "increasing contacts" with Russia; he said 
that Russia uses instability in the region as a means to 
(re)assert influence over some of Afghanistan's neighbors. 
As for Iran, Rassoul described a more constructive role in 
the beginning (during the Bonn Process) than now, but also 
stated that Iran is "no ally of the Taliban." 
 
¶8. (C) ISAF SUPPLY ROUTES. Rassoul spoke of the problems of 
ISAF countries in getting supplies into Afghanistan.  He 
touched on possible routes, e.g., through Iran, adding that 
arrangements regarding supply routes with Iran might be 
accomplished bilaterally by ISAF countries. 
 
¶9. (C) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.  On a few occasions Rassoul 
spoke of exploitation of mineral reserves, especially copper. 
 He mentioned that the Chinese had inked a deal with the 
Afghans regarding copper mining, spoke of plans to bring a 
rail line to the mines, but also spoke of the difficulties in 
exploiting such resources in the current security environment. 
 
Finnish reaction to Rassoul visit 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Finnish officials were very appreciative of Rassoul's 
visit, given that it came just before the Parliament took up 
discussion of the Governments proposal to double troops to 
support the Afghan elections and its "action plan" for 
development in Afghanistan.  in meetings with PolChief, 
Finnish officials have offered varying assessments of how the 
Parliament will greet the government's initiatives.  Anu 
Lamaanen, Deputy Director General of the MFA's Political 
Unit, expressed surprise about the muted media reaction to 
the GoF's proposal to temporarily double its troop 
contribution, especially given considerable negative press 
about the current security situation in Afghanistan; Lamaanen 
thought parliamentary debate might also be muted, as 
parliamentarians have not been provoked one way or another by 
press coverage.  Nevertheless, Finnish officials remain 
concerned about negative press coverage and its impact on the 
public and lawmakers.  They welcome visits from the U.S., 
like that of Deputy Assistant Secretary Moon and OSD Country 
Director for Afghanistan Heidi Meyer on February 11-13, as an 
opportunity to provide a fuller picture of the situation in 
Afghanistan to government officials, parliamentarians and 
opinion-makers. 
BUTLER