09HELSINKI149
FINLAND: COMMENTS ON APRIL GAERC
Fri Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0021
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0149/01 1141347
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 241347Z APR 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4927
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 000149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/ERA FOR JEFFREY GIAUQUE, EUR/NB FOR MIGUEL RODRIGUES 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/25/2019 
TAGS: PREL EUN PGOV FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: COMMENTS ON APRIL GAERC 
 
REF: A. GIAUQUE EMAIL DTD 04/17/2009 
     ¶B. GIAUQUE EMAIL DTD 4/21/2009 
 
Classified By: PolChief Brandon for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY.  PolOff met with Finnish MFA Deputy European 
Correspondent Markku Lampinen on April 23. Lampinen previewed 
all of the EU agenda items.  The Government of Finland (GoF) 
believes that efforts should be made to encourage the new 
Israeli government to honor the commitments made by the 
previous government, including the two-state solution. 
Lampinen said that the Syria Association Agreement (SAA) 
could provide an instrument for engagement in the Middle 
East.  Lampinen said that the GoF supports an increased EU 
role in and contributions to Afghanistan and support for 
UNAMA. On Burma, he said that the GoF supports dialogue but 
reiterated the GoF's strong belief that sanctions remain in 
place until Burma improves.  He characterized the bulk of the 
Ukraine's issues as internal and also hoped that improvement 
of the Romanian-Moldovan situation will take EU discussions 
in the direction of Moldovan development.  He said that the 
GoF would like Slovenia and Croatia to take their border 
dispute to a separate venue outside the EU accession process. 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) EUROPE:  Lampinen said that under General Affairs and 
Enlargement, the GoF would like to see the bilateral border 
dispute between Slovenia and Croatia resolved outside the 
accession framework.  European Neighborhood Policy (ENP), 
while a routine agenda item this GAERC, could include some 
discussion of the association agreement (SAA) for Syria. 
Lampinen said that the Syrian track in the Middle East may 
offer progress and the SAA would be a good instrument toward 
engagement. He also noted that while the EU included Ukraine 
on the agenda, the EU could not get involved in Ukraine's 
internal disputes.  Lampinen said that illegal migration is 
included in the agenda at the request of Malta and Italy and 
that it should be addressed to find an EU-level solution to 
support the Member States who are most affected.  Lampinen 
touched briefly on the Romanian-Moldovan dispute over visas 
and alleged Romanian backing of Moldovan demonstrations only 
to say that he hoped their dispute would not dominate EU 
discussions since the situation seems to have improved lately 
and EU discussions should focus on Moldovan development. On 
Transatlantic Relations, he noted that some members want to 
see regular EU-U.S. meetings institutionalized and he thought 
it would not be likely.  He personally recognized that the EU 
will have to "deliver more" in general but characterized the 
recent U.S. visits as "welcome and positive." Lampinen 
expressed hope that the U.S. will participate in the Troika 
Summit in June. 
 
¶3. (C) BURMA AND ASIA:  Lampinen said that EU conclusions 
support peaceful transformation to a legitimate civilian 
government with an eye to improving social and economic 
conditions and fighting poverty.  Further, Burma can address 
challenges only through a comprehensive dialogue:  They need 
to recognize the need for reform, carry out successful 
elections and free political prisoners.  He stated that the 
EU renewed the common position on sanctions for another year 
and that the EU would reconsider only with positive 
developments in Burma.  He also said that, as part of the 
conclusions, the EU will express a desire to meet with the 
Government of Burma in connection with the ASEAN meeting and 
further urges the Government of Burma to cooperate closely 
with the international community.  He continued that the EU 
will renew its support for the UN and EU Special 
Representatives to Burma. Lampinen stated that the EU 
conclusions on Burma represent GoF thinking on the opening of 
dialogue while not/not giving up sanctions as it would send 
the wrong signal.  The GoF supports Burma's holding elections 
next year that are truly free.  The GoF's position includes 
EU support for regional actors' positive actions on Burma as 
well; Lampinen cited Indonesia and China in particular. 
Lampinen separately expects a situation report on Sri Lanka. 
 
¶4. (C) THE MIDDLE EAST:  Lampinen said that the EU would send 
a message to the Israeli Government to fully engage at the 
level of the previous government on Annapolis and the 
two-state solution.  He said that the EU should have a 
pragmatic approach to a unity government if and when one 
forms.  Lampinen also expects some discussion of "shared 
experiences" in the aftermath of the EU walk out at Durban. 
 
¶5. (C) AFGHANISTAN, PAKISTAN AND IRAN:  Lampinen said that 
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran would be covered during a 
brainstorming discussion over lunch.  On Afghanistan, 
Lampinen remarked that the U.S. view is closer to the EU view 
under the new Afghanistan Pakistan strategy as the EU sees 
development cooperation and civilian crisis management as 
most important to stabilization and strengthening government. 
 
 He said that the GoF supports a strong role for UNAMA and 
that the EU should increase its role and contribution in 
stabilizing Afghanistan.  Lampinen also said that the GoF 
favors an EU election observation mission to Afghanistan if 
security conditions permit.  For Pakistan, he commented that 
an EU-Pakistan Summit should be organized during the Swedish 
EU Presidency.  Lampinen added that as to Iran, he believes 
that the EU conclusions will support EU unity and cooperation 
with the U.S. 
 
BUTLER