09ISTANBUL94
TURKEY-IRAN COMMERCE:  "MOSTLY JUST NATURAL GAS
Fri Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO2059
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIT #0094/01 0651237
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 061237Z MAR 09
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8822
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISTANBUL 000094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; BERLIN FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; BAKU FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; 
BAGHDAD FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX AND XXXXXXXXXXXX; ASHGABAT FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; 
DUBAI FOR IRPO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/06/2019 
TAGS: ECON PREL PGOV ETRD IR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY-IRAN COMMERCE:  "MOSTLY JUST NATURAL GAS 
AND HOT AIR" 
 
REF: (A) 2007 ISTANBUL 104 (B) 2007 ISTANBUL 152 (C) 
     2007 ISTANBUL 557 (D) ISTANBUL 22 
 
Classified By: Deputy Principal Officer Sandra Oudkirk; Reason 1.5 (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Despite two recent trade-related 
Ministerial visits to Iran and accompanying press suggesting 
a rapidly expanding bilateral trade relationship, 
Turkish-Iranian Business Council contacts assured us that 
beyond Turkey's interest in Iranian natural gas, the trade 
relationship is "mostly hot air."  Total trade between Turkey 
and Iran in 2008 reached USD 10.3 billion, of which over USD 
seven billion represented Turkish imports of Iranian 
hydrocarbons.  Turkish exports to Iran accounted for USD two 
billion.  GOT State Minister for Trade Tuzmen, visiting Iran 
in January, agreed with GOI counterparts on a target goal of 
USD 20 billion in bilateral trade by 2011, but our contacts 
called this a fantasy, predicting that bilateral trade would 
rise to no more than USD 12 billion in coming years.  Our 
contacts said "2008's big success story," a Turkish 
consortium's purchase of one of Iran's largest petrochemical 
companies for USD 630 million, is "2009's big failure."  They 
downplayed Iran's request to conduct all future trade in 
local currencies, but revealed that Iran wants to deposit USD 
500 million in Bank Mellat's Istanbul branch to serve as a 
line of credit and admitted that if Iran can modernize its 
banking industry, closer bilateral banking ties could lead to 
more growth in bilateral trade.  Our contacts also pointed to 
rivalries both among Turkish associations and within the 
Iranian bureaucracy that complicate trade negotiations, and 
dismissed the recent transportation MOU as "just a piece of 
paper for the ECO Summit."  End Summary. 
 
Reports of Expanding Turkish-Iranian Trade ties? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) ConGen Istanbul's NEA Iran Watcher met recently with 
XXXXXXXXXXXX (please protect), the XXXXXXXXXXXX of the 
Turkish-Iranian Business Council, a trade promotion 
association under the auspices of Turkey's Foreign Economic 
Relations Board (DEIK), and separately with XXXXXXXXXXXX
(please protect), the Turkish-Iranian Business Council's 
XXXXXXXXXXXX, to discuss recent signs of expanding trade 
contacts between Turkey and Iran.  We took note of recent 
meetings between Turkish and Iranian trade delegations, 
including: 
 
-- The Istanbul-based "Developing Eight" (D8) Commissioners 
meeting in Istanbul on January 10, attended by a "large and 
energetic" Iranian delegation (according to a D8 contact). 
Press reports indicated the Iranian side called for closer 
banking cooperation with D8 member states including Turkey. 
 
 
-- Turkish Minister for Foreign Trade Tuzmen led a delegation 
of GOT and business officials, including XXXXXXXXXXXX, on a late 
January visit to Tehran and Mashhad.  He met with Iranian 
Vice President Davoodi, Oil Minister Nozari, Commerce 
Minister Kazemi, Minister for Industry and Mines Nahavandian, 
and Agriculture Minister Eskandiari.  Press reports indicated 
the two sides pledged to expand bilateral trade to USD 20 
billion by 2011, and quoted Tuzmen claiming that his visit 
resulted in USD 250 to 300 million in bilateral trade deals 
signed.  Local press also quoted Nahavandian saying that Iran 
wants to use Turkish ports like Trabzon as primary transit 
venues for importing European goods to Iran, replacing 
Persian Gulf ports like Dubai.  According to Iranian press, 
Davoodi said both sides also discussed a proposal to conduct 
future trade only in Turkish Lira and/or Iranian Rials, 
rather than in dollars or Euro. 
 
--  The Governor of Iran's East Azerbaijan Province Ahmad 
Alireza Beighi, Chairman of the Iran-Turkey Trade Council 
Rahim Sadeghian, and Iranian Ambassador to Turkey Bahman 
Hosseinpour led a group of 120 Iranian officials and 
businessmen to a "trade promotion exchange" in Istanbul on 
February 24-26, hosted by Turkey's National Association of 
Industrialists and Businessmen (USIAD).  DEIK Chairman Rona 
Yircali and Independent Industrialists and Businessmen's 
Association (MUSIAD) Chairman Cihat Vardan also attended, and 
welcomed prospects for expanded trade ties. 
 
-- Turkish Transport Minister Yildirim visited Tehran 
February 28-March 3 to chair a "Turkey-Iran Joint Commission 
on Transportation" meeting.  He signed a transportation MOU 
with GOI Transport Minister Behbehani reportedly committing 
both sides to improving road, rail, and air links between 
Turkey and Iran, including a project that would link Turkey, 
Iran, and Pakistan by a single freight-train rail-line. 
Yildirim also met President Ahmadinejad.  Turkish press 
quoted both of them as reaffirming the goal of reaching USD 
20 billion in bilateral trade by the end of 2011. 
 
"Don't Believe the Press" 
----------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Despite this spate of recent meetings, our 
Turkish-Iran Business Council contacts dismissed claims of a 
warming or expanding bilateral commercial relationship. 
Instead, they highlighted a number of economic and political 
challenges in dealing with the GOI and Iranian companies, and 
acknowledged that the global economic downturn was negatively 
impacting Turkish businesses' interest in Iranian markets. 
 
¶4.  (C) Trade volumes:  XXXXXXXXXXXX explained that trade between 
Turkey and Iran had indeed expanded in 2008, reaching a total 
annual volume of USD 10.3 billion.  However, more than USD 
seven billion of that was Turkey's import of Iranian 
hydrocarbons (mostly natural gas), while Turkish exports to 
Iran -- mostly iron and steel, tobacco products, textiles, 
and automotive parts -- accounted for only USD two billion. 
(Current trade figures are available at the GOT's statistical 
agency's website, www.tuik.tr, under the tab "VeriBilgi" and 
then "Ulkelere Gore Dis Ticarat".)  XXXXXXXXXXXX predicted that 
Turkish imports of Iranian gas would increase in 2009-2010, 
but would be offset by declining bilateral trade in most 
other sectors. He speculated that bilateral trade would not 
reach more than USD 12 billion by 2011, "with 80-90% of that 
being hydrocarbon imports." 
 
¶5.  (C) A "showcase" deal gone bad:  Our contacts said one of 
Trade Minister Tuzmen's objectives in his January trip to 
Tehran was to press the GOI to allow the Turkish 
petrochemical company Gubretas, which in February 2008 
purchased Iran's one of largest petrochemical companies, Razi 
Petrochem, for USD 635 million (ref A), to restructure the 
deal.  XXXXXXXXXXXX told us that Gubretas's Chairman, a member of 
DEIK, admits that the deal was a bad one, "losing tens of 
millions" of dollars in the past several months from 
lower-than-expected fertilizer prices, lower-than-expected 
production from Razi's aging factories, overly-leveraged 
balance sheets, and a GOI order in January that all 
petrochemicals sold through Iran's Mercantile Exchange (IME) 
must only be sold domestically rather than exported. 
According to XXXXXXXXXXXX, the January 2008 deal required Gubretas to assume Razi's USD 320 million in debt, to pay USD 125 
million at the time of sale, and to deposit the remaining USD 
510 million in an Iranian escrow account, to be paid in full 
in five years.  Gubretas reportedly asked Tuzmen to press the 
GOI to give Razi permission to export its petrochemicals 
abroad and to ease restrictions on the use of Gubretas's 
escrow deposit, but so far Iran has refused. 
 
¶6.  (C) Pressed about the other reported outcomes of Tuzmen's 
Iran trip, XXXXXXXXXXXX said it had been "a waste of time."  The USD 300 million in deals reportedly signed during Tuzmen's visit 
really only referred to the January 2009 bilateral trade 
volume (USD 426 million).  XXXXXXXXXXXX claimed the press 
misunderstood what Tuzmen was saying, and he insisted that no 
significant deals were signed during that trip.  He laughed 
off Nahavandian's claim that Trabzon could replace Dubai as 
Iran's primary transit port for European imports, noting that 
as a Trabzon native he was familiar with its port facilities, 
which would need massive expansion to rival Dubai's 
facilities or cut into Dubai's Iran trade.  "We asked if Iran 
would help invest in port improvements at Trabzon, or highway 
improvements from Trabzon to Iran, they declined.  I would 
love to see Trabzon become like Dubai, but it will never 
happen.  Nahavandian just wants to talk about Trabzon to 
press the Emirates to stop fingerprinting Iranian 
businessmen." 
 
¶7.  (C) Dueling trade groups, murky Iranian rivalries:  XXXXXXXXXXXX 
said DEIK was caught by surprise at the February visit of the 
East Azerbaijan province Governor and trade group.  He noted 
that even though DEIK should act as the single contact for 
Iranian trade delegations, independent Turkish trade 
associations, including MUSIAD and USIAD, think they can 
deliver better bilateral trade deals for their members than 
DEIK, and thus reach out to Iran directly.  "Iranian 
businessmen don't care who sponsors them; they just want a 
free trip to Turkey."  When XXXXXXXXXXXX learned of that trade 
delegation he called USIAD and demanded a seat at the table, 
which USIAD grudgingly gave.  XXXXXXXXXXXX told us that Iran's 
Ambassador to Turkey, Hosseinpour, and its Consul General in 
Istanbul, Yasini, argued about this trip, with Hosseinpour 
insisting that bilateral trade visits work only through DEIK, 
while Yasini (supported by Iranian-Turkish Business Council 
Chair Sadeghian) lobbied the GOI to work through MUSIAD (a 
Islamist oriented trade association), USIAD (a nationalist 
trade association) and others.  XXXXXXXXXXXX also lamented the 
"murky power rivalries" within Iran, which Turkish companies 
find difficult to navigate.  As one example, he cited a deal 
that a Turkish hotel chain wanted to buy some Iranian hotels 
in 2008, a deal supported by the Iranian MFA and Commerce 
Ministry.  Somehow it ran afoul of the "Supreme Leader's 
Representative" to one of the ministries, and the deal died. 
"When that happens, it is not over politics or ideology, but 
always over who gets what cut from the deal." 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Banking expansion:  Asked about the press reports of 
a proposal to use national currencies in bilateral trade, 
XXXXXXXXXXXX said Turkish businesses would never accept payments in 
Iranian Rials.  He acknowledged that Iran had tabled a 
proposal under which it would deposit a sum of money ("maybe 
around USD 500 million") in Bank Mellat's Istanbul branch 
(ref D), as a line of credit for Iranian businesses importing 
Turkish goods, as well as for hard currency payments by the 
GOT for its hydrocarbon purchases.  But the two sides 
disagree on key terms, including over the initial deposit. 
According to XXXXXXXXXXXX, Turkey proposed Iran make the full 
deposit using Euros from its foreign exchange reserves which 
would then be deposited in a Turkish Lira account, while Iran 
proposed making the deposit in Rials, which would be 
converted to Lira at a favorable rate.  Iran also pressed for 
agreement to expand its banking presence in Turkey "to 
facilitate the arrangement," but Tuzmen declined.  XXXXXXXXXXXX told us the proposal was "going nowhere" but he professed surprise 
when shown an Iranian Commerce and Industry press release 
reporting that Iran's Export Development Bank has already 
deposited an initial tranche of 50 million Euros into Bank 
Mellat's Istanbul branch for this purpose.  XXXXXXXXXXXX admitted 
that if Iran can modernize its banking industry, closer 
banking ties between Turkey and Iran could lead to 
significantly expanded bilateral trade. 
 
Next Steps:  ECO Summit, Ahmadinejad's visit 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX called the transportation MOU signed between 
Transport Ministers March 3 "just a piece of paper."  He said 
Iran wants Turkey to finish constructing rail and ferry links 
that would allow Iran to send goods by train into Turkey's 
eastern Van province, over Van Lake, and on to central and 
western Turkey.  Turkey wants Iran to reduce the fuel tariff 
it charges to Turkish truckers entering Iran (to protect 
Iran's domestic fuel subsidies), which drives up the cost of 
Turkish exports to Iran and points farther east.  Neither 
issue was fully resolved in the transport MOU, per XXXXXXXXXXXX. 
Instead, it commits Turkey and Iran to build a freight rail 
link with Pakistan.  Although "real improvement of regional 
transportation links and infrastructure would be a great 
benefit to regional trade" the current MOU with Iran "is just 
for show, for the ECO Summit in Iran" on March 11. 
 
¶10.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX said the GOT has not invited DEIK or any trade associations to attend the ECO Summit.  XXXXXXXXXXXX was dismissive of ECO's (and the D8's) role in promoting regional trade, 
calling ECO a "paper organization" whose weakness is 
exploited "by a few member states" to pursue strictly 
national goals.  "It does nothing to make Turkish trade with 
Iran more profitable."  He speculated that the real talks at 
the ECO Summit will be about pipelines, not trade or 
transportation, with President Gul trying to convince Central 
Asian ECO member states to support the Nabucco pipeline. 
 
¶11.  (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX did not know if President Ahmadinejad plans to bring trade officials with him when he visits Istanbul March 
16-20 for the World Water Forum.  He promised to inform us if 
Ankara asks DEIK to organize trade talks with the Iranian 
delegation, though he asserted that many of his GOT contacts 
are distracted by preparations for Turkish municipal 
elections March 29, and won't focus on trade issues until 
afterwards. 
 
¶12. (C) XXXXXXXXXXXX separately told us he has been asked to begin preparations for the next Turkey-Iran Joint Business Council 
Meeting, to be held in Istanbul in early May.  That meeting 
will continue discussions on Iran's banking proposal and the 
outstanding transportation issues, and will also focus on new 
potential areas for trade and commercial cooperation 
including Turkish interest in expanding into Iran's USD one 
trillion "halal" (religiously approved) food market, as well 
as "tourism expansion" (ref C). 
 
Comments 
------- 
 
¶13.  (C) It is likely that our contacts' efforts to downplay 
prospects for expanded bilateral trade, and to highlight the 
difficulties of dealing with Iran, were partially motivated 
by self-interest.  As businessmen with years of experience 
pursuing Iranian trade deals, they are well aware of the US 
and international sanctions on Iran, probably well 
experienced at navigating as close as possible to the limits 
of those sanctions, and eager not to attract USG attention in 
the event Washington increases economic pressure on Iran.  On 
the other hand, their frustrations with Iran were palpable. 
That a neighboring market of such potential -- 70 million 
mostly young, western-minded, consumer-oriented people -- is 
still largely off limits to some Turkish goods and 
unprofitable for others because of the GOI's unhelpful 
economic and political policies is genuinely galling to 
Turkish businessmen like XXXXXXXXXXXX and XXXXXXXXXXXX.  They asked the 
USG to support Turkish-Iran trade cooperation as "the easiest 
and least threatening way" to modernize Iran's economy, "to 
free it from Iranian government mismanagement."  But they 
ultimately concurred that absent a decision by the Iranian 
government itself to reform its economic system, the focus of 
Turkish-Iranian trade in coming years would likely remain 
"mostly just natural gas and hot air." 
 
 
¶14.  (C) Bio note:  XXXXXXXXXXXX's full-time job is as Chairman of 
"Forum Fairs and Promotions," which Turkey's Under 
Secretariat for Foreign Trade uses to organize international 
fairs with trade partners.  (Indeed, XXXXXXXXXXXX asked if the USG 
would like to participate in a Turkey-Iraq trade fair in 
Gaziantep, May 22-24.)  As noted, XXXXXXXXXXXX is from Trabzon, 
where he previously was (among other business ventures) 
Deputy Chairman of TrabzonSpor, one Turkey's best soccer 
teams.  XXXXXXXXXXXX speaks good English.  End comments. 
Wiener