09ISTANBUL78
TURKISH THINK TANK EXPERTS EXPOUND ON IRAN
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO3132
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIT #0078/01 0571034
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 261034Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8792
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISTANBUL 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON FOR GAYLE; BERLIN FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; BAKU FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; 
ASHGABAT FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; BAGHDAD FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX AND XXXXXXXXXXXX
DUBAI FOR IRPO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS KNNP IAEA TU IR
SUBJECT: TURKISH THINK TANK EXPERTS EXPOUND ON IRAN 
 
REF: A) ANKARA 284 B) 08 ISTANBUL 287 
 
Classified By: Deputy Principal Officer Sandra Oudkirk; Reason 1.5 (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  We recently pulsed private Turkish experts 
for latest views on Turkey-Iran and US-Iran relations.  The 
most common themes we heard were:  Turkey and Iran, as 
neighbors and rivals, both seek a stable "balance of power" 
with each other and usually pursue bilateral relations with 
that goal in mind; changing Iran's policies will require 
changing the regime's worldview "which won't come cheap" (and 
must include US respect for Iran's regional interests and 
influence); and Turkey can help the US and P5 1 talk to Iran. 
 End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Accompanied by visiting UNVIE Senior Advisor Andrea 
Hall (ref A), we met February 17 in Ankara for discussions on 
Turkey-Iran and US-Iran relations with Dr. Mustafa Kibaroglu 
(Bilkent University), Professor Meliha Altunisik (Middle East 
Technical University), Duygu Guvenc (Sabah newspaper), and 
Dr. Arif Keskin of the Center for Eurasian Strategic Studies 
(ASAM).  We met February 18 in Istanbul with Ambassador Murat 
Bilhan, Dr. Vural Altin and Dr. Necmi Dayday of the 
Turkish-Asian Center for Strategic Studies (TASAM), Dr. Ercan 
Citlioglu and retired LTG Metin Yalcin from Bahcesehir 
University's Strategic Research Center, and Can Buharali of 
the Center for Political and Economic Studies (EDAM). 
 
Offer More, Start Secretly, Let Turkey Help 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Kibaroglu, a leading academic on nonproliferation, 
said that P5 1 pressure and diplomacy can slow down Iran's 
nuclear program, but stopping it will require far more than 
has yet been offered.  The 2006 offer does not address the 
regime's key needs: assurances of regime survival, and 
acceptance of Iran's leading role in the region.  To the 
regime the benefits of a nuclear weapons capability outweigh 
the risks, especially now that the U.S. military option seems 
"off the table" and prospects for more UNSC sanctions in the 
near term seem remote.  Moreover, the regime will never give 
up the "prestige" of an enrichment capability, though it may 
be persuaded to cap its capability at current levels.  To 
convince the regime to negotiate, the P5 1 should speak more 
respectfully to Iran, raise international pressure on Iran as 
much as possible to hold talks, make clear that additional 
security-related incentives will be offered at the table, and 
enlist Turkey's help, including to initiate talks in secret. 
Kibaroglu asserted that "Iran trusts Turkey more than it does 
anyone else in the region" and underscored that Turkey's 
membership on the UNSC and the IAEA Board of Governors makes 
it well-suited to act as a facilitator of P5 1-Iran talks. 
Turkey has most to lose if Iran goes nuclear, Kibaroglu 
insisted; it should participate in finding a solution. 
 
 
Change Iran's worldview, not just its nuclear program 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) According to METU International Relations 
Department Chair Meliha Altunisik, Iran had high expectations 
for a conciliatory approach from the Obama administration, 
but recent indications suggest USG policy on Iran will not 
change dramatically.  Complicating prospects for engagement 
is that the Iranian regime does not understand the USG's real 
"bottom line": Is it to prevent Iran from building a nuclear 
weapon, prevent Iran from mastering industrial-scale 
enrichment, or prevent Iran from retaining any enrichment 
capability at all?  She urged the USG to clarify its 
Iran/nuclear redlines precisely.  She expressed concern that 
other destabilizing Iranian policies (which also impact 
Turkey) like support for terrorism, rejection of Israel, and 
mischief in Iraq and Afghanistan might not be addressed as 
forcefully by P5 1 negotiators struggling to strike a 
workable nuclear deal with Iran. "The point of any deal 
should be to change the Iranian regime's worldview, not just 
its nuclear program."  She also urged the USG to stop 
publicly using the terms "carrot and stick", explaining that 
Iranian officials believe the USG uses those terms out of 
intentional disrespect, to make Iran seem subservient. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Altunisik probed on current USG thinking about how 
a future regional security arrangement involving Iran might 
work.  She suggested building off of the "Iraq and Neighbors" 
process, since the key regional actors already participate, 
and it is not "weighed down" by Arab-Israeli disputes.  The 
Iraq Neighbors Process might be used to agree on regional 
security principles; identify mutual interests (e.g., 
fighting terrorism, piracy and drugs; addressing common 
environmental problems); and develop practical cooperation on 
the already-existing Ministerial tracks (e.g., among regional 
Finance Ministries, Interior Ministries, etc. but with Iran 
as the new focus instead of Iraq. 
An Opposing View:  Treat Iran Like "a Thief with a Gun" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) XXXXXXXXXXXX, an Iranian Azeri and long-time Iran 
watcher, offered a pessimistic view of US-Iran relations in 
2009, warning that if USG policy on Iran leans too much 
towards engagement and incentives and away from sanctions and 
the threat of military action we will make no progress in 
slowing Iran's quest for nuclear weapons.  He suggested this 
has been a clear lesson of past interaction with Iran, 
pointing out that Iran stopped its weaponization activities 
in 2003 because it feared a U.S. attack in the wake of the 
interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan.  "For Iran's leaders 
to be convinced to do anything, they need to be scared."  The 
regime is committed to developing a nuclear weapons 
capability to ensure that regional rivals (Russia, Turkey, 
Saudi Arabia, Egypt) and the U.S. cannot threaten it.  No 
package of incentives from the U.S. could offer Iran as much 
security as a nuclear weapon.  Moreover, Keskin told us, the 
USG should stop focusing on Iran's presidential elections, 
since only Supreme Leader Khamenei will make final decisions 
about Iran-US relations.  Even if Khamenei permits improved 
relations, no future President other than Ahmadinejad has 
enough credibility with hard-liners to win their full 
support.  Thus, counter-intuitively, Ahmadinejad probably 
would be more useful in securing U.S. goals than Khatami. 
Moreover, "if you wait until June to talk you might as well 
wait until September, since Iran will say it needs that much 
time to assemble a new administration."  Between now and 
June, Khamenei appears to have decided that Majles Speaker 
Larijani should represent regime views to the international 
community, rather than Ahmadinejad, FM Mottaki, or SNSC 
Secretary Jalili. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Once the USG is ready to meet with Iran, XXXXXXXXXXXX 
reiterated, Washington should be prepared for a long, 
difficult process.  "You cannot end a 30-year long crisis in 
confidence in a few months or even a few years," by which 
time Iran will have acquired a nuclear weapons capability. 
"Everyone in Iran thinks this is the year for the nuclear 
program."  XXXXXXXXXXXX likened Iran to a thief with a gun: "He 
knows the gun may save his life or it may make someone else 
kill him.  Iran must be made to understand that if he does 
not drop the gun, he will be killed." 
 
Address Iran's many grievances and fears 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) TASAM Vice Chairman (and former Ambassador) Bilhan 
and TASAM experts underscored Turkey's opposition to a 
nuclear weapons capable Iran.  They pointed to Iran's many 
grievances against the US as evidence that the US must 
restore trust with the regime before diplomacy can succeed. 
Iran needs confidence it will have guaranteed access to 
nuclear fuel in exchange for suspending its enrichment 
program, for example.  Its negative experience with EURODIF 
in the 1980s convinced it not to trust such arrangements. 
Iran wants to see more pressure on Israel to join the NPT. 
Iran also worries that if it "comes clean" about a past 
nuclear weapons program the US would use that admission as 
grounds for military action.  TASAM experts urged the U.S. to 
stop issuing threats and instead use soft power, 
confidence-building gestures, and incentives to bring Iran to 
the negotiating table.  Bilhan's contacts with Iranian 
counterparts (including Iranian MFA think tank director 
Mousavi, ref B) lead him to believe that Iran would be 
willing to negotiate on the level of enrichment that it could 
retain under strictest IAEA safeguards, but it would not 
agree to dismantle its program completely. 
 
¶9. (SBU) TASAM experts surmised that even if Iran eventually 
achieved the ability to build a crude nuclear device, it 
would probably not use it, nor would Iran be able to mount it 
on a sophisticated delivery system for another decade or 
more.  As a result, Turkey does not consider Iran's nuclear 
program to be an imminent threat.  Turkey and Iran are 
regional rivals with roughly comparable military forces, but 
neither currently threatens (or has designs against) each 
other's vital interests.  On the other hand, Bilhan added, 
the Gulf Arab states do see Iran's nuclear program, as well 
as its conventional forces, as an imminent threat.  Their 
fears also must be addressed by P5 1 diplomacy. 
 
Count on Ahmadinejad's re-election; Stay out of ethnic 
politics 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Citlioglu predicted that Russia and China will 
continue to block tougher UNSC sanctions on Iran in 2009, 
even if the USG engages with Iran without preconditions but 
Iran still stalls.  He also urged that the USG press Israel 
to stay in the background as P5 1 efforts with Iran evolve, 
since "Israel can have a very negative impact" on US-Iran 
engagement.  Citlioglu said Iran's presidential elections 
will not influence the regime's approach to talks with the 
P5 1.  "It doesn't matter who wins.  Khamenei and the mullahs 
will still make the decisions."  He speculated that Khamenei 
will decide to fully endorse Ahmadinejad, ensuring his 
victory, because "a non-clerical president is less of a 
threat to him."  Citlioglu noted that the USG decision to 
sanction the PJAK as a terrorist group under Executive Order 
13224 will be seen positively by Iran, but he warned against 
the U.S. destroying that goodwill by supporting other restive 
ethnic movements in Iran, like the Azeris, citing local news 
reports of US efforts to instigate Azeri unrest in northwest 
Iran. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Both Citlioglu and Yalcin claimed that if Iran 
develops nuclear weapons capability Turkey would also move 
quickly to do so, to maintain the balance of power.  Egypt 
and Saudi Arabia would also seek the capability, they 
speculated, though Turkey would oppose that because it would 
disrupt rather than solidify that balance.  The only way to 
get Iran to the negotiating table is through increased 
pressure.  The only way to secure Iran's agreement to stop 
pursuing nuclear weapons is to change the regime's worldview 
by convincing the regime that the US is not a threat to its 
survival, and by offering cooperation in areas important to 
the regime (and to Turkey), like counter-narcotics and 
fighting Kurdish/PJAK terrorism. 
 
Iran only hears what it wants to hear 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) EDAM Board member Can Buharali (a former Turkish 
diplomat once stationed in Iran) offered from experience that 
"Iran hears what it wants to hear" and rarely responds 
constructively to criticism or threats.  That is why Turkey 
avoids criticizing Iran in public: doing so only loses 
influence with Iran and makes Turkey seem like a USG proxy, 
without moderating the regime.  But when Turkey explains to 
Iran privately that a nuclear weapons-capable Iran would be a 
threat to Turkey's vital national interests, Iranian leaders 
appear to listen.  Turkey must strike a balance, however, by 
also making clear its support for Iran's and all countries' 
NPT Article IV rights to peaceful nuclear technology. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Buharali doubted that USG engagement with Iran 
before the June elections would be useful to either side. 
But a goodwill gesture from the USG to the next Iranian 
president shortly after his election (even if it is 
Ahmadinejad) would be viewed positively by Khamenei and could 
lead Iran back to the negotiating table. Once at the table, 
Iran will expect the USG to formally recognize the regime's 
legitimate status and legitimate regional interests.  "All 
Iranian leaders want that, from hard-liners to reformists." 
The nuclear program, however, is not a bargaining chip, it is 
"a national goal."  Iran may be willing to agree on stringent 
measures to give assurances it would not weaponize, but it 
will never give up the enrichment capability that it has 
worked so hard to achieve, he assessed.  On the other hand, 
Iran wants desperately to re-establish relations with the US 
and secure a full lifting of sanctions, which have stunted 
its hydrocarbon sector.  Iran thinks it can "have it both 
ways":  keeping an enrichment capability while getting the US 
to lift sanctions.  Buharali warned that Iran "buys time and 
stalls very well."  Some hard-liners still want Iran to stall 
until after it has clearly enriched enough uranium for a 
future nuclear weapon, and then negotiate from a position of 
greater strength.  As the USG considers whether and when to 
engage, Buharali urged that it continue to reach out to the 
Iranian population  -- "a key U.S. stakeholder" -- both in 
Iran and abroad, and continue to support civil society 
development in Iran, "but not behind the regime's back." 
Instead, he suggested offering developmental and humanitarian 
assistance openly, either through UN agencies or even 
directly to and through the Iranian government itself. 
 
Comment 
------ 
 
¶14.  (C) These academic and think-tank colleagues all follow 
Iranian affairs closely, have lived in Iran or traveled 
recently to Iran, and maintain contacts with Iranian 
counterparts.  We thus find their views on Iran to be 
credible and well-informed, especially with regard to the 
most commonly-recurring themes:  Turkey and Iran seek a 
stable balance of power with each other and almost always 
pursue bilateral relations with that goal in mind; moderating 
Iran's policies will require genuinely convincing the regime 
that the USG does not seek its overthrow and indeed accepts 
an influential role for Iran in the region; and Turkey 
understands Iran better than the U.S. does and is prepared to 
help us engage.  It is also noteworthy where our expert 
interlocutors disagreed, for example on the timing of 
possible engagement, or what level of further international 
pressure on the regime would help bring it to the table. 
This simply reflects that even to a Turkish expert on Iran, 
the inner workings, levers, and pressure points of the 
Iranian regime remain largely a mystery.  End comment. 
 
WIENER