09KAMPALA1074
UGANDA: ABDUCTED AND IMPRISONED JOURNALIST CHARGED
Thu Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO8051
RR RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #1074/01 2601401
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 171401Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1779
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0821
RHMFISS/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 KAMPALA 001074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2019 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KDEM UG
SUBJECT: UGANDA: ABDUCTED AND IMPRISONED JOURNALIST CHARGED 
WITH SEDITION 
 
REF: A. KAMPALA 01055 
     ¶B. KAMPALA 01044 
     ¶C. STATE 67260 
     ¶D. HILLSMAN-OJIKUTU EMAILS 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Chief Aaron Sampson for 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Ugandan authorities released radio host 
Robert Kalundi Sserumaga on bail on September 15 after 
charging him with six counts of sedition for comments made 
during a live September 11 television show.  Sserumaga was 
abducted and imprisoned by the Police Criminal Investigation 
Division's Intelligence Unit, and claims to have been beaten. 
 Sserumaga, who is an ethnic Baganda, alleged that the 
Ugandan government and members of the ruling National 
Resistance Movement (NRM) were using the September 10-11 
riots as a pretext to arrest opposition intellectuals and 
settle political scores.  On September 17, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Permanent Secretary Ambassador James Mugume 
defended the decision to arrest Sserumaga and close selected 
radio stations as necessary steps to save Uganda from the 
same forms of ethnic violence that engulfed Rwanda and Kenya. 
 As Uganda struggles to balance freedom of expression with 
public safety, the circumstances of Sserumaga's arrest and 
the suspension of other journalists show once again that in 
Uganda, the preservation of peace and security comes first. 
End Summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
Journalist Arrested, Beaten 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Well-known journalist and radio talk show host Robert 
Kalundi Sserumaga described the circumstances of his arrest 
and detention to the U.S. Mission officers on September 15 
after posting bail to secure his release from custody. 
Sserumaga was accompanied by family members who have 
surrounded him to ward off any subsequent attempts to 
threaten his safety.  He appeared with a bandage on his hand 
where an IV was inserted while receiving care during a brief 
hospital stay following his arrest, but otherwise showed no 
outward signs of injury. 
 
¶3. (C) Sserumaga said he was bundled into an unmarked vehicle 
by pistol-wielding plain-clothed assailants as he departed 
the studios of WBS-TV on the evening of September 11. 
Sserumaga had just finished recording a live television talk 
show on the September 10-12 riots which left, at last count, 
24 dead and more than 100 injured (refs A and B for 
background).  Restrained by three men in the back of the 
sedan, Sserumaga said he struggled with his captors while the 
vehicle drove though Kampala.  Sserumaga said his attempts to 
kick the vehicle's automatic gear shift out of gear and open 
the car doors forced the security agents to sit on him, hold 
down his arms and legs, push his head back, and choke him. 
When he realized that the vehicle was no longer heading in 
the direction of Kampala's Central Police Station, Sserumaga 
said he demanded to go to a police station. 
 
¶4. (C) Instead his captors delivered him to what Sserumaga 
described as an unmarked derelict police station that had a 
newly-painted interior.  There, he was locked in a constantly 
illuminated, windowless cell with 26 others.  His cell mates 
included shirtless men caught up in post-riot sweeps of the 
city, and a local government official arrested at gun-point 
in his pajamas after police lured him outside to help 
"resolve" a neighborhood dispute.  The prisoners suspected 
two other inmates of being government informants deliberately 
placed in the cell.  Sserumaga described a young male inmate 
who seemed to have a broken leg and was so badly beaten 
around his face that he could not lay his head on the cell's 
cement floor. Sserumaga let the boy use his leg as a pillow. 
 
¶5. (C) Sserumaga and other prisoners were occasionally 
removed from the cell to undergo questioning, beatings, and 
what Sserumaga described as clumsy forms of intimidation. 
Sserumaga was unable to ascertain what branch of the Ugandan 
security services had arrested him as his captors wore no 
uniforms or insignias.  His family, meanwhile, posted news of 
his disappearance on the internet, contacted international 
journalist protection groups, and spoke with the Irish 
Ambassador to Uganda (Sserumaga is reportedly a dual 
Ugandan-Irish national).  Sserumaga's brother attributed his 
eventual transfer to a real police station on September 12 to 
a telephone call by the Irish Ambassador and the 
international response to Sserumaga's arrest.  Sserumaga was 
subsequently moved from police custody to a local hospital to 
 
KAMPALA 00001074  002 OF 004 
 
 
undergo routine medical observation for a suspected 
concussion. 
 
-------------- 
Police Tactics 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Inspector General of Police, Maj. Gen. Kale Kayihura, 
personally assured Sserumaga's family on September 12 that 
Sserumaga was in police custody at a "gazetted," meaning an 
officially recognized, police station.  However, family 
members who later tried to find the police station with the 
help of local taxi drivers were unsuccessful.  Member of 
Parliament Beti Olive Namisango Kamya, who provided the 
collateral required for Sserumaga to post bail, told the 
Embassy that the building where Sserumaga was originally 
detained was an un-gazetted "safe house." 
 
¶7. (C) Sserumaga said he initially thought he had been 
arrested by the Joint Anti-Terrorism Task force (JATT).  Gen. 
Kayihura, however, said the JATT did not participate in 
Sserumaga's arrest and that Sserumaga had been in police 
custody since his initial arrest.  On September 16, 
presidential advisor Moses Byaruhanga said Sserumaga was 
arrested by the Intelligence Unit under the Police's Criminal 
Investigation's Division (CID).  The Intelligence Unit is led 
by David Magara, a known human rights offender (refs C and D). 
 
¶8. (C) Sserumaga believes the government and the NRM are 
using the September 11-12 riots as a pretext to round up 
intellectuals and those critical of the government.  He noted 
that the Local Council Chairman he met while in the 
Intelligence Unit's safe house belonged to the opposition 
Democratic Party (DP) and had recently tried to blow the 
whistle on local NRM officials who were creating fake 
villages to which they could assign phantom polling places 
for the 2011 elections.  On September 15, Museveni said he 
had ordered the arrest of DP publicity secretary Betty 
Nambooze for inciting rioters.  Sserumaga's brother said he 
had spoken to Nambooze from where she is currently hiding to 
avoid arrest. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Another Museveni Critic Charged with Sedition 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) Authorities warned WBS-TV that the station risks 
closure if it released recordings of the September 11 talk 
show. The Ugandan Broadcasting Council suspended indefinitely 
the talk show's host, Peter Kibazo, and one other guest who 
appeared on the September 11 show.  The Mission obtained a 
copy of the show on September 14 from  an official at the 
Ugandan Broadcasting Council. 
 
¶10. (C)  During the show, in addition to describing the 
Government of Uganda as a colonial occupying force in 
Buganda, Sserumaga questioned President Museveni's upbringing 
and integrity.  "Are we dealing with seriously well-formed 
people," asked Sserumaga of the President and NRM senior 
leaders, "or are we dealing with people who are suffering 
from a poor upbringing?" At another point Sserumaga said 
Museveni resorted to the use of force "because of poor 
upbringing and thinking that he can always fool people." 
 
¶11. (C) Sserumaga also challenged Museveni's frequent refrain 
about his 1993 decision to personally restore Uganda's 
traditional Kingdoms by arguing that it was the Buganda who 
enabled Museveni to found the NRM.  Sserumaga then wondered 
why none of the Baganda leaders who joined with Museveni in 
the 1960s and 1970s survived while many of Museveni's closest 
allies from western Uganda did.  He also accused Museveni of 
conniving to secure oil rights in the western Uganda region 
of Bunyoro and encouraged the people of Bunyoro to "wake up". 
 When asked by moderator Peter Kibazo - now indefinitely 
suspended by the Uganda Broadcasting Council - if he could 
identify any positive conclusions to the two days of rioting, 
Sserumaga - who is himself a Baganda - facetiously said it 
was "good news" Ugandans from all over Uganda could unite to 
repress the Baganda. 
 
¶12. (C) Authorities have charged Sserumaga with six counts of 
sedition based on these comments and ordered him to surrender 
his passports.  Sserumaga denied the charges, saying he had 
no intention of inciting hatred against the President. 
Member of Parliament Kamya, who is facing a sedition charge 
of her own stemming from a January 2008 newspaper article, 
noted that the government will not be able to prosecute 
Sserumaga until the Constitutional Court rules on a challenge 
 
KAMPALA 00001074  003 OF 004 
 
 
over the constitutionality of the sedition and sectarian 
clauses located in Sections 39-41 of Uganda's penal code. 
The court challenge, which was initiated by The Independent 
editor Andrew Mwenda, has been pending since 2005 when Mwenda 
was charged with 15 counts of sedition.  Mwenda was arrested 
and charged with sedition again just last month after The 
Independent published a cartoon of Museveni reviewing a 
checklist for rigging the 2011 elections. 
 
¶13. (C) With the constitutional challenge to the sedition law 
still unresolved, sedition charges can be a de facto form of 
systematic harassment as those charged are required to report 
once or in some cases twice a month to local authorities. 
Those who have had their passports confiscated and wish to 
travel abroad must go through a prolonged process to request 
their passport's return.  Those who still retain their 
passports, like MP Kamya, must also obtain official 
permission to leave Uganda. 
 
---------------------------------- 
MFA: Uganda is not Rwanda or Kenya 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (C)  On September 17, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Permanent Secretary Amb. James Mugume defended Sserumaga's 
arrest, the response of Ugandan security forces to the 
rioters, and the closure of four local radio stations.  He 
stressed that there are more than 50 radio stations in 
Kampala and over one hundred across Uganda and that the 
Uganda Broadcasting Council had zeroed in on just four for 
inciting violence.  Amb. Mugume said authorities warned the 
Buganda-run Central Broadcasting Service (CBS) radio to curb 
ethnic hate speech well before last week's riots, and that 
Uganda moved quickly to shut the station down once it was 
clear CBS was inciting listeners not only to riot but also to 
single out non-Baganda for harassment or worse.  Mugume said 
Sserumaga's televised comments in on September 11 contained 
many of the same code words, albeit in English rather than 
Luganda, used by Baganda radio to encourage acts of violence 
and ethnic division. 
 
¶15. (C) Referring specifically to Rwanda and Radio Mille 
Collines, Mugume noted that the international community did 
not realize that Rwandan radio stations were inciting 
genocide until it was too late.  Mugume said the Ugandan 
government believed that without immediate action to quell 
the violence and the radio stations inciting it, the riots 
would quickly escalate out of control.  "If the killing of 
police officers had continued," said Mugume, "it would have 
been mayhem."  Mugume reiterated an offer by Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Sam Kutesa and the Inspector General of 
Police to provide English language transcripts of selected 
CBS broadcasts (septel).  He said he understood the U.S. and 
European interest in encouraging Uganda to consolidate 
democratic gains and respect freedom of expression, but said 
that if Uganda moved as quickly as the West would like, 
Uganda could lose the gains it has achieved over the last 20 
years.  Observing that Kenya nearly "lost it" in 2007-2008, 
Mugume said Uganda was determined not to make the same 
mistakes.  He also appealed to the U.S. Mission to ensure 
that Washington understood the internal calculations behind 
the Ugandan government's response to the September 10-12 
riots. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Comment: Balancing Press Freedoms with Public Safety 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶16. (C) Ugandan officials explained the crack down on 
independent media and the closing of radio stations as a 
necessary step to muffle ethnically charged "hate speech" and 
prevent further riots.  This argument may be a valid point 
leading to the closure of the Buganda-run CBS radio, as there 
are numerous reports linking violent rhetoric emanating from 
the Luganda-language CBS to the intimidation and harassment 
of western Ugandans and Asians. Following the riots, members 
of our locally employed staff reported witnessing attempts to 
identify, humiliate and physically threaten people from 
Museveni's region of western Uganda. The government now faces 
a delicate balancing act with CBS, as some Buganda are 
threatening further violence if CBS is not restored. But 
turning the station back on could result in renewed ethnic 
vitriol. 
 
¶17. (C) Peter Kibazo, the suspended television talk show host 
who moderated the discussion that landed Sserumaga in hot 
water, told the U.S. Mission that the government needed to 
take CBS radio off the air to preserve the peace.  He 
 
KAMPALA 00001074  004 OF 004 
 
 
described other closed radio stations and suspended 
journalists - including himself and Sserumaga - as 
"collateral damage."  Sserumaga's arrest, other journalist 
suspensions, the arrest of Democracy Party MP Issa Kikungwe, 
and the arrest warrant for DP publicity secretary Betty 
Nambooze for inciting riots and hatred suggest a diminished 
willingness on the part of the Ugandan government to tolerate 
dissent.  Ironically, the local and international backlash 
against Museveni's media crackdown may provide cover for the 
small number of ethnic Baganda extremists who actually are 
trying to incite ethnic violence. 
LANIER