09MANAGUA1051
WHAT'S REALLY BEHIND THE MOSQUITO COAST INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT?
Tue Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1051/01 3002242
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 272242Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0030
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001051 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN KRAAIMOORE 
DEPT FOR DRL MAGGIO 
DEPT FOR INL/IAA 
STATE FOR USOAS 
STATE FOR USAID 
PASS TO MILLENIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/10/27 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV NU PBTS
SUBJECT: WHAT'S REALLY BEHIND THE MOSQUITO COAST INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT? 
 
REF: MANAGUA 1047; MANAGUA 501; MANAGUA 415 
MANAGUA 103 - JANUARY ELECTION FRAUD 
2008 MANAGUA 1329 - HURRICANE FELIX 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert J. Callahan, Ambassador; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: Six months have passed since the April 18 
declaration of independence of the Mosquito Coast by the Council of 
Elders and the election of Reverend Hector Williams as the Wihta 
Tara (Miskito for "grand judge") to lead the people.  The Ortega 
government continues to be silent and has refused to open a public 
dialogue with the independence movement leaders.  A protest march, 
which was to culminate in a takeover of the Regional Government 
Offices was repressed by government supporters with police 
acquiescence (see REF A).  Independence is not a new issue for 
Nicaragua's Atlantic Coast, which has passed through more than 100 
years of various levels of autonomy from the central government. 
However, this latest iteration of the movement seems disingenuous 
and manipulated by the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) 
and certain actors within the movement for their own political and 
personal purposes.  END SUMMARY 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -----
SIX MONTH ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -----
 
¶2. (C) On April 19, the Council of Elders, an indigenous Miskito 
Indian group from the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN), held 
an election and declared their independence from the central 
government (see reftel B).  The new "Wihta Tara" (Miskito for 
"grand judge") elected by the Miskito Council of Elders announced 
the formation of a new "Miskito army" for the first time since the 
1890s.  This Miskito "army" (not an organized armed force in any 
sense)  and the Wihta Tara peacefully occupied YATAMA party 
headquarters in late April, after which the movement seemed to 
disappear from the media's radar. As the six-month anniversary of 
the independence movement approached, the central government had 
not issued an official statement about the independence 
declaration, nor had held any public talks with the Wihta Tara. 
Perhaps as an effort to call attention back to the independence 
movement, the Wihta Tara called on followers to join him in the 
unsuccessful march to take over the regional government offices in 
Bilwi, RAAN in mid-October (see REF A). 
  
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 MOSQUITO COAST INDEPENDENCE IS NOT NEW
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The issue of independence for Nicaragua's Mosquito Coast 
spans over 100 years.  The Caribbean coast of Nicaragua was 
independent from the central government until 1894, when it was 
forcibly annexed by the GON through a military campaign led by 
Rigoberto Cabezas.  Before annexation, the Mosquito Coast was a 
British protectorate from 1655 until 1860, and ruled by a line of 
Miskito kings, the first of whom was crowned in England.  The 
British protectorate over the Miskito Indians brought the English 
language and customs to the Caribbean Coast over the period, but 
U.K. claims were alternately disputed by Spain, the Central 
American Republics and the United States. [NOTE: U.S. opposition to 
the British protectorate was mainly due to fears that Britain would 
control Greytown at the mouth of the San Juan River and the 
proposed inter-oceanic canal through Nicaragua. END NOTE] 
 
¶4. (U) An 1860 treaty between GON and the United Kingdom known as 
the Treaty of Managua transferred to Nicaragua the sovereignty over 
the entire Caribbean coast from Cabo Gracias a Dios to Greytown at 
the mouth of the San Juan River, but granted autonomy to the 
Indians in the Mosquito Reserve.  [NOTE: The Mosquito Reserve is a 
narrow strip of territory that measures approximately 225 miles 
from Greytown in the south to the Wawa River in the north and 
inland approximately 40 miles from the Caribbean Coast to the 
eastern limit of the Nicaraguan highlands.  END NOTE]  From 1860 
until 1894, the Mosquito Coast was essentially autonomous from the 
central government and self-governed by an elected Indian chief. 
The Miskito Indians rejected the suzerainty of Nicaragua over their 
territory, and even appealed to the Hapsburg emperor of Austria, 
who in 1880 sided with the Indians claim of a right to 
self-government.  In 1894, Rigoberto Cabezas led a military 
campaign to annex the Reserve.  Miskito Indians' and other coastal 
peoples appealed to England for protection, but to no avail. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- --------------- 
FORCED ASSIMILATION FOLLOWED BY SOMOZA HANDS-OFF POLICY
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- --------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Following the Cabezas campaign, the Atlantic Coast was 
subjected to a decades-long campaign by the Managua central 
government to impose Spanish culture and language on the region, 
which was renamed the Zelaya Department (after the Nicaraguan 
President).  Schools that taught English or indigenous languages 
were forced to adopt Spanish language and textbooks - a practice 
that was deeply resented by the local populations.  In the early 
1900s an Afro-Miskito leader from Bilwi, Samuel Pitts, raised an 
army of over 6,000 Miskito Indians to attack Managua in order to 
regain their independence and fight the "illegal" incorporation of 
the Caribbean Coast into Nicaragua.  His indigenous army traveled 
as far as the San Juan River until a severe outbreak of malaria 
decimated their ranks.  Pitts returned to the coast to raise 
another army for a second campaign, but was ambushed and killed by 
agents of the GON. 
 
¶6. (U) Through the ensuing years the region was economically 
exploited by foreign companies (with the blessing of the central 
government) for its rich resources, but was generally ignored by 
the GON in terms of providing other public services available on 
the Pacific side of Nicaragua.  During the Somoza era (1934 - 1979) 
Managua had a "hands off" policy that allowed independent 
development of the region and a sense of autonomy that is still 
frequently referred to as "the golden time" because there were 
plenty of jobs at foreign companies which operated banana 
plantations, lumber businesses and gold mines.  The 1979 Sandinista 
Revolution irrevocably ended the quasi-independence of the region 
and brought the Atlantic - Pacific conflict back. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
MISQUITO COAST & SANDINISTAS
------------------------------------------ 
  
¶7. (U) Prior to the Sandinista Revolution, some Miskito indigenous leaders, such as Brooklyn Rivera, received training from Sandinista guerrilla movements. However, after the Sandinista Revolution, the new government sought to extend full control over the Atlantic Coast down to the local neighborhood through its Sandinista Defense Committees. In response to central government control over the region, several Miskito groups formed a guerrilla movement that eventually joined the Nicaraguan Resistance (Contras) in Honduras. For example, on February 25, 1982 a Miskito guerrilla leader, Steadman Fagoth, took refuge in Honduras with 3,000 other Miskito guerrillas. The Sandinistas subsequently began to denounce the Contra activities along the Rio Coco zone. Then on December 20-21, 1982 several Sandinista soldiers were killed in the village of San Carlos and the government retaliated by massacring at least 30 Miskitos the next day. A state of emergency was declared over the region which lasted from 1983 until 1988.
 
¶8. (U) During the conflict, the Sandinista-leaning Atlantic Coast 
leaders such as Ray Hooker convinced the central government that 
the way to peace would be to grant limited autonomy to the diverse 
region.  In 1987, Ray Hooker and other like-minded leaders were 
able to draft and secure the passage of Law 28 in the National 
Assembly that created the RAAN and RAAS from the former Zelaya 
department.  The legislation provided a framework for regional 
autonomy with some level of regional integration with the rest of 
Nicaragua.  It was sufficient to convince Miskito and other 
guerrilla leaders to peacefully end their conflict with the 
Sandinistas. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
POST AUTONOMY - NEW POLITICAL ASSIMILATION 
--------------------------------------------- -----------------  
 
¶9. (U) With the return of democracy to Nicaragua in the 1990 
victory of Violeta Chamorro, new hope came to the region that it 
would not be neglected nor exploited by the central government for 
its rich natural resources.  Regional parties such as PAMUK and 
YATAMA (Miskito for "Sons of the Living Earth") held sway in the 
initial elections, but by the election of Arnoldo Aleman in 1996 
the better organized and financed national parties, such as the 
FSLN and the Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC), had established a 
firm presence in the region.  Coastal people realized that the 
Autonomous Laws did not provide true financial autonomy to control 
their own development, as the central government exercised enormous 
control over regional budgets and national programs.  National 
party control over state institutions, such as the Supreme Court 
and the Supreme Electoral Council, also discouraged the progress 
and development of regional political parties.  Combined with the 
tremendous wave of Pacific-coast migrants to the region following 
the war, regional parties have been forced to align with national 
parties in order to survive. 
 
--------------------------------- 
WHY INDPENDENCE NOW? 
--------------------------------- 

¶10. (C) The Wihta Tara's April 19 public declaration of independence started the most recent political showdown between the RAAN indigenous separatists and the regional and municipal governments, controlled by the FSLN and their YATAMA allies. While the GON has publicly ignored the uprising, surrogates for President Ortega, including Steadman Fagoth, have publicly blamed the USG for being behind the movement. Leaders of the independence movement claim that there are several reasons why they have declared their independence. They are frustrated with the regional government's corruption and its failure to address the needs of the Miskito people following the September 2007 Hurricane Felix natural disaster (see reftel E). They are also upset about the election fraud perpetrated by the FSLN and its Yatama allies during the January 2009 municipal elections (see reftel D). Moreover, they are discouraged with the deteriorating economic situation within their community and the central government's neglect of the region.
  
¶11. (C) Despite these valid arguments for independence, contacts 
tell us that the real force behind the current independence 
movement is Oscar Hodgson, the Council of Elder's legal 
representative.  Hodgson reportedly worked for Lenin Cerna and the 
Sandinistas' intelligence service during the 1980s and continues to 
have ties with the FSLN party.  He wanted a position in the 
regional government, but was passed over.  Contacts have told us 
that Hodgson is manipulating the independence movement to enter 
into a negotiation with the FSLN.  It is widely believed that any 
chaos in the Atlantic Coast through the independence movement would 
prevent free and fair Regional Council elections on March 7, 2010, 
and help the FSLN consolidate control in the region.  Fagoth was 
allegedly dispatched by President Ortega in May to negotiate with 
Hodgson and the Wihta Tara, but the closed-door discussions 
allegedly broke down when the Council of Elders asked for more 
money than Ortega was willing to pay. 
 
-------------- 
COMMENT 
--------------  
 
¶12. (C) While there are deep historical grievances behind the 
current independence movement, our contacts tell us that they are 
suspicious of the timing and true motives of the organizers.  Oscar 
Hodgson, a trained lawyer and the legal advisor to the Miskito 
Council of Elders, is known to be an FSLN-sympathizer.  Post 
believes that he may be manipulating the independence movement to 
create leverage in negotiating with the FSLN nationally.  It is 
highly suspicious that neither the Government of Nicaragua (GON) 
nor President Ortega has made any official statements about the 
April 19 declaration months after the fact.  What is behind the GON 
silence?  Post believes that FSLN may also be allowing the current 
independence movement as part of a Machiavellian strategy to keep 
coastal people off-balance in the run-up to regional elections set 
for March 7, 2010.  The independence movement could create a crisis 
in the region that might force the National Assembly to cancel or 
postpone regional elections.  In the absence of a clear statement 
by the FSLN government about the movement, combined with public 
accusations by its surrogates (Steadman Fagoth, Brooklyn Rivera) 
that the U.S. is behind it, the movement can be manipulated by the 
FSLN to serve its political purposes.  We will continue to monitor 
events as they unfold. 
CALLAHAN