09PARIS1553
FRANCE/BRAZIL: THE ECONOMIC AGENDA
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO6153
RR RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHFR #1553/01 3271652
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 231652Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7582
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 2344
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 0002
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 0002
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 0001
INFO RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 2754
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 001553 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 19528: DECL:11/19/19 
TAGS: ECON PREL EINV BEXP ETRD EAID SENV FR BR
SUBJECT: FRANCE/BRAZIL: THE ECONOMIC AGENDA 
 
Ref A)Paris 1526; B) Brasilia 533; C) State 104985; D) Paris 1520; 
E)Paris 1099 
 
PARIS 00001553  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY ECON MINISTER COUNSELOR SETH WINNICK, REASONS 1.4 (B 
AND D) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: Behind the cultural exchanges and warm diplomatic 
relations with Brazil (Ref A), France is embarking on a long-term 
strategy to court a country it sees as a resource-rich future global 
powerhouse and foothold in Latin America.  Since the 2005 "Year of 
Brazil in France," commercial ties have flourished between the two 
countries, and now 35 of the top 40 French companies operate in South 
America's largest economy, focused on the energy, transportation, and 
defense sectors.  Brazil named 2009 "The Year of France in Brazil," 
an effort that ended this month, to further institutionalize this 
relationship.  Under France's new public diplomacy strategy, 
dedicating one calendar year to cultural and economic cooperation 
with a specific country has become a diplomatic tool to strengthen or 
improve economic as well as political ties in emerging markets. 
Beyond bilateral military and civilian economic cooperation, the 
North-South firepower of the Franco-Brazilian strategic partnership 
may extend globally into the G-20 and the UN Security Council and the 
International Monetary Fund, as well as work on climate change issues 
for the upcoming Copenhagen Summit.  End Summary. 
 
Substantial Economic Growth Between 2005 and 2009 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. (SBU) As President of the EU Council, Nicolas Sarkozy used the 
second E.U.-Brazil Summit in December 2008 to reinvigorate ties with 
Brazil.  He and Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva agreed 
on an Action Plan for the Implementation of a Strategic Partnership 
(2008 Action Plan) that laid out broad areas for an enhanced civilian 
and military partnership.  Brazil then hosted the "Year of France in 
Brazil" in 2009 -- a year packed with eight presidential meetings or 
visits, four summits, and the creation of several high-level 
public-private working groups focused on the economy, commerce, 
civilian nuclear energy, biodiversity, and climate change.  According 
to the French employer's union (MEDEF), both countries saw a "window 
of opportunity" to replace the EU-Mercosur relationship after trade 
negotiations with Mercosur stalled.  In March 2009, Brazil 
established a chamber of commerce in Paris, complimenting the 
century-old French chamber in Brazil. France's Junior Minister for 
Trade Anne-Marie Idrac, bolstered by French transportation and 
financial industry leaders, led talks with Brazilian counterparts on 
investment in France and cooperation on (Brazilian) bio-fuels and 
(French) nuclear energy in May 2009.  During President Sarkozy's 
visit to Brazil in September 2009, he signed a Joint Declaration with 
President Lula that built on the 2008 Action Plan and laid out more 
specific measures and areas of cooperation. 
 
¶3. (U) Franco-Brazilian commercial activity has multiplied since 
¶2005.  The rising level of investment between the two countries 
centers on complementary industrial interests and needs, with a focus 
on manufacturing, chemicals, metal production, and services, 
including transportation.  From 2005 to 2008, Ubifrance, France's 
agency for international business development, reported that 
Brazilian exports to France grew 39 percent (from 2.8 billion euros 
to 3.9 billion) and French exports to Brazil increased by 59 percent 
(from 2.2 billion euros to 3.5 billion) While the overall volume of 
trade is roughly balanced, the relative importance of the two trading 
partners to each other is not.  France was Brazil's eighth-largest 
trading partner in 2008, while Brazil represented less than one 
percent of France's bilateral trade.  France has made Brazil a 
priority developing country destination for foreign direct investment 
(FDI), investing close to USD 15 billion in 2008, a 50 percent 
increase from 2004.  While Brazilian FDI in France is only half of 
French FDI in Brazil, it has doubled over the last four years. 
Ubifrance said approximately 350 French companies employed more than 
250,000 people in Brazil as of October 2008. (Note: The French MFA 
provided figures of 400 companies and 400,000 people. End note.) 
More than 400 other French companies expressed interest in Brazil 
following "The Year of France in Brazil," according to the MFA's 
Brazil desk. Roughly 30 Brazilian companies and subsidiaries operate 
in France. 
 
Military Sales and Technology Transfer Take Off 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶4.  (U) Since signing the 2009 Joint Declaration in Brasilia, the 
first products of the strategic partnership were two major military 
sales in the form of a combined USD 12 billion helicopters and 
submarine package.  A third military deal (the Rafale jet sale -- Ref 
 
PARIS 00001553  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
A) is under consideration.  According to Brazilian officials, 
technology transfer provisions were key elements in all of these 
deals.  The Joint Declaration outlines further cooperation in 
developing unmanned vehicles and better communication and territorial 
surveillance networks along maritime and terrestrial borders, 
including the border between French Guyana and Brazil. 
 
Cooperation in Nuclear Energy, Transportation, 
Biodiversity, and Policing 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Civil nuclear energy and transportation infrastructure 
development form two of the four major civilian pillars of the 2008 
Action Plan.  France's nuclear energy giant, Areva, is supplying 
instrumentation for the currently inactive Angra III nuclear reactor 
(Brazil's third).  Areva and Brazil's Electronuclear plan to 
co-manage the reactor, which is expected to come online again by 2014 
after a 23-year hiatus and generate about 1,350 MW (Ref B).  Brazil 
also expects France to provide further expertise and training 
programs in nuclear energy development, and the Action Plan expresses 
hope for the construction of new nuclear reactors.  Brazil gets 
almost half of its energy from oil, 36 percent from hydroelectric 
dams and seven percent from natural gas.  French industry leaders GDF 
Suez, Electricite de France, and Suez Environnement all have 
hydroelectric subsidiaries in Brazil.  GDF Suez currently leads 
private sector electricity production in Brazil, with hydroelectric 
output of more than 7,000 MW of power capacity.  The company's CEO, 
Gerard Mestrallet, co-chairs the high-level bilateral commercial 
group created under Trade Minister Idrac.  Sustainable transport is 
one of the group's chosen sectoral themes; France's Alstom is 
currently developing tram and metro infrastructure in Sao Paulo and 
Brasilia, and hopes to begin building a high-speed train line between 
Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo and Campinas by 2014.  To facilitate 
cross-border trade and transport, the state of Ampas and French 
Guyana are building a bridge over the Oyapock River. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Concerns related to policing 700 kilometers of rainforest 
border between French Guyana and Brazil has reinforced cooperation in 
border enforcement and management of Brazil's biodiversity, both on 
the border and in the entire Brazilian Amazon. Brazil recently signed 
a bilateral protocol on managing and developing its forest resources 
after extensive lobbying by France.  The agreement envisions future 
economic exploitation by French companies.  Some of this cooperative 
management may be achieved through a Franco-Brazil Amazonian research 
center, consisting of a network of researchers that would promote 
technological development and the transfer of scientific and 
technical knowledge and training.  The Joint Declaration also calls 
for mindfulness of international agreements, including those on 
intellectual property.  French Guyana and Brazil are also working 
toward an accord to fight illegal gold mining on the border and 
related clandestine immigration.  The MFA also noted that French law 
enforcement trainers are helping Brazil prepare for the security of 
the upcoming soccer World Cup and Olympic Games; the MFA official 
expected France to "gobble up" the upcoming security contracts in a 
tender offer. 
 
How France is Building This Relationship 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) A network of new and preexisting public and private 
organizations reinforce the Franco-Brazilian strategic partnership 
from the federal to the local level.  Vice President of the French 
Senate Marquis Roland du Luart, who chairs the Senate Franco-Brazil 
Friendship Committee, predicted that Brazil will be one of the 
world's most important countries during the next 50 years. Du Luart 
said Brazil compared favorably to other South American countries like 
Argentina where French investments failed.  At the regional level, 
state governments forged cooperative relationships with French 
regions during the past decade along technical strengths; the Parana 
and Rhone Alps regions cooperate on common high-tech initiatives, and 
Brasilia and Montpellier work together on transportation efforts 
(with assistance provided by Alstom).  Brazilian regions also 
partnered with Aquitaine on aeronautics and Ile-de-France on 
airports.  The 2009 Joint Declaration also calls for partnerships 
between French and Brazilian public agencies and high authorities 
with an emphasis on scientific research, agricultural enterprise, 
economic development, and financial regulation via central banks. 
 
An Asymmetric, But Strategic Relationship 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) Brazilian embassy officials in Paris told Econoffs that Brazil 
recognizes the asymmetrical nature of the strategic partnership and 
 
PARIS 00001553  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
understands that France could reap proportionally greater profits and 
gain access to previously tightly-controlled Amazonian resources. 
But Brazil is willing to make this bargain in exchange for 
international recognition of its ascendance to the global stage.  The 
Brazilian officials also said that despite the imbalance in Brazilian 
and French bilateral operations, France guaranteed technology 
transfer, unlike the United States or Japan (or Sweden, in the case 
of the jet fighter contract).  France also has openly advocated for 
Brazil to have "a seat at the table," including reform of the 
International Monetary Fund to favor emerging countries and a 
permanent seat on the UN Security Council (Ref A).  In return, France 
stands to gain a powerful partner in the developing world and a 
launching point for its next planned forays into Mexico, Argentina 
and Chile. 
 
Global Ambitions: The G-20, Copenhagen Summit, and Development 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10. (C) Brazilian contacts believe that France reinvigorated the 
partnership out of a perceived necessity to partner with emerging 
countries, and the French MFA's Brazil desk confirmed that the 
partnership has global ambitions -- while striving to be "balanced 
and mutually beneficial."  According to the desk, France has "courted 
the favor of the Southern giant" in order to have a clearer picture 
of the aspirations of all countries in the Southern Hemisphere. 
 
¶11. (SBU) At the Aquila Summit in July 2009, France and Brazil called 
for an "Alliance for Change," or G-14 with South Africa, Brazil, 
China, India, Mexico and Egypt, something for which Sarkozy has long 
advocated and promised to implement during the French G-8 presidency 
in 2011 (Ref A).  The Alliance for Change would work on reforming the 
international system and reorienting it toward the emerging economies 
and their increasing importance as consumers of global production. 
The formalization of the G-20 as the premier forum for international 
economic issues has more than realized this objective.  The September 
2009 Franco-Brazilian Joint Declaration states that the G-20 summits 
have "proved that the Franco-Brazilian dynamic is pertinent and 
necessary."  Both countries seem intent on using this new North-South 
partnership as essential leverage in future international fora.  The 
global objectives of the strategic partnership became even more 
evident on November 14 with announcement of a Franco-Brazilian 
proposal to obtain an "ambitious" agreement at the upcoming 
Copenhagen Summit on climate change (Ref D). 
 
¶12. (C) Finally, France and Brazil, as global partners, plan to move 
beyond international financial system and climate change issues to 
development in third countries, notably Africa (Ref A).  The MFA's 
Brazil desk said France was encouraging Brazil's engagement in Africa 
in order to counterbalance the rapidly increasing Chinese presence 
there, especially in countries where France's colonial legacy has 
left a precarious relationship.  As part of the Alliance for Change 
goals for sustainable growth and crisis prevention, France and Brazil 
have focused on food security and agricultural development and the 
eventual reform of the Food and Agricultural Organization. Concrete 
three-party accords were signed this year to cooperate with Cameroon 
in aquaculture and with Mozambique in conservation farming and soil 
preservation, as well as work in Uganda.  France and Brazil are also 
founding members of the UN's innovative financing arm, UNITAID, which 
currently taxes airline tickets to finance medication for HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis, and malaria in poor countries (Ref E). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13. (C) Under the aegis of cultural celebration and warm presidential 
ties, France has forged a strategic partnership with Brazil with 
sharp-eyed economic and geopolitical intentions.  While France gains 
a toehold in Latin America and an emerging economic ally, Brazil 
gains legitimacy and clout.  France and Brazil, two major 
agricultural exporters, may face hurdles in this growing 
relationship, as well as frictions over intellectual property and 
problems related to the realities of military cooperation.  But for 
the moment, both countries are putting on a strong and convincing 
show of mutual admiration and support. 
 
RIVKIN