09SKOPJE411
MACEDONIA: AHMETI RATES STATE OF AFFAIRS A "FOUR
Fri Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Skopje
VZCZCXRO8167
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHSQ #0411/01 2331320
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 211320Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY SKOPJE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8480
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE 0549
RUESEN/SKOPJE BETA
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SKOPJE 000411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MK
SUBJECT: MACEDONIA: AHMETI RATES STATE OF AFFAIRS A "FOUR 
OUT OF TEN" 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR PHILIP REEKER FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Following the commemoration of the 8th 
Anniversary of the signing of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, 
Ambassador Reeker joined DUI leader Ali Ahmeti at his family 
sheep station deep in the mountains of western Macedonia on 
August 16.  Ahmeti was critical of Prime Minister Nikola 
Gruevski, expressed concerns over Intelligence Chief Sasho 
Mialkov's disdain towards the ethnic Albanian community, and 
noted President Ivanov's relative lack of power.  Ahmeti 
assessed the country's current state of affairs and commented 
on Menduh Thaci's latest antics.  He also expressed his 
dissatisfaction with Gruevski's religious agenda and had 
harsh words for Islamic Community of Macedonia (ICM) 
President Sulejman Rexhepi.  Ahmeti presented two project 
ideas to the Ambassador and asked for U.S. support. (End 
Summary) 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Critical of Gruevski and His Inner Circle 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (C) Prime Minister Gruevski is too young and his youth is 
reflected in his decision making, according to Ahmeti. 
Ahmeti said that he warned the Prime Minister to resolve the 
name issue with Greece and establish diplomatic relations 
with Kosovo a long time ago, otherwise relations with Serbia 
and Bulgaria would also become problematic.  Ahmeti asked 
Ambassador Reeker to put more public pressure on the PM to 
resolve the name issue.  The Ambassador noted that we need to 
calibrate public comments to avoid exacerbating Gruevski's 
insecurities and that behind the scenes actions can often be 
more effective. 
 
¶3. (C) Ahmeti was also concerned that Security and 
Counter-Intelligence Director Sasho Mijalkov has too much 
influence over his cousin, the PM.  He noted that Mijalkov 
has made remarks in government meetings expressing his deep 
disdain for the ethnic Albanian community. He is worried that 
Mijalkov has the contacts and desire to provoke rogue ethnic 
Albanian elements in Macedonia into creating problems, which 
Mijalkov could use to justify broad action against the ethnic 
Albanian community at large.  Though mostly critical of 
Gruevski's inner-circle, Ahmeti said President Ivanov 
actually seemed like a "good guy," but felt that he was "more 
of a professor than a president" and lacked real power as a 
de facto subordinate of the Prime Minister. 
 
---------------- 
How's it Going? 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (C) When asked to rate the current state of affairs in 
Macedonia between one and ten (ten being ideal and zero being 
2001) Ahmeti rated Macedonia a 4 or 5.  He said ethnic 
Macedonians still believed the country was theirs alone.  He 
pointed to the lack of official use of the Albanian language 
throughout the country and the lack of equitable 
representation of ethnic Albanians in leadership positions in 
government as the two biggest issues for the ethnic Albanian 
community.  He noted that during DUI's previous government 
coalition with SDSM, DUI controlled stronger Ministries than 
it controls now.  Ahmeti said overcoming the name issue and 
joining NATO would make it easier to focus on the other 
interethnic issues and would alleviate a lot of the mounting 
frustrations in the minds of ethnic Albanians. 
 
--------------- 
Thaci's Antics 
--------------- 
 
¶5. (C) DPA leader Menduh Thaci's New Agreement (proposed to 
replace the Ohrid Framework Agreement), his most recent 
boycott of Parliament and his announcement that he will ask 
Albania to veto Macedonia's NATO bid are all indications of 
Thaci's gradual marginalization, according to Ahmeti. 
However, he believes Thaci's behavior has become more erratic 
and could threaten the stability of Macedonia.  Ahmeti noted 
he would meet with Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha on 
August 19 and said he would reiterate that the ethnic 
Albanian community in Macedonia did not support Thaci's call 
for a NATO veto.  (Comment: Overall support among citizens of 
Macedonia for NATO membership remains around 95% according to 
recent IRI polling.  Among ethnic Albanians, the figure may 
be closer to 100%. End Comment) Ahmeti told the Ambassador 
that he preferred New Democracy leader Imer Selmani to Thaci 
as the primary ethnic Albanian opposition voice.  He felt 
Selmani at least represented a constructive and reasonable 
 
SKOPJE 00000411  002 OF 002 
 
 
opposition.  He also said Selmani was very close to Gruevski 
and the two visit each other's homes. 
 
------------------------------- 
"More Churches Than Believers" 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Ahmeti said he has a very different perspective from 
the PM on matters of religion.  He does not agree with  the 
PM's political-religious agenda and insistence on erecting 
ever more churches and religious symbols. There are more 
churches and mosques in Macedonia than believers, according 
to Ahmeti. He believes government money could be spent more 
effectively on other projects.  Ahmeti also asserted that 
Islamic Community of Macedonia (ICM) President Sulejman 
Rexhepi-- who recently criticized the Ambassador for meeting 
with the Sufi Islamic Bektashi Community-- was everything but 
a believer.  Ahmeti called the ICM "God's bureaucracy" and 
said he does not support it. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Consolidating Higher Education and Cleaning the Water 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7. (C) Ahmeti mentioned two projects he was considering and 
asked Ambassador Reeker for his feedback and support.  First, 
Ahmeti said he felt the State University of Tetovo and the 
private South Eastern European University in Tetovo were 
essentially duplicating efforts and unnecessarily competing 
with one another for limited resources.  Ahmeti wanted to 
merge them into one university with state funding and 
international support.  Second, Ahmeti mentioned that he had 
met with the Mayors of six municipalities located in the 
mountains south of Skopje to discuss cleaning up the 
contaminated rivers and lakes that flow into Macedonia's 
popular local tourist destination, Matka Lake, and eventually 
into Skopje by way of the Vardar River.  He asked the 
Ambassador if he and EU Special Representative Fouere would 
also be willing to meet with the mayors and support such a 
project.  Ambassador Reeker made no firm commitments to 
either project but offered Ahmeti advice on ways to proceed 
and said the Embassy would consider other ideas as the 
projects progressed. 
REEKER