09TEGUCIGALPA617
TFH01: WHO'S WHO OF THE HONDURAN COUP
Fri Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tegucigalpa
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTG #0617/01 1982303
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 172303Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0165
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS IMMEDIATE 0725
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/THE WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUMIAAA/USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000617 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/16/2019 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PINR HO
SUBJECT: TFH01: WHO'S WHO OF THE HONDURAN COUP 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 594 
     ¶B. TEGUCIGALPA 591 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶C. TEGUCIGALPA 587 
     ¶D. TEGUCIGALPA 580 
     ¶E. TEGUCIGALPA 578 
     ¶F. TEGUCIGALPA 574 
 
Classified By: amb. Hugo Llorens, e.o. 12958 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: As the Zelaya and Micheletti teams prepare to 
engage for a second round of talks in Costa Rica July 18 on 
restoring the constitutional order in Honduras, the fate of 
any deal that may emerge from the talks will most likely be 
determined by a relatively small number of opinion-makers and 
power brokers in Honduras who are not part of either Zelaya's 
administration or Micheletti's de facto regime.  This message 
profiles some of these figures and their potential roles in 
making or breaking a political agreement, using the color 
scheme laid out in ref B and previous.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Carlos Flores: President of Honduras 1998-2002 and 
elder statesman of the Liberal Party, Honduras's largest 
political party.  Flores also publishes one of the country's 
major daily newspapers, "La Tribuna," which has been critical 
of Zelaya's presidency.  Zelaya views him as a political 
rival and obstacle to his plans to transform the Liberal 
Party.  Little happens in Honduran politics without Flores 
knowing about it.  Still, he claims he had no advance 
knowledge of the June 28 coup, even though the decree and 
analysis that coup defenders cite as proof of Zelaya's intent 
to dissolve Congress and convene a constituent assembly 
following his constitutional reform opinion poll appeared the 
morning of the coup in "La Tribuna." Since the coup, Flores 
has quietly sought to promote dialogue among key players to 
resolve the political crisis.  Since at it's heart the crisis 
is a feud within the Liberal Party, he is extremely well 
placed.  His daughter, Lizzy Flores, is Vice President of 
Congress and rumored to have been uncomfortable with the way 
Zelaya's removal was rushed through Congress June 28. 
 
Hue: pastel pink 
Stature: high 
Influence: high 
Role: crucial 
 
¶3. (C) Ricardo Maduro: Zelaya's immediate predecessor as 
President of Honduras (2002-2006) and elder statesman of the 
National Party.  Maduro is well respected among the White 
Team and within the Honduran and international business 
community. Maduro has sworn to the Ambassador that he had no 
foreknowledge of the June 28 coup.  However, most of his 
party strongly supported Zelaya's removal, more so than the 
ruling Liberal Party, which is split over the issue.  But 
Maduro is a man of considerable intellect and strategic 
vision who can be persuaded that a political compromise that 
restores the consitutional order is in Honduras's, and 
therefore the National Party's, best interest. 
 
Hue: eggshell 
Stature: high 
Influence: high 
Role: potentially very helpful 
 
¶4. (C) Cardinal Oscar Rodriguez: The Archbishop of 
Tegucigalpa has long been one of the most respected and 
beloved figures in Honduras, or at least he was until he 
publicly endorsed the coup and the Micheletti regime on live 
television July 4, causing him to be vilified by the Red 
Team.  He has called for peace and reconciliation but also 
urged Zelaya to stay out of Honduras.  In recent days, he has 
backed away somewhat from his earlier endorsement of the 
coup, we think under instructions from the Vatican.  He told 
the Ambassador the evening of July 16 that he would support 
an agreement brokered that would allow President Zelaya to 
return to Honduras.  His early support for the coup 
nonetheless undermined his credibility as a potential 
mediator.  Still, his blessing for any agreement could sway 
significant numbers from both the Red and White camps. 
 
Hue: almond 
Stature: high (but falling among reds) 
Influence: high 
Role: Potentially important as a ratifier 
 
¶5. (C) Elvin Santos: The Liberal Party presidential nominee, 
Santos has a strong personal political interest in finding a 
resolution to the current crisis (ref A).  He enjoyed a 
10-point lead in polls over National Party candidate Pepe 
Lobo shortly before the coup.  The first post-coup poll 
showed him trailing Lobo by five points: 41-36 percent.  He 
has made a series of televised messages appealing for peace, 
reconciliation and dialogue while being careful to neither 
condemn nor endorse the coup.  As Zelaya's former vice 
president who resigned to run to succeed him while distancing 
himself from Zelaya politically, Santos's interests are best 
served by moving quickly past the current crisis and shifting 
the Honduran political discussion away from Zelaya and 
Micheletti and onto the campaign to succeed them. 
 
Hue: powder puff 
Stature: medium 
Influence: moderate 
Role: post-electoral hope 
 
¶6. (C) Pepe Lobo: The National Party presidential nominee, 
Lobo has benefitted in the short term from the conflict 
within the Liberal Party.  But his long term interests, as 
possibly the next president, require restoring legitimacy and 
removing Honduras from international pariah status.  Like 
Santos, he has made televised messages calling for peace, 
reconciliation and dialogue.  But he has been more supportive 
of the coup and the Micheletti regime. 
 
Hue: Lilac 
Stature: medium 
Influence: moderate 
Role: potential spoiler or redeemer 
 
¶7. (C) Arturo Corrales: Although part of Micheletti's 
negotiating team in San Jose (ref F), Corrales has not taken 
a position within the new regime and has thus preserved his 
ability to act as the consumate bipartisan dealmaker.  A 
former presidential candidate for the small, centrist 
Christian Democrat Party, Corrales is known as the "oracle" 
of Honduran politics for his shrewd instincts and predictive 
power.  He is also considered by some to be one of the three 
most important power-brokers in Honduran politics, along with 
ormer presidents Carlos Flores and Rafael Callejas 
 
Hue: ivory-blush 
Stature: high 
Influence: igh 
Role: dealmaker 
 
¶8. (C) Vilma Morales: Another member of Micheletti's 
negotiating team for the first round of talks in San Jose, 
Morales was Chief Justice of the Honduran Supreme Court 
2002-2009.  A National Party stalwart, she regularly feuded 
with Zelaya from the bench and has been one of the June 28 
coup's most outspoken legal defenders.  Although respected 
within Honduran legal circles, her legal judgment on the 
current crisis is clouded by her partisanship. 
 
Hue: snowblind 
Stature: high 
Influence: low-medium 
Role: not likely helpful 
 
¶9. (C) Luis Rubi: As Attorney General, he appears to have 
been directly involved in the decision to remove Zelaya, has 
defended the legality of the action since and has used the 
legal apparatus under his control to stifle dissent and 
intimidate/persecute members of Zelaya's team.  The Attorney 
General is appointed through a consultative process to a 
five-year term and may not be removed at the pleasure of the 
President.  His continued tenure may therefore need to be 
part of the negotiation, with Whites desiring that he stay in 
place as a check on Zelaya and Zelaya demanding his 
resignation. 
 
Hue: sunbleached 
Stature: medium-high 
Influence: high 
Role: might have to go 
 
¶10. (C) Jorge Rivera Aviles: The Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court, he told the Ambassador that he was not involved in the 
coup and was unwilling to swear-in Micheletti on June 28. 
Others say he was a key coup plotter.  Either way, he has 
publicly defended the legality of the coup, but we understand 
some other justices on the court consider it was illegal (ref 
E). He is constitutionally third in line of succession to the 
Presidency. 
 
Hue: birch 
Stature: medium-high 
Influence: high 
Role: Could be key 
 
¶11. (C) Edmundo Orellana: Former Foreign Minister then 
Defense Minister for Zelaya, resigned just before the coup 
when Zelaya fired defense chief Vasquez Velasquez for 
refusing to carry out the constitutional reform opinion poll 
in defiance of a court order.  Also a Liberal Party member of 
Congress.  Orellana is a lawyer and diplomat of center-left 
political views.  He has been working behind the scenes with 
remnants of the depose Zelaya cabinet to seek a negotiated, 
conditional return of Zelaya to power. 
 
Hue: passionate pink 
Stature: medium 
Influence: moderate 
Role: potentially useful go-between 
 
¶12. (C) Jose Azcona: Son of former President of the same name 
(1986-1990) Azcona is considered one of the rising generation 
of Liberal Party leaders and a possible future presidential 
candidate.  He holds a second-tier leadership position in the 
Congress and is close to Micheletti. Nonetheless, he has 
expressed to us his disagreement with the coup and desire to 
help broker a deal on Zelaya's conditional return.  But he 
has kept those views private so as not to burn his bridge 
with Micheletti. 
 
Hue: fuschia 
Stature: medium 
Influence: medium 
Role: behind-the-scenes voice of reason 
 
¶13. (C) Jaime Rosenthal: One of Honduras's most prominent 
media and industrial tycoons, Rosenthal has been a long-time 
power broker and financial backer of the Liberal Party.  His 
son Yani was  Minister of the Presidency during the first 
half of Zelaya's term.  His newspaper, "Tiempo," has been the 
most sympathetic to Zelaya of the four major Honduran dailies 
and the most critical of the coup since June 28.  His 
television stations have also taken a moderate line since the 
coup and been more willing to air anti-coup viewpoints. 
 
Hue: peach 
Stature: medium-high 
Influence: high 
Role: Could be key to selling an agreement 
 
¶14. (C) Jorge Canahuati: A rival/competitor of Rosenthal's, 
Canahuati's "El Heraldo" and "La Prensa" have been the most 
harshly anti-Zelaya and pro-coup.  His publications frame the 
opinions of the National Party mainstream. 
 
Hue: lily white 
Stature: medium-high 
Influence: high 
Role: possible obstruction 
 
¶15. (C) The "Turcos": Refers to the small industrial and 
financial elite, predominantly of Arab/Palestinian origin, 
who dominate the Honduran economy and have tremendous weight, 
usually exercised behind the scenes, on its politics. 
Prominent memberws include Miguel Facusse, his son-in-law 
Fredy Nasser, the Kafie Brothers and Camilo Atala.  It is 
highly likely that at least some of them knew about the coup. 
 These are the so-called "Power Groups" railed against by 
Zelaya and his leftist supporters. 
 
Hue: alabaster 
Stature: medium 
Influence: high 
Role: will need to be coopted into any deal 
 
¶16. (C) Doris Gutierrez: A member of Congress from the 
leftist Democratic Unification (UD) Party, Gutierrez is a 
leading voice of the democratic left, with the stress on 
"democratic."  She has attacked corruption in the Zelaya 
administration but also the coup that removed him. 
Hue: magenta 
Stature: low-medium 
Influence: low-medium 
Role: could bring some reds around to a deal 
 
¶17. (C) Rafael Alegria: A militant advocate for small farmers 
(although disdained by many truly representative peasant 
organizations), Alegria is generally considered to be a 
Chavez proxy, if not actually on Chavez's payroll.  He was 
constantly seen in Zelaya's presence in the final days before 
the coup, when Zelaya was threatening to push ahead with a 
constitutional reform opinion poll in defiance of a court 
order. 
 
Hue: blood red 
Stature: low 
Influence: low 
Role: obstruction 
 
¶18. (C) Cesar Ham: Presidential candidate for the leftist UD 
party, he was closely associated with Zelaya's final push for 
a constitutional reform opinion poll in defiance of a court 
order.  He and some others in his party are now openly 
calling for violent insurrection to bring Zelaya back. 
 
Hue: crimson 
Stature: low 
Influence: low-medium 
Role: potential wrecker 
LLORENS