10MONTEVIDEO27
Uruguay: Incoming Foreign Minister Sends Positive Signals
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Montevideo
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMN #0027/01 0501912
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 191912Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0263
INFO MERCOSUR COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L MONTEVIDEO 000027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/02/19 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ETRD CVIS UY
SUBJECT: Uruguay: Incoming Foreign Minister Sends Positive Signals 
 
REF: MONTEVIDEO 23 AND PREVIOUS 	
 	
CLASSIFIED BY: David Nelson, Ambassador, State, Exec	 REASON: 1.4(B), 
(D) 	
 	
Summary 	
 	
------------ 	
 	
 	
 	
¶1. (C) Ambassador Nelson called on incoming Foreign Minister Luis 	
Almagro February 19.  The two shared a warm and friendly ninety 	
minutes discussing Uruguay's role in regional and international 	
affairs, with Almagro stressing his understanding of the necessity 	
of active U.S. participation in any well-functioning 
multilateralism.   Almagro sent other positive signals on climate 
change and the Pathways initiative, encouraged discretion and speed 
in managing the U.S. visa issues of Uruguay's new leadership, and 
appealed for help for Uruguay's wool textile industry.  Almagro and 
the ambassador agreed to maintain open and frequent communications. 
End Summary. 
 
 
 
Regional/Multilateral Cooperation 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (C) The ambassador thanked Almagro for Uruguay's cooperation on 
regional and multilateral issues, adding that the U.S. understands 
and welcomes Uruguay's desire to boost its presence and visibility 
on the international stage (e.g., by seeking a seat at the UNSC for 
2015-16).   Ambassador Nelson explained that a consequence of the 
sort of international vocation that Uruguay is demonstrating is 
that we will often approach his overworked and understaffed MFA 
with demarches about issues of importance around the globe. 
Almagro made clear that he welcomes any chance to understand our 
views, saying that he and his ministry will always listen carefully 
to anything the U.S. has to say.  Uruguay is a strong believer in 
the importance of multilateralism, Almagro continued, and effective 
multilateralism is impossible without U.S. participation.   Almagro 
highlighted his commitment to human rights issues in international 
fora. 
 
 
 
A New Face Earns Respect 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (C) Referring to unhelpful comments made last month by incoming 
Minister of Defense Luis Rosadilla about U.S. participation in the 
Haiti relief effort, Almagro told the ambassador that he had 
addressed the issue during a meeting of President-elect Mujica's 
security cabinet February 10.  According to Almagro, he noted his 
concerns about other cabinet ministers speaking out on foreign 
policy issues, asserting himself, apparently without dissent, as 
Mujica's foreign policy spokesperson.   Almagro suggested and 
encouraged open and frequent communications with the ambassador on 
all relevant matters. 
 
 
 
Pathways Ministerial 
 
-------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) Almagro apologized to Ambassador Nelson because he will not 
be able to attend the Pathways ministerial in San Jose March 4-5. 
Instead, Almagro will be sending in newly-sworn-in Vice Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Roberto Conde.  Almagro's predecessor, Foreign 
Minister Pedro Vaz, had directed the MFA to develop a Pathways 
proposal to allow Uruguay to share its successful experience with 
the ""One-Laptop-per-Child"" program.  Almagro told the ambassador 
that while Uruguay intends to pursue that proposal, he is also 
thinking about another relating to Uruguay's strong commitment to 
freedom of the press.  That, said Almagro, is also worthy of 
emulation and suitable for sharing with the region. 
 
 
 
Visas 
 
------- 
 
¶5. (C) The ambassador told Almagro that we will always encourage 
and welcome visits of Uruguayan cabinet ministers to the U.S., 
adding that U.S. visa law will sometimes offer complications to 
Uruguayan government officials, including President Mujica, whose 
pasts include armed insurrection.   The ambassador promised Almagro 
that we will handle all sensitive visa applications with total 
discretion, and asked for understanding of our laws and processes. 
The news that even an application by President Mujica would require 
special processing brought a demonstration of disquiet by Almagro, 
and the discussion ended with Almagro endeavoring to encourage 
Uruguayan officials to apply as far in advance of any U.S. trip as 
possible, and the ambassador promising that the Embassy and 
Department will facilitate the process to the best of our ability. 
 
 
 
Market Access for Uruguayan Textiles 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Almagro described the plight of the beleaguered Uruguayan 
wool textile industry, and asked the ambassador about the 
possibilities that Uruguayan wool would one day be included in a 
preferential regime.  Almagro was aware that Senator Lugar had 
supported the possibility of Uruguay's inclusion in a restructured 
Andean Trade Preference Program.  The Ambassador explained that the 
ATPDEA was extended for one year in December 2009, but Uruguay was 
not included. 
 
 
 
Climate Change 
 
------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The ambassador thanked Almagro for Uruguay's timely 
association with the Copenhagen Accord.  Almagro stressed Uruguay's 
intention to play a positive role with regard to climate change, 
which he described as a personal as well as professional interest, 
and to collaborate as closely as possible with the U.S. in this 
area.   Almagro particularly welcomed joint efforts in alternative 
energy. 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
¶8. (C) Almagro has enjoyed a rapid rise to prominence within the 
MFA, as his association with President-elect Mujica's political 
movement and time as foreign policy advisor to Mujica when Mujica 
was minister of agriculture allowed him to move him past more 
senior career officials.   He is not someone with whom U.S. 
officials have had a lot of interaction, so we were not expecting 
the warmth with which he received  the ambassador.  The meeting 
went much longer than expected, and Almagro seemed keen to have us 
understand that he wants to maintain an excellent bilateral 
relationship. 
Nelson