10PANAMA71
Deterioration of Panama's Business Climate Under President
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0071/01 0412244
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 102244Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0434
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA...C O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/02/10 
TAGS: ECON PM COM EINV ENRG
SUBJECT: Deterioration of Panama's Business Climate Under President 
Martinelli 
 
REF: 2008 PANAMA 405; 2009 PANAMA 657; 2009 PANAMA 757 
2009 PANAMA 803 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Stephenson, Ambassador; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
¶1. (C) The Government of Panama (GOP) disadvantaged at least two 
American companies in a $55.5 million dollar improperly implemented 
emergency licitation procedures for electrical generators to 
fortify Panama's electrical generation capacity in anticipation of 
El Nino.  This improper licitation in December 2009 adds to the 
body of evidence of a deterioration of the business climate in 
Panama under the Martinelli Administration. 
 
 
 
Supply and Demand for Electricity 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) Due to rapid economic growth over the past decade, Panama's 
peak demand for electricity grew by 3.9% per year.  A regulatory 
regime that allows any qualified electric generation company to 
enter the market has kept Panama's peak demand for electricity from 
outstripping its supply.  [ETESA, a state-owned company, owns and 
operates 100% of the transmission lines and EDEMET (operated by 
Spanish-owned Union Fenosa), EDECHI (operated by Union Fenosa), and 
Elektra Noreste (operated by British-owned Ashmore (aka AEI)) have 
concessions to distribute electricity in specific geographic 
areas.]  While Panama's demand has not outstripped supply, there 
have been plenty of close calls and temporary public campaigns to 
cut electricity consumption.  See reftel A. 
 
 
 
Solution to El Nino's Effect 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) The late December through April dry season is expected to be 
longer than normal in 2010 due to the El Nino weather phenomenon. 
If the dry season is extended, the reservoirs for several large 
hydro-electric generators may fall below levels to operate the 
generators.  (53% of installed generation capacity is hydro and 60% 
of the produced electricity is hydro.)  To mitigate the effect of 
El Nino, the government is encouraging companies with large backup 
generators to use them during peak hours, requesting consumers to 
cut back on energy usage, and purchasing 100MW of capacity from 
portable generators. 
 
 
 
Questionable Licitation Procedures 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) Due to the reported desire to quickly bring on 100MW of 
capacity, the Secretary of Energy Juan Urriola invoked emergency 
licitation procedures in December 2009 that allowed him to invite 
companies to bid over the course of 10 days.  Three companies were 
invited to bid, but only Aggreko International submitted a bid. 
(Aggreko is listed on the FTSE and has corporate offices in 
London.)  As a result, Aggreko International won the contract for 
$55.5 million.  The bidding process was closed after only six days 
instead of the required 10 days and two U.S. companies, Caterpillar 
and APR, separately told emboffs that they would have bid on the 
contract if offered the chance. 
 
 
 
¶5. (C) When reporters questioned the licitation procedures and 
asked why Caterpillar was not invited to bid, Urriola publicly 
stated Caterpillar did "disastrous work."  (Caterpillar's heavy 
equipment dominate the Panamanian market.  Caterpillar also is 
building a Demonstration Center for its equipment in Panama and 
located a regional headquarters in Panama.)  After the bad press 
Caterpillar received, APR decided not question the licitation due 
to their desire to win possible future contracts.  Based upon 
quotes in a major newspaper - La Prensa, Urriola had a prior 
business relationship with Aggreko. 
 
 
Comment 
 
 
 
¶6. (C)  The Investment Climate for American firms has deteriorated 
since the Martinelli Administration took office on July 1.  Events 
that contributed to the deterioration are: 
 
 
 
*          The GOP procured approximately $100 million through 
sole-source contracts between July 1 and September 25, 2009 under 
emergency licitation procedures; some of the contracts were for the 
expansion of the coastal highway ($55 million), purchase of a 
Presidential airplane ($21.9 million), and procurement of twenty 
ambulances ($1.7 million). 
 
 
 
*          The GOP passed a law that eliminates contract concession 
changes by reverting contracts back to the original non-amended 
concession if the company harmed the people of Panama; thereby 
eliminating years of business predictability to contract holders. 
See reftel C.  This law primarily targets port concessions, 
including Manzanillo International Terminal - one of the largest 
U.S. investors in Panama. 
 
 
 
*          The GOP now charges hydro-electric generators for use of 
water, which was not part of the original concession agreements. 
AES, an American firm, supplies almost one-third of Panama's 
electricity through hydro power and lost investment grade rating 
for $300 million in bonds for a project in Panama.  See reftel B. 
 
 
 
*          Royal Caribbean, a U.S. operated pipeline, and several 
other U.S. and foreign companies have expressed concern about the 
evolving business investment climate in Panama to emboffs. 
 
 
 
*          Even small U.S. investors experienced great angst when 
the Martinelli Administration proposed a law that changed the cost 
of titling rights of possession on coastal lands and islands from 
nominal administrative fees to an arbitrary GOP decided "fair 
market value."  See reftel D.  After extensive engagement by the 
Embassy and Panamanian civil society, there was an exemption 
inserted for rights of possession holders with less than five 
hectares.  However, some American citizens have more than five 
hectares; one American informed econoff that he intends to invoke 
the Bilateral Investment Treaty due to the possible indirect 
expropriation. 
 
 
 
The Embassy will continue to actively advocate on behalf of U.S. 
companies and encourage the GOP to provide a predictable investment 
climate and to strengthen the rule of law. 
STEPHENSON