09STATE80163
S) REPORTING AND COLLECTION NEEDS: THE UNITED
Fri Jul 31 20:08:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1645
RR RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #0163/01 2122048
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 312024Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME 0673
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 5248
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 7044
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 2637
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 9388
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9465
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 1034
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 2653
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 3680
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 4458
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2406
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 7503
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 9888
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 2537
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 4533
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 2427
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 6121
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 5675
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3128
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 2351
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 5996
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 5977
RUEHOU/AMEMBASSY OUAGADOUGOU 8735
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 5501
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 5526
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 2691
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 1046
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1500
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 8889
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 9893
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 8737
RUEHVI/AMEMBASSY VIENNA 8905
RUEHVB/AMEMBASSY ZAGREB 2969
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7784
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 5364
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 8154
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
INFO RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC//DHI-1B/CLM//DP//
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC//NHTC//S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 24 STATE 080163 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/31/2034 
TAGS: PINR KSPR ECON KPKO KUNR
SUBJECT: (S) REPORTING AND COLLECTION NEEDS: THE UNITED 
NATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 048489 
 
Classified By: MICHAEL OWENS, ACTING DIR, INR/OPS. REASON: 1.4(C). 
 
¶1. (S/NF) This cable provides the full text of the new 
National HUMINT Collection Directive (NHCD) on the United 
Nations (paragraph 3-end) as well as a request for continued 
DOS reporting of biographic information relating to the 
United Nations (paragraph 2). 
 
¶A. (S/NF) The NHCD below supercedes the 2004 NHCD and 
reflects the results of a recent Washington review of 
reporting and collection needs focused on the United Nations. 
 The review produced a comprehensive list of strategic 
priorities (paragraph 3) and reporting and collection needs 
(paragraph 4) intended to guide participating USG agencies as 
they allocate resources and update plans to collect 
information on the United Nations.  The priorities should 
also serve as a useful tool to help the Embassy manage 
reporting and collection, including formulation of Mission 
Strategic Plans (MSPs). 
 
¶B. (S/NF) This NHCD is compliant with the National 
Intelligence Priorities Framework (NIPF), which was 
established in response to NSPD-26 of February 24, 2003.  If 
needed, GRPO can provide further background on the NIPF and 
the use of NIPF abbreviations (shown in parentheses following 
each sub-issue below) in NHCDs. 
 
¶C. (S/NF) Important information often is available to 
non-State members of the Country Team whose agencies 
participated in the review of this National HUMINT Collection 
Directive.  COMs, DCMs, and State reporting officers can 
assist by coordinating with other Country Team members to 
encourage relevant reporting through their own or State 
Department channels. 
 
¶2. (S/NF) State biographic reporting: 
 
¶A. (S/NF) The intelligence community relies on State 
reporting officers for much of the biographical information 
collected worldwide.  Informal biographic reporting via email 
and other means is vital to the community's collection 
efforts and can be sent to the INR/B (Biographic) office for 
dissemination to the IC. 
 
¶B. (S/NF) Reporting officers should include as much of the 
following information as possible when they have information 
relating to persons linked to : office and 
 
STATE 00080163  002 OF 024 
 
 
organizational titles; names, position titles and other 
information on business cards; numbers of telephones, cell 
phones, pagers and faxes; compendia of contact information, 
such as telephone directories (in compact disc or electronic 
format if available) and e-mail listings; internet and 
intranet "handles", internet e-mail addresses, web site 
identification-URLs; credit card account numbers; frequent 
flyer account numbers; work schedules, and other relevant 
biographical information. 
 
¶3. (S/NF) Priority issues and issues outline: 
 
¶A.  Key Near-Term Issues 
      1) Darfur/Sudan (FPOL-1) 
      2) Afghanistan/Pakistan (FPOL-1) 
      3) Somalia (FPOL-1) 
      4) Iran (FPOL-1) 
      5) North Korea (FPOL-1) 
 
¶B.  Key Continuing Issues 
      1) UN Security Council Reform (FPOL-1) 
      2) Iraq (FPOL-1) 
      3) Middle East Peace Process (FPOL-1) 
      4) Human Rights and War Crimes (HRWC-3) 
      5) UN Humanitarian and Complex Emergency Response 
(HREL-3) 
      6) Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
(WMDN-5H) 
      7) Terrorist Threat to UN Operations (TERR-5H) 
      8) Burma (FPOL-1) 
 
¶C.  UN Peace and Peacebuilding Operations 
      1) Africa (FPOL-1) 
      2) Outside Africa (FPOL-1) 
      3) Policy Issues (FPOL-1) 
 
¶D.  UN Security Council 
      1) Procedures and Dynamics (FPOL-1) 
      2) Sanctions (FPOL-1) 
 
¶E.  UN Management 
      1) UN Leadership Dynamics (FPOL-1) 
      2) Budget and Management Reform (FPOL-1) 
 
¶F.  UN General Assembly Tactics and Voting Blocs (FPOL-1) 
 
¶G.  Other Substantive Issues 
      1) Food Security (FOOD-3) 
      2) Climate Change, Energy, and Environment (ENVR-4) 
      3) Transnational Economic Issues (ECFS-4H) 
      4) Arms Control and Treaty Monitoring (ACTM-4) 
      5) Health Issues (HLTH-4) 
      6) Terrorism (TERR-5H) 
      7) Trafficking, Social, and Women's Issues (DEPS-5H) 
 
STATE 00080163  003 OF 024 
 
 
 
¶H.  Intelligence and Security Topics 
      1) GRPO can provide text of this issue. 
      2) GRPO can provide text of this issue. 
      3) Foreign Nongovernmental Organizations (FPOL-1) 
      4) Telecommunications Infrastructure and Information 
Systems (INFR-5H) 
 
      ¶15.  Collection requirements and tasking 
 
(Agriculture is the Department of Agriculture; Commerce is 
the Department of Commerce; DHS is the Department of Homeland 
Security; DIA/DH is Defense Intelligence Agency/Defense 
HUMINT; Energy is the Department of Energy; DNI/OSC is the 
Open Source Center of the Director of National Intelligence; 
FBI is the Federal Bureau of Investigation; HHS is the 
Department of Health and Human Services; Navy is the Navy 
HUMINT element; NCS/CS is the CIA's Clandestine Service; 
OSC/MSC is the Map Services Center of OSC; State is the 
Department of State; TAREX (Target Exploitation) collects 
information using HUMINT Methods in support of NSA's 
requirements; Treasury is the Department of Treasury; USAID 
is the U.S. Agency for International Development; USSS is the 
U.S. Secret Service; USTR is the U.S. Trade Representative; 
WINPAC is the Weapons Intelligence, Nonproliferation, and 
Arms Control Center.) 
 
¶A.  Key Near-Term Issues 
 
      1) Darfur/Sudan (FPOL-1). 
-- Views of United Nations (UN) member states on contributing 
troops and air transportation equipment, such as helicopters, 
to the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) and the African Union 
(AU)-UN Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). 
-- Details of deployments of troop contributor countries to 
UNMIS/UNAMID. 
-- Details on actions and views of UN personnel deployed in 
UNMIS/UNAMID. 
-- Views of UNSC members on the success or failure of 
UNMIS/UNAMID. 
-- Operational plans of UNMIS/UNAMID from both the UN 
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in New York, and 
UNMIS/UNAMID in Sudan. 
-- Details of diplomatic engagement between UNMIS/UNAMID 
Special Envoys for the Darfur Peace Process in Sudan, and the 
Sudanese government or Darfur rebel groups. 
-- Views of member states on UN activities in Sudan 
(including Darfur). 
-- Divisions between UN member and UN Secretariat assessments 
of the situation on the ground as it affects UN action. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Indonesia, Japan, Libya, 
Mexico, Nigeria, Russia, Rwanda, Sudan, Turkey, Uganda, 
 
STATE 00080163  004 OF 024 
 
 
Vietnam 
International Organizations:  AU, European Union (EU), UN 
 
      2) Afghanistan/Pakistan (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans and intentions of key UN leaders and member states 
regarding the ongoing operations of the UN Assistance Mission 
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), including force protection in 
Afghanistan. 
-- Information on plans and intentions of UN leadership or 
member states affecting elections in Afghanistan. 
-- Reactions to and assessments of security threats directed 
at the UN or aid personnel attempting to render humanitarian 
assistance. 
-- Plans and intentions of key member states and Secretariat 
leadership concerning Afghan political and economic 
reconstruction, including efforts to combat warlords and drug 
trafficking. 
-- Afghan, Pakistani and Iranian intentions or reluctance to 
secure and safeguard UN and nongovernmental organization 
(NGO) personnel (international as well as locally-hired 
staff). 
 
Countries:  Afghanistan, Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, France, Iran, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Pakistan, 
Russia, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
Terrorist Groups: Taliban 
International Organizations:  EU, UN, World Bank 
 
      3) Somalia (FPOL-1). 
-- UN plans and potential to expand, reinforce, or replace 
the UN Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and African Union 
(AU) Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). 
-- Plans and intentions of UN leadership, the Department of 
Peacekeeping Operations, and member states to deploy a UN-led 
maritime force to monitor piracy off the coast of Somalia. 
-- Willingness of member states to pledge troops or air 
transport to a possible UN or multinational force in Somalia. 
-- Views of Somali population on the deployment of a UN or 
multinational peacekeeping force in Somalia. 
-- Details of diplomatic engagement between UN envoys and 
Somali government or Somali opposition officials. 
-- Information on World Food Program activities in Somalia. 
-- Details of UN Development Program (UNDP)-Somalia training 
Transitional Federal Government police officers and Alliance 
for the Reliberation of Somalia officials in the Joint 
Security Force. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Ethiopia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, 
Russia, Somalia, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, NATO, UN 
 
      4) Iran (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans and intentions of the UN Secretary General (SYG), 
 
STATE 00080163  005 OF 024 
 
 
Secretariat staff, or member states to address efforts by 
Iran to develop, test, or proliferate nuclear weapons. 
-- Positions and responses of member states to future 
International Atomic Energy Association (IAEA) Director 
General reports on Iran,s Implementation of Safeguards and 
relevant provisions of UN Security Council (UNSC) resolutions. 
-- Specific plans and activities of the UK, France, Germany 
(EU-3), and Russia with respect to IAEA policy toward Iran. 
-- Plans and intentions of key UN leaders and member states, 
especially Russia and China, regarding human rights in Iran, 
sanctions on Iran, Iran,s arming of HAMAS and Hizballah, and 
Iran,s candidacy for UN leadership positions. 
-- Plans and intentions of Perm 5, other key member states, 
coalition partners, and key Secretariat officials concerning 
sanctions against Iran. 
-- Member support/opposition/subversion of US positions 
regarding Iranian sanctions. 
-- Iranian diplomatic efforts with the IAEA and UN member 
states to avoid passage of additional sanctions and effective 
implementation of existing sanctions, as well as its efforts 
to end UNSC involvement in Iran's nuclear program by 
returning Iran's nuclear file to the IAEA. 
-- Information on Iran,s activities as chair of the UNDP and 
within the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 
-- Development and democratization activities of the UNDP in 
Iran; details about the UNDP Resident Coordinator,s 
relationship with Iranian officials. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Germany, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, Libya, 
Mexico, Russia, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
Terrorist Groups: HAMAS, Hizballah (Lebanese) 
International Organizations:  EU, IAEA, UN 
Non-State Entities:     West Bank and Gaza Strip 
 
      5) North Korea (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans and intentions of UNSC members, especially the P-5, 
to consider additional resolutions against North Korea and/or 
sanctions under existing resolutions. 
-- Information on the plans and actions of UNSC members to 
address efforts by North Korea to develop, test, or 
proliferate nuclear weapons. 
-- UN views on food aid to North Korea, designating it as a 
nation in famine, and misuse of aid. 
-- North Korean delegation views and activities; 
instructions/plans of delegation officials on North Korean 
WMD-related issues. 
-- Development and democratization activities of the UNDP in 
North Korea. 
-- Details about the UNDP Resident Coordinator,s 
relationship with North Korean officials. 
-- Biographic and biometric information on ranking North 
Korean diplomats. 
 
 
STATE 00080163  006 OF 024 
 
 
Countries: Austria, Burkina Faso, Burma, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, North Korea, Russia, 
Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations: EU, IAEA, UN 
 
¶B.  Key Continuing Issues 
 
      1) UN Security Council Reform (FPOL-1). 
-- Positions, attitudes, and divisions among member states on 
UN Security Council (UNSC) reform. 
-- Views, plans and intentions of Perm 5 and other member 
states on the issue of UNSC enlargement, revision of UNSC 
procedures or limitation of Perm 5 privileges. 
-- International deliberations regarding UNSC expansion among 
key groups of countries:  self-appointed frontrunners for 
permanent UNSC membership Brazil, Germany, India, and Japan 
(the Group of Four or G-4); the Uniting for Consensus group 
(especially Mexico, Italy, and Pakistan) that opposes 
additional permanent UNSC seats; the African Group; and the 
EU, as well as key UN officials within the Secretariat and 
the UN General Assembly (UNGA) Presidency. 
-- Willingness of member states to implement proposed reforms. 
-- Reactions of UN senior leadership towards member 
recommendations for UNSC reform. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Brazil, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Libya, Mexico, 
Pakistan, Russia, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, UN 
 
      2) Iraq (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans and intentions of the Perm 5, other key member 
states, coalition partners, and key Secretariat officials 
concerning Iraqi political and economic reconstruction, the 
UN Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), and internal Iraqi 
boundaries. 
-- Plans and intentions of the International Organization for 
Migration to assist with the reintegration of internally 
displaced persons and refugees. 
-- Extent to which member states will support or subvert US 
positions regarding Iraqi objectives, including 
reconstruction efforts. 
-- Information on plans and intentions of the SYG, 
Secretariat staff, or member states affecting elections in 
Iraq. 
-- Iraqi actions to convert UNAMI to a Chapter 6 mission. 
-- Iraqi attitudes toward the UN. 
-- Reactions to and assessments of security threats directed 
at the UN or aid personnel attempting to render humanitarian 
assistance. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Iraq, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
 
STATE 00080163  007 OF 024 
 
 
Terrorist Groups: Insurgents in Iraq, Iraqi Shia Militants 
International Organizations:  EU, UN, World Bank 
 
      3) Middle East Peace Process (FPOL-1). 
-- Details on views, plans and intentions of key Secretariat 
decision-makers, member states and influential blocs and 
coalitions on UN engagement and role in the Middle East Peace 
Process (MEPP), including implementation of the roadmap. 
-- Indications that a UNGA special session on the Middle East 
might be reconvened. 
-- Developments within the UN system that would further the 
Arab-Israeli peace process. 
-- Details about Quartet (EU, UN, US, and Russia) MEPP plans 
and efforts, including private objectives behind proposals 
and envoy negotiating strategies. 
-- Strategy and plans of SYG special envoy regarding US 
positions, Quartet plans, and other (EU, Russia, UK) special 
envoys. 
-- Indications member states or donor countries might scale 
back UN peacekeeping presence in or aid donations to the 
Middle East. 
-- Plans of the SYG or member states to pressure the US on 
the MEPP. 
-- Views, plans and tactics of the Palestinian Authority, 
including its representative to the UN, to gain support in 
the UNSC, UNGA, or UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) for its 
strategies and positions on Palestinian-Israeli issues, 
including from Russia and EU countries, especially France, 
Germany, and UK. 
-- Views of Secretary General,s Special Envoy and UNSC on 
possible settlement of the Shab'a Farms dispute to include 
Syria/Lebanon border demarcation. 
-- Secretariat views regarding water management as part of 
the Middle East Peace Process, including domestic and 
regional competition for allocation. 
-- Quartet views on Syria's policies and approach toward 
Israel and Palestinians and on Syrian motives behind and 
efforts to subvert or support Israeli-Palestinian 
negotiations. 
-- UN efforts to influence negotiating positions on 
territorial boundaries, water resources and management, and 
right of return. 
-- Views, plans and tactics of HAMAS to gain support in the 
UNSC or UNGA for its strategies and positions on 
HAMAS-Israeli issues, and on HAMAS-Palestinian Authority 
issues, including from Russia, China, Iran, and EU countries, 
especially France, Germany, and the UK. 
-- Information on UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) 
activities in Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and the West 
Bank, and its relations with HAMAS/Hizballah. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to support/oppose US 
priority to reduce the number of Middle East resolutions. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
 
STATE 00080163  008 OF 024 
 
 
Croatia, Egypt, France, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, 
Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Mexico, Spain, Syria, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
Terrorist Groups: HAMAS, Hizballah (Lebanese) 
International Organizations:  EU, UN 
Non-State Entities:     Palestinian Authority, West Bank and 
Gaza Strip 
 
      4) Human Rights and War Crimes (HRWC-3). 
-- Plans and policies of UN leaders, member states, and 
foreign NGOs to promote human rights. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states toward the 
International Criminal Court (ICC), International Criminal 
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the International 
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the Special Tribunal for 
Lebanon, the Special Court for Sierra Leone, and other 
UN-related courts and tribunals dealing with human rights 
issues. 
-- Plans and intentions of UNHRC members to support or oppose 
US policies in the UNHRC. 
-- Views of UNSC and other member states on Zimbabwe,s 
government policies on human rights, humanitarian assistance, 
democracy, and candidacy for any UN leadership positions. 
-- Views and intentions of UNSC, UN human rights entities, 
and members regarding Sri Lankan government policies on human 
rights and humanitarian assistance;  UN views about 
appointing a Special Envoy for Sri Lanka. 
-- Plans and perceptions of member states toward 
establishment of new measures to prevent genocide, crimes 
against humanity, war crimes, and other systematic human 
rights abuses. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states toward proposals and 
resolutions supported by the US or like-minded states, 
including those advancing democracy; women's rights, 
particularly implementation of UNSC Resolutions 1325 and 
1820; those pertaining to children in armed conflict; or 
those condemning human rights abuses in individual countries. 
-- Information on reactions of member states to resolutions 
designed to promote democracy, human rights and reforms in 
the Muslim world. 
-- Perceived success or failure of abilities and priorities 
of the UN Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights 
(OHCHR), and efforts by member states to undermine OHCHR 
independence. 
-- Views, intentions and tactics of UNHRC members regarding 
reform and the role of the US. 
-- Member state support for/opposition to objectives of human 
rights, refugee, development, and emergency relief agencies. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states or UN Special 
Rapporteurs to press for resolutions or investigations into 
US counterterrorism strategies and treatment of detainees in 
Iraq, Afghanistan or Guantanamo. 
-- Degree of coordination by and among human rights agencies, 
especially between the UN Human Rights Council, the OHCHR, 
 
STATE 00080163  009 OF 024 
 
 
the UNGA Third Committee, the UN Economic and Social Council, 
and the International Labor Organization. 
-- Plans and agenda for upcoming UNGA Third Committee and 
UNHRC sessions and world human rights conferences, 
particularly plans by developing countries to stymie 
criticism of their human rights records through procedural 
motions or influencing votes. 
-- Plans of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) to 
sponsor resolutions or conventions in the UN restricting 
freedom of speech under the rubric of criminalizing 
"defamation of religion." 
-- Details of UNHRC and OHCHR budget shortfalls. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Chad, China, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, France, Georgia, Iraq, Japan, Lebanon, 
Libya, Mexico, North Korea, Russia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, 
Sudan, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam, Zimbabwe 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, Human Rights Entities 
and War Crimes Courts, ICC, OIC, UN 
 
      5) UN Humanitarian and Complex Emergency Response 
(HREL-3). 
-- Information on the planning and execution of responses to 
humanitarian emergencies by UN member states and Secretariat; 
indications US assistance may be requested. 
-- Efforts of UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 
World Food Program (WFP), UN Development Program (UNDP), UN 
Children's Fund (UNICEF), World Health Organization (WHO), 
and other UN entities to respond to and to coordinate 
activities in humanitarian or refugee crises, including 
environmental disasters. 
-- Views of UN Secretariat, UNSC members, and key member 
states on UNRWA. 
-- Details on effectiveness of UNHCR and OCHA leadership. 
-- Information on ability of UN to gain/not gain humanitarian 
access to troubled areas, especially in light of security 
concerns. 
-- Location of humanitarian facilities, including GPS 
coordinates, and number of personnel. 
-- Details of friction between UNHCR, OCHA and UN Security 
Coordinator Headquarters and field offices. 
-- Level of cooperation and coordination or lack thereof 
between UN aid agencies and non-UN aid programs. 
-- Interoperability and willingness to work with US 
coalitions in humanitarian assistance operations; willingness 
to provide support despite security threats. 
-- Indications of donor fatigue. 
-- Status of and member support for/opposition to efforts by 
UNHCR to refocus organization's work and to redistribute 
programs to other agencies. 
-- Details on UNHCR funding shortfalls. 
-- Perceived ability of the UNDP to coordinate an effective 
UN presence in each country and to promote democratic 
 
STATE 00080163  010 OF 024 
 
 
governance. 
-- Plans and ability to care for and protect internally 
displaced persons. 
-- Communications and logistics problems. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  Economic-Societal Entities, 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), UN, World Health 
Organization 
 
      6) Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
(WMDN-5H). 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to address threats 
to international security from the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction. 
-- Views of member states on tactical and substantive aspects 
of resolutions pertaining to missile proliferation, missile 
defense, nuclear disarmament, the IAEA, and Israel's nuclear 
program. 
-- Information from key Secretariat decision-makers, key IAEA 
Secretariat staff, member states, or influential blocs or 
groups, such as the Nonaligned Movement (NAM), the OIC, or 
the Group of 77 (G-77), on the role of the UN on nuclear 
proliferation or addressing the expansion of capabilities to 
produce or use weapons of mass destruction. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, Burma, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  EU, IAEA, International Arms 
Control Organizations, OIC, UN 
 
      7) Terrorist Threat to UN Operations (TERR-5H). 
-- Plans and intentions of Secretariat and member states to 
respond to individuals affiliated with terrorist groups or 
state sponsors of terrorism threatening the safety or 
security of domestic and overseas UN personnel, facilities, 
protectees, or installations. 
-- Evidence of relationship or funding between UN personnel 
and/or missions and terrorist organizations. 
-- Debate in Secretariat, UNSC counterterrorism bodies 
(subcommittees), UN agencies and among member states about 
measures for funding of security for UN domestic and overseas 
facilities, operations, and personnel. 
-- Host-country intentions to secure and safeguard UN and NGO 
personnel. 
-- Reactions to and assessments of terrorist acts directed at 
the UN, UN personnel, UN protectees, or domestic and overseas 
UN installations, including foreign UN missions in New York. 
-- Details of UN efforts to acquire, collect, assess and 
disseminate threat information within the US and overseas. 
-- Plans of UN security offices to upgrade security at UN 
 
STATE 00080163  011 OF 024 
 
 
domestic and overseas UN facilities. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  UN 
 
      8) Burma (FPOL-1). 
-- Views of UNSC and member states on Burma,s policies and 
actions on human rights, humanitarian assistance, democracy, 
and attempts to play a larger UN role. 
-- Plans and intentions of the Special Adviser to the UN 
Secretary General on Burma regarding future interaction with 
Burma and engagement with UN member states. 
-- Plans and intentions of the SYG on Burma; level of trust 
in his Special Adviser. 
-- Views of Burmese officials on the SYG, on his Special 
Adviser on Burma, and on key countries in the UN. 
-- Role of the UN in Burmese elections. 
-- Development and democratization activities of UNDP in 
Burma; details about the UNDP Resident Coordinator,s 
relationship with Burmese officials. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, Burma, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, 
Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations: EU, UN 
 
¶C.  UN Peace and Peacebuilding Operations. 
 
      1) Africa (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans and intentions of UN leaders and member states 
regarding peace operations, especially in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Chad/Central African 
Republic, Burundi, Cote d,Ivoire, and Liberia. 
-- UN peacekeeping plans and intentions regarding military 
operations against rebels based in the eastern part of the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
-- Early warning information available to the Secretariat on 
potential threats to peace and security. 
-- UN views on the role of AFRICOM in African conflict 
resolution and post-conflict capacity building. 
-- UN expectations of US military involvement in African 
peacekeeping missions and how this may influence UN 
willingness to establish, curb, or end missions. 
-- Extent to which UN peace operations in Africa are 
straining the resources of the UN and member states; impact 
of current operations on future operations and readiness. 
-- UN views on peacekeeping mission creep and pressures to 
expand the UN role in African conflict zones, either in the 
form of more comprehensive "peacemaking" mission mandates or 
in areas where security threats demand more aggressive and 
timely UN-led multilateral intervention. 
-- Details on views of the UN Department of Peacekeeping 
 
STATE 00080163  012 OF 024 
 
 
Operations on operational plans, including the ability of the 
UN and its member states to build capacity in Africa, 
including by working with the AU or other regional 
organizations and NGOs. 
-- Efforts by China, France, Iran, and others to gain 
influence in Africa via UN peace operations. 
-- Information on extent of support and capabilities for 
peace operations by the AU and the Economic Community of 
Western African States (ECOWAS). 
-- Official stance on deploying HIV positive troops and 
actual practice. 
-- Degree to which official peacekeeping reporting matches 
unofficial communications of events; views on those 
discrepancies. 
-- Views of African states that host peacekeepers regarding 
UN peacekeeping troops and troop contributing countries. 
-- Attitudes and intentions of Ghana and Rwanda concerning UN 
peace operations in Africa and perception of their relative 
ability to contribute to such efforts. 
-- Attitudes of other African States to Ghana/Rwanda 
participation and leadership. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Burundi, 
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Congo, Cote d,Ivoire, 
Democratic Republic, Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt, Ethiopia, 
France, India, Japan, Jordan, Liberia, Libya, Mexico, Nepal, 
Nigeria, Pakistan, Russia, Rwanda, Somalia, South Africa, 
Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay, Vietnam, Zimbabwe 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, ICC, NATO, UN 
Non-State Entities:     Lord,s Resistance Army 
 
      2) Outside Africa (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans and intentions of UN leaders and member states 
regarding ongoing peace operations outside Africa. 
-- Willingness of UN leaders and member states to support UN 
peacekeeping efforts and utilize preventive diplomacy in 
areas of potential conflict. 
-- Views of member states on and plans to respond to the 
US-backed G-8 plan to expand global peace operations 
capabilities. 
-- Views and positions of key member states and Secretariat 
toward proposed resolutions, mandates, peacekeeping issues, 
and US-sponsored initiatives. 
-- Information on whether member states will utilize 
references to the ICC to condition support for peace 
operations. 
-- Information on deployment benchmarks, pre-deployment 
screening, and supply and logistic shortfalls in peace 
operations. 
-- Ability to obtain pledges and deploy capable military 
forces, including surge capabilities. 
-- Views of UNSC members, the Secretariat, and key member 
states on Haiti,s government policies and actions on human 
rights, humanitarian assistance, and democracy. 
 
STATE 00080163  013 OF 024 
 
 
-- Views and positions of UNSC members, the Secretariat, and 
key member states regarding the UN Interim Force in Lebanon 
(UNIFIL) and peacekeeping in Lebanon. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Brazil, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Georgia, Haiti, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, 
Lebanon, Libya, Mexico, Nepal, Russia, Spain, Turkey, Uganda, 
Uruguay, Vietnam 
International Organizations: AU, EU, ICC, NATO, UN 
 
      3) Policy Issues (FPOL-1). 
-- UN member views, plans, and intentions concerning the 
capability of the UN to organize, lead, and carry out new, 
complex military operations and civilian police operations. 
-- Information on Secretariat or member views on or 
initiatives for peace operations reform. 
-- Information on the appointment of SYG special 
representatives for new peace or political operations. 
-- Scope, objectives, command structures, rules of 
engagement, and threat environment for proposed peacekeeping 
activities, including transportation and communications 
infrastructures and any available maps. 
-- Types, number, and capabilities of troops, equipment, and 
materiel that countries are willing to contribute. 
-- Information on interoperability of equipment and material 
available for logistic support. 
-- Information on turf battles between the Department of 
Peacekeeping Operations, Department of Field Support, and 
Department of Political Affairs over control of peace 
operations. 
-- Information on turf battles between logistic and military 
sides of peace operations. 
-- UN member views on reform of the Department of 
Peacekeeping Operations. 
-- Information on troop contributing countries' tendency to 
follow orders given by troop contributing country commanders 
vice UN field commanders. 
-- Influence of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR) and the Office of the High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNCHR) on including human rights and refugee 
concerns within peace operations mandates. 
-- Host government views and concerns about UN policies 
toward that country. 
-- Influence of UN security coordinator on operational 
planning; field personnel reaction to UN security directives. 
-- Capability/plans for Standby High-Readiness Brigade 
(SHIRBRIG) deployments. 
-- Details on peacekeeper abuse of women and children; 
national and UN responses. 
-- Changes in ability of member states, especially member 
states of EU, AU and ECOWAS, to contribute troops to peace 
operations, including for economic, social, and operational 
reasons. 
-- Details on contributions of member states (in kind, 
 
STATE 00080163  014 OF 024 
 
 
personnel, or financial). 
 
Countries:  Austria, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, China, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, India, Italy, Japan, 
Jordan, Libya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russia, 
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Turkey, Uganda, 
Uruguay, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, UN 
 
¶D.  UN Security Council 
 
      1) Procedures and Dynamics (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans, intentions, and agendas of UNSC members and 
Secretariat on issues that come before the UNSC, especially 
voting intentions of UNSC members and priorities or frictions 
among the Perm 5. 
-- Plans and intentions of UNSC members to support or oppose 
US policies in the UNSC. 
-- Specific views and positions of key member states on 
US-sponsored initiatives, initiatives with implications for 
the US, and other proposed resolutions and mandates. 
-- Plans, intentions, views, positions, lobbying, and tactics 
of regional groups, blocs, or coalitions on issues before the 
UNSC, especially those that do not include the US 
(particularly the Africa Group, AU, EU, NAM, G-77, Rio Group, 
Arab League, the OIC, and the Group of Latin America and 
Caribbean Countries (GRULAC). 
-- Differences in the positions of member states, differences 
between UN missions and their capitals, internal procedures 
for determining voting instructions, and voting instructions 
to delegations. 
-- Priorities, plans, and intentions of new member states 
joining the UNSC, and influences on them by regional groups, 
blocs, or coalitions on issues before the UNSC, especially 
those that do not include the US (particularly AU, EU, NAM, 
G-77, Rio Group, Arab League, and the OIC). 
-- Plans and intentions of member states of regional groups 
regarding UNSC candidacy. 
-- Biographic and biometric information on UNSC Permanent 
Representatives, information on their relationships with 
their capitals. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, OIC, UN 
 
      2) Sanctions (FPOL-1). 
-- UNSC member plans, intentions, and views toward sanctions 
issues, especially during negotiations of sanctions 
resolutions. 
-- Willingness of and efforts by UN member states to violate 
sanctions. 
-- Perceived and actual impact of sanctions on target 
 
STATE 00080163  015 OF 024 
 
 
governments, individuals, entities, as well as on civil 
population. 
-- Plans, intentions, and agendas of UNSC sanctions committee 
members. 
-- Plans, intentions, and agendas of UNSC sanctions committee 
expert groups and their ability to support sanctions 
monitoring. 
-- Pressure to limit scope and length of new sanctions, 
especially from coalitions and regional groups. 
-- Views and actions of the Secretariat or member states with 
regard to sanctions, including to bolster UN ability to 
support sanctions implementation and to address violations. 
-- Views of target government on sanctions imposed on it. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Sierra Leone, 
Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations: EU, UN 
 
¶E.  UN Management 
 
      1) UN Leadership Dynamics (FPOL-1). 
-- SYG's management and decision-making style, and his 
influence on the Secretariat. 
-- Plans, measures and efforts undertaken by the SYG and 
subordinates on US political and bureaucratic objectives for 
UN management. 
-- Role and influence of Secretariat and other key officials 
with SYG and other UN system agencies. 
-- Views of and brokering by key officials on major issues. 
-- Changes in and appointment and selection process for key 
officials of Secretariat, specialized agency, committee, 
commission, and program officials in New York, Geneva, 
Vienna, and other UN system cities,  to include special 
assistants and chiefs of staff. 
-- Personalities, biographic and biometric information, 
roles, effectiveness, management styles, and influence of key 
UN officials, to include under secretaries, heads of 
specialized agencies and their chief advisers, top SYG aides, 
heads of peace operations and political field missions, 
including force commanders. 
-- Relations between key UN officials and member states. 
-- Views of member states on the next SYG race, to include 
preferred candidates and candidates lacking UN member support. 
-- Views of UNSC members and other member states on Cuban, 
Iranian, or Syrian candidacy for any UN leadership positions. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, Cuba, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Syria, 
Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  UN 
 
      2) Budget and Management Reform (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans, measures and efforts undertaken by the SYG and 
 
STATE 00080163  016 OF 024 
 
 
subordinates on US political and bureaucratic objectives for 
UN management. 
-- Perceptions of member states of the effectiveness of the 
Office for Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) and the Joint 
Inspection Unit (JIU) to combat waste, fraud, mismanagement, 
and corruption. 
-- Effectiveness of the OIOS, in light of the review of the 
OIOS mandate. 
-- Plans and moves to implement OIOS recommendations. 
-- SYG's view of the role of the OIOS. 
-- Secretariat attitudes toward and evidence of corruption in 
UN agencies and programs, and willingness to implement 
measures to reduce corruption. 
-- Plans and intentions of UN member states or the 
Secretariat to address corruption issues at the UN and UN 
agencies. 
-- Plans and intentions of UNDP Executive Board members to 
push for or block management reform proposals. 
-- Plans and intentions of UNDP Executive Board members or 
senior UNDP managers to address potential or actual cases of 
corruption or mismanagement by field missions, including 
efforts to cover up waste, fraud, or abuse. 
-- Internal complaints by UNDP staff about waste, fraud, or 
abuse and efforts by UNDP management to respond to them. 
-- Plans and intentions of Board members, such as Iran, to 
push for increased UNDP funding for programs in their own 
countries or those of their friends. 
-- Degree of independence from UN headquarters of UNDP 
Resident Coordinators in the field and perceptions of field 
staff on UN aid consolidation reforms under the "One UN" 
Program. 
-- Efforts by the G-77 Board members to develop common group 
platforms, especially on budget and management reform issues. 
-- Developments in the implementation of the performance 
based personnel system and contractor reform. 
-- Plans, intentions, and agendas of UN specialized agency 
executive committees. 
-- Impact and effectiveness of whistle-blowing provisions on 
the UN reform process. 
-- Attitudes of UN staff and member states towards extending 
a common whistle-blower protection program to all UN funds 
and programs. 
-- Indications of pressure by member states or groups to 
increase or control growth in the budget. 
-- Secretariat and member attitudes towards changes in the 
scale of assessments. 
-- Options under consideration to resolve financial problems. 
-- SYG views on and plans for responding to Government 
Accountability Office reports calling on the UN to more 
effectively implement results-based budgeting, and make 
further progress on management reform. 
-- Secretariat and member attitudes and plans to improve the 
UN budget process. 
-- Status and use of advanced information systems to 
 
STATE 00080163  017 OF 024 
 
 
streamline UN processes. 
 
Countries:  Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Burkina Faso, China, 
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, France, Japan, Libya, 
Mexico, Russia, South Africa, Syria, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  UN 
 
¶F.  UN General Assembly Tactics and Voting Blocs (FPOL-1). 
-- Plans, intentions, views, positions, lobbying, and tactics 
of regional groups, blocs, or coalitions on issues before the 
General Assembly, especially those that do not include the 
US, i.e., the Africa Group, AU, EU, NAM, G-77, Rio Group, 
Arab League, the OIC, and the GRULAC. 
-- Details of bargaining on votes or candidacies and attempts 
to marginalize or undermine proposed or planned US positions 
or policy initiatives. 
-- Information on the EU agenda in the UNGA, especially as it 
relates to US priorities in the First, Third, and Fifth 
Committees. 
-- Information on efforts by the EU or other member states to 
secure additional voting rights in the UN and its specialized 
agencies. 
-- Lobbying by member states for committee membership 
assignments or vice presidencies. 
-- Information on current and likely future leadership of 
regional groups, blocs, and coalitions. 
-- Differences over positions between UN missions and their 
respective capitals. 
-- Voting instructions to delegations on key resolutions. 
-- Plans, intentions, and agendas of key committee chairs; 
member views of issues that come before these committees. 
-- Efforts of Third World countries to moderate, via NAM and 
G-77, Third World positions on development, defamation of 
religion, or human rights issues. 
-- Intentions of UN members to use non-UN bodies and working 
groups to bypass perceived UN bureaucracy. 
-- Perceptions of member states of the viability and 
potential impact of the US-backed Democracy Caucus. 
-- Biographical and biometric information on key NAM/G-77/OIC 
Permanent Representatives, particularly China, Cuba, Egypt, 
India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, South Africa, Sudan, 
Uganda, Senegal, and Syria; information on their 
relationships with their capitals. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, France, Indonesia, Japan, Libya, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Russia, Senegal, South Africa, 
Sudan, Syria, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  AU, EU, OIC, UN 
 
¶G.  Other Substantive Issues 
 
      1) Food Security (FOOD-3). 
-- Status and proposals related to the UN Comprehensive 
 
STATE 00080163  018 OF 024 
 
 
Framework for Action to address the global food crisis. 
-- WFP activities and proposals related to reforming donor 
food aid policies and establishing a new standing global fund 
to address regularly occurring food crises. 
-- WFP and FAO plans and proposals regarding the impact on 
food prices and food security of the growing use of ethanol 
and biofuels. 
-- Internal UN responses to international calls for reform of 
FAO and WFP. 
 
Countries:  Afghanistan, Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Ethiopia, France, Haiti, Iraq, Japan, Libya, 
Mexico, North Korea, Pakistan, Russia, Somalia, Sudan, 
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam, Zimbabwe 
International Organizations:  FAO, UN, World Animal Health 
Organization 
Non-State Entities:     Palestinian Authority, West Bank and 
Gaza Strip 
 
      2) Climate Change, Energy, and Environment (ENVR-4). 
-- Country preparations for the December 2009 Copenhagen UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Meeting. 
-- Developments related to other UNFCCC meetings and 
discussions on a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol. 
-- Perceptions of key negotiators on US positions in 
environmental negotiations. 
-- Developments on the Montreal Protocol, including reactions 
to US efforts to limit hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). 
-- Indications that member states working through the UN and 
its specialized agencies are/are not fostering environmental 
cooperation, partnerships and capacity building between and 
among member states and regional and sub-regional 
organizations. 
-- Monitoring of and compliance with UN-sponsored 
environmental treaties; evidence of treaty circumvention. 
-- Information on adherence to member states' own national 
environmental programs, including protection, monitoring, and 
cleanup efforts. 
-- Efforts by treaty secretariats to influence treaty 
negotiations or compliance. 
-- Information on the Convention on Biological Diversity, 
particularly on access, benefit sharing and bio-safety. 
-- Information on the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, 
including potential efforts to modify or amend its provisions. 
-- Information on excessive maritime claims, including those 
relating to ridges. 
-- Information on efforts to develop a mechanism to add 
chemicals to the list of persistent organic pollutants. 
-- Information and perceptions on the strategic approach to 
international chemicals management, especially efforts of the 
EU's management program. 
-- Information on participation in and compliance with the UN 
Basel Convention. 
-- Status of efforts to set standards to promote 
 
STATE 00080163  019 OF 024 
 
 
environmental protection, including protection of forests, 
desertification, and invasive or endangered species. 
-- Efforts within the UN to protect water resources, and to 
promote development of alternative sources of energy. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  EU, UN 
 
      3) Transnational Economic Issues (ECFS-4H). 
-- Information on efforts by UN member states or 
organizations to promote or obstruct regulatory reform, 
including banking and financial reforms, transparency, 
international law, trade, development, and foreign direct 
investment to reflect the Monterrey anti-poverty consensus 
and the Millennium Development Goals. 
-- Plans, intentions, and tactics of the UNGA President 
regarding international financial problems; views of member 
states regarding these plans. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to support US 
priorities related to economic freedom and promotion of 
democracy. 
-- Secretariat or member plans to develop multilateral 
economic, trade, or development agreements impinging on US 
interests. 
-- Efforts by member states and the Secretariat to reconcile 
international differences over globalization, especially the 
perceived impact of globalization on human rights, labor, and 
environmental issues. 
-- Member positions on UN decisions, plans, and activities 
concerning environmentally sustainable economic growth 
through market economies, free trade, private investment, and 
efficient multilateral development assistance. 
-- Efforts to expand the global compact involving 
corporations committed to observing human rights, 
environmental, and labor standards. 
-- SYG's views and statements on trade issues and efforts to 
influence future World Trade Organization rounds. 
-- Plans and intentions of UN member states that may impact 
freedom of navigation. 
-- Information on international taxation initiatives. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  EU, FAO, International 
Financial Institutions and Infrastructures, UN, World Bank, 
World Trade Organization 
 
      4) Arms Control and Treaty Monitoring (ACTM-4). 
-- Plans, tactics, timetables, and draft proposals for the 
Eighth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and especially 
 
STATE 00080163  020 OF 024 
 
 
information related to the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East 
and a Middle East Nuclear Weapons Free Zone initiative, from 
interested individual member states (especially China, Cuba, 
Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran, Russia, and South Africa) and 
like-minded groups such as the NAM and the New Agenda 
Coalition (Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, South 
Africa, and Sweden). 
-- Member state views of the major problems facing the NPT; 
whether or under what conditions states would consider 
withdrawing from the NPT. 
-- Member views on and responses to US plans and policies on 
missile defense and positions on a Fissile Material Cutoff 
Treaty, particularly those of Russia, China, and Pakistan. 
-- Information on IAEA plans for safeguards, international 
fuel banks, or other nuclear fuel supply arrangements, and 
meetings of the Board of Governors at the IAEA. 
-- Member views on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
(CTBT); prospects for country ratifications and entry into 
force. 
-- Member plans for plenary meetings of the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group; views of the US-India Civil Nuclear Cooperation 
Initiative. 
-- Readiness of member states to reform the agenda of the UN 
General Assembly's First Committee; proposals prepared by 
member states for the First Committee. 
-- Views of key delegations on US proposals on land mines. 
-- Tactical and substantive information regarding periodic 
arms control meetings in New York, Geneva, Vienna and 
elsewhere, including the Biological Weapons Convention, the 
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT) review process, UN experts group on missiles, 
and meetings on conventional arms. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to introduce new 
arms control or proliferation prevention measures or make 
significant changes to existing agreements. 
- Member or Secretariat plans to address WMD proliferation, 
safeguards, arms control and disarmament, or other threat 
reduction efforts. 
-- Foreign attitudes on UN-sanctioned arms control 
negotiations. 
-- Biographic and biometric data on, and positions of key UN 
arms control interlocutors, especially candidates for the 
position of Director General of the IAEA, and the heads of 
other international institutions. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Brazil, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, France, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, 
Japan, Libya, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Russia, South 
Africa, Sweden, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  EU, IAEA, International Arms 
Control Organizations, NATO, OSCE, UN 
 
      5) Health Issues (HLTH-4). 
-- UN, WHO, and other international organizations, 
 
STATE 00080163  021 OF 024 
 
 
forecasts, expected impacts, plans, proposals, key studies, 
and reactions to major health crises and other health-related 
issues, including efforts on disease eradication, improving 
health standards and access to care and medicine, and 
programs to monitor and respond to emerging infectious 
disease outbreaks and other disasters or emergencies. 
-- Information on deliberations in the UN and other 
international health organizations on health issues and the 
policy positions and objectives of member states and key 
figures, including compromises, insertions, and items omitted 
in published declarations and studies. 
-- Information on international health organizations, 
relationships and interactions with countries and other 
organizations, including relationships with regional offices 
or subsidiaries. 
-- Details on limits and restrictions placed on international 
organizations to investigate reports of diseases that pose an 
international threat, including restrictions placed on the 
nationality of members of investigation teams. 
-- Details on disease transparency, particularly indications 
about inconsistent reporting of outbreaks to appropriate 
international organizations and delivery of specimens to WHO- 
and FAO-affiliated laboratories, and including discussions or 
agreements impacting the publicly disclosed occurrence of 
diseases. 
-- Details of discussions related to the accessibility of 
HIV/AIDS drugs (antiretroviral drugs or ARVs). 
-- Details related to the availability, accessibility, and 
regulation of health care, particularly medications, 
vaccines, and counterfeits. 
-- Member state attitudes toward maintenance of smallpox 
stocks. 
-- Information on global counterfeit medications to include 
surveillance, countermeasures, and research and development 
issues. 
-- Details on efforts to implement health-related Millennium 
Development Goals. 
-- Details on corruption in international health 
organizations or the corrupt use of goods and services 
provided for health issues by bilateral and multilateral 
donors and international health organizations, including WHO, 
UNAIDS, FAO, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, 
and Malaria. 
-- Details on irregularities in Global Fund fundraising, 
spending, and treatment of whistle blowers. 
-- Personalities, biographic and biometric information, 
roles, effectiveness, management styles, and influence of key 
health officials, to include the Director General of the WHO, 
head of UNAIDS, the Pan American Health Organization, under 
Secretaries, heads of specialized agencies and their chief 
advisers, and top aides. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
 
STATE 00080163  022 OF 024 
 
 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations: EU, FAO, UN, World Animal Health 
Organization, WHO 
 
      6) Terrorism (TERR-5H). 
-- Information on plans and intentions of UN bodies and 
member states to respond to or address within UN fora the 
worldwide terrorist threat. 
-- Structure, plans and key figures of UN counterterrorism 
strategy. 
-- Information on plans and activities of UNSC,s four 
counterterrorism sub-bodies. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to address terrorism 
by implementing anti-terrorism legislation as called for 
under resolutions, particularly as they relate to tracking 
financial transactions. 
-- Views of member states on US policy toward terrorism. 
-- Efforts of member states to support or oppose activities 
undertaken by UN specialized agencies such as the 
International Maritime Organization and the International 
Civil Aviation Organization to improve maritime and airline 
security. 
-- Information on UN support for technical assistance to 
member states to combat terrorism, particularly in Africa. 
-- Views of member states about inclusion or exclusion of 
terrorism against Israel in counterterrorism efforts and 
definition of terrorism. 
-- (For further requirements, see the NHCD on Terrorism 
Threats to US Interests at Home and Abroad, July 13, 2005.) 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  UN 
 
      7) Trafficking, Social, and Women's Issues (DEPS-5H). 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to support or oppose 
US priority to combat trafficking and exploitation of men, 
women, and children. 
-- Member state perceptions of ability of UN Economic and 
Social Council (ECOSOC) to follow through on strategies to 
support women and children through UN specialized bodies. 
-- Information on member efforts to combat organized crime, 
narcotics trafficking, and trafficking in persons. 
-- Plans and intentions of member states to address 
reproductive issues, including the aims of the EU vis-a-vis 
the US, GRULAC, Arab, and OIC nations. 
-- Member state perceptions or plans regarding efforts to 
reconcile religious differences worldwide. 
-- Information on reforms undertaken within the UN 
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 
and future plans of the organization. 
-- Member views on education initiatives. 
 
 
STATE 00080163  023 OF 024 
 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  EU, OIC, UN 
 
¶H.  Intelligence and Security Topics 
 
      1) GRPO can provide text of this issue and related 
requirements. 
 
      2) GRPO can provide text of this issue and related 
requirements. 
 
      3) Foreign Nongovernmental Organizations (FPOL-1). 
-- Influence of key UN-affiliated foreign NGOs on UN 
decision-making. 
-- Efforts of foreign NGOs to undermine US policy initiatives. 
-- Foreign NGO role in, views toward, and influence on UN 
policies and activities on globalization, justice, human 
rights, the environment, and 
family/women/children/reproductive issues. 
-- Ability and capacity of foreign NGOs to assist refugees, 
displaced persons, and victims of disasters through the UNHCR 
and WFP. 
-- Ability and capacity of foreign NGOs to support the UN 
Environmental Program or national efforts with environmental 
protection, pollution monitoring, and cleanup efforts. 
-- Contacts between foreign NGOs and Secretariat staff that 
could involve sharing of confidential data. 
-- Foreign efforts to strip US or foreign NGOs of UN 
affiliation and to block US or foreign NGOs seeking UN 
affiliation. 
-- Efforts by member states-*particularly China, Cuba, 
Israel, Russia, and Islamic countries*-to obtain NGO 
affiliation for organizations supporting their policies. 
-- Efforts by organizations affiliated with terrorist 
organizations or foreign intelligence organizations to obtain 
NGO affiliation with the UN. 
-- Efforts by the EU through the Arhus convention to place 
NGOs on UN bureaus; reactions of member states to those 
efforts. 
-- Role of NGOs at the Office of the High Commissioner for 
Refugees (OHCR), OHCHR, and UNHRC in the Third Committee of 
the UNGA. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, Cuba, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  EU, OIC, UN 
 
      4) Telecommunications Infrastructure and Information 
Systems (INFR-5H). 
-- Current technical specifications, physical layout, and 
planned upgrades to telecommunications infrastructure and 
 
STATE 00080163  024 OF 024 
 
 
information systems, networks, and technologies used by top 
officials and their support staffs. 
-- Details on commercial and private VIP networks used for 
official communications, to include upgrades, security 
measures, passwords, personal encryption keys, and types of V 
P N versions used. 
-- Telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of key officials, 
as well as limited distribution telephone numbers/directories 
and public switched networks (PSTN) telephone directories; 
dialing numbers for voice, datalink, video teleconferencing, 
wireless communications systems, cellular systems, personal 
communications systems, and wireless facsimiles. 
-- Information on hacking or other security incidents 
involving UN networks. 
-- Key personnel and functions of UN entity that maintains UN 
communications and computer networks. 
-- Indications of IO/IW operations directed against the UN. 
-- Information about current and future use of communications 
systems and technologies by officials or organizations, 
including cellular phone networks, mobile satellite phones, 
very small aperture terminals (VSAT), trunked and mobile 
radios, pagers, prepaid calling cards, firewalls, encryption, 
international connectivity, use of electronic data 
interchange, Voice-over-Internet protocol (VoIP), Worldwide 
interoperability for microwave access (Wi-Max), and cable and 
fiber networks. 
 
Countries:  Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, France, Japan, Libya, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Vietnam 
International Organizations:  UN 
CLINTON