06ABUDHABI3629
IRAQ COMPACT PREPARATORY MEETING A SUCCESS
Thu Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abu Dhabi
VZCZCXRO2799
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHAD #3629/01 2570751
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140751Z SEP 06 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6928
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0211
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 ABU DHABI 003629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB A/S DSULLIVAN, EB/IFD/ODF 
S/I, C, NEA/I, NEA/ARP 
TREASURY FOR D/S KIMMITT, CDOWNARD, DAS ASAEED 
NSC FOR MOSULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 129589:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID EFIN IZ PREL PGOV ECON AE
SUBJECT: IRAQ COMPACT PREPARATORY MEETING A SUCCESS 
 
REF: A) STATE 144134 
     B) ABU DHABI 03097 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  On September 10, the United Arab Emirates hosted 
the Preparatory Group for the International Compact for Iraq (ICI). 
The United Nations (UN) represented by Deputy Secretary General Mark 
Malloch Brown, and the Government of Iraq (GOI), represented by a 
delegation led by Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih, 
co-chaired the meeting.  The U.S. delegation was led by Deputy 
Treasury Secretary Kimmitt and EB Assistant Secretary Sullivan.  The 
meeting was attended by 14 countries, the European Union, European 
Commission, and League of Arab States, as well as the World Bank, 
International Monetary Fund, Islamic Development Bank, and the Arab 
Development Fund.  Five Iraqi Ministers-- Finance, Oil, Planning, 
Trade and the National Security Advisor--spoke at the meeting.  They 
each emphasized that the ICI is a policy of the Iraqi government, 
and they were all consistent in their message regarding the 
importance of the Compact.  Deputy PM Salih said that the GOI is 
committed to undertaking the reforms cited in the Compact, such as 
effective public resource management, economic reform, social sector 
reform, and energy, infrastructure, and agricultural investment. 
The GOI is steadfast in its desire to work with its international 
partners to make the effort a success.  Salih also laid out the key 
objectives and elements of the Compact and stressed the need to move 
quickly in order to keep up the momentum and ensure buy-in by the 
Iraqi people. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary continued.  Deputy Secretary General Malloch Brown 
stressed that the security needs of Iraqi civilians must be 
addressed, and he noted that internal political consensus among the 
Iraqi people is a key component to Iraqi economic reform.  "If 
anything can stem the violence and offer peace and stability, 
perhaps the Compact, with its emphasis on political stability, can 
achieve this goal," he said.  The next ICI Preparatory meeting will 
be held in Baghdad in October.  The Compact will be discussed on 
September 18 on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New York 
as well as at the World Bank/IMF meeting in Singapore the same day. 
All of the delegates welcomed Iraqi leadership of the process. 
Comments by key participants follow.  Philippe Douste-Blazy, French 
Foreign Minister, Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed al-Hayhan, UAE Foreign 
Minister and Sheikha Lubna al-Qasimi, Minister of Economy also 
attended the meeting.  Text of the Abu Dhabi Declaration: ICI 
contained in paragraph 17, and a full list of delegates is at para 
¶18. End summary. 
 
------------------------ 
UN:  Mark Malloch Brown 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) In his opening remarks, the Deputy Secretary General 
stressed that the security needs of Iraqi civilians must be 
addressed and noted that internal political consensus among the 
Iraqi people is a key component of Iraqi economic reform.  "Although 
these two factors are painful, they are important for future gain," 
said Deputy Secretary General Malloch Brown. He noted that the 
delegates need to understand the challenges facing ordinary Iraqis 
such as rapidly rising  food and fuel prices, and lack of basic 
services such as water and electricity. He said that social services 
need to be targeted to the poor.  As such, foreign investment in the 
Iraqi oil sector is critical to the reform process, according to 
Malloch Brown.  He also said the Compact process should neither be 
too fast or too slow and that time is needed to build consensus 
among the Iraqis.  "If anything can stem the violence and offer 
peace and stability, perhaps the Compact, with its emphasis on 
political stability, can achieve this goal.  The ICI offers Iraqis 
confidence in the future of their country," said the Deputy 
Secretary General.  He urged donor nations and international 
 
SIPDIS 
financial organizations to offer financial support to the GOI "to 
ensure their burden is not too heavy."  All sources of support must 
be provided to the GOI: debt relief, loans, grants, technical 
assistance and foreign investment. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
GOI:  Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih laid out the key 
objectives and elements of the Compact and stressed a) the need for 
a commitment from international partners, and b) the importance of 
moving quickly in order to keep up the momentum and ensure buy-in by 
the Iraqi people. Salih stressed the urgency because he said the 
Iraqi people are concerned that the GOI does not have the 
international buy-in necessary to move forward on the Compact. Salih 
said, "the GOI is committed to political and economic reforms, but 
 
ABU DHABI 00003629  002 OF 007 
 
 
needs a high-profile and wider momentum in order to launch the 
Compact as soon as possible."  The Compact focuses on key reforms to 
support Iraq's economic transformation and generate broad based, 
sustainable economic growth. Salih said the GOI is committed to 
undertaking the reforms in the Compact and working with its 
international partners to make the effort a success.  Iraq will 
deliver its part of the reform program, including creating a 
transparent and efficient oil sector, developing a transparent and 
efficient budget, improving good governance, and phasing out 
subsidies and tackling corruption, but it needs the international 
community to do its part in the process as well, he said. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Salih stressed the GOI's commitment to restoring political 
stability and combating violence and corruption by implementing the 
National Reconciliation Plan, which should be enacted by the end of 
March 2007.  Under the reconciliation plan, the Constitution and 
election laws will be revised.  An amnesty law will also be drafted 
by January 1, 2007.  Furthermore, by the end of 2006, 50 percent of 
the Iraqi provinces will be protected by Iraqi security forces. 
Combating corruption is the first priority of the Iraqi government, 
Salih said.  The proposed economic changes under the Compact will 
benefit all Iraqis and the GOI will work to protect the poorest 
Iraqis by establishing a strong social safety net. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Deputy Prime Minister laid out his plan to pass a 
Hydrocarbon law by the end of 2006.  The new law will improve 
efficiency and transparency in the energy sector, while encouraging 
both domestic and foreign investment.  Iraq currently produces 2.4 
million barrels of oil a day and hopes to increase production to 4.3 
million of barrels a day by 2010, which will create new job 
opportunities for Iraqis. Salih believes the private sector needs 
support and welcomes Iraqis living outside the country to return 
home and invest their skills and resources in Iraq's future.  He 
also said a new investment law should be signed by the end of this 
month, which will strengthen the banking sector, ensure that 
companies pay their taxes, and make it easier and more transparent 
for foreign companies to invest in Iraq. 
 
---------------- 
Iraqi Ministers 
---------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Dr. Hussain al-Sharistani, Minister of Oil, stated that the 
ministry has begun to make a series of fuel price liberalizations. 
The former program of fuel subsidies fostered a system of corruption 
and abuse.  On September 5, a law was passed to liberalize the 
importation and sale of fuels at market prices to private suppliers. 
 The ministry is also drafting a new Hydrocarbon law, which will 
clarify the framework for decision-making in the oil sector, both at 
the national and provincial levels.  The new law, which 
al-Sharistani hopes to be approved by December, will improve the 
efficiency, transparency and accountability of the hydrocarbon 
sector, and will encourage -- as well as regulate -- private sector 
development.  It will also establish dispute resolution mechanisms 
and will ensure oil revenues benefit Iraqis in all regions. Once the 
new law is approved, major international oil companies can begin 
working in Iraq. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Al-Sharistani said that although oil is plentiful in Iraq 
and its revenues are the major source of the Iraqi economy, 
supplying fuel to the nation is challenging because the 
infrastructure is lacking. In the next five years, Iraq intends to 
increase crude production to more than three billion barrels a day. 
The Minister noted that if oil prices remain at their current 
levels, Iraq would earn $60 billion a year.  Fifty percent of the 
money earned would be used for development and would "create a 
balance in all provinces and improve the standard of living of all 
Iraqis." The GOI will provide development permits in such a way as 
to promote free market competition and promote transparency.  The 
GOI will invest in building refineries in order to increase oil 
product output in the coming years.  He stressed that in order to 
succeed, these projects need the support of the international 
community. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Dr. Bayan Baqer Jaber al-Zuyoudi, Minister of Finance, said 
the Iraqi Compact requires the GOI to extend its budget planning 
from one year at a time to a five year timeline.  The GOI is working 
with the International Monetary Fund (IMF)on this project.  The GOI 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Paris Club by 
which the GOI received an 80 percent reduction of its debts.  The 
ministry is planning on helping two million Iraqi families as part 
of its development and social network plan.  Bayan Jaber, like his 
colleagues, discussed the importance of fighting corruption and said 
that thousands of cases are currently before the Commission on 
 
ABU DHABI 00003629  003 OF 007 
 
 
Public Integrity.  He also stressed the importance of revitalizing 
the financial sector by restructuring state owned banks and 
industries, and he noted that the GOI hopes Arab countries will 
forgive all of the GOI's previously incurred debts. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Dr. Mowaffak al-Rubaie, Iraqi National Security Advisor, 
said the GOI must protect its citizens. He said the Baghdad Security 
Plan has achieved results and that the level of violence in Baghdad 
over the past month has been greatly reduced.  The National 
Reconciliation Plan's amnesty and detainee provisions will go a long 
way towards a spirit of reconciliation.  In conjunction with the 
reconciliation plan and the cessation of violence, the National 
Security Advisor said the militia must be demobilized and disarmed. 
The GOI will provide training and employment opportunities for 
militia members once they are disarmed. The GOI is committed to 
fighting terrorism and is aware that fighting terrorism requires 
that the GOI abide by: a) the Permanent Constitution, b) the 
political agenda of the GOI, and c) a national reconciliation 
project for building a democratic Iraq based on rule of law.  Iraq 
plays an integral part in regional security, and it is working 
closely with other countries in the region to fight terrorism, he 
said. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Ali Ghaleb Hussain Baban, Minister of Planning and 
Development Cooperation, said the ministry is focused on providing 
opportunities for local and foreign private sector investments.  In 
order to achieve this goal, the GOI needs to ensure transparency. 
Baban also said the GOI is working to control inflation and 
rehabilitate the job sector in order to help the economy recover. 
The ministry wants to consult with the international donor community 
to rebuild Iraq. 
 
----------------------- 
Delegates' Perspectives 
----------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Generally, the delegates were very supportive of the GOI 
and of the Iraq Compact.  Donor nations and international financial 
organizations were pleased that the GOI is leading the Compact and 
seem committed to the process of moving it forward.  Many noted that 
the GOI needs to work harder to combat corruption and promote 
transparency.  World Bank Senior Vice President and General Counsel, 
Ana Palacio said, "the success of the Compact will be measured by 
the GOI's ability to help its people within a reasonable budget 
framework."  Although the delegates were mainly supportive, many 
were apprehensive about the security situation in Iraq.  The French 
Foreign Minister, Philippe Douste-Blazy called for the Compact to 
delineate a troop withdrawal timeline. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Although delegates did not make specific monetary 
commitments during the Preparatory meeting, Saudi Arabia reiterated 
a previous $1.5 billion pledge for development and trade commitment 
and agreed to work closely with the Iraqi Ministry of Planning on 
how to best use the money.  Additionally, Kuwait said it wanted to 
work with the GOI and pledged $500 million for energy, health and 
railway network development, as well as $60 million for schools and 
hospitals. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Deputy Secretary of Treasury Robert Kimmitt said the USG 
strongly supports this important Iraqi initiative.  The parties 
should move quickly on the Compact since the GOI is moving quickly 
on passing important legislation that supports the ICI, and both 
processes should be in sync.  He said that both the political and 
security framework timelines are important and believed Iraqi 
officials are committed to reaching these goals.  There is 
significant scope for international support, including grants, 
technical assistance, loans and debt relief.  D/S Kimmitt suggested 
the Compact be completed as soon as possible but not later than the 
end of November and offered full USG assistance and resources in 
order to achieve this goal. 
 
¶15. (SBU) In order to push the Compact forward, the next technical 
meeting will be held in Baghdad in October.  There will also be an 
intensive set of consultations between the Executive Committee and 
the Preparatory Group via digital video conferences.  At the 
conclusion of the Preparatory meeting, the co-chairs circulated the 
Abu Dhabi Declaration on the International Compact with Iraq, the 
text of which is below.  At the time of circulation, the Iraqi 
Planning Minister said, "the content of the message is an assertion 
of the international community to help Iraq.  I consider this 
document to mean that the Iraqi Compact is now accepted by all the 
delegates." 
 
---------------- 
 
ABU DHABI 00003629  004 OF 007 
 
 
Press Conference 
---------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) At the conclusion of the meeting, Deputy Secretary General 
Malloch Brown and Deputy PM Salih held a brief press conference. 
Malloch Brown emphasized that, "the world remains frustrated by the 
ongoing crisis in Iraq despite the positive achievements to date." 
The leadership to address this political, security and economic 
crisis must be Iraqi, and the Compact will be the mechanism to 
support the Iraqi government.  This view is based on the certainty 
that the international community cannot afford to see Iraq fail." 
Salih addressed a question on how to convince the international 
community that they are not squandering their resources in 
supporting Iraq by pointing out that the progress made to date, as 
well noting as the implementation of the Iraqi roadmap. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Abu Dhabi Declaration:  International Compact with Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (U) The delegates agreed on an Abu Dhabi declaration: 
International Compact with Iraq.  Begin text. 
 
      On 10 September 2006, the Government of the United Arab 
Emirates hosted a preparatory meeting on the International Compact 
with Iraq (ICI) of States and multilateral institutions in Abu 
Dhabi.  The meeting was opened by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Khalfan bin 
Khirbash, Minister of State for Financial and Industrial Affairs of 
the United Arab Emirates, and co-chaired by H.E. Dr. Barham Salih, 
Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, and H.E. Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, 
Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations.  The purpose of the 
meeting was to assess the preparatory work of the ICI, an initiative 
of the Iraqi Government supported by the International Community. 
The event was attended by representatives of 13 Governments, the 
European Union, European Commission and League of Arab States, and 
senior officials of the World Bank, IMF, Islamic Development Bank, 
The Arab Development Fund.  The meeting resulted in an agreement on 
the direction and process of the ICI as presented by the Government 
of Iraq. 
 
      The ICI is an initiative of the Government of Iraq for a new 
partnership with the International Community.  The Compact, jointly 
co-chaired by the Government of Iraq and the United Nations, with 
the support of the World Bank, will, over the next five years, bring 
together the International Community and Multilateral Organizations 
to support Iraq in achieving its National Vision.  This Vision seeks 
to build a secure, unified, federal and democratic nation, founded 
on the principles of freedom and equality, and providing peace and 
prosperity for all its people, and fully integrated within the 
region and the international community.  Guided by the Millennium 
Development Goals, the Government will work to meet basic needs, 
protect the rights of all citizens and ensure the optimal use of the 
country's resources for the common good. 
 
      The Deputy Prime Minister H.E. Dr. Barham Salih, together with 
H.E. Dr. Bayen Baqer Jaber Al Zuyoudi, Minister of Finance, H.E. Ali 
Ghaleb Hussain Baban, Minister of Planning and Development 
Cooperation, H.E. Dr. Husain Al Sharistani, Minister of Oil and H.E. 
Dr. Mowaffak al Rubaie, the National Security Advisor, spoke to the 
objectives and commitments that it is hoped will realize the 
National Vision.  They outlined the key priorities on which to form 
a Compact, such as effective public resource management and 
institutional strengthening, economic reform in private Sector 
development, social sector reforms and investment, energy and 
agricultural reform investment.  The Government of Iraq also pledged 
its strong commitment to tackling corruption, creating a transparent 
and efficient oil sector, developing a solid budgetary framework, 
improving governance, and building and consolidating effective 
national institutions. 
 
      The Government of Iraq also recognizes that good governance 
and resolution of security and political challenges are interlinked, 
and are pre-requisites for progress in all other areas, including 
economic revival and normalization.  The Government of Iraq 
therefore expressed its strong commitment to making urgent progress 
on national reconciliation, political inclusion and consensus 
building, the rule of law, and the establishment of professional 
security forces able to carry out their duties impartially. 
 
      The participants welcomed the commitments made by the 
Government of Iraq within a comprehensive political, security and 
economic framework that addresses the urgent needs of the Iraqi 
people.  The participants also pledged their support to work closely 
with the Government of Iraq in further developing the ICI with the 
 
ABU DHABI 00003629  005 OF 007 
 
 
assistance of the United Nations and the World Bank.  For its part, 
the United Nations is committed to support and facilitate the 
Compact, through its mission and agencies in Iraq and the good 
offices of the Secretary-General and his representatives. 
 
The participants look forward to the next stage of this process, the 
High-Level Meeting, convened by the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations in New York on 18 September 2006.  The New York Meeting will 
review the development of the ICI within the framework of relevant 
Security Council Resolutions.  The New York meeting will be followed 
by an update on the ICI to Finance Ministers at the Annual World 
Bank/IMF Meeting in Singapore on 19 September 2006. 
 
      The Preparatory Meeting recognized the need to expeditiously 
complete the development of the ICI through a broad consultative 
process at the national, regional and international levels.  It is 
the intention of the preparatory group to work towards finishing the 
compact before the end of the year. End text. 
 
--------- 
Delegates 
--------- 
 
¶18. (U) The following is a list of delegates present at the 
meeting: 
 
United States of America 
------------------------ 
Robert Kimmitt, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury 
Daniel Sullivan, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and 
Business Affairs 
Ahmed Saeed, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Treasury 
Zalmay Khalilzad, Ambassador, Embassy of the United States of 
America, Iraq 
Michele Sison, Ambassador, Embassy of the United States of America, 
United Arab Emirates 
 
Government of Iraq 
------------------ 
Dr. Barham Salih, Deputy Prime Minister 
Bakr Jaber Al Zuyoudi, Minister of Finance 
Husain al Shahristani, Minister of Oil 
Ali Ghaleb Hussain Baban, Minister of Planning and Development 
Cooperation 
Muwafaq Baqer Al Rubai'i, National Security Advisor 
Mohamed Al-Haj Hmood, Deputy Minister for Minister of Foreign 
Affairs 
 
United Nations 
-------------- 
Mark Malloch Brown, Deputy Secretary General of the United Nations 
Ashraf Qazi, Special Representative for the Secretary General for 
Iraq 
Jean-Marie Fakhouri, Deputy Special Representative for the Secretary 
General for Iraq 
Yacoub El Hillo, Deputy Reconstruction and Humanitarian Coordinator 
for Iraq 
Jehangir Khan, Iraq Team Leader, APD/DPA 
 
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
--------------------------------------------- 
Dr. Khalifa Ali Dau, Senior Financial Advisor 
 
Canada/International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Douglas Williams, Head of Delegation, Director General of Middle 
East and Maghreb 
Daniel Joly, Director of Iraq Task Force 
Elizabeth Williams, Head of Aid for Iraq 
Vera Nicholas-Gervais, Political Counselor, Embassy of Canada, Abu 
Dhabi 
 
European Commission 
------------------- 
Patricia Llombart 
Sophie Kisling, Administrator for Iraq 
IIkka Uusital 
 
Finland (EU Presidency) 
----------------------- 
Aapo Polho, Director General for the Department of Africa and the 
Middle East of MoFA 
Leena Pylvananen, Regional Manager Unit for the Middle East and 
North Africa 
 
ABU DHABI 00003629  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
Republic of France 
------------------ 
Jean-Pierre Guinhut, Ambassador, Head of Intergovernmental Mission 
for Iraq's Reconstruction 
Philippe Douste-Blazy, French Foreign Minister 
 
Federal Republic of Germany 
--------------------------- 
Ruediger Lotz, Director of the Iraq Task Force in the German 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Jurgen Steltzer, Ambassador to the Embassy of Germany, United Arab 
Emirates 
 
International Monetary Fund 
-------------------------- 
Ibrahim El-Tijani, Chief of Mission, Baghdad 
Bennet, Resident Representative from Amman, Jordan 
 
Islamic Development Bank Group 
------------------------------ 
Dr. Osman El Fiel, Division Chief, Poverty Reduction Division, MENA 
Region 
Hassan Abdul Magid, Country Officer for Iraq 
 
Republic of Italy 
----------------- 
Vittorio Craxi, Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs 
Paola Imperiale, Minister Plenipotentiary & Chief of Staff for Under 
Secretary Craxi 
 
SIPDIS 
Gianludovico de Martino, Minister Plenipotentiary, Head of the Task 
Force for Iraq at the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Maurizio Melani, Ambassador, Embassy of Italy, Iraq 
Paolo Dionisi, Ambassador, Embassy of Italy, United Arab Emirates 
 
Japan 
----- 
Gotaro Ogawa, Ambassador in charge of Iraq Reconstruction 
Assistance 
Junya Matsura, Deputy Director, Second Middle East Division, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
The State of Kuwait 
------------------- 
Khaled al Maghames, Director of Coordination, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
Marwan Al Ghanem, Technical regional Manager for Arab States, Kuwait 
Development Fund 
 
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
--------------------------- 
Saleh Al-Ouji, General Manager, Imports Insurance Management, Saudi 
Development Fund 
Nasir a-Alhooti, Acting Minister 
 
The Republic of Korea 
--------------------- 
Ki-ho Chang, Ambassador, Embassy of Korea, Iraq 
Bong-kae Do, First Secretary, Deputy Director of Development 
Cooperation Division, International Economic Affairs Bureau, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
 
Spain 
----- 
Manual Pineiro, Ambassador, Embassy of Spain, United Arab Emirates 
Sergio Carranza Forster, Director General for the Mediterranean, 
Middle East and Africa 
Don Cesar Espada Sanchez, Head of Iraq Office, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
 
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Dr. Kim Howell, Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
Dominic Asquith, Ambassador, Embassy of the UK, Iraq 
Edward Oakden, Ambassador, Embassy of the UK, United Arab Emirates 
 
United Arab Emirates 
-------------------- 
Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, Foreign Minister 
Dr. Mohammad bin Khalfan bin Khirbash, Minister of State for 
Finance 
Khaled Ali Al Bustani, Assistant Under Secretary for Budget and 
Resources 
Muhammad Abdul Rahim Abdul Jaleel, Assistant Under Secretary for 
 
ABU DHABI 00003629  007 OF 007 
 
 
International Cooperation 
Saeed Hamdan Al Naqabi, Minister for the GCC 
 
World Bank 
---------- 
Ana Palacio, Senior Vice President & General Counsel of the World 
Bank Group 
Joseph Saba, Country Director for Iraq 
Simon Stolp, Representative, Iraq 
 
¶19. (U) (Note: This message has been cleared by A/S Sullivan and D/S 
Kimmitt.  End note). 
 
SISON