06AITTAIPEI3028
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S UPCOMING TRIP TO
Sat Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3028/01 2450559
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020559Z SEP 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1917
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5610
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6816UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S UPCOMING TRIP TO 
SOUTH PACIFIC 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave extensive 
coverage September 1 to President Chen Shui-bian's upcoming overseas 
trip, which is slated for September 3; former DPP Chairman Shih 
Ming-teh's campaign to oust President Chen, of which some warm-up 
activities will kick off this evening; the Taipei District Court's 
ruling on the highway electronic toll collection system scandal 
case; and Taiwan-born Yankee pitcher Wang Chien-ming.  The 
pro-unification "United Daily News" ran a front-page banner headline 
that read "Bian Departs by Military Aircraft, Returns by China 
Airlines."  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest 
daily, on the other hand, front-paged an exclusive news story with 
the headline "Chiang Kai-shek Airport Will Be Changed to Taiwan 
Taoyuan Airport." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" commented on President Chen's planned 
transit of Guam, saying Chen's major objective is actually to 
transit the United States, while his secondary objective is to 
cement Taiwan's relations with its allies.  The article said it 
seems that the United States has no intention of seizing this 
opportunity to give Chen a hard time.  A separate "Apple Daily" 
column also said it is understandable why Washington will not allow 
Taiwan's Air Force One to land in Guam, because it has become a 
habit for Chen to maneuver and toy with Taiwan's foreign relations 
as he did with every election.  An opinion piece in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times," however, criticized the "Chen-haters" for smearing President 
Chen's diplomatic agenda and sabotaging Taiwan's diplomatic efforts. 
 End summary. 
 
A) "Bian's Dream of Guam" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (9/1): 
 
"President Chen is about to repeat the odyssey he made in May, 
visiting Palau and Nauru this time. In reality, A-Bian is acting 
with a hidden motive:  His major objective is to transit the United 
States, while his secondary objective is to consolidate Taiwan's 
relations with its allies.  It is a pity that the United States 
would not allow the Air Force One he will be aboard to transit Guam; 
only a commercial airplane will be allowed to land in Guam. 
 
"The U.S. concern is that Air Force One symbolizes the presidency of 
a sovereign nation, which would send China off into hysterics, and 
the United States does not see the need to offend China for A-Bian. 
Commercial planes, on the other hand, represent civilians, and are 
thus irrelevant to the controversy over sovereignty.  It seems that 
the United States has no intention of hitting a man when he is down 
- that is, to seize this opportunity to torture A-Bian. ..." 
 
B) "Sad Departure" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang commented in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (9/1): 
 
"Three months ago, A-Bian was in discord with Washington over his 
transit of the U.S., causing unnecessary harm to the mutual trust 
between Taiwan and the United States.  This time, he was mildly 
rebuffed again by the U.S. over his transit of Guam.  A-Bian keeps 
on creating questions to test Washington's patience towards him. 
Just on the eve when one million people are about to gather to oust 
him, he is using Taiwan-U.S. relations as stakes; he seems to have 
gone too far again. 
 
"The two allies that he is going to visit have a total population of 
less than 30,000.  Not a single soul in the world would believe that 
he is traveling to strive for Taiwan's foreign relations this time; 
not even he himself dares to claim that he is traveling overseas for 
Taiwan's sake.  It is quite easy to understand that Uncle Sam does 
not want A-Bian to take 'Air Force One' and land it on U.S. 
territory, because he is maneuvering and toying with foreign 
relations as he did with the elections, and it has grown into a 
habit.  The more he travels overseas, the more harm it does to 
Taiwan's image in the international community. 
 
"As it stands now, no matter where he goes, he cannot dodge the 
ruthless criticism shooting towards him from all sides.  Every time 
he opens his mouth to speak, even if he does not misspeak, his 
remarks are interpreted either excessively or out of context.  But 
A-Bian can never control his mouth; especially at this moment when 
his body and mind are out of balance, whatever he says is sure to 
hurt himself. ..." 
 
C) "Diplomatic Needs Hurt by Domestic Politicking" 
 
Liu Kuan-teh, a Taipei-based political commentator, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
 
30,000] (9/1): 
 
"... Shih's camp has urged Chen to cancel his diplomatic agenda, as 
well as the pan-blue camp's sabotaging of Taiwan's diplomatic 
efforts, are nonsense.  They ignore the increasing imbalance between 
Taiwan and China in terms of diplomatic strength.  The timing of 
Chen's tour of the South Pacific is significant in a strategic way, 
given that Beijing bought off former ally Chad early last month. 
The fact that China has reached out to the world and exerted 
increasing influence in global affairs in recent years through 
frequent state visits to its allies constitutes a tremendous 
challenge to Taiwan's already-fragile foreign relations.  ... 
 
"Chen's trip has two important functions.  One is to correct any 
perception that opposition kowtowing to Beijing is representative of 
public opinion in this country.  It is necessary for the government 
to launch an extensive international campaign to counter Beijing's 
divide-and-conquer strategy.  More importantly, Taiwan must develop 
a new foreign policy agenda in reaction to China's incorporation of 
'great nation diplomacy.' ..." 
 
YOUNG