06AITTAIPEI3259
MEDIA REACTION: CAMPAIGN TO OUST PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN
Wed Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3259/01 2630833
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200833Z SEP 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2227
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5676
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6893UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CAMPAIGN TO OUST PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage September 20 on the ongoing and follow-on movements to 
former DPP Chairman Shih Ming-teh's campaign to oust President Chen 
Shui-bian; on the violent clashes that erupted between the pro-Chen 
and anti-Chen protesters in Tainan Tuesday; and on an attempted 
military coup in Thailand Tuesday.  The pro-status quo "China Times" 
ran a front-page banner headline that read "To Communicate with Bian 
over Exit Mechanism, Lee Teng-hui Will Invite Lien, Soong, and Wang 
to Help Resolve Political Chaos."  The pro-unification "United Daily 
News" also ran a banner headline on page six that said: "Watching 
Political Developments, Lee Teng-hui Does Not Rule out Possibility 
of Ousting Bian."  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's 
biggest daily, by contrast, carried a banner headline on page four 
that read "Shih Ming-teh Calls for Negotiation, [But] Lee Teng-hui 
Remains Unmoved." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "China Times" 
editorial calls for tolerance in dealing with the clashes between 
the people who oppose President Chen and those who support him.  A 
"United Daily News" editorial urged the Legislative Yuan to consider 
launching a presidential recall motion for the second time.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News" said Taiwan needs a cease-fire and an 
end to political confrontations between the ruling and opposition 
parties.  End summary. 
 
A) "Be Tolerant and Sympathetic toward the Various Anxieties of the 
Red-Shirted and Pro-Green Groups" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/20): 
 
"The confrontation between the red-shirted people who want to oust 
Bian and the Green pro-Chen supporters seems to be spreading to 
every part of the island.  Regardless of the question of whether 
such clashes will escalate, no one is happy to see the confrontation 
being directed to become battles among the Taiwan people. ...  For 
Taiwan, the most important thing right now is not to find an enemy 
inside the island, and the most urgent issue is not about its 
sovereignty.  Instead, the top priority is to rebuild the values 
system that has been trampled on and torn down, to reclaim the 
significance of right and wrong, and to establish a sound foundation 
for the operation of Taiwan's democracy.  It is fortunate that the 
'Oust Bian' movement this time has risen beyond the traditional 
labels that distinguish different political parties, Blue and Green, 
and unification and independence.  The enthusiastic participation of 
women and youth in the campaign also manifested a new, pure, and 
genuinely honest power, which is derived from love, not from fear or 
grief.  Taiwan has found its future in this power; and it's up to 
the Blue and the Green camps each to decide if they also view it the 
same way." 
 
B) "Legislative Yuan May Consider Launching Recall Motion for the 
Second Time" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
(9/20): 
 
"On the night of September 15, people who want to oust Bian flooded 
the streets of Taipei City like red lava.  In the face of such a 
situation, Chen Shui-bian undoubtedly not only feels uneasy at the 
Presidential Office but is also unable to manage the country 
effectively.  Even when he left the capital and went to other 
cities, he still faced protests of those who want him to step down; 
he has lost all his dignity.  Should this situation continue, 
national affairs will be left unattended, and Taiwan will cease to 
function and be stuck in stagnation for the next 20 months.  Now is 
the time for the Legislative Yuan to consider launching a 
presidential recall motion for the second time!  The timing for 
launching such a motion should be at the moment when the 
investigation report on the special account for affairs of state 
case is made public. ... 
 
"The purpose of launching a second recall motion is to use key 
issues, such as the closing of the case on the special account for 
affairs of state, to test again the attitudes of the DPP and the 
Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU).  The TSU, which abstained from voting 
for the first recall motion, will have to reconsider its position 
now.  The DPP will also have to cope seriously with the second 
recall motion in the face of [the investigation report] which may 
possibly say 'Wu Shu-chen is indicted on the charges, while Chen's 
involvement in the case is sealed for the time being and will be 
charged after he leaves office.' ..." 
 
C) "Time for Dialogue, Not Confrontation" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] noted in an editorial (9/20): 
"... Taiwan needs a cease-fire and an end of political confrontation 
between the governing ruling and opposition political forces and for 
all sides to step back from short-term partisan interests or 
personal resentments to engage in dialogue on Taiwan's needs in a 
broader perspective.  The recent campaign, both by the 'Depose Chen' 
campaign and the 'Formosa Sunshine' rally, have demonstrated a 
growing public eagerness for cleaner government, more political 
stability, continued economic improvement, efficient and responsive 
governance and rule of law through democratic political institutions 
and an independent judiciary.  Taiwan's democracy may not be 
perfect, but it has gone through bottom-up and grassroots evolution. 
 Any resource to extremist measures that contravene the principle of 
democratic change under a constitutional order will constitute not a 
progressive 'revolution' but a regressive 'counter-revolution' that 
will annihilate our difficult but considerable democratic progress. 
Only by ending political confrontation and restarting dialogue can 
Taiwan enter the next stage of democratic deepening and 
consolidation." 
 
YOUNG