06ANKARA5261
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (AUGUST 2006)
Wed Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1792
RR RUEHDBU
DE RUEHAK #5261/01 2561316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131316Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8581
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RULSJGA/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RUEAORC/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUCNEXC/EXPORT CONTROL AND RELATED BORDER SECURITY
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005261 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, JFEENEY 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DSILLIMAN, BHUNT 
DOE/NNSA- TPERRY, LPARKER, EDESCHLER 
CBP/INA- BWATTS, JGOUGE 
DOC FOR TCURTIN 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM PREL TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (AUGUST 2006) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
¶1.      Summary:  August was a busy month for EXBS 
activities.  U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
conducted an assessment on the Port of Mersin followed by 
Targeting and Risk Management Workshop for 29 Turkish Customs 
officials; preparations were finalized for a Coast Guard Port 
Security/Port Vulnerability Workshop in Izmir; along with 
more progress on the Internal Control Program (ICP) and 
Product Identification Tool (PIT). Finally, EXBS Advisor 
utilized various opportunities to further explain the 
importance of ratification of the U.S.- Turkish NP 
Cooperation Agreement, and the positive impact that the EXBS 
program can have in Turkey. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)            Aug 4 - EXBS Advisor met with Department Head 
for Customs Enforcement Ali Aygun to review upcoming 
Targeting and Risk Management Workshop that was scheduled to 
take place at the Port of Mersin later in August.  Final 
logistical issues were resolved, along with arrangements for 
the CBP team to conduct a pre-workshop assessment of the Port 
of Mersin, to better target the workshop on areas that would 
best improve the Turkish procedures.  Aygun noted that the 
Regional Director for Mersin was very interested in the 
workshop and was fully available to meet with CBP officials 
and to assist in any way he could.  Aygun anticipated that 
the workshop would be very successful. 
 
EXBS Advisor, DOC contractor Rossitza Petrov, and 
representatives from Docuart International, the locally 
selected ICP and PIT customization contractor, met with 
Undersecretariat for Customs Head of Data Processing and 
Communication Department Nurcan Ozyazici and other Customs 
officials to discuss the PIT project.  Ozyazici informed EXBS 
Advisor that she was still awaiting final approval from 
Customs Undersecretary concerning the use of US funding for 
the customization project.  Petrov outlined in detail the 
customization schedule and the responsibilities of both 
Turkish Customs and Docuart in the process.  Petrov also 
answered questions concerning the training of instructors and 
the deployment of the program following completion of the 
customization.  Ozyazici stated that she expect to have final 
approval by the end of the month and that work could begin in 
September. 
 
2)           Aug 9 - 11 - EXBS Advisor and visiting CBP team 
met with Mersin Regional Customs Director Dogan Kanmaz, 
Deputy Director Ali Merdanoglu, port officials and other 
senior staff members.  CBP team provided an overview of the 
Targeting and Risk Management Training that would be 
conducted the following week.  The CBP team then began an 
assessment of the Mersin Port, beginning with information 
collected during the briefing on operation provided by Mersin 
Customs staff.  Following the briefings tours of the 
passenger ferry processing area, the commercial port 
facilities and the Mersin Free Zone were conducted.  CBP team 
was able to observe the offloading of cargo, the movement of 
trucks, the checking of incoming and outgoing trucks and 
passenger vehicles.  Turkish Customs officials were very open 
and willing to discuss their operation and exchange 
experiences.  CBP team fund Turkish Customs operations well 
within traditionally accepted international standards with no 
significant areas of major concern. 
 
3)           Aug 14 - EXBS Advisor met with Undersecretariat 
for Maritime Affairs Head of Safety of Navigation Department 
Okay Kilic to discuss US Coast Guard-led Port Security/Port 
Vulnerability Workshop to be held at the Port of Izmir in 
September.  EXBS Advisor provided additional information on 
the workshop that was obtained during recent consultations in 
Washington.  Kilic stated that there is a high interest in 
the information exchange, but requested that more sections on 
port safety be added to the workshop.  EXBS Advisor responded 
 
ANKARA 00005261  002 OF 003 
 
 
that port safety is part of each section, but that he will 
also request the CG team add information on safety and 
hazardous cargo.  Kilic expressed appreciation and believes 
that this workshop will be a benefit to the personnel working 
at the Port of Izmir. 
 
4)           Aug 23- EXBS Advisor met with Department Head 
for Customs Enforcement Ali Aygun to review the recently 
completed Targeting and Risk Management Workshop along with 
other EXBS areas of cooperation with Turkish Customs, 
including CIT, PIT, and SLD.  Aygun informed EXBS advisor of 
the very positive feedback that he had received from not only 
the Mersin Regional Director but also others that had 
attended the workshop.  Aygun stated that he looks forward to 
other opportunities for future cooperation.  EXBS Advisor 
again requested support from Turkish Customs in seeking final 
Parliamentary ratification of the NP Agreement and reviewed 
some of the equipment that is being prepared for delivery to 
Turkey following ratification of the Agreement.  Aygun stated 
that he will add to his report to the Undersecretary of 
Customs on the Workshop a reminder that the areas of 
cooperation that will be made available to Turkish Customs 
following the ratification on the Agreement and the need for 
Turkish Customs to assist in pushing for final full 
ratification. Finally Aygun outlined Turkish activities on 
the Iranian border and how additional equipment could assist 
in their activities in that region. 
 
EXBS Advisor met with DG for EU and External Relations Riza 
Korkmaz.  Korkmaz provided an update on the areas of 
cooperation that Turkey and the EU have been working, 
including upgrades to border crossings, joint training and 
professional exchanges between Turkey and other members of 
the EU Customs Union.  Korkmaz added that even with the 
cooperation with the EU, he looks forward to increased 
cooperation with the US following the final ratification of 
the NP Agreement. 
 
5)           Aug 24 - EXBS Advisor met with Undersecretariat 
of Foreign Trade (UFT) Agreements Department Head Ziya 
Demirduzen to review the progress of the ICP project, 
evaluation of the translation of the EU control list and 
discuss possible other areas of cooperation. Demirduzen 
informed EXBS Advisor that UFT has been in contact with the 
contractor, Docuart, and will have their final review and 
input submitted to them by the end of August.  The program 
appears to be working properly and there are only minor 
corrections needed in some of the documents.  Demirduzen 
added that the review of the translated control list is being 
accomplished with the assistance of the Istanbul Mineral and 
Metals Association.  He hopes to have the review completed by 
mid-September.  EXBS Advisor informed Demirduzen that it is 
now time to begin planning for the next stages of the ICP 
program, including instructor training and an 
Industry-Government Forum.  If plans begin now, the 
instructor training could take place in late October and the 
IG Forum in early November.  Demirduzen agreed that this 
could be possible, but would need to check with his Director 
General before committing to these time frames. 
 
6)          Aug 25 - EXBS Advisor met with President of 
Turkish Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK), Okay Cakiroglu to 
discuss various issues.  EXBS Advisor expressed his 
appreciation for Cakiroglu's staff's for the work being 
completed on the CIT course.  Cakiroglu replied that he 
believes there are many areas in which mutual cooperation can 
provide a benefit to not only the US and Turkey but to other 
countries in the area, and that by working together it is 
possible to make this a safer region for all.  The CIT course 
is but one way to assist in the fight against the illegal 
spread of nuclear and dual use items. 
 
7)          Aug 31- EXBS Advisor met with Acting MFA Arms 
Control and Disarmament Head of Department Serhan Yigit to 
conduct monthly update meeting on all current projects in 
progress in Turkey, including Internal Control Program (ICP), 
Commodity Identification Training (CIT), Product 
Identification Tool (PIT) and Second Line of Defense (SLD). 
 
ANKARA 00005261  003 OF 003 
 
 
EXBS advisor reviewed the recently completed TRM workshop in 
Mersin and the upcoming Port Safety and Security Workshop to 
be held in Izmir in September.  EXBS Advisor delivered 
information on the proposed Industry-Government Forum as the 
next step in the development and deployment of the ICP 
program.  EXBS Advisor also discussed the status of the NP 
Cooperation Agreement, which is awaiting final ratification 
by Grand National Assembly.  EXBS Advisor reiterated previous 
conversations that the delay in ratification is holding up 
provision of important equipment to Turkish Customs.  Yigit 
stated that he understood the ramifications and will continue 
to work with his leadership to urge ratification by 
Parliament. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: 
 
1)        Aug 14 - 18 - Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
conducted a Targeting and Risk Management (TRM) Course at the 
Port of Mersin, Turkey.  The goal of the TRM course was to 
enhance the officers' knowledge and abilities to better 
screen shipments by identifying and effectively targeting 
those that present a risk.  During the week, 29 Turkish 
Customs officials actively engaged in all course activities 
and field exercises at the Mersin Port.  Student and 
instructor feedback was positive. 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: 
 
1)         Sep 17-23- Port Physical Security/Port 
Vulnerability Course to be conducted by US Coast Guard at 
Port of Izmir. 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: None 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Sep 17-23- Port Physical Security/Port 
Vulnerability Course to be conducted by US Coast Guard at 
Port of Izmir. 
 
¶B.         Oct 23-25 (proposed)- ICP Instructor Training in 
Ankara. 
 
¶C.         Nov 8-9 (proposed)- Industry - Government Forum in 
Istanbul. 
 
¶D.         Oct/Nov (proposed)- INECP nuclear industry 
outreach workshop to be conducted. 
 
¶E.         Jan/Feb (proposed)- First CIT Pilot Course 
conducted by Turkish instructors with assistance by INECP 
personnel. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON