06ANKARA5121
TIP: TURKISH MFA EXPRESSES DISMAY AT REPORTED USG USE OF
Tue Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #5121/01 2481402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051402Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8416
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1205
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 0104
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1780
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKDAI/DIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU//TCH//
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEUITH/TLO ANKARA TU
RUEHAK/TSR ANKARA TUUNCLAS ANKARA 005121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE, EUR/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF OIIP TU
SUBJECT: TIP: TURKISH MFA EXPRESSES DISMAY AT REPORTED USG USE OF 
FRONTLINE VIDEO "SEX SLAVES" 
 
REF: STATE 73395 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  MFA DDG for Expatriate Turks, Migration, Asylum 
and Property issues Akif Ayhan called us in on September 4 to 
express GOT dismay at the U.S. Representative to UNVIE's announced 
plans to show the documentary "Sex Slaves" at the UNDC in Vienna 
towards the end of September.  While Turkey has openly acknowledged 
that it has been on the receiving end of human trafficking from 
Russia, Ukraine, and other countries, he said it should not be 
singled out and held up as a bad example in this fashion.  Ayhan 
reviewed U.S.-Turkey cooperation in combating human trafficking and 
noted Turkey's elevation to a Tier 2 country in U.S. Department of 
State Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report.  A non-paper was passed; 
full text is in paragraph 10.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ayhan met with Consul Sandra Shipshock and passed a 
non-paper that requests UNVIE cancel its plans to show the video 
"Sex Slaves" later this month in Vienna.  Ayhan said the documentary 
had been originally shown on February 7 this year as part of the 
"Frontline" series.  Reftel encouraged Posts to use the video in 
their outreach efforts. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Minister Ayhan said Turkey's relatively relaxed entry 
requirements for visitors from Russia, Ukraine, and other countries 
in the region are an important element of the pull factor.  In fact, 
after Germans, the Slavic population represents the second-largest 
group of visitors in search of sun, sand and an economical holiday. 
A small percentage of visitors are also seeking a foothold in the 
illegal labor market, particularly in the fields of home health 
care, domestic work, or entertainment.  "We are not a police state," 
Aygan said, "and we cannot track the activities of each person who 
enters."  He said that since the time of Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, 
Turkey has followed a path of liberalization in the realms of 
politics, economics, and human interaction.  Ayhan commented that 
Turkey does not wish to restrict migration, but acknowledged there 
needs to be a balance between security concerns and maintaining an 
open society. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ayhan reviewed Turkey's programs to assist victims of human 
trafficking, which have been put in place with the assistance of the 
U.S. government, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
and other NGOs.  Shelters for victims have been opened in Istanbul 
and Ankara.  A special hotline for victims has been set up with 
Russian, Turkish, English and Romanian-speaking counselors available 
to assist. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Ayhan said that that the Turkish Penal Code (TPC) does not 
mention clearly enough the crime of human trafficking.  Article 227 
only addresses prostitution, and while Article 80 does refer to 
human trafficking, it pertains to exploitation of laborers, such as 
children, and did not contemplate victims of the sex trade.  He said 
that the Turkish Parliament will correct this, but it will take some 
time. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ayhan noted that human smuggling, trafficking, and 
organized crimes all have possible links with terrorist rings, as 
they can be revenue-generating centers to support possible terrorist 
activities. Ayhan made it clear that the government does not deny 
there is a problem in human trafficking within its borders - "it is 
a mea culpa situation" -- and admitted that they still have a ways 
to go.  He blamed the media for its tendency to sensationalize the 
topic, and said inaccurate reporting was a continuing problem, as 
writers confuse smuggling with trafficking. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Returning to the showing of "Sex Slaves," he said that an 
officer at the Turkish mission in Vienna had watched the program and 
was disappointed.  Ayhan said his government objects to the 
"politically critical" portrayal of Turkey's customs and police 
officials as playing a role in the trafficking. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Turkish Government is conveying their message of 
concerns on several fronts, including to the U.S. Mission in New 
York, the U.S. Mission in Vienna and, in the near future, through 
the Turkish Ambassador in Washington.  Ayhan also noted that Turkey 
is about to take the chair on the Budapest process meetings to 
combat illegal migration. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment and Recommendation:  Turkey acknowledges that it 
has a trafficking problem and is taking active steps to deal with 
 
it. The 2006 TIP report stated that Turkey is "making significant 
efforts" to fully comply with standards for the elimination of 
trafficking. US missions planning to use the video can incorporate 
these facts into their presentations.  They might also give 
consideration to appropriate ways for dealing with counterpart 
Turkish missions on the matter.  End Comment and Recommendation. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Begin Text of Non-Paper: 
 
Permanent Mission of Turkey to the UN Office in Vienna reported that 
the US Mission to International Organizations in Vienna (UNVIE) 
informed them of their intention to show a movie on some Moldovan 
and Ukrainian victims of human trafficking in Turkey at the UNDC in 
Vienna towards the end of September and invite our Permanent 
Representative to make a speech addressing the issue during the 
event. 
 
We have learned with regret that in some parts of this movie, 
Turkish security and customs officials are portrayed as colluding 
with the traffickers or being soft on the unlawful acts of these 
persons. 
 
We believe that the events as reflected in the movie are not 
compatible with the current realities in Turkey and conveys an image 
opposite to Turkey's uphill battle against human trafficking. 
 
Being one of destination countries, Turkey is actively and 
effectively combating against human trafficking.  She has made 
strides in this area.  An informative note concerning turkey's 
ongoing fight against this scourge is enclosed herewith for further 
reference. 
 
Turkey's endeavours in this field have also been recognized by the 
US State Department.  Once a "Tier 3" country, Turkey has been 
promoted to "Tier 2" category in State Department's annual 
"Trafficking in Person's Report." 
 
We understand that this movie distributed by the State Department's 
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons to the US 
Missions, intends to draw attention to a global issue.  However, it 
regrettably fails to depict a realistic picture about the current 
situation on the ground in Turkey.  The movie also fails to project 
the strenuous efforts of Turkish authorities. 
 
We consider the invitation addressed to our Permanent Representative 
in Vienna to make a speech prior to such an event as inappropriate. 
 
Therefore, the display of this movie by American Missions under the 
instructions of the State Department could not be regarded as an act 
which would strengthen the joint actions towards fulfillment of our 
ultimate objectives.  As a matter of fact, showing films on UN 
platforms blaming other UN members is not a customary practice and 
will not contribute to enhancing our common fight against 
trafficking in human beings. 
 
We respectfully demand that the movie in question be urgently 
withdrawn and any public display of the said movie be refrained. 
 
Encl: 1 
 
ONGOING EFFORTS OF TURKEY 
(COMBATING TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS) 
 
-- Turkey is a destination country in human trafficking.  In 2004, 
239 victims, in 2005, 256 victims and in 2006 (1 January-21 August) 
193 victims were identified.  In 2004 and 2005, 495 traffickers were 
apprehended in Turkey. 
 
-- Within the framework of the National Action Plan prepared by the 
Task force (Chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs), in 2003, 
Cooperation Protocols were signed respectively by Directorate 
General of Security and by Gendarmerie with NGOs which run shelters 
in Istanbul and Ankara for victims. 
 
-- Victims receive medical, psychological and legal counseling at 
these shelters.  Since their inauguration, nearly 300 victims were 
accommodated in these shelters. 
 
-- The Ministry of Health extends free medical care and medication 
 
 
to victims of trafficking. 
 
-- The Ministry of Interior issues free of charge six months valid 
and extendable residence permits to victims without any 
preconditions, such as cooperating with authorities.  Until today 35 
residence permits were issued to the victims. 
 
-- A toll free tip off/emergency helpline (157) became operational 
in May 2005.  Until today, 98 victims were reached through this 
helpline. 
 
-- A spot film promoting 157 helpline for victims is aired on 
Turkish TV channels as well as on channels in Moldova and Ukraine. 
 
-- More than 600,000 pamphlets (in Turkish, Russian, Romanian, and 
English) have been handed over at air and sea ports by the Turkish 
National Police. 
 
-- A new public awareness campaign was launched by IOM on January 
31, 2006. 
 
-- An EU Twinning Project on Trafficking in Human Beings was 
initiated in 2006.  An Action Plan will be drawn up as an output of 
this project. 
 
-- Turkey in cooperation with IOM has initiated a project on 
establishment of a data collection network on victims of human 
trafficking in the Black Sea region. 
 
-- Turkey has signed cooperation protocols on combating trafficking 
in human beings with Moldova, Ukraine, Georgia, and Belarus. 
 
-- Turkey participates in the activities carried out within the 
framework of NATO, OSCE, Council of Europe, BSEC, Bali Process, SECI 
and Bern Initiative.  She recently took over the Chairmanship of the 
Budapest Process. 
 
-- Turkey also actively attended the sessions of the Council of 
Europe for the drafting of a human trafficking convention namely 
"CAHTEH." 
 
End Text. 
 
Wilson