06BEIJING18534
CHINA LABOR ISSUES OVERVIEW
Fri Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2482
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #8534/01 2440857
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 010857Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5827
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 6795
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 5695
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 7038
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 1346
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 5911
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8068
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1305UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 12 BEIJING 018534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM AND DRL/ILCSR 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR KARESH, A. ROSENBERG, MCCARTIN 
LABOR FOR ILAB - CARTER, OWENS, HELM, ZHAO, SCHOEPFLE 
TREAS FOR OASIA/ISA-CUSHMAN 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN 
GENEVA FOR CHAMBERLIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV PREL CH
SUBJECT: CHINA LABOR ISSUES OVERVIEW 
 
(U) SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED: NOT FOR INTERNET 
DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1.  (U)  This message provides background to assist 
with the planning of Labor Secretary Chao's September 
13 meetings with Chinese Minister of Labor and Social 
Security Tian Chengping.  The cable includes a section 
on current political and economic context (paras 4- 
19), a review of developments in China's labor 
situation since Secretary Chao's 2004 visit (paras 20- 
44), and a brief biography of Minister Tian (paras. 
45-47).  Post is happy to provide one-page briefing 
summaries for easy reference. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Tian's visit will offer an opportunity to 
discuss our productive bilateral cooperation on labor 
issues under three active USDOL programs in Labor Rule 
of Law, Coal Mine Safety, and HIV/AIDS Workplace 
Education.  The U.S. is also providing assistance for 
the development of Corporate Social Responsibility 
programs as well as Labor Law education, through 
programs funded by the State Department's Bureau of 
Democracy, Rights and Labor.  The State Department's 
Bureau of International Law Enforcement Affairs has 
also funded ILO work to assist China in preparing to 
ratify ILO Conventions 29 (Forced Labor) and 105 
(Abolition of Forced Labor).  In 2004, DOL and the 
Ministry of Labor and Social Security (MOLSS) signed 
four letters of understanding on cooperation on Wage 
and Working Hour Law Administration, Pension Programs, 
Workplace Safety and Health, and Mine Safety and 
Health, but no programs have been initiated yet.  Tian 
may wish to discuss the possibility of increasing 
bilateral cooperation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The meeting with Tian will also provide an 
opportunity to encourage the Chinese Government to 
improve governance in the labor area.  Although China 
is making progress in legislation and regulation, 
implementation is far from international standards. 
Numerous labor disputes that should be resolved 
through existing mechanisms end up festering because 
these mechanisms are ineffective, time-consuming and 
expensive, or because local labor bureaus do not 
enforce the rules.  In many cases, workers who attempt 
to resove disputes through proper channels come to 
believe that extra-legal means (e.g., strikes, 
demonstrations) are the only way to get satisfaction. 
It is important to remind Tian that U.S. interest in 
labor cooperation includes human rights concerns, but 
extends beyond them; Congress and the general public 
take an active interest in our open market policies 
and look to us to demonstrate that our bilateral 
engagement is effective in enhancing workers rights. 
A more rational labor market with effective dispute 
resolution mechanisms in China will also help attract 
and keep high-quality U.S. investment. 
 
THE POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT 
---------------------------------- 
 
View from Beijing 
----------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)  The Chinese leadership views the outside 
world through the prism of China's own domestic 
challenges and developments and the leadership's 
determination to increase China's global influence. 
The leaders of a one-Party state faced with profound 
development and security challenges are focused on 
stability and on preventing any perceived challenges 
to the power and primacy of the Communist Party.  The 
regime's success, and hence its legitimacy, depends in 
good part on its continuing to deliver breathtaking 
economic growth (approximately 9 percent per year for 
 
BEIJING 00018534  002 OF 012 
 
 
the past 27 years) and commensurate increases in 
living standards for over 1.3 billion Chinese people. 
Job creation is a paramount concern.  To achieve the 
goal of continued rapid economic growth, the 
leadership believes it requires domestic stability and 
stable relations with the U.S. and neighboring 
countries.  China's increasingly active diplomacy 
stems largely from these imperatives, from the 
conviction of Chinese leaders that a stable, peaceful 
international situation benefits China, and to a 
growing extent from China's global quest to secure 
resources.  The Chinese realize that the relationship 
with the U.S. is of paramount importance to their 
continued economic growth, to global stability and 
security, and to China's ability to continue what some 
Chinese call its "peaceful rise." 
 
President Hu consolidates power; Politicking; Taiwan; 
Military Build-up 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  President Hu has consolidated his authority 
within China's cumbersome collective leadership 
structure, although maneuvering in the run-up to the 
fall 2007 Communist Party Congress is intensifying. 
Changes in personnel at lower levels of the Party and 
Government are preparing the way for leadership 
changes to be ushered in at the Congress and will 
likely preoccupy China's leadership over the coming 
year.  Some Vice Premiers are nearing retirement age 
or facing grave illness and a number of Ministers and 
Provincial Governors may be moved up and/or to the 
center.  Although President Hu has reiterated the need 
for China to continue reforms following heated debates 
on the issue, he has shown caution in areas that touch 
on domestic stability and has supported retrenchment 
in the areas of free speech and media.  Internal 
discussions about China's place in the world show 
increasing signs of economic nationalism, with concern 
by some that Chinese companies face unfair 
competition.  Hu appears to favor an incremental 
approach to "reform" that would improve governance, 
reduce corruption, increase democracy within the Party 
and enhance Party legitimacy but not alter the Party's 
basic monopoly on power.  Taiwan remains a top concern 
for Chinese officials.  China appreciates U.S. 
statements on our one-China policy and our efforts to 
preserve the cross-Strait status quo.  The U.S. and 
others are concerned over the unclear purpose of 
China's large increases in defense spending and the 
military buildup and modernization.  We continue to 
seek to understand how China's buildup is consistent 
with its oft-stated assertions of a defensive military 
doctrine.  The U.S. and China coordinate efforts on 
many issues, such as counterterrorism, the Six-Party 
Talks, unanimous UNSC resolutions on Iran and North 
Korea, and combating infectious diseases.  We 
continue, however, to look to China to contribute more 
to resolving these issues. 
 
Rapid Economic Growth and its Challenges 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  China's economy continues to grow at a 
brisk pace.  The Chinese official figure for the first 
half of 2006 was 10.9 percent, although some believe 
the true figure may have been even higher.  The latest 
GDP figures indicate that China has now overtaken the 
UK and France to become the world's fourth largest 
economy (based on size of GDP).  However, in per 
capita terms, China ranked one hundred tenth in the 
world in 2005 (IMF data).  At the end of 2005, China 
revised its GDP upward by 16.8 percent.  According to 
the revised statistics, the contribution from services 
now amounts to between 30 and 40 percent of China's 
 
BEIJING 00018534  003 OF 012 
 
 
overall GDP.  Many Chinese economic policy officials 
are increasingly concerned about both the pace and 
composition of China's growth. The Central Government 
seeks to rein in what it perceives to be irrationally 
high growth in some provinces, yet local officials are 
often promoted for their ability to increase 
investment, GDP and jobs.  Despite the Government's 
stated goal of promoting consumption-led growth, the 
economy of late has been increasingly driven by 
investment and net exports.  Chinese officials feel 
the need to maintain high growth to create non- 
agricultural jobs for the large, globally 
uncompetitive and still poor rural sector.  Slowing 
economic growth, or worse yet, a sudden contraction, 
could pose social stability challenges for the Chinese 
Government. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  China faces enormous long-term development 
challenges, including the need to invest more in 
public health, environmental protection and education, 
and securing adequate, reliable access to resources 
and energy.  China's large current account surplus is 
due to an extraordinarily high savings rate of 51.8 
percent (2005 gross national savings rate; EIU data), 
which exceeds an extraordinarily high investment rate 
of 44.5 percent (2005 grows investment as a share of 
GDP, EIU data).  High household precautionary savings 
are necessary because Chinese lack both private and 
public insurance and social safety nets to manage 
rising health costs, finance education and provide for 
a secure retirement.  Corporate savings have risen 
with profits, further pushing up the savings rate. 
Due to weak corporate governance, neither public nor 
private companies pay significant dividends. 
Developing the financial sector, social safety nets 
and corporate governance will all have a far bigger 
impact on China's trade surplus than exchange rate 
changes or reductions in trade barriers, but such 
structural changes will take time. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Big threats loom, including widespread 
continuing drought and water shortages, air and water 
pollution and the new threat of avian influenza.  For 
all its growth, the Chinese economy is also energy- 
inefficient.  China's energy consumption per unit of 
gross domestic product is almost two and one-half 
times greater than the world average and energy 
intensity is still rising, a reflection of ongoing 
high rates of investment in fixed assets.  In the 
early 1990s, China was still a net energy exporter, 
but early this decade, overtook Japan as the world's 
second largest importer of crude oil.  Westinghouse, 
still with much U.S. content though now owned by 
Japan's Toshiba, is a finalist for new Chinese nuclear 
power plant contracts and approved for USG advocacy; 
those nuclear power plants are part of China's plans 
to diversify its energy supplies, which the U.S. 
supports. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Political support for inefficient state- 
owned industries has led to overcapacity, falling 
prices, and profitability, and burgeoning bad debts 
that by some estimates could exceed half of China's 
annual gross domestic product.  Overcapacity is 
particularly evident in such areas as steel, aluminum, 
cement, real estate and construction.  Economic growth 
and its concomitant urbanization have lead to a 
growing gap in living standards between China's 
urbanites and rural residents.  The transfer of 
population from rural to urban areas that accompany 
industrialization in all societies continues apace in 
China.  Remaining price controls (including on 
energy,) administrative measures that interfere with 
market operations, Communist Party selection of 
banking leaders and government selection of preferred 
 
BEIJING 00018534  004 OF 012 
 
 
industries tend to perpetuate inefficient capital 
allocation in China. 
 
China's Foreign Trade Performance 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  China's foreign trade growth also 
continues to be impressive.  Total trade for 2005 
exceeded USD 1.4 trillion (USD 756 billion through the 
first half of 2006), with export growth for 2005 at 
28.4 percent and import growth at 17.6 percent.  The 
PRC's overall trade surplus was USD 102 billion in 
2005 (USD 61.5 billion through the first half of 
2006), over three times the surplus in 2004.  The U.S. 
is China's largest export market, taking more than 
one-fifth of all Chinese exports.  In 2005, China also 
attracted USD 60 billion in foreign direct investment 
(marginally down to USD 28.4 billion through the first 
half of 2006).  Foreign invested enterprises (FIEs) 
have accounted for about half of China's exports in 
recent years, employ about 11 percent of China's urban 
workforce, and pay roughly 20 percent of total tax 
revenues.  As a result of strong inward capital flows, 
China's foreign exchange reserves now exceed USD 940 
billion, the largest total in the world, and are 
expected to exceed USD one trillion before year's end. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  U.S. exports to China grew for the sixth 
consecutive year, up 18.2 percent in 2005 after a 22 
percent increase in 2004, a continuation of a trend 
that began with China's accession to the World Trade 
Organization in 2001.  In the first quarter of 2006, 
U.S. export growth to China exceeded 29 percent. 
Despite this good nws, PRC exports to the U.S. grew 
even faster.  As a result, China's trade surplus with 
the U.S. rose from USD 162 billion in 2004 to over USD 
201.7 billion in 2005.  Many of the underlying reasons 
for this unprecedented surplus are structural, in the 
form of China's low wages and low overhead and capital 
costs.  Nonetheless, China too often uses industrial 
policy tools to promote and protect favored industries 
and sectors.  Its ineffective enforcement of 
intellectual property rights is a major problem for 
American exporters. 
 
Currency Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  China's currency regime poses increased 
risks to the Chinese and global economies.  While 
China increased the value of the renminbi (RMB) last 
year by 2.1 percent, and has allowed it to rise by 
another 1.7 percent against the U.S. dollar through 
late August, it remains effectively pegged to the U.S. 
dollar.  The peg is contributing to growing 
macroeconomic imbalances in the Chinese economy and is 
constraining the Central Bank's ability to maintain 
financial stability.  To avoid the risk of repeating a 
cycle of credit-fueled boom-busts, China needs to 
tighten its monetary policy.  But its inability to 
raise interest rates is constrained by the peg, 
because absent appreciation of the currency, higher 
interest rates would just induce more speculative 
inflows.  Some Chinese officials are concerned about 
the potential adverse impact of exchange rate 
flexibility on the export sector, particularly about 
the vulnerability of low value added assembly 
operations that are most likely to transfer to Vietnam 
or other low wage countries, and which support 
hundreds of millions of migrant workers whose 
remittances help the rural economy.  Fortunately, 
there appears to be increased understanding among the 
political elite of the linkage between China's peg, 
its large balance of payments surplus, and excessive 
credit and investment growth.  In mid-August, the 
 
BEIJING 00018534  005 OF 012 
 
 
authorities allowed RMB volatility to increase 
notably.  Most analysts expect the RMB's rate of 
appreciation to increase slightly. 
 
Health and the Environment 
-------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  China's rapid economic growth is 
stretching its natural resources and increasing 
concerns about pollution and environmental damage. 
Water issues are a major concern for urban areas and 
on the farm, especially in northern China.  Water 
shortages have been chronic in some parts of China due 
to long-term price controls that discourage 
conservation.  Poor water quality exacerbates 
shortages and has become a hot political issue, 
especially since the major toxic spill in the Songhua 
River in northeastern China last winter.  The Chinese 
Government values its partnerships with EPA, the 
Department of Energy and other U.S. agencies in 
addressing these issues.  U.S. NGOs are assisting 
China in everything from working to protect 
biodiversity to developing better environmental laws 
and ensuring community participation. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Public health is of increasing national 
concern, especially since the 2003 SARS epidemic. 
Beijing has taken more serious measures to control 
HIV/AIDS and is working harder to stem the spread of 
avian influenza.  The U.S. and China are collaborating 
on a robust Emerging Infections program to combat 
disease, with both the National Institute of Health 
and the Centers for Disease Control active in China. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture and USAID are also 
supporting bilateral animal health programs.  However, 
China's reporting of animal outbreaks of avian 
influenza is not as strong as the reporting on the 
human health side, and we continue to urge greater 
openness with both information and samples. 
 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) China's poor record on protecting 
intellectual property rights has been one of the most 
pressing difficulties facing our relationship.  From 
pirated CDs and DVDs to theft of entire product lines 
from unknowing American manufacturers, IPR problems in 
China harm U.S. companies around the world, and 
threaten China's ability to be seen as a responsible 
participant in the international trading system. 
While China has made significant and valuable progress 
in some areas related to IPR, the scope of the problem 
is increasing faster than Chinese enforcement efforts. 
 
"National Economic Security" and Shifting Bureaucratic 
Strongholds 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  Pursuant to the Eleventh Five-Year Plan 
(2006-2010), the Central Government announced a focus 
on rural development, addressing rising income 
inequality and moving China up the value chain.  We 
are observing a shift in China's trade policy center 
of gravity from the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM) and 
WTO implementation issues towards the National 
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) and 
implementation of more ambitious industrial policies. 
As NDRC fleshes out its policy mandate, we expect to 
see increased experimentation with policy measures 
that will test, and perhaps breach, WTO norms. 
Examples include the mandatory application of domestic 
standards (WAPI), rules designed to increase the 
percentage and technological sophistication of local 
content (autos), and support for development of 
 
BEIJING 00018534  006 OF 012 
 
 
advanced manufacturing and high technology programs. 
 
¶17. (SBU)  China's policy for these emerging 
industries appears to be to nurture them by carving 
out of market share via government procurement policy 
(software), restricted expansion of FIE market share 
growth in undefined "sensitive" sectors and may have 
particularly problematic results in services 
(insurance, banking, telecommunications and direct 
sales.)  China erects technical and sanitary standards 
to delay the entrance of competing products 
(pharmaceuticals, medical devices and agricultural 
products). 
 
Beijing Summer Olympics 
----------------------- 
 
¶18.  (SBU)  The Summer Olympics will take place in 
Beijing August 8-24, 2008.  The city will also host 
the Paralympic Games that September.  The Games will 
attract some 10,500 athletes, 180,000 accredited 
staff, 22,000 media and 230 VIPs, and perhaps up to 60 
heads of state.  Organizers indicate these will be the 
biggest, most expensive and most watched Olympic Games 
in history.  Beijing will be the primary site with 285 
of 302 total events; Qingdao in Shandong Province will 
host sailing events, and Hong Kong will host 
equestrian events.  Preliminary Olympic Games soccer 
matches will be played in a number of other mainland 
cities.  The Chinese Government will reportedly spend 
between USD 30 and 40 billion on the Games.  The 
Beijing Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games 
(BOCOG) is the public coordinator for the Olympics, 
although the Communist Party remains the final 
Arbiter, as it is for all major policy questions. 
 
¶19.  (U) The venue centerpieces in Beijing will be the 
91,000-seat Olympic Stadium, nicknamed the Bird's 
Nest, and the nearby Aquatic Center.  The estimated 
cost of the complex is about USD 400 million.  Beijing 
is in the process of major upgrades to its public 
transportation and highway systems.  In addition, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
Energy are cooperating with Chinese counterparts to 
improve the environment and energy efficiency in 
Beijing in connection with the Games. 
 
CHINA LABOR DEVELOPMENTS SINCE 2004 
----------------------------------- 
 
Role of Ministry 
---------------- 
 
¶20.  (U)  The Ministry of Labor and Social Security 
(MOLSS) is responsible for crafting policies to 
improve and implement China's labor laws and 
regulations, and various social welfare insurance 
programs, including pension, unemployment, workplace 
injury and maternity benefit insurance programs. 
Enforcement of the laws and regulations is the 
responsibility of provincial or sub-provincial labor 
bureaus.  MOLSS has no formal authority over 
provincial bureaus, but the bureaus look to the 
Ministry for policy direction.  MOLSS is not 
responsible for workplace safety and health issues. 
These fall under the jurisdiction of the cabinet-level 
State Administration for Work Safety (SAWS) and the 
State Administration for Coal Mine Safety (SACMS). 
Health insurance is under the jurisdiction of the 
Ministry of Health. 
 
The Labor Market 
---------------- 
 
¶21.  (U) China's official figures show a labor force 
 
BEIJING 00018534  007 OF 012 
 
 
of approximately 750 million, including 200-250 
million urban workers, 100-150 million migrant 
workers, and roughly 400 million farmers (many of whom 
engage in other occupations as well).  While Chinese 
official statistics report unemployment of about 4.2 
percent, this refers only to urban residents who have 
registered as unemployed.  MOLSS surveys estimate a 
real unemployment rate closer to 7 or 8 percent, and 
anecdotal estimates in some areas are much higher. 
Rapid economic growth in and around China's cities 
continues to create jobs and attract labor from rural 
areas; unemployment, underemployment and rising 
expectations in rural areas is also driving labor 
migration.  Urban workers who are registered urban 
residents earn an average of RMB 73.3 (USD 9) per day, 
and enjoy some social welfare benefits.  Migrant 
workers earn about half as much, with no social 
welfare benefits, but this is still more than they 
would earn back in their villages. 
 
¶22.  (U)  Official statistics indicate that on 
average, wages rose 14.9 percent in 2005.  Some 
heavily industrialized areas of China, e.g., the Pearl 
River Delta, are beginning to experience shortages of 
unskilled labor and wage increases for both skilled 
and unskilled labor.  These shortages may be partially 
the result of rural tax cuts and other Central 
Government policies meant to increase living standards 
in rural areas, which have reduced the push to 
migrate. 
 
¶23.  (U)  Unemployment is currently significant for 
recent university graduates.  China?s rapid increase 
in post-secondary students since 1999 has produced a 
large pool of educated persons with high expectations. 
The public sector cannot absorb all of these 
graduates, and private sector employers complain that 
the quality of graduates is too low.  A recent survey 
suggests that only 10 percent of post-secondary 
graduates have the skills necessary to assume 
professional or management positions in the private 
sector. 
 
The Social Safety Net 
--------------------- 
 
¶24.  (U)  The 1995 Labor Law shifted responsibility 
for pensions, health insurance, unemployment 
insurance, workplace injury insurance and maternity 
benefits from the old "work units" of the command 
economy to various levels of government.  In the past 
two years, the Central Government has devoted much 
attention to reforming and improving the social 
welfare insurance, experimenting, in different 
locations, with a variety of models.  So far, however, 
no comprehensive pension, health care, unemployment or 
workplace injury insurance system is in place.  A 
December 2005 report by an investigative committee of 
the National People's Congress (the NPC is China's 
national legislature) observed that "coverage of the 
social welfare insurance system is too narrow, the 
levels of government responsible for maintaining 
insurance funds are too low, and there is a serious 
problem of arrears to insurance funds." 
 
¶25.  (U)  PENSIONS: China modified its pension rules 
in January 2006.  Current rules mandate a three-tiered 
system to be administered by local governments.  The 
three tiers include a pay-as-you go "social pool" 
funded by employer contributions (20 percent of 
wages), personal accounts funded by mandated employee 
contributions deducted from wages (8 percent), and 
voluntary, employer-funded supplementary accounts. 
There are some provincial pilot programs which vary 
from the national standards.  Pension accounts are 
 
BEIJING 00018534  008 OF 012 
 
 
managed by local governments.  Participation (in the 
first two tiers) is mandatory, but non-compliance is 
widespread.  The NPC noted that the bulk of 
participants in current pension programs were 
employees of China's remaining state-owned and 
cooperative enterprises.  Private sector urban workers 
and migrant workers are largely uncovered.  MOLSS 
reports that the pension system covered 178.8 million 
workers as of June 2006. 
 
¶26.  (U)  Because the first tier of the pension system 
is a defined benefits program, mandated contributions 
are high (20 percent of wages), and the system is 
still deeply in deficit.  The People's Bank of China 
estimated that the system was RMB 6 trillion (USD 760 
billion) as of the end of 2004.  In many cases, local 
governments raid personal accounts of contributing 
workers to fund their current liabilities to retirees. 
The Deputy Minister of MOLSS reportedly said that the 
total amount owned to "empty" individual accounts at 
the end of 2004 was RMB 740 billion (USD 94 billion) 
and growing by RMB 100 billion (USD 13 billion) per 
year. 
 
¶27.  (U)  In addition, China has yet to establish a 
nationwide pension system for rural residents. 
Although pilot pension programs for rural residents 
and migrant workers exist, they are neither common nor 
popular.  The NPC report attributed this to the fact 
that most pension benefits are not easily transferable 
from one jurisdiction to another. 
 
¶28.  (U)  UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE:  Local labor bureaus 
maintain a system of social pools funded jointly by 
employer (2 percent of wages) and employees (1 percent 
of wages).  Benefits are based an employee's seniority 
and set at a percentage of the local monthly minimum 
wage.  As with pensions, participation is mandatory, 
but non-compliance is widespread.  MOLSS reports that 
the unemployment insurance system covered 145.3 
million workers as of June 2006. 
 
¶29.  (U)  WORKPLACE INJURY/DISABILITY INSURANCE: 
Employers pay injury/disability insurance based on the 
risk level attributed to their industry by the local 
labor bureau.  Disabled workers receive 100 percent 
reimbursement of medical expenses from the insurance 
fund, and 100 percent of total wages for up to 18 
months.  MOLSS reports that the workplace 
injury/disability insurance system covered 89.54 
million workers as of June 2006. 
 
¶30.  (U)  MATERNITY BENEFITS:  Benefits cover full 
salaries for the required period of maternity leave, 
paid for through a social pool funded by employees 
alone.  Many localities in China have not yet set up 
maternity benefit systems.  MOLSS reports that the 
maternity benefit system covered 59.6 million workers 
as of June 2006. 
 
¶31.  (SBU)  The inadequate social safety net 
profoundly affects the personal welfare of the average 
Chinese citizen.  Rural residents have virtually no 
publicly-funded safety net, and only a portion of the 
urban population is covered.  Private sector insurance 
is highly underdeveloped.  The lack of safety nets 
compels many Chinese to save to manage rising health 
costs, finance education and provide for their own 
retirement.  China's savings rate in 2005 was an 
extraordinary 51.8 percent of GDP.  This high level of 
savings contributes to China's current account 
surplus, and thus to China's trade surplus.  A 
meaningful reform of the social safety net could 
reduce precautionary savings, and reduce macroeconomic 
imbalances that exacerbate China's trade surplus with 
 
BEIJING 00018534  009 OF 012 
 
 
the United States. 
 
Workers Rights and Working Conditions 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶32.  (SBU)  China's economy appears to be creating 
jobs for most of the roughly 7 million new workers who 
enter the labor force and 10 million rural workers who 
migrate to the cities each year.  Wages appear to be 
rising in some parts of the country.  Nevertheless, 
incidents of worker discontent are frequent, whether 
measured by the roughly 300,000 labor disputes 
reported by the All China Federation of Trade Unions 
in 2005, or by the large (but unknown) number of 
(often unreported) strikes and protests.  Workers lack 
legitimate channels through which to seek timely 
resolution of grievances.  In the vast majority of 
labor disputes workers seek nothing more than what 
they are minimally entitled to under the law or their 
labor contracts.  As indicated by the NPC report, the 
Chinese Government is well aware of the problems.  It 
has been slow to address them, however, because doing 
so requires tackling governance/rule-of-law issues 
fundamental to China's decentralized, single-Party 
system. 
 
¶33.  (SBU)  FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION: China does not 
recognize freedom of association, despite having 
ratified the 1998 ILO Convention on Fundamental Rights 
at Work.  The ACFTU, a "mass movement" arm of the 
Communist Party is the only union recognized in China. 
Workers who attempt to form independent unions or 
associations, or who simply demonstrate against 
legitimate grievances risk imprisonment.  The ACFTU 
has significant power under the Labor Law, but is seen 
by most observers as, at best, a social organization, 
and, at worst, an advocate for employer interests. 
In a handful of exceptional cases, ACFTU unions have 
freely elected their own leaders in individual 
enterprises.  Chinese academics are working with the 
ACFTU to explore ways the union can modestly increase 
its role in protecting workers' rights, e.g., by 
representing workers in court. 
 
¶34.  (SBU)  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: True collective 
bargaining does not take place in China.  Although not 
prohibited by the Labor Law, there is, in practice, no 
mechanism for workers to negotiate with employers as a 
unit, except through the ACFTU.  Collective bargaining 
in China generally consists of an employer and a pro- 
employer ACFTU union signing an off-the-shelf model 
collective contract.  Such contracts rarely cover more 
than wage provisions.  Although the Government has 
called for increased use of collective contracts, 
there is no indication that either the Chinese 
Government or the ACFTU seeks to move toward setting 
wages and other terms of employment through actual 
negotiation.  The subject of whether wages in China 
are freely set via collective bargaining has been 
discussed in the U.S.-China Joint Committee on 
Commerce and Trade (JCCT) in connection with China's 
request to be treated under USG trade regulations as a 
market economy. 
 
¶35.  (SBU) FORCED LABOR: Chinese law prohibits forced 
labor, and authorities have arrested employers for 
trapping workers at labor sites.  However, forced 
labor is part of the Chinese administrative detention 
system. The Public Security Bureau (police) can 
sentence certain offenders to periods of "reeducation 
through labor" without judicial review.  The ILO, with 
USG funding, is working with China on legislative 
changes necessary to ratify the forced labor ILO 
Conventions 29 and 105.  Since late 2004, the ILO's 
Special Action Program to Combat Forced Labor has also 
 
BEIJING 00018534  010 OF 012 
 
 
been working with MOLSS to address detection and 
prosecution of human trafficking cases.  In2005, 
China cooperated with the U.S. Prison Labor Task Force 
to resolve several allegations of prison labor 
products being exported to the United States.  In each 
case, visits to Chinese prisons uncovered no evidence 
that the goods in question were produced there. 
 
¶36.  (U)  CHILD LABOR:  Despite reports from some 
outside observers that child labor is on the rise in 
China, there is no publicly available data on which to 
judge.  The Labor Law prohibits employment of workers 
under 16, and provides special protections for workers 
between 16 and 18.  The ILO reports that the 
percentage of working children is low in China, but 
that reports of child labor are relatively prevalent 
in the garment, footwear, toy, firecracker and food 
processing industries, as well in catering and 
"entertainment" services.  Isolated labor shortages in 
industrialized regions potentially increase demand for 
child labor.  The Chinese Government has intensified 
efforts to combat child labor. 
 
¶37.  (U)  One problem which has received much 
publicity in the past two years is the recruitment of 
underage students to work in factories on "work-study" 
programs.  A recent case involved an alleged 
arrangement between a teacher, a labor contractor, and 
a factory manager to supply 10-14 year old students to 
peel grapes in a cannery in Ningbo, Zhejiang Province, 
during summer vacation.  The teacher and labor 
contractor allegedly kept a portion of the children's 
wages, and are currently under investigation. 
 
¶38.  (U)  A May 2006 report on Child Labor issued by 
"China Labor Bulletin" (a Hong Kong NGO) noted that 
Chinese Government efforts to combat child labor focus 
on the demand side (by prosecuting employers), but do 
not adequately address the supply side.  Many poor 
families willfully encourage their teenage children to 
leave school to work at age 14 or 15 because they do 
not have the money to pay for continued schooling, or 
because they see no benefit in completing a high 
school curriculum which is geared toward preparation 
for college entrance exams. 
 
¶39.  (SBU)  DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT:  The most 
severe form of discrimination in employment continues 
to be the household registration (hukou) system, which 
effectively brands Chinese citizens at birth as rural 
or urban residents, based on their mother's status. 
Although most regulations restricting internal 
migration have been abolished, Chinese citizens cannot 
change their hukou place of residence without (rarely 
granted) government approval.  As a result, hundreds 
of millions of Chinese rural residents working in 
urban areas face obstacles gaining access to social 
welfare insurance, care in public clinics and 
hospitals, or public education for their children. 
The ILO estimates that there are some 22 million 
children of migrant workers left behind in rural 
areas.  Local regulations in some jurisdictions 
restrict also employers to hiring only people with 
local hukous. 
 
¶40.  (SBU)  The hukou system creates significant 
hardship for employees and employers alike, 
effectively breaking China into numerous separate 
labor markets, while at the same time making migrant 
workers of all skill levels and easily exploited 
second class of citizens in the towns and cities where 
they work.  Under instructions from the Central 
Government, provincial and sub-provincial governments 
are experimenting with various means to de-link hukou 
status from access to benefits, but the Central 
 
BEIJING 00018534  011 OF 012 
 
 
Government remains committed to maintaining the 
system, as it prevents uncontrolled rural-urban 
migration.  Chinese labor experts believe serious 
reform of the hukou system will not take place until 
after the Government has established a unified social 
welfare insurance system that covers both urban and 
rural residents, and an anti-discrimination law that 
addresses discrimination against rural people. 
 
¶41.  (U)  Chinese laws prohibit discrimination in 
employment and occupation against women and ethnic 
minorities.  Some complaints of discrimination, 
including institutionalized discrimination, are well- 
founded, such as local governments' preference for 
using Han Chinese contractors for construction 
projects in ethnic minority areas.  Numerous studies 
by Chinese academics also highlight various forms of 
discrimination that are not illegal.  These include 
widespread use of height or physical appearance 
criteria in hiring. 
 
¶42.  (SBU)  China ratified ILO convention 111 on 
Discrimination in Employment and Occupation on January 
12, 2006.  MOLSS officials said the Ministry hopes to 
use the ratification to force legislative and 
regulatory action to better combat discrimination in 
employment.  Establishing a definition of 
"discrimination" will be the first step.  This 
presents an opportunity for Chinese academics and 
public interest groups to press for further relaxation 
of the hukou system. 
 
¶43.  (SBU)  ACCEPTABLE CONDITIONS OF WORK:  Although 
wages appear to be rising in China, there has been 
little improvement in working conditions in the past 
two years.  The AFL-CIO, the ICFTU, the Congressional- 
Executive Committee and China and other observers have 
commented on this lack of progress in great detail 
(and with varying degrees of spin).  Perhaps the most 
credible testament to the lack of progress, however, 
is the NPC's well-researched "Report on Implementation 
of the PRC Labor Law."   The report included the 
following findings (Embassy can provide a more 
detailed unofficial translation of the report): 
 
-- The ratio of workers with signed labor contracts is 
low, duration of labor contracts is short, and the 
contents of labor contracts do not conform to 
standards. 
 
-- The minimum wage guarantee system is not fully 
implemented, wage arrears continue to occur, and there 
is no regular mechanism for increasing wages. 
 
-- Excessive overtime is common and working conditions 
are substandard. 
 
-- Most workers in private enterprises and sole- 
proprietorships do not participate (in social welfare 
insurance programs) and the vast majority of migrant 
workers have trouble participating in the systems in 
their present form. 
 
-- Labor inspection agencies do not have adequate 
resources, their methods are weak and their 
investigations of, and sanctions for illegal behavior 
lack force. 
 
Legislative developments 
------------------------ 
 
¶44.  (U)  There has been no new labor legislation 
since 2004, but MOLSS it would place priority on four 
pieces of draft legislation in 2006.  The NPC 
published a draft Labor Contract Law in March 2006 for 
 
BEIJING 00018534  012 OF 012 
 
 
public comment.  There was a large response, including 
from the American business community.  Discussion of 
controversial issues continues, including the role of 
labor in business decisions and tightened restrictions 
on labor contracting.  A draft Employment Law will 
debut for public discussion in late August.  A draft 
Labor Dispute Law and Social Insurance Law have not 
yet been published.   A Bankruptcy Law passed on 
August 27, 2006, that makes wage and social insurance 
contribution arrears senior to other debts of bankrupt 
enterprises.  This provision is considered a victory 
for the ACFTU, whose influence overcame resistance 
from the People's Bank of China, which noted that the 
bankruptcy laws of other countries emphasize debts to 
banks and other creditors. 
 
BIOGRAPHY OF TIAN CHENGPING 
--------------------------- 
 
¶45.  (SBU) Tian Chengping was appointed Minister of 
Labor and Social Security on July 1, 2005. He has 
actively promoted labor market and social insurance 
reforms, and welcomes international dialogue.  Tian 
was a university classmate of Chinese President Hu 
Jintao.  He is a member of the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP) Central Committee. 
¶46.  (U)  Tian's previous positions were:  Chairman of 
the Shanxi Provincial Legislature Standing Committee 
(2003-2006), Secretary of the Shanxi Province CCP 
Provincial Committee (1999-2003), Chairman of the 
Qinghai Province Provincial Legislature Standing 
Committee (1997-1999), Acting Governor, then Governor 
of Qinghai Province (1992-1997), Secretary of the 
Beijing Xicheng District CCP Committee (1984-1992), 
Deputy Party Secretary at the Qianjin Chemical 
Workings, Beijing, (1974-1983), and Secretary of the 
Communist Youth League of the Beijing General 
Petrochemical Works (1973-1974). 
¶47.  (U)  Tian is a native of Daming, Hebei Province, 
and was born in 1945.  He joined the Communist Party 
of China (CPC) in 1964 and graduated from the 
Department of Civil Architecture of Qinghua University 
in 1968. 
 
SEDNEY