06BEIJING20676
SEPTEMBER 27 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: CHEN SHUI-BIAN
Wed Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1720
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0676/01 2701102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271102Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8329
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 020676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH TW
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 27 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
TERRITORIAL DEFINITION REMARKS, OUST-CHEN CAMPAIGN, 
CROSS-STRAIT COOPERATION, ANTI-CORRUPTION CAMPAIGNS 
 
¶1. Key points made at the September 27 Taiwan Affairs 
Office (TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- China strongly condemns suggestions made by Chen 
Shui-bian regarding a change of Taiwan's territorial 
definition in Taiwan's "constitution" at a September 
24 Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) meeting. 
 
-- Issues in Taiwan such as the campaign to oust Chen 
Shui-bian should be resolved by the people of Taiwan. 
 
-- Concerns raised in Taiwan over cross-Strait 
agricultural cooperation are narrow-minded and biased. 
 
-- In response to a question about a possible meeting 
between former KMT Chairman Lien Chan and President Hu 
Jintao, the spokesman said the matter is "still under 
discussion." 
 
-- Fighting corruption has been a consistent strategy 
on the Mainland and there is no connection between the 
campaign against Chen Shui-bian and the dismissal of 
Shanghai Party boss Chen Liangyu. 
 
Statement Condemning Chen Shui-bian Comments 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesman Li Weiyi led 
off the September 27 TAO press conference with a 
strongly worded statement condemning Chen Shui-bian's 
September 24 comments on altering the definition of 
Taiwan's territory in the process of "constitutional 
revision."  Li said, "According to Taiwan media 
reports, Chen Shui-bian, facing difficulties, raised 
the issue of changing the definition of Taiwan's 
'territory' in the context of 'constitutional 
revision.'  Prior to this, the DPP Standing Committee 
was considering including provisions touching on 
'Taiwan independence' in a draft 'constitutional 
revision' and had already begun to research such 
provisions.  This shows that Chen Shui-bian for his 
own interests has again broken his previously 
reiterated 'four noes' commitments and promises to not 
touch on 'sovereignty' or 'territorial' issues in 
constitutional changes and raises the danger signal of 
pushing for 'de jure independence' through 
'constitutional revision.'  This again shows Chen 
Shui-bian's stubborn support for his 'Taiwan 
independence' position and for deliberate separation 
of Taiwan from Chinese territory.   It once again 
shows that he has never been honest and his political 
capital is completely bankrupt.  Chen Shui-bian's 
splittist behavior, damaging cross-Strait relations 
and threatening the peace and stability of the Taiwan 
Strait and the Asia-Pacific region, his duplicity and 
cowardly machinations were condemned by Taiwan and 
international media." 
 
¶3. Li went on to recount China's efforts in recent 
years to work for cross-Strait peace and stability and 
reiterated China's intent to "make utmost efforts" to 
encourage the development of peaceful and stable 
cross-Strait relations.  At the same time, China 
firmly opposes "Taiwan independence" and efforts to 
achieve "de jure independence" through "constitutional 
revision."  China is paying close attention to 
"constitutional revision" actions in Taiwan.  Anyone 
who attempts in any way to separate Taiwan from China 
must be "burned for playing with fire" and will suffer 
"ignominious defeat," Li concluded. 
 
Campaign To Oust Chen Shui-bian 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about his attitude toward the campaign to 
oust Chen Shui-bian, Li said such issues in Taiwan 
should be resolved by the people of Taiwan and 
reiterated opposition to "Taiwan independence" moves. 
 
¶5. Asked if Beijing is willing to meet DPP members who 
support "Taiwan independence," Li said the mainland 
strongly opposes "Taiwan independence" but would 
welcome DPP members who appropriately support the 
development of cross-Strait ties. 
 
Agricultural Forum and Possible Hu-Lien Meeting 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6. Li said cross-Strait agricultural cooperation is 
win-win and will benefit both sides by utilizing 
comparative advantages.  An agricultural forum will be 
 
BEIJING 00020676  002 OF 002 
 
 
held in Hainan and will be attended by 400 
representatives from Taiwan and the mainland.  Li 
criticized as narrow-minded and biased the concern 
reportedly expressed by a Taiwan official that cross- 
Strait agricultural cooperation could increase 
mainland competitiveness vis-a-vis Taiwan by exposure 
to Taiwan's superior agricultural technology.  Asked 
if Hu Jintao would meet with KMT leader Lien Chan 
during the forum, Li said the agenda is "still under 
discussion." 
 
Charter Flights Between Taiwan And Mainland 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Li said that China supports charter flights between 
Taiwan and the mainland, which are conducive to cross- 
Strait relations.  The current situation is still far 
from meeting the demands of both sides.  Responding to 
a question which praised the Mainland's response to a 
recent car accident in Jilin province involving 
tourists from Taiwan, Li said that measures were taken 
to meet the demands of the Taiwan compatriots and such 
measures should be further developed. 
 
Anti-Corruption Campaigns 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. Li deflected a question about links between the 
oust-Chen campaign and the dismissal this week of 
Shanghai Party boss Chen Liangyu (no relation), 
stating that the two issues are unrelated and that 
anti-corruption efforts have been a consistent 
priority of the Mainland.  The Chen Liangyu case shows 
the level of determination in the Chinese leadership 
to fight corruption and demonstrates that all are 
equally responsible to maintain discipline. 
 
SEDNEY