06BRASILIA2003
Bahia PFL Leaders Combative and Pessimistic
Thu Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO5727
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #2003/01 2641011
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211011Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6731
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 5497
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 8111
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 2929
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4291
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6486
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5681
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 5798UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 002003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON BR
 
SUBJECT:  Bahia PFL Leaders Combative and Pessimistic 
 
REFS: A. Brasilia 1961, B. Brasilia 1996 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Senator Antonio Carlos Magalhaes (ACM)(protect), 
opposition PFL (Party of the Liberal Front) from Bahia, said Lula 
will try but fail to form a government of reconciliation if he is 
re-elected on October 1, and Federal Deputy Jose Carlos Aleluia 
(protect), PFL from Bahia, says Brazilian voters have been brought 
to Lula's side by excessive public spending but the country is 
heading for a moral and political "precipice."  During a September 
12 meeting with Poloff, ACM sounded determined to work toward 
preventing Lula from forming a government that would include current 
members of the opposition, and said the opposition in congress might 
even attempt to impeach Lula.  In a separate meeting, Aleluia made 
clear to Poloff his frustration that voters seem ready to re-elect 
President Lula despite what Aleluia views as Lula's first term 
record of gross abuses of authority, a poor economic policy, and 
widespread corruption.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Excessive Public Spending Means Votes for Lula 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. (SBU) Embassy Poloff met on September 12 over breakfast with Jose 
Carlos Aleluia (PFL) from Bahia at Aleluia's home.  Aleluia said two 
of the biggest problems with Lula's administration are runaway 
public spending and low public investment.  He complained that Lula 
has used the powers of the presidency to "buy" the courts, the 
universities, the Federal Police, and the Public Ministry.  He said 
the public payroll has ballooned under Lula.  Lula has "bought" 
universities by creating new ones, he said, and he named several 
states where new public universities had been created, encumbering 
the government with lifetime academic appointees and pensions for 
their spouses.  In Minas Gerais, for example, four new public 
universities had been created during Lula's first term, according to 
Aleluia.  Further, Aleluia accused Lula of manipulating the Federal 
Police so that the many of the corruption cases it discovered 
recently are claimed to have existed all along but were previously 
undetected. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Aleluia said Lula had appointed so many judges to the 
Supreme Court that if the Court ever had to make a decision 
concerning the coming election, it would decide in Lula's favor.  He 
also criticized the hiring of a large of number of public employees 
through job competitions.  "Brazil has become the country of job 
competitions," he complained.  As an example, he said the government 
had created many entry level judgeships with excessive salaries.  He 
said the young judges earn 18,000 reais (about USD 8400) a month, 
which is a very high salary in Brazil. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Aleluia said the bloated federal payroll, combined with the 
Bolsa Familia assistance program for poor families, make Lula 
practically unbeatable on October 1, although he added that if the 
election goes to second round Lula would be vulnerable and could 
lose to Geraldo Alckmin of the Party of Brazilian Social Democracy 
(PSDB), with which the PFL is currently allied in opposition to 
Lula.   Alleging a political manipulation of Lula's flagship social 
welfare program, the Bolsa Familia (Family Allowance), Aleluia noted 
that when Lula took power, the program provided benefits to five 
million families.  Lula added three million more, and recently added 
three million more, bringing the total to about 11 million families. 
 (Note: according to Brazilian government statistics, in May 2006 
there were 9.2 million families in the Bolsa Familia program, and in 
June 2006 the figure jumped to 11.1 million, which is current 
figure.)  Aleluia also said the Bolsa Familia program has induced 
some families to quit working, creating a new dependency on the 
federal government, although he stopped short of saying he was 
opposed to the Bolsa and other assistance programs, some of which 
Lula inherited from the Fernando Henrique Cardoso administration. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Aleluia also criticized the Lula government for a lack of 
public investment, but did not get into specifics, aside from noting 
that the government had failed to build new roads.  He also 
complained of high interest rates, a low economic growth rate, and 
an unfavorable foreign exchange rate for the Brazilian real.  The 
foreign exchange rate is hurting all exporters, especially 
agricultural interests in the south, he added. He acknowledged that 
the trade balance is good, but said it could be better. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Even though in the northeast Lula may win the votes of 
eighty percent of the poor, Aleluia said, about ten percent of those 
votes will be lost because the least sophisticated voters will have 
trouble with the electronic voting machine.  He explained that not 
only do voters have to confront the electronic voting machine, they 
 
BRASILIA 00002003  002 OF 002 
 
 
have to know their candidates' numbers and enter each one manually, 
as opposed to selecting from a list.  Finally, he said, the voting 
order places the presidential vote at the end, and some voters will 
give up before getting to that point. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Finally, Aleluia opined that Brazilians are generally happy 
with their country and their lives, but the country is heading 
toward a moral and political precipice.  He said the choice is 
between taking Brazil in the direction of Bolivia or Chile.  He is 
convinced that Lula's re-election will take Brazil toward the 
Bolivian model. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Lula Will Fail to Bring Opposition to His Camp 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8. (SBU) Embassy Poloff, accompanied by the Salvador Consular Agent, 
met with Antonio Carlos Magalhaes at his Salvador office on 
September 12.  ACM began by saying that Lula would try but fail to 
form a government of reconciliation if he is re-elected on October 
¶1.  ACM said he expected Lula to appoint two or three persons as 
ministers who are not identified as political or partisan figures. 
He said they might be figures similar to former and current Justice 
Ministers Nelson Jobim and Marcio Thomaz Bastos.  He predicted a 
majority of the Senate will be in opposition, including at least two 
to three PMDB senators, such as Jarbas Vasconcelos of Pernambuco. 
Asked who the other PMDB opposition Senators might be, ACM said that 
is not yet known.  ACM predicted that after October 1, when a new 
threshold law will eliminate parties failing to reach a certain 
minimum of votes nationally, only about six parties will remain 
standing.  He also commented in passing that the PFL is perceived as 
being on the right, but is really a centrist party, and that the 
PSDB is perceived as being center-left but is also a centrist 
party. 
 
¶9. (SBU) When asked whether the PSDB and PT might unite in the 
future out of ideological similarity, ACM dismissed this possibility 
out of hand.  He said this would not happen for two reasons: they 
are competitors, and Fernando Henrique Cardoso will not allow it. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Need to be Tougher on Lula, Even Impeach Him 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) On corruption in the Lula government, ACM said without 
hesitation that Lula knew everything.  The opposition had missed an 
opportunity to impeach Lula in his first term, but might try again 
in the second, ACM declared.  He said Lula has committed impeachable 
crimes and there is enough evidence to impeach.  When asked to 
comment on Alckmin's new campaign emphasis on corruption, ACM said 
he had been telling Alckmin to be tougher on Lula on this issue. 
Alckmin was late to start attacking on corruption, said ACM, but it 
is having an effect.   At the same time, ACM said the general public 
cares about corruption, but the poor think "Lula is their friend and 
all politicians steal." ACM also said Lula has not yet been directly 
implicated in a corruption scandal because the Ministerio Publico is 
subject to Lula's political control through the Minister, who owes 
allegiance to Lula. ACM continued to say that Lula has "bought lots 
of people," including NGOs, which he claimed were now "all corrupt." 
 (Note: the conversation with ACM occurred before the most recent 
scandal breaking over Lula and the PT, per reftel B.  End note.) 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment:  Deputy Aleluia and Senator Magalhaes's 
pessimistic and combative attitudes toward the PT and President Lula 
are in line with predictions of difficult executive-legislative 
relations we have heard from at least one other politician (reftel) 
and some journalists in the Brazilian northeast.  If ACM and Aleluia 
are typical of PFL attitudes, Lula will have a difficult time with 
the Senate in a prospective second term, where the opposition may 
hold a majority after October 1.  In that case, political progress, 
in spite of Lula's best efforts, could be subject to some degree of 
gridlock.  But ACM's influence over his colleagues is less than it 
was in the past.  In 2001 he resigned from the Senate during a 
scandal in which he was accused of accessing information about 
secret Senate votes.  By resigning, he retained his political 
 
SIPDIS 
rights, and was elected again in 2002 to a term ending in 2010. 
ACM, who is now 79 years old, expresses sentiments held many among 
in the anti-Lula block, but to the point where even some who 
sympathize believe he has crossed a line and insults the presidency, 
not the President.  Whether others will join his openly hostile camp 
remains to be seen.  End comment. 
 
Chicola