06BRASILIA2069
SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 81
Thu Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO3725
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #2069/01 2711609
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281609Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6839
INFO RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4303
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 5810
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 4895
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3179
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1975
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 3940
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5693
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 1130
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6498
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 1147
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3442
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 5551
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 8180
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 2986
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DOE WASHDC
RUEHC/DOI WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEANAT/NASA HQ WASHDC
RUCPDC/NOAA WASHDC
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL
RUEHRC/USDA WASHDC
RUCPDO/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 13 BRASILIA 002069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USAID TO LAC/RSD, LAC/SAM, G/ENV, PPC/ENV 
TREASURY FOR USED IBRD AND IDB AND INTL/MDB 
USDA FOR FOREST SERVICE: LIZ MAHEW 
INTERIOR FOR DIR INT AFFAIRS: K WASHBURN 
INTERIOR FOR FWS: TOM RILEY 
INTERIOR PASS USGS FOR INTERNATIONAL: J WEAVER 
JUSTICE FOR ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES: JWEBB 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL: CAM HILL-MACON 
USDA FOR ARS/INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH: G FLANLEY 
NSF FOR INTERNATIONAL: HAROLD STOLBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR EAID TBIO ECON SOCI XR BR
SUBJECT: SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 81 
 
¶1.  The following is the eighty-first in a series of newsletters, 
published by the Brasilia Regional Environmental Hub, covering 
environment, science and technology, and health news in South 
America.  The information below was gathered from news sources from 
across the region, and the views expressed do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Hub office or our constituent posts. 
Addressees who would like to receive a user-friendly email version 
of this newsletter should contact Larissa Stoner at 
stonerla@state.gov.  The e-mail version also contains a calendar of 
upcoming ESTH events in the region. 
 
¶2. Table of Contents 
 
Agriculture 
--(3)Brazil and Botswana Link Up On Agricultural Research 
--(4)Uruguay Halts Production and Sale of GM Corn 
--(6)Brazil State, Paraguay Sign Livestock Management Agreement 
 
Health 
--(7)Peru: Fast-tracking Detection of a Tropical Killer 
--(8)Venezuela: Tobacco Banned in Green Zone 
--(9)Chile: Warning for New Pulp Mill 
 
Water Issues 
--(10)Brazil: Small Farmers to Protect Water Source 
--(11)Argentina: 'Unusual' Dispute Between Bottled-Water Giant and 
Mining Company 
 
Forests 
--(12)Guyana: Verification System for Timber Products Being Crafted 
--(13)Brazil Announces 11 percentDrop In Amazon Deforestation 
--(14)Brazil Proposes Fund to Stem Rainforest Cutting 
--(15)Brazil Announces New, Tamper-Free Forest Product Monitoring 
System 
 
Wildlife 
--(16)Galapagos 'Face Species Threat' 
 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
--(17)Chilean Salmon Farms Draw Official Scrutiny 
 
Protected Areas 
--(18)Bolivia Revokes Oil-Drilling Concessions in National Parks 
 
Science & Technology 
--(19)Argentina to Invest USD510 Million in Science by 2010 
 
Pollution & Waste Management 
--(20)Warning for Latin America: Used Cell Phones 
--(21)Ecuador, Chevron Tangle over Pollution Trial 
 
Energy 
--(22)Soya Promises to Be the New Energy Source For Argentina 
--(23)Chile's Debate on Nuclear Energy Intensifies 
--(24)Brazil's Petrobras Finds New Way to Make Cleaner Diesel 
--(25)Argentina to Expand Nuclear Program 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  002 OF 013 
 
 
--(26)Brazil's Alcohol Cars Hit 2 Million Mark 
 
Climate Change 
--(27)L. America, Caribbean 'must act on climate change' 
 
General 
--(28)US Organic Company to Partner CI in Forest Protection IN 
Guyana 
--(29)Brazil and EU Collide Over Retread Imports 
--(30)UNEP Report on Peru Sees Major Problems-and Reason for Hope 
--(31)Brazil: Garbage Collectors Demand Recognition 
--(32)Peru - Beggar on a Throne of Gold 
 
----------- 
Agriculture 
----------- 
 
¶3. Brazil and Botswana Link Up On Agricultural Research 
 
AUG. 30, 2006 - Brazil and Botswana have agreed to cooperate in 
agricultural research over the next five years.  The move is the 
latest in a series of scientific partnerships announced recently 
between Brazil and African countries.  The new agreement signed 18 
August by representatives of the Brazilian Agricultural Research 
Corporation (Embrapa) and Botswana's Ministry of Agriculture will 
focus on agriculture in extremely dry areas.  One aim is to 
strengthen the capacity of scientific institutions and their staff 
to develop new technologies.  The partners will share scientific 
knowledge and genetic material from local plants and animals.  The 
collaboration will include research to improve livestock and crop 
production.  It will involve work on plant and animal health, food 
processing, and the sustainable use of soils and other natural 
resources. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
¶4. Uruguay Halts Production and Sale of GM Corn 
 
AUG. 29, 2006 - The Uruguayan government has banned the production, 
use and sale of genetically modified corn.  The resolution, issued 
on August 17, is the result of a complaint filed by NGO RAP-AL to 
the Ministry of Environment, Territorial Ordinance, and Livelihood 
(MVOTMA) in early 2006.  The group claimed that GM corn was being 
sold without the proper labels and not in compliance with the proper 
procedures to trace the seeds.  An inspection by the Ministry proved 
the veracity of the accusation.  According to the press report, the 
MVOTMA and the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries have signed an 
agreement establishing fines for such infractions. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
¶5. NOTE from US Embassy Montevideo: Uruguay has only banned Bt11 
corn for human consumption.  It can still be grown and can be fed to 
animals.  And other GM corn can still be grown as previously.  Also, 
On September 1, several local producers filed suit to remove the 
restriction.  Among other points they argued that the GOU had 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  003 OF 013 
 
 
violated government policy against taking action before the NCC 
completed its policy review.  Please refer to MONTEVIDEO 817. 
 
¶6. Brazil State, Paraguay Sign Livestock Management Agreement 
 
AUG. 22, 2006 - Brazil's No. 1 cattle state of Mato Grosso do Sul 
and neighboring Paraguay signed an agreement to work together to 
take concrete measures to improve the sanitary management of 
livestock, 10 months after a confirmed outbreak of foot-and-mouth 
disease along the border, according to a report in local Agencia 
Estado newswire.  The plan calls for the mapping of properties and 
registration of their herds, the identification of frontier cattle, 
joint action to control animal transit, and a creation of a joint 
data base.  The deal also allows for the construction of Brazilian 
meatpackers in Paraguay, which will permit Brazil to buy fresh beef 
cuts from its neighbor, instead of buying live cattle as it does 
now, said the report.  Brazil's Agriculture Ministry said that it 
would maintain a ban on three cities in Mato Grosso do Sul state due 
to its latest lab results that showed the presence of foot-and-mouth 
antigens on 55 properties, even though there were no new cases of 
the contagious livestock disease. 
 
Source - Cattle Network 
 
------ 
Health 
------ 
 
¶7. Peru: Fast-tracking Detection of a Tropical Killer 
 
AUG. 25, 2006 - Researchers have developed a new way to rapidly 
assess the risk of developing a severe disease called leptospirosis 
from contact with water.  The approach, which has been tested in 
Peru, can gauge whether water contains the bacteria that cause the 
disease and, if so, how many are present.  The researchers used a 
technique called polymerase chain reaction to rapidly amplify tiny 
pieces of bacterial DNA.  This allowed them to assess which types of 
Leptospira were present in water from gutters, wells, puddles and 
streams in rural and urban parts of Iquitos, in Peru's Amazon 
region.  The Peruvian study suggests that reducing sources of 
standing water and clearing away waste in urban areas might reduce 
the number of cases of severe leptospirosis. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
¶8. Venezuela: Tobacco Banned in Green Zone 
 
AUG. 19, 2006 - The 75-hectare Parque del Este (East Park), a green 
area in the middle of the Venezuelan capital, will become smoke-free 
before the end of the year, announced Parks Institute spokeswoman 
Carolina Albarran.  "In the areas where we see highest consumption 
of cigarettes -- a habit of 22 percent of the 26 million Venezuelans 
-- we are promoting agreements and ordinances to create ever more 
spaces free of tobacco smoke," Rose Melkon, of the Health Ministry's 
anti-tobacco program, told Tierramerica.  The program already 
includes the Parque del Oeste (West Park), also in Caracas, and the 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  004 OF 013 
 
 
Parks Institute says it is studying an extension of the initiative 
to all areas under its authority. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶9. Chile: Warning for New Pulp Mill 
 
AUG. 19, 2006 - The medical board of the Chilean city of Nuble, 500 
km south of the capital, has issued a warning about the potential 
harmful effects of the imminent opening of the Nueva Aldea 
Industrial Forestry Complex of the CELCO company.  The association 
of physicians believes that the waste discharge from the pulp plant 
will be a strong and irreversible threat to the health of more than 
45,000 people who use the water of the Itata River for their own 
consumption, for fishing or for crop irrigation.  The regional 
president of the board, Carlos Rojas, told Tierramerica that the 
substances produced in the bleaching process, such as resins and 
organochlorides, can lead to cancer and genetic malformations.  The 
board also warns that dumping the waste into the ocean, as has been 
announced, will not resolve the problem. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
------------ 
Water Issues 
------------ 
 
¶10. Brazil: Small Farmers to Protect Water Source 
 
AUG. 26, 2006 - Fifteen farming families will each earn 100 to 260 
dollars a month over the next three years for maintaining the 
forests on the banks of the Cubatao River, which provides water for 
the half-million residents of the city of Joinville in the southern 
Brazilian state of Santa Catarina.  The local agreement between the 
Municipal Environment Foundation and the Rural Workers Union is a 
pioneering effort in Brazil.  This "environmental financial 
compensation" will vary according to the size of the agricultural 
properties, which range from 900 to 30,000 square meters, in the 
Sierra Dona Francisca Environmental Protection Area, explained 
municipal environmental chief Norival Silva.  The aim is for the 
small farmers to make a commitment to conserve the river and 
forests, he told Tierramerica. The program began with 15 families 
that live upriver from the water extraction point, but will be 
expanded to include more families in the future, said Silva. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶11. Argentina: 'Unusual' Dispute Between Bottled-Water Giant and 
Mining Company 
 
AUG. 2006 - Anti-mining campaigns have become more frequent in 
Argentina as investment in mineral extraction in the region has 
surged in recent years.  But a mining dispute in Mendoza province 
qualifies as unusual nonetheless.  That's because the leading 
opponent in this case is a foreign-owned company-the French 
bottled-water giant Danone.  Since 1999, Danone has owned a 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  005 OF 013 
 
 
173,000-acre (70,000-hectare) tract of land in a region of 
mountainous Mendoza province known as Villavicencio.  In Argentina, 
however, land ownership does not guarantee control of the subsoil, 
as Danone is now well aware.  A decade ago, Mendoza provincial 
authorities granted an exploration concession to an Argentine 
company called Minera del Oeste.  The concession covers Paramillos, 
part of the Danone-owned land that is 10,500 feet (3,200 meters) 
above sea level and for centuries has been known as a source of lead 
and zinc.  The dispute has spotlighted the environmental value of 
the Villavicencio region, which provides habitat for animals 
including pumas, guanacos, condors and eagles.  But Danone cites 
more immediate reasons to oppose mining development in 
Villavicencio.  There, it produces bottled water of the same name, 
one of the leading bottled-water brands in Argentina.  Villavicencio 
water relies on nature as a marketing tool, its label featuring a 
rendering of the Mendoza landscape. 
 
Source - EcoAmericas 
 
------- 
Forests 
------- 
 
¶12. Guyana: Verification System for Timber Products Being Crafted 
 
SEPT. 16, 2006 - New Minister of Agriculture Robert Persaud 
[recently] launched the process for a legal verification of timber 
products and said he hopes to meet with stakeholders in the sector 
on how best to deal with persons who export "impurities" in forest 
produce.  This appears to be a reference to cocaine shipments made 
in timber.  The new system is a joint effort between the Guyana 
Forestry Commission (GFC) and the Forest Products Marketing Council 
of Guyana Inc. and is being done with the assistance of the United 
States Agency for International Development - Guyana Trade and 
Investment Support Project (USAID - GTIS), the World Wildlife Fund 
(WWF) and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). 
The development of the process is being carried out by ProForest, a 
natural resource management company from the United Kingdom.  The 
process will last though to the end of 2006. 
 
Source - Stabroek 
 
¶13. Brazil Announces 11 percentDrop In Amazon Deforestation 
 
SEPT. 06, 2006 - The Brazilian Environment Ministry announced that 
the rate of deforestation dropped in the Amazon region in the period 
from August 2005 to July 2006 (10,943 square kilometers), in 
comparison to the same period between 2004 and 2005 (12,318 square 
kilometers), the second consecutive period of sustained reduction. 
According to the Ministry, the positive result can be attributed to 
increased enforcement by the Federal Police and the IBAMA 
environmental agency, together with a drop in the expansion of 
soybean crops into the Amazon region because of reduced 
international commodity prices.  In related news, federal statistics 
bureau IBGE reports that the number of endangered species in Brazil 
grew 46 percentsince 1989. 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  006 OF 013 
 
 
 
Source - Public Affairs US Embassy Brasilia 
 
¶14. Brazil Proposes Fund to Stem Rainforest Cutting 
 
SEPT. 01, 2006 - Brazil proposed on Aug. 31 a fund to compensate 
developing countries that slow the destruction of their rainforests, 
a move that could help lower emissions of gases blamed for rising 
world temperatures.  The Brazilian initiative, presented at a 
planning meeting for upcoming global climate talks in Rome, calls 
for creating a fund that countries could tap into if they could 
prove they had brought deforestation below rates of the 1990s. 
 
Source - ENN 
 
¶15. Brazil Announces New, Tamper-Free Forest Product Monitoring 
System 
 
AUG. 25, 2006 - Ibama (Brazilian Environmental Protection Agency) 
officially published a normative instruction on August 23, creating 
a new system of Forest Origin Documents (DOF) to track Brazilian 
timber and timber derived products.  The new system takes effect 
September 1 and aims to combat illegal deforestation by enforcing 
stricter control over the movement and storage of forest products. 
DOFs will replace the highly contentious and notoriously corrupt 
system of paper ATPFs (Forest Product Transport Authorizations) that 
have been the backbone of at least 10 separate schemes to illegally 
harvest and market illegal timber. 
 
Source - BRASILIA   00001791 
 
-------- 
Wildlife 
-------- 
 
¶16. Galapagos 'Face Species Threat' 
 
AUG. 24, 2006 - Officials in Ecuador say they are worried about the 
discovery of foreign species on the Galapagos Islands.  Despite 
inspections of incoming ships and planes, local people recently 
found an iguana and a turtle which probably came from mainland South 
America.  Invasive foreign species are one of the main threats to 
the islands' wildlife.  Officials are particularly worried about the 
newly discovered iguana which is probably a type which breeds 
rapidly and could compete with the indigenous varieties.  It almost 
certainly arrived in cargo and was missed by inspectors.  Other 
foreign animals in the Galapagos were introduced deliberately, only 
for their disastrous impact to be appreciated too late.  Naturalists 
are working to eradicate thousands of feral goats which are a direct 
threat to the habitat of the Galapagos' giant tortoises. 
 
Source - BBC 
 
----------------------------- 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
----------------------------- 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  007 OF 013 
 
 
 
¶17. Chilean Salmon Farms Draw Official Scrutiny 
 
AUG. 2006 - Scrutiny of Chile's lucrative but controversial 
salmon-farming industry has been turned up a notch following 
legislative hearings on the sector's increasingly controversial 
environmental, sanitary and labor record.  The lower house of the 
Chilean Congress met last month in special session to consider 
tighter oversight of salmon farming at the insistence of green 
groups, worker organizations and small-scale fishermen.  Meanwhile, 
government agencies have stepped up policing of the sector, which 
has become the second largest salmon producer in the world, 
generates USD1.7 billion in annual exports and supplies about half 
of all farmed salmon consumed in the United States.  In late May, 13 
Chilean salmon companies-including some of the nation's largest 
exporters-were fined by the Lake District Regional Environmental 
Commission (Corema) office for surpassing by 2 to 11 times the 
annual production limits specified in their environmental permits. 
Chilean health authorities, meanwhile, are preparing to sanction at 
least 15 salmon companies in the country's Lake District for failing 
to comply with government solid-waste disposal regulations. 
 
Source - EcoAmericas 
 
--------------- 
Protected Areas 
--------------- 
 
¶18. Bolivia Revokes Oil-Drilling Concessions in National Parks 
 
AUG. 29, 2006 - The Bolivian President Evo Morales announced the 
revocation of oil concessions in twenty National Parks.  Bolivian 
authorities have not disclosed information on which companies will 
be affected by the decision, but it is known that Petrobras 
(Brazil), Repsol-YPF (Spain) and Total (France) had concessions to 
explore for oil in those areas. Bolivia's Federal Attorney General 
ordered the arrest of former executives from various oil companies, 
including Petrobras and Repsol YPF, amidst an investigation on 
alleged fraud. 
 
Source - Public Affairs US Embassy Brasilia 
 
-------------------- 
Science & Technology 
-------------------- 
 
¶19. Argentina to Invest USD510 Million in Science by 2010 
 
AUG. 21, 2006 - The Argentinean government has launched a USD510 
million program to support research aimed at boosting the private 
sector's productivity.  According to Argentina's Minister of 
Science, Technology, and Education, Daniel Filmus, this is the 
largest investment made in S&T over the past few decades.  Of this 
investment, USD 280 million comes from an IDB loan - the largest 
loan for S&T ever made in Latin America, according to the press 
report. 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  008 OF 013 
 
 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
---------------------------- 
Pollution & Waste Management 
---------------------------- 
 
¶20. Warning for Latin America: Used Cell Phones 
 
AUG. 26, 2006 - Mobile phone use is expanding throughout Latin 
America, but regulations and technology are insufficient to deal 
with the obsolete units, which can contain metals and other 
materials that are harmful to the environment and health.  According 
to a study published Aug. 21 by the LatinPanel consulting firm, 70 
percent of the Latin American population uses cellular phones. 
Among the countries where the penetration of this technology is 
greatest are Colombia (90 percent), Venezuela (89 percent), Chile 
(87 percent) and Bolivia (82 percent).  The region does not have the 
enormous dumps for electronic waste from industrialized countries -- 
as exist in nations like China and Pakistan -- but the explosive 
increase in the number of cell phones is beginning to worry some 
authorities. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶21. Ecuador, Chevron Tangle over Pollution Trial 
 
AUG. 2006 - The pollution trial pitting Ecuadorian Amazon Indians 
against Chevron has touched off a legal battle between the oil 
company and Ecuador's government.  In 2004, Chevron and Texpet, its 
Ecuadorian subsidiary, filed an arbitration claim in New York asking 
that Petroecuador, Ecuador's state oil company, pay their legal 
bills in the pollution case and cover any damage awards stemming 
from the litigation.  Ecuador recently fired back, filing papers in 
New York federal court to block the arbitration.  Ecuador argues in 
part that Texpet-formerly a subsidiary of Texaco and now a 
subsidiary of Chevron by virtue of Chevron's 2001 acquisition of 
Texaco-committed fraud in connection with an 
environmental-remediation program that lies at the heart of the 
pollution litigation. 
 
Source - EcoAmericas 
 
------ 
Energy 
------ 
 
¶22. Soya Promises to Be the New Energy Source For Argentina 
 
SEPT. 08, 2006 -The production of soya, which has changed the face 
and fortunes of Argentine agriculture, is poised to launch a 
promising new energy industry.  Dozens of small producers, eyeing a 
lucrative export market and the prospect of burgeoning domestic 
demand, are building factories to turn some of Argentina's abundant 
soya oil into a cheap, renewable fuel for which there is increasing 
overseas appetite.  Driven by the introduction of genetically 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  009 OF 013 
 
 
modified crops to Argentina a decade ago, soya production has 
rocketed to a record 40m tons in the past season, and the country is 
the world's biggest producer of soya oil - a prime raw material to 
make biodiesel.  The Spanish group Repsol-YPF, one of the biggest 
oil energy companies in Argentina, plans to open a USD 30mi plant 
next year with capacity of 100,000 tons in the first year.  Aceitera 
General Deheza, an edible oils producer, is eyeing a USD 40mi 
investment to build a 200,000-ton plant, probably near the city of 
Rosario, north of Buenos Aires, the center of Argentina's soya 
processing industry and home to the world's highest concentration of 
soyabean crushing plants. 
 
Source - Financial Times.  Article kindly shared by US Embassy 
Buenos Aires 
 
¶23. Chile's Debate on Nuclear Energy Intensifies 
 
SEPT. 05, 2006 - President Michelle Bachelet will stand firm on her 
pledge against the use of nuclear energy, [according to] government 
spokesperson Ricardo Lagos Weber.  Leaders within her own ruling 
Concertacion coalition, however, are now forming a united front to 
promote further research into the alternative energy source, citing 
an estimated seven percent yearly increase in energy demand and 
diminishing prospects for gas imports from Argentina and Bolivia. 
On August 21, the presidents of the four Concertacion parties, 
during a routine meeting to set the political agenda, demanded 
explanations for Bachelet's steadfast opposition to nuclear energy. 
Though a taboo subject for decades in Chile, nuclear energy is 
gaining followers within Latin America, most notably Argentina, 
Mexico, and Brazil, as well as around the world. 
 
Source - Santiago Times 
 
¶24. Brazil's Petrobras Finds New Way to Make Cleaner Diesel 
 
AUG. 2006 - Brazil's state oil company, Petrobras, has pioneered a 
refining process whereby cleaner, high-quality diesel fuel can be 
made through the reaction of petroleum and vegetable oils.  The new 
diesel is made by using hydrogen to process a mixture of 10-18 
percent soy oil and 82-90 percent petroleum in a catalytic cracker. 
Brazil plans to tap its vast supply of soybeans to make the new 
fuel, which is named H-Bio because hydrogen is used as a reagent, or 
catalyst.  The fuel differs from the B-2 biodiesel already being 
produced and sold at the pumps.  B-2 biodiesel consists of 98 
percent conventional diesel fuel and 2 percent biofuel made from 
vegetable oil and a sugarcane-based ethanol reagent.  Petrobras says 
it was offering B-2 at 500 service stations this month and plans to 
make it available at 3,500 of its 7,000 stations by the end of the 
year.  By law, use of B-2 will be mandatory by 2008, when it is 
scheduled to replace standard diesel.  B-5 biodiesel, a mix of 5 
percent biofuel and 95 percent diesel fuel, will be mandatory by 
¶2013.  The government says it won't require a higher percentage of 
biofuel in diesel until production of the 100 percent biofuel used 
in these blends rises sufficiently.  That production is expected to 
reach 210 million gallons (800 million liters) by 2008. 
 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  010 OF 013 
 
 
Source - EcoAmericas 
 
¶25. Argentina to Expand Nuclear Program 
 
AUG. 23, 2006 - Argentina announced an ambitious plan to expand its 
nuclear program to meet rising energy demands, including extending 
the life of existing plants and possibly resuming uranium mining. 
At a Government House news conference, Planning Minister Julio de 
Vido said the plan calls for increasing the life span of the aging 
Atucha I and Embalse nuclear power plants and completing 
construction by 2010 on the longstalled Atucha II plant.  Two 
decades of delays have hampered completion of the Atucha II project, 
located some 75 miles northwest of the capital of Buenos Aires.  The 
nearby Atucha I facility has been operating since the mid-1970s, in 
conjunction with the Embalse plant in central Argentina.  The 
planning minister was flanked by President Nestor Kirchner, who did 
not comment on the plan nor on a report by the leading newspaper 
Clarin saying the nuclear program could cost the government USD3.5 
billion over eight years. 
 
Source - NY Times 
 
¶26. Brazil's Alcohol Cars Hit 2 Million Mark 
 
AUG. 18, 2006 - Brazil's new generation of cars and trucks adapted 
to run on alcohol has just hit the two-million mark, motor industry 
figures show.  "Flex-fuel" vehicles, which run on any combination of 
ethanol and gasoline, now make up 77 percent of the Brazilian 
market.  Brazil has pioneered the use of ethanol derived from 
sugar-cane as motor fuel.  Ethanol-driven cars have been on sale 
there for 25 years, but they have been enjoying a revival since 
flex-fuel models first appeared in March 2003.  Just 48,200 
flex-fuel cars were sold in Brazil in 2003, but the total had 
reached 1.2 million by the end of last year and had since topped two 
million, the Brazilian motor manufacturers' association Anfavea 
said. 
 
Source - BBC 
 
-------------- 
Climate Change 
-------------- 
 
¶27. L. America, Caribbean 'must act on climate change' 
 
AUG. 29, 2006 - A coalition of major UK environmental and 
development organizations has urged Latin American and Caribbean 
countries to reduce their vulnerability to climate change.  In a 
report released 28 August, the group also calls on industrialized 
nations to do more to help poorer nations face the threat.  The 
report links droughts in the Amazon, floods in Haiti and vanishing 
glaciers in the Andes to human activities including local 
deforestation and distant greenhouse gas emissions.  It says the 
region's governments should make priorities of energy efficiency and 
renewable power and should assess the threat climate change poses to 
agriculture, health and water supplies.  The 20 organizations behind 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  011 OF 013 
 
 
the report include the New Economics Foundtion, the International 
Institute for Environmentand Development, ActionAid International, 
Practial Action and the WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
------- 
General 
------- 
 
¶28. US Organic Company to Partner CI in Forest Protection IN Guyana 
 
SEPT. 08, 2006 - Conservation International Guyana (CI) has 
announced a new partnership with Save Your World LLC, a US-based 
organic bath and body products company, which will donate a portion 
of its sales to the Upper Essequibo Conservation Concession (UECC). 
 The Government of Guyana and CI entered an agreement in 2005 to 
lease 200,000 acres of rainforest located in the upper reaches of 
Guyana's largest river, the Essequibo.  And CI pays the Guyana 
Forestry Commission (GFC) exactly what they would have received had 
the area been given out under a logging contract.  Instead of 
cutting trees the area is protected and kept in its pristine state 
as a conservation concession rather than a timber producing 
concession.  The partnership between CI and Save Your World intends 
to take advantage of this innovative agreement with the government. 
 
 
Source - Stabroek 
 
¶29. Brazil and EU Collide Over Retread Imports 
 
AUG. 2006 - In many ways, Brazil's clash with the European Union 
(EU) over retreaded tires resembles a standard trade dispute. 
European retread producers, upset about Brazilian efforts to block 
imports of the reconditioned tires, have forced a showdown between 
the EU and Brazil at the World Trade Organization (WTO).  The 
wrinkle, however, is that instead of revolving around trade issues 
such as dumping and unfair competition, Brazil's defense focuses on 
environmental degradation, malaria and dengue fever.  At a WTO 
hearing in Geneva last month, Brazilian officials argued importation 
of EU retreads would add to the glut of illegally discarded tires 
that is blighting the land and rivers and creating habitat for 
disease-carrying mosquitoes.  Experts believe that in the context of 
WTO disputes, the Brazilian approach might be a first.   The WTO is 
due to hold a second round of hearings with Brazil and the EU in 
September before issuing a final ruling in early 2007. 
 
Source - EcoAmericas (please contact Larissa Stoner for complete 
article) 
 
¶30. UNEP Report on Peru Sees Major Problems-and Reason for Hope 
 
Aug. 2006 - Peru's capital is parched, polluted and choking on the 
exhaust of a growing number of automobiles, according to a new 
report by the UN Environment Program (UNEP). Nevertheless, there is 
increasing environmental awareness on the part of Lima's eight 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  012 OF 013 
 
 
million-plus residents, and the sprawling city would have a greener 
future if steps were taken to address the problems.  UNEP'S Global 
Environment Outlook (GEO) for Lima and Callao, the two-city 
metropolis where a third of Peru's people live, studies 
environmental problems and recommends ways to address them.  Of all 
problems studied, water was "the most critical," says Renee 
Lariviere, technical director of the study, done by UNEP and the 
non-profit Grupo GEA in Lima.  Says Larivihre: "Though air quality 
is not good, action is being taken. On water, awareness must be 
raised and investment is needed." 
 
Source - EcoAmericas (please contact Larissa Stoner for complete 
article) 
 
¶31. Brazil: Garbage Collectors Demand Recognition 
 
AUG. 19, 2006 - The "catadores" (informal garbage collectors) of 
Belo Horizonte, capital of the southern Brazilian state of Minas 
Gerais, will launch their fifth Festival of Garbage and Citizenship. 
 "We are fighting for recognition of the service we provide the 
cities, producing environmental, economic and social benefits," Luis 
Henrique da Silva, head of the festival promoter, the Belo Horizonte 
Association of Collectors of Reusable Material, told Tierramerica. 
One objective of the event is to connect Brazilian catadores with 
their counterparts in the rest of Latin America, and their movement 
with the government, experts and activists.  Some 50,000 people are 
expected to take part in the festival.  Experiences of garbage 
collectors in Brazil, Colombia, Egypt and India; solid waste 
management; and people on the streets will be topics of debate. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶32. Peru - Beggar on a Throne of Gold 
 
AUG. 19, 2006 - Mining companies operating in Peru are seeing 
increasing millions in profits as a result of the surge in 
international prices for metals, but few are contributing what is 
needed to alleviate the poverty of the people living in mining 
areas.   President Alan Garcia, who took office Jul. 28, promised 
during his electoral campaign to renegotiate the contracts in the 
mining industry. But now he appears willing to accept "voluntary 
contributions" to social investment, with sums as yet undefined.  In 
the northwestern Peruvian region of Cajamarca is Latin America's 
leading gold mine, run by the Yanacocha company in partnership with 
the U.S.-based Newmont and Peru's Buenaventura.  But the paradox is 
that this booming mine is located in an area where 74.2 percent of 
the population lives in poverty.  The world's fifth producer of 
gold, second in silver, third in copper and zinc, and fourth in 
lead, "Peru is a beggar seated on a throne of gold," according to a 
popular local saying. Peru is among the countries with greatest 
poverty in the region.  Nationwide, 51 percent of Peru's 27 million 
people are poor, and 24 percent live in extreme poverty, according 
to the national institute of statistics, INEI. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
 
BRASILIA 00002069  013 OF 013 
 
 
SOBEL