06CAIRO5872
REPORT ON BIOSAFETY WORKSHOP IN EGYPT
Tue Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #5872 2621418
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191418Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1456UNCLAS CAIRO 005872 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR USDA/FAS/ICD/FID/SBEASLEY, OA/BIG/ARUDE, FAA/RHAGER 
DEPT FOR EP/MSPIRNAK, NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD BEXP USTR TBIO TSPL EG
SUBJECT: REPORT ON BIOSAFETY WORKSHOP IN EGYPT 
 
Ref:  FAS 679567; FAS 679988 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The Office of Agricultural Affairs hosted a 
?Best International Practices for Developing Biosafety 
Regulatory Systems? workshop in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, 
from September 5-6, 2006. Local and international 
biosafety experts made presentations on the benefits of 
agriculture biotechnology, experiences under various 
regulatory regimes, and factors to consider when 
developing a regulatory system.  Egyptian participants 
were from the Ministries of Agriculture, Health, 
Environment, Foreign Affairs, and Trade and Industry. 
Private sector stakeholders also attended. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. Each 45 minute round-table session was followed by a 
discussion.  Topics included: 1) Biotechnology?s 
potential benefits for Egyptian agriculture; 2) Status of 
Egypt?s biotechnology regulatory framework; 3) 
Implementing an effective biosafety regulatory framework; 
4) The biosafety protocol and the WTO; 5) Regulatory 
regime cases studies/experiences from South Africa, 
Spain, and the Philippines; and 6) Moving products to 
commercialization. 
 
¶3. Dr. Hanieya El-Itribi, Director of Egypt?s 
Agricultural Genetic Engineering Research Institute 
(AGERI), who spoke on the benefits of biotechnogy, noted 
that several challenges confront Egypt?s agriculture 
sector: limited arable land, erosion, loss of soil 
fertility, and an increasing population.  However, she 
pointed out, all these could be mitigated through the 
application of modern biotechnology.  (NOTE: Egypt is a 
pioneer in the research and development of biotech, but 
has yet to harness this capability to meet its food 
needs). 
 
¶4. Dr. Osama El Tayeb, Consultant to the Ministry of 
Environment and drafter of Egypt?s pending biotechnology 
regulation bill, outlined the contents of Egypt?s current 
and pending regulations.  He stressed that Egypt?s 
regulations would be consistent with the Biosafety 
Protocol, would consider socio-economic implications of 
biotechnology, and would incorporate a science-based risk 
analysis approach.  The Ministry of Justice is currently 
reviewing this draft bill, and Parliament may begin 
deliberations on it as early as November 2006. 
 
¶5. The workshop?s other presenters were international 
experts and spoke on the areas detailed above.  Workshop 
attendees praised speakers for their extensive knowledge 
of the subject matter and practical approach in relaying 
information.  Several participants commented to FAS that 
they were impressed at the ease with which speakers were 
able grasp all aspects of the issues.   They also added 
that the workshop made them better equipped to advocate 
on behalf of advancement of this technology. 
 
¶6. During break-out sessions, groups with representatives 
from each of the ministries established next steps for 
future activities.  The compilation of those ideas and 
suggestions will guide the planning and organization of 
events over the next 12 months. Suggestions included: 1) 
a ministerial-level workshop to clarify roles and 
responsibilities of the various government entities under 
the draft biosafety bill; 2) a workshop on methods for 
biosafety communication and outreach; 3) a workshop 
designed to create a strategy for commercializing 
locally-developed agriculture biotechnology products. 
 
¶7. The USAID Mission in Cairo funded the workshop.  It 
was part of a series of activities over the next year to 
extend capacity building to relevant government entities 
involved in regulating agricultural biotechnology 
application in Egypt. 
 
¶8.  COMMENT:  Overall, the workshop was a success in that 
it brought all the major players in Egypt face-to-face 
for the first time to discuss the importance of advancing 
this technology for the sake of Egypt?s farmers. 
Participants committed to remain engaged on the issue and 
to cooperate to ensure the successful application of 
biotechnology in Egypt. Furthermore, the results of the 
break-out sessions provide a road-map for future 
activities.  END COMMENT. 
 
RICCIARDONE