06DAMASCUS4436
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Peace Process,
Mon Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4436/01 2541321
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111321Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1488
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6267
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4096
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2659
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7283
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1287
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4665
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0880
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7017UNCLAS DAMASCUS 04436 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Peace Process, 
Syria/Palestinians, 9/11 Anniversary (9/11) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers today led with a statement to 
Egyptian TV by Information Minister Muhsen Bilal denying media 
reports that Syria accepted the deployment of European border 
guards to monitor the Syrian-Lebanese border.  He stressed that 
the telephone conversation between President Asad and Italian PM 
Romano Prodi on September 8 did not touch on this issue.  The 
talk was only about Italy offering technical assistance to Syrian 
border guards, he said.  Minister Bilal explained that UNSC 
Resolution 1701 does not call for the deployment of international 
forces on the Syrian-Lebanese border. 
 
Al-Thawra featured a press conference held by Spanish FM 
Moratinos in Cairo with Egyptian FM Abul-Ghait, in which 
Morations confirmed that there is no need to change the 
principles of the peace process, primarily the land-for-peace 
formula, which, he said, is the only solution to the Palestinian 
crisis, and the Golan and Shebaa Farms issues. 
 
On Syrian-Palestinian issues, papers reported Syrian Vice 
President Shara's meeting with a Palestinian academic 
delegation headed by Dr. Azmi Bishara.  Both sides agreed that 
developments in the Middle East are not in accord with US- 
Israeli desires and that a just and comprehensive peace that 
ends the Israeli occupation is the only guaranty of security and 
stability in the region. 
 
Papers also featured US preparations to commemorate the 9/11 
attack and reported that President Bush is trying to use the 
occasion to bolster his declining popularity and restore his 
lost credibility. 
 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Italian PM Prodi corrects media reports:  President Asad did not 
intend at all to accept any deployment of European troops along 
the Syrian-Lebanese border;  Syrian forces will monitor borders 
with Lebanon.  Information Minister Bilal denies Syria's 
acceptance of European border guards" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 9/11) 
 
"Spanish Foreign Minister Moratinos:  There is no need to change 
the principles of the peace process, mainly, the land-for-peace 
formula" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/11) 
 
"Lebanese circles warn against foreign tutelage.  Lebanese MP 
Aoun accuses the government of stealing international aid. 
Lebanese MP Hashem:  Syria constitutes Lebanon's depth" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/11) 
 
"Vice-President Shara briefs Palestinian academic delegation on 
latest developments and repercussions of the Israeli aggression 
against Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/11) 
 
"Palestinian President Abbas talks about a national unity 
government within days and Prime Minister Hanieh rejects the 
Quartet's conditions" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/11) 
 
"The US observes the 9/11 anniversary.  Bush with no popularity. 
Combating terrorism is a permanent war" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 9/11) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"Desperate Endeavors to Foil Victory" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (9/11):  "As expected, the March 14 forces' statement 
continued attacking the Resistance and its weapons, ridiculing 
the victory that Hizballah achieved, and directing the fire of 
 
hatred toward Syria.... 
 
"All attempts in the statement to undermine the victory that the 
valiant Resistance achieved were expected and consistent with 
the line that the embassies of the trusteeship countries have 
drawn for the 14 March forces.... The March 14 leaders realize 
the serious threat that Hizbollah's victory posed to their 
political future.  This is why you see them pushing ahead, first 
to protect themselves and second to please the capitals of the 
trusteeship and tell them:  We are still able to play the role 
and perform the mission you assigned us...." 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"The Mentality With Which They Act" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, wrote (9/11):  "The international political and 
military activity in the region after Israel's defeat in Lebanon 
is primarily meant to maintain Israel's security and the comfort 
of the Israelis, not to bring about a just peace in the Middle 
East.... 
 
"The US Administration, which is an adventurous Likudist 
administration, is using everything in its power to support 
Israel and is recruiting its allies for this purpose.... 
Europeans, who are following behind the Bush Administration, 
tirelessly travel to and from the region and never stop 
consulting among themselves and with other parties, but only 
after obtaining approval from Israel.  Prior Israeli approval is 
basic and indispensable.... The Arab allies of the United 
States, for their part, are acting in a way that shows both 
political stupidity and provocation.... 
 
"Unfortunately, this is the way Israel is being treated, even 
though everyone is convinced that Israel is a power of 
occupation, aggression, and terrorism.... However, the recent 
Israeli defeat in Lebanon at the hands of the Lebanese national 
Resistance turned the equation of the Arab-Israeli conflict 
upside down and imposed new facts that cannot be ignored in any 
way.... 
 
"The Resistance in Lebanon proved that Israel's defeat requires 
nothing but the will and determination to achieve victory and 
regain rights...." 
 
---------------------- 
 
"We, America and 9/11" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, chief editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented (9/11):  "Five years after the start of the 
war on terrorism, the world and the United States are less 
safe.... 
 
"The Bush Administration is acting foolishly with its war on 
terrorism.  It is turning into a war against Arabs and Islam, 
and its efforts to promote democracy are resulting in sectarian 
sedition.... After five years, the security situation in 
Afghanistan is in its worst shape, with the country suffering 
from poverty, unemployment, and a growth in drug cultivation. 
Iraq, for its part, continues to bleed, with daily killings and 
a fertile soil for civil war.... 
 
"It is important for Arabs to learn the lessons of the past five 
years and evaluate their relations with the United States.... 
American plans that came out of the 9/11 womb were hostile 
plans, and they are now in the throes of death. 
 
"Under the 9/11 umbrella, the US Administration has committed 
many sins.  No country can promote democracy and at the same 
time boast that it keeps secret prisons around the world.  And 
 
no supporter of personal freedom can accept the idea of 
eavesdropping on telephone calls and monitoring personal 
mail.... 
"The most important lesson to be learned from the results of 
Bush's policy is that accepting American conditions is a 
disgrace.... One of the big mistakes of the US Administration is 
that it did not talk with those who opposed its policy.... But 
its biggest mistake was this blind bias for and mad sponsorship 
of Israel. 
 
"The experience of the past five years has proven that force 
cannot achieve security for anyone.... The US Administration 
must change its policy because the road it is taking is open to 
all negative possibilities." 
 
Corbin