06DAMASCCUS4435
Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/Lebanon, Peace
Mon Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0011
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4435/01 2541321
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111321Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1485
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6264
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4093
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2656
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7280
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1284
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4662
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0877
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7014UNCLAS DAMASCCUS 004435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/Lebanon, Peace 
Process, Syria/China, Syria/Australia, War on Terrorism (9/8-10) 
 
 
¶1. Summary:   Syrian papers over the weekend led with reports of 
President Asad's phone conversations with Italian PM Prodi, which 
focused on technical assistance to be offered to Syrian border 
guards, and featured a statement by the Syrian News Agency 
denying reports that Syria has accepted European border guards to 
monitor the Lebanese-Syrian border. 
 
Syrian papers also reported Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov's 
visit to Damascus, his meetings with President Asad, VP Shara 
and FM Mouallem, and his press conference, in which he stated 
that his talks dealt with the situation in Lebanon and the 
Middle East peace process.  Headlines featured Lavrov's 
statement at the press conference that the recent events in 
Lebanon have revealed the importance of achieving solutions to 
Middle East problems.  He reiterated the importance of 
implementing UNSC resolution No. 1701 and rebuilding Lebanon and 
called for an international conference on Middle East peace. 
Headlines also featured FM Mouallem's statement that "Syria 
doesn't work through secret mediators" and that "everything 
Syria does is known and announced." 
 
On Syrian-Chinese relations, papers reported the visit to 
Beijing by Mohammad Said Bkheitan, Regional Assistant Secretary 
of the Al-Ba'th Party, on an official visit to China for talks 
about Party cooperation, the Chinese economic experience, and 
the role of the Party in setting its general policies and 
supervising its implementation. 
 
On Syrian-Australian relations, papers reported the visit to 
Australia by Syrian Expatriates Minister, Buthaina Shaaban, who 
delivered a lecture at Macquarie University in Sydney, entitled, 
"Syrian Strategy for Peace in the Middle East," in which she 
confirmed that Syria is working for the establishment of peace in 
the region on the basis of international resolutions and the 
principle of land for peace. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad and Italian PM Prodi discuss in a phone call 
technical assistance to Syrian border guards.  Syria denies 
agreement to deployment of European border guards along 
Syrian/Lebanese border" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/10) 
 
"President Asad holds talks with Russian FM Lavrov.  Lavrov talks 
in Damascus were successful and fruitful.  Syria and Russia call 
for seizing the peace opportunity.  Syria:  Russia has an 
important role in maintaining security and stability.  Conditions 
are appropriate to revive President Putin's peace initiative. 
Lavrov:  We are eager to work with Syria to achieve a 
comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.  Mouallem: 
Syria does not work via secret mediators;  what Syria does is 
well-known and announced" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/8) 
 
"Hizbollah rejects deployment of UNIFIL outside southern Lebanon 
and calls on the February 14th group not to bet on foreign 
parties" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 9/10) 
 
"The Lebanese army denies illegitimate crossings into Syria" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/10) 
 
"After meeting a Syrian popular delegation, former Lebanese PM Al- 
Hoss:  Syria has always supported Lebanon and its resistance. 
Syrian MP Habash:  We did not demand any meeting with the March 
14 team" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/8) 
"Israeli siege ends, and Israeli piracy continues.  Six Lebanese 
abducted from Eita al-Shaab and Merwahin.  Calls to 
reject receiving Blair in Lebanon.  A debate over the aftermath 
of Israeli aggression" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/9) 
"The General Secretariat of the Pan-Arab Conference hails the 
Resistance victory and calls for helping Lebanon and reactivating 
boycott of Israel" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/9) 
"Bkheitan, Regional Assistant Secretary of the Ba'th Party, 
receives Palestinian intellectual Bishara:  Syria exerts efforts 
to boost Palestinian national unity.  Bkheitan heads to Beijing, 
presiding over an official Party delegation" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 9/10) 
 
"Israel continues to impose preconditions and rejects an 
international peace conference.  Abbas and Olmert will not 
discuss a prisoner swap" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/9) 
 
"The Israeli army invades Khuzaa.  Three Palestinians injured. 
HAMAS:  No resignation under force" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
9/10) 
 
"PM Blair defends policies identical to those of Bush 
administration, and calls for resumption of Palestinian-Israeli 
negotiations" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/10) 
 
"Japan completes withdrawal of troops from Iraq.  Security 
enforcements in Karbala.  Attacks and explosions in Baghdad, 
Karkuk and Beiji" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 9/10) 
 
"On the eve 9/11 anniversary, US President Bush:  The danger of 
terrorism still exists.... We will pursue terrorists without 
mercy" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/10) 
"A US Senate report:  Saddam Hussein had no relation with al- 
Qaeda" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/9) 
"Democrats in US Senate reject vote to keep Bolton in his 
position, due to his inefficacy and negative role at the UN" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/8) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"From Hiroshima to Qana" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(9/9):  "No doubt the destruction of the two towers of the World 
Trade Center and the Pentagon building was a terrorist act par 
excellence.  But that act was carried out by a small group of 
people who represented no country or even a party.  The US 
Administration's response to the 9/11 attacks, on the other 
hand, has been the worst form of terrorism, because it is state 
terrorism practiced by the world's biggest and strongest 
country, a country that should have had the world's security and 
peace at the center of its attention and responsibility, not the 
contrary.... 
 
"It is strange for the Bush administration to claim that its 
wars against Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine, and Lebanon are aimed 
at eliminating terrorism.  This argument no longer fools even 
the Americans and the British who brought George Bush and Tony 
Blair to power.  Here is Bush's popularity rating dropping to an 
all time low, and here is Blair announcing that he will leave 
office within a year....  We also should not forget that the war 
on Iraq brought down former conservative Spanish Prime Minister 
Aznar.... 
 
"Nothing is easier than making war, perpetrating massacres, and 
practicing terrorism, as is now happening in Afghanistan, Iraq, 
and the Palestinian territories and as happened in Lebanon.  But 
taking the road of peace is very difficult for these people, who 
know nothing but the language of killing, destruction, and 
terrorism, and who, over more than six decades, have committed 
mass killings from Hiroshima to Qana to Marwaheen to Siddiqin to 
Gaza to Janin.  They are the same hands and the same killers, 
from Hiroshima to Qana." 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"Lahd also Meets the March 14 Group" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishrin, commented (9/8):  "The main job of the March 14 group 
in Lebanon is to level accusations against Syria, tarnish 
Syria's image, and spoil relations between the Syrian and 
Lebanese people.  This is what Israel and the United States want 
this group to do.... 
 
"Syria is not surprised by the positions and statements of 
members of this Lebanese group because it really believes they 
are an Israeli product with an American stamp.  Therefore, they 
can never be the true representatives of Lebanon.  They utter 
nothing but what Israel and the United States dictate to them 
directly or through the brokers in the region who speak for the 
Israelis and the Americans.... 
 
"There is a statement by Antoine Lahd, commander of the former 
pro-Israel militia in south Lebanon, in which he revealed that 
he 'regularly meets in Europe with figures from the March 14 
team....' There are also reports about meetings between Walid 
Junblatt and Israeli figures in Europe.... 
 
"What is important to the overwhelming majority of the Lebanese 
and to Syria is that these people are completely exposed in 
their relations, contacts, alliances, and attacks on Syria and 
the Lebanese nationalist line.  They are exposed and unable to 
have a real effect on national Lebanese issues.  They know 
themselves very well.  History will have no mercy on them." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"First, Let Palestinians Unite" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Razan Imran, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(9/9):   "Palestinians must renounce their differences and adopt 
a unified position.... This is the only way for them to force 
Israel to recognize their rights.... 
 
"It is regrettable that despite all the Israeli killings and the 
siege, Palestinians have not united their ranks.... Staging 
strikes in protest of food shortages is a perfectly legitimate 
action.  But holding the Palestinian government fully 
responsible for the siege that Israel has imposed in 
collaboration with other countries that turn a blind eye to it, 
is conduct that ignores facts.... 
 
"It is regrettable that some of the people of the 58-year-old 
Palestinian cause have not learned that their enemy understands 
nothing but force.  This enemy redeployed in Gaza only by force. 
It withdrew from south Lebanon only by force.  It rushed to a 
political rescue from the results of its aggression against 
Lebanon only under the pressure of unfamiliar military losses. 
All that was a result of force, not only military force, but 
also the force of a unified position...." 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"What Do They Want from Sudan?" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(9/8):   "The powers that pushed for the adoption of Resolution 
1706 on Darfur do not want to give the Sudanese government the 
chance to implement its plan in that region.  Rather, those 
forces wanted to create tension there to pave the way for the 
deployment of international forces and the implementation of 
their own agendas.... 
 
"It is no longer secret that the US and Western interest in 
Sudan is linked to the reported oil discoveries there and to 
Israel's effort to divide Sudan and reach the sources of the 
Nile...." 
 
Corbin