05LIMA2226
ACTING FOREIGN MINISTER ON HANDLING OF RELATIONS
Wed May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 002226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/16/2015 
TAGS: PREL PE CI
SUBJECT: ACTING FOREIGN MINISTER ON HANDLING OF RELATIONS 
WITH CHILE 
 
REF: A. SANTIAGO 1070 
 
     ¶B. LIMA 2180 
     ¶C. SANTIAGO 1011 
     ¶D. SANTIAGO 1000 
     ¶E. LIMA 2061 
     ¶F. LIMA 2018 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Alexander Margulies.  Reason:  1.4(b 
/d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  Acting Foreign Minister Armando Lecaros, 
in response to a query from the Ambassador during a meeting 
on 5/16, stated that the Foreign Ministry has worked closely 
with President Alejandro Toledo in handling the crisis in 
bilateral relations with Chile over the latter's delivery of 
arms to Ecuador during the 1995 border war; that Foreign 
Ministers Manuel Rodriguez and Ignacio Walker almost had a 
joint declaration worked out, but the Chilean Government 
pulled back at the last moment, presumably in response to 
pressure from the Chilean Armed Forces; that Rodriguez will 
again attempt to reach an accord with Walker upon the 
former's expected return on 5/23 from an extended illness; 
and that if no accord is reached, the worst likely scenario 
would be for no/no movement forward on bilateral ties until 
the next Peruvian Government takes office in July 2006. 
Lecaros added that a solution could be reached if Chile put 
in writing what Foreign Minister Walker had already said 
publicly.  The Acting Foreign Minister welcomed the 
Ambassador's interest in the issue, and said he thought it 
would be "positive" for a similar expression of USG interest 
to be made in Santiago.  The Ambassador noted that the U.S. 
was following the issue with interest, but not/not trying to 
inject itself into this Peru-Chile bilateral matter.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  The Ambassador raised the ongoing crisis in 
Peruvian-Chilean relations over Chilean arms deliveries to 
Ecuador during the 1995 border war (Reftels) during a 5/16 
meeting with Acting Foreign Minister Manuel Lecaros.  Lecaros 
explained that: 
 
--  Contrary to claims by opposition politicians and some 
media commentators, Peru's response has not/not been 
influenced in any way by a desire to divert attention from 
the Toledo Government's domestic political problems. 
 
--  The Foreign Ministry has been fully involved in 
developing the GOP's response, with Lecaros himself working 
side-by-side with President Toledo. 
 
--  This is not a question of one arms shipment, as the GOC 
claims, but rather of multiple shipments that Peru believes 
occurred. 
 
--  It is possible that Chilean President Ricardo Lagos is 
unaware of the additional arms shipments, as he expressed 
surprise when Toledo mentioned this at a dinner in Brasilia 
during the South American-Arab Summit. 
 
--  Peruvian Foreign Minister Manuel Rodriguez and his 
Chilean counterpart Ignacio Walker almost resolved this issue 
in Morocco, during the late-March meeting of South American 
and Arab Foreign Ministers.  The two developed a draft joint 
declaration that the GOC walked back from at the last minute. 
 
--  The Peruvians suspect that objections from the Chilean 
Armed Forces scuttled the draft joint declaration, and that 
the Chilean military continues to exert influence over the 
GOC's public comments, judging from the tenor and tone of 
those statements. 
 
--  Foreign Minister Rodriguez, who has been seriously ill 
for the past few weeks, is expected to return to his office 
on 5/23, and will make it a priority to work the issue. 
 
--  While other efforts, such as an initiative by Peruvian 
Congress President Antero Flores-Araoz to discuss the issue 
with the leader of Chile's legislature, are welcome, a 
resolution can only be achieved through negotiations by the 
two Foreign Ministries. 
 
--  GOP officials will maintain a closed mouth policy on the 
issue of bilateral relations with Chile for the time being, 
in order to facilitate talks. 
 
--  If no/no accord is reached, the most likely worst case 
scenario would be that there will be no/no forward movement 
on bilateral ties until a new Peruvian Government takes 
office in July 2006. 
 
--  Foreign Minister Walker had in one public declaration 
said that Chile acknowledged and expressed regret for the 
arms shipment in 1995 and reiterated that expression of 
regret now.  Repeating the apology in writing in the present 
tense, Lecaros emphasized, is the key to resolving the 
dispute from Peru's perspective. 
¶3.  (C)  Lecaros then asked the Ambassador what was the 
nature of USG interest in this issue, adding that if the 
Ambassador had not raised the matter he would have brought it 
up.  The Ambassador noted that the USG is a guarantor of the 
Rio Protocol of 1942, that it has excellent relations with 
Peru and Chile, and that it desires to see friendly relations 
between the two countries restored.  He explained that the 
USG is not/not seeking to involve itself in Peru-Chile 
negotiations, particularly as neither country has expressed 
interest in U.S. participation.  Lecaros agreed, but replied 
that he was glad to hear of the USG's interest in the matter, 
and opined that it would be "positive" for the U.S. to make a 
similar expression of interest in Santiago. 
 
¶4.  (U)  President Alejandro Toledo, in a 5/17 speech 
commemorating the 36th anniversary of the Andean Community of 
Nations, suggested that his government would like to see 
bilateral ties with Chile improve.  Although he did not 
mention Chile specifically, the President stated, "We have 
other challenges and should not let ourselves be distracted 
by the issue of arms or of conflicts in the past.  As Peru is 
not disposed to delve into other issues that have passed, we 
simply have to arrive at an agreement to resolve this.  It 
would be a grave error to remain trapped in the past."  When 
asked by the press whether his comments were intended as a 
positive gesture towards Chile, the President noted that 
Chile has invested over USD four billion in Peru, bilateral 
trade exceeds USD one billion, Chilean President Ricardo 
Lagos was the first to be accorded a State Visit from Toledo, 
who made a State Visit to Santiago in return.  "We have a lot 
in common," Toledo concluded, but there is a pending issue 
that has to be resolved.  How will it be resolved?  We have 
left that in the hands of the Foreign Ministry." 
 
¶5.  (C)  COMMENT:  Foreign Minister Rodriguez will have his 
work cut out for him in trying to develop a formula that can 
reconcile Peru's demand for a public apology with Chile's 
insistence that the matter was dealt with a decade ago.  It 
probably does not/not help that both countries are entering 
into election campaigning, which can only restrict their 
respective governments' maneuver room.  With respect to 
Lecaros' account, we note that Foreign Ministry Under 
Secretary for Political Affairs Oscar Maurtua alluded to 
 
SIPDIS 
frustrated talks between the two Foreign Ministries in his 
5/10-11 op-eds (Ref B), but did not provide the details 
Lecaros did.  In addition, Prime Minister Carlos Ferrero, 
Congress Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Gustavo 
Pacheco, and the Foreign and Defense Ministries previously 
referred to Peruvian intelligence reports from 1995 to 
support their assertions that there were more than one 
shipment of arms by airplane (Refs B, D-E), although hard 
evidence to corroborate these reports has not/not been made 
public.  END COMMENT. 
STRUBLE