06ABUJA677
DARFUR NEGOTIATIONS: MAIN ISSUES IN SECURITY
Mon Mar 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abuja
VZCZCXRO2636
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHUJA #0677/01 0861203
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271203Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABUJA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5039
INFO RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 3685
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000677 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/SPG, AF/RSA, D, DRL, INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PROV PREL NI SU
SUBJECT: DARFUR NEGOTIATIONS: MAIN ISSUES IN SECURITY 
ARRANGEMENTS TEXT 
 
REF:  ABUJA 676 
 
¶1.   (SBU) Summary: Many hours of discussion with the 
mediation team and with the parties have identified five key 
issues that will have to be resolved: how the ceasefire 
commission will make decisions; how different geographic 
areas will be defined and managed; provisions for the 
exercise of the policing function; the regime for control of 
the international border; and, provisions for arms control, 
demobilization, and integration of forces.  The mediation 
team has prepared a revised 25 page text for presentation to 
the parties.  USDEL has urged the AU mediators to present 
this text and a revised text on power-sharing as soon as 
possible.  SEPTEL reports on other activity.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
CEASE-FIRE COMMISSION DECISION-MAKING 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.   (SBU)  How the ceasefire commission will make 
decisions: The current "ceasefire" is frequently violated by 
all parties, with no significant action taken by the 
ceasefire commission.  The parties agree that the commission 
can act on the basis of consensus; they reject the idea that 
in the absence of consensus the commission chairman (AU 
force commander) can take a decision.  The mediation is 
considering a proposal that, in the absence of consensus, a 
troika (AU, EU and U.S.) could take a decision.  No 
discussion has taken place whether the commission might 
operate differently after the transition from AU to UN 
forces in Darfur. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
GEOGRAPHIC DEFINITIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.   How different geographic areas will be defined and 
managed: The present text has provisions that refer to: 
zones of de facto control (where a specified party now has a 
military position); exclusion zones (where, after regrouping 
and consolidation of forces,  one of the parties is 
recognized as being in control and the other parties 
excluded); IDP camps (where a humanitarian agency is the 
camp manager); buffer zones from which the parties are 
excluded (areas surrounding IDP camps and areas to separate 
the parties' zones of control/exclusion zones); and, 
humanitarian routes (to a limited number of  IDP camps). 
Gradually the parties are seeing that the present 
definitions are unworkable, and the mediation plans to use 
the map work to generate usable definitions and plans.  A 
key issue is deciding who is responsible for security in 
buffer zones and along humanitarian routes; another is 
recognizing the obligation, under international humanitarian 
law, for safe access for all humanitarian activities (not 
just those along humanitarian routes) to be respected. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - 
POLICING FUNCTIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.   Provisions for exercise of the policing function: The 
present draft states that AMIS police monitors will patrol 
all IDP camps (about 100) and provide for their perimeter 
security in the buffer zones, plus perform the police 
function in other buffer zones.  To perform these tasks 
adequately 24/7 at all locations would require a large 
police force. AMIS does not have sufficient police to 
perform these tasks, and the government will probably object 
to AMIS police having arrest powers (as opposed to 
monitoring arrests by government police).  Another issue is 
the movements' assertion that they have their own "police"; 
the government has rejected this assertion. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
BORDER CONTROL 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.   Regime for control of the international border: Both 
sides regularly violate international law by taking arms and 
supplies across the Chad-Sudanese border and by allowing 
various rebel groups to enjoy safe-havens on the opposite 
side of the border.  The recently signed Tripoli Agreement 
promises an end to this activity, but it lacks any practical 
implementation mechanism (only ten observation posts to 
cover the border from Libya to Central African Republic). 
The current draft text repeats the absolute obligation of 
the parties not to allow arms, materiel, and fighters to 
cross the border, but both sides privately admit that they 
expect such activity to continue.  Current UN thinking is to 
 
ABUJA 00000677  002 OF 002 
 
 
use two 500 troop battalions to control the border, a task 
that could only be performed with the assistance of aerial 
surveillance.  In addition the parties and mediators have 
not yet come to grips with the challenge of zones of de 
facto control and zones of exclusion controlled by the 
movements that abut the international border (as will most 
likely be the case for the northern part of the border with 
Chad and the border with Libya). 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
ARMS CONTROL, DEMOBILIZATION, INTEGRATION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.   (SBU) Arms Control, demobilization, and integration of 
forces: These issues are located in the "bridging section" 
of the current draft for an "Enhanced Humanitarian 
Ceasefire."  The government has stated that it wants a 
"permanent ceasefire" that addresses these issues; and, some 
movement spokesmen have said they want these issues resolved 
before they sign a new ceasefire text.  Work on the mapping 
of forces has moved the parties in this direction.  During 
the course of this week USDEL will work with the mediation 
to open discussion of these issues, especially the need to 
make provision for disarmament of janjaweed and tribal 
militias. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶7.   (SBU) For the first time the parties are entering into 
serious discussion of all security issues.  The mediation, 
depleted by departure of several of its military experts, 
needs constant encouragement to take advantage of this 
opportunity.  End comment. 
CAMPBELL