08ABUJA233
NIGERIA: 2007-2008 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY
Tue Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abuja
VZCZCXYZ0017
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUJA #0233/01 0361410
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051410Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ABUJA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2013
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
INFO RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 8685UNCLAS ABUJA 000233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/AAE 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OE, OI, OD and OC 
LAGOS FOR DEA AND FBI 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM NI IZ
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: 2007-2008 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY 
REPORT (INCSR) PART I, DRUGS AND CHEMICAL CONTROL (AF, WHA) 
 
REF: 07 STATE 136787 
¶1. Summary 
Nigeria remains a hub of narcotics trafficking and money laundering 
activity and is still ranked as one of the world's most corrupt 
countries.  Nigerian criminal organizations dominate the African 
drug trade and transport narcotics to markets in the United States, 
Europe, Asia, and other parts of Africa. Some of these organizations 
are also engaged in advance-fee fraud, commonly referred to in 
Nigeria as "419 Fraud" after a formerly relevant section of the 
Criminal Code of Nigeria, and other forms of fraud against U.S. 
citizens and businesses as well as citizens and businesses of other 
Countries.  Serious under/unemployment has been a major problem for 
Nigeria in civilian governments and military governments alike. 
Abysmal economic conditions for the vast majority of Nigerians 
contribute significantly to the continuation and expansion of drug 
trafficking, widespread corruption and other criminal acts.  These 
factors, combined with Nigeria's central location along the major 
trafficking routes and access to global narcotics markets have 
provided both an incentive and mechanism for criminal groups to 
flourish. 
¶2. Heroin from Southeast and Southwest Asia, smuggled via Nigeria, 
accounts for a significant portion of the heroin reaching the United 
States. Nigerian criminal elements, operating in South America, 
transship cocaine through Nigeria to Europe, Asia, and Africa. 
South Africa is a major destination for Nigerian-trafficked cocaine 
within Africa.  Nigerian-grown marijuana is exported to neighboring 
West African countries and to Europe, but not in significant 
quantities to the United States. Aside from marijuana, Nigeria does 
not produce any of the drugs that its nationals traffic.  Nigeria is 
a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. End Summary. 
 
¶3. II. Status of Country 
Nigeria does not produce precursor chemicals or drugs that have a 
significant effect on the United States, but it is fully entrenched 
as a major drug-transit country. In addition, Nigerian criminal 
elements operate global trafficking/criminal networks, moving 
cocaine and heroin to major developed country markets. 
¶4. Nigerian drug organizations are heavily involved in corollary 
criminal activities to their prime illicit "business" of drugs. 
These include document fabrication, illegal immigration, and 
financial fraud. Their ties to criminals in the United States, 
Europe, South America, Asia, and South Africa are well documented. 
Nigerian poly-crime organizations exact significant financial and 
societal costs, especially among West African states with limited 
resources for countering these organizations. 
¶5. The National Drug Law Enforcement Agency (NDLEA) is the law 
enforcement agency with sole responsibility for combating narcotics 
trafficking and drug abuse in Nigeria. In 2007, the NDLEA enjoyed 
success in securing more resources from the Nigerian national budget 
but is still underfunded.  The Agency received a total sum of 
N26.824M (ca. $220,000 for administrative expenses and N357M (ca. $3 
million) for salaries and benefits. No funds were released for 
capital projects. 
¶6. All law enforcement agencies suffered a loss of focus while the 
country concentrated on local, state and national elections in April 
¶2007.  Cooperation between Nigeria's law enforcement agencies still 
leaves much to be desired.  Although all law enforcement elements 
are represented at Nigeria's international airports and at its sea 
ports, joint operations between them are virtually non-existent.  A 
missing ingredient partially explaining the dearth of apprehensions 
of major traffickers or the absence of consistent interdiction of 
major shipments of contraband is interagency cooperation.  No single 
law enforcement agency in Nigeria has adequate resources to combat 
the increasingly sophisticated international criminal networks that 
operate in and through the country itself; inter-agency cooperation 
is necessary for success. 
 
¶7. III. Country Actions against Drugs in 2007 
Policy Initiatives. Nigeria's counter narcotics policy is based on 
the National Drug Control Master Plan (NDCMP), which has been in 
place since 1998. This plan assigns responsibilities to various 
government ministries and agencies as well as NGOs and other 
interest groups. In addition, the Master Plan outlines basic 
resource requirements and timeframes for the completion of 
objectives. Many of these goals are still unfulfilled. 
¶8. NDLEA has 46 field operational commands, seven (7) established 
Directorates and nine (9) autonomous Units and offices that work 
together to carry out the drug control mandate of the Agency. 
Additionally, the recent computerization of the Agency's 
administrative and accounting statistics ensures greater efficiency 
and transparency than in the past. 
¶9. Law Enforcement Efforts. Established in 1989, the NDLEA works 
alongside Customs, the State Security Service, the National Agency 
for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC), the Nigerian 
 
Police Force (NPF), and the Nigerian Immigration Service at various 
ports of entry and throughout the country.  The NDLEA's most 
successful interdictions have taken place at Nigeria's international 
airports, with the majority of hard drug seizures (e.g. cocaine and 
heroin) at Lagos' Murtala Mohammed International Airport. 
Increasing numbers of drug couriers are being apprehended at Abuja 
International Airport.  The agency has successfully apprehended 
individual drug couriers transiting these airports, but only a few 
of the major drug traffickers sponsoring these couriers.  Efforts 
similar to the vigorous inspections conducted at Lagos and Abuja 
international airports are also needed at Nigeria's five major 
seaports as smugglers change their tactics to avoid detection. 
NDLEA also emphasizes a public campaign focused on destroying the 
annual marijuana crop throughout the country. 
¶10. Between January and September 2007, Nigerian law enforcement 
apprehended 3440 narcotics law violator suspects and seized a total 
of 46,487 kg of various types of illicit drugs summarized thus: 
Cannabis - 45,937 kg; Cocaine - 259.2 kg; Heroin - 85.9 kg; and 
Psychotropic substances - 204.5 kg.   Indeed, a single seizure of 
62.4 kg of heroin at Kano Airport sent from Pakistan in April 2007 
is a strong indication that heroin still remains a serious threat to 
the country.   More vigilance is required not only to prevent the 
importation of cocaine through the borders but also to prevent the 
importation of heroin through the airports. 
¶11. Attempts by the NDLEA to arrest and prosecute major traffickers 
and their associates often fail in Nigeria's courts, which are 
subject to intimidation and corruption. Asset seizures from 
narcotics traffickers and money launderers, while permitted under 
Nigerian law, have never been systematically utilized as an 
enforcement tool, but some convicted traffickers have had their 
assets forfeited over the years. The number of major traffickers 
penalized remains small. NDLEA has requested that the National 
Assembly amend the narcotics law to provide a more strict and 
effective punishment for major traffickers with the minimum sentence 
being a 5 year jail term and no option of a fine, plus provision for 
the seizure of a foreign offender's passport. 
¶12. Drug-related prosecutions have continued at a steady pace. 
Special drug courts and a more energetic approach by the NDLEA to 
prosecute drug traffickers efficiently and successfully have been 
put in place. 
¶13. The NDLEA has assumed a leadership role in drug enforcement in 
the region.  With DEA assistance, the NDLEA created the West African 
Joint Operation (WAJO) initiative, bringing together drug 
enforcement personnel from 15 countries in the region to improve 
regional cooperation.  DEA-assisted WAJO planning conferences have 
continued to be held successfully.  The NDLEA continues expanded 
counter narcotics cooperation with the police in South Africa, where 
Nigerian criminal organizations are believed to be responsible for 
the bulk of drug trafficking. 
¶14. Corruption. Corruption has for many years permeated Nigerian 
society and continues to be a systemic problem in Nigeria's 
government. Unemployment is very high and civil servants' salaries 
are low.  In addition, actual payment of salaries is frequently 
months in arrears, compounding the corruption problem. To combat 
corruption, the Nigerian Government established the Independent 
Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission (ICPC) 
through the Corrupt Practices and other Related Offences Act of 
¶2000. The Act prohibits corrupt practices and other related 
offences, and also provides for punishment for those offenses. 
Recent high profile investigations and arrests have resulted in 
cabinet level officials being charged, dismissed from their post and 
incarcerated while awaiting hearings on corruption charges.  None of 
these actions were for drug-related offenses.  USG technical 
assistance, funded through State/INL and implemented by the U.S. 
Department of Justice, has continued providing the ICPC with 
additional training and technical assistance, including a Resident 
Legal Advisor (RLA) to improve enforcement against corruption. 
Neither Nigerian policy nor any senior government officials are 
known to encourage or facilitate the illicit production or 
distribution of illegal substances or the laundering of proceeds 
from illegal drug transactions. 
¶15. Agreements and Treaties.  Nigeria is a party to the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention, the 1961 UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, as 
amended by the 1972 Protocol, and the 1971 UN Convention on 
Psychotropic Substances.  Nigeria has signed the UN Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol against 
Trafficking in Persons, the Protocol against Smuggling of Migrants, 
and the Protocol against Trafficking in Illegal Firearms. The 1931 
U.S. - UK Extradition Treaty, which was made applicable to Nigeria 
in 1935, is the legal basis for U.S. extradition requests. The 
United States and Nigeria also have a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 
(MLAT), which entered into force on January 14, 2003. 
¶16. The Government of Nigeria continues to work on a mechanism to 
process U.S. extradition requests expeditiously while observing due 
 
process under Nigerian law.  Currently, a dedicated prosecutorial 
team handles all U.S. extradition cases before a specifically 
designated High Court judge. Nigerian law still affords the 
defendant many options to delay/confuse proceedings, especially 
interlocutory objection proceedings which allow defendants to raise 
objections which are litigated first before the main case can 
proceed.  There is one case pending extradition since 2004. 
¶17. Cultivation/Production. Cannabis is the only illicit drug 
produced in any large quantities in Nigeria, and it is cultivated in 
all 36 states. Major cultivation takes place in central and northern 
Nigeria and in Delta and Ondo states in the south. Marijuana, or 
"Indian Hemp" as it is known locally, is sold in Nigeria and 
exported throughout West Africa and into Europe. To date, there is 
no evidence of significant marijuana imports from Nigeria into the 
United States. The NDLEA has continued to pursue an aggressive 
eradication campaign. 
¶18. Drug Flow/Transit. Nigeria is a major staging point for 
Southeast and Southwest Asian heroin smuggled to Europe and the 
United States and for South American cocaine trafficked to Europe. 
While Nigeria remains Africa's drug transit hub, there are 
indications that the preferred methods of trans-shipment have 
changed. The NDLEA unit at Lagos' Murtala Mohammed International 
Airport conducts 100 percent searches of passengers and carry-on 
baggage.  This is extremely significant given the addition of DELTA 
Airlines direct flights to the U.S. from Lagos that started in 
December 2007.  The enhanced security posture at this airport has 
prompted some drug traffickers to use Nigerian seaports, concealing 
large quantities of contraband in shipping containers.  They also 
seemed to have moved to other West African airports and seaports 
with less stringent security controls. 
¶19. Domestic Programs/Demand Reduction. Local production and use of 
marijuana have been a problem in Nigeria for some time; however, 
according to the NDLEA and NGOs, the abuse of harder drugs (e.g., 
cocaine, heroin) seems to be on the rise. Heroin and cocaine are 
readily available in many of Nigeria's larger cities. (Note: Since 
there is no formal tracking system or statistical evidence 
available, the actual extent of domestic drug abuse in Nigeria is 
unclear.)  The NDLEA continues to expand its counter narcotics clubs 
at Nigerian universities and distribute counter-narcotics 
literature. The NDLEA also has instituted a teacher's manual for 
primary and secondary schools, which offers guidance on teaching 
students about drug abuse.  NDLEA sponsored a nationwide contest 
between primary and secondary schools with public presentations held 
at the "UN Day against Drugs" ceremony in 2007.  Sophisticated drug 
treatment is only available from a few private clinics in Nigeria's 
major cities. 
 
¶20. IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
Policy Initiatives. U.S.-Nigerian counter narcotics cooperation 
focuses on interdiction efforts at major international entry points 
and on enhancing the professionalism of the NDLEA and other law 
enforcement agencies.  The DEA country office in Nigeria works with 
the NDLEA Joint Task Force and other operations personnel to help 
train, coordinate, plan and implement internal and regional 
interdiction operations. At all levels, USG representatives enjoy 
excellent access to their counterparts and there is an evident 
desire on both sides to strengthen these relationships.  One option 
for a high-level law enforcement dialogue which is being explored is 
a renewal of the U.S.-Nigeria Law Enforcement Working Group which 
used to meet annually, with each nation alternating as host in its 
capital.  The last meeting of the Group was in 2004. 
¶21. The Road Ahead. Federal funding for Nigerian law enforcement 
agencies and key anti-crime agencies remains insufficient and 
erratic in disbursement.  This affects the planning and consistency 
of actions on the part of these agencies, giving the impression of 
lack of commitment and ineffectiveness.  Unless the Nigerian 
Government remedies this situation, very little progress will be 
made and none sustained.  It will require strong and sustained 
political will and continued international assistance for any 
Nigerian government to confront these difficult issues and bring 
about meaningful change. 
¶22. The U.S. Government has expanded aid to Nigeria's counter 
narcotics efforts; anti-drug assistance provided since February 2001 
now totals over $3 million.  Although Nigeria does not produce 
reliable crime statistics, opinions vary on whether public security 
deteriorated throughout the country in 2007. The police remain 
grossly mistrusted by the Nigerian population and organized crime 
groups continue to exploit that mistrust by preying on citizens 
throughout the country. 
¶23. Nigerian police are poorly trained. NDLEA has mandated that all 
its officers and operatives undergo re-training at the basic level 
and mid-level before qualifying for promotion under the new 
promotion scheme. 
¶24. The U.S. Government will continue to engage Nigeria on the 
 
issues of counter narcotics, money laundering and other 
international crimes. The underlying institutional and societal 
factors that contribute to narcotics-trafficking, money-laundering 
and other criminal activities in Nigeria are deep-seated and require 
a comprehensive and collaborative effort at all levels of law 
enforcement and government.  Progress can only be made through 
Nigeria's own sustained effort and political will, and the continued 
support of the international community. 
SANDERS