06GUAYAQUIL939
Cuenca's Leaders Foresee Correa Victory
Fri Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guayaquil
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGL #0939 2721626
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291626Z SEP 06
FM AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8564
INFO RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 9659
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2890
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3305UNCLAS GUAYAQUIL 000939 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EINV ETRD EFIS EC
SUBJECT: Cuenca's Leaders Foresee Correa Victory 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Cuenca's political, media, religious and business 
leaders told visiting Guayaquil Consul General that Rafael Correa 
would win the upcoming presidential elections.  Few of the leaders 
we spoke with believe that Correa would necessarily pursue the 
radical policies on which he is campaigning.  If he were to, they 
warned that his tenure would be short, as either the military or 
business elite would step in to force him out.  Although Ecuador's 
third largest city is traditionally a stronghold of the Democratic 
Left Party (ID), currently in alliance with Leon Roldos, provincial 
leaders asserted that Roldos's campaign was falling flat.  Correa's 
campaign's emphasis on change resonates with voters, and his 
opponents appear incapable of clearly communicating their vision for 
Ecuador.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) From September 18 to 20, the Consul General and Conoff 
visited Cuenca, capital of the province of Azuay, to pay courtesy 
calls on key government officials, media contacts, business leaders 
and heads of prominent local universities.  The upcoming national 
elections in October were on the minds of nearly all interlocutors, 
who willingly offered their views on the campaign and the 
candidates. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
CUENCA'S OFFICIALS UNANIMOUS: "CORREA WILL WIN" 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  (U) Nearly all interlocutors in Cuenca agreed that Correa will 
likely win the presidential elections in October.  According to Paul 
Carrasco, ID prefect of the province of Azuay and self-proclaimed 
friend of Correa, "People are looking for something different, and 
Correa is offering it to them."  Azuay Governor Pedro Vintimilla, a 
non-career politician with a business background, agreed. "People 
are tired of the same faces," he added.  Most believed that Correa 
would win in the second round, but Jorge Piedra Ledesma, Vice Mayor 
of Cuenca and former member of the ID party (now independent), went 
a step further, declaring that Correa would win by such a large 
margin in the first round that a second balloting would not be 
necessary. 
 
¶4.  (U) Representatives from the Ecuadorian-American Chamber of 
Commerce in Cuenca said Correa's and charisma and connection with 
voters' concerns are putting him ahead of Roldos and Viteri. 
"Correa is saying what people want to hear," said Pedro Jerves 
Ramirez, President of the Chamber.  "Viteri and Roldos have 
supporters, but they're not offering solutions."  Adriano 
Vintimilla, Director of the Telerama TV station added, "Correa is a 
more marketable product." 
 
-------------------------------------- 
IF RADICAL, HE MAY NOT GOVERN FOR LONG 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Though resigned to a Correa victory, few of our contacts 
envision stability for a Correa government, if elected.  Pedro 
Vintimilla pointed to several perceived weakness, saying, "He has no 
plan, no team and no party.  Congress will not work with him." 
Adriano Vintimilla highlighted the last point, adding, "The 
institution of president is not so strong here.  With no allies in 
Congress, Correa would have to dissolve it."  Carrasco was blunter. 
"He will not last six months if he pursues his platform," the 
prefect stated. 
 
¶6.  (U) Given the challenges that Correa would face in his first 
year, many in Cuenca believed that he is saying only what is 
necessary to get elected and that his policies may change after the 
elections.  Several interlocutors opined that, despite his 
reputation, Correa is less revolutionary than Venezuelan president 
Hugo Chavez.  "He is definitely not a Chavista," said Piedra 
Ledesma.  Monseor Vicente Cisneros Duran, Archbishop of Cuenca, 
added that, unlike Chavez, Correa has courted the support of the 
Catholic Church.  "He is not like [former Peruvian leftist 
presidential candidate Ollanta] Humala," said Carrasco.  "I think he 
will change focus [i.e., become more moderate] during the second 
round of the elections." 
 
¶7.  (U) COMMENT: Azuay is an anomaly in Ecuador--an ID stronghold 
strongly in favor of free trade.  The main reason ID leaders in 
Cuenca may be so pessimistic about Roldos' chances, even while local 
polling by two major newspapers shows Roldos leading voter 
preferences in Azuay, probably relates to Correa's effective 
positioning as the candidate for radical change.  Azuay has always 
resented the concentration of national political power in Quito and 
Guayaquil, and voters there may hope Correa will shift the balance. 
Another reason could be simmering tensions within the ID in Azuay, 
which was divided over whether to support Roldos.  Regardless, 
Cuenca's ID political leaders appear resigned to a Correa win.  The 
belief that Correa would be more pragmatic as president than on the 
campaign trail strikes us as wishful thinking, a sentiment shared by 
many of the center left. 
 
GRIFFITHS