05PARAMARIBO725
Possible Venzuelan Meddling
Mon Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Paramaribo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L PARAMARIBO 000725 

SIPDIS 


E.O. 12958 DECL: 11/07/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS NS
SUBJECT: Possible Venzuelan Meddling 

CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR MARSHA E. BARNES, REASONS 1.4 (B) & (D) 

¶1. (C) A member of Desi Bouterse's National Democratic Party (NDP) 
claims Bouterse is receiving funding and tacit political support from 
Venezuela. End summary 

¶2. (C) A member of the Mission has been told by a self described 
member of the NDP that former military dictator Desi Bouterse has 
made a number of recent trips to Venezuela; that he is receiving 
financial support from Venezuela; and that President Chavez has 
promised him recognition and support should Bouterse succeed in his 
stated goal of bringing down the government of President Venetiaan. 

¶3. (C) The Mission member says that in his contacts, spanning more 
than two years, the Surinamese individual has been consistently 
honest and factual and delivered on his word. In response to a 
question the Surinamer indicated that he wanted his information to 
reach the appropriate U.S. authorities. He is described as a 
Surinamese nationalist concerned about outside influence, although 
he finds some of President Chavez's anti-capitalist rhetoric 
appealing. He has never previously offered comment on internal NDP 
matters, although he constantly offers a well left of center take on 
world events. 

¶4. (C) Bouterse is the subject of an Interpol arrest warrant. 
However post has little reason to doubt that he could easily depart 
via charter from Suriname's international airport. A close associate 
of his handles all general aviation. 

¶5. (C) Post has no other information to support or refute information 
presented. Some observers of the local political scene have suggested 
that Bouterse's recent much publicized walks through the central 
market and very poor neighborhoods are taken from Chavez' playbook. 
While these walks have generated some favorable comments from the 
disgruntled, they have failed to produce scenes of Bouterse trailed 
by enthusiastic followers. 

BARNES 


NNNN