04HALIFAX242
HALIFAX PRECLEARANCE:  BANGOR WITHDRAWS OBJECTIONS
Tue Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, EB 
DHS FOR CBP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ETRD PREL ASEC BEXP CA
SUBJECT: HALIFAX PRECLEARANCE:  BANGOR WITHDRAWS OBJECTIONS 
 
¶1.  The City Council of Bangor, Maine, unanimously approved late 
October 25 a resolution to withdraw opposition to Halifax 
International Airport's (HIA) application for preclearance.  The 
Council also authorized the City Manager and Airport Director to 
sign an agreement with HIA on joint marketing.  These efforts 
will focus mainly on expanding regional air service and traffic, 
but will also include broader economic development and tourism 
marketing. In the end Bangor reportedly indicated that it had no 
concerns about originating preclearance, but insisted on an 
undertaking in writing from HIA that it would never seek 
in-transit preclearance.  Betting that Bangor would ultimately 
withdraw its objections, Halifax recently committed itself to 
beginning an expansion project that will -- if preclearance is 
approved -- create a new dedicated area for U.S. DHS personnel. 
HIA anticipates that the earliest this C$70 million facility 
facility could be ready would be late 2006; a spring 2007 
opening date is more likely. 
 
¶2.  The Council's consensus decision came despite what we were 
told was a major last-ditch effort to derail it or delay it 
until after the November 2 election.  Bangor's next step will be 
to communicate its action to Maine's Senators and Member of 
Congress.  HIA anticipates hosting soon a meeting to get a joint 
marketing council up and running.  Airport CEO Reg Milley plans 
to travel to Ottawa October 26 to brief Foreign Affairs and 
press for the inclusion of Halifax preclearance on the next 
Ridge-MacLellan meeting agenda. 
 
¶3.  COMMENT:  Bangor's action comes after a major effort for 
close to two years on the part of HIA to address concerns over 
lost business if preclearance comes to pass.  HIA had been 
prepared to offer to indemnify Bangor for lost revenue, but in 
the end the Council reportedly did not insist on it.  The 
airport terminal expansion project, which will only be completed 
if preclearance is approved, could generate significant business 
opportunities for U.S. firms.  A Trade Lead on the project has 
already been filed by FCS Halifax.  END COMMENT.