06SAOPAULO261
The Ever-Rising Real Part II:  The Emergence of Dutch
Fri Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO5550
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0261/01 0691958
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101958Z MAR 06
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4638
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 5801
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 1853
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 2086
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 1600
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 2637
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 2752
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 6885
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 2437
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 2310
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SAO PAULO 000261 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR MSULLIVAN 
NSC FOR SUE CRONIN 
TREASURY FOR FPARODI 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO/WH/EOLSON 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/MWARD 
STATE PASS FED BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR ROBITAILLE 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ETRD BEXP ECON EINV PGOV BR
SUBJECT: The Ever-Rising Real Part II:  The Emergence of Dutch 
Disease? 
 
REF:  Brasilia 366 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is the second of a two-part series on the 
macro-economic consequences of the recent rise in the Brazilian 
real.  The first cable in the series, Brasilia 366, looked at the 
GOB's macro and debt management policies.  This cable, authored by 
ConGen Sao Paulo, considers the effect of the strengthening real on 
the business sector. 
 
¶2.  (U) Summary.  As the real reaches its highest level in five 
years (reftel), some economists believe the Brazilian economy may be 
suffering from a form of "Dutch disease," a diagnosis stoutly denied 
by government officials.  Nonetheless, Development/Industry/Trade 
Minister Furlan has warned that the current exchange rate threatens 
exports and has called for adjustments.  Export-dependent industries 
are increasingly concerned about their future competitiveness if the 
real continues to strengthen, and many are freezing or cutting back 
investment.  Even some import-competing industries, such as 
textiles, are beginning to feel pressure.  More ominously, some 
agricultural giants are feeling the pressure and are moving major 
production facilities to other countries.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
DUTCH DISEASE: A DIRE DIAGNOSIS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Critics of Brazil's monetary policy have added a new concept 
to their artillery: "Dutch disease."  Originally given the moniker 
"national resource curse," the term was coined by The Economist 
magazine in 1977.  Dutch disease refers to the deindustrialization 
of a nation's economy owing to the discovery of a natural resource, 
the export of which raises the value of that nation's currency, 
thereby making manufactured goods less competitive with those of 
other nations, increasing imports, and decreasing exports.  The 
phenomenon was first noticed in the Netherlands in the 1960s after 
the discovery of North Sea gas.  In recent weeks, several prominent 
Brazilian economists, such as Professors Carlos Eduardo Goncalves 
and Joaquim Eloi de Toledo of the University of Sao Paulo, and 
Francisco Eduardo Pires de Souza, advisor to the Department of 
Planning at the state-owned National Bank for Economic and Social 
Development (BNDES), have argued that Brazil is suffering from Dutch 
disease symptoms. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Some analysts claim that Dutch disease has afflicted 
Brazil because of the rise in the country's exports of minerals and 
high-priced commodities like soybeans.  In 2005, agribusiness 
accounted for nearly 86 percent of Brazil's trade surplus, which 
came in at a record USD 44.8 billion.  Domestically, the effects of 
the strengthened real are already reportedly affecting industries 
that generate many jobs, even those that don't export (e.g., 
footwear and textiles) forcing factories to shut down in the face of 
increasing competition from Asian countries, such as China.  Recent 
estimates claim the strong real forced nearly 1,000 companies, 
principally small and medium-sized enterprises, out of the export 
market last year.  Officials at CIESP, a prominent Sao Paulo state 
industry federation, note that while Brazil registered record 
exports in 2005 - US$118 billion -- the country's export base was 
quite narrow:  40 companies were responsible for 45% of exports 
while 60 companies accounted for 65% of exports.  Trade balance 
figures released February 19 showed that imports grew more than 
exports in the third week of February.  The trade surplus (exports 
minus imports) fell from US$ 881 million in the previous week to US$ 
579 million. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Carlos Velloso, a prominent economist with links to the 
opposition PSDB party, argued to Econoffs that Brazil is seeing 
Dutch Disease-like effects due to burgeoning exports of high priced 
commodities.  These effects, he pointed out, extended to all 
tradable goods sectors, including import-competing sectors such as 
textiles.  And while low-priced Chinese textile imports were a key 
competitive threat for the Brazilian textile sector, he said, so was 
the appreciated Real. 
 
----------- 
 
SAO PAULO 00000261  002 OF 004 
 
 
GOB DENIALS 
----------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Brazilian government officials are quick to dismiss the 
notion that the country has caught Dutch disease.  In a recent press 
interview, BNDES President Guido Mantega said, "Dutch disease does 
not apply to Brazil, which faces no risk of deindustrialization, or 
of returning to an agro-exporter past."    Mantega, a former 
Minister of Planning and one of the leading economists in the 
governing Workers' Party (PT), noted that manufactured products 
comprise a majority of Brazil's exports, and that "Brazilian 
industry has never been stronger."  Mantega further observed that 
Brazil's share of the world market is growing and that the Brazilian 
car industry exported 33 percent more vehicles in 2005 than in 2004. 
 Mantega pointed out that the automotive industry was the sector 
that posted the highest level of growth in the past three years, 
with increases in output, productivity and job creation.  (Note: 
Many of the low-priced vehicles manufactured in Brazil are exported 
for sale to consumers in Mexico; in turn, Mexican producers 
manufacture vehicles for sale in the more lucrative U.S. market.) 
 
¶7.  (U) Minister of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade Luiz 
Fernando Furlan also argues that Dutch disease does not apply to 
Brazil, pointing out that the country can boast of a wide variety of 
export sectors, of which industrial products represent a large 
share, with no single commodity or sector dominating.  Nevertheless, 
both Furlan and Mantega acknowledge that the continued rise in the 
real is worrisome.  With respect to the decline in the trade surplus 
announced last month, Furlan publicly noted that this was the first 
time in recent years the trade surplus had dropped in the month of 
February in comparison with February of the previous year. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Local economists are divided on the subject.  Some have 
"diagnosed" the disease and maintain that the country has already 
suffered deindustrialization as a consequence.  Others insist that 
the difficulties faced by Brazil's industrial sector are the result 
of overly high interest rates and taxes, combined with shortcomings 
in infrastructure and technology.  Although most interlocutors tell 
EconOffs that the strong real is their main concern, all agree that 
Brazil's unfavorable business climate would still be a hindrance 
even if the real remained weak.  Brazil's non-competitive business 
climate is generally blamed for Brazil's failure to grow, while it 
is the strong real that has been blamed for actual export shrinkage. 
 
 
¶9.  (U) Fernando Cardim de Carvalho, a professor at the Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro, believes that although the situation 
differs from the experience of the Netherlands, Brazil is in fact 
suffering the effects of currency overvaluation.  In a recent 
interview, Carvalho argued that the overvaluation of the national 
currency is not an inevitable consequence of the surplus of dollars 
brought about by exports of products for which world market prices 
or export volumes have rapidly risen.  He pointed out that Argentina 
and China have also experienced major growth in export revenues, but 
have maintained exchange rates favorable to exports, and low 
interest rates, converting their trade surpluses into currency 
reserves, unlike Brazil.  Carvalho contended that the problem with 
Brazil lies with high benchmark interest rates set by the Central 
Bank, which make it too costly to expand reserves the way that China 
and other countries with large trade surpluses have done.  In 
addition, he added, high interest rates have attracted speculative 
capital (as opposed to Foreign Direct Investment), which has further 
exacerbated the overvaluation of the real.  Carvalho warned that 
depending on agricultural or mineral exports is "bad business, 
because world market prices for primary sector commodities are 
highly unstable."  Regardless of whether Brazil is facing Dutch 
disease or not, economists and government officials agree that 
export industries are suffering from the strong real. 
 
----------------------- 
INDUSTRY FEELS THE PAIN 
----------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The business newspaper Valor Economico cites a poll 
 
SAO PAULO 00000261  003 OF 004 
 
 
conducted in the U.S. with 203 American companies operating in 
Brazil, which shows an abrupt change in their plans to invest here. 
According to the study, disappointment with poor GDP results in 2005 
and the increasing valuation of the real vis-a-vis the dollar have 
led U.S. companies to reduce investments in Brazil.  Interlocutors 
throughout the Sao Paulo consular district (which accounts for close 
to 70 percent of Brazil's GDP) have consistently complained to 
EconOffs that the strengthening real is hurting local industry and 
that the effects of the weakened dollar will be evident in 2006 
first quarter reports.  While most complaints have involved 
industrial sectors (auto, machinery, etc.), recent trends show that 
the strong real is starting to affect Brazil's agricultural sector 
as well.  This is especially bad news, given that agro-business 
accounted for 86 percent of Brazil's 2005 record trade surplus. 
Although strong international prices for commodities buoyed 
agro-exports during the real's 2005 rally (gaining almost 17 
percent), it appears that large agro-business is finally feeling the 
real's pinch.  This is evident in the experiences of agro-business 
companies Bunge and Archer Daniels Midland (ADM). 
 
Agro Agony 
---------- 
 
¶11.  (U) American agro-giant Bunge, which processed 13 million tons 
of soy in Brazil last year, announced in February that it will have 
to close brand new factories that it just completed constructing in 
¶2005.  In December, it suspended processing at 7 of its 49 
fertilizer plants, and shut down 2 of its 12 soy processing 
factories.  Meanwhile, Bunge just finished construction on a soy 
plant with a capacity to process 19 million tons a year in 
neighboring Argentina.  Bunge states that it is transferring a 
portion of its Brazil operations to Argentina for tax and 
"competitiveness" reasons.  Moreover, Bunge investment in Brazil 
over the next four year will be cut by 70 percent.  Bunge 
representatives remarked, "the impact of the exchange rate has 
become violent for our company.  The only way to maintain viable 
operations that would still be acceptable to our shareholders was 
for us to reduce operations." 
 
¶12.  (SBU) But the damage is not confined to the closing of 
factories.  Bunge representatives warned of unfolding 
deindustrialization in the Brazilian agro-sector.  According to 
Bunge, "tax difficulties, the exchange rate, and infrastructure and 
logistic problems are leading soy producers to gradually reduce 
operations."  The Brazilian Association of Vegetable Oil Industries 
warns that while Brazilian grain exports will grow 10 percent in 
2006, exports of processed products (such as soy oil and meal) will 
fall by four percent.  Bunge claims that they already experienced 
this four percent decrease in 2005.  Bunge's export volume for 2005 
was a mammoth USD 2.2 billion, but company executives note that this 
high figure masks an underlying problem: high exports represent an 
increase in prime material (grain) and a reduction in processed 
goods (oil and meal).  According to Bunge, "this dramatic reduction 
in industry is not easily reversed.  Brazil is turning into a 
world-class provider of prime material, but it's losing industrial 
capacity.  This is not a trend that will simply reverse itself once 
it's discovered." 
 
¶13.  (SBU) U.S. company Archer Daniels Midland Company (ADM), 
another of Brazil's principal soy producer, is experiencing the same 
problems as Bunge.  ADM has reduced soy processing operations in 
Brazil by 30 percent.  Factories in the southern cities of Tres 
Passos, Rio Grande do Sul and Paranagua (Parana state), with 
capacities to process 1,000 tons of soy per day, will not return to 
operations for the 2006-07 crop.  ADM remarks, "the increasing cost 
of the real has provoked a loss in international competitiveness. 
This has forced us to refrain from investing and close down 
factories."  Although it was in the middle of its corporate 
investment cycle, ADM has suspended further investment in Brazil, 
though the company could return to invest again if the exchange rate 
softened.  ADM admitted, "with the current exchange rate, Brazil is 
not the export platform it used to be." 
 
Auto Anguish 
 
SAO PAULO 00000261  004 OF 004 
 
 
------------ 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The effects of the strong real are felt most acutely by 
businesses that produce manufactured and semi-manufactured goods, 
with strong dependence on low internal costs.  Damiel Prates, a 
researcher at the Center for Political Economy at the University of 
Campinas, remarked, "the exchange rate is critical in the area of 
manufactured goods.  Brazil has just started to face the realities 
of exchange rate politics.  The figures already show that industrial 
exports are falling by the wayside."  The irony, according to Jose 
Ricardo Roriz Coelho of the Federation of Industries of Sao Paulo 
State (FIESP), "...  is that the real's 2005 increase of 16.75 
percent is an effective tax break on imports, while at the same time 
an increased tax on exports."  This export tax is being felt across 
industrial sectors.  For example, the American company Eaton, which 
produces automotive power train components in Brazil, has felt the 
pinch.  With 30 percent of its revenue tied to exports, Eaton has 
already received demands from clients: reduce costs or we'll seek 
alternative suppliers.  According to Eaton's Vice President for 
Latin America, Carlos Alberto Briganti, "the automotive industry has 
already asked for a 10 percent cut in costs.  The strong real limits 
new gains in productivity in the automotive supply chain, a sector 
that has not dealt with inflation for a long time."  Briganti notes 
that Eaton's challenge isn't just maintaining contracts, but also 
acquiring new contracts.  "The real concern is the future," says 
Briganti. 
 
------------------------- 
Strong Real: Weak Growth? 
------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Comment:  The real concern is the future.  This sentiment 
is prevalent among our business interlocutors.  Brazil experienced 
less-than-mediocre GDP growth of 2.3 percent in 2005 (in the 
hemisphere, only Haiti performed worse).  While many estimates for 
2006 range between 3.5 to 4 percent, achieving this could be 
difficult as export industries feel the squeeze of the strong real. 
And, while the Dutch Disease-diagnosis seems to us to be premature, 
should these nascent deindustrialization trends consolidate, Brazil 
could lose some of the ground it has gained in industrial exports 
and see itself returning to its previous status as primarily an 
export platform for raw materials and prime agricultural goods.  The 
Lula administration has resorted to targeted benefits for certain 
export-oriented sectors in an attempt to ameliorate the effect of 
the appreciated Real on export industries.  Given current 
expectations that the Real will appreciate further and remain strong 
into the medium term, however, the GoB may find such simple 
palliatives wanting.  But, we have no expectation that broad-based 
tax reform or other necessary microeconomic reforms, which could do 
much to offset the effects of the exchange rate by reducing costs 
for businesses and increasing their competitiveness, will be 
addressed by the Congress at all during this presidential election 
year.  End Comment. 
 
¶16.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
McMullen