04DJIBOUTI583
PRESIDENT GUELLEH REVIEWS FIVE YEARS IN OFFICE
Mon Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DJIBOUTI 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF AND AF/E 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EINV SO ECON PHUM SOCI DJ
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT GUELLEH REVIEWS FIVE YEARS IN OFFICE 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: To commemorate the fifth anniversary 
of his election April 9, 1999 President Guelleh held 
a press conference with local journalists (not the 
opposition) April 7 to outline what he described as his 
accomplishments. He began with a short speech and 
answered questions for more than an hour.  Guelleh's 
assessment of his time in office was positive, naming 
restoring peace as his greatest accomplishment.  He 
also expressed his desire to create an economic market 
that would attract foreign direct investment.  On a 
regional level, Guelleh said the Government of Djibouti 
hopes for a peaceful resolution to the Somalia issue 
and considers overall relations with neighboring 
countries good.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) On the fifth anniversary of his election as 
President of Djibouti, Ismail Omar Guelleh highlighted 
the accomplishments of his administration in the areas 
of equality and social justice, public education, 
battling social vices, and what it means to be 
Djiboutian.  He commented that five years ago he asked 
the Djiboutian people to "accompany me in the task of 
creating a society founded on our spiritual and cultural 
components."  Guelleh also addressed the idea of 
independence, saying "Independence is more than an act 
of separation from the ancient colonial power.  It is 
above all the rescue of the self-respect, of the 
dignity of the Djiboutian people who exercise their 
liberty.  But independence is a process that continues 
every day.  It is the manner in which the Djiboutians 
exist in the world and in all of life." 
 
¶3. (U) Questions to Guelleh from the press focused on 
whether Guelleh felt he had fully accomplished his 
goals politically and economically.  Guelleh commented 
that he believed he had "restored peace to the hearts 
of our citizens.  Peace has been my best success.  I 
believe I have responded to the appeals of the most 
disadvantaged of our population.  The respect of man 
has been at the center of our strategy."  (Note: 
Guelleh refers to the final peace treaty ending the 
civil war signed in 2001.  End Note)  Guelleh 
emphasized that his administration has put social 
sector needs first, as a base for development of the 
country, highlighting education, health, the role of 
women, habitat and water as the most important areas. 
Guelleh reminded the audience that "to transform or 
construct a country takes generations...but I think I 
have modestly contributed to the rebuilding of our 
nation." 
 
¶4. (U) On the growth of the economy and whether it 
would foster sustainable development, Guelleh said the 
government has started to reduce the cost of living by 
bringing the scales of internal taxes on consumption 
down from 33 percent to 8 percent.  The next step is 
to rehabilitate the infrastructure of the country by 
engaging the workforce in professional training.  "We 
commit ourselves" Guelleh continued "to creating the 
conditions necessary to attract foreign direct 
investment.  But the road is long and the difficulties 
remain with the recent price of oil."  Guelleh 
commented that despite these difficulties the economy 
was promising, a rise in youth employment statistics 
had been reported and for the first time Djibouti's 
growth rate surpassed its birth rate.  Guelleh detailed 
the efforts that the government has made, emphasizing 
stabilization of public finances, reducing debt and the 
deficit, and a research program for less costly and 
renewable energy. 
 
¶5. (U) On the issue of corruption and reforms, Guelleh 
refuted the idea that corruption has gained the most 
ground, saying "It is a question of education in my 
opinion...If the directors don't speak, don't teach, 
don't educate the people, the spread of corruption 
risks becoming dangerous for the society and for the 
country as well as the people who risk the loss of 
their soul."  Guelleh also commented that "It is us 
that need the reforms more than the World Bank or the 
IMF.  It is us that need structure and discipline. 
These reforms are strong and difficult.  But we have 
passed the most difficult point."  Guelleh went on to 
say the IMF Staff Monitored Program negotiated this 
spring would be good for the country and the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy was finally ready for review and 
decision of the administrative council at the World 
Bank. 
 
¶6. (U) Guelleh wrapped up the interview by addressing 
the Somalia issue, saying "We would like that the 
Somali people and their representatives have a chance 
to talk amongst themselves.  We recommend that the 
international community be ready to help the Somali 
people rebuild their country."  In response to 
questions concerning how Djibouti's Somalia policy has 
affected relations with Ethiopia, Guelleh commented 
the two countries are "linked by blood and history. 
The economy further ties us together," and that the 
two countries are compelled to work for the good of 
both countries.  Guelleh paralleled relations with 
Somaliland to relations with Ethiopia saying, "I am 
obliged to facilitate life for our fellow citizens 
on both sides.  The question of sovereignty or 
non-sovereignty does not concern us.  It concerns 
the people of the country that must regulate their 
own affairs with their brothers." 
RAGSDALE