08DJIBOUTI665
Somalia - First Steps to Implementing the Djibouti
Sun Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Djibouti
VZCZCXRO2475
RR RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHDJ #0665/01 2301508
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171508Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9445
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 3373
RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DJIBOUTI 000665 
 
DEPT FOR A/S FRAZER & AF/E 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL DJ SO
SUBJECT: Somalia - First Steps to Implementing the Djibouti 
Agreement 
 
REF: Nairobi 1959 and previous 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  On August 16, UN Special Representative of the 
Secretary General for Somalia Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah (SRSG) opened 
the first meeting of the High Level Committee and the Joint Security 
Committee to implement the Djibouti Agreement.  At least one of the 
objectives of the meeting is to resuscitate the forward momentum 
halted by internal crises threatening to destabilize both the 
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the 
Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS).  The environment is positive, the 
delegates focused, and the mood is collaborative, and all have 
stated their commitment to transform this into concrete action. 
Although the TFG delayed work as it balanced competing interests of 
President Yusuf and Prime Minister Hussein in the composition of its 
delegation, it has now agreed on its members.  Prior to the 
scheduled conclusion of these discussions on August 19, each 
committee is to define its terms of reference and plan of work.  Key 
figures from both parties continue to arrive in Djibouti, yet the 
committees are making progress.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Launching the Djibouti Agreement 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On August 16, in the presence of the Djibouti-based 
diplomatic corps and international representatives from Nairobi, New 
York, and Cairo, the SRSG opened the third round of talks between 
the TFG and the ARS.  The objective of this meeting is to begin 
concrete steps to implement the June 9 Djibouti agreement.  While 
the last round of discussions in Djibouti was slated for 10 days, 
this round was initially designed to last only for two.  The dates 
were chosen just two weeks prior, as internal crises with the two 
parties were threatening to undermine the Djibouti agreement.  With 
the delay in the formal signing, spoilers on both sides had begun to 
exploit the time lag by fueling existing internal divisions.  The 
SRSG called the meeting to get the agreement back on track. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A key outcome of this meeting is standing up the High 
Level Committee and the Joint Security Committee, as outlined in the 
agreement.  Although both the TFG and the ARS submitted their 
delegate lists weeks ago, this was the first time the committees 
met.  While most of the ARS delegates were already in Djibouti where 
the majority of the Central Committee is now based, the bulk of the 
TFG delegated arrived from Mogadishu and Baidoa August 15 in a 
chartered aircraft.  On August 16, there was an official opening 
ceremony.  The TFG Head of Delegation is Ahmed Abdisalam Aden, 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information, Youth Affairs, 
and Sports.  The ARS was represented by Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, 
Chairman of the Central Committee and Abdurahman Abdishakur Warsame, 
Deputy Chairman of the Central Committee.  Prime Minister Hassan 
Hussein is expected to arrive in Djibouti from Addis Ababa on August 
17, and ARS Chairman Sharif Sheikh Ahmed is scheduled to arrive on 
August 18 from Khartoum. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The August 16 opening ceremony set an extremely positive 
tone for the discussions.  After a reading from the Koran, a 
traditional Somali poet sung, "Where there is no peace, there is no 
life," and encouraged all present to think about peace, and only 
peace."  Both Abdisalam and Warsame offered spirited opening 
remarks, emphasizing the importance of reconciliation, collaboration 
and a promise to make the necessary effort toward peace.  One of the 
most important interventions was made by Hamoud Abdi Soultan, 
Djibouti's Minister of Muslim Affairs, who encouraged all actors to 
take personal responsibility to create the conditions for the 
international community to help by   developing multiple solutions 
to address Somalia's problems.  In Somali, Soultan exhorted all of 
the delegates to lay aside personal, political, and clan interests 
for the good of the nation and its people.  He emphasized the 
importance of seizing this opportunity to establish a clear vision 
for the Somali people, before it is too late. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In addition to the TFG and ARS representatives present, 
there was a significant contingent of Djibouti-based business 
leaders.  This group included one of the Adani brothers, one of the 
economic powerhouses in Mogadishu.  Long-time Somalia experts who 
were present at the ceremony told us, "This time, it feels different 
from prior peace conferences."  Delegates from both the TFG and the 
ARS freely embraced and talked -- a stark difference from the last 
round of discussions where both sides refused to formally meet 
face-to-face.  The environment was reminiscent of the jubilant 
atmosphere that marked the June 9 ceremony where the Djibouti 
Agreement was initialed.  Another Somalia expert told us that while 
these conditions are necessary for a breakthrough, they are not 
sufficient.  It will be necessary for all the stakeholders to 
translate this goodwill into concrete actions, bringing along key 
Somalis who are not present, he said. 
 
 
DJIBOUTI 00000665  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Both committees briefly met the afternoon of August 16 and 
the UN Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) distributed draft terms 
of reference.  The delegations discussed procedures to reach to 
finalize the terms and to agree upon a plan of work, including the 
time and place for their next meeting.  They agreed to work 
independently and re-convene on August 17. 
 
-------------------- 
High Level Committee 
-------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) SRSG Ould-Abdallah is the interim chair of the High Level 
Committee (HLC), as both sides try to reach agreement on who will 
facilitate their work in the future.  While the initial meeting of 
the HLC was positive, the delegates were not prepared to address any 
substantive issues.  On August 16, the TFG had not reached a final 
agreement on the composition of its members.  On July 18, the Prime 
Minister submitted a list of nine persons agreed to by President 
Yusuf.  During the conflict between Yusuf and Hussein, the PM 
submitted a list of an additional six representatives to the SRSG. 
Yusuf was reportedly angry and refused to accept any of these new 
members while the PM also dug in his heels.  Of the original list of 
nine, seven representatives are present in Djibouti, as are four of 
the six additional persons proposed by the PM.  President Yusuf said 
that he will not support the process if the original list is not 
accepted.  The TFG reportedly met informally through the night of 
August 16.  The High Level Committee was to convene at 0900 on 
August 17, but the TFG was still working out its internal issues. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) At approximately 1200 on August 17, the TFG declared it 
had reached agreement -- its delegation would be composed only of 
the nine initial persons on its first list.  The others would 
participate in the meetings, but would not be eligible to take any 
official votes or decisions.  The High Level Committee reconvened 
and Abdisalam and Warsame both made statements about their readiness 
for work.  The SRSG welcomed Abdirizak Ashkir Abdi, TFG Minister of 
Reconciliation, Regional Development and Federal Affairs and Nur 
Iidow Beyle, Minister of Public Works and Reconstruction, who were 
not present at the first meeting of the committee.  (Note: Yusuf 
reportedly encouraged both of these ministers to resign, but they 
remain in office.  End note.)  A civil society representative 
discussed the importance of focusing on humanitarian access and 
concrete solutions.  After approximately 20 minutes, the SRSG 
adjourned the meeting.  The High Level committee was expected to 
reconvene later in the day.  The TFG delegates said they have worked 
out their internal difficulties and were ready to move forward.  ARS 
representatives separately told us that they helped mediate the 
conflict within the TFG. 
 
------------------------ 
Joint Security Committee 
------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Joint Security Committee (JSC) is co-chaired by 
Colonel William Bryan Norman (United States), Director of Military 
Planning in the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations and Major 
General Juvenal Niyoyunguruza (Burundi), AMISOM Deputy Force 
Commander.  While there was a significant battle over the TFG 
membership of the HLC, there was no such conflict for the JSC.  TFG 
delegates to the JSC include General Abdi Awale Qeybdid, 
Commissioner of Police, and General Mohamed Warsame Farah "Darwish", 
Director of the National Security Service, both of whom are actively 
participating in the committee work.  After their inaugural meeting 
on August 16, the TFG and ARS representatives met separately to 
prepare amendments to their terms of reference, work plans, and 
platforms.  On August 17, they began meeting early in the morning to 
discuss their ideas and establish sub-committees.  At 1230, the 
delegates asked the co-chairs for the opportunity to draft one 
common document and final terms of reference, which they would 
present to the chairs and international representatives at 1100 on 
August 18. 
 
¶10. (SBU) While the international representatives observed the work 
of the JSC, the participants plainly stated that they preferred to 
work independently.  One of the ARS leaders referred to his fellow 
JSC members as "his brothers" with years of experience on the 
ground, who know the country and its dynamics better than anyone 
from the outside.  Darwish said they appreciated the international 
facilitation, but the JSC can "harmonize their views" on its own and 
later present them to the larger group.  With their pragmatic 
approach, the JSC appears to be making progress.  The ARS and TFG 
delegates told us that they appreciate the opportunity to work 
together and requested that the international community be ready to 
provide technical support for the common security arrangements they 
agree to implement.  The JSC has taken its first steps to developing 
a shared perspective on improving security.  The SRSG stated that to 
his surprise, the JSC is moving forward faster than the he had 
 
DJIBOUTI 00000665  003 OF 003 
 
 
imagined, and is "one step ahead of us."  He expressed hope that the 
HLC would start making similar progress on political issues. 
 
SYMINGTON