05HELSINKI127
ACEH: FINNISH MEDIATOR AHTISAARI PLEASED WITH
Mon Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 000127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/IET, EUR/NB, INR/EAP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2015 
TAGS: PREL PHUM MOPS ASEC ID FI
SUBJECT: ACEH: FINNISH MEDIATOR AHTISAARI PLEASED WITH 
FIRST ROUND OF GOI/GAM TALKS 
 
REF: A. JAKARTA 0564 
 
     ¶B. STOCKHOLM 086 
 
Classified By: POLOFF DAVID ALLEN SCHLAEFER FOR REASONS 1.4 (B AND D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Poloff on January 30 spoke with former Finnish 
President Ahtisaari's special assistant Kristiina Rinkineva. 
Ahtisaari is the head of Finland's Crisis Management 
Initiative (CMI), a conflict-resolution think tank, and had 
agreed to hosting a meeting of GAM and GoI representatives 
after being approached by a Finnish businessman with strong 
ties to Indonesia.  Rinkineva, who accompanied Ahtisaari 
during the negotiating sessions, said that both she and 
Ahtisaari believed the initial round of talks had "probably 
been more positive than we expected."  She said that the GoI 
and GAM representatives had met face-to-face twice, once on 
January 28 and again during a lengthy session on January 29. 
Rinkineva opined that the mere fact that the two sides were 
able to meet in the same room and conduct a civilized 
discussion was a "significant victory."  During one session, 
Ahtisaari and Rinkineva left the room and the GoI and GAM 
leaders held a lengthy private discussion.  She said that 
there appeared to be a general agreement on both sides to end 
the military conflict in Aceh and work toward a peace 
settlement. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Rinkineva told Poloff that while both sides 
seemingly expressed a genuine desire to end hostilities and 
reach a lasting solution, they differed on the means to 
achieve this.  The GoI representatives wanted to talk 
immediately about a comprehensive settlement.  They were less 
enthusiastic about a "staged" agreement that would eventually 
normalize the situation in Aceh.  However, the GAM leaders 
envisioned a more gradual process, beginning with an 
immediate ceasefire in Aceh, followed by negotiations on an 
amnesty for exiled GAM leaders and fighters, and then talks 
about Aceh's political future.  Rinkineva said that the GAM 
leaders stuck to this line throughout the discussions. 
Although the two sides differed on approach, Rinkineva 
reported that Ahtisaari had said that they "shared the same 
goal, but simply by two separate roads," and further remarked 
that he (Ahtisaari) did not believe the GAM leaders were 
under any illusions about the "weak hand" that they held in 
the negotiations. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Rinkineva said that the talks had then moved on to 
whether an enhanced autonomous status for Aceh could be the 
framework for a comprehensive settlement, with the GAM 
leaders "probing the limits" of just what such an enhanced 
status might mean.  At that point, however, both sides felt 
the need to consult with their respective authorities and 
Ahtisaari ended the discussions.  Although there had 
originally been plans for a third session on the morning of 
the 30th, the talks had progressed more quickly than 
expected, and Ahtisaari believed it best to allow both sides 
time for consultation before continuing. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Ahtisaari invited both sides to a second round of 
talks in Helsinki in the near future; Rinkineva said that the 
GAM and GoI representatives agreed, although the timeframe 
has not yet been established.  Ahtisaari released a brief 
public statement on the talks on January 29.  An English 
translation of the statement's text can be found on the CMI's 
website at www.cmi.fi. 
 
MACK