06HELSINKI676
JULY 2006 EU INFORMAL ENVIRONMENTAL MINISTERIAL
Tue Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO2155
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ
DE RUEHHE #0676/01 1991403
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181403Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2178
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENRG ETRD EAGR EUN FI
 
SUBJECT: JULY 2006 EU INFORMAL ENVIRONMENTAL MINISTERIAL 
- FINNS SEEK "GREENING OF THE PRESIDENCY" 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: At the July 2006 EU Environmental 
Informal Ministerial, the GOF made clear its eagerness 
to begin a dialogue with the US on climate change, clean 
energy, and sustainable development as agreed to during 
the recent US-EU Summit in Vienna.  Finnish contacts 
understand and accept the importance the US places on 
discussing environmental policy in the context of energy 
and other key issues, but they repeatedly indicated that 
they intend to launch a dialogue process with the US 
that leads to forward movement on climate change. 
Future "eco-taxation" may play a role in EU 
environmental policy and overall EU financing.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The EU held informal ministerial meetings on the 
Environment in Turku, Finland on July 14-16.  The major 
theme was "Going global on eco-efficiency" in developing 
a new generation of environmental policy.  GOF 
Environmental Minister Jan-Erik Enestam hosted the event 
that attracted 24 EU Environmental Ministers and EU 
Commissioner for the Environment Stavros Dimas. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Finns Seek Real Dialogue with US on Climate Change 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶3. (SBU) The GOF is eager to begin a dialogue on climate 
change, clean energy, and sustainable development as 
agreed to during the recent US-EU Summit in Vienna.  The 
GOF plans to host the first in what it hopes will be a 
series of trans-Atlantic climate change sessions that 
both sides can build upon during subsequent EU 
Presidencies.  Tentatively the GOF will involve the 
Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Trade and Industry 
(Energy), and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Senior 
GOF sources, including the Director General of the 
International Affairs unit in the GOF Environment 
Ministry, have assured us that they understand and 
accept the importance the US places on discussing 
environmental policy in the context of energy and other 
key issues and that all three topics would be discussed 
holistically; however, forward movement on climate 
change with the US will be a priority. 
 
¶4. (U) Several other Ministers also re-emphasized the 
connection between environmental policy and energy. 
Dick Roche, Environmental Minister from Ireland, went 
one step further in linking energy, environment, 
transportation, and agriculture.  Germany stressed that 
discussions during its EU Presidency would also focus on 
the connection between environment, transportation, and 
energy.  There was a united call for new sources of 
energy along with increased efficiency in power 
generation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
The EU's Strategies on Climate and Environment 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶5. (U) The EU Environmental Ministers publicly stressed 
a shift toward viewing entire ecosystems rather than 
just climate change issues.  They cited increased 
resource consumption as a major contributor to climate 
change, and recognized the demand "footprint" that EU 
member states are having on the overall global 
environment.  EU Environmental ministers held that 
globalization has increased well being for many, 
including most Europeans, but that it has come at a 
price in terms of the overall environment and 
development in poorer nations.  The EU continues to 
believe it is possible to increase overall human 
welfare, competitiveness, and economic growth while also 
reducing consumption.  Enestam and Dimas called for an 
international framework and common rules for all 
countries.  Enestam added that "like-minded" European 
countries could move forward with even more aggressive 
environmental initiatives rather than waiting for 
overall EU or global consensus. 
 
¶6. (U) Looking forward, Ministers envisioned a 
comprehensive environmental framework that will carry on 
beyond 2012, including a major focus on a global 
emissions trading system.  Demonstrating the importance 
they place not only on dialogue with the US but also on 
the relevance of some US models, they cited the state of 
California and seven New England states as examples of 
domestic willingness in the US to move in this 
direction.  EU Environmental Ministers readily 
recognized the EU must hit its internal environmental 
goals before it can be seen as a leader to other 
countries like the US and Russia.  The EU would also 
like to see agreements between countries on technology 
 
HELSINKI 00000676  002 OF 002 
 
 
standards, carbon capture and storage, and greenhouse 
emissions.  They also called for a continuation of 
emissions trading commitments, with emissions from the 
aviation industry being added to the equation.  Enestam 
put forward a general proposal on "environmental 
taxation" that would shift some of the tax burden from 
labor to consumers of resources, and asked the European 
Commission to produce a "green paper on the use of 
market-based and financial instruments in environmental 
policies". 
 
---------- 
Comment 
---------- 
¶7. (U) The GOF has clearly made the launching of a 
meaningful dialogue on climate change with the US a 
major priority of its EU Presidency.  During the EU 
informal, the ministers de-emphasized actual discussions 
of energy;  however, they, the Finns and the rest of the 
EU appear to understand clearly that getting the US to 
the table to discuss climate will require that those 
discussions focus on a much broader range of topics -- 
in particular energy security.  We will continue to make 
sure that message is heard as the Finns move forward on 
this. 
 
WARE