06HELSINKI1137
U.S.-EU HIGH LEVEL DIALOGUE ON CLIMATE CHANGE,
Tue Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO1926
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHHE #1137/01 3111250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071250Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2717
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHEPA/HQ EPA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 HELSINKI 001137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
DOE FOR U/S GARMAN AND SEULE 
WHITE HOUSE FOR CEQ/JCONNAUGHTON AND DBANKS 
EPA FOR RMEYERS AND GWAXMONSKY 
STATE PASS TO G/CCONNORS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENRG TRGY TSPL ELTN EUN EPET FI
SUBJECT: U.S.-EU HIGH LEVEL DIALOGUE ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 
CLEAN ENERGY AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN HELSINKI 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  At the first-ever High Level Dialogue on Climate Change, 
Clean Energy and Sustainable Development (HLD) October 24-25 
in Helsinki, the U.S. and EU agreed to strengthen bilateral 
efforts in areas including clean coal, carbon sequestration, 
energy efficiency, renewables, methane recovery, and 
biofuels.  There was reaffirmation that the U.S. and EU 
share common objectives of reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions, improving the global environment, enhancing 
energy security, and cutting air pollution and that the two 
sides are already working together in a number of fora. The 
High Level Dialogue was established at the EU-U.S. Summit in 
Vienna in June, with the objective of building on existing 
transatlantic initiatives and further advancing the 2005 G8 
Gleneagles Plan of Action for Climate Change, Clean Energy 
and Sustainable Development.  In Helsinki, U.S. Delegation 
Chair Under Secretary Dobriansky expressed satisfaction with 
the give-and-take during this two-day dialogue.  At the 
closing press conference, she announced that the U.S. would 
host the next HLD meeting in 2007. German representatives 
stated that as President of the European Commission and head 
of the G-8 in 2007, Germany will emphasize energy efficiency 
and follow up on other topics from the current HLD agenda. 
German Head of Delegation said strongly that the next 2007 
HLD should take place in the U.S. in May under German 
leadership. Media coverage reflected the positive tone of 
the dialogue.  Text of an agreed joint press statement is at 
para 10. 
 
Principal Participants 
 
¶2.  U.S.: 
U/S Paula Dobriansky, Department of State 
Chairman James Connaughton, White House Council on 
Environmental Quality (CEQ) 
Under Secretary David Garman, Department of Energy (DOE) 
Associate Assistant Administrator Robert Meyers, 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
Ambassador Marilyn Ware, U.S. Embassy Helsinki 
Ambassador Boyden Gray, USEU 
 
Finland: 
Minister Jan-Erik Enestam, Ministry of the Environment 
Minister Mauri Pekkarinen, Ministry of Trade and Industry, 
 
EU Commission: 
Director General Mogens Peter Carl, DG Environment 
Deputy Director General Fabrizio Barbaso, DG Transport and 
Energy 
 
Germany: 
State Secretary Matthias Machnig, Ministry of Environment 
Director General Urban Rid, Ministry of Environment 
 
--------------------- 
Themes and Highlights 
--------------------- 
 
¶3.  During two half-days of intensive working sessions, 
delegations from the U.S., Finland, the European Commission 
and Germany covered a broad array of topics related to 
climate change, clean energy and sustainable development. 
Reflecting an approach of "a little bit for everybody," 
discussion sessions included on-going U.S.-EU cooperation; 
greenhouse gas; carbon capture and storage; cleaner energy, 
including renewable energy and clean diesel; cleaner 
vehicles; and biodiversity.  The talks demonstrated that the 
U.S. and EU have far more in common than we have differences 
on a broad range of issues.  The dialogue was thorough, 
technical, and amicable throughout.  What follows are 
highlights of selected HLD themes.  We have also noted 
certain action and follow-up items for the coming weeks and 
months. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Lowering Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  While EU Commission and Finnish officials called for a 
Kyoto-like post 2012 approach to further reduce emissions, 
U.S. officials advanced the idea that government should act 
as a catalyst for private sector innovation, such as the 
 
HELSINKI 00001137  002 OF 004 
 
 
development of clean coal.  Delegates stressed, however, 
that U.S.-EU bilateral cooperation was not enough - cleaner 
coal technology needed to be shared with rapidly developing 
countries like India and China.  Both sides agreed that 
housing, consumer products, cars, tires, and lighting were 
all ripe sectors for further U.S.-EU bilateral cooperation. 
U/S Garman noted that the U.S. is aggressively moving 
forward with carbon capture, storage and sequestration 
technologies; however, complicated legal frameworks present 
cumbersome barriers.  U.S. and EU delegates shared views on 
the effectiveness of the Carbon Sequestration Leadership 
Forum and agreed to strengthen cooperation. 
 
¶5.  U/S Dobriansky called upon participants to advance the 
Gleneagles Plan of Action and work together to address 
climate change through developing technologies, while 
focusing on improving energy security and reducing poverty 
by ensuring global economic development.  She highlighted 
the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and 
Climate as a model for Kyoto and non-Kyoto countries alike 
to foster economic growth while also reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions.  She cited three examples for further 
transatlantic cooperation: 1) methane capture and recovery, 
2) improvements in energy efficiency including the aviation 
sector and further use of programs like EPA's and DOE's 
Energy Star, and 3) building international standards for 
biofuels, particularly biodiesel. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Clean Energy Fuelling Clean Vehicles 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Both the U.S. and EU recognized the need for a mix of 
traditional and alternative (complementary) energy sources 
to meet collective energy needs, especially in the 
transportation sector.  While Europe tends to support 
regulatory (punitive) measures to reduce emissions of 
pollutants and greenhouse gases, the U.S. prefers a market- 
based approach that creates incentives for the private 
sector to develop new technologies and for consumers to 
utilize those technologies.  CEQ's Connaughton pointed to 
U.S. income tax cuts that generated incentives for consumers 
to replace dated technology in their homes with newer, more 
efficient forms.  Both sides recognized the need for a 
breakthrough in technologies for the storage of energy from 
renewable sources, and identified this as an area for 
collaboration.  EU officials emphasized that developing 
renewable energy is a top priority and that the EU's new 
energy policy is intended to improve competitiveness while 
decreasing emissions and energy dependence. 
 
¶7.  EPA AAA Meyers highlighted recent U.S. regulations to 
reduce emissions by up to 95 percent in cars and passenger 
trucks and 90 percent in heavy duty trucks and non-road 
vehicles.   U.S. officials recognized that better use of 
diesel would reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and 
overall emissions.  Several EU delegates lamented that 
biofuels may have a negative environmental impact on 
biodiversity and land use, particularly in Europe.  U/S 
Garman emphasized the promise of science, technology and 
research in achieving a sustainable energy future, and he 
cited numerous examples related to possible future energy 
production, transmission and storage.  He expressed hope 
that next year's HLD would focus on advancing opportunities 
for U.S.-EU collaboration on basic energy research. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Biodiversity Loss:  Policies and Opportunities for Joint 
Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶8.  DG Carl highlighted Commission and member state efforts 
to preserve biodiversity.  In addition to conserving 
national parks, the EU has identified 2,000 sites, (20 
percent of EU territory), where an environmental impact 
study assessing biodiversity is required prior to commercial 
development.  Dobriansky underscored U.S. efforts to focus 
on both domestic and international policies to preserve 
biodiversity, including healthy forest initiatives, 
reurbanization with landscape corridors for migration, 
stringent endangered species laws, marine sanctuary laws, 
and prevention of over-fishing.  The U.S. leverages 
environmental and labor clauses of free trade agreements 
with developing nations to address tropical deforestation, a 
policy approach the EU Commission expressed interest in 
 
HELSINKI 00001137  003 OF 004 
 
 
adopting.  Both sides agreed they are interested in moving 
beyond arresting the extinction of endangered species to 
focusing on their restoration. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  Despite earlier disagreements with the Commission on an 
HLD agenda that included both energy and climate change, the 
Finnish Presidency succeeded in pulling together a 
discussion that successfully explored the synergies between 
energy policy goals and actions on addressing climate 
change, reducing air pollution and improving the global 
environment.  The U.S. was able to underscore for the press 
and conference delegates that EU-U.S. cooperation is ongoing 
on these issues, and the US has remained engaged by 
highlighting the comprehensive 2005 G8 Gleneagles Plan of 
Action.  Kyoto came up, but not often, and its mention 
provided opportunities for the U.S. side to highlight the 
growth of the U.S. economy and accompanying decreases in the 
growth rate of emissions.  As U/S Dobriansky noted, we have 
a tremendous public diplomacy opportunity to "celebrate our 
successes."  Environment Minister Enestam confirmed to U/S 
Dobriansky that the Finns view the HLD as a highlight of 
their Presidency and hope that it has laid the foundation 
for future engagement. 
 
¶10.  Text of joint U.S.-EU press release 
EU and U.S. will continue dialogue on climate change, 
clean energy and sustainable development 
 
Joint Press Release 
 
The European Union and the United States held the 
inaugural meeting of the EU-U.S. High Level Dialogue on 
Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable Development 
in Helsinki, Finland, on October 24-25, 2006. 
 
At the EU-U.S. Summit in Vienna in June, the leaders 
agreed to establish this dialogue in recognition of the 
serious and linked challenges in tackling climate change, 
promoting clean energy and achieving sustainable 
development globally. 
 
The objective of the Dialogue is to build on existing 
transatlantic initiatives and further advance the 2005 G8 
Gleneagles Plan of Action for Climate Change, Clean Energy 
and Sustainable Development. The talks are guided by the 
ultimate objective of the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. 
 
EU and U.S. delegations at the Helsinki meeting 
highlighted the substantial and growing level of U.S.- 
European collaboration and explored areas for further 
work. 
 
Discussion topics included: policies and measures to 
promote low greenhouse gas emission technologies; cleaner 
energy; cleaner and more efficient vehicles; and 
biodiversity loss. 
 
The two sides recognized their common objectives of 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving the global 
environment, enhancing energy security, and cutting air 
pollution. 
 
Both sides underlined the importance of creating the right 
mix of both supply and demand side policies, including a 
variety of market-based mechanisms to accelerate 
commercial use of clean technologies. 
 
The EU and U.S. delegations agreed to strengthen bilateral 
cooperation including to 
 
-- Promote the commercial deployment of clean coal and 
carbon sequestration technologies, including through the 
Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum; 
 
-- Promote energy efficiency, particularly in the 
transportation sector and for buildings and appliances; 
 
-- Enhance methane recovery including through the Methane- 
to-Markets Partnership; 
 
 
HELSINKI 00001137  004 OF 004 
 
 
-- Research, develop and deploy second-generation 
biofuels; 
 
-- Overcome barriers to the use of renewable energy 
sources and biofuels, including through the development of 
international standards; 
 
-- Address global biodiversity loss through natural 
resource conservation and other joint efforts; and 
 
-- Enhance energy access for sustainable development 
Both sides reaffirmed their commitment to continue joint 
dialogue and efforts under the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change including work on long term cooperative 
action in the process established in Montreal in December 
¶2005. 
 
The participants agreed to continue the dialogue through 
annual meetings. The next High Level Meeting will be in 
2007 in the U.S. 
 
Finland's Environment Minister Jan-Erik Enestam and 
Minister of Trade and Industry Mauri Pekkarinen hosted the 
meeting for the EU Presidency, along with Environment 
Director General Mogens Peter Carl and Transport and 
Energy Deputy Director General Fabrizio Barbaso from the 
European Commission. The United States delegation, led by 
Under Secretary of State for Democracy and Global Affairs 
Paula Dobriansky, was co-chaired by White House Council on 
Environmental Quality Chairman James Connaughton and Under 
Secretary of Energy David Garman. Other participants 
 
SIPDIS 
included Secretary of State, Ministry of the Environment, 
Matthias Machnig from Germany, upcoming EU Presidency, and 
representatives from the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. 
 
End joint press release. 
 
WARE