06HELSINKI91
FINLAND: BROAD SUPORT FOR UN REFORM
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HELSINKI 000091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR IO, EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM ADCO
SUBJECT: FINLAND: BROAD SUPORT FOR UN REFORM 
 
REF: SECSTATE 4746 
 
¶1.  (U)  Charge delivered reftel demarche to Foreign Minister 
Erkki Tuomioja on January 25.  She underscored the importance 
the U.S. attaches to UN reform by emphasizing our 
instructions to deliver the demarche at the 
ministerial-level.  Tuomioja welcomed the initiative and 
indicated broad agreement with the U.S. on our shared UN 
reform agenda.  The Foreign Minister--  a committed 
multilateralist with a deep interest in advancing global 
human rights--  indicated that sound reforms in NY and Geneva 
were a top priority for the GoF.  Finland was 
"half-satisfied" with the September agreements coming out of 
the World Summit, and with subsequent progress in some areas, 
especially the Peacebuilding Commission; however, management 
reform, the Human Rights Council, and the Security Council 
remained thorny and complicated issues. 
 
¶2.  (U)  MGMT Reform:  Finland strongly supports the Outcome 
Document and agrees that improved ethics and oversight are 
needed to ensure effective use of UN resources.  Redundant 
resources should be redirected to different initiatives.  The 
top management reform priority should be giving the UNSYG the 
needed tools to do his or her job.  The GoF supports 
increased UNSYG authority over resource redeployment and 
hopes to work closely with the U.S. to achieve this. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Human Rights Council:  The Charge emphasized the 
importance of this initiative, citing the lack of credibility 
of the Commission for Human Rights after electing Libya as 
its chair and failing to sanction major human rights abusers 
like Cuba and Sudan.  Tuomioja agreed with the need for 
reform; however, he took issue with the efficacy and 
credibility of the Commission, opining that there were some 
solid achievements to its credit despite the obvious 
shortcomings.  The Foreign Minister said the successor Human 
Rights Council had to be at least as effective as the 
Commission, which meant NGO participation, effective global 
human rights definitions and guidelines, and appropriate use 
of country-specific resolutions.  The composition of the 
Council was problematic.  The GoF favors a larger Council to 
maximize Finland's opportunity for membership; a figure close 
to the size of the Security Council was too small.  On 
excluding egregious human rights offenders, Tuomioja said 
using sanctions as a litmus test was a possibility, but that 
this had its drawbacks too, and he was not fully convinced it 
was a good idea.  Ongoing intra-EU debate on these issues was 
complicated and compromises would be necessary. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Security Council:  Tuomioja said that even if an 
agreement could not be reached at this stage, it was 
important to keep the dialogue moving.  Finland supports the 
"G-4 Resolution," and officially supports German and Japanese 
permanent membership.  Finland opposes new veto powers for 
any new members, and, "in a perfect world," would support the 
elimination of all vetoes.  Finally, even if no ideal 
solution could be found, Tuomioja hoped that the Security 
Council could at least be made more representative of the 
international community. 
HYATT