06HELSINKI1231
FINNS PREPARE FOR THE WORST: A RUSSIAN OIL SPILL
Tue Dec 12 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO2963
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHHE #1231/01 3461457
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121457Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2820
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RULSJGA/COMDT COGARD WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 001231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  NA 
TAGS: SENV EWWT EPET EUN FI
SUBJECT: FINNS PREPARE FOR THE WORST: A RUSSIAN OIL SPILL 
IN THE GULF OF FINLAND 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Fearing that Russia will react slowly to 
an oil spill and utilize controversial environmentally 
harsh clean up methods, Finland has taken a leadership role 
in the region by developing new oil spill clean up 
technology and by providing bilateral aid to Russia. 
During the past decade, oil transportation in the Gulf of 
Finland has increased by a factor of six, and experts 
predict shipping from Russian ports will increase by an 
additional 50 percent over the next ten years.  Given that 
the Baltic Sea is also shallow, heavily polluted and dotted 
with hundreds of islands; it is environmentally fragile 
enough that a serious spill would have devastating economic 
and social consequences both in Finland and the region. 
Finland therefore hopes that its aid and outreach efforts 
with Russia now will payoff later should an oil spill in 
Russian waters occur.  End summary. 
 
Will Russia Call?  Likely Scenario during an Oil Spill 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In the event of an oil spill, GOF Environment 
Ministry officials want the Russians to request Finnish 
assistance immediately.  However they fear that RussiaQs 
complicated legal framework and confusion over jurisdiction 
may ultimately delay such a request.  Finnish NGOs 
recognize the excellent training of their under-equipped 
St. Petersburg colleagues, but are concerned about a 
disconnect between local authorities and Moscow over oil 
spill clean up authority.  Since the clean up window in the 
narrow Gulf of Finland is limited to one to three days 
before the oil reaches land and since Russia has only one 
oil spill cleanup vessel in the entire Baltic Sea (compared 
to FinlandQs 15 ship-size vessels, and over 100 smaller 
vessels), Russia will need to make its formal request 
quickly for any assistance to be effective.  Regardless, 
should an oil spill occur, Finland plans to deploy an oil 
combating vessel within four hours even though such a 
vessel would be unable to enter Russian waters until Russia 
formally requests assistance.  Citing communication 
challenges and bureaucratic inertia in Moscow, GOF 
officials fear that by the time the request arrives, it 
will be too late. 
 
Regional Cooperation and Controversy 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) The nine members of the Baltic Marine Environment 
Protection Commission (HELCOM) (which include Russia) are 
legally committed to assist each other during an oil spill; 
however, success depends on member states fulfilling their 
commitment to each other.  Annually HELCOM organizes an oil 
spill response exercise to improve interoperability and 
training.  HELCOM officials said the organization has 
defined procedures for requesting assistance from other 
countries; however, even during scheduled exercises 
response times vary greatly -- with Russian response being 
near the bottom.  HELCOM officials carefully sidestepped 
questions about RussiaQs overall oil spill preparation by 
saying that actual preparation is a Qmember state issue 
and that Russia is an effective and contributing member of 
HELCOM. 
 
¶5. (SBU) While HELCOM strongly recommends environmentally- 
friendly mechanical clean up methods that absorb or 
physically remove oil from water, these methods are also 
the most expensive and difficult to use.  Many believe 
Russia would resort to less expensive dispersal agents such 
as surfactants, solvents, or other compounds -- a highly 
controversial method in the region since dispersants simply 
cause the spilled oil to dilute and sink to the bottom. 
Experts question the effectiveness of dispersants in icy 
conditions and in water as shallow as the Baltic Sea. 
Under the right conditions, burning spilled oil may also be 
considered as a method; however, this method requires 
extensive preparation and optimum sea conditions to be 
effective. 
 
Challenges Posed By the Baltic Sea Environment 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (SBU) Finland has developed a wide range of techniques 
and equipment for oil spills in winter; however, Finnish 
officials privately express that there are many Qunsolved 
questionsQ in dealing with a major oil spill in either icy 
or stormy conditions.  At the same time, Finland is 
concerned that the Baltic Sea is increasingly at risk of a 
catastrophic spill.  It is extremely shallow and already 
heavily polluted.  This fact, coupled with the significant 
number of islands in the Baltic Sea, makes the coastline 
 
HELSINKI 00001231  002 OF 002 
 
 
especially vulnerable to long-term consequences from such a 
spill.  Congested and intersecting traffic lanes, combined 
with severe storms and icy conditions make it increasingly 
difficult to operate in the Baltic Sea.  Of the 151 
shipping accidents in the Baltic Sea in 2005, 13 required 
some sort of environmental clean up.  During a recent 
Baltic Sea Conference, GOF officials said the nine members 
of HELCOM likely have insufficient equipment to deal with a 
major oil spill. 
 
WARE