09HELSINKI60
FINLAND: 2009 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING-IN-PERSONS REPORT
Wed Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO5525
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHHE #0060/01 0491246
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181246Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4813
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHTL/AMEMBASSY TALLINN 4221
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 4960
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0563
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0131
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0084
RUEHLN/AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 0206
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 HELSINKI 000060 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, EUR/NB, EUR/PGI 
STATE PASS AID 
 
PART 02 OF 02 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC ELAB FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: 2009 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING-IN-PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: (A)2008 STATE 132759 (B)STATE 005577 (C) Email dtd December 15, 
2008 Finland Action Guide (D) 2008 Helsinki 00563(E) 2008 Helsinki 
00574 
(F)Helsinki 00059 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  001.2 OF 009 
 
 
(SBU) Begin Text.  The following has been keyed according to ref A. 
 
 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
25A, B, C:  The following Finnish criminal laws specifically pertain 
to trafficking in human beings (both sexual and labor offenses). 
They entered into force on 1 August 2004 (Act No. 650/2004; 
Government Bill HE 34/2004).  The laws cover both national 
(internal), Schengen-based and transnational (external) 
trafficking. 
 
--Chapter 25-Section 3 Penal Code 1889/39: Trafficking in Human 
Beings (minimum sentence: 4 months imprisonment; maximum: 6 years 
imprisonment; fines may also be assessed) 
 
--Chapter 25-Section 3A Penal Code 1889/39: Aggravated Trafficking 
in Human Beings (minimum sentence: 2 years imprisonment; maximum: 10 
years imprisonment; fines may also be assessed) 
 
Trafficking in Human Beings (Legal text follows): "Under Chapter 25, 
Section 3, Subsection 1, of the Finnish Penal Code, anyone who by 
means of 1) taking advantage of the dependent position or insecurity 
of another person, 2) deceiving or taking advantage of the deception 
of another person, 3) making a payment to a person having control 
over another person, or 4) accepting such a payment (means) to 
assume control over or recruit another person, or to transfer, 
transport, receive or harbor another person (acts) to subject him or 
her to sexual abuse referred to in Chapter 20, Section 9, Subsection 
1, Paragraph 1 (of the Finnish Penal Code) or comparable form of 
sexual abuse, forced labor, or other conditions violating the 
dignity of human being, or for the purpose of removal of organs or 
tissues, with a view to obtaining financial benefits (motives), 
shall be sentenced for trafficking in human beings.  Under Chapter 
25, Section 3, Subsection 2, of the Penal Code, anyone who, of a 
motive referred to in Subsection 1, assumes control over a person 
under the age of 18 years or recruits, transfers, transports, 
receives or harbors such a person shall also be sentenced for 
trafficking, even if none of the means referred to in paragraphs 1 
to 4 of subsection 1 have been used.  An attempt to commit 
trafficking is also punishable." 
 
Aggravated Trafficking in Human Beings (Legal text follows):  "The 
offender is convicted of aggravated trafficking in human beings 
where 1) trafficking involves use of violence, a threat or fraud 
instead of or in addition to the means referred to in Section 3, 2) 
a serious bodily injury, a serious disease or a threat to life or 
particularly strong suffering is caused by trafficking intentionally 
or of gross negligence, 3) the offence is committed against a child 
or person under the age of 18 years, whose capability to defend 
oneself has essentially weakened, or 4) the offence has been 
committed as part of the activities of an organized criminal group 
referred to in Chapter 17, Section 1a, Subsection 4, of the Penal 
Code.  It is further required for the existence of the elements of 
aggravated trafficking that the offense is considered aggravated on 
the whole.  The offender is also convicted of aggravated trafficking 
in human beings where he or she subjects another person to slavery 
or keeps another person in slavery, transports slaves, or carries 
out trade in slaves, if the offence is considered aggravated on the 
whole." 
 
Finland amended the Act of the Ombudsman for Minorities (enacted on 
January 1, 2009) obligating the Ombudsman4s Office as the national 
TIP rappateur.  The Ombudsman for Minorities is an authority with 
the basic task of advancing the status and legal protection of 
ethnic minorities and foreigners as well as equality, 
non-discrimination and good ethnic relations in Finland. 
 
 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  002.2 OF 009 
 
 
The GoF may also utilize the following laws to prosecute individuals 
engaged in sex or labor trafficking: 
 
--Pandering: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for a maximum of 
three years. 
--Aggravated Pandering: Subject to imprisonment for a minimum of 
four months and a maximum of six years. 
--Coercion into a Sexual Act: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for 
a maximum of three years. 
--Arrangement of Illegal Immigration: Subject to a fine or 
imprisonment for a maximum of two years. 
--Aggravated Arrangement of Illegal Immigration: Subject to 
imprisonment for a minimum of four months and a maximum of six 
years. 
--Aggravated Usury: Subject to imprisonment for at least four months 
and a maximum of four years. 
--Work Safety Offense: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for a 
maximum of one year. 
-- Working Hours Offense: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for a 
maximum of six months. 
-- Work Discrimination: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for a 
maximum of six months. 
-- Violation of the Rights of an Employee Representative: Subject to 
a fine. 
-- Violation of the Right to Organize: Subject to a fine. 
-- Employment Agency Offense: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for 
a maximum of one year. 
-- Work Permit Offense: Subject to a fine or imprisonment for a 
maximum of one year. 
 
Finnish law permits the use of electronic surveillance techniques by 
Finnish law enforcement during the investigation of TIP-related 
crimes.  Trafficking of minors is considered an aggravated offense, 
and penalties for perpetrators are higher than for similar crimes 
involving adults.  Finland is not a source country for labor 
migrants. 
 
25D:  Chapter 20-Section 1 of the Finnish Penal Code provides for a 
minimum of 1, and maximum of 6 years imprisonment for Rape.  Chapter 
20-Section 2 of the Finnish Penal Code provides for a minimum of 2, 
and maximum of 10 years imprisonment for Aggravated Rape.  The laws 
for trafficking provide similar penalties, with the exception of 
Rape versus Trafficking in Human Beings, where the minimum sentence 
for Rape is eight months longer than a similar minimum sentence for 
Trafficking in Human Beings.  The penal code defines aggravated rape 
if in the rape, grievous bodily injury, serious illness or a state 
of mortal danger is inflicted on another; the offence is committed 
by several people; or especially hard mental or physical suffering 
is caused; the offence is committed in a particularly brutal, cruel 
or humiliating manner; or a firearm, edged weapon or other lethal 
instrument is used or a threat of other serious violence is made, 
the offender shall be sentenced for aggravated rape to imprisonment 
for at least two years and at most ten years.  As with most of the 
penal code, this section also punishes attempts. 
 
25E:  The GoF has actively investigated and prosecuted TIP cases 
during this reporting period.  Finnish Police, FBG and the NBI 
initiated approximately 9 TIP-related investigations; one case begun 
during 2007 resulted in aggravated trafficking convictions and at 
least two cases are in appeal.  Finland chose to prosecute an 
unusually egregious domestic case during this reporting period as 
trafficking because the conditions warranted (ref D).  (NOTE: This 
was the second such trafficking conviction in Finland4s history (the 
first one was in 2007).  End note.) 
 
Number of investigations initiated: 
                               2007    2008 
Aggravated trafficking           1       2 
Trafficking                      2       7 
Aggravated pandering             0       0 
Aggravated facilitation of illegal entry 
                                13       8 
Work discrimination resembling usury 
                                17      45 
 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  003.2 OF 009 
 
 
25E - cont.  During the reporting period, no known traffickers were 
given suspended sentences or released with only a fine. 
 
The GoF used the following laws to investigate, prosecute, convict 
and sentence traffickers: 
--Aggravated trafficking: Penal Code, Chapter 25, Section 3a 
(650/2004) 
--Trafficking:            Penal Code, Chapter 25, Section 3 
(650/2004) 
--Aggravated pandering:   Penal Code, Chapter 20, Section 9a 
(650/2004) 
--Aggravated facilitation of illegal entry: Penal Code, Chapter 17, 
Section 8a (650/2004) 
--Work discrimination resembling usury: Penal Code, Chapter 36, 
Section 6 (769/1990) 
 
Type of trafficking offense for the 9 cases initiated in 2008: 
Sexual exploitation              5 
Labor exploitation              3 
Domestic servitude              1 
 
25E - cont.  The GoF maintained its policy of criminally 
investigating and prosecuting individuals (and employers) who 
confiscate workers' passports and travel documents, switch contracts 
or terms of contracts without the workers consent (where such 
contracts exist), use physical or sexual abuse or threat of such 
abuse to keep workers in a state of service, withhold payment of 
salaries as a means of keeping workers in a state of service.  The 
Finnish Construction Trade Union noted that immigrants know their 
rights and are willing to organize, but that foreign recruitment 
companies (Estonia, Poland) do not meet Finnish working condition 
standards.  While the union acknowledged that most cases are not 
trafficking, the pay and allowances fulfilled by the foreign 
recruitment companies are substandard. 
 
25F:  The GoF provides a range of TIP-related training to its 
personnel.  Within the law enforcement community, TIP awareness 
training is integrated into the formal classroom training programs 
of the Finnish Police and Border Guards.  Training occurs at the 
time of entry into the respective law enforcement agencies, and 
continuing training occurs throughout the careers of law enforcement 
personnel.  During this reporting period, all training was provided 
using existing GoF resources and staff, and did not utilize the 
funding or resources of the USG or NGOs; however, NBI asked for and 
received the right to use a DHS short video, which they subsequently 
subtitled in Finnish and released December 2008.  Additional 
awareness training was provided in the following venues: 
 
--March 2009 (Helsinki):  Permanent formation of the Trafficking in 
Human Beings Intelligence Group. 
 
--Ongoing: (Helsinki):  Internal police website 
 
--Ongoing: (Helsinki):  Extended police college training covering 
(1) awareness (2) victim support and (3) investigation as part of 
Basic Police Studies and Commanding Officer Studies. 
 
--Ongoing (Finland):  Training trainers and commanding officers of 
local police units responsible for aliens 
 
--Ongoing:  State-owned airline Finnair continues training new 
flight attendants providing information as part of new employee 
orientation on how to identify and report potential TIP victims, 
particularly children and unaccompanied minors, on Finnair 
international flights. 
 
-- Finland hosted the 2008 OSCE Trafficking conference. 
 
25G:  The GoF actively cooperates with other governments to 
investigate and prosecute TIP-related crimes.  They are active 
members of Europol and Interpol.  The GoF deployed NBI and FBG 
liaison officers abroad, specifically to Estonia, Russia, China, 
France, Spain and the Netherlands.  Finland participates in a law 
enforcement network that operates in twenty countries and will be 
sending a liaison to Abuja, Nigeria in 2009.  Russia is specifically 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  004.2 OF 009 
 
 
targeted for improved cooperation in the revised national action 
plan.  Finnish officers abroad work on a range of immigration and 
law enforcement matters.  One area of focus includes TIP prevention 
initiatives with local counterparts.  The overseas Finnish law 
enforcement staff also work in Finnish embassies to assist in TIP 
victim identification and prevention at the time a potential 
victim's visa application is filed.  Additionally, they work with 
national airline Finnair at their Asian stations to provide 
TIP-related training to Finnair's ground staff and to provide 
liaison support to other diplomatic missions and airlines. 
According to NBI, Estonia, Sweden and Russia cooperated with Finland 
on approximately ten cases during the reporting period. 
 
25H:  Finland will consider extradition requests from all countries 
for non-Finnish citizens residing in, or traveling through Finland, 
who are apprehended as a result of a warrant/request for 
extradition.  The Finnish Constitution only permits Finnish citizens 
to be extradited to other Member States of the European Union and 
other Nordic Countries.  During this reporting period, the GoF 
extradited one EU citizen for a TIP-related crime from Finland, and 
received two traffickers extradited from Estonia.  The GoF is not 
currently modifying its extradition laws for TIP; officials state 
that current law is effective and in full compliance with the 
requirements of the European Union and its other international 
treaty obligations.    US residents have not been implicated nor 
extradited, though during the reporting period, officials cancelled 
a US tourist visa held by an Indian national in an alien smuggling 
case. 
 
25I, J:  The GoF, at the national, local or institutional level, has 
never tolerated the trafficking or smuggling of humans. 
 
25K:  Prostitution is legal in Finland.  The sale and purchase of 
sex in public is illegal throughout Finland, as are brothels and 
clubs permitting sex on premises.  There are no "red light" 
districts in Finland.  Pimping, pandering, and organized 
prostitution are illegal.  Trafficked prostitution is criminalized. 
Buying sexual services from minors or victims of trafficking is 
criminalized.  The laws are uniformly enforced.  Finnish sex workers 
may accept customers in private residences, apartments and, 
depending upon the circumstances, in hotels.  They may not solicit 
customers in public places.  Commercial sex workers typically 
advertise their services via the internet, although word of mouth is 
common as well.  Foreign prostitutes (non-Finns) will typically 
attempt to solicit customers via the internet, in clubs or in other 
discreet venues.  According to Finnish law enforcement, many 
non-Finns come to Finland and rent apartments for short periods of 
time so that they may establish a base from which attract customers. 
 The age of sexual consent in Finland is 16; the minimum age for sex 
workers is 18. 
 
25L:   No TIP-related cases involving Finnish troops or government 
personnel deployed overseas as part of a peacekeeping or other 
similar mission occurred. 
 
25M:  Finland is not a source or destination country for child sex 
tourism, and does not have an identified child sex tourism problem. 
According to the Finnish Ministry of Justice, if a Finn engages in 
child sex tourism overseas, Finland's laws provide for the 
extraterritorial prosecution of such acts, and would be investigated 
and prosecuted by Finnish law enforcement.(Note:  Historically, 
Finland has uncovered and prosecuted one sex tourism case to the 
fullest extent of the law (10 years) under child pornography laws. 
End note.)  According to NBI, during the reporting period, the GoF 
extradited fewer than ten foreigners on the basis of sexual abuse of 
a child; officials did not link these foreigners to sex tourism. 
 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
26A:  The GoF provides support and protection to foreign trafficking 
victims.  Legislation enacted in 2006 permits TIP victims to be 
granted a special Finnish residence permit.  The aim of the Finnish 
permit for victims of trafficking is to help free the victims from 
the grip of criminals involved in trafficking in human beings and to 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  005.2 OF 009 
 
 
facilitate their cooperation with the Finnish law enforcement 
investigative process.  A residence permit issued by the GoF to a 
victim of trafficking in human beings does not limit the possibility 
of applying for asylum in Finland and/or receiving international 
protection.  EU/EEA and Swiss nationals and their family members who 
fall victim to trafficking may register their right of residence or 
apply for a residence card at a police station; there is no 
requirement that they apply for a special residence permit.  NBI 
reports that 21 persons have used the Assistance program since its 
inception (11 female, 10 male).  As of December 2008, 12 persons 
were receiving help through the program.  In cases of victims deemed 
particularly vulnerable, a continuous residence permit may be 
granted even if the victim does not possess a valid travel document. 
 
 
26A - cont.  Residence Permits, once granted, are valid for 6-12 
months and the recipient has an unrestricted right to gainful 
employment in Finland.  A victim without a national passport may be 
granted an alien's passport on application to the Finnish 
Immigration Service.  The residence permit may be renewed as 
necessary.  New fixed-term (extended) residence permits are usually 
granted by the police in the municipality of the victim's residence. 
 If a victim has been granted a temporary residence permit, after 
two years of continuous residence they are granted a continuous 
(permanent) residence permit if the requirements for issuing the 
permit are still met. 
 
26A - cont.  The GoF does not currently have a formal witness 
protection program similar to the model prevalent in the US. 
According to NBI, if a witness or victim requires protection from 
traffickers or during a trial, the police can, with the permission 
of the victim/witness, place them in safe locations for three months 
at a time (which can be renewed as needed).  In one instance, 
officials offered assistance to an Indian witness/victim in an alien 
smuggling case who was threatened by telephone by the smuggler. 
 
26B:  The GoF maintains a robust victims' assistance program, both 
for Finnish citizens and for foreign victims seeking protection in 
Finland.  The nly difference in the treatment of victims is how he 
various agencies providing victims assistanceare reimbursed.  This 
is transparent to the victim; if the victim is a resident of 
Finland, the local municipality covers all costs, and if they are a 
non-resident, the GoF pays the costs.  Either way, the victim is not 
assessed any fees.  According to current GoF operating procedures, 
emergency assistance will be provided as soon as a victim is found, 
reached or identified, irrespective of whether the victim resides in 
the country lawfully.  In the provision of emergency assistance, the 
GoF is attentive to the victim's capacities and mental state and to 
his or her capability to understand the provided information and to 
make decisions.  Finnish law requires that all victims be provided 
with translation services if required (Act on the Status and Rights 
of Social Welfare Clients, 812/2000, Section 5), and that the 
victim's individual needs and culture be taken into account in his 
or her care and treatment (Act on the Status and Rights of Patients, 
785/1992, Section 3). 
 
26B - cont.  The Finnish Ministry of Employment and the Economy is 
charged with managing emergency victims' assistance to 
non-residents.  Foreign nationals/non-residents who are victims of 
trafficking are taken to two specialized "Reception Centers" which 
are fully staffed by trained social welfare, immigration, labor and 
medical staff capable of providing assistance to TIP victims. 
Individuals who are under 18 years old are taken to a facility at 
Oulu, while those 18 and above are taken to a facility at Joutseno. 
Facilities provide shelter, medical and counseling services, food 
and clothing to victims.  An individual may seek emergency services 
at a shelter, even if they do not file any criminal charges against 
a possible trafficker.  Shelter staff may not refer individuals to 
law enforcement personnel against their will.    NGOs also operate 
shelters and drop-in 24-hour facilities available to trafficking 
victims.  Since several ministries fund different portions of these 
social services initiatives and fund the NGOs, any estimate would 
probably be low.  Funding also extends beyond trafficking issues 
(into such issues as domestic violence and refugee asylum). 
 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  006.2 OF 009 
 
 
26C:  Finland is a social welfare state, and the GoF assumes 
responsibility for many TIP-related victims' services that are 
typically provided by NGOs in other countries.  As a result, there 
are no NGOs working exclusively on providing assistance to TIP 
victims, and only a few that address it among other issues of 
concern to women. Still, the GoF provided domestic funding to NGOs 
that supported TIP-related programming.  The Multicultural Women's 
Association (MONIKA), which focuses on psychological, physical, 
sexual and economic abuse against residents of Finland and 
Pro-Tukipiste are the lead organizations.  The GoF funds a series of 
NGO-operated hotlines for TIP and domestic violence victims.  The 
Finnish Red Cross works with the Danish Red Cross on related 
issues. 
 
26D, E, F:  Trafficking victims are not deported and fall under the 
explanations and services in section 26A, B, and C. 
 
26F:  Finnish Border Guards, Police and social services personnel 
are well trained in the potential identification of trafficked or 
suspected TIP victims at Ports of Entry and within Finland's 
borders.  Current Border Guard and Police protocols require that 
suspected victims of trafficking be taken to a victim assistance 
reception center.  The head of the respective reception center 
formally provides the referring agency with a confirmation of 
acceptance of the victim.  Reception center consultants (including 
medical, social work, immigration and law enforcement professionals) 
evaluate the victim's case and decide on the course of care for the 
victim (e.g. transportation to a safe house in instances of 
immediate danger).  There have been approximately nine potential TIP 
victims who have utilized Finnish Reception Centers during the 
reporting period.  Finnish law enforcement and social services 
agencies do not track the number of potential TIP victims referred 
to Reception Centers; they merely track the total number of TIP 
victims who have sought services from the centers. 
 
26G:  Officials identified nine victims during the reporting period. 
 Thirteen victims were referred to care facilities; this number 
includes "suspected" victims and NGO referrals not processed by 
police.  The threshold for assistance is lower than the threshold 
for prosecution. 
 
26H:  GoF law enforcement personnel have been trained to screen for, 
and identify, suspected victims of trafficking in Finland's 
commercial sex trade.  The Border Guard and Finnish police use a 
series of written TIP guidelines developed by the Finnish 
Immigration Service (FIS).  The document includes key TIP victim 
identification questions which are to be used during interviews with 
foreign nationals who have been encountered by police involving sex 
or labor related crimes.  The document also provides a list of 
mandatory protocols to be used by law enforcement personnel aimed at 
protecting a potential victim's rights, and ensuring that they are 
quickly referred to relevant immigration and social welfare 
specialists for further review of their cases.  According to current 
GoF protocols, as soon as Finnish Police suspect that a victim may 
have been trafficked, they must immediately turn the potential TIP 
victim over to the FIS for placement in a TIP Reception Center. 
Additionally, the Border Guards and Finnish Police are required to 
refer all potential TIP victims, whether at a Port of Entry or 
within Finland, who claim credible fear and make a request for 
asylum, to the FIS for expedited review of their claim and access to 
GoF social services. 
 
26I:  The GoF does not treat TIP victims as criminals; it actively 
seeks to protect them and their legal rights.  The GoF also provides 
trafficking victims with access to the Finnish Service for Crime 
Victims, which provides personal support and legal advice for those 
who find themselves victims of a crime.  Additionally, under the 
Finnish Act on Compensation for Crime Damage, victims can receive 
compensation from the perpetrator of a crime for personal injuries 
(including for costs of medical treatment), pain and suffering, a 
permanent handicap or mental anguish.  In the event that a 
perpetrator is unable to pay for damages, a crime has remained 
unsolved, or if the perpetrator has not been apprehended, 
compensation can be obtained directly from the GoF by a victim 
without the need for a formal court decision. 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  007.2 OF 009 
 
 
 
26J:  The GoF strongly encourages all victims of crime, whether 
trafficking or otherwise, to assist the police and prosecutors in 
prosecuting crimes.  The GoF does not impede victims of trafficking 
from filing civil suits or from seeking legal action against 
traffickers, but civil courts suits of that type are generally 
uncommon in Finland compared to the US.  The Kotka case (Ref D) is 
an example of victim restitution. 
 
26K:  The GoF provides TIP-related training for its Border Guards, 
police, diplomatic personnel assigned overseas, public health 
workers, immigration adjudication staff and flight attendants for 
national flag carrier Finnair.  Border Guards are provided with 
ongoing training on ways in which to identify trafficked persons at 
Ports of Entry (e.g. they have specific lists of vetted questions 
for unaccompanied minors transiting Finland).  Finnish police are 
trained in the identification of potentially trafficked persons when 
they are conducting a law enforcement interview regarding 
individuals suspected of prostitution and pandering.  Labor Ministry 
officials are trained at identifying potential instances of labor 
trafficking or servitude when conducting site and licensing 
inspections at restaurants and factories.  Finnair flight attendants 
are trained to identify unaccompanied minors on international 
flights who fit the profile of possible victims.  Such training also 
focuses on the identification and needs of potentially trafficked 
children.  The revised national action plan adds teacher training, 
specifically focused on the trafficking phenomena and children. 
 
26K - cont.  The Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) provides 
comprehensive immigration training for personnel working or destined 
to work at Finnish embassies and consulates.  This training always 
includes a TIP section which is provided by experts on trafficking 
issues; usually experts from the MFA and/or the National Bureau of 
Investigation.  Training courses are organized by the MFA twice a 
year and they include, inter alia, specific training on the 
identification of trafficking victims.  The MFA is closely 
cooperating with both national and international NGOs and other 
civil society actors on trafficking issues.  Within the context of 
the Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) Task Force for 
Trafficking in Human Beings, Finland has also been initiating 
educational programs on trafficking issues for diplomatic staff in 
the CBSS states. 
 
26K - cont.  According to the Finnish MFA, Finnish embassies always 
follow the human rights situation of the country concerned, 
including the situation of trafficking.  They have close contacts 
with local actors including NGOs working with human rights issues. 
Overseas, many Finnish embassies have used their operating funds to 
further their cooperation with local NGOs for projects related to 
human rights, including the prevention of trafficking and sexual 
exploitation of, and providing assistance to, trafficking victims. 
These funds are granted to, and managed by local NGO.  The Finnish 
MFA does not maintain records on the number of trafficking victims 
supported by its missions overseas.  During this period, the MFA did 
not issue trafficking-specific travel documents to potential victims 
of trafficking identified overseas. 
 
 
26L:  The GoF maintains a robust victim's assistance program for 
Finnish citizens, including for citizens of Finland who may be 
repatriated to Finland as a result of their being a victim of 
trafficking.  During this reporting period, no Finns were 
repatriated to Finland as a result of their victimization as a 
trafficked person. 
 
26M:  Major Finnish NGOs addressing trafficking (in addition to 
other issues) in Finland include: Pro-Tukipiste (heading a network 
of 30 NGOs), MonikaNaiset,and the Finnish Red Cross.  IOM also 
conducts monitoring of TIP-related policies and programs in Finland. 
Several of these NGOS operate shelters that provide direct or 
indirect assistance and counseling to TIP victims.  Pro-Tukipiste 
operates a phone hotline. 
 
Prevention 
---------- 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  008.2 OF 009 
 
 
 
27A:  The GoF targeted prostitution, massage and sex-work for 
interviews and distribution of pamphlets in source country languages 
to ensure that workers knew their rights and were aware of what 
constituted trafficking.  DuriQ this reporting period, GoF began 
using a short video obtained from DHS to educate the public about 
trafficking via the internet and television; they have requested 
that the video be shown by Finnair on flights and the outcome is 
pending.  NBI also produced a video for police training purposes. 
Some cable television programming comes from neighboring Nordic 
countries so additional anti-prostitution public service 
announcements reach a Finnish audience.  The MFA again distributed 
brochures at the "Matka" travel show, attended by over 80,000 Finns, 
warning that sex tourism is a crime, and highlighting the damage 
such crimes cause to children. 
 
27B:  The GoF effectively monitored immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking.  The lead agency for the 
detection of potential TIP victims at Finland's Ports of Entry is 
the Finnish Border Guards.  All new Border Guards receive classroom 
TIP training prior to deployment to the field. 
 
27C:  The GoF has actively involved as many stakeholders, including 
NGOs, as possible in the TIP policy discussion.  The 2008 Revised 
National Plan of Action against Trafficking in Human Beings included 
the active participation of a number of NGOs and civic 
organizations.  The MOI and NBI have identified senior 
representatives who are charged with maintaining effective TIP 
related liaison with NGOs.  Such liaison attempts to identify 
potential trends in trafficking in Finland, the identification of 
specific cases for investigation, and to seek feedback on the 
effectiveness of law enforcement efforts in the fight against TIP. 
 
 
27D: In 2008 the GoF revised its National Plan of Action Against 
Trafficking in Human Beings, which originally established a GoF 
"Steering Committee" in 2005 charged with coordinating the 
implementation of the Action Plan.  The committee meets frequently 
at the policy level.  Day-to-day law enforcement coordination on TIP 
investigations and enforcement activities falls to the National 
Joint Intelligence Center.  The Ministry of the Interior (MoI) is 
the lead Ministry on TIP issues, given that the MoI includes the 
Finnish Immigration Service, National Bureau of Intelligence, Police 
and Border Guards.  The NBI (and to a lesser extent, the Border 
Guards) coordinate multilateral TIP law enforcement cooperation and 
investigations with third countries and organizations for the GoF. 
The Revised National Action Plan was developed by representatives of 
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Health, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Education, the 
Border Guard and the National Bureau of Investigation.  NGOs were 
involved in reviewing and providing input to the revision. 
 
27E:  During this period, the GoF and police have continued to 
aggressively enforce prostitution related laws, such as pandering 
and aggravated pandering, as a means of countering the potential for 
organized prostitution in Finland.  Finnish laws are not geared 
towards punishing the nation's commercial sex workers, but rather 
those who seek to purchase or procure commercial sexual.  The 
purchase of sexual services from trafficked persons is fully 
criminalized.  A new NGO, called EXIT, is in the formative phase and 
will assist commercial sex workers wanting to move out of sex work. 
 
27F:  The Finnish MFA continues to actively publicize the fact that 
sex tourism is a crime in Finland by, for example, distributing such 
information at travel fairs.  Finns are subject to Finnish law at 
home or abroad. 
 
27G:  Finnish troops assigned to overseas peacekeeping missions 
receive intensive anti-TIP training at the Ministry of Defense's 
(MOD) International Center.  Military legal advisors and medical 
personnel provide classroom instruction, video presentations and 
practical exercises, all aimed at providing deployed forces with the 
ability to identify potential TIP victims.  At the command level, 
training in the field and pre-departure Key Leader Training sessions 
focus on TIP recognition and prevention.  Pre-deployment training 
 
HELSINKI 00000060  009.2 OF 009 
 
 
for military legal advisors, military police and MoD social workers 
also address TIP issues.  Finland, although not a member of NATO, 
has acknowledged the NATO Policy on Combating Trafficking in Human 
Beings, which sets a zero tolerance concerning trafficking for NATO 
staff and forces under NATO command, including non-NATO troop 
contributing nations taking part in NATO-led operations. 
 
Nomination of Heroes and Best Practices 
--------------------------------------- 
 
28:  We have no nomination for this year. 
 
Finnish TIP Best Practices 
-------------------------- 
 
29:  Early interdiction activities represents a valuable Finnish TIP 
best practice.  The training that Finland invested in police, 
immigration authorities and airline employees resulted in several 
alien smuggling early interdictions this year with potential victims 
totaling over 300 people across all cases. (largest Nigeria 200; 
India over 100).  Since no one can know the full intent of the 
smugglers, early interdiction provides the best victim protection. 
 
29 - contd.  Continued Use of Joint Intelligence Centers represents 
another Finnish best practice.  Under the Ministry of Interior, 
Finnish law enforcement created a national-level Joint Intelligence 
Center (JIC) in Helsinki, which includes full-time representatives 
of the police, National Bureau of Investigation, Customs and the 
Border Guards.  The national center will become permanent March 1, 
¶2009. 
 
BUTLER