09YEKATERINBURG61
YEKATERINBURG OUTREACH TO MUSLIMS EXPANDS - IFTAR 2009
Fri Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Yekaterinburg
VZCZCXRO9789
RR RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHYG #0061 2750616
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020616Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1361
INFO RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 1006
RUEHLN/AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 0594
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 0604
RUEHYG/AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG 1398UNCLAS YEKATERINBURG 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIRF PGOV PHUM RS
SUBJECT: YEKATERINBURG OUTREACH TO MUSLIMS EXPANDS - IFTAR 2009 
 
¶1. The U.S. Consulate General in Yekaterinburg observed the end 
of Ramadan by hosting an Iftar for 40 prominent Muslim religious 
leaders, business people, politicians, diplomats, journalists, 
teachers, and NGO activists  on September 15, 2009 at the Consul 
General's residence.  The Consulate's guests included members of 
the Tatar, Bashkir, Chechen, Ingush, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Azeri, and 
Tajik ethnic groups that make their homes in Yekaterinburg and 
Sverdlovsk oblast.  For the first time, we extended our outreach 
to Muslim politicians and businessmen, including several oblast 
and city duma deputies.  Participants warmly received President 
Obama's Ramadan message.  The representative of the Sverdlovsk 
Oblast Council of Muslim Elders, Rais Nurimanov - one of the 
most respected Muslim leaders in Sverdlovsk - called for 
integration of the Muslim community in the Urals.  Nail 
Shaymartdanov, Vice Speaker of the Sverdlovsk Oblast Duma, spoke 
about developing the community's international cooperation. 
 
¶2. Interestingly, although representatives of various 
organizations that adhere to either the Central Spiritual 
Directorate of Muslims (TsDUM, headed by Supreme Mufti Talgat 
Tadjuddin of Ufa) or the Council of Muftis of Russia (headed by 
Mufti Ravil Gaynutdin) came to the Consulate Iftar, imams and 
muftis did not.  We were not able to contact official 
representative of TsDUM for the Urals Federal District or Mufti 
Sibagatulla (also TsDUM).  The Mufti of Central Asian Muslims in 
Yekaterinburg and Imam Mukhametzyanov (both of Gaynutdin's wing) 
at first confirmed their participation but cancelled the day of 
our Iftar, citing the need to lead prayers at their mosques due 
to the large numbers of people (in the thousands) showing up for 
evening prayers.  Several representatives of the Spiritual 
Directorate of Muslims of Asian Russia did join us.  Their 
official leader in the Urals, Ruslan Nurmametov, seems to have a 
broad network of contacts with political leaders, NGOs, and 
academic and cultural institutions.  With support from regional 
and federal authorities this group has been promoting Islam 
through classes on world cultures and religions. 
 
¶3. According to official statistics (based on the 2002 census 
and legal migration numbers) about 500,000 Muslims live in 
Sverdlovsk oblast, mainly ethnic Tatars and Bashkirs.  The 
Muslim population is growing with the influx of labor migrants 
from Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.  Local 
NGOs working with migrants estimate the Muslim population of 
Sverdlovsk oblast at 800,000 to 1 million, with 200,000 to 
300,000 living in Yekaterinburg.  While the official number of 
migrants from these countries is said not to exceed 126,000 per 
year,  Tagir Samatov, former Mufti of the Urals Federal District 
(TsDUM), believes that 4.5-5 million Muslims live in the Urals 
region.  There are about 30 functioning mosques in Sverdlovsk 
oblast, the majority led by ethnic Tatars. The oblast government 
actively supports interfaith dialogue, and has facilitated 
construction and renovation of mosques in and around 
Yekaterinburg. 
 
¶4. About ten of our guests were female.  Muslim women in the 
Urals seem to be active, open-minded, and collaborative. 
Nurzida Bensgier has been in charge of the oblast Interethnic 
Informational center for years.  Closely cooperating with the 
entire Urals Muslim community, she helps migrant workers from 
Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Kazakhstan.  Rosalia 
Akhmatova heads the Union of Muslim Women, which was formed in 
¶2008.  Among other activities, the Union promotes Muslim fashion 
and is involved in educational and cultural programs at 
different mosques.  Oblast TV offers weekly features on Muslim 
community activities. 
 
¶5.  This year's Iftar provided new insights into the life of the 
Muslim community in the Urals and strengthened the Consulate's 
links with local Muslim leaders and community activists. Our 
guests suggested several ideas to foster interfaith dialogue and 
tolerance in the region.  Guests appreciated the attention paid 
to the Muslim community and expressed the hope that we would 
continue the tradition. 
 
SANDUSKY