02ADANA422
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Mon Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          DECEMBER 13, 2002 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for 
December 13, 2002.  Please note that Turkish press reports 
often contain errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana 
does not vouch for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  ANTI-WAR DECLARATION 
(Bolge/Bolge)  The Cukurova University (Adana) Teaching 
Staff Association issued a written statement calling for 
opposition to the proposed U.S. operation against Iraq. 
The statement said:  "The U.S. is preparing for an 
operation against Iraq taking shelter behind the words 
`terror and democracy.'  The U.S. has been trying to 
maintain its international relations by the way of war 
because the economic basis on which its power is based has 
gradually weakened.  We are concerned over the possibility 
of Turkish support for such an operation intended to bring 
oil regions under control.  With all our might, we are 
saying "No" to (this) war.  We simply oppose the U.S. 
preparing to become the world empire."  Evrensel reported a 
group of Cukurova University students issued a press 
release under the December 10-17 Human Rights Week 
criticizing anti-democratic practices in Turkey. 
 
 
¶3.  FAREWELL TO ARMS IN OHAL 
(Radikal/Milli Gazete/Evrensel)  In the Southeast, licenses 
to carry weapons which were issued during the State of 
Emergency (OHAL) due to personal security will be replaced 
with licenses to own weapons.  Licenses of those who fail 
to apply by January 16 will be declared null and void and 
their weapons seized.  Village guards do not fall within 
the scope of this practice, because officials said the fact 
that OHAL was abolished does not mean the village guard 
system has also been lifted. 
 
 
¶4.  PARLIAMENTARY HRC WILL MAKE ITS FIRST TOUR IN SE 
(Radikal)  The Parliamentary Human Rights Commission will 
make its first tour of inspections in the Southeast, from 
where many complaints are received.  The Commission's 
President, Mehmet Elkatmis (AKP's Nigde Deputy), said the 
commission would investigate all kinds of allegations of 
human rights abuses, eventually coming up with a road map 
on human rights.  According to Elkatmis, torture will be 
the main item on the commission's agenda.  "With laws to be 
passed, there will be no more human rights abuses," 
Elkatmis pledged. 
 
 
¶5.  SES OFFICIAL "EXILED" 
(Evrensel)  Health Employees' Union (SES) Bingol chapter 
President Muharrem Aydinalp and his wife Mevlude Aydinalp 
were transferred to Erzurum province, allegedly due to 
Aydinalp's union-related activities.  The decision was 
reportedly made although an August investigation against 
Aydinalp turned up no criminal activity. 
 
 
¶6.  HEROIN SEIZURE 
(Evrensel)  Gurpinar (Van) District Security Directorate's 
Anti-smuggling and Organized Crime teams seized 79.491 
kilograms of heroin in four bags in the search of a home in 
Yukari Kaymak Quarter.  Over 100 kilograms of unprocessed 
narcotics were also seized.  Police arrested one suspect 
who had been preparing to transport the seized drug to 
another province in a vehicle's 80-liter LPG tank. 
 
 
ECONOMIC AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------------------------- 
¶7.  EU SUPPORT FOR EDUCATION 
(Milliyet)  The Adana National Education Directorate has 
launched a campaign to get its share of the EUR 12 million 
(approx. USD 12.2 million) donated by the EU for "Basic 
Education Support Project" to be carried out in big 
provinces such as Adana, Mersin, Antalya, Bursa and 
Istanbul, which attract intense migration from the 
Southeast.  Adana National Education Director Gungor Kose 
said the project went into effect on September 11 as a 
result of the February 8, 2000 protocol agreement signed 
between the EU and the National Education Ministry.  The 
donation will be used to educate adults, street and working 
children, as well as to turn some schools into multi- 
purpose educational centers for the purpose of training 
illiterate women, girls, and street and working children 
especially in slum areas. 
HOLTZ