03ADANA216
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Thu Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          AUGUST 14, 2003 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for August 14, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Bolge / Lerzan Kara, spokeswoman of the 
Peace Platform, announced in a meeting held 
in Adana that they don't want to see 
Turkish soldiers in Iraq. 
 
 
¶3. Bolge / Security Officials in Adana 
announced that people should be alert when 
they see suspicious packages in the town. 
Officials distributed specially published 
warnings in the town. 
 
 
¶4. Cumhuriyet / Emine Kiyancicek, a 
grandmother who spent 5 years in prison for 
helping PKK complained about the government 
for separating her from her grandchildren 
for five years.  "I still don't know why I 
was kept in prison," she stated. Kiyancicek 
benefited from the new amnesty law. 
 
 
¶5. Evrensel / DEHAP, EMEP, Free Party, and 
Diyarbakir Democracy Platform aim to 
schedule a meeting in Diyarbakir on 
September 1, World Peace Day. 
 
 
¶6. Turkiye / Diyarbakir Security Authorities 
tightened their security measures due to 
possible August 15 attacks which is known 
as the anniversary of the first attack of 
PKK.  All police forces are on alert until 
August 16. 
 
 
ECONOMIC 
 
 
¶7. Hurriyet, Bolge, Express, Turkiye / Kemal 
Onal, Governor of Adana, visited Ceyhan and 
Yumurtalik.  Onal had a meeting with Gurhan 
Unal, the Area Manager of Petroleum 
Pipeline Corporation (BOTAS). Gurhan Unal 
stated that Adana would have natural gas 
service in year 2005. 
 
 
¶8. Hurriyet, Bolge / Umit Ozgumus, Head of the 
Chamber of Industry in Adana, stated that 
the Chamber won't support the Adana 
Industrial Fair which will be held in 
October.  Ozgumus claimed that Mayor of 
Adana and the Head of Chamber of Commerce 
in Adana left Chamber of Industry aside in 
their secret meetings for the industrial 
fair. "We heard about the fair in the 
newspapers", announced Ozgumus.  "If they 
included us, we would have told them the 
difficulties of having a fair in tents and 
why it shouldn't be planned for year 2003", 
Ozgumus stated. 
 
 
¶9. Tercuman, Milli Gazete, Turkiye / Huseyin 
Avni Cos, Governor of Bingol, announced 
that there are 27 anthrax cases in Bingol 
and they are in control of the problem. 
 
 
10 . Milli Gazete, / Mehmet Altun, Head of 
Sanliurfa Corner Shops Association, 
announced that before the opening of 
Akcakale Border Gate on October 29, 
Sanliurfa-Akcakale road should be restored. 
 
 
¶11. Cumhuriyet, Turkiye / After the 
establishment of the temporary Government 
in Iraq there is a significant increase in 
the crossing of the vehicles through Habur 
Border Gate.  About 3000 vehicles a day 
cross the border everyday. 
 
 
CULTURE and TOURISM 
¶12. Turkiye, / Folk Dance Group consisting of 
the 42 Istiklal Makzume Anatolia High 
School students in Iskenderun were awarded 
Olympic Championship in the festival held 
in Vewelsburg/Germany, despite dancing in 
borrowed costumes due to financial 
shortages they had. 
HART