05ADANA91
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR APRIL 27, 2005
Fri Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR APRIL 27, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for April 27, 
¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
BOLGE / EKSPRES:        The new leader of ANAP (Motherland Party), 
Erkan Mumcu, will visit Adana on April 30 to address a public 
meeting. Party members in Adana have committed themselves to 
attracting public attention to the address of the ANAP leader. 
 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        Allegations of irregularities in 
the Baku-Ceyhan Pipeline project have surfaced recently. A 
construction delay and related fine, as well as the alleged 
exclusion of some contractors from tender processes were among 
the concerns that were included in an investigation file, 
according to these two papers.  The Audit Board of the Ministry 
of Energy reportedly is considering pressing charges against 
some former project (note: Botas) officials. 
 
EVRENSEL:       Six people were reportedly detained in Ovacik 
district of Tunceli on the grounds that they aided and abetted 
an "outlawed left-leaning organization."  Documents and data 
obtained in searches following the killing of two alleged 
terrorists during an April 17-18 military operation reportedly 
revealed the connection of these six people to an outlawed 
group. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Cukurca district in Hakkari has reportedly 
turned into a military headquarters again after years of being 
free of military presence.  Villagers who had returned to their 
homes in Cukurca say they fear that they will face another era 
of conflict and insecurity, and will have to leave the place 
once again.  Disturbed about the alleged deployment of Bolu 
Commando Brigade in Cukurca, people in Cukurca reportedly stated 
that this very Brigade oppressed them during 1994 and 1995. 
 
BOLGE:  Jandarma did not allow the members of the 
left-leaning group Halkevleri to stage a demonstration against 
the U.S. in front of the gate of the Incirlik Airbase in Adana. 
Tradesmen of Incirlik district, who make most of their 
livelihood through trade with the staff of the base, reportedly 
threw stones at the group. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Twenty-seven "human shields" that came from 
Cukurova region (Gaziantep, Hatay and Adana) to Sirnak to stop 
the military operations on Cudi Mountain were released. The 
attorney of the human shields said that the court, lacking a 
legal basis for pressing charges against them, would have to 
drop the case. 
 
ZAMAN:  In January 2005 German police and caught and 
arrested Remzi Kartal, a former DEP (pro-Kurdish Democratic 
Party) deputy and a PKK/Kongra-gel member who had been sought by 
Interpol. Turkish authorities at the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs reportedly initiated a process to extradite Kartal. 
Zaman reports that the extradition process was started when it 
was determined that Kartal had the right to Belgian citizenship. 
Upon his arrest it was discovered that his belongings included a 
Belgium passport and a Belgium ID. 
 
ZAMAN:  AKP Istanbul deputy Egemen Bagis reportedly said 
that the negative atmosphere in Turkey regarding U.S. government 
policies would "instantly change in a day" should the U.S. take 
a stance against the PKK in northern Iraq. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   A 12-year-old boy was found dead under a 
bridge in Kiziltepe district of Mardin. The police is 
investigating the event and trying to discover the identity of 
the child. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Forty village headmen from Bingol set off for 
Ankara to voice their objection to Ankara officials' reports, 
which contradict reports of the Bingol Public Works Directorate 
(BPWD) in terms of the number of houses damaged after two 
earthquakes in March (see 3/15 press summ).  BPWD report the 
number of damaged houses as 570 whereas the Ankara officials 
report the number as 347. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
 
¶1.      ZAMAN / EKSPRES / BOLGE:        Chairman of Adana's Chamber 
of Commerce Saban Bas said that Adana's target for exports in 
2005 is 2 billion dollars. 
 
 
REID