06ADANA37
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR FEBRUARY 15, 2006
Thu Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR FEBRUARY 15, 2006 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for February 15, 
¶2006.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   The daily reported that today marked the 8th 
anniversary of Abdullah Ocalan's 1999 capturing in Kenya and his 
being brought back to Turkey as a result of "the unfortunate 
concerted efforts of the international community." (Note: The 
daily emphasized the anniversary as 8th in its front page, but 
articles inside refer to the time frame that passed as 7. End 
Note.)  Murat Karayilan, a senior leader of the military wing of 
the PKK, called on all the Kurdish people to fast today, to 
close down their businesses, not to go outside and not to attend 
their jobs for today.  Many people branded today as a "black 
day" and will wear black outfits accordingly.  An imam 
reportedly advised the community to pray for Abdullah Ocalan. 
Separately, the daily provided coverage about the "aggravated" 
prison condition of Ocalan, and further pointed out that 
Ankara's 11th Heavy Penalty Court did not provide a copy of the 
petition submitted by Ocalan demanding the start of his retrial 
process (see press summary 02/14) to Ocalan's attorneys. 
 
HURRIYET ONLINE:        Daily Hurriyet, one of Turkey's mainstream 
newspapers, claimed today on its internet site that despite the 
ongoing calls of the terrorist organization to date to hold 
various activities (as February 15 approached), people in 
Diyarbakir did not respond to these calls today and no one 
closed their businesses in the streets.  The daily claims that 
ordinary life has been going on safe and sound Diyarbakir. 
Security forces have already raised security threat levels; but 
no incidents have been reported to have happened yet.  The daily 
reported people in Agri's Dogubeyazit district as responding to 
the call of the PKK and said that everybody closed their 
businesses there.  The daily observed some businesses staying 
closed through the day today in Batman, Hakkari and Siirt and in 
quarters of Adana. 
 
CUMHURIYET:     A protest activity and a sit-in protest were held in 
Diyarbakir yesterday (02/14) under the leadership of DTP 
(Democratic Society Party) provincial party organization. 
Nearly 2000 people reportedly attended the event, carried 
banners reading "Ocalan represents our political will", chanted 
slogans in support for Abdullah Ocalan.  The protest ended 
peacefully amid the presence of anti-riot teams, police 
barricades and armored police vehicles. As the group of people 
was dispersing, a group of youth caused a scuffle. Police 
detained two persons among the crowd.  Tension reportedly lasted 
briefly. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:  Demonstration activities to protest February 15 
have continued reportedly in many parts of the southeastern 
region including Sirnak, Hakkari, Diyarbakir and Siirt until 
yesterday (02/14).  Hundreds of people reportedly walked as cold 
weather conditions and snowfall permitted.  People, mostly 
comprised of women and youth, set small fires and walked 
carrying posters of Ocalan.  Activities in the Idil district of 
Sirnak continued until late hours.  Reportedly, 3000 people 
staged a march in Hakkari's Yuksekova district. People carried 
banners reading, "Ocalan represents our political will." 
Hundreds of people in Diyarbakir staged similar protests, made 
press announcements and chanted slogans extending support to 
Ocalan amid the presence of armored military vehicles and 
anti-riot teams. 
 
EVRENSEL:       According to the daily, people, non-governmental 
organizations and mayors expressed their disturbance about the 
presence of military vehicles during a protest activity in 
Sirnak's Cizre district and demanded an explanation from the 
government. 
 
EVRENSEL:       A 21-year-old women attempted to commit suicide in 
Batman, and was hospitalized. 
 
RADIKAL / OZGUR GUNDEM: Murat Karayilan reportedly made an 
announcement and dismissed allegations of any PKK involvement in 
the killing of Kani Yilmaz, former European PKK representative 
who split with the PKK and later established the PWD (Democratic 
and Patriotic Party), and Sabri Tori, a PWD member, in a car 
bomb attack in Iraq's Suleymaniyah province this weekend. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:  According to the daily, the powers that 
surrendered Abdullah Ocalan to Turkey, have aimed at eliminating 
Ocalan from Middle Eastern politics, a fact which allegedly 
complies with these powers' medium and long-term policies in the 
Middle East. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:  Osman Baydemir, Diyarbakir Mayor, completed its 
program in his U.S. visit which sparked controversies between 
the U.S. and Turkey and caused PM Erdogan to cancel his trip to 
the U.S.-Islam World Forum.  Baydemir responded to journalist's 
questions.  Reportedly, Baydemir said that instead of focusing 
on the security aspect of the Kurdish issue, the government 
should adopt legal changes to enhance democratic participation 
in politics.  Baydemir reportedly demanded that a general 
amnesty be issued (by the government). 
 
SABAH (GUNEY):  Alikbek Ceksenkulov, Kyrgyzstan Foreign 
Minister, and Kyrgyzstan Ambasssador to Ankara, following their 
visit to Mersin, came to Adana and paid a courtesy visit on the 
Adana Governor Cahit Kirac. 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    The dispute between two AKP (Justice and 
Development Party) politicians, Abdullah Dogru, AKP Adana 
Provincial Chairperson, and Aytac Durak, Adana Mayor, continues. 
 Reportedly, Abdullah Dogru criticized Durak and said, "Is Adana 
Mayor an almighty person that we can never criticize? Why should 
I not criticize him? If my people are suffering because of 
problems erupting, I will speak on behalf of them. If this 
situation requires me to struggle, I will exert my efforts to 
struggle." 
 
BOLGE / HURRIYET / RADIKAL:     Kemal Oncel, the farmer who had a 
small altercation with the Prime Minister Erdogan during 
Erdogan's visit to Mersin over the weekend said he regretted his 
own arrogant manners while talking to Erdogan and was sorry. 
Oncel withdrew his determination to file a lawsuit against 
Erdogan. 
 
RADIKAL:        Adverse weather conditions and snowfall has been 
badly affecting Bitlis province.  The height of snow covering 
the streets in the city center reached to two meters.  The snow 
reached five meters in the mountainous areas. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    2nd Adana International Economic 
Cooperation Forum, which will be held between February 22 and 
24, will host the prime minister, four ministers, including 
Foreign Affairs Minister, Minister of Industry and Commerce and 
two state ministers, and ambassadors from France, Russia, 
Belarussia, Kazakhstan, Syria and Ozbekistan. 
 
¶2.      EVRENSEL:       Following the resumption of production in the 
Adana Tekel Cigarette Factory, production restarted also in 
Malatya Tekel Cigarette factory and workers ended their strike. 
REID