04SANAA1085
MEPI GRANT RECIPIENT DECLINES AWARD IN
Mon May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 001085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/PPD PENDLETON AGNEW 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/PI DAVID MULENEX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SCUL YM
SUBJECT: MEPI GRANT RECIPIENT DECLINES AWARD IN 
PROTEST OF U.S. POLICIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST 
 
 
¶1. The Yemeni Female Media Forum declined 
acceptance of a MEPI small grant in the amount of 
$16, 500 in protest of U.S. policies in the 
region.  The president of the Forum, Ms. Rahma 
Hujaira, also withdrew herself as a nominee for 
the International Visitors Program.  Several 
Yemeni papers and websites (see paragraph 3) 
carried the text of her withdrawal letter, which 
follows: 
 
¶2. Begin text. 
The Yemeni Female Media Form is thankful for all 
the sincere efforts you have made to support us, 
which makes us believe that there are avenues that 
we both can walk down together to reach an Arab 
and American dialogue that will shut off the 
opportunity of Zionists fishing in dirty water and 
will lead the region to stability, a goal that we 
thought we share in common. 
 
However, the ongoing events in Palestine since the 
return of Sharon from his latest visit to the 
U.S., where he received the green light to ignite 
war in the region with American support, have made 
us realize that we have been trying to fool 
ourselves and create a common ground with your 
government.  The U.S. government has common 
interests with the criminal interests of the 
Zionist entity, which have led our efforts to 
create peace with you to failure. 
 
As we recognize and thank your efforts here, we 
condemn your covering for the Zionist crimes and 
your hideous attacks on women and children in 
Iraq. 
 
We remind you that we are part of this human 
family and the Arab nation where you have chosen 
to shed the blood of strugglers.  This forces us 
to choose resistance.  After we have fooled 
ourselves a lot with the idea of peace with 
Israelis and their allies, your government does 
not leave us any option or excuse to cooperate 
with you in light of your vast cooperation with 
the war criminals in Israel. 
 
Therefore we notify you that we are withdrawing 
our request for MEPI small grant funding, IV 
program consideration, and Yemen American Language 
Institute sponsorship, and we reject the support 
of the U.S. to our Forum unless the U.S. adjusts 
its oppressive policy in the region. 
 
This rejection may forgive our helplessness 
towards our brothers and free us from the penalty 
of conscience. 
 
We thank you for your previous cooperation with us 
but be assured that we hold your government 
responsible for the crimes and massacres against 
our peoples in Palestine and Iraq. 
 
Wishing you all peace and prosperity. 
 
YFMF Head, Rahma Hujaira 
End text. 
 
¶3. Media coverage appeared in the following papers 
and websites: Yemen Observer, independent weekly; 
Annas, independent weekly; Al-Balagh, independent 
weekly; Annahar, independent weekly; Al-Wahdawi 
Net, web site of Al-Wahdawi weekly, mouthpiece of 
the opposition Nasserite Party; and Al-Sahwa Net, 
web site of Al-Sahwa weekly, mouthpiece of the 
opposition Islah Party. 
 
HULL