04SANAA1280
FINAL REPORT: DEMOCRACY SMALL GRANT FOR THE
Mon May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/PD: MQUINN AND JDAVIES, NEA/RA, NEA/ARP: 
TROBERTS, NEA/PD: PAGNEW 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KPAO AFIN KWMN PHUM YM DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT: FINAL REPORT: DEMOCRACY SMALL GRANT FOR THE 
SOCIETY FOR WOMEN AND CHILDERN DEVELOPMENT, SOUL 
 
REF: A) STATE 187026 B) SANAA 5295 
 
¶1.  The Society for the Development of Women and Children 
SOUL   has   concluded   its  training   project   titled 
"Institutional NGOs Capacity Building" This  project  was 
performed in three phases: 
 
           The first phase was the institutional assessment of 
          local organizations to be selected for the training. 
    The second was the implementation of the training 
program. 
    The third phase was the follow up process for 
targeted NGOs 
 
¶2.   SOUL's team carried out institutional assessment  of 
NGOs  in  seven  governorates to assess the  situation  & 
training   needs  of  Yemeni  local  NGOs.  Outcomes   of 
assessment  were  used by SOUL & PAS to select  potential 
organization in the targeted governorates.  According  to 
a  set  of  criteria agreed in advance, 40  NGOs  in  all 
governorates were nominated for assessment; but  10  NGOs 
only  were  selected for the training.  This  phase  took 
approximately one month and half. 
This phase incorporated the following procedures: 
      Development a questionnaire for assessment 
    Identification the targeted governorates by PAS  & 
SOUL 
    Suggestion criteria of selecting NGOs By PAS  & SOUL 
    Identification the indicators and the weights of 
NGOs institutional assessment 
    Communication offices of Ministry of Social Affairs 
and SOUL to get lists of NGOs in each governorates 
    Conducting the institutional assessment for targeted 
NGOs 
    Sorting the overall questionnaires using the 
specified indictors & weights 
    Selection the potential NGOS 
 
SOUL  &  PAS  representative nominated  NGOs  from  seven 
governorates: Sana'a, Amran, Sada'a, Aljawof,  Hadramout, 
Shabwa & Marib. 
 
PAS  worked  with  the  SOUL  team  to  put  emphasis  on 
'quality'  as the foremost merit of the project;  thus  a 
number  of  procedures  were  integrated  throughout  the 
project's implementation process to ensure this value. 
 
 
¶3.  The training commenced on September 27,2003 and 
continued to October 9,2003.  This 2- week training 
incorporated three main issues:  NGO management, 
personnel skills & developing a project proposal.  It was 
implemented via the following methods: 
 
  ¶1.   Giving theoretical background of the subjects 
¶2.   Holding workshops & group discussions 
¶3.   Conducting a role play 
¶4.   Arranging for field visit to SOUL 
¶5.   Inviting some international NGO representatives as 
guest speakers to talk about their experience in Yemen, 
from local & donor NGOs 
¶6.   Pre-training evaluation for participants on each 
subject 
¶7.   Post-training evaluation for participants on each 
completed subject at the end of each training day 
 
The  training focused on the application method more than 
theoretical method. In addition, participants were  asked 
to   prepare  project  proposals  and  look  for  funding 
agencies with SOUL's cooperation. 
 
¶4.   The  last  step was the follow up or post  -training 
evaluation  of trained NGOs.  This step was set  up  from 
November  20-  December  15, 2003.   While  the  training 
program  was implemented, the participants were asked  to 
prepare  a  plan  of action through which  the  evaluator 
could  assess  the  advantages that the participants  got 
from  the  training as well as the improvement that  took 
place in the organization. 
 
The Follow-up & Evolution Phase (FEP) aimed to assess the 
participants    benefits    from      training    course. 
Furthermore, it aimed to follow the implementation of the 
plan  of  actions  developed by participants  during  the 
training 
 
After the process of NGOs evaluation, the evaluator  came 
up with the inal ranking for the NGOs based on the extent 
of  benefit,  application of the  plan  of  actions,  and 
improvement in the NGOs' performance. 
HULL 
 
 
 
 
¶5.  Evaluation Outcomes: 
 
Through the process of evaluation for the NGOs, a  number 
of observations appeared as follows: 
 
       Only 8 NGOs out of 10 were visited and evaluated. 
     One of the organizations "Abraad Environment Protection " 
     did not attend the training course and "The Yemen Women 
     Media Forum" was in the process of finding an office for 
     their  activities, therefore evaluation process  was 
     postponed. 
         Participants  got  benefit  from  the  training 
     demonstrated in their work 
    A number of NGOs rely on determent persons that a 
situation threaten the sustainability of the NGO 
    Most NGOs perform charitable activities through the 
whole year 
    Most NGOs have no filling system so that it was hard 
to promptly get information 
    Most NGOs have no an accounting records for 
s for 
financial transactions as well as no financial systems 
    Most NGOs have no stable financial resources in 
order to continue achieving their objectives