06ADANA29
ADANA AKP CHAIRMAN ENGAGES CONSTRUCTIVELY ON SENSITIVE
Thu Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

090926Z Feb 06UNCLAS ADANA 000029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL TU ADANA
SUBJECT: ADANA AKP CHAIRMAN ENGAGES CONSTRUCTIVELY ON SENSITIVE 
ISSUES 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Adana AKP Chairman Abdullah Dogru 
constructively engaged us on a number of sensitive issues in 
Turkey-US relations.  He was confident that the AKP would remain 
in power in the upcoming elections and would find a lasting 
solution to the Kurdish issue within the next five years.  Dogru 
called for dialogue with Iran to avoid further conflict between 
nations, and greater understanding on religious issues to avoid 
conflict between the West and Islam, as demonstrated in the 
recent anti-Islam cartoon issue as well as recent cases of 
attacks against Christians in Turkey.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Adana AKP Chairman Abdullah Dogru paid a courtesy call 
on the Consulate on February 6.  In wide-ranging discussions 
Dogru talked about US-Iran relations, recent cases of 
intolerance against local Christians, anti-Muslim cartoons in 
Denmark and the AKP's chances in upcoming elections.  On the 
cartoon issue, Dogru emphasized the importance of mutual respect 
of each others' beliefs and urged the US to continue to stay 
engaged on the issue.  On Iran, Dogru also emphasized the 
importance of dialogue and again urged the US to stay engaged 
with our allies and the Iranians to avoid further conflict in 
the region. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On the issue of attacks against Christians in Adana and 
Trabzon, he said that people in the SE still needed to be 
educated about freedoms, including freedom of religion.  Dogru 
opined that instances of recent violence against Christians 
could be seen as efforts against Turkey's EU bid. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Dogru was clearly interested in our views on the AKP, 
and asked for our thoughts on how we thought the party was 
doing.  He said that the party currently enjoyed a 45% 
popularity rating and that it was still developing after only 
about 4 years in power.  He said the party's goal was to stay in 
power for two more terms-he was confident that the AKP would 
stay in power after the presidential election.  On the Kurdish 
issue, he asserted that following the Turkish presidential 
election, the AKP would find a solution and that the PM embraced 
all groups in Turkey, including the Kurds, whom the PM clearly 
wanted to help.    Dogru promised that democracy would expand 
under the AKP's leadership, and predicted that in the next 3 to 
5 years the AK Party would find a lasting solution to the 
Kurdish issue. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In discussing the controversy arising from the 
anti-Muslim cartoons in Denmark, Dogru applauded the US remarks 
announced in a US Embassy press release when the Principal 
Officer shared them with him.  He said AK rank-and-file were 
deeply offended by the cartoons.  He also said that he was 
puzzled why so many Turks were discontent with the US when it 
shared a cultural identity with strong religious roots and 
respected Islam while, on the other hand, they positively 
reacted to a secular Europe without a religious identity any 
more.  Dogru agreed that hate speech should be denounced, but in 
a non-violent fashion.  He said he did not expect to see attacks 
on foreign missions in Turkey such as in neighboring Syria or 
Lebanon. 
 
Comment 
----------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Dogru sought the meeting with us.  He engaged 
constructively on a number of difficult issues in an area of 
Turkey where such issues are highly sensitive among the 
populace.  We hope that by engaging him on these topics he can 
have a calming influence on Muslims in the Cukurova area. 
 
REID