06BEIJING3471
TAIWAN: TAO SPOKESPERSON REPEATS TAO DIRECTOR'S
Fri Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7493
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #3471/01 0550958
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240958Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8652
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ETRD CH TW
SUBJECT: TAIWAN: TAO SPOKESPERSON REPEATS TAO DIRECTOR'S 
ADMONITION ON ABOLITION OF NATIONAL REUNIFICATION COUNCIL, 
OUTLINES TAIWAN TOURISM PROMOTION PLAN 
 
REF: FBIS 20060222052027 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesperson Li Wei 
reiterated TAO Director Chen Yunlin's February 22 
warning that the abolition of the National Unification 
Council and the National Unification Guidelines would 
severely damage cross-Straits relations, responding to 
Taiwan reporters' questions during the February 24 TAO 
press briefing.  TAO and China National Tourism 
Administration officials outlined the Mainland's 
efforts to open up the Taiwan tourism market to 
Mainland residents, noting that the Cross-Strait 
Tourism Exchange Association has been assigned to 
coordinate this work with Taiwan tourism 
organizations.  They criticized Taiwan's division of 
Mainland travelers into separate categories and called 
on Taiwan to remove obstructive policies.  Asserting 
that the Mainland will continue to take positive 
measures to care for the Taiwan people, Li argued that 
the Taiwan authorities' politicized steps have 
hindered free trade.  End Summary. 
 
Beijing Will Remain Vigilant of Chen's Moves 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  During the regularly scheduled February 24 Taiwan 
Affairs Office (TAO) press briefing, TAO Spokesperson 
Li Weiyi quoted directly from TAO Director Chen 
Yunlin's February 22 interview with the official 
Xinhua News Agency (ref), when responding to reporters 
questions about the Chen Shui-bian's recent remarks 
proposing the elimination of the National Unification 
Council and National Unification Guidelines.  (Note: 
The general practice in TAO briefings is for the 
spokesperson to begin with a prepared statement, which 
generally reflects the state of cross-Strait 
relations.  Li did not issue a statement and went 
straight to questions.)  He asserted that the Taiwan 
leadership's moves to promote the abolition of the 
National Unification Council and National Unification 
Guidelines are a dangerous sign of an escalation of 
Taiwan separatists' activities.  If the Taiwan 
authorities insist on abolishing the National 
Unification Council and the National Unification 
Guideline, cross-Straits relations will be severely 
damaged and the fundamental interests of the Taiwan 
compatriots will be harmed.  The Mainland will take 
sincere measures to maintain cross-strait peace, Li 
continued.  He stated that Beijing will closely follow 
the development of the situation and prepare to deal 
with any possible complicated situation at any time. 
Li said he had no information on whether a special 
envoy has come to the Mainland to discuss the recent 
developments. 
 
Mainland Highlights Taiwan Tourism Promotion Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.  TAO Exchange Bureau Director Dai Xiaofeng and 
China National Tourism Administration Tourism 
Promotion Director General Liu Kezhi outlined the 
Mainland's efforts to open up the Taiwan tourism 
market to Mainland residents since Beijing's May 2005 
approval of the plan.  They noted China Tourism 
Administration Director Shao Qiwei's October 28- 
November 6, 2006 visit to Taiwan as the head of a 
delegation comprised of each province's tourism 
officials and large tourism operators.  During the 
trip, Shao, who visited in his capacity as the 
Chairman of the China Tourism Association, formally 
empowered the Cross-Strait Tourism Exchange 
Association to work with Taiwan tourism organizations 
to promote Mainland tourism to Taiwan. 
 
¶4.  The two officials also listed a number of events 
that have enhanced contact between the Mainland and 
Taiwan tourism industries, including the September 
2005 Cross-Strait Tourism Exhibition in Xiamen and the 
China International Travel Mart in Kunming in 
November, which marked the first time Taiwan 
representatives attended.  The Mainland is encouraging 
its tourism representatives to attend the 
International Taipei Tourism Fair in November 2006. 
 
¶5.  Liu asserted that the next step in implementing 
the plan is to encourage Mainland and Taiwan tourism 
organizations to coordinate the details, especially 
security measures for Mainland visitors.  After a 
 
BEIJING 00003471  002 OF 002 
 
 
consensus is reached these organizations should sign 
an MOU or other form of agreement ensuring the orderly 
handling of Mainland tourism.  Liu called on Taiwan to 
make joint efforts to promote mutually beneficial 
cross-Strait travel.  He noted that the Mainland will 
soon issue management regulations governing travel to 
Taiwan and indicated that the Taiwan market will be 
opened up for Mainlanders from different parts of the 
country in stages. 
 
Taiwan Should Remove Obstructive Travel Policies 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6.  Asked about Taiwan's assertions that the Taiwan 
tourism market is already open to Mainland visitors, 
both Liu and Dai criticized Taiwan's division of 
Mainland travelers into three distinct categories. 
This system bars the first category, Mainland 
permanent residents, from visiting, they stated.  Liu 
called on Taiwan to take a constructive attitude 
toward opening up the travel market and to remove 
obstructive policies.  Dai added that Taiwan will not 
become an approved destination status until Taiwan 
permits travel by the first category of Mainland 
residents.  Asked about complications to a recently 
planned joint entertainment program by Fujian and 
Taiwan Dongsen Television stations, Dai remarked that 
it was very inappropriate for the Taiwan authorities 
to cancel the Mainland delegation's trip just prior to 
the scheduled departure.  He stated that the Mainland 
tourism delegation led by Shao Qiwei also encountered 
many restrictions, such as being refused interviews 
with the local press. 
 
Mainland Will Continue to Care for the Taiwan People 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶7.  Li Weiyi asserted that the Mainland is making 
efforts to implement any unilateral plan that benefits 
the Taiwan people, but it also requires Taiwan to 
cooperate and take concrete steps.  Responding to the 
CCTV correspondent's question, he stated that the 
Mainland's tax breaks on Taiwan agricultural products 
have led to a significant increase in Taiwan 
agricultural imports, which totaled USD 3.22 million 
in 2005.  This year the Mainland will take positive 
measures to care for the Taiwan people's interests. 
The Taiwan authorities' politicized steps have 
obstructed the free trade of agricultural products, Li 
argued, adding that Taiwan farmers will pass judgment 
on their own. 
Sedney