06CASABLANCA232
MOROCCO 2005 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Tue Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXRO1896
PP RUEHLA
DE RUEHCL #0232/01 0591552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 281552Z FEB 06
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6300
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 7452
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0441
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0177
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0915
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3625
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0244
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0317
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0157
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 0241
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0323
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0207
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0206
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2763
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 1887
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 0145
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2149
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0206
RUEHBP/AMEMBASSY BAMAKO 0189
RUEHNM/AMEMBASSY NIAMEY 0219
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA 0254
RUEHMIL/AMCONSUL MILAN 0073
RUEHMT/AMCONSUL MONTREAL 0316
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 4654
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH 1103
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0080
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0576
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 19 CASABLANCA 000232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR G/TIP, INL/TIP, DRL/IL, DRL/BA, NEA/MAG, 
NEA/RA, IWI, PRM, AND G 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID AND USTR 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB TANYA RASA, SUDHA HALEY, EILEEN MUIRRAGUI, 
AND MARCIA EUGENIO 
 
GENEVA FOR LABATT 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO 2005 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REFS:  (A) 06 STATE 00003836   (B) 05 CASABLANCA 1068 
 
       (C) 05 RABAT 2278       (D) 05 CASABLANCA 1321 
       (E) 05 CASABLANCA 1052  (F) 05 SECSTATE 230010 
       (G) 05 RABAT 2241       (H) 05 RABAT 2177 
       (I) O5 BRUSSELS 3796    (J) 05 BAMAKO 1344 
       (K) 05 NOUAKCHOTT 0059  (L) 05 RABAT 0343 
 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2. (U) This cable responds to action request (ref A) for 
updated information on the Moroccan government's efforts to 
combat trafficking in persons from March 2005 to March 2006. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Morocco Remains on the Right Path 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Over the past year, the GOM continued to 
prioritize its law enforcement activities intended to 
investigate, prosecute, and deter what the GOM describes as 
"human-trafficking mafias."  According to the Ministry of 
Interior, Morocco has adopted a strategy to fight 
trafficking based on five major pillars: security measures, 
legislation, the creation of institutions specializing in 
fighting illegal migration, international cooperation, and 
public awareness campaigns.  It should be underlined, 
however, that the GOM continues to make no distinction 
between migrant smuggling and human trafficking.  The GOM 
understands both activities as illegal and exploitative, 
which often result in the abuse and even the demise of 
Moroccans and third country nationals who seek to emigrate 
clandestinely. 
 
¶4.  (U) Morocco's geographic position as a natural conduit 
for sub-Saharan trafficking was highlighted this October 
when 11 Africans lost their lives in and around the two 
Spanish enclaves, Melilla and Ceuta, in Northern Morocco 
(ref B) as they stormed fences surrounding the European 
gateways.  Despite efforts made by both Spain and Morocco to 
stem trafficking and illegal migration in the last few 
years, the problem persists and no clear short-term 
solutions seem to be at hand.  As an example of the 
frustration following the October fence storming, the best 
proposal anyone could come up with is to build a third fence 
surrounding the enclaves.  Throughout the year the two 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  002 OF 019 
 
 
countries have reiterated their cooperation and commitment 
to stemming the flow of illegal migrants across the border 
in the north as well as in the waterways between Morocco and 
the Canary Islands. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In addition, Moroccan officials continue to assert 
that the Polisario orchestrates the illicit transfer of 
migrants in the Western Sahara and northern Mauritania to 
the Canary Islands (ref K provides Embassy Nouakchott's 
views).  UN officials in the Western Sahara, however, claim 
they have no evidence that the Polisario is involved in 
migrant smuggling in any organized or sanctioned way. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Morocco continues to work closely with the Spanish 
Government on resolving the issue of the more than 6000 
Moroccan minors living illegally in Spain.  To date, only a 
few have been returned Morocco due to lack of adequate 
facilities available upon their return, according to Spanish 
officials in charge of migration matters in Morocco.  The 
Spanish Government refuses to repatriate the minors until 
they are sure the young Moroccans have a safe and healthy 
environment available in Morocco.  Spain has recently 
pledged funds for just such a rehabilitation center in the 
Tangier area.  The facility, which will assist in the 
minors' reinsertion into Moroccan society, will be a shelter 
where the children can receive counseling, health care, 
remedial education, and job training before being reunited 
with their families or placed in regular schools. 
 
¶7.  (U) The following paragraphs are keyed to questions 
presented in ref A. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Overview of Morocco's Activities to Combat 
Trafficking in Persons and Migrant Smuggling 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU/21.A) Morocco is a country of origin and destination 
for domestic trafficking, generally involving young rural 
girls recruited to work as child maids. It is also a popular 
country of transit for internationally trafficked men, 
women, and children.  It is a country of origin for men, 
women, and minors trafficked to European countries and to a 
lesser extent the Middle East.  In 2005, the Government of 
Morocco, international organizations, and numerous 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), claimed the number of 
Moroccan minors being trafficked and smuggled into Spain, 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  003 OF 019 
 
 
Italy, and other European countries, increased 
significantly.  Spain alone is reporting a 66.5 percent 
increase in the first six months of 2005 as compared to the 
same period in 2004.  Spain and Morocco continue to work 
jointly on a solution to the problem.  Recently the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) proposed a 
plan to address the problem of trafficked minors.  The IOM 
plans to work  with the governments of Morocco and Italy, 
and Moroccan NGOs to combat the problem.  The first phase of 
this cooperation will be a survey to measure the magnitude 
of the problem.  The survey will identify the most 
vulnerable persons, pinpoint the regions from which persons 
are trafficked, and propose the most effective methods of 
prevention. 
 
¶9.  (U/21.A) According to a spokesman from the Ministry of 
the Interior (MOI), the number of Moroccan would-be 
immigrants crossing from Morocco to Europe decreased by 25 
percent in 2005, and by 50 percent from Morocco's southern 
coast to the Canary Islands.  He also claimed that more then 
300 trafficking networks have been dismantled over the last 
year. 
 
¶10.  (SBU/21.B) Domestic trafficking in Morocco has 
historically involved three vulnerable groups as victims: 
(a) girls sent involuntarily to serve as child maids, (b) 
girls offered as child brides, and (c) women forced to 
perform sexual services.  There have been several instances 
where Moroccan women were unknowingly trafficked to Saudi 
Arabia, the UAE, and Syria to become sex workers after being 
promised jobs as domestics.  It appears that the great 
majority of the girls and young women pressed into domestic 
servitude and sexual tourism are from isolated rural 
villages in the Middle and High Atlas Mountains.  Human 
rights advocates charge that "intermediaries" approach poor 
parents promising that their daughters will have a chance at 
a better life as child brides or child maids. 
 
¶11.  (SBU/.21.B) Sub-Saharan Africans transiting Morocco, 
destined for Europe, also fall victim to traffickers. 
According to Dr. Javier Gabaldon, the General and Medical 
Coordinator for the Moroccan office of Medecins Sans 
Frontieres (MSF), the majority of female clandestine sub- 
Saharan migrants with whom he came into contact while 
providing medical care and humanitarian assistance, were 
pressured into prostitution and involuntary servitude to pay 
for food and shelter by their "handlers," whether Nigerian, 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  004 OF 019 
 
 
Moroccan, Algerian, or Spanish. 
 
¶12.  (SBU/21.B) As a country of origin, where the government 
concedes at least 20 percent of the population earns less 
than USD 38 per month, Morocco's rural and urban poor are a 
ready pool for traffickers and migrant smugglers, who 
promise a better life to their recruits.  Thus, most 
internal trafficking of persons occurs in Morocco from rural 
poor areas to the cities.  According to UNICEF and local NGO 
social welfare advocates, traffickers or "intermediaries" 
habitually visit isolated rural villages in the Atlas 
Mountains where they persuade desperate parents that their 
daughters would be better off as child brides or child 
maids.  Similarly, these intermediaries serve as the go- 
between to find employment for adolescent boys.  In rare 
instances, these youngsters and teenagers have ended up as 
sex workers in popular Moroccan tourist destinations, namely 
Marrakech, Agadir and Fez. 
 
¶13.  (U/21.B) Political will exists at the highest levels of 
government to combat trafficking in persons.  King Mohammed 
VI has identified combating trafficking in persons and 
migrant smuggling as "top priorities" and he has backed-up 
this commitment with numerous meetings and discussions with 
the Government of Spain and other EU countries.  Morocco 
recognizes problems with trafficking as both a transit and 
origination country and has asked both the U.S. and the EU 
for assistance with border challenges and repatriation 
issues.  In addition, in 2005, Morocco in cooperation with 
the IOM, hosted a conference on migration and religion. 
Representatives from 44 countries, including many sub- 
Saharan and South Asian countries, participated in the 
conference. 
 
¶14.  (SBU/21.B/C) Foreign economic migrants have 
increasingly sought to enter Europe through the Spanish 
enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla or cross from Laayoune 
(Western Sahara) or Tan-Tan to the Canary Islands.  While 
most come from sub-Saharan Africa, it is becoming 
increasingly common to find Asians from India, Bangladesh, 
Sri Lanka, and Pakistan attempting the journey.  On a 
monthly basis the border patrol and gendarmerie arrest 
hundreds of sub-Saharan Africans and Arabs who have crossed 
the Morocco-Algeria border.  Many of these arrests occur in 
Tangier, the northeast city of Oujda, and in Nador, just 
outside Melilla.  The situation peaked in October 2005 when 
thousands of sub-Saharan migrants stormed the two Spanish 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  005 OF 019 
 
 
enclaves which resulted in the death of 11 clandestine 
migrants (ref B).  The GOM also estimated that there are 
still approximately 10,000 illegal sub-Saharan clandestine 
migrants in Morocco awaiting an opportunity to slip into 
European territory, and another 20,000 poised at the 
Algerian boarder waiting to enter the country. 
 
¶15.  (SBU/21.C) While the GOM continues its efforts to fight 
trafficking, the cost is a hardship.  The GOM has 
continuously requested help from the EU and individual 
countries.  Some joint programs, such as waterway patrols 
between Spain and Morocco, have been successful in helping 
financially and in stemming the problem.  There is evidence 
that lower level corruption exists.  On more than one 
occasion in 2005, police have been arrested for illegal 
involvement in migrant smuggling rings. 
 
¶16.  (U/21.D) Press reports of arrests of Moroccans 
generally cite "hundreds" of clandestine migrants.  Arrests 
by the Moroccan Navy are a fraction of the total arrests. 
Incidents of migrant smuggling, which is rampant in Morocco, 
are most often treated as trafficking in persons.  Thus, the 
proportion of these persons being trafficked remains open to 
question since GOM figures do not differentiate among those 
who are trafficked from the vast majority who are voluntary 
economic migrants. 
 
¶17. (SBU/21.D) The number of Moroccan women compelled to 
perform sexual services remains difficult to determine as 
this sort of activity is culturally unacceptable and is not 
exclusive to large urban centers where NGOs are more active 
in monitoring and confronting such problems.  Many of these 
women initially resort to prostitution because of dire 
economic circumstances and it remains difficult to 
differentiate between those who have been forced or coerced 
by others into such behavior and those who have voluntarily 
opted for prostitution as a means of economic support. 
 
¶18.  (SBU/21.D) Morocco is generally not a destination for 
trafficked victims from outside the country.  However, 
according to senior GOM officials, numerous destitute female 
Nigerian migrants found living illegally in northeastern 
Morocco were forced to prostitute themselves in return for 
protection, food, and shelter.  Recently, the IOM joined 
with the Governments of Morocco and Nigeria to repatriate 
1000 Nigerians, 400 of whom were women and children.  Many 
of these women claim to have been coerced into these types 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  006 OF 019 
 
 
of situation before seeking help. 
 
---------- 
Prevention 
---------- 
 
¶19.  (U/22.A) The government acknowledges that trafficking 
and migrant smuggling are problems. 
 
¶20.  (U/22.B) In  November 2003, in response to a royal 
edict issued by King Mohamed VI, the GOM established an 
overarching agency for migration matters, the National 
Agency for Migration and Border Surveillance.  This agency 
reports to both the Palace and the MOI.  Within the MOI, the 
Director General of Internal Affairs, Director of 
International Cooperation, and Chief of Immigration are 
responsible for directing policy.  Within the Office of the 
Prime Minister, there is a secretariat for migration 
matters.  Other responsible parties include the police, 
gendarmes, and border patrol of the MOI, the Ministry of 
Defense (the army and navy), the Ministry of Social 
Development, Family, and Solidarity (specifically, its 
division of Family, Solidarity, and Social Action), the 
Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of National Education, the 
Delegated Ministry  in charge of Moroccans Living Abroad and 
the Customs Service. 
 
¶21.  (U/22.B) On a routine basis, moreover, officials of the 
Labor Department, which has an Office of Children's Affairs 
dedicated to reducing child labor, meet with ILO-IPEC and 
UNICEF representatives to harmonize policy and establish 
programs designed to combat child labor and the exploitation 
of children, notably those working as child maids or junior 
artisans 
 
¶22.  (U/22.C)  Morocco's Minister Delegate for Foreign 
Affairs and Cooperation announced in February 2003 that the 
government would join with concerned NGOs in conducting an 
awareness campaign targeting youth.  This campaign alerts 
children to the inherent dangers of migrant smuggling and 
trafficking in persons.  Morocco's consulates in Spain and 
Italy have conducted similar outreach to the expatriate 
community to dissuade its members against aiding the 
"trafficking mafias."  Consular officers provide counseling 
services, especially to unattended adolescents, who are 
encouraged to repatriate.  These awareness programs began in 
2004 and are ongoing. 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  007 OF 019 
 
 
 
¶23.  (U/22.D) In conjunction with USDOL, ILAB-IPEC, UNICEF, 
and the governments of various EU countries, Morocco has a 
number of programs underway designed to keep and/or return 
children to school.  These include the USDOL-funded "ADROS" 
program aiding underage children in the labor market and a 
USDOL ILO-IPEC program benefiting rural working children. 
 
¶24.  (U/22.D) In addition to the campaigns listed above, the 
IOM currently has several projects underway and in the 
planning stage.  In spring 2006, the IOM will complete a 
social and educational center in Tetouan aimed at the 
population most vulnerable to trafficking.  IOM is also 
currently developing a plan to assist and educate children 
and minors at-risk of being trafficked or lured into 
clandestine migration. 
 
¶25.  (U/22.F) The GOM relies heavily on NGOs, other relevant 
organizations, and civil society to address the issue of 
trafficking.  The GOM has established excellent relations 
with these organizations. 
 
¶26.  (U/22.G)  Morocco has noticeably increased the 
monitoring of its northeast border with Algeria and along 
its far southwest Atlantic border, including the disputed 
Western Sahara territory, facing the Canary Islands to 
interdict trafficking and migrant smuggling.  It has also 
stepped up enforcement in Tangier and at its airports and 
train stations.  The Moroccan government has a substantial 
and well-organized immigration, customs, and security 
apparatus that closely monitors the country's borders. 
Border patrol officers routinely find clandestine migrants 
hidden in trucks and freighters destined for Spain. 
Unfortunately, a rugged northern coastline, which is 
difficult to patrol, and the close proximity of Europe over 
the narrow Strait of Gibraltar, make it possible for small 
boats to transport illegal migrants to Spain without 
detection.  Moroccan authorities also cite difficulty in 
monitoring the long border with Algeria, by which 
clandestine sub-Saharan migrants transit into Morocco, 
especially as (they claim) Algerian authorities make little 
effort to stem this or cooperate. 
 
¶27.  (U/22.H) The GOM established two interagency 
coordinating bodies, the "National Observatory of 
Migration," which serves as an "anti-trafficking in persons 
task force" authorized to formulate policy, and the 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  008 OF 019 
 
 
"National Agency for Migration and Border Surveillance," 
which conducts investigations and make arrests. 
 
¶28.  (U/22.H) The Office of the Prime Minister's Secretariat 
for Immigration Affairs serves as the coordinating office 
for agencies concerned with migration and illegal 
immigration.  Anti-trafficking activities are primarily 
carried out by the Interior Ministry, although it involves 
different entities falling under it: clandestine immigration 
is the purview of immigration officials; prostitution falls 
under the police; while child brides are under the purview 
of local authorities who ultimately report to the Interior 
Ministry.  Two ministries are chiefly responsible for child 
maid issues: the Ministry of Employment and Professional 
Training and the Ministry of National Education, 
specifically its Department of Non-Formal Education, which 
tries to provide remedial education and job training to 
child maids and "apprentice artisans."  Prosecution of 
individuals charged with trafficking or violation of labor 
laws falls to the MOJ.  Within the Ministry of Social 
Development, Family, and Solidarity, the Office of Family, 
Solidarity, and Social Action develops policies to assist 
women and children, including those who are victims of 
trafficking, but its resources for implementing such 
policies remain very limited. 
 
¶29.  (SBU/22.H) Over the past five years, the GOM has drawn 
closer to Spain and the EU in the common fight against 
migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons.  Morocco 
engages in bilateral efforts with Spain, such as joint naval 
patrols begun in mid-February 2004.  Morocco has continued 
to work closely with other governments as well.  It is a 
member of working groups on immigration with both the EU and 
its fellow Maghreb countries.  Internationally, the 
government participates actively in U.N.-sponsored 
activities relating to trafficking.  Morocco has also 
recently ratified a proposal allowing the IOM to officially 
open an office in Rabat. 
 
¶30.  (SBU/22.J) In 2003, the GOM completed its national 
action plan to combat trafficking in persons.  The following 
were and continue to be involved in developing anti- 
trafficking policies and programs: MFA Delegated Ministry in 
charge of Moroccans Living Abroad, Office of the Chief of 
Migration and Immigration Affairs, Office of the Prime 
Minister, Office of the Director of International 
Cooperation, Ministry of Interior, Chief of Immigration, 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  009 OF 019 
 
 
Ministry of Interior. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶31.  (U/23.A)  On November 20, 2003, Morocco's new 
Immigration and Emigration Act 02-03, entitled "Entry and 
Stay of Foreigners in the Kingdom of Morocco, Illegal 
Emigration and Immigration," was published in the Official 
Bulletin.   Under Title II, Articles 50-56, the law 
prohibits trafficking in persons and sets specific 
punishments.  It severely punishes people involved in 
migrant smuggling and human trafficking, including public 
officials who take a hear-no-evil and see-no-evil approach 
to violations of Moroccan immigration law.  Title II makes 
it abundantly clear that all individuals and their 
accomplices involved in human trafficking face high fines 
and prison sentences.  Asset forfeiture is also established, 
and the courts are given extra-territorial judicial powers 
to rule on violations of Moroccan law, which take place 
outside Morocco.  For the first time, Moroccan immigration 
law holds public officials accountable.  The act 
criminalizes acts not only carried out by the operatives, 
but also by those who provide safe haven to smuggled persons 
and punishes security officers who fail to carry out their 
duties.  The law is especially harsh on public officials who 
are caught promoting illegal emigration and/or migration. 
 
Article 50 stipulates a fine of 3,000 to 10,000 dirhams (ten 
dirhams equals roughly one USD) and/or one to six months 
imprisonment, aside from any punishments under the Penal 
Code, be assessed against any person attempting to enter 
and/or exit Moroccan territory by land, sea, or air by 
presenting a fraudulent travel document(s) or by traveling 
under an assumed name or by using falsified documents.  It 
also prohibits attempted entry/departure from points other 
than recognized border crossings and designated points of 
departure. 
 
Article 51 provides that a prison sentence of two to five 
years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 dirhams be levied 
against any public official (whether in charge of or a 
member of the "public forces"), travel agent, or 
transportation personnel operating carriers by land, water, 
and/or air who attempts to facilitate the illegal entry or 
exit of a person. 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  010 OF 019 
 
 
 
Article 52 dictates a prison sentence of six months to three 
years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 dirhams shall be 
assessed against anyone found to have facilitated, 
organized, or participated in the illegal entry or exit of 
Moroccans and/or foreign nationals in a manner detailed in 
Articles 50-51 and whether or not payment was made for 
his/her services. 
 
Article 52 also specifies increased penalties of 10 to 15 
years in prison and a fine of 500,000 to 1,000,000 dirhams 
be levied against individuals who are repeat offenders and 
are discovered to have been habitually involved in human 
smuggling. 
 
Penalties of 10 to 15 years imprisonment and fines of 
500,000 to 1,000,000 dirhams are to be assessed against 
individual members of any association or cartel created for 
the express purpose of migrant smuggling.  Leaders of these 
associations are also subject to the penalties prescribed in 
Article 294, Paragraph 2, of the Penal Code. 
 
Moreover, Article 52 inflicts even greater punishments of 15 
to 20 years in prison should the would-be emigrant or 
immigrant suffer serious injury and "permanent incapacity" 
is the result.  If the migrant is killed while being 
transported, the trafficker is subject to life imprisonment. 
 
Should convictions be handed down, Article 53 grants the 
courts the right to confiscate the means of transport, 
whether public, private, or rental, used to commit 
violations of the law.  Transportation assets of trafficking 
ring members and their accomplices may also be seized, 
whether or not they participated in the operation. 
 
Article 54 orders that a fine of 10,000 to 1,000,000 dirhams 
be assessed against any corporate entity found guilty of 
immigration infractions as specified above.  Corporate 
entities are also subject to confiscation orders. 
 
Article 55 requires that judgments be made public in three 
daily newspapers, which cover the jurisdiction where the 
case was heard. 
 
Finally, Article 56 establishes that the Moroccan courts may 
hear cases brought against foreigners accused of violating 
Moroccan immigration law.  The courts are given extra- 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  011 OF 019 
 
 
territorial jurisdiction in Article 56, which says they may 
rule on infractions of Moroccan law, which occur outside 
Morocco's borders and are committed by non-Moroccans. 
 
¶32.  (U/23.B) Penalties under articles 497-504 and 540-549 
for traffickers deceiving, defrauding, or coercing 
individuals are from six months to five years' imprisonment 
and fines of 200 dirhams (roughly USD 20) to 5000 dirhams 
(roughly USD 500), depending upon whether minors have been 
corrupted. 
 
 
¶33.  (U/23.C) The penalty for rape or forcible sexual 
assault is dependent upon the involvement of minors and 
whether the act was deemed violent.  Rape offenders can be 
imprisoned for 5-10 years (article 486).  Sexual offenses 
against minors, not involving violence (i.e., intercourse 
not deemed rape), are punishable by five to ten years' 
imprisonment (article 484).  Perpetrators of similar acts 
with violence (rape) face 10-20 years in prison (article 
485); if this results in victim's loss of virginity, the 
offender faces 20-30 years' in jail (article 488).  Actual 
sentences handed down may be less or more severe depending 
on whether it is a first offense or attenuating 
circumstances existed. 
 
¶34.  (U/23.D) While prostitution and solicitation of 
prostitutes is illegal, local law enforcement often casts a 
blind eye to the problem.  Prostitution is commonplace in 
large cites like Casablanca, Marrakech, Fez, and Agadir, but 
also poses a problem in smaller cities and in rural areas as 
well.  The government has prosecuted cases against 
individuals who coerced or forced women into performing 
sexual services. 
 
¶35.  (U/23.E) According to MOI reports, the government 
claims to have broken up more than 300 trafficking/smuggling 
rings in 2005. 
 
¶36.  (SBU/23.F) Various types of individuals are behind 
migrant smuggling and human trafficking in Morocco: 
organized criminal gangs are responsible for coordinating 
some of the clandestine migration to Europe, particularly 
the sub-Saharans transiting Morocco; the above mentioned 
"intermediaries" who for a fee work as professional 
placement agents for the parents of potential child brides, 
child maids, and apprentice artisans; parents of rural girls 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  012 OF 019 
 
 
who act as their own "brokers" for farming out their 
children as child brides or maids; and financially motivated 
criminals who coerce young women into prostitution.  Some 
Moroccan authorities acting independently, such as border 
officials or local police, may also turn a blind eye, in 
exchange for money, to facilitate trafficking. 
 
¶37.  (SBU/23.F)  Most trafficking rings in Morocco are small 
crime groups, although the GOM refers to them as 
"trafficking mafias."   Many of the 300 "mafias" discovered 
in 2005 were freelancers or rings working with a handful of 
people. "Brokers" placing young girls in domestic jobs often 
work independently.  In tourist towns, there are unofficial 
reports that hotel personnel arrange to transport girls and 
young women from rural areas to cities to work as 
prostitutes.  Additionally, there is anecdotal evidence that 
bartenders and taxi drivers act as "pimps" and arrange to 
bring the rural women to the larger tourist cities.  There 
is no evidence that GOM officials are involved in any way. 
 
¶38.  (U/23.G) Security forces are actively engaged in 
investigating, pursuing, and dismantling human trafficking 
and smuggling rings.  The government claims more than 300 
rings were discovered and disbanded in 2005.  While the 
majority of these operations concerned only migrant 
smuggling, the GOM learned that some expeditors had 
pressured sub-Saharan African women to prostitute themselves 
in order to receive food and shelter while others were 
involved in false job recruitment schemes in Spain, Italy 
and Saudi Arabia. 
 
¶39.  (SBU/23.G) A lengthy investigation culminated in 
February 2006, when the GOM dismantled a large international 
network responsible for trafficking clandestine migrants 
from India.  According to the General Directorate for 
National Security (DGSN), the far-reaching organization had 
accomplices along the border between Morocco and Algeria, as 
well as in African transit countries, the Gulf States, and 
Spain.  Moroccan Police arrested 70 suspects, among them a 
policeman working at Casablanca's Mohamed V international 
Airport.  In addition the DGSN claims that an unspecified 
number of the Spanish Civil Guard were involved. 
 
¶40.  (U/23.H) Law enforcement officers often participate in 
training and seminars that cover trafficking when these 
programs are offered by other countries.  Training has been 
given by the France, Germany, Spain, and Saudi Arabia, 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  013 OF 019 
 
 
according to MOI officials. 
 
¶41.  (U/23.I) According to the MOJ, Morocco has numerous 
agreements with other countries regarding investigation and 
prosecution of traffickers.  Those most frequently cited are 
with Spain, France, Italy, and Egypt.  Statistics on the 
number of international investigations are not currently 
available. 
 
¶42.  (U/23.J) The GOM has not extradited individuals charged 
with trafficking, although government officials note that 
Morocco does have bilateral extradition treaties with 
relevant countries.  Morocco does not extradite its 
nationals in accordance with Article 721 of the Penal Code. 
 
¶43.  (U/23.K) There is no evidence of national government 
involvement or tolerance for trafficking.  On a local level 
however, there are rumors that public servants acting on 
their own seek pay-offs or bribes to look the other way in 
some cases of migrant smuggling.  The government is 
attempting to crack down on corruption within the public 
sector.  In order to conform to the United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption which Morocco signed in 
December 2003, the GOM announced a new project aimed at 
creating an independent body to fight corruption.  In 
addition in 2005 the Prime Minister proposed a national anti- 
corruption program, comprised of 23 general preventive and 
31 sector-oriented measures 
 
¶44.  (U/23.L) We have no evidence that any government 
official has been involved with trafficking.  The GOM 
prosecutes to the full extent of the law its own officials, 
as it does other individuals, involved in trafficking. 
 
¶45.  (SBU/23.M) Revisions to the Penal Code enacted in 
December 2003 provide for extraterritorial coverage in cases 
of child sexual abuse and child sex tourism.  In 2005, ten 
foreigners were prosecuted for pedophilia or trafficking, 
one is still under investigation and two cases were 
dismissed for lack of evidence.  In one highly publicized 
case in July 2005, a Belgian national allegedly coerced 
nearly 80 Moroccan women, including a number of minors, into 
posing for pornographic photos by promising to marry them 
and take them to Europe.  The photos were put on the 
internet and later made into a CD and sold throughout 
Agadir, all without the consent of the women.  Thirteen of 
the women, one a minor, were arrested and many more were 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  014 OF 019 
 
 
investigated since pornography is strictly forbidden.  The 
Belgian national returned to Brussels and remains free. 
 
¶46.  (U/23.N) Morocco is a signatory to ILO Conventions 138 
(adopted March 19, 1999; ratified January 6, 2000) and 182 
(adopted November 24, 2000; ratified January 26, 2001). 
These two ILO Conventions were published in the Official 
Bulletin on December 4, 2003.  They went into immediate 
effect.  Morocco has adopted the UN International Convention 
on the Rights of the Child (ratified June 21, 1993). 
Morocco signed the Sale of Children Protocol supplementing 
the Rights of the Child Convention in September 2000. 
Moroccan law has been amended to comply with the UN Optional 
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the 
sale of children, child prostitution, and child pornography. 
The Penal Code was revised in December 2003 to incorporate 
these changes.  Morocco is a signatory to the Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
supplementing the U.N. Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime. Morocco is a party (since May 1959) to the 
Geneva Conventions against slavery, ILO Conventions 29 and 
105 (ratified May 1957 and December 1966 respectively) 
against forced labor, and the 1949 UN Convention against 
trafficking in persons (ratified August 1973).  In June 
2003, Morocco ratified the International Convention on the 
Rights of Migrants and Their Families. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶47.  (SBU/24.A) Morocco's Center for Migrant Rights provides 
counseling services, including an explanation of one's legal 
and civil rights, to migrants; however, legal representation 
is not offered, nor is shelter, medical or psychological 
services.  While in 2003, Morocco and Spain agreed in 
principle on the repatriation of an estimated 6000 Moroccan 
minors living in Spain, only a handful have actually been 
returned due to Morocco's lack of care facilities for the 
minors.  Spain will not begin repatriation of the minors 
until adequate facilities, where the children can receive 
counseling, health care, remedial education, and job 
training before being reunited with their families or placed 
in regular schools, have been established. The IOM facility 
mentioned above will provide some of these types of services 
and may act as a model for future projects.  The GOM relies 
on the NGO community to provide most services to victims of 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  015 OF 019 
 
 
trafficking. 
 
¶48.  (U/24.A) Child maids who have fled abusive employers or 
women forced into prostitution that have fled their 
madams/pimps, have been assisted by Moroccan authorities, 
specifically, the Secretary of State for Family, Solidarity, 
and Social Action.  The former Ministry of Women's and 
Children's Affairs developed a national strategy to combat 
violence against women which includes training for social 
workers to deal with women and girls who are victims of 
violence.  Victims of child labor and forced prostitution 
are often aided by local NGOs active in combating those 
problems. 
 
¶49.  (U/24.A) Child brides who have fled abusive husbands or 
in-laws are unlikely to receive any government assistance 
unless they are placed in a detention center for their own 
protection.  This may also be the case when they have borne 
a child, but the marriage was not officiated and paternity 
has not been recognized.  These detention centers provide 
basic health care and education (often the first formal 
education the mother will have received).  Young, single 
mothers also receive assistance from a variety of NGOs, 
notably INSAF, the Moroccan League for the Protection of 
Children, and Solidarit Feminine. 
 
¶50.  (U/24.B) The GOM provides modest funds to national 
NGO's offering shelter and services to victims of 
trafficking.  In addition, it offers teachers and social 
workers to support national NGOs working with child maids. 
At the Ministry of Labor, it provides offices to the 
International Labor Organization (ILO)'s International 
Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), which is 
working on the child maid problem.  The GOM allows 
authorized NGO's to solicit tax-free donations from 
citizens, residents, and companies, indirectly assisting 
these non-profit elements of civil society to provide 
services to trafficking victims. 
 
¶51.  (U/24.C) Those potential victims of trafficking who are 
detained, jailed, or deported, are usually third country 
nationals transiting Morocco en route to Europe.  Those 
individuals are prosecuted for violation of immigration 
laws.  Morocco is a signatory of the Convention for 
Protection of Immigrants and Their Families. 
 
 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  016 OF 019 
 
 
¶52.  (U/24.C) In 2003 Parliament changed the Penal Code so 
that runaway child maids may be administratively returned to 
their families instead of being arrested for vagrancy.  If 
returning them to their parents is not possible or feasible, 
they should be placed in separate youth centers, not mixed 
in with juvenile delinquents. 
 
¶53.  (SBU/24.D) Morocco's November 2003 Immigration and 
Emigration Act carefully defines the rights of illegal 
immigrants, economic migrants, and asylum seekers in Title 
II, Article 38.  This article also pinpoints the 
prerogatives immigration officials have in protecting 
Morocco's borders.  The statute (and the way the law is 
implemented) blurs the distinction between trafficked 
persons and economic migrants.  It sets forth limits to how 
long a non-Moroccan may be detained and under what 
conditions.  The law furthermore lists the rights which an 
intending immigrant, non-resident alien, casual visitor, or 
trafficked person is entitled.  During and after the October 
incidents in Ceuta and Melilla (ref C), however, there were 
reports from MSF, IOM, and other organizations that human 
rights of the non-Moroccan migrants were violated when 
Moroccan military transported hundreds of sub-Saharan 
illegal economic migrants to the Algerian border and left 
them in the desert with little or no food or water. 
 
¶54.  (U/24.E) While victims are not encouraged to file civil 
suits against traffickers, they often testify on behalf of 
the GOM when it seeks to prosecute trafficking cases. 
 
¶55. (U/24 .F) We are unaware of any specific protections, 
other than laws forbidding the various forms of trafficking, 
that the government provides to victims of trafficking or 
witnesses in cases against traffickers. 
 
¶56. (SBU/24.G) Morocco offers specialized training for 
government officials in how to deal with victims of 
trafficking.  The government has begun training its 
diplomats in countries that are prime destination or transit 
countries, i.e., Spain and Italy, for Moroccan victims of 
trafficking.  Given the GOM's commitment to repatriate 
minors, we suspect Moroccan diplomats are encouraged to 
develop relationships with NGOs serving trafficking victims 
as part of their contact work in the labor or social 
spheres. 
 
¶57.  (U/24.H) Morocco is working with NGOs and the 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  017 OF 019 
 
 
international community, specifically Spain and Italy, to 
establish shelters and a system to assist minors who have 
been the victims of trafficking. 
 
¶58. (U/24.I) The most outspoken organization dedicated to 
the eradication of trafficking and migrant smuggling is the 
"Friends and Families of Clandestine Immigration Victims," 
headed by Khalil Jemmah.  In addition, several local NGOs 
focus on women's and children's issues and directly or 
indirectly work to mitigate the incidence and abuse of child 
brides, child maids and women forced into sexual services. 
The work of these NGOs includes publicizing and monitoring 
the child maid problem; providing remedial education, 
vocational training, health care, and recreational 
opportunities to child maids; rehabilitating and educating 
street children, delinquents and runaways; assisting single 
mothers to become financially independent; educating youth 
and prostitutes (male and female) about the dangers of 
unprotected sex; and advocating women's and children's 
rights. 
 
¶59. (U/21.I) The following (alphabetical) list outlines 
those Moroccan NGOs best known for dealing with populations 
that include possible victims of trafficking.  Most of these 
organizations receive support and/or cooperation from the 
Moroccan government, in particular the Secretariat for 
Family, Solidarity, and Social Action: 
 
Association Bayti 
Dr. Najat M'jid 
Km. 12.5, Ancienne route de Rabat 
Sidi Bernoussi, Casablanca 
Tel: (212) 22-75-69-65/66 
Bayti focuses its work on street children, rehabilitating 
and educating runaways, child prostitutes, and indigents. 
 
Centre Lalla Meriam 
Mrs. Benaich 
2, Rue Souktani 
Rabat 
Tel: (212) 37-20-13-93 and (212) 37-73-03-02 
This center works with single mothers, many of them child 
maids, and abandoned babies. 
 
Ikram 
Mrs. Bennani 
Tel: (212) 22-36-60-98 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  018 OF 019 
 
 
Ikram runs a program for young women in the 15-16 year old 
range to train them to become "certified" domestic servants 
and child-care workers. 
 
La Ligue Marocaine de la Protection de l'Enfance (LMPE) 
Mrs. Fatima Hassar, Prsidente centrale 
Ave Akrach/Rue Mellouza, Nahda II, 
Quartier Haut Souissi, Rabat 
Rabat 
Tel: (212) 37-75-03-10 
LMPE (the Moroccan League for the Protection of Infancy or 
the Children's Protection League) was founded in 1957 with a 
focus on helping abandoned or other vulnerable children.  It 
conducted the first study of child maids in Morocco, 
released in November 1995.  LMPE operates day care centers, 
emergency medical centers, literacy training and clubs for 
poor children and their families.  It is also one of the 
NGOs participating in the child maids project in Casablanca. 
 
Institut Natl. de Solidarit avec les Femmes en Dtresse 
(INSAF) 
F) 
Mrs. Meriem Othmani, President 
20 bis, rue de Peronne 
Casablanca 
Tel: (212) 22-40-12-22 
INSAF (National Institute for Solidarity with Women in 
Distress), established November 1999, is the successor to a 
local affiliate of Swiss-based Terre des Hommes.  It assists 
single mothers by providing a shelter and several "halfway 
homes" (apartments) in Casablanca.  It also helps them 
become more independent through education and training, 
while caring for their infants and children in day care 
centers.  It will be expanding its activities to target 
child maids specifically for sex education, as this 
population constitutes a significant number of rape victims 
and unwed mothers. 
 
Observatoire Nationale des Droits de l'Enfant (ONDE) 
Dr. El Malki Tazi, President 
B.P. 511, Rabat Chellah 
Rabat 
Tel. (212) 37-75-50-99, fax 37-75-53-43 
ONDE (the National Observatory for Children's Rights) 
operates a child abuse hotline (24/7), has organized 
children's rights publicity campaigns with support from 
UNICEF, and has a "one village-one well" campaign to reduce 
 
CASABLANCA 00000232  019 OF 019 
 
 
the labor burden on children and families of fetching water. 
 
Solidarit Feminine 
Mrs. Aicha Echanna 
10, Rue Mingard 
Palmier, Casablanca 
Tel: (212) 22-25-46-46 
This large NGO is an advocate of women's rights, but its 
director has worked on rehabilitating prostitutes and 
spearheaded an effort to publicize the plight of child 
maids. 
 
¶60. (U) Sources for this report include officials in the 
Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Employment, 
Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Justice.  Other 
sources included NGOs, international organizations and other 
child welfare advocates; researchers; Ministry of Justice 
publications; press reports; and prior reporting. 
 
¶61. (U)  Mission POC on TIP issues is Amy M. Wilson, 
Labor/Political Officer, ConGen Casablanca, tel. 212-22-22- 
14-60, ext. 235; fax 212-22-29-91-36; mail: PSC 74, Box 24, 
APO, AE 09718; pouch: 6280 Casablanca Place, Washington, DC 
20521-6280; e-mail: WilsonAM(at symbol)state.gov. 
 
¶62.  Embassy Rabat cleared this message. 
 
GREENE