06ISTANBUL128
BSEC REQUEST FOR OBSERVER VIEWS ON COOPERATION
Thu Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECIN ETRD PO PREL TU
SUBJECT: BSEC REQUEST FOR OBSERVER VIEWS ON COOPERATION 
 
REF: A. CHISINAU 84 
 
     ¶B. 05 ANKARA 6066 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see para 3. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Further to the BSEC Secretariat's late December 
request to observers to forward their views on how they 
envision cooperating with BSEC and its project development 
fund in future (copy faxed to EUR/SE), on February 1 BSEC 
forwarded Poland's response (the first it has received). 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Begin text: 
 
Poland wishes to continue its participation in the activities 
of BSEC as an observer country in the organization.  We see 
the increasing importance of cooperation within the framework 
of the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation. 
Poland also regards the cooperation within the Black Sea as 
paramount (with its huge potential and inestimable 
geostrategic role) both in the regional, European, as well as 
in the global contexts.  Being conscious of the importance of 
regional cooperation and seeing in this cooperation a very 
important stabilising, security ensuring mechanism Poland 
wishes to be part of it not only in the Central European area 
but also -- to the extent possible-- in the wider European 
area, including the Black Sea basin.  Poland being an active 
member of the Visegrad group, the Council of the Baltic Sea 
States, the Central European Initiative, the Regional 
Partnership as well as a country involved in the BSEC, 
Northern Dimension, Artic Council and Barents Sea Council 
cooperation platforms has collected significant experience 
and know-how in regional cooperation.  We have had the 
opportunity and honour to chair in the past 3 years the work 
in the CEI, CBSS, and the Council of Europe.  We therefore 
believe our input to the cooperation in the BSEC can be 
substantial and above all useful.  We are thus open to share 
not only our own experience from the socio-economic 
transformation period but also our pratical "acquis" stemming 
from presiding these regional groupings. 
 
Poland is interested in closely following BSEC initiatives, 
assisting the implementation of BSEC priorities and 
contributing to concrete activities in the areas of i.a.: SME 
development and trade, transport and energy infrastructure 
development, promotion of 
tourism, cooperation in the areas of culture, education and 
science, transfrontier (cross-border) cooperation know-how 
sharing.  We are also envisaging the possibility of making 
use of the development assistance to the benefit of the BSEC 
member states. 
 
End text. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Action request: Consulate seconds Chisinau's request 
for guidance on U.S. plans for cooperation with BSEC and its 
project development fund in order to respond to BSEC's 
inquiry. 
JONES