06KHARTOUM493
Sudan Vision interviews Mansour Khalid
Mon Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9939
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0493 0580718
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 270718Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1633
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000493 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR SU
SUBJECT: Sudan Vision interviews Mansour Khalid 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Dr. Mansour Khalid, Presidential Advisor to 
the Government of National Unity (GNU) and one of the 
leaders of the SPLM in the North, recently gave a long 
interview to Sudan Vision Daily, a pro-government English 
language newspaper.  The interview, printed in five 
parts, covered a wide range of subjects, including the 
difficulties of implementing the CPA, the SPLM's active 
role in Darfur, the importance of not becoming hostile to 
the UN, the continuing strength of the SPLM as a national 
party, and the differing leadership styles of Salva Kiir 
and John Garang.  The full text of the interview can be 
found on-line at www.sudanvisiondaily.com. 
 
¶2.  With regard to CPA implementation, Khalid emphasized 
that the CPA is a long, complicated, and radical 
document; therefore, difficulties in implementation are 
to be expected.  He said that those who complain about a 
lack of action in the first year do not understand how 
difficult it is to bring together two warring parties, 
decentralize a government, and then set up a whole new 
set of institutions and laws.  Khalid also dismissed the 
opposition parties who complain about the ratios of 
representation in the GNU, pointing out that all the 
people of Sudan hailed the CPA when it was first passed, 
including the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), the 
Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and the Umma Party. 
 
¶3.  On Darfur, Khalid explained that the SPLM has taken 
an active role based upon its historical ties with the 
rebel Sudan Liberation Movement (SLM) and their common 
principles in defending the marginalized people of Sudan. 
Now that the SPLM is part of the GNU, he cautioned, it 
must remain engaged through the government channels, 
which it is doing.  As for international intervention, 
Khalid believes that the African Union should be 
reinforced to handle the problem, but said that the 
growing hostility toward the UN is misdirected and 
damaging for Sudan.  He also dismissed calls against 
international interference in Sudan, pointing out that a 
large UN force is currently in Sudan at the invitation of 
the government and is playing an important role in 
ensuring peace. 
 
¶4.  When asked about the death of John Garang, Khalid 
pointed out that the smooth transition was a 
demonstration of the maturity of the SPLM.  While the 
difference in leadership style is partially attributable 
to personalities, Khalid also believes the situations are 
different.  Wartime leadership requires strength and a 
concern for security, while leading in peace is naturally 
a more consultative process.  Khalid refuted claims that 
people close to Garang were marginalized by Kiir's 
appointments to the GNU.  In response to a direct 
question, he explained that Nhial Deng stayed in the 
south as a matter of personal choice, and that Pagan Amum 
is carrying out the mission that Garang gave him, to 
transform and lead the SPLM as a political party in 
Southern Sudan.  He also refuted the notion that the SPLM 
has become more southern-focused under Kiir, pointing out 
that the SPLM is active in the governments of every state 
in Sudan. 
 
HUME