06PARIS728
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Islam and Democracy -
Fri Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Islam and Democracy - 
Controversial Drawings and Free Press Iran North Korea 
PARIS - Friday, February 03, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Islam and Democracy - Controversial Drawings and Free Press 
Iran 
North Korea 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The uproar over images of the Prophet Mohamed is a lead story 
in Le Figaro, Le Monde, France Soir and Liberation, which 
compares the crisis to the Fatwa against Salman Rushdie for 
his `Satanic Verses.' Several national dailies are publishing 
some or all of the controversial drawings. Commentators argue 
that France's freedom of the press cannot be curtailed. On LCI 
television last evening Interior Minister Sarkozy said he 
preferred "caricatures to censorship." FM Douste-Blazy made a 
formal declaration re-iterating the importance of freedom of 
the press, but insisted on the need for "tolerance and respect 
for all." Fatah has threatened all citizens of countries 
having published the drawings of reprisals. France Soir, which 
carried all the drawings in yesterday's edition, has been 
banned in Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria. (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro reports on the different approaches to North Korea 
adopted by Secretary Rice, "who is calling for renewed 
relations," and President Bush who has been using the word 
"criminal" with the regime (See Part C) and on the "last ditch 
efforts of the IAEA in trying to reach a consensus with Iran" 
before putting the affair in the hands of the UNSC. (See Part 
C) 
 
La Croix devotes its lead to Iraq and asks: "Who is still 
going to Iraq?" "Foreigners are avoiding Iraq, it is too 
dangerous. Investors are opening rear bases in Amman and 
Beirut. The security sector is the only sector employing 
foreigners." La Croix interviews French businessmen who 
acknowledge they have "reduced their level of business in 
Iraq." 
 
Results of a poll in Le Parisien, show that Segolene Royal of 
the Socialist Party could lead and beat Interior Minister 
Sarkozy in the run-off, with 51 percent of the votes against 
49 percent. But another poll in Le Figaro shows Sarkozy the 
winner in both rounds, ahead of PM Villepin. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Islam and Democracy - Controversial Drawings and Free Press 
 
"Freedom of Drawing" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its editorial (02/03): 
"Commandments and religious bans are not above the law in a 
republican and secular state. It is essential to make a 
distinction between a religion and those that practice it. The 
latter must be protected from all forms of discrimination. A 
Muslim can be shocked by a drawing, especially a malicious 
one, of Mohamed. But a democracy cannot impose an opinion 
police or risk treading on the feet of Human Rights." 
 
"A Matter of Conscience" 
Yves Threard in right-of-center Le Figaro (02/03): "Although 
there is freedom of opinion in the West. this cannot excuse 
everything. In practice, conscience must also dictate what is 
wrong. The drawings are adding to the confusion in the clash 
between civilizations. Without freedom, the press would be 
poor, but one can also make poor use of the freedom of the 
press. This is why Le Figaro will not publish the drawing." 
 
"Antagonisms" 
Antoine de Gaudemar in left-of-center Liberation (02/03): 
"Seventeen years later, these controversial drawings have 
taken on the look of `satanic drawings,' recalling the Rushdie 
controversy. The debate is shedding light on several 
conflicts. First, between two opposite systems of values: one 
based on a secular society, the other, a system where religion 
is the center of a people's identity. The antagonism between 
these two systems is complicated by yet another conflict: the 
notion of freedom of the press. Many Muslims can indeed feel 
insulted by the assimilation between Islam and terrorism. But 
the strength of democracy and the press lies in allowing free 
expression. This does not mean it supports any form of 
racism." 
 
Iran 
 
"A Last Attempt at a Consensus" 
Maurin Picard in right-of-center Le Figaro (02/03): "The 
atmosphere in Vienna was heavy as the IAEA was conferring to 
decide whether to bring the Iran nuclear issue before the 
UNSC. This board of directors has yet to go to the next phase 
of voting. According to El-Baradei, `we are not in a situation 
of crisis.' The ball is in the hands of the Iranians. For at 
least a month: on March 6 El-Baradei will need to give his 
conclusions on `as yet unresolved issues.' Only then will the 
UNSC be able to take over and decide on potential sanctions 
against Iran." 
 
North Korea 
 
"One Adjective, and Relations Remain Frozen" 
Jean-Jacques Mevel in right-of-center Le Figaro (02/03): "Can 
the Bush administration sit at the same table with a nation it 
has qualified as `criminal?' For North Korea, it is not 
possible. Its neighbors say that taking back that single 
adjective would be enough. In this affair, the U.S. is playing 
two different games. The Secretary of State has just made a 
declaration to the effect that she intends to re-launch the 
dialogue with North Korea `immediately,' For the past four 
months, the use of the adjective `criminal' associated to 
North Korea by the White House has stalled the talks. The Bush 
administration could have used the Beijing compromise made by 
North Korea. Instead, and for reasons that remain unclear, 
Washington persists in its stance at the risk of prolonging 
the standstill and re-enforcing a battle of words, giving the 
North Koreans an alibi for their empty chair policy. It also 
gives them an un-hoped for additional delay to keep arming 
themselves. The word `criminal' has been used at least three 
times by American high officials, Ambassador Vershbow, 
Assistant Secretary Glaser and David Asher." STAPLETON