06PARIS1103
FRANCE REPORTS FIRST CASE OF AVIAN FLU IN
Wed Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/HA, EUR/WE, CA/OCS 
HHS FOR INTERNATIONAL BUDASHEWITZ 
USDA FOR ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
USDA FOR FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
CDC FOR DR. DBELL 
HOMELAND SECURITY FOR OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFLU TBIO CASC AMGT FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE REPORTS FIRST CASE OF AVIAN FLU IN 
WILD BIRD - ANNOUNCES NEW MEASURES & NATIONAL 
EXERCISE 
 
REF: Paris 520 and previous 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1.  Summary: French authorities confirmed on 
February 18 the first case of avian flu in a wild 
duck on French territory.  The government has 
extended the confinement of poultry to all 
departments of continental France. Vaccination of 
fowl is imminent in areas where confinement is 
difficult to enforce, contingent on a green light 
from the EU. French authorities also continue to 
hone the national pandemic preparedness plan and 
have scheduled a major national drill for March 15- 
¶16.  Senior French security authorities have 
requested the participation of the Embassy in the 
exercise.  Embassy would welcome Washington-based 
DHS participation.  End summary. 
 
Bird Flu found in France 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  The H5N1 strain was found in a wild duck at 
Joyeux (Ain), near Lyon. France is the sixth 
European country where a case of avian flu has 
been confirmed.  French government reference 
laboratory determined with 99% accuracy the strain 
matched the Asian origin H5N1 virus.  Authorities 
immediately installed a security zone of three 
kilometers around the spot and a zone of vigilance 
of 10 kilometers radius that is to remain in place 
for at least twenty-one days. The transport of 
birds is forbidden in the surveillance zone. 
 
French Act Quickly:  confinement and vaccination 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3.  Even before final confirmation of the case, 
the GOF extended confinement of poultry to all 96 
departments (districts) in continental France. 
(Fifty-eight departments were previously subject 
to this requirement.) Ahead of all other EU 
members, France has ordered the vaccination of 
ducks and geese in three departments (wet lands) 
where confinement is not practical: Landes, Loire- 
Atlantique and Vendee.  Three million doses of 
vaccine will reportedly be made available during 
the last week of February and vaccination could 
start immediately pending EU authorization (see 
next para).  The vaccination period is expected to 
last about one month. Vaccination costs (1.6 
million euros) will be covered by the GOF. The vet 
vaccines against avian flu will be provided by 
U.S.'s Fort Dogge (Wyeth) and Netherlands Intervet 
(Akzo Nobel). 
 
¶4.  Comment: Press reports highlight that the GOF 
decision to order mandatory vaccination of ducks 
and geese is contested by other EU members and 
scientists.  The latter highlight the risk that 
birds once inoculated might emerge as "carriers" 
of the disease and will be impossible to detect. 
However, the French Food Safety Agency (AFSSA) 
claimed that the types of vaccine chosen should 
make it possible to distinguish between birds that 
have been vaccinated and those that are sick.  The 
French poultry industry is also strongly resisting 
vaccination of poultry.  They see exports falling 
because vaccination makes the poultry unfit for 
consumption for a period of about three weeks.  In 
reality, if poultry were to be vaccinated a number 
of importers would reject the meat.  End comment. 
 
Polishing the national plan 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The updated avian flu national plan released 
in January has been supplemented with material 
detailing a series of measures to be adopted in a 
number of sectors, with emphasis on the health 
sector. More information is available on the GOF 
avian flu dedicated website: 
www.grippeaviaire.gouv.fr and on the Health 
Ministry website: www.sante.gouv.fr. 
 
¶6.  The Foreign Ministry has informed the Embassy 
that two simulations will be staged soon: the 
first on February 24 in Lyon (with participation 
of the Prime Minister) is designed to test 
reactions of the administration at the regional 
level; and a second one "with a much larger scope" 
on March 15-16 (focusing on phase 5 A and B, and 
phase 6 as defined by WHO).  The purpose of the 
second exercise is to test at the national level 
health and security preparedness. Both the Health 
and Interior Ministries will be deeply involved. 
The drill will be conducted under the overall 
supervision and responsibility of the Secretariat 
General de la Defense Nationale (SGDN) in the 
Office of the Prime Minister.  Several foreign 
governments have been tapped to participate 
through their embassies in Paris, including the 
U.K, Germany, Australia, and U.S. 
 
Public Reaction 
--------------- 
 
¶7.   While there is no panic, nor is there 
complacency.  Public authorities continue to 
receive many requests for information (up to 8000 
calls/day last week-end on the government's free 
toll number). Media have reported a 15 to 20 
percent drop in poultry sales since the beginning 
of the year.  While the French media emphasizes 
that France is implementing stricter measures than 
neighboring countries, the GOF public posture is 
reassurance.  Speaking to reporters during his 
trip to Thailand, President Chirac called for a 
"calm, but serious approach to the situation." 
 
STAPLETON