06TUNIS358
Special Media Reaction: SecDef Visit to Tunis
Fri Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0008
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0358/01 0481340
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171340Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9832
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS TUNIS 000358 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA (GRAY) NEA/RA (FOX) NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE) 
NEA/PPD (WHITE, AGNEW) NEA/PA NEA/IPA I/GNEA CWG-PD 
DOD FOR OSD - AXELROD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO OIIP TS
SUBJECT: Special Media Reaction: SecDef Visit to Tunis 
February 10 - 11, 2006 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Tunisian broadcast and print media 
prominently covered the February 10 - 11 visit of 
Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to Tunis.  The local 
 
SIPDIS 
reporting on the visit emphasized the positive strategic 
alliance between the U.S. and Tunisia as well as the 
Secretary's laudatory remarks on Tunisia's "voice of 
 
SIPDIS 
moderation and tolerance in the region."  While the 
broadcast media did not reflect either the Secretary's 
reference to terrorist attacks in Djerba or his comment 
that "political and economic freedom go hand in hand," 
the written press coverage accurately reported on these 
statements.  Comment. The willingness of the GOT to allow 
accurate print press coverage of comments by U.S. 
officials on the need for political reform as well as to 
permit public reminders of the April 2002 terrorist 
attack in Djerba represent a positive evolution in the 
Tunisian media scene.  End summary and comment. 
 
¶2. (U) On February 11, Tunisian television and radio news 
(both government-owned) led with stories about the visit 
of SecDef to Tunisia.  The television dedicated 5 minutes 
at the top of their 2000 news hour to the visit featuring 
footage of the meeting with President Ben Ali, the press 
point at the MOD, and the meeting at the MFA.  The 
coverage focused on the discussion with President Ben 
Ali, highlighting that the two officials talked about 
ways to enforce the Tunisian-American relationship. 
Broadcast media also highlighted President Ben Ali's 
discussion of developments in Iraq and the Middle East, 
focusing on the Palestinian issue and the importance of 
continuing financial aid to the Palestinian people as 
well as on the President's call for dialogue and 
moderation in order to achieve peace and stability in the 
region.  The Tunisian television coverage of the 
Secretary of Defense's comments at the MOD was limited to 
 
SIPDIS 
the following portion of his statement: "Tunisia has long 
been an important voice of moderation and tolerance in 
this region and played a key role in confronting 
extremists not just within this country, but in the area 
as well.  We appreciate those important contributions. 
The United States lauds Tunisia's economic and social 
progress."  The broadcast media did not cover either the 
Secretary's reference to the terrorist attacks in Tunisia 
 
SIPDIS 
or his statement that "political and economic freedom go 
hand-in-hand." 
 
3.(U)  All of the February 12 Tunisian daily newspapers 
placed two articles prepared by the government news 
agency (TAP), the first on the meeting with President Ben 
Ali and the second a summary of the Secretary's statement 
at the MOD.  Most papers headlined SecDef's statement 
that "Tunisia has long been an important voice of 
moderation and tolerance in this region." (Sample 
headlines in para 6.) In the latter article, TAP 
accurately reported on the entirety of the Secretary's 
comments, including the terrorist attacks in Tunisia and 
the statement that "political and economic freedom go 
hand-in-hand." Two newspapers also placed articles on the 
Secretary's meeting with the MFA, highlighting the 
 
SIPDIS 
friendly bilateral relations between our two countries. 
 
4.(U) The lead editorial in the government-owned French 
language daily "La Presse" reminded the reader of the 
high-level exchange of visitors between the US and 
Tunisia over the past three years and noted that this 
bilateral relationships was based "on principles of 
mutual respect and willingness to act in the service of 
shared interests."  The editorial went on to praise 
President Ben Ali and to affirm that Tunisia is the model 
"of moderation and tolerance."   The lead editorial in 
the ruling party French language daily "Le Renouveau" 
echoed these same themes. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment. While the GOT publicly spun the visit 
as further proof of strong American support for President 
Ben Ali and the current policies of the Tunisian 
government, it was noteworthy that it also allowed print 
media coverage of SecDef's reference to the terrorist 
attack on Djerba and his remark linking economic and 
political freedom in the country.  The Tunisian press 
rarely, if ever, mentions the Djerba attacks and similar 
comments on the need for political reform made by 
SecState Powell during his November 2003 visit were not 
only censored, but were even rewritten to include praise 
for Tunisia's human rights record.  The print coverage of 
 
the SecDef's remarks on these two subjects was probably 
allowed because they echo statements that that GOT often 
makes regarding the importance of economic progress as a 
precursor to democracy.  This does, however, represent a 
small, but positive, evolution on the part of the 
Tunisian print media, which has previously heavily edited 
USG statements on the need for political reform in 
Tunisia.  Unfortunately, this does not apply to the 
broadcast media, which carefully edited out such 
references from the coverage of this visit.  End Comment. 
 
¶6. (U) Sample headlines on the visit include: 
 
"La Presse" (government-owned French language daily): 
"President Ben Ali receives Mr. Donald Rumsfeld: Tunisia- 
USA: an important strategic partnership"  "Declaration of 
Mr. Donald Rumsfeld, American Secretary of Defense: 
`Tunisia has always been a voice of moderation and 
tolerance.'" "Minister of Foreign Affairs meets with the 
American Secretary of Defense: Reinforcement of Bilateral 
Relations and Seizing all Opportunities" 
 
"Le Renouveau" (ruling party French language daily): 
"President Ben Ali receives Mr. Donald Rumsfeld: 
Willingness to increase friendly relations and 
cooperation to the highest level."  "'Tunisia, voice of 
moderation and tolerance,' declares Rumsfeld."  The lead 
editorial in this newspaper also praised Tunisian- 
American relations noting that "Between the USA and 
Tunisian there is a strong friendship, mutual respect and 
understanding that has always marked the secular 
relationship that exists between the two countries." 
 
"Ash Shourouq" (private Arabic language daily): 
"Bilateral relations and current events in Ben Ali's 
meeting with Rumsfeld." "Rumsfeld:  Tunisia a voice of 
moderation and tolerance." "Minister of Foreign Affairs 
discusses with Rumsfeld ways to push forward bilateral 
relations." 
 
"Le Temps" (private French language daily): "Chief of 
State receives the American Secretary of Defense: 
Cooperation and strategic partnership"  "Donald Rumsfeld: 
Tunisia, voice of moderation and tolerance" 
 
"As Sabah" (private Arabic language daily): "President 
Ben Ali receives the American Minister of Defense: 
Reinforcing the joint strategic goals between the two 
countries. Necessity of relying on peaceful and legal 
means to resolve problems." "Rumsfeld declaration: 
Tunisia is a voice of moderation and tolerance and plays 
a key role in fighting terrorism in the region." 
 
"Le Quotidien" (private French language daily): "Ben Ali 
- Rumsfeld meeting: Examination of Tunisian-American 
cooperation and regional questions" "Donald Rumsfeld: 
`Tunisia, voice of moderation and tolerance.'" HUDSON