06TOKYO2987
CO-CHAIRS APPEAL TO SRI LANKA TO PULL BACK FROM
Wed May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKO #2987/01 1510919
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 310919Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2688
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 2550
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0586
RUEHKA/AMEMBASSY DHAKA 0627
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 1883
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU 0541
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1506
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 8024
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 1080
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 8730
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 0589
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0527
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 2856
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIC O N F I D E N T I A L TOKYO 002987
SIPDIS
SIPDIS
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/11/2011
TAGS: PGOV PTER PHUM CE NO JA
SUBJECT: CO-CHAIRS APPEAL TO SRI LANKA TO PULL BACK FROM
CRISIS
Classified By: Ambassador J. Thomas Schieffer for Reasons 1.4 b/d

¶1. (C) Summary: U.S., Japanese, Norwegian and EU
participants at the 30 May 2006 Tokyo Co-Chairs meeting
concluded a joint statement presenting a strong Co-Chairs
position on the failing Sri Lankan peace process.
Participants agreed to cite Government of Sri Lanka (GSL)
failure to prevent attacks by armed militias, and to urge
both the GSL and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
to re-commit to agreed basic peace principles. The
statement noted the international community¥s ability to
"support" but not "deliver" peace, and called strongly on the
GSL and LTTE to guarantee the safety of NGOs and aid workers
in Sri Lanka. They endorsed a set of Norwegian initiatives,
to be issued several days after the meeting, for specific
actions the parties should take to negotiate a settlement of
the conflict. The Co-Chairs elected not to respond to the
GSL¥s statement on the EU designation of the LTTE as a
terrorist organization. Full text of the Joint Statement is
in paragraph 5, below. End Summary.

¶2. (C) During the May 30 Tokyo Co-Chairs meeting on the Sri
Lanka peace process, U.S., Japanese, Norwegian and EU
participants presented their views and agreed that Sri Lanka
was on the brink of a civil war. They also agreed the
international community should make clear that both sides
would be held accountable for upholding the 2002 cease-fire
accord. In order to prepare for future talks, the
international community should propose concrete steps to
prepare both parties to return to the negotiating table.

¶3. (C) The Co-Chairs decided to explore the concept of
allocating tasks to other groups of countries who wish to
support the Co-Chairs¥ efforts. Participants agreed that
delivering the peace was the task of Sri Lankans themselves,
and that the international community can only support the
effort. They endorsed a Norwegian initiative listing specific
steps to immediately end violence, restore normalcy, and
resume political talks for the parties to take to move
towards a negotiated settlement of the conflict, and agreed
that details of the initiative would be issued several days
after the meeting. The delegations noted the necessity of
examining how to strengthen the role of SLMM. Participants
also conveyed that the Co-Chairs¥ "condemn absolutely"
attacks on NGOs and aid workers and called on the GSL and the
LTTE to ensure the protection of civil society organizations¥
operations in Sri Lanka.

GSL Statement on EU Designation of LTTE
---------------------------------------

¶4. (C) Mid-meeting, the Japanese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs hosts delivered a statement from Sri Lankan President
Rajapaksa responding to the EU¥s designation of LTTE as a
terrorist organization, on which the GSL hoped for a Co-Chair
response. Meeting participants widely agreed that the GSL¥s
text, which preceded the EU¥s designation announcement,
contained weak and imprecise language on the GSL¥s
implementation of past peace commitments, and that the
Co-Chairs statement should not address it.

Joint Statement
---------------

¶5. (U) At the conclusion of the meeting, participants adopted
the following joint statement.
Begin text
The Tokyo Co-Chairs appeal to Sri Lanka to pull back from
crisis.
Co-Chairs met today in Tokyo at a time when Sri Lanka is on
the brink of war.
Japan convened this meeting, three years after the original
Tokyo Conference on Reconstruction and Development of Sri
Lanka, to decide whether the Co-Chairs, namely the European
Union, Japan, US and Norway, can usefully help further in
addressing Sri Lanka¥s crisis when the Government of Sri
Lanka and the LTTE do not seem to be able to prevent the
sliding back into violence.
The Co-Chairs call on both parties to take immediate steps to
reverse the deteriorating situation and put the country back
on the road to peace.
The LTTE must re-enter the negotiating process. It must
renounce terrorism and violence. It must show that it is
willing to make the political compromises needed for a
political solution within a united Sri Lanka. This solution
should include democratic rights of all peoples of Sri Lanka.
The international community will respond favorably to such
actions; failure to do so will lead to deeper isolation of
the LTTE.
The Government must show that it will address the legitimate
grievances of the Tamils. It must immediately prevent groups
based in its territory from carrying out violence and acts of
terrorism. It must protect the rights and security of Tamils
throughout the country and ensure violators are prosecuted.
It must show that it is ready to make the dramatic political
changes to bring about a new system of governance which will
enhance the rights of all Sri Lankans, including the Muslims.
The international community will support such steps; failure
to take such steps will diminish international support.

-------------

The Co-Chairs recognize that both parties have
responsibilities which they have failed to deliver upon,
including the commitments made at their meeting in Geneva in
February 2006. The LTTE is responsible for numerous terrorist
attacks. The Government has failed to prevent attacks of
armed groups, including Karuna and violent elements of EPDP.
The violence that has resulted is no longer confined to the
parties to the conflict but has spilled over to ruin or end
the lives of innocent civilians. This has led to a breakdown
of law and order and the terrorization of the affected
population. Abuses of human rights have been assessed
recently by the UN and others. The Co-Chairs call on all
parties to respect human rights and pursue human rights¥
abuses. This situation is not sustainable and the country
will continue its slide into greater conflict unless the two
protagonists cease all violence and resolve their differences
through peaceful negotiation.

While the situation gives cause for grave concern, the
Co-Chairs concluded that the ingredients for a peaceful
settlement remain present. The majority in Sri Lanka still
seek peace. All Co-Chairs renewed their commitment to do all
possible to help Sri Lanka in a manner that promotes peace
and to support the current Norwegian-facilitated peace
effort. Other countries and organizations share this view and
wish to support the Co-Chairs¥ effort. To this end, the
Co-Chairs will explore interest for allocating tasks to other
groups of countries to improve the efficiency of work within
the areas defined by the participants in the Tokyo Conference
three years ago.

The Tamil and Muslim peoples of Sri Lanka have justified and
substantial grievances that have not yet been adequately
addressed. The Co-Chairs encourage the Government of the Sri
Lanka to further develop concrete policies for addressing the
grievances of minorities and for building mutual confidence
between different communities. The Co-Chairs and the
international community will support the Government¥s efforts
towards implementing such policies.

However, three years of work since the original Tokyo
Conference shows the international community can only support
but cannot deliver peace. Peace can only be delivered by Sri
Lankans themselves. The Co-Chairs¥ role can be meaningful
only where those parties want to help themselves in bringing
peace with commitment and honesty.

Both parties have agreed to the basic principles of any
future peace during the successful period of negotiation in
2002-2003. The parties should recommit to these principles
set down in the Ceasefire Agreement, the decisions from the
six rounds of talks, and the meeting in Geneva in February
¶2006. In this context, the Co-Chairs will support any
solution agreed by the parties that safeguards the
territorial integrity of Sri Lanka, assures protection and
fulfills the legitimate aspirations of the Tamil people and
indeed of the Muslim people, guarantees democracy and human
rights, and is acceptable to all communities. Norway has
prepared a number of initiatives for the parties to return to
talks, which will be issued shortly. The Co-Chairs endorsed
these initiatives.

The solutions to the problem cannot be brought through
conflict - the history of Sri Lanka shows that war is not
winnable for either side and simply causes immense suffering
to the citizens. Finding solutions requires political
commitment, imagination and spirit of compromise and the
responsibility for this lies solely with the Government of
Sri Lanka and the LTTE.

The Co-Chairs reiterate their support for the important role
of Norway as facilitator to the peace process and the
ceasefire monitoring activities of Sri Lanka Monitoring
Mission (SLMM) in an increasingly difficult situation. At the
same time, it is necessary to examine how to strengthen the
role of SLMM.

The Co-chairs note that over $3,400 million has been provided
by donors based on Tokyo pledges and tsunami funds, and more
than 20% of that assistance has been allocated to the North
and East including LTTE controlled area. Such assistance has
contributed to improving the livelihood of people in Sri
Lanka. As long as the commitment to the Ceasefire Agreement
by both parties is proven by way of their actions, the
international community will continue its assistance in
addition to humanitarian aid. As improvement of health,
education and development is important as confidence-building
measures, the Co-Chairs could also provide funding to support
the efforts to meet these critical needs.

The Co-Chairs reaffirm that a continuous and positive
involvement of the UN, Red Cross, and civil society,
including the NGOs, in the peace process is vital. However,
there has been increasing criticism of and even open attacks
against these actors lately. The Co-Chairs condemn
absolutely these attacks. The Government of Sri Lanka and
the LTTE should ensure their protection so their positive
work for Sri Lanka can continue. The Co-Chairs will follow up
closely the findings of the agencies involved in monitoring
human rights, such as the UN and SLMM.

Three years ago at the original Tokyo Conference, the
international community was requested to support the peace
process. The key elements to this process were the
facilitation by Norway, the monitoring role of the SLMM, the
Co-Chairs and substantial aid flows from a multitude of
donors. The international community remains committed to its
supporting role agreed three years ago but it turns to the
government and LTTE to deliver on their side of the bargain
if war is to be avoided.
End text.

Participants
------------
¶6. (U) Participants at the Co-Chairs meeting included the
following:

United States
-------------

Mr. Richard Boucher, U.S. Assistant Secretary for South and
Central Asian Affairs
Ambassador Jeffrey Lunstead, U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka and
Maldives
Ms. Molly Gower, Sri Lanka Desk Officer

Japan
-----

Ambassador Yasushi Akashi, Representative of the Government
of Japan
Ambassador Akio Suda, Japan¥s Ambassador to Sri Lanka
Mr. Shinsuke Shimizu, Director of Southwest Asia Division,
MOFA

Norway
------

Mr. Erik Solheim, Norwegian Minister of International
Development
Mr. Jon Hanssen-Bauer, Norwegian Special Envoy
Ambassador Hans Brattskar, Norway's Ambassador to Sri Lanka

European Union
--------------

Mr. Herve Jouanjean, European Community's Representative
Mr. Julian Wilson, Head of Delegation, European Union
Delegation to Sri Lanka
Ambassador Peter Moser, Austrian Ambassador to Japan
Ambassador Van Dijk Reynout, Ambassador of the Netherlands to
Sri Lanka
¶7. (U) A/S Boucher cleared this message.
SCHIEFFER