08TOKYO376
NEWLY ARRIVED IRANIAN AMBASSADOR COMMENTS ON
Wed Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXRO6383
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHKO #0376/01 0440252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 130252Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1694
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TOKYO 000376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL IR JA
SUBJECT: NEWLY ARRIVED IRANIAN AMBASSADOR COMMENTS ON 
ISLAMIC REVOLUTION, RELATIONS WITH JAPAN 
 
 
¶1. (U) In a February 11 paid advertisement in the 
International Herald Tribune on the occasion of the 29th 
anniversary of the Islamic Revolution, newly arrived Iranian 
Ambassador Abbas Araghchi (not yet officially accredited) 
seeks to spread his country's official positions on 
withstanding foreign aggressions, its commitment to justice, 
tranquility, and mutual respect and dialogue, its opposition 
to the production, stockpiling, development and proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, and its ongoing efforts to engage in fair 
negotiations for the resolution of issues.  He lauds the 
National Intelligence Estimate as "a victory for the Iranian 
nation" upending a "long-running rhetorical campaign by some 
bullying circles."  With regard to Japan, Araghchi refers to 
Iran and Japan as "the two distinguished civilizations of 
Asia" and says the two should play an important role in 
regional and global developments through mutual cooperation. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Separately, MOFA contacts denied a Yomiuri Shimbun 
press report dated February 9 out of Tehran that President 
Ahmadinejad's Senior Advisor Mojtaba Samareh Hashemi plans to 
visit Tokyo soon.  MOFA Second Middle East Division Iran Unit 
Chief Takashi Kamada told Political Officer that Hashemi has 
not been invited, nor are there any plans to receive him. 
That said, Kamada noted that given Hashemi's important 
position, were he to express an interest in coming to Japan, 
Tokyo would be unable to resist his self-imposed invitation. 
If this were to take place, Kamada said MOFA would notify 
Embassy as soon as possible of any pending visit. 
 
¶3. (U) Begin text of Iranian National Day greeting: 
 
Title: Congratulations on the 29th Anniversary of the Islamic 
Revolution 
 
In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful: 
 
On the auspicious occasion of the 29th anniversary of the 
Islamic Revolution of Iran, I am honored to convey, my most 
cordial and sincere greetings and best wishes to Their 
Majesties the Emperor and the Empress, the members of the 
Government and the people of Japan. 
 
In February 1979 the heroic sacrifices of Iranian people, 
under visionary leadership of late Imam Khomeini, came to 
fruition and the autocratic rule of a despotic regime was 
brought to an end and in a referendum to decide the type of 
government, 99.8 percent of the electorate voted for the 
Islamic Republic. 
 
Over the past 29 years the Islamic Republic of Iran has made 
tremendous strides in various fields and the Iranian nation 
has been able to firmly stand out against foreign aggressions 
and preserve its independence.  As a politically awakened 
nation, Iran is genuinely interested in helping find 
diplomatic solutions to diverse regional and international 
crises, which is driven by three pre-revolution era slogans, 
that is, "independence", "liberty" and the "Islamic 
Republic."  In the wake of the triumph of the Islamic 
Revolution in Iran, today we witness that principles such as 
tolerance, justice, liberty, pluralism and pursuit of 
happiness dominate the Iranian society. 
 
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always emphasized justice, 
tranquillity and mutual respect and dialogue as its guiding 
principle through which amicable relations with our 
neighboring countries and expansion of bilateral and 
multilateral relations have been historically pursued. Iran 
has spared no efforts to have cordial diplomatic relations 
with other nations.  At the same time, the foreign policy of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran is based on the rejection of all 
forms of domination and considers the achievement of 
independence, liberty, and justice to constitute the rights 
of all peoples of the world. 
 
We also believe that no government can assume rights to 
itself while depriving others of the same.  And no government 
can presume responsibilities for others while relieving 
herself from the same. Thus, the Islamic Republic of Iran is 
committed to all its responsibilities, embraces expansion of 
its relations with all peace-loving nations in the world, and 
rejects any aggression and threat that causes instability and 
war. 
 
Accordingly, the Islamic Republic of Iran, is opposed to the 
production, stockpiling, development and proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, and considers that production of a new 
generation of these weapons particularly inhibit constructive 
efforts aimed at disarmament and rejects production of any 
and all nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.  My 
government has repeatedly sought fair negotiations for the 
resolution of issues.  Iran's nuclear program has never 
 
TOKYO 00000376  002 OF 002 
 
 
diverted from its peaceful course and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director General has stated that 
Iran's nuclear program is no threat to international peace 
and security. 
 
The findings in the most recent US National Intelligence 
Estimate, concluding that Iran does not have covert nuclear 
weapons upended a long-running rhetorical campaign by some 
bullying circles.  This report has two salient parts: First, 
it is a turning point with regard to the Islamic Republic of 
Iran's nuclear issue.  Second, it is released by the US 
intelligence community, and it unquestionably discredits the 
misrepresentations of the bullying powers.  The NIE's report 
is also a clear proof of the Islamic Republic of Iran's 
rightfulness and legitimacy of the nuclear issue.  It is not 
only a victory for the Iranian nation, but also an 
achievement for the international community.  Peaceful 
nuclear energy use is not a taboo anymore. 
 
We also believe that engaging the Security Council and 
passing resolutions is a violation of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty principles. The nuclear issue dossier should be 
handled by IAEA.  It is also necessary to see a change in the 
policy of intimidation, pressure, embargo and restriction 
against Iran. 
 
I would like to emphasize that despite the contradictory 
behavior of some countries in initiating and pursuing the 
unjustifiable act of passing Security Council resolutions, 
the Islamic Republic of Iran is prepared to resolve the 
nuclear issue through constructive negotiations. 
 
Relations with Japan 
 
Iran and Japan, as the two distinguished civilizations of 
Asia, enjoy deep historical bonds and no hostility towards 
each other. I firmly believe that both Japan and Iran can 
play an important role in regional and global developments 
through mutual cooperation.  Japan's industrial status makes 
this necessary as much as Iran's geo-economic position allows 
such a role.  With regard to economic cooperation, Japan has 
been one of the main economic partners of Iran.  In the 2007, 
the volume of trade between Iran and Japan was approximately 
$14 billion. Iran supplied nearly 12.5 percent of Japanese 
market crude oil requirements. 
 
Abbas Araghchi 
Ambassador designate of the Islamic Republic of Iran to Japan. 
 
End Text. 
SCHIEFFER