08TOKYO2445
GEORGIA LETTER TO G8 SPEAKERS ON RUSSIAN ACTIONS
Fri Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKO #2445/01 2490843
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050843Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7065
INFO RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 9719
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 6266
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1489
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2163
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 2522
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 2182
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI 0109
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS TOKYO 002445 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR OREP JA RS GG
SUBJECT: GEORGIA LETTER TO G8 SPEAKERS ON RUSSIAN ACTIONS 
 
¶1. (U) The Embassy of Georgia in Tokyo delivered the 
following letter from the Chairman of Georgia's Parliament 
under cover of diplomatic note.  The letter was addressed to 
the delegations attending Japan's G8 Speakers' Meeting in 
Tokyo and Hiroshima, September 1-3.  A copy of the letter has 
been sent directly to Speaker Pelosi's office. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Letter Text: 
 
 
Dear Colleague, 
 
Allow me to address you in this very difficult for my country 
period, when Russia has attacked young Georgian democracy and 
continues to occupy and annex part of the country. 
 
The whole world has been witnessing the brutality of Russian 
actions, including indiscriminate bombings of the civilian 
population of Georgia.  Acting under the pretext of defending 
own citizens, Russia in fact carried out large-scale ethnic 
cleansing of the local Georgian population in the conflict 
regions.  More than hundred thousand citizens had to flee 
from the territories occupied by Russian military and their 
accompanying paramilitary units. 
 
Moscow claimed Russia had no designs on our territory.  Why 
then did it bomb about 30 different Georgian cities and 
villages?  Why did it occupy Georgian city such as Gori? Why 
does it continue to occupy our strategic port of Poti? And 
why did it rush to illegally recognize the independence of 
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, eschewing diplomacy or any 
peaceful means of conflict resolution? 
 
My country has called for an international investigation of 
the facts surrounding the start of the war, and of the real 
and alleged atrocities that have taken place on our soil. 
 
Georgia had nothing to gain and everything to lose from 
military conflict.  Our economy was growing at the fastest 
pace in Europe.  After a brief period of domestic political 
tension, two elections hailed as free and fair by 
international observers confirmed our democratic credentials. 
 This is why our Government had been striving so hard in 
recent months to promote a peace plan for Abkhazia and South 
Ossetia -- a plan championed by the international community 
and effectively blocked by Russia within the OSCE and the UN 
SC.  Russia responded to the progress being made in resolving 
the conflicts by escalating its provocations throughout the 
spring and early summer.  It became evident that ending the 
conflicts did not serve Moscow,s purposes. 
 
Now, more than ever, the state and the people of Georgia need 
unswerving support from the international community. 
 
The resolve and moral clarity with which the international 
community responds to this crisis, I believe, will have 
long-term consequences for the entire Euro-Atlantic 
community.  While Russia repeatedly defies the EU-mediated 
ceasefire and belittles international efforts to end to the 
invasion, it is incumbent upon us to forge a firm, united 
front. 
 
As Georgia begins to rebuild with the indispensable help of 
our allies, we are hopeful that some good might come of this 
tragedy. 
 
This war was never about South Ossetia or Georgia.  Moscow is 
using its invasion, prepared over years, to rebuild its 
sphere of influence, seize greater control of Europe's energy 
supplies, and punish those who believed democracy could 
flourish on its borders.  While this reality is distressing, 
eliminating illusions about Moscow's goals allows us to 
develop an effective political response. 
 
The invasion's toll on Georgia has been devastating: Hundreds 
have died and there are over 100,000 new IDPs and refugees. 
Russian bombers targeted our economic infrastructure, 
destroying roads, ports, factories, and civilian housing; we 
estimate rebuilding costs of between  (euro) 1-2 billion. 
But Moscow's boldest gambit -- its overt efforts at 
overthrowing democratically elected government in Georgia -- 
failed.  My country stands more united than ever. 
I believe the most potent international response to Russia is 
to stay united and firm by providing immediate material and 
political support to Georgia.  Intensive international 
engagement is needed to resolve conflicts on the basis of 
international law and declared will of all local residents. 
Backing Georgia with world's political and financial 
institutions is a powerful response.  If Moscow is trying to 
subvert our independence using its lethal tools, we must 
resist with democratic tools that have sustained more than 60 
years of peace in Europe. 
 
Excellency, allow me to use this opportunity to extend my 
appreciation for Your and your country's active support of 
Georgia.  I hope our fruitful cooperation finally will bring 
lasting peace to my country and entire region. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
/s/ 
 
David Bakradze 
 
End Letter Text. 
 
 
ZUMWALT