09TOKYO2329
PRIME MINISTER HATOYAMA'S FOCUS ON CHINA
Wed Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tokyo
VZCZCXRO4172
RR RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHKO #2329/01 2800901
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 070901Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY TOKYO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6662
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RUEHKSO/AMCONSUL SAPPORO 7311
RUEHNH/AMCONSUL NAHA 9142
RUEHOK/AMCONSUL OSAKA KOBE 0615
RUEHFK/AMCONSUL FUKUOKA 6798
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEATRS/TREASURY DEPT WASHDC
RHMFISS/USFJ
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TOKYO 002329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/J 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/09/2019 
TAGS: PREL CH JA
SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER HATOYAMA'S FOCUS ON CHINA 
 
REF: A. TOKYO 600 
     ¶B. TOKYO 984 
 
TOKYO 00002329  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
Classified By: CDA James P. Zumwalt for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 ¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Prime Minister (PM) Yukio Hatoyama has 
made Sino-Japanese ties a foreign policy priority as he seeks 
to establish political footing abroad.  A key policy 
challenge facing his new Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ)-led 
coalition government is maintaining the current political 
goodwill between Japan and China and advancing the still 
somewhat amorphous concept of a ""mutually beneficial 
relationship based on common strategic interests.""  The PM 
set the policy tone early when, in the run-up to the August 
30 general election, he publicly declared his longstanding 
opposition to official visits to Yasukuni Shrine.  Press 
statements and recent speeches suggest that Hatoyama sees 
regional mechanisms, mainly his much-publicized ""East Asia 
Community"" (EAC) concept, as a way to realize his China 
policy objectives and to enhance ties beyond traditional 
bilateral frameworks.  The PM, however, must weigh the 
diverse set of views within his party as well as those of DPJ 
Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa, whose perspective on China in 
the past has shaped the party's public position on the issue. 
 Potential limits to cooperation with Beijing exist, despite 
Hatoyama's outreach efforts.  Japan continues to search for 
ways to hold frank discussions on key concerns such as 
Chinese military modernization and longstanding maritime and 
territorial disputes.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (C) One of the key policy challenges facing the new 
DPJ-led coalition government is advancing the policy 
initiated by Prime Minister Hatoyama's immediate predecessors 
to improve relations with China.  Tokyo Embassy interlocutors 
agree that Sino-Japanese ties have improved markedly since 
the tension-filled years of former Prime Minister Junichiro 
Koizumi.  Since 2006, Japan and China have held several 
high-level meetings at bilateral, trilateral, and 
multilateral venues, deepened trade ties and economic 
interdependence, and accelerated military confidence-building 
discussions on issues such as disaster relief and antipiracy. 
 Japan's China observers, however, cite longstanding maritime 
and territorial disputes, divergent interpretations of 
Japan's wartime past, China's poor food and product safety 
record, and the country's growing military, economic, and 
political regional and global influence as underlying strains 
that continue to bedevil overall ties and test Prime Minister 
Hatoyama and his government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Adopting Finer Points of Previous Administrations 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. (C) Keenly cognizant of China's increasing economic and 
political importance and mindful of the sensitivities 
inherent in the relationship, Hatoyama has made Sino-Japanese 
ties a foreign policy priority as he seeks to establish 
political footing domestically and abroad.  He appears to be 
following a somewhat reliable blueprint mapped out by his 
immediate predecessors, Taro Aso, Yasuo Fukuda, and Shinzo 
Abe.  Although universally panned for their leadership 
limitations, the troika of former prime ministers maintained 
smooth ties by stressing the importance of high-level 
dialogue and visits, and by avoiding visits to the 
controversial Yasukuni Shrine--the commemorative resting 
place of Japan's war dead, including 14 class A war 
criminals.  Aso himself met Chinese leadership multiple times 
during his short tenure.  In this way, Hatoyama's approach to 
China can be considered an area of policy continuity with the 
Aso government. 
 
¶4. (C) Hatoyama set the policy tone early when, in the run-up 
to the August 30 general election, he publicly declared his 
longstanding opposition to official visits to Yasukuni 
Shrine.  In August, during the Shrine's fall festival, the 
DPJ leader publicly stated his intention not to visit the 
Shrine and underscored his preference for all Cabinet members 
to do the same.  Hatoyama's decision to appoint Katsuya Okada 
 
TOKYO 00002329  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
as Foreign Minister (FM) also resonated positively with 
China, given Okada's stance on Japan's wartime 
responsibility, MOFA officials told U.S. Embassy Tokyo. 
""Japan must properly assess the fact that it embarked on that 
wretched, foolish war,"" Okada has declared in the past. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Hatoyama has sustained his policy focus on China since 
becoming prime minister.  In his first press conference as 
the nation's leader on September 17, Hatoyama called for 
building a ""relationship of trust"" with China.  He expounded 
on this ideal during the September 21 meeting with Chinese 
President Hu on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New 
York.  The two leaders agreed to deepen bilateral ties and 
make the relationship ""more substantive,"" according to press 
readouts and Embassy MOFA contacts.  Hatoyama underscored the 
importance of acknowledging and overcoming differences.  On 
history-related issues, for example, he conveyed support for 
then Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama's 1995 statement of 
""regret and remorse"" over past Japanese militarism.  On 
disputed offshore gas fields in the East China Sea (ECS), 
Hatoyama proposed creating a ""Sea of Fraternity,"" to which Hu 
responded by raising his own calls for a sea of ""peace, 
friendship, and cooperation"" as well as the advent of 
long-awaited bilateral negotiations, postponed since both 
sides signed a joint development agreement in June 2008. 
Hatoyama will continue these efforts to improve relations 
during his October 10 trip to Beijing, where he is scheduled 
to meet Hu again on the margins of the second trilateral 
Japan-China-South Korea Summit (septel). 
 
¶6. (C) Embassy sources tell us that Chinese officials are 
responding positively to Hatoyama's gestures.  Beijing 
invited Hatoyama to visit China in September, MOFA officials 
told Embassy Tokyo.  Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao sent a 
congratulatory message to Hatoyama on September 16 calling 
for stronger bilateral relations ""starting from a new 
historic threshold.""  Wen expressed hope the two countries 
could work together to push for ""fresh developments.""  ""As 
neighbors, efforts to deepen the mutual trust and cooperation 
between China and Japan are in keeping with the fundamental 
interests of both nations and their people,"" the Chinese 
Premier stated. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
East Asia Community as Means to Manage China 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Press statements and recent overseas speeches suggest 
that Hatoyama sees regional mechanisms, including his 
much-publicized ""East Asia Community"" (EAC) concept, as a way 
to realize his China policy objectives and to enhance ties 
beyond traditional bilateral frameworks.  Although his EAC 
vision lacks granularity at this early stage and has been the 
subject of much media criticism for being ""unrealistic"" and 
""outdated,"" Hatoyama is still pitching the idea to regional 
counterparts, most notably to Hu during their meeting on 
September 21.  He told Hu that the ""Community"" would be based 
on a ""fraternity spirit"" in Asia.  The PM sees China as the 
key to jump-starting the EAC ideal and appears more sanguine 
than other leaders about tackling political issues as they 
relate to a potential Community.  Hatoyama told Hu that 
resolving the countries' prolonged disputes could be the 
starting point, according to MOFA China Division officials. 
Hatoyama's ""Sea of Fraternity"" vision and efforts to 
strengthen existing partnerships, to China and ASEAN member 
countries for example, could serve as the foundation for the 
broader Community idea, other MOFA officials add.  Tsuyoshi 
Yamaguchi, a DPJ lawmaker and member of Deputy Prime Minister 
Naoto Kan's National Strategy Bureau (NSB), has told us that 
he (Yamaguchi) is working on building momentum and fleshing 
out the EAC idea by focusing on a few concrete cooperative 
initiatives with China and Korea.  For example, Yamaguchi is 
considering pursuing ECS development as an ""Asian project."" 
 
¶8. (C) Speculation abounds about the content and overall 
composition of the framework as well as Chinese receptivity 
to the EAC, but one consistent message from our interlocutors 
 
TOKYO 00002329  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
has been that the EAC is a long term vision and that the 
concept does not necessarily exclude the United States. 
Hatoyama stressed this point during his first press 
conference as prime minister.  The specifics are still 
developing, but the EAC would ""not lessen the importance of 
U.S.-Japan relations,"" senior DPJ member Kozo Watanabe told 
us.  MOFA Asian and Oceanian Affairs Bureau Director General 
Akitaka Saiki has downplayed U.S. concerns about the idea as 
well.  Having briefed Hatoyama multiple times on Asia policy, 
he assured Embassy Tokyo that the new administration wants 
the United States to play a major regional role. 
 
¶9. (C) In his remarks October 7 at the Foreign 
Correspondent's Club, Okada reiterated that a strong alliance 
with the United States and better relations with Japan's 
neighbors can be pursued simultaneously.  Okada outlined his 
vision of the EAC as comprising ASEAN, China, Japan, Korea, 
Australia, New Zealand, and India.  The United States is not 
excluded in the same way Japan does not feel excluded from 
the EU or NAFTA, he said.  The upcoming Japan-China-Korea 
Summit in Beijing provides a chance to expound on the EAC 
concept, Okada added.  Initially, the focus should be on 
deepening economic interdependence and cooperation on energy, 
environment, and public heath.  Some MOFA officials reiterate 
Okada's point that only energy-, health-, and 
environment-related issues will fill the main agenda to 
start.  During his September 28 meeting with Chinese Foreign 
Minister Yang Jiechi in Shanghai, FM Okada mentioned that 
policy coordination should begin in these three areas before 
gradually transitioning to more politically sensitive issues, 
according to MOFA's China managers.  However, some Embassy 
contacts, such as DPJ foreign policy expert and Vice Minister 
for Internal Affairs and Communication Shu Watanabe, describe 
the EAC concept as nothing more than an effort to increase 
people-to-people contact.  Economic integration and other 
hard topics will not move forward, Shu Watanabe insists. 
 
¶10. (C) Although idealistic in tone, Hatoyama's vision subtly 
mirrors a general view shared by several Embassy 
interlocutors who take a more hardline approach to China. 
They stress the importance of using multilateral mechanisms 
to ""lock"" China in, encourage Beijing to abide by 
international standards and norms, and encircle the country 
by strengthening ties to third country neighbors, such as 
South Korea and ASEAN.  Japan's China observers regularly 
cite Beijing's preference to deal with countries bilaterally 
often in contravention of global concerns regarding human 
rights, rule of law, and democratic processes.  They see 
Chinese membership in mechanisms such as APEC, the East Asia 
Summit, and ASEAN-related groupings as a way, in part, to 
compel Beijing to play responsibly and by the rules. 
 
---------------------- 
Japan as Regional Link 
---------------------- 
 
¶11. (C) Hatoyama probably envisions his objectives in Asia as 
serving the additional purpose of enhancing Japan's role as 
link between the region and the United States.  Japan can 
serve as a ""connector"" between Asia and the United States, 
Okada reportedly told Chinese Foreign Minister Yang in 
Shanghai on September 28.  Hatoyama has sought to assure 
concerned parties that an EAC and robust Sino-Japanese ties 
do not come at the expense of relations with Japan's most 
important ally, despite his much-publicized desire to 
reevaluate the parameters of the Alliance.  The PM also has 
said that improvement in Sino-Japanese ties is a plus for the 
United States, just as improvement in U.S.-China ties is a 
plus for Japan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Potential Room for Policy Unity Within the DPJ 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶12. (C) Some Embassy interlocutors argue that policy cohesion 
on issues such as China is more possible than before as the 
DPJ matures from a party of sundry political transplants to a 
party comprising original DPJ members, starting with the 143 
 
TOKYO 00002329  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
first-term DPJ Diet members elected on August 30.  Absent 
concrete policy details, members agree on the importance of 
Sino-Japanese ties as part of an overall foreign policy 
approach to Asia.  Hatoyama's and Okada's inaugural press 
conference statements reinforced the main points outlined in 
pre-election party Manifesto calls for ""proactive foreign 
relations"" and a more ""Asia-centered"" foreign policy. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Internal and External Challenges Exist 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (C) That said, Hatoyama must still manage ideological 
diversity within his party on issues related to China.  DPJ 
members differ on the extent to which they see China as a 
threat, and on the extent to which they view bilateral and 
multilateral engagement as a means to curb Chinese influence 
in Asia.  DPJ members who downplay Chinese military and 
political intentions view engagement with China and other 
regional neighbors primarily as tool to strengthen ties 
within the region.  Party centrists and more right-of-center 
conservatives see engagement as a way to check and counter 
China's growing regional influence (Ref A).  There also 
exists the preference of some members within Hatoyama's 
party, and within the ruling coalition more broadly, to take 
a hardline stance against China's human rights record, 
particularly in Tibet and Xinjiang, and to support Taiwan 
membership in international organizations--a view held by DPJ 
member and Defense Ministry Parliamentary Secretary Akihisa 
Nagashima and by Deputy Prime Minister Naoto Kan, among 
others. 
 
¶14. (C) Hatoyama also must weigh the views of DPJ Secretary 
General Ichiro Ozawa, whose perspective on China has, in the 
past, helped shape the party's public position on the issue. 
Ozawa enjoys ties to China--he meets annually with Chinese 
leadership--while at the same time is a large Taiwan 
supporter, MOFA officials told Embassy Tokyo.  Ozawa was 
instrumental in recruiting the newest crop of DPJ Diet 
members and is thus in position to infuse his own policy 
preferences into China-related issues. 
 
¶15. (C) There are potential limits to cooperation with 
Beijing as well, despite Hatoyama's outreach efforts.  Japan 
continues to call for frank discussions on key concerns such 
as Chinese military modernization and longstanding maritime 
and territorial disputes (Ref B).  The East China Sea and 
disputes over the Senkaku Islands remain a ""big problem,"" 
MOFA's China Division regularly notes.  Japanese public 
opinion on such sovereignty-related issues, and ongoing 
concerns about China's food and product safety record, among 
other issues, could further constrain Hatoyama's efforts. 
ZUMWALT