05PANAMA1947
PANAMA EVANGELICALS SEEKING POLITICAL POWER
Fri Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PANAMA 001947 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: PANAMA EVANGELICALS SEEKING POLITICAL POWER 
 
REF: PANAMA 01591 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Two Panamanian Evangelical ministers plan to form 
a political party (Partido Teologia) in 2007 with the goal of 
electing a president and legislators in 2009.  If nerve and 
energy were the only prerequisites for political success, 
these admitted political novices would surely win some 
elections.  Spouting a pro-business and pro-American 
philosophy, they presented their plan with enthusiasm and 
eloquence in a recent meeting with PolOff.  Some 10-15% of 
Panamanians are Evangelicals, but a similar effort to form a 
Panamanian Evangelical Party in 1994 failed due to a lack of 
funding.  The two ministers hope to harness the potential 
strength of this large group of voters but reject forming 
alliances with existing political parties.  Instead, they 
seek a new approach to solve their country's poverty, 
narcotrafficking, and political corruption.  Although they 
are inexperienced and somewhat naive, they could surprise and 
become effective politicians if they prove good at 
fundraising, a vital part of creating a new political party. 
End summary. 
 
Part time Ministers but fully committed 
--------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU)  Panamanian ministers Rafael Dyer Frank and Evans 
Ellis are the driving force in a plan to organize an 
Evangelical political party in Panama.  Ellis works full-time 
for the Panama Canal Authority in information technology and 
part time for the Hosana Church.  Dyer describes himself as a 
part-time business consultant who also works for the Church 
of the Miracles of Jesus Christ.  Both Frank and Ellis are 
Afro-Panamanians from the once-prosperous city of Colon.  At 
this time the party has 150 organizers, mostly church 
leaders.  Frank and Ellis claim a Panamanian economist 
recently joined their ranks to provide advice to their new 
political entity. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Note:  Colon prospered from the 1940s to 1970s 
because of a large U.S. military presence that created many 
relatively high-paying civil service jobs as well as 
opportunities to work for American families as cooks, 
drivers, maids, and gardeners.  Colon began a rapid decline 
in the late 1970s when a series of events -- U.S. military 
base closings, closure of the Panama-Colon railroad, and the 
decline of the oil refining industry -- helped tip the city 
into a depression from which it has never recovered (see 
REFTEL).  Afro-Panamanians make up 14% of Panama's population 
and are subject to racial discrimination and prejudice.  Some 
among Panama's elite blame the United States for bringing 
West Indians to Panama to work during the construction of the 
Canal and also blame the U.S. because those workers chose to 
remain in Panama once the Canal construction was completed. 
The descendants of the builders of the most important 
economic asset in Panama are blamed for creating many of the 
existing social problems in Panama.  End note.) 
 
 
Evangelicals in Social Distress 
------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU)  What motivates Frank is the social injustice and 
suffering that he sees on every hand.  Frank estimates 50% of 
the Evangelicals in Panama are unemployed and told PolOff 
many have taken to drug dealing to earn a living.  Frank 
cites unemployment (currently at 12.8%) in Panama as the 
cause of delinquency and crime.  He told PolOff about a woman 
he knows who sells drugs to support her family and who no 
longer attends church because of the work she has been forced 
to pursue.  The woman has told Frank that she would stop this 
illegal activity if she could get any other type of 
employment. 
 
What about governing? 
--------------------- 
4A.  (SBU)  Frank has a hazy idea about what the Evangelical 
Party would do once in power.  He would pursue an ambitious 
and utopian social and economic agenda that would include 
better salaries for police, less taxes on small businesses, 
and incentives for investment in Panama.  The newly elected 
party would have close relations with the United States. 
Frank believes only U.S. citizens are capable of helping 
Panama to fight the problems of drug trafficking, 
unemployment, and corruption within the Government of Panama. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Frank is clearer about identifying problems than 
identifying solutions.  Frank described the current political 
parties in Panama as "only helping the upper classes while 
the rest of Panama grows worse."  He blames much of the 
unemployment in Colon on former President Guillermo Endara, 
who he says stopped the sale of merchandise purchased from 
the Colon Free Trade Zone, causing many people to turn to 
drug dealing to support themselves.  (Note: In this 
situation, Frank clearly does not understand economic 
fundamentals.  The purpose of a special trade zone such as 
Colon is to allow the tax-free importing of goods into a 
country for tax-free export to a third country.)  He views 
Latin American political systems as ineffective and thus 
seeks ideas from outside the region.  Frank credits the 
United States as "leaving Panama in better shape following 
its withdrawal than other countries in the Caribbean" and 
expressed interest in studying the economic growth achieved 
by India and China. 
 
A pyramid scheme? 
----------------- 
5A.  (SBU)  Frank described a simple plan to organize his 
political party using existing church memberships.  According 
to Frank, Evangelical churches in Panama have 450,000 members 
over age 18 who are able to vote.  Each member of the church 
will be required to recruit two other persons for the party 
enabling the Evangelicals to elect a president along with 
members of the National Assembly, Panama's legislative 
branch.  (Note: the two people to be recruited would have to 
be non-members of the Evangelical churches.  End note.) 
Frank told PolOff "there is no way we cannot win with this 
strategy." 
 
The Dutch Connection 
-------------------- 
¶6.  (SBU)  The Evangelicals are hoping to lure support from a 
Dutch banker who plans to open a bank in Panama in 2006.  The 
new bank would make loans to start small businesses such as 
restaurants, hotels, handicraft shops, internet cafes, and 
computer assembly plants to fight the unemployment, drug 
abuse, and poverty that bedevils Panama's poor.  Since 
Evangelicals live in all parts of Panama, Frank believes the 
whole country would benefit from this program.  Frank 
foresees ten percent of the profits from these businesses 
would help establish an Evangelical Party in 2007.  Frank and 
Dyer estimate they will need at least $1 million dollars. 
The profits generated from the businesses they hope to start 
would help finance their political campaigns in 2009 when 
Panama will elect a new president, vice president, and 
legislative assembly.  (Note: Forming a political party in 
Panama is  difficult and expensive.  One must submit a 
petition signed by 50 persons in each of Panama's nine 
provinces and five comarcas (Indian territories) and recruit 
60,000 members, a figure derived from 4% of the total votes 
in Panama's last election in 2004.  End note.) 
 
 
The Grand Tour 
-------------- 
¶7.  (SBU)  Frank plans a trip to the Netherlands and other 
countries in Europe paid for by his Dutch banker friend.  (He 
did not want to disclose his name or the name of his bank.) 
Frank is planning to study economics and finance while 
touring schools, businesses, and factories.  His stated goal 
is to observe the political stability and economic prosperity 
of Europe and learn how it could be applied to make Panama a 
developed country. 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Connection 
--------------- 
¶8.  (SBU)  Frank said he has acquaintances active in an 
Evangelical church in North Carolina.  He also spoke about 
visiting Evangelical groups in Colombia and the Dominican 
Republic to study their political movement.  Frank also 
believes he will receive financial support from the 
Panamanian expatriate communities in the U.S., many of whom 
are Evangelicals.  Frank has also met with leaders of the 
Mormon church in Panama which has an estimated 16,000 members 
as well a missionary presence.  Members of the budding 
Evangelical Party also want to meet with Catholic leaders to 
solicit their possible support in forming a new political 
party. 
 
Comment 
------- 
While it is easy to dismiss the Evangelicals' plan as 
unrealistic, the proposed Evangelical Party may just reflect 
what many Panamanians already think: income disparities are 
growing worse, employment prospects are not improving, and 
the Torrijos administration, now one year old, has done 
little to improve the life of the average Panamanian.  In a 
Gallup poll recently conducted in Panama, 64% of Panamanians 
reported no preference for any political party while the 
ruling PRD garnered only 23%.  Although the Evangelicals are 
pro-business and pro-American, they could be a precursor for 
other groups with an agenda less-favorable to U.S. interests. 
 Successfully forming a new political party and winning 
legislative seats, let alone the Presidency, would be a 
formidable task for Panama's evangelicals.  Winning some 
seats in the National Assembly, Panama's legislative body, is 
a more realistic goal as would forming a political bloc to 
deliver their votes to one of Panama's presidential 
candidates in 2009 in exchange for new economic and social 
programs.  However, the Evangelicals do not want to work with 
political parties who they believe have not fulfilled 
promises in the past.  Their unwillingness to form a 
coalition with other parts of Panamanian society may prevent 
them from achieving political success despite enthusiasm and 
commitment.  The emergence of politicized Evangelicals could 
also foster reform movements in Panama's existing political 
parties to win the votes of this sizable minority. 
ARREAGA