07MEXICO6049
CODEL REID DISCUSSES IMMIGRATION, SECURITY, AND
Thu Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO5385
OO RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #6049/01 3401354
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 061354Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9802
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION PRIORITY 0122
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 0431
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 3913
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 1318
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA PRIORITY 3571
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI PRIORITY 0301
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USNORTHCOM PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY133115
2007-12-06 13:54:00
07MEXICO6049
Embassy Mexico
CONFIDENTIAL

VZCZCXRO5385
OO RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #6049/01 3401354
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 061354Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9802
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION PRIORITY 0122
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 0431
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 3913
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 1318
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA PRIORITY 3571
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI PRIORITY 0301
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USNORTHCOM PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 MEXICO 006049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/MEX AND WHA/EPSC, INR, AND INL 
USDOC FOR 4320/ITA/MAC/WH/ONAFTA/GWORD 
TREASURY FOR IA (ALICE FAIBISHENKO) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/07/2015 
TAGS: ECIN ECON ETRD MX OVIP PGOV PREL SNAR
SUBJECT: CODEL REID DISCUSSES IMMIGRATION, SECURITY, AND 
ECONOMIC COOPERATION WITH PRESIDENT CALDERON 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR ANTONIO O.GARZA FOR REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Senator Harry Reid (D-Nevada), leading a bipartisan 
Senate delegation, met with Mexican President Felipe Calderon 
November 29 in Mexico City.  The delegation pointed to 
improving U.S. Mexican relations following Calderon's 
election.  President Calderon called immigration an "economic 
phenomenon" and asked the delegation to support immigration 
reform. While the delegation agreed on the need for reform, 
some members told Calderon that comprehensive reform in the 
U.S. would not be possible without improved border security. 
On security, President Calderon described his efforts to 
fight narcotics traffickers and organized crime, asking for 
U.S. assistance and cooperation.  The Senate delegation 
agreed noting their support for the recently announced Merida 
Initiative.  The Senate delegation raised the threat of 
populism to Latin American democracy and prosperity, and 
called on President Calderon to take a leadership role in the 
region.  Calderon agreed, adding that the best way for Mexico 
to lead would be to build regional alliances.  Responding to 
Senator Kent Conrad's (D-North Dakota) concern over America's 
growing trade deficit with Mexico, Calderon suggested that 
while the U.S overall trade and budget deficits must be 
reduced, its trade deficit with Mexico was a natural 
outgrowth of successful NAFTA implementation, and only 
working together as a regional economic power could the U.S. 
and Mexico both benefit from their relative comparative 
advantage and confront the economic threat posed by China and 
India.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Senator Harry Reid led the delegation which included 
Senator Thad Cochran (R-Mississippi), Senator Jeff Bingaman 
(D-New Mexico), Senator Kent Conrad (D-North Dakota), Senator 
Byron Dorgan (D-North Dakota), Senator Mike Crapo (R-Idaho), 
and Senator Robert Menendez (D-New Jersey).  The Ambassador 
accompanied the delegation.  Mexican Foreign Secretary 
Patricia Espinosa and Undersecretary for North America Carlos 
Rico joined President Calderon. 
 
Better Neighbors 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) Calderon opened the meeting saying he believed that 
U.S.-Mexican relations had improved recently.  Senator Reid 
agreed, pledging to "be better neighbors."   He added that he 
watched the close 2006 Mexican elections with interest, and 
recalling the period of protests following the elections, 
noted that Calderon was a stronger leader as a result. 
Referring to the recent Senate floor debate on immigration 
reform, Reid said he appreciated President Bush's initiative, 
adding that the only way to deal with the issue was through 
comprehensive legislation.  He explained that he had tried to 
achieve consensus in the Senate, but that reform now would 
have to wait until after the 2008 presidential election. 
Reid added that he was happy with  U.S.-Mexico cooperation on 
law enforcement in general and efforts to combat drug 
trafficking in particular and congratulated President 
Calderon for the resolve he had shown going after the 
cartels.  That resolve paved the way for USG action on the 
Merida Initiative.  Congress's only complaint, one that 
Senator Reid suggested the Mexican Congress might share, was 
that it was not consulted more fully on the proposal.  Reid 
looked forward to closer economic links between the U.S. and 
Mexico, adding that in Nevada, his own state, welcomes 
significant numbers of Mexican tourists and boasts a large 
Mexican-American community.  Latinos make up 25% of Nevada's 
population, while Clark County Schools are closer to 40% 
Hispanic.  Reid told Calderon he looked forward to doing 
anything he could to help. 
 
 
MEXICO 00006049  002 OF 006 
 
 
¶4. (C) On immigration, Calderon said he did not want to be 
President of a country where people were leaving every day. 
Mexico was losing its best, brightest, strongest, and 
youngest.  Children were losing parents.  Calderon explained 
that in Michoacan, his home state, most little towns were 
"just old people and kids."  More than 400 Mexicans per year 
were dying while illegally crossing the border. Nevertheless, 
economic disparities made immigration a natural phenomenon, 
impossible to stop.  The only rational way to deal with it 
would be to regulate and order it, though he recognized 
American sensitivities.  Calderon's goal was to attract and 
build companies that would provide opportunities in Mexico. 
He was committed to structural reform and was working 
diligently to create incentives fostering development.  The 
Mexican Congress, Calderon added, had already reformed the 
pension system, and had turned to tax and energy reform. 
 
¶5. (C) Responding to a comment from Senator Reid on Iraq, 
Calderon said the worst thing the U.S. and Mexico could do 
would be to make people see each other as enemies.  "Mexico 
may be the last friend of the U.S. in Latin America.   It 
must act more rationally and less emotionally.  We share 
important values."  On drug trafficking and organized crime, 
Calderon said he believed that this situation had improved 
from the time of his inauguration.  Mexico's future, as well 
as democratic rule was at stake.  In one year, he explained, 
270 Mexican federal police, and more than 300 local police 
were killed.    Nevertheless, law enforcement officials had 
made amazing seizures.   Police had discovered USD 205 
million in cash in one house, and on November 28 destroyed 
the world's largest single cocaine seizure. 
 
¶6. (C) Calderon believed that instilling respect for the rule 
of law was the most important condition for Mexico's 
development as a prosperous nation.  It was appropriate and 
justified to put the government, as well as his own family at 
risk to accomplish this.  Nevertheless, Mexico could not do 
this alone, and needed American help.  Calderon emphasized 
the cartels were a shared problem-not just Mexico's or just 
the U.S.'s. 
 
¶7. (C) America's drug consumption was the origin of organized 
crime in Mexico, but now the cartels were diversifying their 
activities.  They vie for control of local businesses, and 
have diversified into robbery and kidnapping in several areas 
of the country.  The government, the federal police, army, 
and navy were fighting hard to rescue several regions and 
take control again.  Mexico and the United States need a 
common strategy to fight the traffickers.   Mexico had the 
will, but not enough capability or resources.  Calderon 
warned, if both nations fail, the next Mexican President 
might not believe so strongly in the rule of law, and the 
border would bring bigger problems for the U.S. 
 
¶8.  (C) Reid noted that the delegation was sensitive to the 
American appetite for illegal products.  He was concerned not 
only about addicts, but the number of American "recreational 
users."  Colombia and Ecuador would not have the problems 
they do without U.S. users.  Both education and enforcement 
were necessary to combat the traffickers, and though much 
needed to be done in the hemisphere, "Mexico must be the 
first step." 
 
¶9. (C) Turning to poverty as a driver of legal and illegal 
immigration, Reid agreed that help was needed in Mexico to 
build an economic base so people would not want to leave 
their families.   He suggested that micro-lending may be an 
appropriate tool to help economic growth.  He also noted that 
the U.S. would likely benefit from helping Mexican farmers 
change crops as one potential example of the kind of useful 
assistance the U.S. might provide.  A more pressing example 
of where assistance was needed is Tabasco, which Reid termed 
"Mexico's Katrina" and said that he was open to Mexican 
 
MEXICO 00006049  003 OF 006 
 
 
requests for assistance. 
 
The U.S. in Latin America 
------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Reid, motioning to delegation member and 
Cuban-American, Senator Robert Menendez, told Calderon he 
believed Hugo Chavez would be "the new Castro."  Calderon 
agreed, noting that Venezuela's oil wealth made the threat 
significantly different.  Reid told Calderon that Colombian 
President Uribe described his situation with Chavez as 
"difficult" to the delegation during their meeting the day 
before, and then Reid suggested that Calderon's own 
leadership in this region would be necessary to serve as a 
counterpoint to Chavez.  Calderon agreed that the problem 
with Chavez was serious, but suggested that in order to 
"lead," Mexico would need to build regional alliances, 
bolstering its strategic position with Latin American people. 
 
¶11. (C) Reid noted that such a position would be "easier for 
Mexico than for the U.S.," adding that Mexico could likely 
work more effectively if the U.S. refrained from acting. 
Calderon assured Reid that Mexico would not "surrender the 
region."  Given the situation in Nicaragua, Bolivia, Ecuador, 
and Venezuela, Latin American populists were finding a 
receptive audience, and the relationship with U.S. was a 
defining issue.  Calderon advised that vilifying another 
people was "the worst thing the U.S. could do."  It was "easy 
in Mexico to make anti-imperialist speeches against the U.S. 
Voters would respond.  Politicians can blame inflation and 
other ills on Americans."   Anti-Americanism in Mexico is a 
fact of life.  In this respect, Calderon was especially 
worried about the American Presidential campaigns and the 
language being used.  Mexicans can easily be portrayed by 
presidential candidates as enemies and "bad people."  Under 
such conditions, any effort by a Mexican President to 
strengthen Mexico-U.S. cooperation could be seen as 
surrender.  Calderon agreed with Reid that Mexican prosperity 
was linked to American prosperity and would reduce pressure 
for immigration, as well as create markets for U.S. products. 
 Calderon encouraged a "friendly border environment."  Both 
sides should work together on common problems such as drug 
trafficking. 
 
Security First 
-------------- 
 
¶12. (C) Calderon said "Americans want a secure border -- I do 
too." He added that on November 28, Alberto Capella Ibarra, a 
civic leader in Tijuana fighting corruption had his house 
attacked by criminals likely living in San Diego.  Organized 
crime was active on both sides of the border.  To solve 
problem of San Diego-Tijuana or El Paso-Juarez some problems 
would lie in San Diego or El Paso. 
 
¶13. (C) Mexican officials have already seized 50 tons of 
cocaine in 2007, significantly higher than historical levels. 
 Calderon feared that the cartels were corrupting American 
police to smuggle guns and drugs across the border.   He 
called on both sides to reduce impunity at border.  To do 
this, Calderon wanted to have the modern sophisticated 
equipment necessary to combat border crime and detect the 
movements of criminals.  Cartels had very sophisticated 
equipment.  There was a concentration of gun shops on the 
U.S. side of the border.  Mexican local police used only guns 
38 caliber or smaller, and did not carry automatic weapons. 
Conversely, Mexican police seized 7,767 weapons from 
criminals in 2007, as well as rocket launchers.  Calderon 
needed to stop weapons traffic to Mexico if he was to 
challenge the cartels. 
 
¶14. (C) Additionally, Mexico needed non-intrusive mechanisms 
to detect drugs concealed in cars.  As an example, agricultural producers in Sinaloa protested because Mexican 
law enforcement officials damaged their crops while searching 
trucks.  Gamma ray or x-ray detectors would allow Mexican 
police to inspect 1 in 5 trucks where they now inspect 1 in 
¶100.  Guns have been found in U.S. cars bound for Mexico. 
Calderon felt that with more enforcement the situation would 
improve.  Calderon did not believe drugs should be legalized 
-- the cartels would simply move to other criminal 
enterprise.  He was afraid Mexico was "losing the window to 
fight these groups."  As a result "this year, we took the 
initiative and are pushing them against the wall."  The 
Mexican federal budget for security will increase 70% in 
¶2008.  Senator Reid agreed that U.S. officials "needed to 
focus on what is going from the U.S. to Mexico."  He also 
praised Ambassador Garza for his efforts. 
 
The Immigration Debate 
---------------------- 
 
¶15. (C) Calderon asked the senators what they believed could 
be done to reduce the tension in the U.S. over immigration. 
In Mexico, defending what are seen as the human rights of 
Mexican people has become a national cause, though Calderon 
recognized right of any country to enforce its laws.  How 
could media and politicians in the U.S. be persuaded to look 
at the debate from this perspective? 
 
¶16. (C) Senator Crapo noted that Idaho has a strong 
relationship with Mexico, adding that he supported 
comprehensive immigration reform, which would be valuable to 
both countries.  The 12 million undocumented Mexicans in the 
U.S. were the stumbling block.  If lawmakers could find 
agreement on what to do about the status of those already 
living in America, they could resolve the problem.  While 
people disagree over whether to offer undocumented aliens 
citizenship, there is common ground.  Crapo suggested the 
compromise may be a legal status short of citizenship.  The 
U.S. also needed a strong guest worker program. 
 
¶17. (C) Senator Conrad told Calderon that he had voted to end 
the filibuster blocking immigration reform in the Senate, but 
added that unless the American people believed their 
government has acted to control the border, lawmakers would 
not be able to move forward on reform.  Controlling the 
influx of immigrants would take both countries working 
together, as U.S. jobs remain a huge magnet.  To pass an 
immigration bill, government must convince people we are 
doing something to stop the influx of immigrants.  Without 
this, it has no credibility.  Crapo added that the two issues 
-- border control and comprehensive immigration reform were a 
"chicken and egg" question. 
 
¶18. (C) Senator Dorgan raised trade, noting a growing USD 6 
billion/month trade deficit with Mexico that could have 
serious consequence and "already may be affecting the 
dollar."  He believed the U.S. should "get more serious about 
reciprocal trade agreements, though they need not be 
perfectly equal." 
 
¶19. (C) Calderon called for a joint strategy against 
organized crime to improve border security, and reiterated 
that a strong U.S.-Mexico bilateral relationship would also 
improve security.  He suggested that leaders should explain 
how this relationship creates better conditions for both 
nations.  Calderon recognized the situation caused by the 12 
million undocumented Mexican already living in U.S.  He 
suggested that to discourage new migrants; both countries 
look at mechanisms to bring back people to Mexico.  Calderon 
believed further development of the Mexican tourism sector 
offered excellent potential for growth, noting that the 
administration, making great progress, created a million new 
jobs in last year in formal sector, a Mexican record.  He 
also noted the advantages of improving guest worker programs, noting how current programs help the U.S. economy. 
 
U.S.-Mexico: A Regional Economic Power 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (C) On the U.S.-Mexico trade deficit, Calderon said the 
U.S. has huge deficits with the rest of the world and the 
dollar was decreasing quickly.  The American economy needed 
to overcome deficits to address devaluation of the dollar. 
Calderon noted that while Mexico did have a trade surplus 
with respect to the U.S., Mexican exports to the U.S. were 
growing at only 6% per year compared to Mexican  exports to 
Europe, growing at 27% per year, the Middle East growing at 
95% per year, and the rest of Latin America growing at 32% 
annually.  Calderon noted that under these circumstances, 
Mexico's position vis-a-vis the U.S. was less threatening 
than other U.S. trading partners. 
 
¶21. (C) Nevertheless, he said, Mexico was natural provider to 
U.S., not China, and Mexico's prosperity was linked to the 
U.S.   Unlike the U.S. trade deficit with the rest of the 
world, the trade deficit with Mexico was a natural phenomenon 
of the complimentary economies.  Calderon suggested thinking 
about regional prosperity, rather than in the U.S. alone. 
Without closer integration, North America would lose 
opportunities for prosperity.  The North American economy was 
performing "the worst in the world," losing opportunity to 
better integrated economies.  He suggested comparing North 
America to the integrated countries of the former Soviet 
Union, which were growing quickly. 
 
¶22. (C) Calderon warned that without closer regional 
integration, the U.S. could suffer as England had following 
the industrial revolution.  Looking at the North American 
economy as a whole in comparative advantage terms; Mexico 
could provide workers, land, and better conditions for 
production.  American companies were moving to Mexico-looking 
for just that.  Calderon argued that it was better that firms 
move to Mexico to export to U.S. than move to China, India. 
He encouraged the Senators to think in terms of the region. 
 
¶23. (C) Senator Conrad countered that U.S. businesses moving 
to Mexico left unemployment and bitterness in their wake.  At 
the same time, Americans saw Mexicans entering the U.S. 
illegally and bringing down wages.  He believed that closing 
U.S. businesses were a loss that legislators ignored at their 
own peril.  Senator Reid disagreed, noting that the U.S. 
would be marginally better off if companies moved to Mexico 
versus moving to China or India.  The relocation was 
happening, and the governments should do what they could to 
direct departing firms to Mexico. 
 
¶24. (C) President Calderon suggested Mexico and the U.S. look 
at the impact of trade under NAFTA.  Tradable goods exports 
in both the U.S. and Mexico have increased since NAFTA 
implementation in 1994.  Calderon added that the American 
economy registered its best performance following NAFTA's 
implementation.  Senator Conrad insisted that there was risk 
in our current economic course.  Quoting Robert Rubin, Conrad 
saw a threat to U.S. economic strength, because of the large 
external financing required by trade deficits. 
 
¶25. (C) Calderon agreed citing performance of the American 
economy under President Reagan.  Large U.S. budget deficits 
as a result of defense expenditures provoked an increase in 
interest rates.    This in turn had caused debt crisis in 
Mexico.  America then reduced its budget deficit to zero, 
which reduced interest rates, which in turn reduced the 
U.S.'s overall trade deficit. 
 
¶26. (C) On regional integration, Calderon argued businesses 
would move to locations where they are likely to profit the 
most; China was quite competitive in this regard.  The U.S. 
and Mexico together must provide competitive conditions in 
the region to counter this.  Neither country could prosper by 
closing its economy.    Calderon wanted the American people 
to see Mexican people as partners.  If the U.S. and Mexico do 
not create a competitive region, opportunity will go 
elsewhere. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶27. (C) President Calderon, with his graduate degree in 
economics sees the interrelated issues of immigration, 
security, and growth in economic terms.   Despite polemics 
and heated debate over these issues in both the U.S. and 
Mexican press, Calderon and the Senate Delegation held an 
useful, dispassionate discussion that lasted twice as long as 
scheduled and delved into the factors behind the issues.  End 
Comment. 
 
¶28.  (U) This message has been cleared by Sen. Reid's 
delegation. 
 
 
 
 
Visit Mexico City's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/mexicocity and the North American 
Partnership Blog at http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
GARZA