02ANKARA8622
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
                    ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Heavy diplomacy traffic expected next week - Sabah 
Denktas: No acceptance of the plan, but evaluation only - 
Hurriyet 
From Hannay to both sides on Cyprus: Yes or No - Milliyet 
One million postcards to EU leaders - Hurriyet 
Foreign Investors await Copenhagen Summit - Milliyet 
Bulent Arinc: I will not support mistakes - Milliyet 
PM Gul: Worship in Hilton was not smart - Hurriyet 
 
 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Grossman and  Wolfowitz are coming to Ankara - Zaman 
Denktas sounds convinced - Radikal 
Pressure on Turkey about Cyprus increases - Cumhuriyet 
Portugal's PM Barroso: EU has kept Turkey waiting for too 
long - Radikal 
Headscarf finds its way to Prime Ministry - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Diplomacy Traffic:  "Sabah" reports about next week's 
expected heavy diplomatic traffic in Ankara.  British FM 
Jack Straw, UN envoy Alvaro De Soto, Danish FM and EU term 
President Per Stig Moller, Grossman and Wolfowitz are among 
the list of visitors expected next week.  "Zaman" reports 
that A/S Marc Grossman and Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul 
Wolfowitz are coming to Ankara at the beginning of December 
to discuss Iraq, the EU, and Cyprus. 
 
 
Cyprus: "Hurriyet" reports that TRNC President Denktas is 
under heavy pressure by Ankara, Washington, the UN and the 
TRNC opposition to accept the UN plan.  However, during his 
interview with Bayrak TV, Denktas was said that `We asked 
for extra time from the General-Secretary.  To accept the 
plan is different from  evaluating and amending it.' 
"Radikal" reports that FM Yasar Yakis was successful in 
convincing Denktas to sit at the table for discussions. 
Tomorrow Denktas is expected to announce his decision to 
discuss the UN plan. 
 
 
EU: All papers cover AKP Leader Tayyip Erdogan's successful 
meeting with Portugal's PM Barroso.  "Radikal" reports that 
the meeting in Lisbon boosted Erdogan's morale.  Barroso 
reportedly gave Erdogan full support and said that the EU 
should give a concrete answer, either `Yes' or `No', to 
Turkey.  To have a country wait this long for an answer is 
completely wrong, he said.  Barroso promised to support 
Turkey in Copenhagen.  "Hurriyet" and "Radikal" report that 
300 students from 45 universities have launched a new 
campaign to send one million postcards to EU leaders asking 
for their support for Turkey at the Copenhagen Summit. 
Domestic Politics: The headscarf issue continues to be at 
the top of the agenda.  "Sabah" reports that AKP leader 
Erdogan was upset by the emphasis given to the headscarf 
issue.  "Milliyet" reports that the Turkish General Staff is 
preparing a report citing `fundamentalism'  as Turkey's 
number one security threat.  The report will be presented to 
the NSC at their November 29 meeting.  Moreover, Land Forces 
commander General Yalman will reportedly voice concerns 
about the negative impact of politicians' wives wearing 
headscarves.  "Cumhuriyet" reports that the headscarf has 
penetrated the Prime Ministry despite the warning of the 
President that the headscarf must not be worn in public 
places.  One of the Prime Ministry's secretaries went to 
work yesterday wearing a headscarf. 
 
 
Umut Oran: "Hurriyet" reports that Turkish Apparel Industry 
Association (TGSD) Leader Umut Oran will take over the 
leadership of the International Ready-wear Apparel 
Federation (IAF) on December 2 in Miami.  130,000 
organizations from 27 different countries will be 
represented at IAF.  IAF's 2003 congress will be held in 
Istanbul. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
a) NATO Summit 
b)   UN Cyprus Plan 
 
 
"After the NATO Summit" 
Haluk Ulman wrote in economic/political Dunya (11/26): "The 
demise of communism left the NATO alliance without an enemy. 
The lack of a common enemy led many to ask  whether European 
members of NATO should seek more independent policies by 
loosening their military ties with the US.  The continuation 
of NATO is a very important issue for the US.  NATO remains 
the most appropriate tool for the US to preserve its 
influence and control over the European continent.  . The 
search for a good justification for NATO's existence has 
ended for the benefit of the US following the 9/11 events. 
The new enemy is international terrorism, and the Prague 
summit signified that new era.  What both the old and the 
new members of NATO accepted, in fact, either reluctantly or 
enthusiastically, was the American view on how to cope with 
the common enemy, i.e. international terrorism." 
 
 
"What should be done about the Cyprus Plan?" 
Sedat Ergin wrote in mass appeal Hurriyet (11/26): "Two 
conclusions can be made about the plan.  First of all, 
although portions of the language may be inadequate, the 
plan envisions sovereignty and equality for the Turkish 
Cypriot side. . Secondly, the territorial concessions call 
for very serious analysis and revision.  However, this can 
be done at the negotiating table and, whether we like it or 
not, we have to prepare ourselves mentally for territorial 
concessions. . It would be very wrong to impose the EU 
summit as a deadline for this plan. The document requires a 
negotiation process, which will inevitably take place early 
next year.  Therefore, it cannot be signed in its present 
form."