02ANKARA7924
TURKEY: TIMELINE TO ESTABLISH NEXT GOVERNMENT
Tue Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 007924 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
CENTCOM AND EUCOM: PLEASE PASS TO POLADS AND J-5 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: TIMELINE TO ESTABLISH NEXT GOVERNMENT 
 
¶1. Timeline in para 2 lists the sequence of steps to be 
followed as the Justice and Development (AK) Party prepares 
to establish a government in the wake of its Nov. 3 landslide 
election victory.  According to AK officials, assuming that 
President Sezer observes Turkish law and tradition (i.e., 
gives the mandate to form a government to a prime-ministerial 
candidate from the largest party in Parliament, in this case 
AK), the next government can be up and running by early 
December. 
 
 
¶2. Timeline: 
 
 
-- Nov. 3 election results and distribution of seats 
certified by Supreme Election Board (YSK) by Nov. 17-18. 
 
 
-- Within five days (approx. Nov. 22) after YSK announces the 
results, new Parliament convenes, M.P.s take oath. 
 
 
-- As soon as new Parliament is seated, the Turkish President 
is free to bestow the mandate to form the next government. 
By tradition, the mandate goes to the leader of the largest 
party in Parliament.  In AK's case party leader Erdogan was 
ruled ineligible to run for parliament and thus cannot be 
Prime Minister during the just-elected Parliament.  AK will 
thus choose a P.M. candidate from among its newly-elected 
majority once Erdogan has had an initial meeting with 
President Sezer Nov. 7. 
 
 
-- P.M.-designate has 45 days to form a government, during 
which time he submits a proposed cabinet list to the 
President. 
 
 
-- Once the President approves the proposed cabinet list, the 
new government is constituted (i.e., the 58th government will 
be announced in this case) but does not yet assume powers. 
 
 
-- P.M. submits cabinet list and, usually at the same time, 
government's draft program to Parliament. 
 
 
-- Within seven days of submission of cabinet list, the P.M. 
or his designated minister reads the draft program. 
 
 
-- After allowing two days for parliamentary review of the 
program, Parliament begins debate on vote of confidence 
(technically, a vote of confidence on the government's draft 
program). 
 
 
-- Vote takes place one full day after end of debate; debate 
is of undetermined length; expected to be shorter in the 
current situation, given AK's ability to form a one-party 
government with only one party in opposition. 
 
 
-- Upon winning the vote of confidence, the government 
assumes its functions. 
PEARSON