02HARARE2835
Harare's Fuel Lines: It's Not Pretty
Thu Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 002835 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/S AND AF/EX 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR JFRAZER 
USDOC FOR 2037 DIEMOND 
PASS USTR ROSA WHITAKER 
TREASURY FOR ED BARBER AND C WILKINSON 
USAID FOR MARJORIE COPSON 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EPET EFIN ETRD AMGT ZI
SUBJECT: Harare's Fuel Lines: It's Not Pretty 
 
Ref: Harare 2809 
 
¶1. Summary: An informal poll of Embassy staff today 
indicates that it remains very difficult to obtain fuel 
in Harare. Nonetheless, several stations are pumping and 
vehicles on the road have increased from approximately 25 
to 50 percent of normal. End Summary. 
 
¶2. Local staff say it has taken from 2-24 hours in line 
to purchase fuel over the past few days.  Many leave cars 
unattended in gas lines and pay local "touts" to contact 
them when the precious stuff arrives.  There are reports 
of frustratingly-long unfruitful stints.  Here's what a 
few local employees told us today: 
 
"This morning I had to pass through one of the few 
service stations which had the precious liquid to give a 
friend some food. He slept there last night having joined 
the queue at about 3:00 pm yesterday.  When I saw him at 
seven in the morning he had been in that one place for 
sixteen hours. For the whole time there was no fuel. It 
was expected at about eight o'clock this morning.  The 
fuel station as is expected, is owned by a member of the 
ruling regime." 
 
"Last Sunday I waited for 5 hours at a service station 
but got nothing.  A lot of people are waiting for under 
two hours and getting nothing." 
 
"Some of my colleagues have had to spend the whole night 
at these queues hoping that fuel will be delivered the 
next day.  On average one would need to spend 12 to 18 
hours queuing for the precious liquid." 
 
"I have been looking for diesel since Saturday last week. 
I spent 3 hours on Saturday and the product ran out two 
cars before I could be served.  On Sunday, I spent 2 
hours at [one station] and another 3 hours at [another 
station] and again diesel ran out before I could be 
served. The same story happened on Tuesday and Wednesday 
night after work." 
 
Note: The Embassy sells fuel to employees, but at about 
10-fold the local subsidized price.  For that reason, 
many employees still try to procure it on the economy. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶3. It seems every Zimbabwean motorist has a fresh battle 
story to tell.  Parastatal NOCZIM is importing fuel but 
unable to satisfy the heavy pent-up demand.  Black-market 
transactions are becoming more common, public transport 
is sketchy and taxis have begun to charge about 5-times 
the normal fare.  We will continue to track this 
important issue. 
 
Sullivan