02HARARE2011
MEDIA REACTION WSSD; HARARE
Tue Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 002011 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PD, AF/S, AF/RA 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION WSSD; HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   Editorials in Zimbabwe's newspapers continue to 
      focus on the ongoing World Summit on Sustainable 
      Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, South Africa. 
      Excerpts: 
 
  ¶2.   Under headline "Earth summit hopes of ending 
      African poverty" the independent daily "The Daily News) 
      (09/02/02) comments: 
 
      "By the time the WSSD ends in Johannesburg later 
      this week, nearly 100 world leaders, including 
      President Mugabe, will have presented their 
      theories on how to end world poverty.  Africa, 
      as the poorest continent, has been at the center 
      of the discussion preceding the arrival of the 
      world leaders.  If the summit's proposals to end 
      poverty are implemented with more honesty and 
      dedication than the resolutions of the summit in 
      Rio de Janeiro in 1992, then there is a chance 
      the world could strike a decisive blow against 
      poverty. . .  The struggle against poverty is 
      essentially a demand by the poor for the 
      developed world to loosen its purse strings when 
      dealing with the developing world, whether it is 
      in bilateral trade or straightforward aid. . . 
      In view of the failure of the rich nations to 
      live up to their promises at the Rio summit, who 
      can blame the angry demonstrators (against the 
      summit in Johannesburg)?  At the same time, 
      there ought to (be simultaneous) demonstrations 
      against corruption in Africa." 
 
  ¶3.   Under headline "Region reflects on land" the 
      weekly ZANU PF organ "The People's Voice" (09/01/02) 
      comments: 
 
      "The issue of land was first brought onto the 
      agenda of the international community by the 
      conference of representatives of peasants and 
      peasant communities a few years ago.  But, now 
      it has been inscribed in bold letters at the 
      WSSD in Johannesburg.  All developing countries 
      should address the issue of land ownership, and 
      land utilization, and find viable solutions.  In 
      southern Africa, Zimbabwe has led the way by 
      asserting the rights of the indigenous people 
      over their own natural resources.  That 
      assertion is now being supported by the friendly 
      governments of Namibia and South Africa, who are 
      suggesting a regional approach to the land 
      question.  That would be an important step 
      forward for the peasant farmers in the fourteen 
      nations of the SADC. . ." 
 
SULLIVAN