03ADANA173
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Thu Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          JULY 07, 2003 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 03, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Gunaydin / Workers at the government 
operated Cukobirlik textile factory will 
lose their jobs when their contracts are 
cancelled on July 4. They will receive 
severance pay. The World Bank and IMF had 
been asking for the closure of the factory, 
as it was not making any profit for a long 
time.  A private, currently unpublicized 
company, will rent the factory and 1200 
workers will work in the new company. 
 
 
¶3. Turkiye, Milli Gazete / Hatice Fistikci, a 
pregnant woman from Gaziantep, and her 
unborn baby died on the way to the 
hospital.  The health clinic in her town 
was closed and she had to be transported to 
the nearest hospital to give birth. The 
husband of the woman blames the government 
for the deaths due to the closure of the 
health clinic in their town. 
 
 
¶4. Turkiye / Munip Ustundag from Diyarbakir 
Mother and Child Health Organization 
announced that three babies die of diarrhea 
in Diyarbakir everyday.  "Mothers should 
get special education about how to feed 
their babies," he added. 
 
 
¶5. Evrensel / Igdir villagers who want to live 
on the mountains for the summer have to 
prove that they haven't previously been 
convicted by the government of any crimes. 
If they have, they are not allowed to live 
on the mountains. Attorney Ibrahim Tikiz 
stated that this practice is against human 
rights and asked for an explanation from 
the government. (Editor's Note: PKK 
militants used to hide in the mountains and 
make their homes there.) 
 
 
¶6. Evrensel / In Van, NGOs and DEHAP 
(Democratic People's Party) are planning a 
meeting on July 5 for Democracy in Turkey. 
Selim Bozyigit, the organizer of the 
meeting, announced that their aim is to 
inform the people about the EU 
Harmonization Package, the problems of 
migration, and the conditions in the 
prisons. 
GABRIELSON