03ADANA212
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Thu Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0212 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          AUGUST 07, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for August 07, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Evrensel / Yuksekova Prosecutors' Office 
started investigation on the DEHAP 
(Democratic People's Party) women who sent 
their white headscarves to the President. 
Prosecutors' office brought suit against 
the women for helping and supporting KADEK. 
 
 
¶3. Evrensel / In Diyarbakir, Kenan Dogu was 
arrested for having five copies of Azadiye 
Welat (Free Motherland)-Banned Kurdish 
Newspaper-. 
 
 
¶4. Evrensel, Turkiye / In Nusaybin/Mardin two 
KADEK terrorists died during a clash 
between Turkish soldiers. 
 
 
¶5. Milli Gazete / In Hakkari about 500 women 
from DEHAP protested the fights between 
tribes by sitting in front of Ataturk 
statue. 
 
 
¶6. Hurriyet / In Silopi a boarding school is 
going to be used for the rehabilitation of 
PKK militants who would surrender under the 
new amnesty law. 
 
 
¶7. Hurriyet, Milliyet / PKK attacked a police 
corner in Mardin. Two policemen died during 
the attack.  It is believed that this was a 
planned action in order to prevent the PKK 
militants' surrender. 
 
 
¶8. Turkiye / Hikmet Tan, Governor of Van 
called all PKK/KADEK militants to 
surrender.  Tan stated that rehabilitation 
centers would supply all the necessary 
services including barbers, communication, 
food and clothing. 
 
 
¶9. Hurriyet / In Payas/Hatay women walked to 
protest against the coal dust they have 
been breathing for 20 years.  A contractor 
possesses the authority to use the coal- 
sieving workshop.  Women claimed that there 
is an increase in the cancer cases in the 
area due to the coal. 
 
 
¶10. Turkiye / Security officials arrested Turan 
Ari from Turkish Hizbullah in Mersin.  Ari 
is responsible for the murder of three 
people in Mersin. 
 
 
¶11. Bolge / According to Etem Acikalin from 
Adana (HRO) Human Rights Organization the 
new amnesty law would not help the Kurdish 
problem. HRO gathered in a park to protest 
the new law. 
 
 
¶12. Bolge / Osman Yilmaz, head of the youth 
branch of Workers' Party stated that they 
don't want the government giving grants to 
poor students to study in Islamic private 
schools. 
¶13. Radikal / Nusret Miroglu, Governor of 
Diyarbakir announced that about 10,000 
people returned to their villages in 
Diyarbakir.  Governor stated also that they 
are helping the villagers to build their 
houses. 
 
 
ECONOMICAL 
 
 
¶14. Sabah Guney / M. Yasar Ozgul new Head for 
GAP announced that they have completed 
about %50 of the GAP projects. 
 
 
TOURISM 
¶15. Turkiye / Japanese tourists are the 
frequent visitors of Nemrud in Adiyaman. 
HART