03ADANA228
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Sun Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0228 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          AUGUST 29, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for August 29, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Milliyet, Zaman / Adana Security Office 
informed the rural authorities (muhtar) 
about the new "reintegration" law. 
Security official Kamil Karabork stated 
that the aim is to give the correct 
information direct to the authorities in 
the rural areas in order to prevent 
misinformation. 
 
 
¶3. Sabah / In Cizre, Sirnak province, and 
Silopi, Sirnak province, PKK/KADEK 
terrorists attacked two police corners 
simultaneously, at about 9.00pm on August 
¶28.  The raid resulted in the injury of six 
police officers. Sirnak governor Vehbi Aluc 
leads the investigations in the area. 
 
 
¶4. Evrensel / Ministry of Health announced the 
reopening of the recently closed health 
center in Patnos, Agri province. 
 
 
¶5. Cumhuriyet / According to Cumhuriyet, 
leishmania is a big threat in Diyarbakir, 
Sanliurfa and Adiyaman.  There are about 
300 reported leishmania cases in the area. 
Malaria and Tropical Diseases Center, 
founded in Diyarbakir with the financial 
aid of the Japanese government and the 
World Bank, is in poor condition and the 
Diyarbakir governor agreed on using the 
building as a kidney dialysis center for 
Diyarbakir State Hospital. 
 
 
ECONOMIC 
 
 
¶6. Zaman, Expres / Members of Adana State 
Employees' Union Confederation (KESK) 
gathered at a park to protest government's 
salary increase policy. 
 
 
TOURISM and CULTURE 
 
 
¶7. Zaman, Expres / Kemal Onal, Adana Governor, 
visited Adana Museum.  Mr. Onal confirmed 
that the works of art and remains in the 
museum are not being maintained in proper 
conditions.  Onal stated his intention to 
initiate the process of climatizing the 
whole museum building for the protection of 
carpets and other remains. 
 
 
¶8. Cumhuriyet / "Elbaba Camping, the only 
tourism center in Tunceli, is closed due to 
the pressure from TEDAS authorities", 
announced Mahmut Utan, the owner.  Mr. Utan 
blames TEDAS for the inadequate supply of 
electricity to the camping area. 
 
 
¶9. Hurriyet / Members of the State Turkish 
Music Choirs in Elazig and Diyarbakir, 
prefer to work in a larger city.  Only 10 
of the 79 chorists work in Diyarbakir and 
Elazig, the rest are in larger cities 
working on temporary positions but 
receiving their salaries from Diyarbakir 
and Elazig. 
REID