03ADANA200
SOUTEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY
Tue Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
JULY 23, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 23 2003.  Please note that Turkish press 
reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Milliyet / Yeni Turkiye Party (YTP) 
celebrated its first anniversary in Adana. 
Zafer Yegenoglu, the head of YTP in Adana 
announced that there are big problems ahead 
of Turkey and recession and inequality are 
the worst. 
 
 
¶3. Bolge, Turkiye, Evrensel  / Riza Mete, the 
head of the Adana Doctors' Association 
announced that SSK Hospitals and doctors 
are doing their best considering the 
economical and social factors in mind. 
Mete also stated that they support the 
policy of the government to put all state 
hospitals under the same official 
description. "This allows the patients 
under Social Security to choose their 
hospitals", he added. 
 
 
¶4. Bolge, Turkiye / Security forces found 
45000 root hemp in Sivrice/Elazig. The 
farmer who owns the land is under police 
custody. Investigation continues. 
 
 
¶5. Gunaydin / Community Center in Adana gave 
service for 8000 people in three years 
time. In the center children under school 
age can get music, art and sports 
education.  Women and school age children 
can also benefit from the services of the 
center.  Eight teachers work in the center 
as volunteers. The local government pays 
teachers' lunch and transport expenses. 
Center welcomes donations. 
 
 
¶6. Turkiye / In Bingol 21 year old Felek 
Bulbul committed suicide.  In Mardin, Ayten 
Akkun (19) attempted to commit suicide. 
Investigations still continue. (Editor's 
Note: Southeast Turkey has the biggest 
suicide rate in Turkey) 
 
 
¶7. Turkiye / In Cizre/Sirnak 21 Kalasnikov 
rifles were found in a truck.  Five people 
are under police custody for questioning. 
 
 
 
 
¶8. Turkiye / Orhan Uysaloglu is the new Head 
for National Education in Tarsus. 
 
 
¶9. Evrensel / Workers in Malatya TEKEL (State 
Tobacco Factory) are not leaving their 
factory.  The two Korean potential buyers 
were not allowed in the factory yesterday. 
(Editor's Note: Government's plan is to 
privatize TEKEL and workers are against it 
due to job losses and less payment.) 
 
 
¶10. Bolge / Some 26 truck drivers were arrested 
at Habur Border Gate for selling some or 
all of the American unleaded petrol and 
helicopter fuel they get from the Incirlik 
Base in Adana.  Truck drivers were supposed 
to transport the petrol and fuel to Iraq. 
 
 
ECONOMICAL 
 
 
¶11. Radikal, Evrensel, Sabah / Hasankeyf in 
Batman is going to be restored.  With its 
6000 caves and historical value, which go 
back to Assyrians, it is almost like an 
open-air museum.  Efkan Ala, Governor of 
Batman stated that a new project is about 
to start and it is supported by the Prime 
Minister himself. 
 
 
¶12. Milliyet / Saban Bas, The Head of the Adana 
Chamber of Commerce continues his visits to 
get support for the Industrial and 
Commercial Fair which will take place in 
Adana between October 6-12. Bas visited 
Tarsus Chamber of Industry and Chamber of 
Commerce yesterday. 
HART