03ADANA215
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Wed Aug 13 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0215 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          AUGUST 13, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for August 13, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Hurriyet / Turkish Security Forces take 
extra precautions for possible August 15 
attacks in the Southeast.  August 15, 1984 
is known as the date of the first attack of 
PKK/KADEK in Southeast. 
 
 
¶3. Hurriyet / Ebru Demirok, former financial 
assistant of Global Stoks in Adana, 
restricted by Turkish authorities from 
leaving the country.  Demirok disappeared 
with some 2.5 million US dollars a few days 
ago. 
 
 
¶4. Milli Gazete, Turkiye / With the return of 
about 47,000 people, 392 villages in 
Diyarbakir came to life.  Nusret Miroglu, 
Governor of Diyarbakir, announced that they 
have a project of bringing small villages 
of three to four houses together so that 
they can get better service.  Miroglu also 
stated that government helps the villagers 
to rebuild or restore their houses. 
 
 
¶5. Milli Gazete / There was a sound bomb 
attack at the house of the relative of 
Mehmet Nezir, Batman Parliament member, in 
Batman. 
 
 
¶6. Evrensel / Ferhat Tunc, folk singer, 
criticized the government for not being 
democratic.  Government sued Tunc for 
helping and supporting PKK due to the 
supportive words he used for PKK during his 
concert. 
 
 
¶7. Bolge / HRO in Adana had a press meeting in 
front of their office building in Adana. 
After the speeches Mehmet Ocalan, brother 
of Abdullah Ocalan, wanted to make a speech 
but the police did not allow him to do 
that. 
 
 
¶8. Zaman / A suspicious package alarmed the 
police in Adana yesterday.  The package in 
front of the Garanti Bank, Ataturk Street 
Branch-which is very close to the US 
Consulate in Adana, was opened by police 
experts.  The package was empty. 
 
 
ECONOMIC 
 
 
¶9. Milliyet, Radikal / Eight Cukobirlik top 
managers face up to 15 years of 
imprisonment. Between the years of 2000 and 
2003 allegedly they misused the resources 
of the factory. 
 
 
¶10. Turkiye / Thirty businessmen from 
Southeastern Anatolia Industrialists and 
Businessmen's Association (GUNSIAD) plan a 
business trip to Iraq to develop their 
export capacities and the border trade. 
HART