03ADANA208
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Thu Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          AUGUST 01, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for August 01, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Cumhuriyet / For the first time in 15 years 
an anesthetist was appointed to Mardin 
State Hospital. 
 
 
¶3. Dunya / "%75 of the malaria cases occur in 
the Southeast of Turkey", stated The GAP 
Health Report.  According to the report the 
region is desperately in need of medical 
doctors and health personnel and most 
contagious diseases are reported in this 
part of Turkey. 
 
 
¶4. Turkiye / Hikmet Tan, Governor of Van 
announced that PKK members who would 
benefit from the Amnesty Law will be housed 
in Vanspor Social Center during their 
questioning. After their investigation the 
ones who did not commit any crime will be 
released.  It is reported that a great 
number of PKK members are at the border to 
benefit from the Amnesty Law. 
 
 
ECONOMICAL 
 
 
¶5. Bolge / Kerkuk-Yumurtalik oil pipeline will 
not open until October 2003 due to some 
construction problems.  (Editor's Note: 
There has been sabotage to the pipeline on 
June 12) 
 
 
¶6. Milliyet, Express, Radikal,  / A team of 
about fifty Turkish cooks were sent to Iraq 
to cook for the American soldiers.  The 
cooks were chosen among the retired cooks 
and their assistants from Incirlik Base. 
 
 
¶7. Dunya / Selim Arpaci, Head of Pistachio Nut 
Research Center in Antep announced that 
they will get a better crops if they use 
the modern and scientific techniques in 
farming. 
 
 
¶8. Cumhuriyet / Munzur Nature and Culture 
Festival in Tunceli has started under very 
strict security measures.  Festival will 
last four days.  Some music groups, authors 
and artists will be visiting Tunceli during 
the festival. 
 
 
¶9. Gunaydin, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Bolge, 
Turkiye  / Hasan Aslan from Karatas grew 
the first cotton crops in Adana. 
Cukobirlik purchased his first crops for 
12,600,000 TL per kilogram. 
 
 
EDITORIAL 
 
 
According to Gila Benmayor from Hurriyet Koc 
Holding, Ramstores, and AvrAsya Building 
Construction Company are interested in doing 
business in Syria.  Benmayor stated that Syria 
has problems in its financial sector. There is 
only one official Bank in Syria, which is The 
Central Bank of Syria. Just recently three more 
banks were given permission to start business, 
which were from Lebanon, Jordan and Saudi 
Arabia. Benmayor stated that Kocbank is 
planning to open a branch in Syria. Ramstore 
also had similar plans but due to the Iraqi war 
they decided to wait. 
HART