03ADANA182
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY
Fri Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
JULY 10, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 10, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Milliyet, Bolge / Ilker Alptug, a 
university student at Cag University found 
dead at an American teacher's house who 
teaches English at Incirlik Base School. 
The student and the teacher have known each 
other for several years. Smith was on 
vacation in the US during the incident.  He 
had given his keys for his house to the 
student before he left for US. 
 
 
¶3. Milliyet / Two soldiers who were killed by 
the PKK/KADEK terrorists during the 
attempted assassination for the Governor of 
Tunceli had bulletproof jackets on.  A 
Turkish Security official announced that 
all soldiers had bulletproof jackets on and 
without them there would have been more 
loss of life. 
 
 
¶4. Bolge / Kemal Onal, the Governor of Adana 
started an investigation into the murder of 
the attorney Mehmet Sayis, who was killed 
in front of his house on July 1. Ziya 
Dilmen, the head of the Department of 
Smuggling and Organized Crimes is claimed 
to be involved in the murder and was the 
first to be questioned. 
 
 
¶5. Hurriyet / A group of PKK/KADEK terrorists 
blocked Tunceli-Pertek road yesterday. 
After propagandizing people for PKK they 
released the cars and allowed people to go. 
 
 
¶6. Hurriyet / Members of the Clean Society 
Association gathered in a park in Adana and 
shouted "Long live Turkey " and  "America 
go to hell", while they kicked an effigy of 
the American President George Bush. 
 
 
¶7. Milli Gazete / The rate of divorce is 
growing in the Southeast. Meral Danis, 
attorney of Diyarbakir Bar, described that 
as the awakening of the Southeastern women. 
" In most cases the reason is the beating 
of the women by the husband" Danis added. 
 
 
¶8. Evrensel / A group of young people 
collected 8000 signatures for peace and 
general amnesty.  They wanted to send the 
signatures to the government officials in 
Ankara.  During a fight with the police, 25 
members of the group were taken under 
police custody. 
 
 
¶9. Evrensel / Four members of DEHAP 
(Democratic People's Party) were arrested 
due to the help and support they gave to 
PKK/KADEK terrorists. 
 
 
 
 
ECONOMICAL 
 
 
¶10. Gunaydin, Bolge, Milliyet / Cukurova 
Industry and Commerce Fair will take place in 
the North Adana between the dates of October 6 
and 12.  Saban Bas, the head of the Chamber of 
Commerce in Adana announced that they are 
planning to internationalize the fair once the 
necessary criteria are accomplished. 
HART