03ANKARA1593
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MARCH 13, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Bush has lost hope at UN - Turkiye 
U.S. to pay wages of 2 million Iraqis - Hurriyet 
EU's secret Cyprus plan - Milliyet 
Ocalan trial enigma - Sabah 
Ankara: ECHR's Ocalan ruling political - Turkiye 
Gul reluctant to take part in new cabinet - Vatan 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
U.S. turns down Turkey's proposal for new negotiations - 
Zaman 
Blair, too, might be out; Bush getting lonelier - Cumhuriyet 
Bush loses struggle with UN - Yeni Safak 
Verheugen: Cyprus will badly affect Turkey, EU ties - 
Radikal 
Washington blames Denktas for Cyprus impasse - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Mardin to become UN's humanitarian operations center in war 
- Dunya 
WB's Chibber complains about ignorance of government - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: Afraid of a new decree rejection by the parliament, 
AKP leader Erdogan is delaying the formation of a new 
cabinet until a UN decision on March 14.  A new decree will 
be submitted to parliament after Erdogan's cabinet wins a 
vote of confidence.  The AKP leadership is concerned that 
the party might not be able to survive a second failure on 
this issue.  Papers claim that U.S. Ambassador Pearson told 
Erdogan in a recent meeting that the U.S. would need at 
least five years to see some progress in Iraq, and that the 
U.S. is planning to stay in the region for 25 years. 
Pearson also reportedly gave Erdogan guarantees regarding 
Mosul and Kirkuk.  Papers think Erdogan had concerns about 
the military/economic deal with the U.S., but Pearson 
stressed that the memoranda of understanding with Turkey 
would not be reviewed.  Papers expect Erdogan to submit his 
cabinet list to President Sezer not earlier than Monday. 
Meanwhile, about 100 protesters attempting to enter the 
Iskenderun port to block the transport of U.S. military 
equipment to the Iraqi border were dispersed by police. 
 
 
Cyprus: EU expansion commissioner Verheugen has reiterated 
that the deadlock on the Cyprus issue would adversely affect 
Turkey's EU entry drive.  The European Commission earlier 
announced that Turkey would be considered an `occupier' on 
the island once the Greek Cypriots join the EU.  Afraid of 
irreparable damage in ties with the EU, Ankara has decided 
to encourage Denktas to begin direct talks with the Greek 
Cypriots to resolve the issue.  Papers expect the EU to 
gradually exert pressure on Turkey, and to encourage Turkish 
Cypriots to move to southern Cyprus after the accession 
protocol with the Greek Cypriots is signed on April 16. 
ECHR on Ocalan trial: The European Court of Human Rights 
(ECHR) has ruled that PKK leader Ocalan's right to defense 
was restricted during his trial in Turkey, and that his 
detention period was longer than allowed by law.  The court 
called for a retrial.  The ECHR noted that the trial was 
unjust, and claimed that the judges were not impartial. 
Turkey will appeal the ECHR decision within three months. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"The test for Erdogan" 
Hasan Cemal noted in mass appeal Milliyet (3/12): "New prime 
minister Erdogan will  go through a series of tests in 
coming days.  These tests include the second authorization 
for permission to the US; relations between Turkey and the 
US; the economic reform program; the IMF; Cyprus; the EU, 
and the internal balances within the AKP.  More importantly, 
none of the above-mentioned issues can afford to wait. . 
There are already worst-case scenarios circulating in the 
event that Turkey's relations sour with the US and the EU. 
Some of the scenarios are terribly pessimistic, but we 
should also realize that the financial markets in particular 
are very anxious to see two things happen immediately -an 
agreement with the IMF, including a budget and other related 
measures; and the decision to allow the authorization 
decree.   Erdogan assumes the Prime Ministry position at the 
most critical stage in our recent history.  The second 
decree should pass from parliament.  Fiscal discipline 
should be established, with no detours into populism.  The 
Cyprus question should also be taken up in a spirit of 
finding a settlement. . These are some of the major tests, 
and it only requires a short period of time to see whether 
Erdogan will pass them successfully." 
 
 
"What is going on?" 
Ahmet Tasgetiren argued in the Islamic-intellectual Yeni 
Safak (3/12): "Turkey is under attack from both the US and 
the EU.  Despite significant differences between the US and 
EU on Iraq policy, they seem to be in harmony in twisting 
Turkey's arm.  The US is "beating up" Turkey in order to get 
Turkey on its side in Iraq.  The EU is "beating up" Turkey 
in order to serve Greek/Greek Cypriot interests and to 
undermine Turkey's EU membership prospects. . Turkey needs 
the US as much as the US needs Turkey, and the same is also 
valid for Turkish-EU relations.  Yet the European stance 
about Turkey is fanatical, if not downright stupid.  The US 
administration seems to be under the influence of the hawks 
and their conspiracies.  Turkey is urgently in need of a 
mental awakening, and an independent policy adjustment is 
required." 
 
 
PEARSON