03ANKARA1232
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Decree crisis in government - Sabah 
Gul to ministers: State interests at stake, no room for 
emotions - Hurriyet 
61,500 U.S. troops to stay in Turkey six months - Vatan 
U.S. trusts northern Iraqi Kurds too much - Turkiye 
Barzani goes too far - Aksam 
Kurds don't want Turkish troops in northern Iraq - Vatan 
Annan brings his third plan himself - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Reluctant decree - Yeni Safak 
Ankara awaiting a final gesture from U.S. before enacting 
decree - Radikal 
Bush threatens Turkey - Cumhuriyet 
KDP: Turkish occupation worse than Baghdad regime - Radikal 
Erdogan welcomes new Annan plan - Zaman 
Ankara: Third Annan plan insufficient - Cumhuriyet 
Annan: tragedy if no compromise in Cyprus - Milliyet 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Amb. Pearson: We are close to agreement w/GOT - Dunya 
Oil nightmare: Crude oil up to $36 - Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: The GOT agreed on Monday to send to parliament a 
decree for deployment of foreign troops in Turkey, despite 
the fact that no compromise has been worked out with the 
U.S.  Cabinet ministers who initially refused to sign the 
bill were convinced by Prime Minister Gul, who promised that 
the issue would not be discussed in parliament before the 
U.S. agrees to meet Turkish demands.  Turkey will provide 
logistical support to the passage of 61,500 foreign troops 
to northern Iraq over three months, according to the 
resolution.  17,000 U.S. troops will be stationed in Turkey 
for rapid deployment in cases of emergency, and the 
remaining 44,750 will go to northern Iraq, according to 
reports.  Government Spokesman Sener said that although many 
ministers opposed the draft, it was ultimately signed by all 
ministers.  Papers view parliamentary approval as unlikely 
unless the U.S. accepts Turkish demands.  Ankara expects a 
goodwill gesture from the U.S. to overcome parliamentary 
resistance.  Parliamentary Speaker Arinc's strong opposition 
to the decree is a grave concern for the AKP leadership. 
The U.S. is reportedly annoyed by Turkish demands for 
written guarantees, and President Bush warned Foreign 
Minister Yakis during his Washington visit that Turkey might 
be abandoned by the IMF, WB, and WTO.  The President also 
cautioned that the U.S. would act together with Kurdish 
groups in northern Iraq in the absence of Turkish support. 
Having settled the issue of the $15 billion economic aid 
package, Turkey and the U.S. are now working to reach 
agreement regarding military and political issues.  Some 
Turkish journalists wishing to cover the Iraqi opposition 
congress in Erbil were denied access by the KDP, who said 
that TGS permission was not sufficient to cross the Iraqi 
border.  KDP officials regard the Turkish presence in 
northern Iraq as a bigger threat than the regime in Baghdad, 
according to reports. 
 
 
Cyprus: Ankara, Athens and the sides in Cyprus are reviewing 
the third Annan plan.  Ankara is reportedly not happy with 
the new plan, which does not include changes on the question 
of sovereignty, or on the bi-zonal structure or property 
issues.  Denktas has criticized the plan for `seeking a 
continuation of the Greek Cypriot Republic.'  After meeting 
with Greek Cypriot President Papadopoulos on Monday, Greek 
Prime Minister Simitis said he saw no chance for a solution 
with the new plan.  UN Secretary General Annan, in Ankara 
for meetings with top-level Turkish officials, said he would 
announce the latest changes to the plan in Cyprus, and that 
the plan was the last chance for a solution before the new 
deadline of March 7.  After meeting with Annan in Ankara on 
Monday, AKP leader Erdogan said the revised Annan plan had 
improved chances for a  compromise. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq 
 
 
"Bad signs for Turkey from northern Iraq" 
Fatih Altayli argued in mass appeal Hurriyet (2/25): "It 
looks like northern Iraq will be a painful issue for Turkey 
for the next 10 years, as the strong anti-Turkish statements 
from the northern Iraqi Kurdish leaders clearly indicate. 
This was, in fact, a crisis foretold.  Because the American 
and other western "so-called" NGOs have been working to 
manipulate the Kurdish groups in the region since 1991. 
Turkish governments made a terrible oversight and handed 
over the responsibility to the military, instead of focusing 
on the political aspect of the issue.  The political control 
of the region went to the Western powers, predominantly the 
US and France.  Now we are just paying for this mistake." 
 
 
"Turkey should say no to US" 
Mustafa Karaalioglu argued in Islamic-intellectual Yeni 
Safak (2/25): "The Turkish government has the best possible 
international atmosphere to justify the illegitimacy of the 
US action plan on Iraq.  Turkey should act with pride as 
well as political dignity so that this country does not 
serve as a logistical facility for the American invasion 
plans.  . The AKP government should consider Turkey's 
regional interests as opposed to Turkey's economic losses. 
The US plan for Iraq looks like a deliberate crime and the 
AKP has enough popular support for not taking side with it. 
. Otherwise Turkey will completely miss the chance to stand 
against any of the American action plans for the Middle East 
in a near future.  Taking side with the US means Turkey 
sells all its regional interests to 6 billion dollars." 
PEARSON