03ANKARA4761
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004761 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JULY 28, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Rumsfeld to Gul: Don't take a year to decide on troop 
deployment -Milliyet(7/26) 
Associated Press: Turkey/US Begin Joint Operations near Iraq 
Border - Milliyet (7/27) 
Mysterious Operation - Sabah 
Turkish Troops to be Dispatched to Iraq in the Autumn - 
Hurriyet 
US Welcomes Messages of Gul - Milliyet 
Syrian PM Sends Positive Messages to Turkey Before his Visit 
- Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkish Troops to Baghdad - Cumhuriyet (7/26) 
US Presses for Urgent Decision, Turkey Takes it Time - 
Radikal (7/27) 
Troop Deployment Discussions Bring Turkey to a Deadlock - 
Cumhuriyet 
Syrian Prime Minister: Turkey's Iraq Policy is Right - Yeni 
Safak 
Repentance Law and 7th on this Week's Agenda --Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Turkish Troop Deployment to Iraq: Sunday's "Hurriyet" 
reported on FM Gul's comments on a possible Turkish troop 
deployment in Iraq.  On his return from Washington, Gul said 
that the US request for Turkish troops would be discussed 
with the General Staff, but noted that the government will 
make the final decision.  Sunday's Cumhuriyet, on the other 
hand, reports that the military will make the final 
decision.  It remains unclear whether the issue will be 
discussed in parliament before the summer recess, scheduled 
to begin August 1.  "Milliyet" predicts that a decision on 
troops would  probably be delayed until September. 
Following the FM's comments that the government would 
consult the military before making a decision, the General 
Staff tasked Lt.Gen. Koksal Karabay to prepare a risk 
assessment for Iraq. 
 
 
Gul Visits US:  Today's "Milliyet" reports that the US 
welcomed the messages given by Turkish FM Gul during his 
visit to Washington.  According to the story, US officials 
said they had `not heard such positive messages since the 
death of Ozal.'  Gul reportedly highlighted the government's 
determination to establish a civilian political system, to 
end the special military status in Iraq, and AKP's 
determination to act in parallel with American values in 
contrast to growing anti-American sentiments in Turkey. 
Weekend papers also report that Gul met with DepSecDef 
Wolfowitz at a farewell dinner in the Turkish Embassy and 
had breakfast with A/S Marc Grossman before he left 
Washington. 
 
 
The Visit of Syrian Prime Minister Mustafa Miro:  Today's 
"Hurriyet" draws attention to the positive messages of the 
Syrian Prime Minister before his official visit to Turkey 
tomorrow.  PM Mustafa Miro will be the first Syrian PM to 
visit Turkey in the last 17 years.   "Hurriyet" predicts 
that Miro will support an end to Turkish-Syrian tensions 
over the PKK, water issues, and territorial claims.  Miro 
will reinforce Syria's acceptance of Turkey's unitary 
structure and reiterate the importance of Syrian-Turkish 
relations.  Miro will also stress that improved ties with 
Turkey are not intended as a challenge to the US.  In an 
interview with Islamist-oriented "Yeni Safak," Miro said 
that the Turkish government is `meeting our expectations 
about Iraq.'  Like Turkey, he said, Syria favors a stronger 
UN role in the Iraq process.'  Turkey and Syria are expected 
to sign several political and economic agreements during the 
visit. 
 
 
Repentance Law: "Yeni Safak" reports that the repentance law 
will be re-debated in the parliament this week.  330 votes 
are required to pass the draft.  Sunday's "Radikal" reported 
that before the voting session, the draft will be explained 
to AKP deputies in detail, and they will be urged to give 
their full support. 
7th Harmonization Package: Sunday's "Radikal" reports that 
the 7th EU harmonization package will be discussed in the 
parliament's justice committee today and will be sent to the 
full parliament for a vote on Wednesday.  The Government 
hopes to pass the package this week, before the parliament 
recess now scheduled to begin August 2. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"Political messages given by Gul" 
Yasemin Congar observed in mass appeal Milliyet (7/28): 
"U.S. officials, concerned about rising anti-American 
sentiment in Turkey, complained to FM Gul that the AKP has 
not given the Turkish nation a consistent message about the 
joint interests of the U.S. and Turkey.  Gul assured the 
U.S. side that the political line of AKP overlaps with 
American values. .  Gul believes anti-Americanism is linked 
to the spread of extreme nationalism, pointing to a threat 
of rising national socialism in Turkey.  Like Gul, the 
Americans believe that the CHP is feeding this rise in 
nationalism.  Americans following Turkish politics hold 
increasingly negative views of the CHP. .  Gul told 
Wolfowitz in detail about the AKP concept of a `modern 
Muslim political identity.' .  He believes that an 
`authentic and reformist' political line can be an impetus 
for change in Muslim countries." 
 
 
"Different views" 
Asli Aydintasbas wrote in mass appeal Sabah: "Although 
Turkey is not a significant priority of U.S. foreign policy 
anymore, Gul's U.S. visit can be considered successful. . 
Despite all the tension and disappointment in the 
relationship, Cheney, Rumsfeld and other U.S. officials 
established a very positive dialogue with Gul. .  U.S. 
officials repeatedly voiced their request for Turkish troops 
for a stability force in Iraq.  But they make it clear that 
the U.S. side won't be engaging in a long negotiation 
process as seen in the handling of the March 1 decree. . 
Ankara might naturally win some concessions from the 
Americans.  However, Ankara's hand is not strong enough to 
impose conditions such as a Turkish deputy being assigned to 
Bremer, influence on the form of the new Iraqi constitution, 
or the disarmament of the Kurds. .  If Ankara wants to be in 
the Iraqi equation, it must put forth swift and attainable 
demands." 
 
 
DEUTSCH