03ANKARA2198
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, APRIL 4, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
U.S. troops enter Saddam's palace - Milliyet 
Powell: UN must have a role in Iraq - Aksam 
President Sezer: Powell visit timely, productive - Vatan 
Iraqi troops withdrawing inside Baghdad - Vatan 
Allied forces besiege Mosul - Sabah 
Pentagon's `Mogadishu fear' - Sabah 
Pentagon sends 65,000 body bags to front - Turkiye 
King Abdullah: U.S. an invader - Aksam 
Annan: All sides will lose - Turkiye 
Missile in marketplace: 8 killed - Hurriyet 
Iraq deports Al-Jazeera correspondent - Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Allies readying for Baghdad onslaught - Radikal 
Death pouring down Baghdad streets - Radikal 
Council of Europe to U.S., UK: Stop this crime against 
humanity - Cumhuriyet 
Coalition troops turn war into massacre - Yeni Safak 
Desert heat worries coalition troops - Zaman 
U.S. hits marketplace a third time - Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
UN permits Turkish firms to transfer goods to Iraq - Dunya 
Lion's share in Iraqi contracts to Halliburton, Brown&Root - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
War on Iraq: Secretary Powell has asked Ankara for 
permission to deploy special U.S. forces for search and 
rescue purposes.  As such a permit would require 
parliamentary approval, however, the Turks were forced to 
deny the request, "Hurriyet" reports.  Worried that 
humanitarian aid could go to terrorist organizations in the 
region, Ankara has insisted on maintaining tight control 
over such supplies.  "Yeni Safak" strongly criticizes the 
transfer of Hummer jeeps to Northern Iraq, saying that 
sophisticated missile systems might be mounted on them. 
"Radikal" reports on a disagreement between Americans and 
Turks on the location of the coordination center for 
representatives of the U.S., Turkey, KDP, PUK, and Turkomen 
representatives.  The Americans say that security 
considerations require the center to be in Diyarbakir or 
Silopi, while Turks believe it should be set up in Northern 
Iraq to enable monitoring of developments in the region. 
The information received by the center regarding PKK/KADEK 
and Al-Ansar organizations and mass movement of displaced 
persons will determine the scope of a Turkish military 
presence in Northern Iraq.  Special Iraq Envoy Khalilzad is 
expected in Ankara on Tuesday to finalize discussions, 
according to reports.  "Aksam" claims that during his 
meetings in Ankara, Secretary Powell agreed to give the 
Turks written guarantees on regional issues of concern such 
as Mosul and Kirkuk, security of the Turkomen, and the 
terrorist threat.  Turkey is reconsidering a U.S. demand for 
expelling Iraqi diplomats allegedly linked to terror groups. 
Thus far, Ankara had turned down the U.S. demand. 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that during his meeting with Secretary 
Powell, TGS Chief General Ozkok warned of Turkish military 
action if American promises on Northern Iraq's stability are 
not kept.  Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Gul elaborated on his 
remark that Turkey is part of the coalition against Iraq by 
saying that Turkey is not a combatant country, but still a 
member of the U.S.-led coalition.  Parliamentary Speaker 
Arinc strongly criticized the U.S. and UK for acting 
insensitively not only regarding cultural heritage and 
monuments, but also with respect to human life.  Dailies 
report that the Iranian and Syrian foreign ministers will 
visit Ankara next week for meetings about Kurdish activities 
in Northern Iraq.  The visit is taking place amidst 
speculation that Iran and Syria, alleged developers of WMD, 
could be the next targets of the United States. 
 
 
Positive Images of Coalition Forces:  For the first time 
since the opening of hostilities, there have been photos in 
Turkish newspapers and film clips on Turkish television 
showing positive interaction between coalition forces and 
Iraqis.  Today's "Aksam" carries an article/photo of Iraqis 
and UK troops playing soccer.  (The Iraqis won the match.) 
In today's "Sabah," there is a photo of a British soldier 
playing pattycake with a little Iraqi girl, with a caption 
explaining how UK forces are trying to reach out to 
children.  "Vatan" had a full page of photos including U.S. 
troops giving medical aid to an Iraqi civilian, and British 
and UK troops playing with Iraqi children.  The soccer game 
and video of U.S. soldiers singing for Iraqi kids while 
standing on their vehicle have been replayed on NTV, 
national network TRT, and CNN-Turk.  It is a beginning. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Post war scenarios / Powell visit 
 
 
"The US is in need of allies" 
Ferai Tinc commented in mass appeal Hurriyet (4/4): 
"Secretary Powell's next stop after Ankara was Belgrade, 
where he found a city of never-ending crime and corruption. 
He was in a country, Yugoslavia, where a lasting peace has 
yet to be established.  Belgrade represents a striking 
example of why we cannot talk about peace and democracy in 
the post-Saddam era in Iraq.  . The US does not appear 
willing to leave Iraq to anyone in the post-Saddam period. 
It is interesting to observe that the US has left all Iraqi 
opposition elements out of the game, with the exception of 
the Kurds.  Things in Iraq are getting messy, and the visit 
by Secretary Powell to Ankara shows that the US feels the 
need for allies at this stage." 
 
 
"After Powell" 
Yilmaz Oztuna wrote in the conservative/mass appeal Turkiye 
(4/4): "US-Turkish relations were nearing an irrational 
stage, and Turkish foreign policy was headed for a serious 
crash.  Meanwhile, that kind of atmosphere has become a very 
good opportunity for anti-Turkey groups to intensify their 
efforts.  The sudden visit of Secretary Powell is an attempt 
to heal bilateral relations.  We should thank Foreign 
Minister Gul for doing the right thing by declaring that 
Turkey is `in the coalition' even before Russia and France. 
. Secretary Powell's visit helped a great deal to prevent 
Turkey from becoming isolated or alienated.  It was also 
very important to note US remarks about not allowing an 
economic crisis in Turkey." 
 
 
PEARSON