03ANKARA1074
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Turkey and the US reach agreement on Military and Economic 
issues-Hurriyet 
US Finds the Turkish requests too much-Sabah 
Here is the "B" Plan- Turkiye 
US Will not start Renovation of bases and the ports until 
Parliament decides - Milliyet 
Papadopulos Knot in Cyprus!-Milliyet 
Elections in Cyprus bring uncertainty to Cyprus plan- 
Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
AKP's Bargaining on Iraq -Cumhuriyet 
Turkey extends its last offer to the US, US Warships Waiting 
for final decision-Zaman 
US Challenges Turkey-Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq:  The overall tone of press coverage is that time is 
running out, and that the US is becoming impatient about the 
delayed decision by parliament.  US sources are saying that 
"Turkey better come up with a decision on whether to allow 
US troops, or we will implement a Plan B."  Mass appeal 
Hurriyet's Washington reporter also quotes a "high level and 
very important US official" as saying that Turkey will have 
to pay the consequences if it fails to permit US troops, and 
that the US will never forget Turkey's decision.  Turkish 
officials are reportedly "waiting for the right time" to 
make their case to the parliament.  Most papers conclude 
that Turkey has forwarded more demands to the US in order to 
satisfy Turkish public opinion. 
 
 
"Hurriyet" outlined an agreement which is "close to being 
concluded" between the US and Turkey regarding possible 
military cooperation.  Turkey will keep 15,000 soldiers in 
the oil-rich areas of Iraq in order to establish a buffer 
zone.  Another 25-35,000 Turkish troops will be joining US 
troops for joint action elsewhere in northern Iraq.  There 
will be a co-command authority, with one Turkish and one US 
general, Hurriyet reports. 
 
 
Meanwhile, all papers and TV channels cover the ongoing 
discussions between the US and Turkey on political, military 
and economic issues.  "Zaman" reports that after parliament 
speaker Bulent Arinc announced that the decision regarding 
US troop deployments in Turkey would not be discussed in 
parliament today, concerns have been raised about US-Turkish 
ties.  Most weekend papers evaluated FM Yakis and State 
Minister Babacan's sudden trip to the US as a "fruitless 
visit."  Both ministers stated on their return that no 
agreement had been reached on the economic package, even 
after a  meeting with President Bush.  "Yeni Safak" reports 
that Turkey had asked the US for written guarantees on 
political, economic and military issues.  The US' 
unwillingness to make any commitments about Turkish losses 
caused deep concern on the Turkish side. 
 
 
Cyprus: All papers cover the election results in Cyprus. 
"Vatan" says that the Turkish Cypriots are upset about the 
election victory of Tasos Papadopulos, a former EOKA 
activist.  "Milliyet" reports that the victory of 
Papadopulos had caused worries about the future of the 
Cyprus talks.  "NTV" quoted TRNC president Denktas as saying 
that "the solution to the Cyprus issue can hardly can be 
worked out with Papadopulos, who already declares himself 
president of the whole island." 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq 
 
 
"US: Better make up your mind immediately" 
Mehmet Ali Birand noted in mass appeal Posta (2/18): "After 
spending some time in Washington, it seems to me that the 
Bush administration is very determined to go ahead with the 
Iraq operation with or without another UN resolution.  It 
does not matter how strongly the Europeans oppose the U.S., 
and it does not matter whether Turkey is involved or not. 
The Iraq operation will be carried out and Saddam will be 
toppled. . Given the circumstances, the nature of the 
Turkish parliament's decision becomes historically important 
regarding Turkish-American relations.  The US 
administration, feeling stabbed in the back by France and 
Germany, is now keeping a keen eye on Turkey.  Americans are 
clearly warning that `time is almost up,' and that Turkey 
should come up with a decision. The Americans view it this 
way: `We did our best to meet Turkey's expectations, and 
that's it.'  It seems that Ankara will have to produce a 
parliamentary decision in the end whether it likes it or 
not." 
 
 
"The American megalomania" 
Ahmet Tasgetiren argued in Islamic-intellectual Yeni Safak 
(2/18): "Turkey is facing a US threat based on messages 
coming from Washington: `Unless the Turkish parliament 
approves US military movements from Turkey to Iraq, a Plan B 
will be implemented.'  If this message is about `paying the 
consequences,' it is not only Turkey but also the US that 
will pay a price.  The US is currently facing a world-wide 
`common sense' opposition, and Washington has been aiming to 
tarnish Turkish common sense and pride." 
 
 
"Puzzle-ridden bargain between the US and Turkey" 
Sedat Ergin reviewed the latest developments in the US- 
Turkey negotiations under the following categories: 
A) Political document 
Turkey and the US are now debating a critical text related 
to the future of Iraq. 
Turkish and US officials continue to make adjustments in the 
draft. The document will contain a series of principles 
regarding the structure of a post-war Iraq.  The document 
will regulate critical issues like the political and 
constitutional structure of Iraq, the status of the 
Turkomen, control of oil-rich areas, and the transfer of oil 
to international markets. It is not yet clear whether the 
document will come into effect through an exchange of 
letters between the US President and the Turkish Prime 
Minister, or will be prepared as a memorandum of 
understanding. 
 
 
B) Economic agreement 
This document will include pledges for the compensation of 
possible Turkish losses in the war by the US administration. 
There are serious differences between the parties on this 
issue. The US has increased the amount of proposed grants 
for Turkey from $4 billion to $6 billion. Half of this 
amount will be used to erase Turkey's military debt. In a 
meeting with Turkish ministers last week, President Bush 
stressed that the possible grant figure cannot go beyond the 
current US proposal.  In addition, Washington is considering 
a proposal to give Turkey credits instead of grants. The US 
has offered to give Turkey up to $15 billion in credits. 
However, Turkey is cool to this formula because it would 
place an additional burden on the shoulders of Turkish 
taxpayers.  Ankara is pushing for an increase in the grant 
figure.  The US says that the Turkish estimate of $80 
billion in losses for a five-year period after the war is 
not realistic. 
 
 
C) Agreement about the deployment of troops 
This agreement is related to the stationing of US troops in 
Turkey, their transition to northern Iraq and cooperation 
between Turkish and US troops in northern Iraq. The number 
of US troops to come to Turkey and the command of US and 
Turkish troops in northern Iraq is under discussion within 
this framework. 
 
 
D) Other protocols 
In addition to the main agreements, there is also bargaining 
about some other protocols as well as certain secret 
documents to be signed by the two parties.  All the 
agreements are linked to each other. Progress in one of the 
issues might positively impact the others.  If Turkey is not 
satisfied on the political issues, it might decline to meet 
US demands for military cooperation. 
 
 
E) Parliamentary permission 
The most important move to influence the outcome of the 
complicated bargaining is the pending parliamentary 
permission for the deployment of US troops in Turkey.  The 
permission will come to parliament's agenda if a 
breakthrough is achieved in the bargaining process. At the 
same time, the parliamentary permission for the deployment 
of US troops will help progress on the other issues. 
 
 
F) US vessels waiting off Turkish territorial waters 
US vessels waiting off Turkish waters are an element of 
pressure in the bargaining. 
Washington says that the vessels will be sent to the 
southern front unless the Turkish parliament issues the 
necessary permission for the deployment of US troops today. 
Ankara assumes that the US cannot afford to abandon its 
plans for fighting on a northern front, and that the US is 
bluffing in its threat to send the vessels to the Persian 
Gulf.  Turkey is using parliamentary permission for the 
deployment of US troops to exert pressure on the US. . 
 
 
In sum, the point where the parties stand right now 
indicates a deadlock." 
 
 
PEARSON