03ANKARA5668
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005668 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Turkish Cypriot Opposition Agrees to By-Pass Denktas - 
Hurriyet (9/6) 
Ankara Questions US on Zebari's Remarks - Milliyet (9/6) 
Five Turkish Patrol Stations Between Habur and Baghdad - 
Hurriyet (9/7) 
FM Gul Says Turkish Troop Deployment Requires Military's 
Approval - Milliyet 
Bush's Rating Drops - Hurriyet 
U-Turn  From Zebari - Milliyet 
Bin-Laden Opens A New Front in Iraq - Milliyet 
Zebari Staffs Foreign Ministry With Non-Arabic Speakers - 
Hurriyet 
Simitis Calls For Solution in Cyprus - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
PKK Interlude to Turkish-U.S. Military Meetings - Radikal 
(9/6) 
US Agrees to Warn Zebari - Radikal (9/6) 
FM Gul: "We'll Go to Iraq Only For Peace"- Cumhuriyet 
Iraq is the New Al-Qaeda Front - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Turkish Troop Deployment:  Sunday's "Cumhuriyet" reports 
that despite remarks by Iraqi Government Officials, FM Gul 
says that Iraq's territorial integrity and political 
cohesion are important to Turkey, and that Turkish troops 
will go to Iraq to establish peace and stability.  Today's 
"Milliyet" gives front-page coverage to the FM's comments 
that Turkish General Staff approval is a must for the troop 
deployment.  Gul stressed   that the government is not 
trying to pass responsibility for the decision to the TGS. 
He said that the decision will a political one, but that it 
would be wrong to act without the military's approval. 
Sunday's "Hurriyet" covered details of the agreement 
reportedly reached between US and Turkish military 
delegations.  Turkey and the US have agreed that Turkey will 
control a separate sector in Iraq.  According to "Hurriyet," 
Turkey wants to set up five military patrol stations between 
Habur and Baghdad to ensure security for the transit of 
Turkish troops. 
 
 
Zebari Steps Back:  Today's papers report that Iraqi Foreign 
Minister Zebari made a `U-turn' from his remarks implying 
that Turkish troops are not wanted in Iraq.  Zebari said 
that Turkey, Syria, and Iran can play a role in the 
reconstruction of Iraq.  "Vatan" points out that Zebari's 
change of view comes after a US intervention.  Ankara had 
asked the US to issue a warning to Zebari, the paper notes. 
 
 
Cyprus Issue:  "Milliyet" draws attention to FM Gul's 
statements regarding Cyprus.  Gul said that he will be 
travelling to Greece in October to discuss the Cyprus issue 
and the EU accession. During his trip, Gul said that he may 
announce `new decisions.' Gul added that a link will be 
established between a solution on the Cyprus issue and a 
date for Turkey's negotiations on EU accession.  Weekend 
papers reported that three opposition parties in the TRNC 
have agreed to cooperate against Denktas in December's 
elections.  The three parties signed a protocol in which 
they agreed that Denktas will be removed as Cyprus 
negotiator is he is defeated in at the ballot box. 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"We can't merely watch" 
Yasemin Congar  wrote in the mass appeal Milliyet (9/8): 
"Some in Turkey tend to see the Iraqi Kurds as `puppets' of 
the United States.  They therefore evaluate Iraqi Minister 
Zebari's statements of opposition to a Turkish troop 
presence as an effort by the Americans to `play the Kurdish 
card.'  But anyone who follows this relationship closely can 
see that the Kurds do not simply follow U.S. orders. 
.Turkey's government leaders have made a correct analysis, 
and concluded that the success of the United States in Iraq 
is in Turkey's interests. .  The U.S. wants a unitary Iraq 
that is moving on a path toward democracy, an Iraq that does 
not shelter terrorism, and an Iraq that will become a source 
of stability in the region.  Therefore, Turkey must work 
against the powers struggling against the establishment of 
such an Iraq. .  President Bush, in a televised speech 
today, will urge the international community to increase 
cooperation in Iraq.  Ankara is happy with the Bush 
Administration's U-turn. .  Turkish diplomats believe that 
the U.S. effort at the UN might encourage the Turkish 
parliament to adopt a decision to send troops to Iraq.  . 
The decision to be taken by Turkish politicians will bring 
to them an historic responsibility." 
 
 
"Why should we go to Iraq?" 
Ali Bulac commented in the conservative/opinion maker Zaman 
(9/8):  "Iraq's infrastructure has totally collapsed, and 
the majority of the Iraqi population is struggling against 
hunger to survive.  Infant deaths are rising significantly. 
The occupiers are carrying out disgraceful operations in 
which they arrest and humiliate people every day, including 
the violation of Iraqi women. .  Turkey cannot look at the 
Iraqi tragedy through the eyes of America and the West. . 
Turkey must go to Iraq to help its Iraqi brothers, not the 
occupiers. .  We don't have scholars who can establish a 
dialog with the holders of social and political initiative, 
the Sunni and Shiite clerics in Iraq. .  Human rights 
organizations should have reported ongoing violations in 
Iraq.  Humanitarian aid organizations should have organized 
extensive programs to help the Iraqi people.  Our medical 
organizations should have rushed to the help of dying Iraqi 
children.  In short, Turkey must go to Iraq with its brain 
and its heart." 
 
 
EDELMAN