03ANKARA7793
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007793 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 19, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Four conditions for the Annan Plan - Aksam 
Saddam Under Interrogation - Sabah 
Denktash: We are disappointed by the US - Turkiye 
Police capture an Al-Qaeda terrorist - Milliyet 
US asked Turkey to impose visa requirement on Iran - 
Hurriyet 
Turkish `brain' of Al-Qaeda arrested - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Weston: Annan Plan is the only plan - Cumhuriyet 
Weston and Verheugen Pressure Ankara for Solution - Radikal 
France divided on the headscarf debate - Radikal 
US Forces attack Iraqi civilians in Samarra - Yeni Safak 
PM Erdogan Calls on Denktash to Change His Advisors - Yeni 
Safak 
Michael Moore: We created Saddam - Cumhuriyet 
US Pressures Iran Through Turkey - Zaman 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  US Special Cyprus Coordinator Thomas Weston, who is 
on the island for talks with Turkish Cypriot leader Denktas 
and political party leaders, urged Turks and Greeks to begin 
negotiations as soon as possible so that the Annan Plan can 
be taken to a referendum.  Denktas complained to Weston that 
the US is supporting Greek Cypriot views.  Weston will 
proceed to Ankara on Friday for talks with MFA officials. 
Prime Minister Erdogan, in Uzbekistan for an official visit, 
outlined some possible adjustments to the Annan Plan.  The 
exchange of property on both sides is unacceptable, 
according to Erdogan.  `There is no need to provoke people 
after 29 years,' he said.  The existence of two sovereign 
states must be clarified in the plan, he added.  Erdogan 
noted that the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus is 
an issue to be discussed.  Turkey's EU membership should not 
be linked primarily to a solution on Cyprus, Erdogan 
stressed.  Dailies expect Ankara to unveil its new peace 
plan for Cyprus once a new government is formed in the 
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). 
 
 
Ambassador Edelman meets the Minister of Interior: US 
Ambassador Eric Edelman said during his meeting with 
Minister of Interior Abdulkadir Aksu on Thursday that Turkey 
should require a visa from nationals of its eastern 
neighbors to ensure better control of borders.  Edelman also 
offered Aksu explosives training for Turkish police by 
American experts.  Edelman urged Aksu to enhance the 
security of US facilities in Turkey.  Aksu said his 
government would arrive at a decision on the Iran visa issue 
after evaluating the US suggestion. 
 
 
 
 
US Religious Freedom report: The annual US report on 
international religious freedom, submitted to the Congress 
on Thursday, listed Turkey among the countries that have 
discriminatory laws or policies against certain religions. 
The report said that Turkey restricts the freedom of non- 
Muslims such as Christians and the Bahai, and notes that 
freedom of expression for some Muslims in Turkey is also 
restricted, especially with regard to use of the headscarf 
in public areas. 
 
 
Turkey, Iran to cooperate on education: Turkey's minister of 
education, Huseyin Celik, has reached an agreement with his 
Iranian counterpart, Murtaza Haji, on a technical, cultural 
and educational exchange program, "Milliyet" reports. 
Analysts believe that exchange programs with a country that 
applies religious norms in education could cause problems 
for Turkey in the future. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
Iraq; EU-Turkey-Cyprus 
"The End of Saddam" 
Coskun Kirca noted in the mass appeal Aksam (12/19): "The 
capture of Saddam Hussein does not necessarily mean the 
establishment of stability in Iraq.  The Baath Party of Iraq 
has a strong network in the Sunni population and is capable 
of conducting attacks against coalition forces.   There is 
also a cultural aspect of this within the Arab community -- 
Arabs never want to see their leaders as losers, nor accept 
their failures.  It is for sure that Saddam was one of the 
most brutal dictators in the world.  He ordered more than 
400,000 political opponents to be murdered, not to mention 
the fact that he gassed his own people.  Nevertheless, at 
least some Iraqi Arabs will continue to see him as a hero 
even if he is given a fair trial. . Now the main issue is 
how to conduct Saddam's trial.  The UN-sponsored 
international court is not the best option, due to Arab 
sentiment and local sensitivities in this region.  The IGC- 
proposed Iraqi tribunal for political crimes is the most 
appropriate option taking into account the situation in 
Iraq." 
 
 
"Turkey Should Be Given a Date in the Spring" 
Ferai Tinc urged in mass appeal Hurriyet (12/19): "The 
recent EU summit ended in a fiasco by failing to implement 
the EU expansion policy.  Yet there is another development 
which is of direct concern for Turkey.   The six members of 
the EU asked the Commission not to expand the Union's 
budget, which was scheduled for the 2007-2013 period.  This 
effort will only lead to a cut in funds and lowering of 
spending.  All of this indicates the real reason for the 
EU's unwillingness to give Turkey an encouraging message 
about the membership calendar.  . The upcoming EU summit in 
spring 2004 is the most critical one.  It is critical not 
only for Turkey, but for Cyprus as well.  The EU is waiting 
for a settlement to the Cyprus issue.  But the EU should 
also give a negotiation date to Turkey at the spring 2004 
summit.  Otherwise, the whole EU-Turkey-Cyprus process will 
be very negatively affected." 
 
 
EDELMAN