03KUWAIT1973
RETURNING STOLEN KUWAITI PROPERTY
Sun May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 001973 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL IZ KU
SUBJECT: RETURNING STOLEN KUWAITI PROPERTY 
 
¶1. This is an action request. Please see para. 5 
 
¶2. Summary: A member of Kuwait's ruling family met with the 
Ambassador on May 4 to seek his assistance in reclaiming 
property stolen by Iraqis during the 1990-91 occupation of 
Kuwait.  The request highlights the need to establish a 
procedure for current and future property claims. End Summary. 
 
¶3. Shaykh Ahmed Jaber al-Abdullah al-Jaber al-Sabah paid a 
visit to the Ambassador on May 4, and asked him to help 
recover property he and his family had stolen from them 
during the occupation of Kuwait.   Shaykh Ahmed said he had 
recently seen the articles -- a 1964 Rolls Royce Silver Cloud 
vehicle with historical significance to the State of Kuwait, 
and a personalized china set -- on television, when camera 
crews displayed vehicles and other property in the palace of 
Uday Saddam Hussein.   Shaykh Ahmed presented the Ambassador 
with a letter in imperfect english from his father, Shaykh 
Jaber al-Abdullah al-Jaber al-Sabah, and a packet of papers, 
including photos and a vehicle title, showing his ownership 
of these items. 
 
¶4. The text of the letter follows: 
 
28 April 2003 
 
Your Excellency Richard H. Jones 
Ambassador of the United States of America 
To the State of Kuwait 
 
Among my invaluable fortune looted by Iraqi soldiers 
during the Iraqi invasion of the State of Kuwait in 1990, 
there's a unique antique "Rolls Royce ) Silver Cloud  64" 
that had been shown on TV's and other media when displaying 
cars in the Palace of Odai, Saddam Husein's elder son.  This 
Rolls Royce is so important that several foreign heads of 
state and top officials who visited Kuwait in the past used 
it.  I enclose the car's traffic documents.  Among my 
belongings, there's also an official coffee china-set had 
been shown in newspapers April 16.  It goes back to 1960's 
and served many heads of state I hosted.  I enclose photos 
verifying that the china-set belongs to me.  You'll find my 
name on each piece.  Photos of the rest of the set, that I 
still have, are also enclosed.  Please kindly let me know the 
proper procedures to restore the above-mentioned Rolls Royce 
and other belongings from Iraq?  Thank you in advance for 
your kind help in this regard. 
With best regards. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
 
Sheikh Jaber Al-Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah 
 
END TEXT. 
 
¶5. Action:  Embassy requests State Department coordinate with 
appropriate Department of Defense elements to locate these 
items, and inform us of the proper procedure for Shaykh Jaber 
to follow to ensure their return. 
URBANCIC