04ADANA132
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY OCTOBER 01, 2004
Mon Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM IZ TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY OCTOBER 01, 2004 
 
¶1.      This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for October 
01, 2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
¶2.      MILLIYET/SABAH/MILLI GAZETE/TERCUMAN/YENI SAFAK/RADIKAL: 
GOT forces launched an operation in rural Tokat province, 
killing five DHKP-C militants, including two females. One 
Jandarma sergeant was also killed in the ensuing clashes. 
 
¶3.      EVRENSEL: In Hakkari, a mine exploded yesterday at a 
location between Yenimahalle and Bercelan Pasture where it is 
alleged that the security forces have thrown chemical material 
from helicopters on the forests in the region. A cow was killed 
in the explosion. The owner of the livestock, Cercis Bor, 
applied to the Hakkari Chapter of HRA for assistance in getting 
the area around the houses in the area swept for mines. 
 
¶4.      EVRENSEL: In Tunceli, EMEP ("Toil" Party) protested GOT 
pressure on the people of Tunceli and the burning of the forests 
in the region.  EMEP Provincial Chairman Huseyin Tunc said 
burning forests and threatening journalists would not produce 
any solutions, and that steps should be taken to bring peace and 
brotherhood to the region. Approximately 250 persons carrying 
signs with "Budgets for education, not for war," marched in the 
town yesterday. Tunceli's CHP lawmaker Hasan Guyuldar brought a 
motion bringing forest burning in Tunceli to the agenda of 
Parliament. 
 
¶5.      ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: In Siirt, Eruh Sub-governor Ozan 
Balci, Eruh District Jandarma Commander, and soldiers allegedly 
harassed Human Shield Initiative members attempting to travel to 
the Cirav Mountains where military operations were underway. 
 
¶6.      SABAH:  In Mardin, Turkey's Director of Religious Affairs, 
Prof. Dr. Ali Bardakoglu, Mardin's Syriac Metropolitan Saliba 
Ozmen and Metropolitan Samuel Aktas of Midyat jointly opened a 
mosque built by a businessman from Mardin. In his opening 
remarks, Prof Bardakoglu said "We are grateful to our Prophet, 
Prophet Moses, and all saints for having created this unity." 
 
¶7.      EKSPRES/BOLGE: In Adana, the Cukurova University 
administration instructed guards not to allow female students 
wearing headscarves to enter the campus, but the decision was 
later changed. Female students said they had come to school for 
education, but some teachers did not allow students wearing 
headscarves to enter classes.  Approximately 50 female students 
and male students supporting them protested the administration's 
decision.  President Ahmet Necdet Sezer will attend the October 
7 Academic Year Opening Ceremony at the university. 
 
¶8.      YENI SAFAK: After being arrested in Van for drug 
trafficking and later kidnapped from a police station, former 
Van deputy Mustafa Bayram's son, Hamit Bayram, was arrested in 
Ankara on September 17.  He was transferred to a prison in 
Malatya, where he denied accusations at the court, and claimed 
that he was tortured. Bayram said no drugs had been found on him 
or in his car, but he said that he was addicted to drugs. Bayram 
will be sent to Forensic Medicine to confirm his claims of 
addiction. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
 
¶9.      RADIKAL: Twenty industrious female students from poor 
families in Hakkari enrolled at the Industrial Vocational High 
School and started classes in German. The girls will be educated 
in Turkey and taken to Germany to work in the Mercedes Benz 
Company, based on an MOU signed between the company and the 
Association Supporting Modern Life. 
 
¶10.     CUKUROVA HURRIYET: In Adana, the Second Cukurova Industry 
and Trade Fair will be held between October 02-10. Approximately 
one million visitors are expected to visit the fair in which 404 
domestic and international firms are participating.