04ANKARA6276
TURKISH PRESIDENT, PM CONGRATULATE POTUS, VP ON
Fri Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

050912Z Nov 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/SE FOR DAVID MCCORMICK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: TURKISH PRESIDENT, PM CONGRATULATE POTUS, VP ON 
ELECTION VICTORY 
 
REF: A. 11/04/2004 MCFARLAND/MCCORMICK FAX 
 
     ¶B. 11/04/2004 MCFARLAND/MCCORMICK E-MAIL 
     ¶C. 11/05/2004 MCFARLAND/MCCORMICK FAX 
 
¶1. (U) The Turkish MFA faxed us the following letters of 
congratulations dated November 4, 2004 from Turkish President 
Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
addressed to President Bush and a letter of congratulations 
dated November 4, 2004 from Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
to Vice President Cheney. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin unofficial translation of text of Sezer letter 
to President Bush: 
 
His Excellency 
George W. Bush 
President of the USA 
 
Dear Mr. President, 
 
I would like to extend my sincere congratulations on your 
re-election as the President of the United States of America. 
 
As two staunch allies, Turkey and the US have acted in close 
cooperation and solidarity for over half a century in 
protecting the common values of the community of free 
nations.  I am fully confident that this partnership, which 
is significant not only in bilateral relations but also in 
the strengthening of the peace and security in the greater 
geography encompassing the Balkans, Caucuses, Middle East and 
Central Asia, will continue in your second term as the 
President of the USA, having gained new dimensions and 
strength. 
 
In this regard, I would like to renew our determination in 
the further enhancement of our bilateral relations in various 
fields, foremost in the fight against terrorism and the 
promotion of our common values and peace in the our region 
and the world. 
 
Mr. President, I would like to take this opportunity to 
express my best wishes for your health, happiness and 
success, as well as the well-being and prosperity of our 
friends, the people of the United States of America. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ahmet Necdet Sezer 
President of the Republic of Turkey 
END TEXT. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Begin unofficial translation of text of Erdogan letter 
to President Bush: 
 
His Excellency Mr. George W. Bush 
United States of America 
 
Mr. President, 
 
I congratulate Your Excellency on the occasion of Your (sic) 
reelection as the President of the United States of America. 
 
On this occasion I would like to emphasize the importance 
that we attach to the relations between our two countries 
that have a deep rooted history and common values.  We always 
have the desire and the will to further our relations with 
the United States which is a friend, ally and the main 
partner of Turkey in regional and world affairs. 
 
Besides our bilateral relations, the fight against terrorism, 
transatlantic cooperation, regional stability and 
transformation, establishing harmony among civilizations, 
combating the proliferation of WMD's, the expansion of the EU 
and NATO and the strengthening of international institutions 
are issues for which we will exercise mutual effort with the 
USA and in which we have a common vision. 
 
I am confident that in your second term as the President of 
the USA, the cooperation between our two countries will 
continue to grow.  In this regard, the close dialogue and 
cooperation that we are going to maintain will contribute to 
the enhancement of our mutual interests as well as to the 
global peace, stability and the dynamism of transatlantic 
relations. 
 
Mr. President, I would like to take this opportunity to renew 
my best wishes for your personal health and happiness as well 
as for the continuation of the success of Your administration. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey 
END TEXT. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Begin unofficial translation of text of Erdogan letter 
to Vice President Cheney: 
 
H.E. Dick Cheney 
Vice President of the USA 
 
Mr. Vice President, 
I would like to extend to You (sic) my sincere 
congratulations on the occasion of your election as the Vice 
President of the United States of America for a second term. 
In this regard, I would like to reiterate my conviction that 
the Turkish-American relations based on deep-rooted 
friendship, will develop to the benefit of our two countries 
and will continue to contribute to the peace and stability of 
our region. 
 
Turkey and the USA are two close allies sharing a common 
vision in the international arena.  The steps that we have 
taken for the cooperation, will continue to contribute 
significantly to the development of peace, security and 
prosperity in Eurasia, Middle East, Balkans, Caucasus and 
Europe as well as the development of the transatlantic 
relations. 
 
I am confident that during your tenure for a second term as 
the Vice President, our relations with the US will develop on 
bilateral, regional and international matters on the basis of 
mutual benefit, as it did in the past. 
 
Mr. Vice President, I would like to take this opportunity to 
renew my best wishes for your personal health and happiness 
and the continued success of the Administration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey 
END TEXT. 
EDELMAN