04ANKARA1445
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Suicide Attack Against Masonic Lodge - Sabah 
US Policy for PKK: Wait and See - Sabah 
US Uncertainty on PKK issue - Hurriyet 
Cyprus Referendum Date April 20 - Milliyet 
Osman Ocalan `Selling Out' - Milliyet 
President Bush to Arrive in Turkey Before NATO Summit - 
Turkiye 
US Embassy Spokesman: US to Fulfill its Commitment on PKK - 
Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkish Companies Given Cheney's Fuel Oil Contracts - Yeni 
Safak 
US Follows PKK Activities in Iraq Closely - Yeni Safak 
US Denies Reports on Osman Ocalan's Arrest - Zaman 
Washington Slights Turkey on PKK and Interim Iraq 
Constitution - Radikal 
US Did Not Keep Its Promise - Cumhuriyet 
The Law Which Forces Iraq to Separation - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Masonic Lodge Bombing:  Two suicide bombers attacked a 
facility associated with a Masonic lodge in Kartal-Istanbul 
last night.  Around 40 people were dining in the lodge when 
terrorists attacked.  One of the suicide bombers and one 
waiter died in the explosion, and the other bomber was 
seriously injured.  Police reports say that the terrorists 
used pipe bombs, and that damage to the building was rather 
limited.  "Milliyet" notes that such bombs are usually used 
by the IBDA-C terrorist organization.  At least six people 
were injured in the incident. 
 
 
US Policy on PKK:  All papers and TV channels report on a US 
diplomat's statement that the US could not make any 
commitments about how and when it would carry out the 
struggle against the PKK.  After one TV channel interpreted 
these remarks as implying that "the US will not fight 
against the PKK in Northern Iraq", the US embassy spokesman 
reiterated that the United States stands behind its 
commitment to ensure that Iraq does not become a terrorist 
threat for neighboring countries, including Turkey. "Sabah" 
claims that the US is following a `wait and see' policy on 
the PKK issue in Northern Iraq.  "Cumhuriyet" reports that 
the US has come up with new excuses to delay its effort to 
eliminate the terrorist organization.  "Hurriyet" cites a US 
source as saying that PKK leaders will be arrested if they 
are encountered by US forces in Iraq.  "Radikal" says that 
after ignoring Turkish concerns on the Iraqi constitution, 
Washington now disappoints Turkey for its unwillingness to 
carry out a joint military action against the PKK in 
Northern Iraq.  FM Gul told NTV that the PKK is `Turkey's 
own responsibility' that would not be left to others.  `No 
one should trust someone else 100 percent," Gul said. 
 
 
Cyprus:  "Hurriyet" reports that FM Gul said that the 
upcoming four-party talks on Cyprus with the involvement of 
Turkey and Greece will be held at the highest possible 
level, probably, most likely in an unspecified European 
capital.'  "Milliyet" reports that Greek Cypriot leader 
Papadopulos has rejected all proposals by the Turkish side 
on the Annan plan.  "Radikal" notes that newly-elected Greek 
PM Karamanlis will meet with Papadopulos over the weekend. 
"Zaman" reports that the parties in Cyprus have agreed to 
hold simultaneous referenda on the results of the 
negotiations on April 20. 
 
 
EDITORIALS: Iraq/TAL 
 
 
"The Constitution for Chaos" 
Sami Kohen commented in the mass appeal Milliyet (3/10): 
"The initial positive signs that Iraq was on its way toward 
representational democracy did not last very long.  Right 
after the signing ceremony of the temporary administrative 
law (TAL), Shiite groups began asking for changes to certain 
provisions in the law.  In addition, there was an attack by 
Kurds against Turkmen in the Kirkuk region.  These 
developments bring to mind the basic question: is the TAL 
going to resolve the current chaos in Iraq or just 
accelerate it?  The Americans might see the TAL as a success 
and a model for Middle East countries.  But the Iraqi people 
are occupied with other issues of daily life such as 
violence, insecurity and the lack of goods and services.  . 
Moreover, each Iraqi group has a different priority and 
different set of goals.  It seems very difficult to melt all 
of these differences down to a unified state structure, 
particularly at a time of chaos and terror. . Ankara has 
concerns about the TAL and has expressed them to Washington. 
Washington's message is `not to worry' because this is a 
transitional process and changes will be made in the final 
constitution.  We don't know if the US has shaped a workable 
plan on this matter.  It remains to be seen how the Iraq 
groups, which barely reached a consensus on the temporary 
law, will be able to agree on the final constitution." 
 
 
"Constitution in Iraq" 
Yilmaz Oztuna noted in the conservative Turkiye (3/10): "The 
US has worked to establish order in both Afghanistan and 
Iraq, yet it has failed in the end.  The current situation 
indicates that the US has proven its military strength and 
experience, but does not have much skill as an imperial 
power.  A transitional constitution was drafted for both 
Iraq and Afghanistan, and the US had the constitution 
accepted by the countries' ethnic leaders, who were actually 
appointed by the US.  The TAL is basically a division of 
Iraq between Kurds and Shiites and, interestingly enough, 
even they are not happy with the outcome.  It is an open 
secret that this kind of Pax Americana will be extended to 
 
SIPDIS 
the Greater Middle East.  Syria and Iraq might be next on 
the US list.  Yet the real question is how the US will 
perform in managing the political problems similar to those 
it has encountered in Iraq and Afghanistan." 
Sami Kohen 
 
 
 
 
EDELMAN