04ANKARA2138
Trafficking in Persons: IOM Reports Recent
Tue Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 ANKARA 002138 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: Trafficking in Persons: IOM Reports Recent 
Developments in Turkey 
 
 
Ref: 04ANK1595 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In April 9 discussions with Emboff, IOM 
Chief of Mission Regina Boucault cited 1) ongoing 
anti-TIP training for Turkish law enforcement 
officials, and 2) implementation of a victim referral 
agreement between the Ministry of Interior and 
Turkey's leading TIP NGO as continuing evidence of the 
GOT's shift toward cooperation, progress in anti- 
trafficking efforts. END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. (U) According to IOM Mission Director Regina Boucault, 
extensive training activities (reftel) initiated by 
both IOM and GOT are gaining momentum in Turkey.  The 
training programs are designed to alert judicial and 
law enforcement officials - judges, prosecutors, 
border guards, national and military police - to 
special screening, processing, and humanitarian 
requirements for trafficking victims.  "Training has 
an impact, we're seeing a change in attitude and 
awareness."  She cited as evidence, two repatriations 
of trafficking victims in the last week.  She noted, 
police in Mersin screened two Moldovan women and 
transferred them to Adana after determining both were 
victims of trafficking.  Police contacted HRDF and IOM 
with details immediately and, as the two women 
requested, repatriated them within 24 hours of their 
first contact.  Post is currently following up with 
IOM Moldova, and Turkish MFA officials for further 
details related to these cases. 
 
 
¶3. (U) The next in an ongoing series of IOM TIP workshops 
is scheduled for April 14-16 for the General Command 
of the Turkish Military Police.  Other GOT attendees 
will include: representatives from Turkey's MOJ, MFA 
and Security Directorate. Europol and UK police will 
also participate.  IOM workshops and training 
programs, according to Boucault, focus on critical TIP 
issues including: Identifying Trafficked Victims; 
Differences in International Legal Definitions of TIP 
Crimes and Migrant Smuggling; Causes of Human 
Trafficking, Actors, Mechanisms, and Consequences; 
Violation of Human Rights; Activities in Counter 
Trafficking; Case Studies; Treatment of Traffic 
Victims; TIP Conditions in Turkey; Best Practices for 
Treatment of Victims; Treatment of Victims as 
Witnesses; Investigation Methods and Techniques; and 
Intelligence on Trafficking. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Though pleased with the recent change in momentum, 
Boucault notes that IOM is still working with the GOT 
and HRDF to establish a clear referral mechanism that 
minimizes the number of bureaucratic hurdles to 
assisting TIP victims.  According to Boucault, "Police 
contact HRDF whenever they have a trafficking case. 
HRDF refers the matter to IOM with the information 
they have available.  IOM then has to go back to 
identify which Police Officer is in charge, where, 
etc."  Boucault notes that changes in these current 
referral procedures will be tough to implement in the 
absence of a shelter for victims of trafficking.  She 
is currently working with Beyhan Bagis and her husband 
Egemen Bagis, an AK Party Istanbul MP and close 
advisor to PM Erdogan, to try to help establish the 
shelter.  IOM and HRDF are also pursuing other funding 
opportunities for the project (see proposal in para 
7). 
 
 
¶5. (U) In the meantime, Boucault notes, IOM and HRDF are 
hard at work organizing training programs with 
important TIP themes, pointing to the following press 
report published by IOM in February 2004.  Begin text: 
 
 
TURKEY - Counter Trafficking Training for Law 
Enforcement Officials - The IOM office in Ankara 
has taken part in two counter trafficking 
training seminars for Turkish law enforcement 
officials. 
 
 
The two-day seminars, which brought together 50 
chief prosecutors, representatives from the 
Turkish NGO, Human Resource Development 
Foundation (HRDF), and the Ministry of Justice, 
focused primarily on international legislation 
and prevention, protection and assistance to 
victims of trafficking. 
 
 
The training sessions also reviewed case studies 
and best practices in the field of counter- 
trafficking. 
 
 
A recent IOM report confirmed that growing 
numbers of foreign women from the former Soviet 
republics are being trafficked to and through 
Turkey often for sexual exploitation. 
 
 
According to the report, Turkish authorities have 
made considerable efforts to combat irregular 
migration and trafficking in human beings; both 
in terms of legislation and institutional 
reforms.  But more needs to be done to raise 
awareness amongst the general public and to 
support and coordinate the work of NGOs and other 
organizations involved in prevention, protection 
and assistance to the victims.  END TEXT. 
 
 
¶6. (U) Boucault pointed to a March 6 IOM letter addressed 
to Turkey's anti-trafficking authorities.  Begin text: 
 
 
The International Organization for Migration 
highly values the medical treatment free of 
charge offered to victims of trafficking in 
Turkey.  This is a demonstration of the important 
steps being undertaken by the Turkish authorities 
on behalf of trafficked persons and IOM 
congratulates the authorities for it. End text. 
 
 
¶7. (U) IOM PROPOSAL FOR ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS OF 
TRAFFICKING IN TURKEY.  Begin text: 
 
 
A Pilot-Project for a comprehensive approach to the 
protection of victims of trafficking: 
 
 
--------------- 
PROJECT SUMMARY 
--------------- 
 
 
The overall aim of the pilot-project is to set up a 
protection mechanism for victims of trafficking, 
initially in Istanbul.  Such a protection mechanism 
will have three components.  The first is to provide 
training to police officers to raise their awareness 
on the issue of trafficking, provide guidelines on the 
identification of and appropriate treatment to victims 
of trafficking. 
 
 
The second component includes the establishment of a 
Reception Center for abused foreign women who have 
been trafficked for sexual exploitation and have 
been rescued or have managed to escape from their 
condition and are in need of protection. 
 
 
The third component will provide safe, humane and 
voluntary return home to the trafficked women. In 
order to ensure the sustainability of the return, a 
Reintegration Fund will be established to provide 
vocational training or loans. 
 
 
At the end of the project some 300 young women and 
girls will have been assisted in Turkey and to 
return safely to their home countries. 
 
 
At the end of the pilot project, it is also expected 
that a mechanism would have been set up with 
government entities for the referral of and 
assistance to trafficked women as well as a 
voluntary return mechanism in line with 
international standards and practices within the EU 
countries. Ultimately, it is expected that the 
project will help to create a coordinated mechanism 
between Government authorities, partner NGOs, 
Consulates and Embassies of countries of origin and 
IOM in the provision of appropriate and timely 
assistance to victims of trafficking. 
 
 
Background and Justification: Trafficking in women 
for sexual exploitation has reached alarming 
proportions in the region over the course of the 
last few years, as documented by a number of IOM 
studies on this subject, and by the media at large. 
 
 
Economic disparities between the countries of 
Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and some of their 
wealthier neighbors, high unemployment and lack of 
opportunities at home, insufficient information on 
migration realities and the consequences of 
irregular migration, are some of the factors which 
combine to make of Eastern European and CIS 
countries major source countries of trafficked 
migrant women. 
 
 
Turkey has become a favored destination in the 
region as it is perceived to be offering an 
attractive combination of desirable elements for a 
would-be migrant in search of better economic 
prospects: geographic proximity, economic 
opportunities, and a liberal visa regime. This 
situation is thoroughly exploited by migrant 
traffickers who recruit young women and girls 
sometimes with the promise of regular employment, 
but ultimately with the result of forced 
prostitution, debt bondage, and various forms of 
abuse including forced confinement, control of 
personal documents and passports, threat and abuse. 
 
 
Women and girls arrested by the Aliens' Police are 
treated as other irregular migrants, namely they are 
taken to the aliens' detention centers, primarily in 
Istanbul and the larger cities, and are subsequently 
subject to deportation for overstaying their visas 
or not having any valid document. Deportation of 
Romanians and Moldovans is carried out by bus, 
across Bulgaria, to the Romanian city of Constanza 
on the Black Sea; others are deported by sea to 
Odessa. There is evidence that traffickers, aware of 
this return pattern, position themselves in the 
towns immediately across the border in neighboring 
countries where they take advantage of bus stopovers 
or boat arrivals to approach the returnees and 
intimidate or attract them into rejoining the 
trafficking cycle. Some women report of having been 
coerced into prostitution right after crossing the 
border, of being forced to return to Turkey, or of 
being relocated to other markets deemed more 
lucrative (Cyprus, Italy, etc).  Those women who are 
not intercepted by traffickers across the border are 
expected to organize their own transportation to 
their final destination. Most of them do not have 
the means to cover these costs.  Dumped across 
borders, these women are extremely vulnerable to new 
recruitment by agents and traffickers who operate in 
the area. 
 
 
Prostitution is not prohibited in Turkey.  However, 
the law is very restrictive with respect to the work 
of foreigners. Therefore, foreign women trapped into 
prostitution are often contravening the national 
laws in two respects: illegal practice of work as 
well as illegal stay in the country.  Furthermore, 
the network of NGOs in Turkey is not very strong and 
non-existent for foreign women caught in irregular 
situations. And even if NGOs existed, the very fact 
that the women are in an irregular situation would 
prevent them from leaving the country without the 
involvement of the Turkish authorities. Henceforth, 
they have nowhere to turn to for assistance to 
protect them against their traffickers and no means 
to return home even if they can pay the airfare. 
 
 
The issue of Trafficking is gaining momentum in 
Turkey in Government circles as well as in the 
public opinion. In the last years, and in the 
framework of the EU accession process, Turkey has 
modified its legislation to combat trafficking.  In 
particular, the amendments to the Penal Code and the 
Law on Combating Profit-Oriented Criminal 
Organizations, adopted by the Turkish Parliament in 
2002 introduces the definition of human trafficking 
and smuggling into the Turkish legal system and 
prescribes heavy penalties for the traffickers and 
smugglers.   Furthermore, the Draft Law on Work 
Permits for Foreigners, approved by Turkish 
Parliament in 2003 makes it possible for some 
categories, including domestic workers, to be 
employed legally in Turkey.  Article 5 of the 
Citizenship Law was amended to fight trafficking in 
women through false marriages: while a request for 
Turkish citizenship could be filled immediately 
after marriage, under the new law, a provisional 
period of 3 years is needed before a request can be 
made. 
 
 
The legislation is fully in force and the results of 
its implementation remain to be seen. So far, when 
the Police apprehend women, that could be victims of 
trafficking, they are too often apprehended and 
deported on the basis of their illegal stay in the 
country. If women are suspected to work in the sex 
industry, they are sent for medical check and if 
found with STDs are immediately deported. Unless 
they are willing to cooperate with the Police and 
testify in court, they may not be granted the 
necessary protection/assistance that a victim needs. 
While training in combating organized crime is part 
of the curriculum of the training in the Police 
force, such training touches upon large networks, 
drugs and arms in particular. 
 
 
In order to implement the new legislation, several 
ministries are taking practical measures.  The 
Ministry of the Interior has issued a directive 
sensitizing the Police force to the trafficking 
issue and the way to treat apprehended victims of 
trafficking.  The Ministry of Tourism has 
established a specific questionnaire for visa 
application in various languages to avoid abuses in 
employment. The Ministry of the Interior and the 
Ministry of Justice are conducting training seminars 
on the issue of Trafficking. 
 
 
The Turkish Government has taken various other 
measures. An inter-ministerial task force has been 
set up under the leadership of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs tasked with the elaboration of a 
Plan of Action to deal with the trafficking issue. 
The Plan of action has identified priorities, which 
were endorsed by the Prime Ministry. They include 
training of the Law enforcement bodies, involvement 
and training of NGOs to deal with the issue as well 
as the establishment of Emergency hot lines free of 
charge for victims of trafficking, as well as the 
establishment of Reception Centers. 
 
 
However, the resources required to cope with this 
issue as well as that of the dramatic flows of 
irregular migrants stranded in Turkey on their way 
westwards are inadequate.  Turkey lacks the full 
financial as well as human resources and facilities 
to cope with these irregular trends.  And yet, the 
urgency to provide basic protection to the victims 
of trafficking becomes a priority. The efforts and 
changes put in place by the Turkish authorities as 
described above need to be supported and extended on 
a large scale. 
 
 
In order to raise awareness on the issue of 
trafficking in Turkey, IOM carried out a preliminary 
study on "Trafficking in Women: the Case of Turkey". 
It is the first study of its kind in Turkey where 
little is actually known on the issue.  In fact, 
when IOM Turkey launched the study it was mainly 
because IOM Research studies from neighboring 
countries (of origin), which all pointed out to 
Turkey as a destination and transit country. The 
Study has confirmed that Turkey is mainly a 
destination country.  Because of a liberal visa 
regime, women from the former Soviet Union come 
legally to Turkey but often overstay their visa and 
then become vulnerable and easy prey to abuse.  They 
are usually well educated but feel compelled to 
leave their homes in search of work and better 
opportunities.  The study further identifies that 
trafficking to Turkey is more often through 
relatives and friends.  Although the Turkish 
authorities have introduced legal changes, as 
mentioned above, much remains to be done.  In 
particular to fully implement these changes 
throughout the country, to raise awareness on 
Trafficking of the Law enforcement officers and the 
Judiciary as well as the public opinion and the 
media, to establish Reception Centers for victims of 
trafficking as well as a return mechanism based on 
voluntariness.  In this regard, the Study points out 
to the need to involve the civil society and the 
NGOs in the provision of protection, health and 
legal assistance. 
 
 
------------------- 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
------------------- 
 
 
Project description; In order to support the 
Government of Turkey's efforts, IOM would assist in 
the following: 
 
 
- Awareness raising workshops for Law Enforcement 
and Referral Services.  The Police being, very 
often, the first and most important interface 
with victims of trafficking, they constitute the 
major actor in ensuring that immediate protection 
is granted to the victims. As an essential 
component of the protection set up, Police 
officers need to be sensitized to the issue of 
trafficking, to the plight of victims of 
trafficking, to international standards in 
dealing with victims of trafficking, to 
international conventions and national laws, to 
best practices.  The Police needs to be able to 
identify victims of trafficking and be aware of 
the particular assistance they need. 
 
 
In addition to such training of a general scope 
for front line officers, IOM would provide 
specific training on investigative techniques to 
better fight trafficking. 
 
 
At the same time, other actors such as social 
workers, local authorities, the Judiciary, NGOs 
working in the field, are similarly in need of 
training on a new issue for them. These training 
workshops would be extended to them. 
 
 
A measured and targeted information initiative to 
inform victims of trafficking that there is a way 
out of their plight and that assistance is 
available would be set up. In particular, 
information on the establishment of a Hotline - 
run by an NGO under IOM supervision - would be an 
efficient tool to improve the referral system. 
Training of the persons managing the hotline will 
be provided. 
 
 
- Protection/Temporary Reception Center; IOM would 
work with a local NGO to set up a first Reception 
Centre in accordance with appropriate standards. 
Under IOM supervision, the selected NGO would 
progressively run the Reception Centre. The 
victims of trafficking will stay in the Reception 
Centre while IOM is arranging for their voluntary 
return home.  In the Reception Center, victims of 
trafficking will receive food and accommodation 
and appropriate legal, medical and psychological 
care, using local facilities as needed, and any 
other assistance that may be required. 
 
 
The Turkish authorities have established a 
'humanitarian visa' to enable victims of 
trafficking who are willing to testify in court 
to temporarily stay in Turkey legally.  The 
Reception Centers will be open to them throughout 
the legal process. 
 
 
For security reasons the Reception Center should 
be guarded on a 24 hour basis and its location 
should not be disclosed publicly to prevent the 
victims from being abducted or harassed by their 
traffickers.  For obvious reasons also, the 
Police should not be visible and will not enter 
the Reception Center unless specifically 
requested by IOM or to escort to Court those who 
have accepted to testify against their 
traffickers. 
 
 
In the Reception Center, IOM will conduct 
thorough interviews of the victims, including 
their personal and educational background, 
reasons for coming, routes, assistance to migrate 
etc., as well as to prepare for the return and 
possible reintegration assistance in the home 
country.  This information will be confidential 
in order to urge the victims to provide much 
needed information on their plight as well as to 
tailor any reintegration component back home. 
This information will feed in a central database 
established in IOM Headquarters. 
 
 
- Voluntary return assistance; IOM would provide 
assistance to those who would volunteer to return 
home.  IOM Staff will conduct a private interview 
and a Voluntary Return Form will be signed in 
situ.  IOM will further arrange for the 
documentation with Consulates of the relevant 
countries whether in country or abroad; the exit 
formalities in accordance with national laws; 
transit if necessary; reception in the home 
country by IOM missions and transportation to the 
final destination.  Assisted voluntary returns 
will follow IOM regular procedures. 
 
 
- Reintegration Assistance; The project foresees 
the creation of a Reintegration fund that would 
be used on a voluntary basis and in close 
cooperation with IOM missions in the countries of 
origin. Reintegration assistance would be sought 
as appropriate on a case-by-case basis in the 
form of vocational training, loan funds, micro- 
enterprise, etc. Funds disbursed to set up a 
business would be on a reimbursable basis - a 
means to assess the validity of the project and 
the accountability of the person - but with no 
interest. Vocational training will be given 
considering the personal background of the 
person. 
 
 
Rehabilitation in the form of medical and 
psychosocial assistance will continue to be 
provided in the country of origin as needed. 
 
 
- IOM Expertise vis-a-vis Project Activities;  IOM 
has established itself as an important agency in 
combating trafficking.  Since 1993, IOM focused 
on preventing and combating trafficking in women 
and children through research, information 
sharing, information campaigns/prevention, and 
assisted return and reintegration support for the 
victims of trafficking.  Since 1995, IOM has 
published over fifteen case studies on the 
worldwide trafficking of women, and also 
publishes a quarterly newsletter on trends in 
migrant trafficking and measures being taken by 
governments to combat it.  In 2000, two 
fundamental studies Migrant Trafficking and Human 
Smuggling in Europe and "Perspectives on 
Trafficking of Migrants" were published and well 
appreciated, both by the academic and counter- 
trafficking professional communities. 
 
 
There are currently over 70 IOM counter- 
trafficking projects, active or in development, 
targeting over 50 countries in Africa, Asia, 
Central, Eastern and Western Europe, and Latin 
America, as well as one global assistance project 
targeting all developing countries in Africa, 
Asia and Latin America. 
 
 
------------------ 
OVERALL OBJECTIVES 
------------------ 
 
 
The main objective is to assist the Turkish 
authorities in setting up a comprehensive protection 
mechanism for victims of Trafficking and enhance the 
country's capacity to combat trafficking in Human 
Beings. 
 
 
---------------- 
PROJECT PURPOSES 
---------------- 
The project purposes is to provide protection to the 
victims of trafficking through the provision of training to 
sensitize Law enforcement and Judicial officers and other 
social partners to the issue of trafficking, to the 
national and international instruments, to international 
standards of screening, referrals and treatment of victims 
of trafficking and best practices in order to give them the 
tools to identify and provide appropriate assistance to the 
victims of trafficking. 
 
 
- The establishment of a Reception Center, with 
medical care and legal counseling; 
 
 
- a voluntary return scheme in safety and dignity to 
the home country; 
 
 
- a reintegration fund to provide a livelihood to the 
returnees and ensure the sustainability of the return 
and the empowerment of former victims of Trafficking. 
 
 
------- 
RESULTS 
------- 
 
 
- Training of 100 Law enforcement Officers, including 
Police, Gendarmerie, Judges, social workers, etc. 
 
 
- Setting up of a fully functioning Reception center for 30 
trafficked women at a time with provision of legal 
counseling, medical care and any other assistance that may 
be required. 
 
 
- Ensuring a fully functioning hot line with trained staff 
with language abilities. 
 
 
- Provision of return assistance to 300 trafficked women 
and setting up of a return mechanism in cooperation with 
national authorities. 
 
 
- Setting up of a Reintegration Fund for vocational 
training or creation of small-scale enterprises on a 
voluntary and reimbursable basis. 
 
 
---------- 
ACTIVITIES 
---------- 
 
 
- Capacity Building/Awareness raising workshops for 
Law Enforcement officers and the civil society 
partners; 
- Develop a curriculum that would combine theory and 
practice and include national and international 
instruments, international conventions, best 
practices, case studies; 
 
 
- Organize training sessions; 
 
 
- Identify the trainers at national and international 
level; 
 
 
- Coordinate with Government authorities the list of 
participants; 
 
 
- Provide appropriate training to 100 persons; 
 
 
- Protection/Temporary Reception Center 
Identify a Reception Center to be provided by local 
authorities; 
 
 
- Identify a local NGO to manage the Reception Center 
under IOM overall supervision and monitoring; 
 
 
- Train the staff who would run the Reception Center; 
- Link up with health care providers to provide 
medical assistance including specialized treatment; 
 
 
- Set up a legal counseling facility; 
 
 
- Hot line: Develop a strategy and tools to 
disseminate information about the hotline and the 
Reception Center; 
- Train appropriate staff on 24/7 basis 
(Psychologists, Law enforcers, Social workers) with 
language abilities; 
 
 
- Voluntary return assistance:  Set up a mechanism 
with relevant Turkish authorities for IOM staff to 
interview possible trafficked women in detention and 
organize transfer to the Reception Center for those 
who have actually been trafficked. Register the 
applicants; 
 
 
- Obtain travel documents as necessary from the 
Consulates of countries of origin; 
 
 
- Organize exit formalities with the appropriate 
Turkish authorities; 
 
 
- Make travel arrangements including determination of 
itinerary and booking as well as transit assistance 
when necessary; 
 
 
- Coordinate with IOM Missions in transit and origin 
country for further assistance including onward 
transportation, reception; 
 
 
- Arrange departure assistance at airport by IOM 
Turkey staff; 
 
 
- Disbursement of an allowance for onward 
transportation and pocket money; 
 
 
- Reintegration; Provide counseling and referral upon 
arrival in the country of origin as feasible and 
available; 
 
 
- Set up a reintegration fund for vocational training 
or creation of small-scale enterprise in which each 
training or creation of business will be evaluated 
according to individual merits and funding 
requirements. 
 
 
------ 
INPUTS 
------ 
 
 
International Organization for Migration (IOM): 
 
 
- Responsible for all components of project 
implementation; 
 
 
- Provision of technical and operational expertise in 
project implementation and administration; 
 
 
- Responsible for financial accountability; 
 
 
- Supervision and monitoring of project partners; 
 
 
- Coordination and cooperation with government 
authorities, other IOM Missions, Consulates and other 
partners as appropriate; 
 
 
- Keeping up a well-documented database; 
 
 
- Regular reporting to donors. 
 
 
 
 
The Government of Turkey: 
 
 
- Identify the required number of participants to the 
training workshops and facilitate their attendance. 
 
 
- Facilitate the organization and funding of the 
training workshops by providing facilities for their 
venue and other in-kind contributions. 
 
 
- Cooperate with IOM and its partners in project 
implementation, in particular rescue, easy and regular 
access to the detention center to interview and assess 
potential trafficking cases; facilitate and expedite 
exit formalities; facilitate IOM voluntary return 
scheme, etc. 
 
 
- Provide free of charge an appropriate Reception 
Center to host some 30 persons 
 
 
- Provide overall security to the Reception Center 
outside of its premises and as required to the victims 
themselves upon request of IOM. 
 
 
- Provide a Hotline facility. 
 
 
- Provide free medical checks in Government hospitals 
for victims of trafficking 
 
 
- Waive any fine related to overstay in the country. 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
MONITORING, REPORTING, EVALUATION 
--------------------------------- 
 
 
The pilot project will be monitored and evaluated by IOM 
according to its internal procedures, in addition to any 
criteria and timeframe that might be mutually agreed with 
the donors.  IOM will provide an update on a regular basis, 
including statistical data and migrants profiles as well as 
recommendations for follow up measures or necessary 
adaptations of the current project.  IOM will provide an 
interim progress report after 6 months implementation as 
well as a yearly financial and narrative report. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND KEY ASSUMPTIONS 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
This project will be implemented on the assumption that: 
 
 
- The Turkish authorities will provide the necessary 
staff for training. 
 
 
- The Turkish authorities will provide the Reception 
Center premises and ensure security of the premises. 
 
 
- The Turkish authorities will provide a free of 
charge hotline. 
 
 
- The Turkish authorities will provide full support to 
the project and to the return scheme in accordance 
with IOM requirements and procedures. 
 
 
- The victims of trafficking will be willing to 
benefit from the program. 
 
 
- The Embassies of the countries of origin will 
provide assistance in documentation, translation and 
other support as necessary. 
 
 
EDELMAN