04ANKARA2200
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Fri Apr 16 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
FRIDAY, APRIL 16, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Verheugen: EU will help Turks if Greeks reject plan - 
Milliyet 
Denktas defends a `no' vote - Turkiye 
Denktas: Annan Plan an insult to Turks - Hurriyet 
Ankara urges EU to make Greeks pay for `no' - Sabah 
Athens will `respect' decision of Greek Cypriots - Milliyet 
US pledges $400 million for Cyprus - Turkiye 
Aliyev: Azerbaijan will be first to recognize `TRNC' - 
Hurriyet 
Bush takes historic U-turn, Transforms US Middle East policy 
- Hurriyet 
New page in GME initiative: Expanding Israel Project - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Powell, Straw urge Greek Cypriots to vote `yes' - Zaman 
US signals recognition of `TRNC' - Zaman 
EU warns Greeks to lift sanctions on `TRNC' - Radikal 
AKEL makes its `no' final - Radikal 
AKEL disappoints Turkish Cypriots - Cumhuriyet 
Foreigners flee Iraq - Yeni Safak 
9/11 confessions from Tenet - Cumhuriyet 
Bush supports Israel's annexation plan - Cumhuriyet 
Bush approval for Israeli occupation - Radikal 
EU rejects Sharon-Bush plan - Yeni Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
U/S Grossman calls `TRNC FM':  The semi-official Anatolian 
Agency (AA) reports from Washington that State Department 
Undersecretary Marc Grossman called Turkish Cypriot `Foreign 
Minister' Serdar Denktas to tell him about US plans for 
improving relations with the Turkish side in cooperation 
with the EU if a settlement on Cyprus is blocked because the 
Greek Cypriots vote `no.' One possible scenario would be for 
the EU to define the Turkish Cypriot zone as a `special 
zone' while it awaits full EU membership.  The US is also 
considering loosening sanctions on the Turkish side, 
extending financial support through international financial 
institutions, starting international flights to Turkish 
Cypriot airports, opening of a US representation in the 
north, and encouraging the flow of American capital to the 
Turkish zone.  A US representation in the Turkish sector 
would be based on the China-Taiwan model. 
 
 
Cyprus:  EU expansion chief Verheugen said that if the Greek 
Cypriots vote against the Annan Plan, the Green Line in 
Cyprus would become a de facto border for the EU.  It would 
not mean recognition of the TRNC, Verheugen said, but the 
Greek Cypriots will be held responsible for the division in 
the island and Turkish troops will no longer be seen as an 
occupation force.  Dailies believe Verheugen is openly 
threatening the Greek Cypriots in an effort to encourage a 
`yes' vote on April 24.  The EU is also discussing ways to 
extend financial aid to the `TRNC,' facilitate Turkish 
Cypriot exports to Europe, allow foreign investments in the 
north, and start international direct flights to the Turkish 
sector.  The US might not recognize the `TRNC,' but it is 
not expected to stop other countries that may be willing to 
do so.  State Department Spokesman Boucher stressed that the 
Turkish Cypriots would not be left alone if the Greeks 
reject the Annan Plan.  Washington is looking for ways to 
lift economic sanctions on the `TRNC.'  The US pledged $400 
million for the reunification of Cyprus at an international 
donors conference held Thursday in Brussels.  Turkish 
Cypriot leader Denktas addressed the Turkish parliament in 
Ankara on Thursday.  If the UN plan is accepted, Denktas 
claimed, the `TRNC' will be separated from Turkey forever 
and it will not be possible to prevent a new military coup 
by the Greek Cypriots.  According to a public opinion survey 
of 934 Turkish Cypriots on April 8, 59.3 percent will vote 
for the Annan Plan, and 28.1 against.  52.5 percent said 
their priority before casting a vote would be the decision 
of the Turkish government, while 33.5 would follow a 
decision by Denktas. 
 
 
Baykal charges a `plot' against CHP:  In an exclusive to the 
pro-Islamic daily "Yeni Safak," Republican People's Party 
(CHP) leader Deniz Baykal said his party had been targeted 
by the media, the business world and `international forces' 
because of CHP's policies regarding Cyprus and Iraq.  If the 
UN-sponsored plan is accepted, Baykal warned, all of Cyprus 
will become a Greek Cypriot state within the next two 
decades.  `The Greek Cypriots have the backing of the 
Church, the EU, Greece and international capital," Baykal 
claimed.  `You cannot establish a balance between a 
homogenous state in the south and a mixed entity of Turks 
and Greek Cypriots in the north,' Baykal asserted. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
a)  Iraq 
b)  Cyprus 
 
 
"The Doomsday Scenario" 
Fehmi Koru argued in the Islamist-opinion maker Yeni Safak 
(4/16): "We have been seeing the consequences of the 
American occupation for months.  Recent news from Iraqi 
resistance groups indicates a growing chaos.  The occupation 
forces have apparently failed to prevent the activity of 
these groups, whose tactic is to use more violence to end 
the resistance. . The Iraqi resistance did not happen 
overnight. It is not possible to tie the resistance only 
with the situation in Iraq. The gist of the problem stems 
from the Palestinian issue, the assassination of Yasin, the 
silence from Washington, and the US veto in the UN to 
prevent the resolution to blame Israel.  President Bush has 
created a dilemma for himself by tying his political destiny 
to Israel.  The ongoing policies in Iraq are accompanied by 
growing US favoritism toward Israel. . President Bush is 
preoccupied with the upcoming election.  With this in mind, 
he took the side of Sharon and announced Washington's new 
Middle East policy.  This policy undoubtedly will help to 
increase tension in Iraq.  The US-led military alliance in 
Iraq is likely to face more serious threats. . The war lobby 
in Washington is pushing for extreme measures, which will 
turn the whole world into a bloodbath.  This is the doomsday 
scenario." 
 
 
"Naturally, Yes" 
Ferai Tinc wrote in the mass appeal Hurriyet (4/16): "Those 
who always viewed the Turkish Cypriot side as the obstacle 
to a Cyprus settlement have now been left with no argument. 
The Greek Cypriots are clearly working for a `no' in the 
referendum, and it seems the EU is about to be faced with a 
serious dilemma.  In fact, Brussels has already started 
working on a series of formulas in the event of a `yes' from 
the Turkish side and a `no' in the South.  According to EU 
enlargement chief Verheugen, the green line in Cyprus will 
be considered as an EU border if the Greek Cypriots vote 
`no' and the Turkish Cypriots vote `yes.'  This amounts to 
an official declaration of a divided Cyprus for the first 
time by an EU official. . Anyone who follows the Cyprus 
issue will realize that such a statement about the fate of 
Cyprus cannot possibly be made without Washington's consent. 
All of this leaves no option but a clear `yes' from the 
Turks." 
 
 
"Why Do the Greek Cypriots Say No?" 
Mehmet Ali Birand commented in the mass appeal Posta (4/16): 
"We always knew that Greek Cypriots viewed the Turks only as 
a minority.  However, this belief never had been voiced so 
openly before.  When the Turkish side took the initiative 
and changed its policy, the Greek Cypriots did not know what 
to do.  When Turkey used the chance presented by the Annan 
plan, the Greek Cypriots were surprised.  They were counting 
on Denktas' obstructionism to pave their way to the EU.  If 
Ankara had changed its policy earlier, we might have faced a 
different result.  If Turkey had said "yes" last year in The 
Hague, the Greek Cypriots still would not have made a move. 
April 24 is very close.  Now the Turkish side has to do what 
is necessary.  It has to show that its aim is not to divide, 
but to unite the island and to live in peace.  Cyprus' 
future will be decided on April 24.  The island will either 
be divided in two, with the southern portion becoming a 
member of the EU, or both sides will become EU members 
through the Annan plan. If Greek Cypriot leaders are 
thinking of dominating the entire island in the future, they 
are making a very big mistake.  If they have made a 
conscious decision to divide the island and are following a 
carefully crafted policy, then it is their business." 
 
 
EDELMAN