04ANKARA2392
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Europe will reward TRNC for `yes' - Milliyet 
TRNC asks EU to freeze Greek Cypriots' membership - Sabah 
Powell promises Gul to end isolation of TRNC - Sabah 
UN bids farewell to Cyprus - Aksam 
Cheney cited about energy lobbies again - Aksam 
Thousands of Americans warn Bush to keep abortion legal - 
Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
EU urges Turkey to recognize the Greek Cypriot state - 
Cumhuriyet 
Ankara asks US, EU to remove sanctions on northern Cypriots 
- Radikal 
Ankara launches diplomatic attack against TRNC sanctions - 
Zaman 
US reviews Cyprus policy - Zaman 
EU to release Euro 260 million for Turkish Cypriots - 
Radikal 
Cheney's man Lundquist involved in energy irregularity - 
Yeni Safak 
Americans replace outgoing Spanish troops in Iraq - Zaman 
Fallujah under fire - Zaman 
Turmoil continues in Fallujah - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  EU foreign ministers said they are determined to 
end the isolation of northern Cyprus after the April 24 
reunification referendum failed because of an overwhelming 
'no' vote on the Greek Cypriot side of the island.  Euro260 
million was released as an initial step to support the 
economy of `TRNC.'  The EU will work to integrate the north 
and south of Cyprus economically and develop relations 
between the two sides, say papers.  The EU is preparing to 
open an office in the Turkish side, and will accept the 
Green Line buffer zone dividing Cyprus as the EU border, 
mainstream dailies note.  However, "Cumhuriyet" says the EU 
has urged Ankara to recognize the Greek Cypriot state and 
pull troops out of Turkish Cypriot north of the island.  The 
`Prime Minister' of the Turkish Cypriot enclave, Mehmet Ali 
Talat, calls for the EU to freeze the membership of the 
Greek Cypriots until a solution is reached to the division 
of the island.  Talat has also written the EU foreign 
ministers and urged them to establish direct relations with 
the `TRNC' and asked to expand the circulation of goods 
between the two zones in Cyprus.  Secretary of State Colin 
Powell said US was reviewing its policies toward the Turkish 
Cypriot north, and added that US actions would be parallel 
to the EU policies, write papers.  Powell called Turkey's 
Foreign Minister Gul to praise the constructive approach of 
the Turkish Cypriots and vowed to continue US support for 
the Turkish side of the island, say reports.  Turkish 
dailies expect `PM of TRNC' Talat to meet with Secretary 
Powell in Washington next week.  Dailies speculate that 
Ankara would not object to prospective US and EU policies of 
`by-passing' Denktas and holding official meetings directly 
with the Turkish Cypriot government.  On Monday, the GOT and 
the National Security Council (NSC) called for the US and 
the EU to keep the promises they made to northern Cyprus by 
ending the embargo. 
Turkish peacekeepers for Afghanistan:  The US seeks more 
Turkish soldiers for duty in Afghanistan, with the arrival 
of the new troops planned for 2005 for active operations 
outside Kabul, papers quote US NATO envoy Nick Burns.  FM 
Gul will discuss the issue at a meeting with the NATO 
Secretary General Scheffer in Istanbul on Wednesday. 
 
SIPDIS 
"Cumhuriyet" reports Congressman John McCain as saying to 
CBS that Turkish troops and peacekeepers from other Muslim 
countries should be deployed in southern Afghanistan. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Cyprus 
 
 
"Cyprus: Gains and Losses" 
Yilmaz Oztuna commented in the conservative-mass appeal 
Turkiye (4/27): "Under the current circumstances, Turkey 
should be able to receive a date from the EU in the upcoming 
December summit.  Turkey has also gained an important 
benefit from the referendum in that there is no way the EU 
can place Turkey on the irreconcilable side of the Cyprus 
issue.  With the help of the northern Cypriots' yes to the 
Annan Plan and the EU's vision of Turkey, we have two 
important components of continuing to be part of the modern 
civilized world, which is the most important benefit of all. 
.  There will be another important gain if the embargoes 
against Turkish Cyprus are lifted.  In fact, a unique 
opportunity was missed due to the unfortunate attitude of 
the Greek Cypriot side.  Had the Annan Plan been approved by 
the both sides, it would be a relief for everyone, including 
the whole of Cyprus, the US, the EU and the UN." 
 
 
"Withdrawing forces from Cyprus" 
Fatih Altayli suggested in the mass appeal Hurriyet (4/27): 
"The referenda results are not the best outcome for Turkish 
Cypriots, yet they still provide hope and optimism for the 
future.  The current process has gained a dynamic momentum 
and the northern side will be the winner regardless of what 
comes next.  Turkey is also on the winners' side.  It would 
not be realistic to expect the embargoes to be immediately 
lifted and recognition process to be immediately initiated. 
Yet, it is absolutely realistic to see things developing to 
the benefit of the north.  In sum, this is a win-win case 
for both Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot side.  .  This is 
the very time to take an initiative that will enhance 
Turkey's position: reduce the number of Turkish troops on 
the island.  If Turkey manages to do this, it will provide 
enormous diplomatic benefits for us." 
 
 
"Is the Problem Over?" 
Sami Kohen opined in the mass appeal Milliyet (4/27):  "The 
ability of the Turkish side of Cyprus to preserve the 
benefits gained with the referendum depends on the strategy 
it will follow. A policy that aims at permanent division or 
separation will bring huge problems in the future, 
especially, for Turkey, which expects a date from the EU in 
December, and for the Turkish Cypriots, who want the 
embargoes to be fully lifted and hope to join the EU 
(immediately after the Greek Cypriot accession) in the near 
future.  Therefore, following their latest diplomatic 
success, it would be useful for the Turkish side to keep its 
options open for the realization of the `Republic of the 
United Cyprus.'   Of course, for this, the Greek side will 
need to show a serious change in its stance and correct its 
`oxi' mistake.  And, for everyone's benefit, this change has 
to be realized, as soon as possible, before the roads are 
separated fully." 
 
 
EDELMAN