04ANKARA5205
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, SEPTEMBER 1-15,
Wed Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 005205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, SEPTEMBER 1-15, 
2004 
 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries about anti-TIP public 
information campaigns, post provides as examples the 
following TIP press reports.  Text of articles originally 
published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published September 10, 2004 by Turkish language 
Yeniden Ozgur Gundem; also published on Turkish Women's 
Advocacy Group Flying Broom website 
http://www.ucansupurge.org/newhtml/130804/130 804turkiyeden.p 
hp:  (Note: Emboff confirmed that this article incorrectly 
references IOM as the source of the report.  The correct 
source is the Ankara Chamber of Commerce, not/not IOM. END 
NOTE.) 
 
     TITLE: IOM: Turkey is a Center for Prostitution 
     BEGIN TEXT: The IOM reported that Turkey has become a 
     central base for women trafficking and prostitution. 
     According to a study by the IOM, around 3000-4000 women 
     from eastern European countries and mostly from the 
     Moldova, Georgia and the Ukraine, were deported each 
     year.  The report stressed that irregular migration 
     movements increased with globalization and that this 
     created a suitable atmosphere for human trafficking, 
     mainly women trafficking. 
 
     The report noted that migration from eastern European 
     countries, which faced severe economic crisis, high 
     inflation and mass unemployment at the end of 1980s, 
     has increased toward Turkey.  Unemployed but well- 
     educated women were on the top of the list. 
 
     The report went on saying that Turkey has been putting 
     emphasis on tourism in order to increase its foreign 
     exchange reserves since 1960s and pursuing a liberal 
     border policy.  Thus it became a lucrative center for 
     those who migrated.  The report said, "Increasing 
     number of immigrants with different characteristics as 
     been entering Turkey as tourists." 
 
     The percentage of the Russian women who were deported 
     for carrying VD is lowest among the others. 
 
     The IOM noted that those foreign women who were forced 
     into prostitution in Turkey were either divorced or 
     single coming from negative family backgrounds in 
     villages or rural areas. END TEXT. 
 
  ¶3. (U) Published September 10, 2004 in the Pakistan Daily 
  Times: 
 
     TITLE: Two Pakistani immigrants arrested 
     BEGIN TEXT: ZAGREB: The Croatian police arrested two 
     illegal Pakistani immigrants, suspected of human 
     trafficking near the Croatian border with Slovenia, on 
     Wednesday. 
 
     The police arrested a total of 18 immigrants. Two of 
     them belonged to Pakistan while 14 were from Turkey and 
     two from China. The Chinese immigrants were caught near 
     Varazdin in the north of the country, said the police. 
     They were trying to enter Slovenia when the Croatian 
     police arrested them. A 41-year-old immigrant was 
     injured when he tried to resist. A police officer was 
     also injured in the encounter. The illegal immigrants 
     were going to Germany, Austria and Italy via Slovenia. 
     END TEXT. 
 
  ¶4. (U) Published September 10, 2004 in the Pakistan Daily 
  Times: 
 
     TITLE: 58 arrested on border with Iran 
     BEGIN TEXT: CHAGHAI: Chagai Levies have arrested 58 
     people for crossing the Pakistani border with Iran at 
     Zero Point Taftan illegally, local administration in 
     Taftan said on Wednesday. They were trying to enter 
     Iran to proceed further to Europe via Turkey and Greece 
     in search of jobs. END TEXT. 
 
¶5. (U) Published September 7, 2004 by the International 
Office for Migration: 
 
     TITLE: GEORGIA - IOM Assists Uzbek Victims of 
     Trafficking to Return Home - 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: This past weekend the IOM offices in 
     Azerbaijan and Georgia assisted the last two persons of 
     a group of 14 victims of trafficking to return to their 
     homes in Uzbekistan. 
 
     In May and June seven women, residents of Uzbekistan 
     were taken on various flights from Tashkent to Tbilisi 
     with the promise of attractive employment in Georgia. 
     Upon arrival in Georgia's capital, they were locked up 
     in an apartment and told that instead of working in 
     Georgia they would be taken to Dubai to work there as 
     prostitutes. 
     The women were kept in the apartment until 22 June when 
     two managed to escape and informed the police who 
     rescued the rest of the women and arrested the 
     traffickers. 
 
     IOM's involvement began after the women's release from 
     captivity, first by referring them to the shelter, 
     establishing the profile of the women, providing 
     support to the shelter, providing medical assistance to 
     the victims, and finally assistance to return and 
     reintegrate in the countries of origin. 
 
     Whilst most women returned to their homes soon after 
     they were released, the two women who returned home 
     last weekend were kept two and a half months in the 
     police shelter because they did not have proper travel 
     documentation. 
 
     Without prospective to be returned soon and tired of 
     waiting they escaped from the shelter to face the risks 
     of irregular migration again. They slipped through the 
     border of Azerbaijan using forged passports and turned 
     to their diplomatic representation in Baku. On the 
     request of the Embassy of Uzbekistan, IOM Baku ensured 
     the secure stay and final return home of the victims, 
     in coordination with IOM Tbilisi and IOM partners in 
     Tashkent. 
 
     Research conducted by IOM in the Southern Caucasian 
     countries confirmed that Azerbaijan and Georgia are 
     primarily source countries of victims of trafficking, 
     who are lured with attractive promises to work in 
     countries such as Turkey, Greece, the United Arab 
     Emirates, Russia, the United States and a number of 
     Western European countries, only to end up being 
     exploited there by traffickers. Azerbaijan and Georgia 
     are also used by traffickers for transit of women, 
     mainly from Central Asian countries, to serve in the 
     United Arab Emirates and other destination countries. 
 
     IOM Missions in the Southern Caucasus are assisting the 
     local authorities to prevent trafficking in persons, 
     protect and assist victims of trafficking and prosecute 
     traffickers. END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published September 7, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian 
News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: Palestinian Interior Minister Visits Aksu 
     BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA - Palestinian Interior Minister 
     Hakam Balawi, currently in Ankara, met Turkish Interior 
     Minister Abdulkadir Aksu on Tuesday. 
 
     After the meeting Aksu said that "there is an urgent 
     need for international cooperation to fight 
     international organized crime networks." 
 
     Turkish and Palestinian delegations would discuss fight 
     against international terrorism, drug smuggling, human 
     trafficking, organized crimes and illegal migration and 
     cooperation between security organizations of the two 
     countries, Aksu noted. 
 
     On the other hand, Balawi conveyed a message from 
     Palestinian President Yasser Arafat wishing well to 
     Turkish prime minister and people. 
 
     Stating that Turkey and Palestine would sign a 
     memorandum of understanding, Balawi noted that they 
     would do their best to meet its requirements. 
 
     Balawi said that there were very good relations between 
     Turkey and Palestine, recalling that Turkey was the 
     first country which recognized Palestine. 
 
     Stating that there was terrorism organized by Israel in 
     Palestine, Balawi said that terrorism continued killing 
     people in his country. Balawi underlined that Turkey, 
     which knew the situation of Palestine, was supporting 
     them on this issue. END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published September 5, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian 
News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: Aksu: Importance Of International Cooperation In 
     Fight Against Terrorism Is Understood 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ABANT - Turkish Interior Minister 
     Abdulkadir Aksu said, "the recent terrorist act in 
     Russia has showed the importance of international 
     cooperation in fight against terrorism." 
 
     Aksu told reporters on Saturday that it is impossible 
     not to curse terrorist act in Russia. Stressing that 
     the global dimension of terrorism has emerged one more 
     time in the recent terrorist act in Russia, Aksu said, 
     'the importance of international cooperation in fight 
     against terrorism is understood. We have defended 
     cooperation in fight against terrorism for years. World 
     saw the real face of terrorism after September 11 
     attacks in the United States.' 
 
     Aksu said, "we will further focus on the training of 
     hostage rescue teams which has a special importance in 
     fight against terrorism and we will send special 
     operation teams under Security Directorate General to 
     foreign countries for training if necessary." 
 
     Aksu said that Turkey has signed cooperation agreements 
     with 48 different countries against international 
     terrorism, illicit drug trafficking and human 
     smuggling. 
 
     Aksu said that Turkey has made important progress 
     against violation of human rights. 
 
     Noting that by the time he started his term in office, 
     he formed a desk for prevention of torture and 
     violation of human rights, Aksu said European 
     countries, which were screening Turkey due to torture 
     and violation of human rights in the past, now ended 
     this process. END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published September 5, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian 
News Agency: 
 
     ANKARA - NATO Parliamentary Assembly will come to 
     Turkey under its annual working visit. 
 
     Turkish Parliament Press Office released a written 
     statement on Saturday and said that a delegation, which 
     will be comprised of 23 officials from parliaments of 
     NATO countries and 10 officials from staff of 
     Secretariat General of the Assembly, will come to 
     Turkey on September 6. 
 
     The delegation will be headed by NATO Parliamentary 
     Assembly Turkish Group Chairman Vahit Erdem. 
 
     The delegation will be briefed in Interior Ministry, 
     Foreign Ministry and National Defense Ministry. 
     Officials will discuss Iraq-Afghanistan and Turkey- 
     Russia relations, political and military situation, 
     Turkish defense industry and international cooperation, 
     terrorism, illicit drug trafficking and human 
     smuggling. 
 
     The delegation will also meet Turkish President Ahmet 
     Necdet Sezer, Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc, Prime 
     Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Foreign Minister 
     Abdullah Gul, Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu and 
     National Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul. 
 
     The delegation which will visit Southeast Anatolian 
     Project (GAP) region and Nevsehir region will depart 
     from Turkey on September 12.  END TEXT. 
¶9. (U) Published September 1, 2004 by the Southeastern 
Eurpoean Times: 
 
     TITLE: Economic Plights Drive Prostitution in Turkey 
     BEGIN TEXT: Increasing jobs and services would reduce 
     the number of women who are driven to prostitution, 
     said Ankara Chamber of Commerce Chairman Sinan Aygun. 
     [AFP] 
     By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul 
     - 27/08/04 
 
     Though prostitution is legal in Turkey, most of the 
     women working in the industry are not registered and 
     many are forced to ply their trade against their will, 
     according to a new study conducted by the Ankara 
     Chamber of Commerce (ATO). The research found that 
     prostitution is spreading in Turkey due to economic 
     troubles. 
 
     The study estimated there are as many as 100,000 
     prostitutes in Turkey, 30,000 of whom are waiting to 
     obtain licenses. One out of every 350 women is at risk 
     of prostitution or sexual abuse. Fifty-six brothels are 
     in operation, employing 3,000 women; an additional 
     15,000 prostitutes are registered with the police. Many 
     are unable to gain employment in a registered brothel 
     and end up working on the streets, researchers said. 
 
     In the southeastern province of Diyakbakir alone, an 
     estimated 6,000 women are working illegally as 
     prostitutes, according to the study. Istanbul has at 
     least 500 underage sex workers, including girls as 
     young as 12 years old. Furthermore, researchers noted, 
     there has been an influx of sex workers from Ukraine, 
     Moldova, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Belarus. 
 
     "There is an annual turnover of around 3 billion euros 
     in the prostitution sector. And brothel keepers, 
     barpersons, nightclubs, hotel owners and taxi drivers 
     all get a slice of the cake. That is to say, hundreds 
     of thousands of people earn a living by prostitution," 
     the report said.  END TEXT. 
 
     Source description: 
     The Southeast European Times Web site is a central 
     source of news and information about Southeastern 
     Europe in nine languages: Albanian, Bulgarian, 
     Croatian, English, Greek, Macedonian, Romanian, 
     Serbian Latin, Serbian Cyrillic and Turkish. 
     The goal of the Southeast European Times is to offer 
     accurate, balanced and forward-looking coverage of 
     developments in Southeast Europe. 
     Each business day, the site captures the top news from 
     across the region as reported in local and 
     international media. It also features analysis, 
     interviews and commentary by Southeast European Times 
     correspondents in the region. 
     The Southeast European Times coverage is distinguished 
     by an in-depth knowledge of local issues - the key 
     players, events and sensitivities that can trigger 
     significant developments - tempered by a cross- 
     regional perspective. It identifies trends, solutions 
     and successes that can serve as models for progress 
     throughout the region. 
     The Southeast European Times is sponsored by the US 
     European Command, the joint military command 
     responsible for US operations in Southeast Europe and 
     elsewhere. EUCOM oversees participation of US troops 
     in NATO's peacekeeping forces in Kosovo (KFOR), Bosnia 
     and Herzegovina (SFOR) and Macedonia. 
     EUCOM is committed to promoting stability, co- 
     operation and prosperity in the region. 
EDELMAN