04ANKARA5689
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Mon Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005689 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 4, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Erdogan named `European of the Year' - Hurriyet 
Turkey's EU membership likely after 2013 - Milliyet 
Israeli tanks in Gaza - Aksam 
Children victims of violence in Iraq - Aksam 10/3 
Kurds rally for a free Kirkuk - Hurriyet 10/3 
Kerry leads Bush by 3 points - Milliyet 
Nader a `Republican' independent - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Schroeder urges EU to keep promise to Turkey - Zaman 
FM Gul `confident' of positive EU report - Radikal 
FM Erdogan: No torture in Turkey - Cumhuriyet 
US strikes Fallujah again - Cumhuriyet 
Samarra under US control - Yeni Safak 
Zawahiri threatens Norway, South Korea - Cumhuriyet 10/3 
World silent on Palestine - Radikal 
Israel carries out `genocide' - Yeni Safak 
Palestine cries for help - Cumhuriyet 10/3 
Afghanistan's problems will continue after elections - Zaman 
10/3 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
EU-Turkey:  Papers believe that the European Commission 
progress report on Turkey will be largely, advising the EU 
to start entry talks with Turkey without delay.  Papers 
claim that the key phrase in the Commission recommendation 
will be: `The Commission considers that Turkey has 
sufficiently fulfilled the political criteria and recommends 
that accession negotiations be opened.'  The EU will reserve 
the right to suspend accession negotiations if there is 
backsliding in the Turkish reform process.  Unsettled issues 
with the EU include freedom of religion and expression, 
human rights, the situation in southeast Turkey, military- 
civilian relations, and economic and structural reforms. 
The EU will continue monitoring closely the implementation 
of reforms in these areas, and the continuation of entry 
talks will depend on Turkey's performance.  Entry talks do 
not necessarily mean that Turkey will be admitted to the 
European bloc, papers report, and in any event Turkey's full 
membership will not come until at least 2013.  Experts warn 
that the EU's internal balances and Turkish sensitivities in 
key areas will make negotiations difficult.  The media 
speculates that EU demands for more freedoms for the Kurds 
and other minorities may grow. 
Erdogan receives `Quadriga' award:  On Sunday, German 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder presented PM Erdogan with the 
`Quadriga' award for his positive role in the reform process 
in Turkey.  Speaking at the awards ceremony in Berlin, 
Schroeder said that Europe most keep its word to Turkey and 
support its bid to join the bloc.  Erdogan said he expected 
a positive report from the Commission.  `We have done our 
homework,' Erdogan said, `now it's time for the Europeans to 
do what is necessary.' 
EO-OIC forum cancelled:  EU objections to the Turkish 
Cypriots' representation at an EU-OIC forum under the name 
`Turkish Cypriot State' led to the cancellation of the 
meetings scheduled for October 4-5 in Istanbul.  Weekend 
papers criticize the EU for `surrendering' to pressure from 
Athens and Nicosia.  The Greek Cypriot foreign ministry 
hailed the cancellation as a `victory,' "Cumhuriyet" 
reports. 
Nicosia enters Customs Union with Ankara:  Ankara has 
included Cyprus in Turkey's Customs Union (CU) agreement 
with the EU, weekend papers report.  The MFA said that the 
inclusion of southern Cypriots in the Customs Union did not 
imply recognition, and that Ankara would continue its 
`special' relationship with the Turkish Cypriots.  Ankara is 
expected to ask the EU to remove economic sanctions on the 
northern Cypriots before launching trade with Nicosia. 
Sunday's "Cumhuriyet" strongly criticizes the Turkish 
government for `conceding' to the Greek Cypriots despite the 
fact that the EU has kept none of its promises with regard 
to easing sanctions on northern Cyprus. 
Talabani wants `Brussels model' for Kirkuk:  In an interview 
with the Islamist-oriented "Yeni Safak," Iraqi Patriotic 
Union of Kurdistan (PUK) leader Jalal Talabani called on all 
ethnic and political groups to agree on a `Belgian-type' 
structuring for Kirkuk.  Talabani denied allegations that 
the northern Iraqi Kurdish parties are helping displaced 
Kurds return to their homes.  `It is a natural right for the 
Kurds and Turkmen driven out by Saddam to return home,' he 
stressed.  Talabani also denied charges of secret ties 
between the Kurds and Israel.  `We cannot block Israeli 
businessmen coming to Iraq,' Talabani added.  He also said 
that Kurdish Jews returning to Iraq will be allowed to go 
back to their villages.  Responding to speculation about an 
independent Kurdish state in Iraq, Talabani said such a 
`foolish' venture would cause catastrophe in the region. 
`Someone should tell us how a Kurdish state, encircled by 
three strong states -- Iran, Syria and Turkey - that oppose 
Kurdish independence could possibly exist,' Talabani said. 
Turkish Red Crescent employee wounded in Iraq dies:  Mustafa 
Pekcan, a Turkish Red Crescent employee severely wounded in 
a terrorist attack near Mosul, died in Ankara on Saturday. 
"Aksam" claims that Pekcan was taken to the Al-Salam 
hospital in Mosul instead of the fully-equipped American 
military hospital, and was evacuated to Ankara six days 
after his health condition deteriorated.  "Aksam" quotes 
Pekcan's friends as saying that he was a victim 
`insufficient medical attention' in Mosul. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Election 2004; EU-Turkey 
 
"Bush and Kerry's Joint Vision" 
Yasemin Congar wrote from Washington in the mass appeal 
"Milliyet" (10/4): "The election atmosphere is getting 
stronger in Washington, yet there will be no fundamental 
change in US policy or the campaign against terrorism 
regardless of whether Bush or Kerry wins.  In the next 4 
years, the US will be seriously engaged in the fight against 
terrorism.  The project focuses on the Islamic world, and 
combines elements of political, economic, and social 
reforms.  In terms of the rhetoric, it addresses the 
ideological grounds for terrorism and directly targets 
radical Islam. . The election atmosphere forces both 
candidates into brief responses and sound-bite messages, so 
a real discussion of terrorism has not been a part of the 
election debate.  Foreign policy staffers from both the 
Kerry and Bush teams have reached a consensus regarding 
their vision for the war on terror.  Although the vision is 
basically the same, it seems that a Kerry administration 
would have a better chance of success than a second Bush 
administration.  Nevertheless, the war on terror will remain 
the immediate priority no matter who wins." 
 
"Becoming Aware of the EU Reality" 
Gunduz Aktan commented in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(10/2):  "In many European countries, especially Germany and 
France, there are historical prejudices against Turkey.  The 
word `Turk' is used in many pejorative ways.  Moreover, 
those who really make Turkey out to be the `other' in 
Christian Europe are French intellectuals.  In his book 
"Structure du Serail," Alain Grosrichard proves through 
Freudian analysis how Montesquieu's concept of `oriental 
despotism' portrayed Turks as the opposite of a European 
identity.  At a time when the Armenians' anti-Turkish and 
anti-Semitic sentiments are on the rise, the Muslim minority 
faces significant reaction in Europe, and extreme 
nationalist parties are opposed to Turkey in the European 
Union.  The view of Turkey as the `other' is definitely 
getting stronger.  Under such conditions, it is impossible 
for one to accept a country and a nation which is thought to 
represent the antithesis of everything one believes in as 
one's equal.  Another problem is that the French public is 
currently experiencing one of its periodic depressions. 
Some EU members, including the new ones, oppose the French 
stance on the U.S. war in Iraq, and create significant doubt 
about the future of the EU and the leadership of France. 
Turkey's membership therefore becomes even less attractive 
for the French.  There is also the financial burden our 
membership will bring, together with the important 
adjustments needed within EU institutions.  At this point, 
the best possible scenario appears to be to continue on our 
road step-by-step and be pleased to get a date to start 
negotiations, while ignoring anti-Turkish statements made by 
French politicians." 
 
EDELMAN