04MADRID1851
SPAIN:  APPROVAL FOR TRAINING SHIP EMPIRE STATE
Thu May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 001851 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOT FOR MARITIME ADMIN. RITA JACKSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT MARR SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN:  APPROVAL FOR TRAINING SHIP EMPIRE STATE 
 
REF: STATE 44487 
 
¶1.  Embassy delivered March 2 a nota verbal to Spain's 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) regarding the State 
University of  New York (Suny) Maritime College crew of 
approximately 600 cadets and 75 crew officers aboard the 
Federal Training Ship Empire State that will stop in 
Barcelona from May 28 through June 1 and bunker off Ceuta on 
16 June with the purpose of training future merchant marine 
officers. 
 
¶2.  Embassy received a response May 14 from the MFA.  An 
informal translation follows: 
 
    "The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Spain 
presents its complements to the Embassy of the United States 
of America in Madrid and in relation to the Nota Verbal 
number 87 of 2 March 2004 communicates that there is no 
problem in authorizing the federal training ship Empire State 
to call in the port of Barcelona from 28 May through 1 June 
and in the port of Ceuta for nine hours for bunkering on 16 
June 2004. 
 
    Similarly, the logistical needs, port services, and exit 
onto land of citizens are authorized."  End translation. 
 
¶3.  Embassy understands that Barcelona will be a liberty 
port, and that off Ceuta will be used for bunkering, with no 
personnel disembarking nor shore side personnel joining the 
vessel. 
 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov) and the U.S. Embassy's 
website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
 
¶5. Minimized Considered 
ARGYROS