04MANAMA1924
Sports Programming Works
Wed Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001924 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ECA PHARRISON, JSUPPLEE, BOLLISON 
ECA/PE/C/CU DSCHUMAN; NEA/ARP DBURNS 
NEA/PPD MQUINN, PAGNEW, CWHITTLESEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL SOCI OEXC KPAO BA
SUBJECT: Sports Programming Works 
 
 
¶1.   (U) The Bahraini reaction to the highly successful 
visit of former Georgetown University Basketball players 
Omari Faulkner and Courtland Freeman was summed up by the 
Bahrain's National Basketball Team coach: "More sports 
programs are needed to foster greater dialogue." The two 
Cultural Envoys did a masterful job in engaging with a 
young Bahraini audience, GoB Officials, and Bahraini 
teachers and coaches by using basketball as a common 
language. During their November 29 - December 2 visit to 
Bahrain, the Cultural Envoys were hosted by the President 
of the Bahrain Basketball Association, who told APAO that 
a visit like this is "long overdue and something that 
must continue." 
 
¶2.    (U) Mr. Faulkner and Mr. Freeman were a "dream 
team" as cultural envoys with natural ability to connect 
with others. Among a younger audience they spoke about 
the value of sports in building determination, instilling 
a spirit of teamwork, and breaking down cultural 
barriers. The two visitors led practices with teams of 
teenagers at several athletic clubs. At the Muharraq 
Club, one of Bahrain's largest sports clubs, the young 
players refused to leave the practice hall and pleaded 
with their parents to watch them play with their "new 
American friends." 
¶3.   (U) The cultural envoys discussed their experience 
as students and players at a NCAA Division I University 
and encouraged Bahrainis to apply for Post's exchange 
opportunities to study at universities in the U.S. The 
players participated in drills and scrimmages with the 
Bahrain National Basketball Team.  The coach excitedly 
stated, "this is what we aim for, basketball players of 
all cultures enjoying a common passion for sports 
together." 
 
¶4.   (U) The Cultural Envoys received wide media 
coverage.  Articles about their events appeared in both 
the Arabic and English daily newspapers.  One Arabic 
newspaper called the visit a new opportunity for cultural 
dialogue with sports as the common language.  In 
addition, a profile of the athletes and their experience 
in Bahrain will be featured in the upcoming edition of 
Bahrain's "Confidential Magazine."  The players also 
participated in a live interview with Radio Bahrain, 
which targets a young audience. 
 
¶5.   (U) COMMENT: Post strongly encourages more cultural 
sports programs. This event was a large success due to 
the charisma, professionalism, and interpersonal skills 
of Mr. Freeman and Mr. Faulkner and because of the power 
of sports to reach beyond cultural and political 
barriers.  At a time when U.S. policies face challenges, 
the common interest in the ideals of teamwork, 
dedication, and sacrifice involved in athletics and the 
"appreciation for the game" offers a common ground. The 
principal of a secondary school told the PAO, "these are 
the types of programs that can rebuild what terrorism has 
tried to destroy." END COMMENT. 
 
Monroe