04PARIS9191
TFX001: FRENCH CASUALTIES AND HUMANITARIAN
Thu Dec 30 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 009191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID CASC FR
SUBJECT: TFX001: FRENCH CASUALTIES AND HUMANITARIAN 
RESPONSE IN AFTERMATH OF TSUNAMI 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  On December 29, poloff spoke with MFA India 
Desk Officer, Louis Vassy, about French victims of the 
tsunami of December 26 and French plans for humanitarian aid 
 
SIPDIS 
packages for the regions hit hardest by the disaster.  Vassy 
elaborated on the deaths and voiced concerns that the number 
of French casualties might rise drastically.  He also spoke 
about French plans to contribute 15 million Euros to United 
Nations and International Red Cross relief efforts; later in 
the day it was announced that the 15 million would be part of 
a larger 22.16 million Euro French relief package.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
French Victims and a Fear that the Worst is Yet to Come 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
¶2.  Vassy told us that there have been 20 confirmed French 
casualties as of December 29 from the tsunami -- 19 deaths 
occurred in Thailand and one in Sri Lanka.  While French news 
reports put the number of French missing at 90, Vassy said 
that the MFA fears that the number is higher and that the GOF 
is preparing for the possibility of a sharp increase in the 
number of French casualties.  The MFA announced that the 
number of French injured is 189.  The GOF has established 
hotlines to facilitate the identification of victims. 
 
---------------------- 
The French Aid Package 
---------------------- 
¶3.  On December 29, the French government announced details 
of an aid package for the victims in the affected region. 
The package totals 22.16 million Euros (US$30.1 million) of 
which 15 million Euros are allocated to humanitarian agencies 
of the United Nations and the International Red Cross; 1.56 
million will go to bilateral assistance in the form of 
equipment, rescue workers and other specialists; and an 
additional 5.6 million Euros will be offered as part of a 
European Union aid package (the French contribution is 
roughly 17% of the total EU aid package). 
 
¶4.  Prior to announcing the package, French Prime Minister 
Jean-Pierre Raffarin brought several ministers together to 
discuss relief efforts in the region to include Minister of 
the Interior, Dominique de Villepin; Minister of Finance, 
Herve Gaymard; Minister of Transportation, Gilles de Robien; 
Minister of Justice, Dominique Perben; and Minister of Health 
Philippe Douste-Blazy.  The ministers heard an account from 
French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier, who had just returned 
from his emergency trip to Sri Lanka and Thailand to assess 
damage and coordinate relief. 
 
¶5.  Outside of the official aid package, efforts are being 
made across France through local governments, NGOs and 
individuals to provide humanitarian aid.  In the next few 
days some 34 tons of food will be sent to the region through 
Catholic Relief and the French Red Cross; and the French NGO, 
Doctors without Borders, will send 40 tons of emergency aid 
supplies to Sri Lanka. 
Wolff