04PRETORIA5363
South Africa recognizes, supports and
Mon Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 005363 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/ETC, OES/STC, EB, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR PCOLEMAN AND VESPINEL 
DEPT PASS USPTO FOR MADLIN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI TBIO KSCA ECON ETRD KIPR SF
SUBJECT:  South Africa recognizes, supports and 
protects Indigenous Knowledge Systems 
 
REF:  A) PRETORIA 4519; B) 03 PRETORIA 1904 
 
¶1.  Summary.  South Africa continues to support the 
protection and development of Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems (IKS) through a variety of government and 
private efforts.  In the late 1990s, the new South 
African Government encouraged deeper investigation 
into IKS through research projects and surveys.  The 
Department of Science and Technology (DST) funds a 
variety of IKS research projects and has also 
established a unit to coordinate the programs.  DST, 
in collaboration with research institutions, 
universities, traditional healers, private companies 
and local communities formulated a national IKS 
policy, which provides IKS with legal recognition and 
protection.  Several stakeholders are establishing 
partnerships to utilize IKS for broader economic and 
social development.  Constructive and potentially 
significant partnerships have also emerged between 
western-trained scientists and traditional healers. 
End summary. 
 
Revival of IKS in South Africa 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Indigenous knowledge (IK) is local, often 
community-based knowledge unique to traditional 
cultures and societies.  IK is used in agriculture, 
education, natural resource management, health care 
and numerous other activities.  This report reviews 
the increasing interest in Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems (IKS) in South Africa and highlights policy 
and program activities of key players in IKS.  The 
consensus among IKS experts is that the former chair 
of the parliamentary portfolio committee on Arts, 
Culture, Science, Language and Technology, Dr. Wally 
Serote, is the "father of IKS" in South Africa. 
During his tenure in parliament Serote called on 
government and research institutions to recognize the 
significance of IKS and challenged them to develop 
mechanisms to protect it.  Dr. Serote argued that IK 
needed to be explored further to determine its 
contribution to local development and its future 
potential.  According to Dr. Serote, appropriate 
recognition of IKS will contribute to the broader 
development of the African continent. 
 
¶3.  Serote urged western-trained intellectuals to 
acknowledge IKS in spite of its possibly unfamiliar 
fundamentals, references or logic.    He argued that 
science and technology is not the exclusive property 
of industrialized societies.  Partnerships are 
necessary between IK practitioners and western 
trained intellectuals to explore and unearth the 
maximum potential of the IKS. 
 
SAG's growing commitment to IKS development and 
advancement 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
------ 
 
¶4.  Government Science Councils began serious 
investigation into IKS following Parliamentary 
discussions prompted by Dr. Serote and a subsequent 
meeting of academics on IKS in mid-1996.  The Council 
for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), 
National Research Foundation (NRF) and the Human 
Sciences Research Council (HSRC), in partnership with 
nine historically disadvantaged universities, 
collected data on existing IKS in local communities. 
 
¶5.  A research pilot project was conducted in the 
then Northern (Limpopo) Province at the end of 1997. 
The project identified students across university 
faculties and trained them on how to identify 
indigenous technologies, methods of recording them, 
as well as village protocols.  Following the 
completion of these IKS audits, the government held a 
national workshop on IKS in 1998.  Over time, 
universities and science councils supported more 
research projects in IKS.  Students collected data on 
housing and medical IKS technologies to study them 
and evaluate their possible development and 
enhancement.  This research was coordinated and 
funded through the CSIR, which cataloged the acquired 
information.  Since 2000, DST has allocated R10 
million per year to the NRF for funding IKS research 
projects.  Through June 2004, 256 grants for IKS 
activities have been awarded. 
 
¶6.  The newly-appointed Minister of Science and 
Technology, Dr. Mosibudi Mangena, told participants 
in a SADC IKS workshop in June 2004 that DST is 
giving IKS policy and legislation formulation top 
priority.  His department has established an inter- 
departmental IKS committee, funded research grants 
through the NRF and provided financial support to the 
Indigenous Knowledge Systems of South Africa Trust. 
The department's approach is designed to raise 
awareness, as well as promote development, 
partnerships, poverty alleviation and the sustainable 
use of resources.  DST is also developing a framework 
to establish a Traditional Knowledge Data Library. 
 
Policy formulation and multi-departmental cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
- 
 
¶7.  In an IKS briefing to Parliament in November 
2004, Dr. Mosimege spelled out the key "drivers" of 
IKS policy in South Africa.  First South Africa is 
affirming African cultural values in the face of 
globalization.  Development of IKS supports the 
"African renaissance" and helps to redress apartheid- 
era institutions and policies that equated IK with 
backwardness.  IKS policy secondly intends to develop 
services provided by traditional healers, who play a 
critical role in local communities.  The third driver 
is the potential contribution that IKS can make to 
the national economy in terms of job creation, 
poverty alleviation and technology transfer. 
Finally, IKS provides key linkages to other knowledge 
systems. 
 
¶8.  Dr. Mosimege told EST Assistant that since 1996 
the SAG has been developing an IKS policy framework. 
In 1999, the SAG established a Ministerial task team 
to formulate IKS policy and draft legislation. 
Because IKS involves crosscutting issues, forging a 
national IKS strategy and developing related 
legislation is a complicated task.  As a result, IKS 
has been addressed in policies and legislation of 
various other departments. 
 
¶9.  For example, the Department of Environmental 
Affairs and Tourism drafted the Biodiversity Act, a 
chapter of which regulates the collection and use of 
indigenous plants and the equitable sharing of 
profits.  DST contributed to the IKS-related language 
in the Act.  DST is cooperating with the Department 
of Trade and Industry on Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPR) matters, including the draft Patents Amendment 
Bill of 2004.  The bill proposes to empower the 
Registrar of Patents to refuse granting of patents in 
cases where the application does not disclose the 
origin of genetic or biological resources. In cases 
involving patents based on IK, the bill would 
restrict patents unless there is disclosure of the 
origin of the traditional knowledge used in the 
patent invention, and prior informed consent of 
indigenous people possessing such knowledge. 
 
¶10.  DST has also worked with the Department of 
Health in drafting the Traditional Health 
Practitioners Bill (Ref A) passed in September 2004. 
The new law recognizes traditional healers as 
healthcare professionals and regulates the industry. 
Under the law, the government will support the 
educational and training needs of the practitioners, 
will provide protection for IK, and will allow 
traditional healers to participate in medical aid 
reimbursement programs. 
 
¶11.  DST also has policy and working relationships 
with nine other departments that constitute the multi- 
departmental committee on IKS.  The SAG has finalized 
an IKS policy document to deal with recognition, 
protection and the development of the IKS. Cabinet 
adopted the policy document, which now awaits 
promulgation. 
 
NRF and IKS - Project support 
------------------------------ 
 
¶12.  Sekamotho Mthembu, an NRF official, told EST 
Assistant that DST provides funding for IKS projects 
and NRF administers the funding and solicits 
proposals for projects.  The approved proposals 
comply with specific guidelines on production, 
transmission, and utilization of Indigenous Knowledge 
and technologies.  The proposals have to be 
consistent with the Poverty Relief Program of the 
DST, which aims to empower rural communities and add 
value to available local resources. The research 
themes include traditional medicine and health, food 
systems, socio-cultural systems, arts, crafts and 
materials.  Mthembu said that although the NRF does 
not direct the subject of research, it sets high 
research standards.  The quality and excellence of 
the proposals and the researchers' expertise are the 
determining factors for project selection.  The NRF 
received 57 proposals by July in 2004. 
 
CSIR and IKS: Bio-prospecting, poverty alleviation 
and partnerships 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
-- 
 
¶13.  Dr. Marthinus Horak is the head of the Bio- 
prospecting unit at the CSIR.  He stressed to EST 
Assistant that South Africa is endowed with a robust 
biodiversity of over 23,000 plant species, 
representing 10 percent of the entire plant world. 
There are also approximately 200,000 traditional 
healers in South Africa, many of whom possess strong 
indigenous knowledge and skills.  The country also 
has a fast-developing science and technology sector. 
The CSIR intends to coordinate among stakeholders, 
including researchers, private sector, traditional 
healers and local communities, so that all can derive 
optimum benefits from the resources and share them 
equitably. 
 
¶14.  According to Dr. Horak, traditional healers 
approached the CSIR in 1997 seeking assistance to 
bring modern technology into traditional healing and 
to add value to traditional knowledge through 
scientific evaluation of medicines.  The parties 
established collaborations in 1998.  CSIR has worked 
with about 200 traditional healers through a ten- 
member committee representing the country's nine 
provinces.  Dr. Horak considers these traditional 
healers to be forward-looking and working to rectify 
the misconception that all traditional healers are 
"witch doctors."  Healers also want to raise 
awareness about their contribution in keeping South 
Africans healthy, and seek valid recognition from the 
government and the public. 
 
¶15.  CSIR's partnerships combine scientific know-how 
and Indigenous Knowledge in an effort to develop 
products for various uses, including fragrances, 
pharmaceuticals and pesticides.  For example, reftel 
B reported on development of an appetite suppressant 
from a desert plant hoodia, used by the San tribes. 
Although multinational drug company Pfizer pulled out 
of the effort due to corporate reprioritization, CSIR 
continues to develop this project, and the San people 
will receive benefits from the royalties. 
 
¶16.  The Bio-prospecting unit is also pursuing 
development of eight other plant products including a 
mosquito repellent.  Dr. Horak reports that if all 
goes well, the products could offer up to 100% 
effectiveness, well above existing competing 
products.  The CSIR is also working with communities 
in agro-processing programs, establishing organic 
farms and medicinal farms for poverty alleviation. 
CSIR first helps ensure a market for a product and 
then establishes a company.  CSIR also provides 
mentoring in technical and managerial skills for the 
community, and then exits once the community members 
are able to manage the venture on their own. 
 
¶17.  Local studies show that 80 percent of South 
Africans, especially in the rural areas, rely on 
relatively inexpensive and easily accessible 
traditional medicine as primary health care.  The SAG 
hopes for joint development with western scientists 
of traditional medicines into drugs that can 
contribute to treatment of HIV/AIDS and malaria.  The 
Medical Research Council (MRC), CSIR and the 
University of Pretoria are working in partnership 
with traditional healers to draw active compounds 
from medicinal plants.  They will establish the 
scientific basis and provide clinical validation of 
the traditional remedies. 
 
National body promotes IKS development 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Indigenous Knowledge Systems of South Africa 
(IKSSA) is an independent, DST-funded non- 
governmental organization established in 2002. 
Representing over 800 traditional healers, IKSSA 
advocates for IKS, and protects and promotes 
intellectual property for IKS.  Dr. Mogomme Masoga, 
Research Manager at IKSSA, told EST Assistant that 
his institution seeks to raise awareness about IKS 
and engage willing partners in projects.  IKSSA wants 
to be seen as a link between African development and 
NEPAD structures on IKS.  IKSSA has a resource center 
housing IKS materials in the form of research 
articles, books, newspaper clips and visual tapes. 
IK practitioners, researchers and the public have 
access to the materials. 
 
Regional cooperation - NEPAD conference 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶19.  IKS is receiving greater attention at regional 
and continental levels.  The Southern African 
Development Community (SADC) and New Partnership for 
African Development (NEPAD) science and technology 
conference held in Maputo in June 2004, allocated one 
day to discuss IKS issues, and the discussions 
recommended possible workshops in Tanzania or Zambia 
in 2005. Tanzania has reportedly approached the World 
Bank to discuss potential funding for IKS projects 
for the benefit of the region. 
 
Conclusion 
----------- 
 
¶20.  The South African Government takes IKS very 
seriously.  IKS projects involving partnerships 
between western trained scientist and IK users have 
significant potential to contribute to innovative 
research, poverty reduction at the community level, 
and more effective drugs to combat widespread 
diseases. 
 
FRAZER