04QUITO2464
GALAPAGOS PARK LEADERSHIP POTENTIALLY DESTABILIZED
Fri Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY - PARA MARKINGS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: GALAPAGOS PARK LEADERSHIP POTENTIALLY DESTABILIZED 
 
 
¶1. (U)Summary:  The status of the leadership of the Galapagos National 
Park (GNP) is uncertain, with Park Director Edwin Naula facing 
possible dismissal.   There are political motives behind the change 
and we will continue to press for stability.  The US Mission has 
expressed concern at the highest levels of the government on the 
impact of continued polarization of the park directorship on the 
sustainability of donor investments, and reiterated the need for 
technically qualified staff to lead the program.  A continued ebbing 
of park management undermines international conservation efforts, 
threatens the archipelago's unique and fragile ecosystems, and raises 
concerns on Ecuador's long-term ability to independently manage its 
vital natural resources.  Our efforts to prevent further instability 
in the leadership may be frustrated; we continue to press for the 
conservation and protection of the Park.  End Summary. 
 
Possible Replacement of Park Director 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U)Rumors of a park director replacement have been swirling for 
several weeks.  During this period, the Ambassador expressed concerns 
about park stability with the Minister of the Environment.  This same 
message has been conveyed by AID with ministry officials and the 
donor community. 
 
¶3. (U)On September 7, the Ambassador met with Gutierrez to express 
concerns about the importance of institutional stability for the 
Park, donor concerns over rumors about the possible removal of the 
Park Director, the importance of avoiding politicizing the park 
leadership, and sustainability of USG investments.  Gutierrez said he 
had agreed about the importance of Park conservation. 
 
¶4. (U)Naula has alleged there are political motives for his removal. 
He told the ADCM that he had refused to step down unless Gutierrez 
orders him directly.  Later the day, however, press also reported 
unconfirmed rumors that Gutierrez had in fact ordered the Minister of 
Environment to fire Naula.  That has still not happened, fueling 
uncertainty. 
 
¶5. (U)GOE sources say a decision will be made shortly on the removal 
of Naula.  One candidate for the job is Fausto Cepeda, a former park 
director who until recently served as an advisor to the fishing 
sector in the Galapagos.  He would not be ideal; some believe Cepeda 
would be biased towards the fishing sector over conservation. 
 
¶6. (U)The Galapagos Park Rangers Association has contacted our consular 
agent in the Galapagos to voice concern over the politicization of 
the park and requested USG intervention. 
 
¶7. (U)The Embassy has repeatedly cautioned the GOE that the director 
position must not be used as a political tool.  Jimmy Carter made the 
same points to Gutierrez during an August visit.  We support the full 
stability and protection of this unique environment.  The position of 
park director should be predicated solely upon qualified technical 
experience. 
 
USG Assistance 
-------------- 
 
¶8. (U)The Galapagos has had 8 park directors in the last 18 months. 
The constant turn-over has hampered the successful development of GOE 
conservation programs.  USG programs, foreign investment and 
multilateral donations have also been adversely affected.  The 
ultimate victim of this instability has been the Park and its 
welfare. 
 
¶9. (U)Fishermen from Baja California, Mexico are currently visiting 
Galapagos fishing cooperatives under an exchange program financed 
with USAID's marine reserve project.  This exchange is aimed at 
reducing conflict between environmental and fishing interests.  The 
Mexicans are sharing a world-class fisheries management model that 
has successfully bridged the interests of government, fisheries, and 
environmental groups.  Additionally, two new USG initiatives are 
under way: a) the creation of an environmental prosecutor unit in the 
Galapagos Province and b) strengthening local government institutions 
through the Galapagos Municipal Consortia. 
 
¶10. (U)USAID co-chairs the donor round table and a one-day meeting will 
take place on September 17 to discuss the Galapagos situation at the 
request of UNDP.  In addition to the international donor community, 
the Ministry of Environment has been invited to attend. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment:  Despite our best efforts, it appears the 
President may have decided to remove the Park Director.  Also, there 
are political motives for this change, as the President seeks to 
mollify the political opposition (in this case we suspect PSC leader 
Leon Febres Cordero) which is calling for his impeachment.  We will 
continue to press to ensure that any new director is qualified and 
focused on conservation.  End comment. 
 
KENNEY