04QUITO2235
ECUADOR'S RAIDS AGAINST TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Wed Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC, WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR'S RAIDS AGAINST TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
REF: QUITO 2198 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The police in Ecuador have conducted 75 raids 
(compared to five required in the action plan) aimed at 
eradicating trafficking in persons (TIP) and focusing on the 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  Minors were found 
in 25 raids and typically were released to family members. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  DINAPEN, a police unit whose works focuses on minors, 
provided Post with a clear report of all law enforcement 
activities conducted as part of the GOE's effort to combat 
TIP.  While the 60-day action plan required a minimum of five 
raids, the police conducted 75 raids from June 4 to August 7, 
¶2004.  The raids were conducted periodically in 14 of 22 
provinces.  Four of the eight provinces in which raids were 
not conducted are in eastern Ecuador with jungle terrain and 
almost no population.  Post's DHS representative said that, 
of the establishments listed on the report that he is 
familiar with, they all are prostitution houses. 
 
¶3.  DINAPEN encountered minors engaged in commercial sexual 
exploitation in 25 of the 75 establishments.  In an 
additional two cases, the minors had an immigration violation 
and it is not clear if they were involved in prostitution. 
The police found minors in the highest percentage of raids in 
the provinces of Azuay, Orellana, and Pichincha.  In cases 
where minors were found, often they were placed in the 
custody of their parents or other relatives.  In a few cases, 
rescued minors were taken to a shelter, a home for juveniles, 
and provincial government agencies designed to protect 
children. 
 
¶4.  Comment.  The GOE clearly made a large effort, given its 
limited resources, to combat TIP through law enforcement 
raids.  DINAPEN conducted 15 times the number of raids 
required in the action plan.  Furthermore, DINAPEN conducted 
some raids as early as June 4, before this year's TIP report 
was published.  Post will continue to follow up with DINAPEN 
and request additional reports on their law enforcement 
activities against TIP.  End Comment. 
KENNEY