04QUITO2980
TIER 2 WATCH LIST INTERIM ASSESSMENT
Fri Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: TIER 2 WATCH LIST INTERIM ASSESSMENT 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 228298 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 2595 
     ¶C. QUITO 2252 
     ¶D. QUITO 2773 
     ¶E. QUITO 1877 
     ¶F. QUITO 2861 
     ¶G. QUITO 2274 
     ¶H. QUITO 2874 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Ecuador has taken significant steps since June 
to combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  The government 
increased public awareness of the problem, reached out to 
source and destination countries, and established a national 
plan.  The GOE has cooperated with the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) to establish a center for TIP victims in 
Machala.  The government has trained police and other 
employees about TIP.  Congress debated the first draft of an 
anti-trafficking bill, and in the meantime judges have 
prosecuted child pornographers under existing laws.  The 
police have stepped up raids on nightclubs and bars where 
minors work as prostitutes, returning numerous TIP victims to 
their families.  Despite these steps forward, key challenges 
remain:  passing pending legislation in a distracted Congress 
and better victims services.  End Summary. 
 
Publicity, the MFA's Outreach, and a National Plan 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  Since the publication of our TIP report in June, the GOE 
publicized TIP, created an interagency committee to draft a 
national plan, and reached out to other governments.  On 
August 18, President Gutierrez issued a presidential decree 
that established a national plan and an interagency committee 
to combat trafficking (Ref G); he told the Ambassador on 
October 27 that combating TIP is one of his government's 
highest priorities (Ref H).  The decree tasked government 
agencies to cooperate to solve the problem and helped the 
government focus its efforts in a coordinated manner.  Former 
Minister of Government Raul Baca also spoke out publicly at a 
police training session against TIP on September 23 (Ref B). 
On August 12, the Ministry of Government (MoG) placed a 
front-page story in Ecuador's largest newspaper highlighting 
the ILO study and recent law enforcement activities aimed at 
combating commercial sexual exploitation of minors (CSEM) 
(Ref C).  During the week of October 4, 60 Voice of America 
radio stations in Ecuador aired an editorial against TIP (Ref 
D).  In early October, the MFA met with the embassies of Peru 
and Spain and discussed ways to combat trafficking rings. 
 
NGOs' Contributions and Training 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  The GOE has cooperated with various NGOs who are actively 
involved in fighting TIP.  The ILO will fund, at the GOE's 
request, a model facility for TIP victims in Machala in 
January 2005.  Plans are underway for similar projects in 
Quito and Guayaquil (Ref F).  In September and October, the 
MoG and ILO trained 250 police officers on CSEM (Ref C).  In 
November Geneva Global began its search for local partners in 
its small grants program, and Child Defense International met 
with the municipality of Santo Domingo on November 11 to sign 
the agreement to begin a project to fight commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors (CSEM).  That project included the 
establishment of a computerized control and monitoring system 
to track victims' cases and disseminate information regarding 
CSEM.  Conferences were held in Cuenca (June 30 - July 1) by 
the President of the Ecuadorian Supreme Court and in Quito 
(October 21 - 22) by the MFA to increase awareness of the 
problem and encourage coordination among the GOE, NGOs and 
international organizations (Refs E and F). 
 
Legislation, Prosecution, and Raids 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The government has introduced comprehensive anti-TIP 
legislation, which is pending in Congress; meanwhile the 
government has prosecuted the cases it can using existing 
legislation.  On October 20, Congress debated the first draft 
of the anti-TIP legislation (Ref F).  Congress is expected to 
approve the legislation in January 2005, according to the GOE 
and Congressional sources.  The American Bar Association is 
currently reviewing the draft legislation to ensure it meets 
international standards.  In a key TIP-related case, the 
perpetrators in the Burdet-Cedeno child pornography ring were 
convicted on four charges with sentences of 12 to 25 years 
(Refs D and F).  Ecuadorian citizen and U.S. legal permanent 
resident Angel Mariscal was also sentenced to 100 years on 7 
charges of child pornography (Ref D).  However, the case of 
AmCit Joseph Day is no longer moving forward; we believe he 
may be released if no substantive charges are brought against 
him. 
 
¶5.  Meanwhile, the police child protection unit, DINAPEN, 
dramatically stepped-up raids on nightclubs and discotheques 
to seek TIP victims.  From June 4 - August 7, the police 
engaged in law enforcement activities at 75 establishments 
and rescued minors in 25 of these locations, where 
prostitution is believed to occur.  From August 14 - October 
21, DINAPEN raided 202 nightclubs and bars  and found 246 
minors who are believed to have engaged in prostitution. 
 
¶6. Comment:  Ecuador has made significant progress on TIP but 
much more remains to be done.  The resignation of Government 
Minister Raul Baca on November 8 was a temporary setback for 
TIP efforts; Baca told the Ambassador on November 10 that he 
sought to continue to promote anti-TIP coordination in an 
advisory capacity and by involving the MFA and National 
Council on Women in the national planning process.  We will 
engage shortly with Baca's successor to promote continued 
anti-TIP progress.  National Council on Women Director Rocio 
Rosero will also play a key role in the interagency process; 
we will work with her and other committee members to ensure 
continued progress.  In sum, we believe Ecuador is on the 
right track and is committed at the highest levels to 
furthering its progress on this issue. 
KENNEY