04QUITO2704
ECUADOR TRYING TO STABILIZE GALAPAGOS PARK
Thu Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002704 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EC ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL SENV
SUBJECT: ECUADOR TRYING TO STABILIZE GALAPAGOS PARK 
MANAGEMENT 
 
REF: QUITO 2599 
 
¶1. Summary.  The Minister of the Environment, Fabian 
Valdivieso, is attempting to change the process for selecting 
directors of the Galapagos National Park (GNP), hoping that 
an independent procedure will purge politics from this 
position and stabilize park management.  The Minister 
proposes hiring independent consultants to devise a 
methodology for selecting potential candidates.  The Embassy 
is backing this approach, encouraging an independent and 
transparent selection process.  The Carter Center has invited 
Valdivieso to visit its facility to begin laying the 
groundwork for an international forum on the Galapagos that 
the center is planning for next year.  The situation in the 
GNP remains calm.  End Summary. 
 
Proposed Format for Selecting Park Directors 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Valdivieso has convened three meetings since announcing 
his initiative to depoliticize the directorship of the GNP 
(Reftel).  He proposes hiring independent consultants to 1) 
develop a manual for selecting, contracting, and evaluating 
directors of the GNP, 2) draft a Presidential decree 
incorporating the procedures manual into the selection 
process, and 3) develop a short list of candidates to replace 
the interim director.  The consultants will also produce a 
public relations strategy ensuring that there is sufficient 
transparency in and support of the selection process. 
 
¶3.  The proposed consulting team will be comprised of three 
people - a human resources specialist with at least five 
years of international experience, an administrative law 
specialist with knowledge of the norms and processes in the 
Galapagos, and a communications specialist also familiar with 
the problems of the Galapagos.  Donors are suggesting that 
Valdivieso use international consultants to maintain 
independence in the process. 
 
Embassy Promotes Stability from All Sides 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The Embassy has always pushed conservation as the 
overriding goal in the Galapagos.  We are promoting the use 
of international consultants in this selection process and 
independent selection of the director to stabilize the GNP. 
 
¶5.  The DCM met with Valdivieso to reiterate this point. 
Valdivieso commented that while the selection process is 
critical for stabilizing leadership in the GNP, the 
underlying problem also needs to be addressed - that is, the 
fundamental conflict between fishing and conservation. 
Industrial fishing cannot be sustained on the Galapagos and 
those living off its ever-diminishing resources need to be 
trained in other livelihoods.  The DCM agreed but pointed out 
that the world is watching and there is mounting pressure to 
quickly stabilize the current situation.  Valdivieso asked 
that we lobby President Gutierrez on his behalf in order to 
stabilize his position. 
 
¶6.  The Carter Center sent a letter to President Guiterrez 
proposing an international forum to discuss the Galapagos. 
The DCM urged Valdivieso to visit the Carter Center as soon 
as possible to begin laying the groundwork for this forum. 
The Carter Center is a neutral party that could bring 
together donors and other interested parties to devise a 
lasting solution for the Galapagos.  The DCM also encouraged 
Valdivieso to develop a public relations strategy to take 
advantage of this trip, as well as other successes that arise 
from this process. (Valdivieso tentatively plans to visit 
Atlanta the week of October 25.) 
 
¶7.  The Embassy is also encouraging other countries to engage 
the Ministry of the Environment on this topic.  German 
Embassy officials say they will soon begin bilateral 
negotiations with Ecuador and that management of the 
Galapagos will be an issue of discussion.  The Canadians and 
the British report that they are also pushing for stability 
and conservation. 
 
All Quiet on the Western Front 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  The truce between the fishermen and the GNP employees 
seems to be holding, due in large part to the presence of 
approximately 50 armed police at the GNP.   The Embassy is 
following the situation closely and will warn American 
Citizens that live in or around the GNP to leave the area 
should violence erupt. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  Valdivieso, while sincere and well qualified, is 
politically weak.  With President Gutierrez publicly and 
privately signaling a post-electoral cabinet adjustment, we 
fear Valdivieso may not be around long enough to oversee this 
process.  For this reason, we are advising him to visit the 
Carter Center in the hope that his visit may bolster his 
public standing and boost the selection process, and lay the 
groundwork for a definitive solution to the Galapagos problem. 
 
KENNEY