04TAIPEI4082
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S NATIONAL DEFENSE WHITE
Tue Dec 28 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 004082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S NATIONAL DEFENSE WHITE 
PAPER 
 
A) "Prevent Independence by All Means, No Hope For 
Negotiations [Between China and Taiwan]" 
 
Journalist Wang Li-juan wrote in the conservative, pro- 
unification "United Daily News" (12/28): 
 
"China Monday released its national defense white 
paper, in which the `negatively developing Taiwan 
independence power' is listed as an important factor to 
influence [China's] national security.  China proposed 
three strongly-worded `resolute' oppositions and one 
`never,' which are more harsh and more baldly stated 
than the `three conditions to use force against Taiwan' 
stated in its 2000 national defense white paper. 
 
"`Permanent refusal to negotiate' is not mentioned in 
the `conditions' to use force against Taiwan in this 
year's white paper.  However, the white paper proposed 
that the two sides across the Strait could only resume 
talks after the Taiwan authority accepts the `One 
China' principle and terminates separatist activities 
of Taiwan independence.  It is obvious that China by 
all means constrains Taiwan independence in its policy 
toward Taiwan, and China has no hope for future talks 
in the Taiwan Strait.." 
 
B) "The National Defense White Paper Is Another Card 
For China to Push For Anti-Secession" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
editorialized (12/28): 
 
".China's 2004 national defense white paper indicated 
that the persistent U.S. arms sale to Taiwan is sending 
a wrong signal [from the United States] to Taiwan.  It 
[the white paper] clearly pointed at the special U.S. 
arms procurement by Taiwan at the cost of more than 600 
billion NTD.  However, China did not mention the United 
States when saying [China] resolutely opposes `any 
country' forming any military alliance with Taiwan. 
The white paper also said China would keep a low 
profile and a cooperative attitude on its nuclear 
strategy.  These declarations are weaker than before 
and the meaning is that China seeks help from the 
United States, and China does not adopt a 
confrontational attitude with the United States. 
 
"Looking back on history, it is less than four years 
since China 2000 released its national defense white 
paper commenting on the Taiwan issue, hence, there is 
quite a change in China's policy toward Taiwan.  The 
fundamental nature of China's military threats toward 
Taiwan has not changed, but the contents of the 
comments and the adjustment in focus are closely 
correlated with political changes within Taiwan.  To be 
frank, the current deadlock in cross-Strait relations 
is not caused by any single factor from either side of 
the Taiwan Strait.  Tests in the future might be more 
grim, and the authorities on both sides of the Strait 
should face them with wisdom." 
 
PAAL