04TAIPEI3578
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 003578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
A)  "Change in the Nature of the Triangular 
Relationship between Washington, Beijing and Taipei" 
 
Journalist Wang Ming-yi said in the "My Views" column 
of the centrist, pro-status quo "China Times": 
 
". The Chen Shui-bian administration's national 
security team has evidently sensed that `cross-Strait 
stability and maintenance of the peaceful status quo in 
the Taiwan Strait have always been issues of common 
concern for the international community, ones in which 
the United States plays an essential role.'  This is 
[the team's] reflection and review of the mutual trust 
crisis between the United States and Taiwan.  But the 
question is: [U.S. President George W.] Bush's 
criticism of Taiwan leaders and [Secretary of State 
Colin] Powell's disregard of Taiwan's sovereign status 
did not come about simply because the Taiwan 
authorities have become `unpredictable friends' of 
Washington.  Instead, they are the result of a 
fundamental change in Washington's thinking in dealing 
with the Taiwan issue. 
 
"Neither side of the Taiwan Strait can possibly deny 
that the United States' national interests are the real 
variables that affect the cross-Strait situation. 
Lately, Washington has been playing a more proactive 
role in setting foot in cross-Strait issues.  It does 
not want to be a mere `facilitator'; instead, it wants 
to be an `arbitrator.'  Washington does not support 
Taiwan independence and is opposed to China's use of 
force against Taiwan.  The status quo of `peaceful 
confrontation' across the Taiwan Strait is, reasonably 
speaking, in the best interests of Washington. . 
 
"Sources said prior to Powell's visit to Beijing in 
late October, relevant think tanks in Washington had a 
closed-door meeting with State Department officials. 
In the meeting, a heavy-weight `pro-China' think tank 
person suggested that since the political situation in 
Taiwan headed by President Chen is full of 
`unpredictability,' Washington should seriously 
consider how to work with Beijing to `jointly handle' 
the Taiwan issue in an attempt to effectively control 
or prevent any `Taiwan variables' that might seriously 
endanger future Washington-Beijing ties.  When both 
[Taiwan's] friend and its rival have started to adopt a 
wait-and-see and cautious attitude toward the Taiwan 
authorities, it will be the biggest crisis for Taiwan's 
existence and development." 
 
B) "Why U.S., Japan Must Defend Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
editorialized (11/11): 
 
". Taiwan's strategic position is extremely important 
to both the United States and Japan.  Therefore, if 
China is able to take over Taiwan, Beijing will secure 
a virtual stranglehold over the Taiwan Strait and thus 
influence the security of Japan's crucial marine 
communication lines with Southeast Asia and the Middle 
East. 
 
"Therefore, it is strategically necessary for both 
Washington and Tokyo to join together and defend Taiwan 
in order to safeguard both Japan's national security 
and the interests of the U.S. in the Asia-Pacific 
region. 
 
"Therefore, the most urgent task facing Tokyo is to 
develop channels and methods with Washington to 
cooperate in the defense of the Taiwan Strait. 
Moreover, Japan's naval Self-Defense Forces should work 
hand in hand with Taiwan's navy to ensure the security 
of the seas surrounding Taiwan and thus ensure that the 
U.S. Navy can smoothly and rapidly send naval carrier 
task forces to Taiwan Strait in order to cope with an 
emergency situation." 
 
C) "On Friendship" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" said in an editorial (11/12): 
 
". In Taiwan's case, the `special friend' is the United 
States.  If it were acting in sheer self-interest, the 
U.S. would have abandoned Taiwan long ago.  Taiwan, to 
be quite honest, is an irritant between the U.S. and 
China - the relationship between the world's most 
powerful and it's [sic] most populous is something 
which is vital in foreign policy, and likely to be the 
century's most crucial bilateral relationship.  In 
truth, the U.S. State Department seems to view Taiwan 
just as that - an irritant.  Sometimes Taiwan seems to 
think that friendly is all one way - that the U.S. 
should aid Taiwan, without Taiwan doing anything in 
return. 
 
"When it comes to defense, the U.S. acts likes a friend 
- at times it speaks frankly as a friend would, but 
Taiwan often acts more like a customer in a marketplace 
than a friend, haggling over small details and not 
accepting what is a good deal without trying to beat 
the seller down. 
 
"Taiwan's friends in the U.S. are mainly in the 
Congress.  These people like and admire Taiwan as a 
brave and resourceful ally, but this patience at times 
must wear thin as well.  But like friends, they accept 
there will occasionally be differences of opinion.  But 
it is in the nature of friends to speak frankly, and 
when these friends speak, we should listen. ." 
 
KEEGAN