05ADANA209
ADANA CLO ACTIVITY REPORT
Fri Nov 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000209 
 
SIPDIS 
 
M/DGHR/FLO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TU ADANA
SUBJECT: ADANA CLO ACTIVITY REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 199877 
 
Section One: 
Management Officer:  Telside L Manson, FS-4, 40 hours per week 
 
Section Two: 
Additional CLO staff members: None 
 
Section Three: 
1) Agencies served by the CLO office under ICASS:  Department of 
State 
2) Breakdown of the post constituency: 
        ¶A. Employees at Post: 
                Marines: 0 
                Singles: 0 with children; 1 without children 
                Married: 2 with children; 0 without children 
                Individuals w/tandem assignments: 0 
 
                Total employees with children: 2 
                Total employees without children: 1 
                Total employees represented above: 3 
 
        ¶B. Family members (on orders): 
                Spouses: 2 at post; 0 away from post 
                Elder Family Members: 0 
                Children: 4 (total number in all categories below) 
                Ages 0 - 5: 2 
                Grades K - 5: 1 
                ¶1. Number of children attending the 
Office-of-Overseas-School-assisted school: 1 
                ¶2. Number of children attending another school at 
post: 0 
                ¶3. Number being home-schooled: 0 
                ¶4. Number attending school away from post, receiving 
education allowance: 0 
                ¶5. Number not living with parent at post, not 
receiving education allowance: 0 
                Total population Grades K - 5: 1 
 
                Grades 6 - 8:  0 
 
                Grades 9 - 12: 2 
                ¶1. Number of children attending the 
Office-of-Overseas-School-assisted school: 2 
                ¶2. Number of children attending another school at 
post: 0 
                ¶3. Number being home-schooled: 0 
                ¶4. Number attending school away from post, receiving 
education allowance: 0 
                ¶5. Number not living with parent at post, not 
receiving education allowance: 0 
                Total population Grades 9 - 12: 2 
 
                Family Members who are high school graduates but 
under the age of 21 (23 if still in college): 0 
                ¶1. Number at post: 0 
                ¶2. Number attending school away from post: 0 
                Total 1 + 2: 0 
 
                Total family members on orders at post: 6 
                Total family members on orders away from post: 0 
                Total family members represented above: 6 
 
        ¶C. Total number of Members of Household (not on orders): 0 
 
        ¶D. Total client population: (Add total employees to total 
family members and total members of household count): 9 
 
Section Four: 
        ¶A. Family Member Employment 
        -- Objective: To promote and facilitate family member 
employment inside and outside the mission, work agreement 
permitting.  If you are part of the SNAP pilot, please note any 
cooperative programs between the CLO and the LEA. 
        --None seeking employment. 
 
        ¶B. Crisis Management and Security Liaison 
        -- Objective: To provide a channel of information between 
community members and the official mission that raises security 
awareness and represents community security concerns. 
        -- Routine checks with both family members to remind them 
of security concerns. 
 
        ¶C. Education Liaison 
        -- Objective: To maintain contact with schools at post and 
provide resource information about education. 
        -- Provided advance information to incoming family 
regarding school liaison contact and website. 
 
        ¶D. Information and Resource Management 
        -- Objective: To gather and organize information so it can 
e distributed or available to mission community and FLO 
Washington. 
        -- Pass newsletters from nearby Incirlik Air Base to 
family members. 
 
        ¶E. Guidance and Referral 
        -- Objective: To listen to individual and collective 
concerns and offer appropriate resources and referrals.  (Please 
respect client confidentiality; no names or details should be 
disclosed that might identify an individual.  You may wish to 
focus on which resources have been identified for referrals.) 
        -- Been available to both family member to hear any 
concerns. 
 
        ¶F. Welcoming and Orientation 
        -- Objective: To assist the individual's adjustment to the 
new environment. 
        -- Requested language training funding for both incoming 
employee and spouse. 
        ¶G. Community Liaison 
        -- Objective: To maintain contact with official mission, 
host country and community groups (list routine meetings 
attended, boards of which CLO is a member and in what capacity, 
e.g., chair, non-voting member, etc.) 
        -- Member of the Turkish-American Women's Organization. 
 
        ¶H. Events Planning 
        -- Objective: To develop and implement programs for all 
segments of the mission population that introduce the host 
culture, maintain familiar American traditions or respond to 
needs expressed at post. 
        -- Hosted New Year party for staff and family members. 
 
Section Five: 
No TDYers at Post for the reporting period. 
No changes in CLO staffing or work hours. 
 
Section Six: 
        ¶A.  Overview of life at post: As a very small post (3 
Officers) lacking other diplomatic missions in the city, social 
life in Adana largely revolves around the nearby Incirlik Air 
Base, where regular community events are scheduled and some 
services are offered including:  pool, library, bowling alley, 
bar, exchange, commissary, and schools.  However, there are 
numerous places to visit within a few hours drive of Adana 
including beaches, skiing, hiking, historic sites, and mountain 
climbing. 
 
        ¶B. Significant changes in post demographics: Post Adana 
now has two families as opposed to last reporting period when 
there was only one family at post and two single officers. 
 
        ¶C. Increase/decrease in crime: None 
REID