05ADANA35
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR FEBRUARY 22, 2005
Wed Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR FEBRUARY 22, 2005 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for February 22, 
¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
ZAMAN / OZGUR GUNDEM / MILLIYET / HURRIYET / YENI SAFAK / 
EVRENSEL / SABAH:       The trial of four special operations team 
members, who were allegedly involved in the deaths of Ugur and 
Ahmet Kaymaz in November, started at the Mardin 2nd Penalty 
Court. Considering the security reasons and because of the fact 
that they are on duty, since as they have been reassigned to 
their posts in other cities, the team members stated that they 
would not attend the court hearing and requested from the court 
to submit their statements in writing. The security of the court 
hearing was maintained by 2000 police officers. Some of the 
Turkish Parliament's Human Rights Commission members, the leader 
of DEHAP, Tuncer Bakirhan, European Parliament member, Feleknaz 
Uca, and NGOs were present to watch the proceedings as well. A 
500-person group gathered in front of the Office of the Governor 
and shouted slogans in favor of Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   The tent-settlements (or -camps) that were set 
up after the earthquake hit Hakkari will be abolished and the 
tents will be reestablished at individual locations close to the 
buildings in which people face the severe risk of collapse. 
Removal of the tent camps disturbed some of the tent dwellers, 
who are especially fearful of the cracks caused by the quake in 
their houses. However, other people experiencing severe building 
damage welcomed the idea. 
BOLGE / OZGUR GUNDEM:   The intensity of the hostilities in 
Mersin have reportedly not decreased since Umit Gonultas was 
shot dead during the Feb 15 demonstrations that aimed to protest 
Ocalan's capture by Turkey six years ago. The riot police have 
blockaded various streets in the province since then, (according 
to Ozgur Gundem). DEHAP Provincial Youth Branches protested in 
front of the Mersin Department of Justice the shooting of 
Gonultas and demanded that the killers of Gonultas be found. 
 
 
RADIKAL:        The number of patients with pneumonia and bronchitis 
has increased by 120 percent in Tatvan in Bitlis province. The 
Chief Doctor of Tatvan Birth and Child Care Hospital reported 
that between January 1 and February 10, 2,773 children with 
respiratory inflammations, pneumonia and bronchitis have been 
brought to the hospital for treatment. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
 
¶1.      MILLIYET / EKSPRES / BOLGE / ZAMAN / TURKIYE:   Adana 
Chamber of Commerce will open the East Mediterranean Foreign 
Trade Center today to foster the international relationships of 
Cukurova Region's SMEs. Among the undertakings of the Center are 
providing advisory services to the SMEs with regard to national 
and international fairs and promoting the export opportunities 
available within the (Cukurova) region. 
 
¶2.      SABAH (GUNEY):  Saban Bas, Chairperson of the Adana 
Chamber of Commerce, expressed that the 1st Economic Cooperation 
Forum of Adana turned out to be a very fruitful event. According 
to Bas, the Forum's achievements beneficial to Adana's economy 
were the business ties established with the participant foreign 
businessmen, which are worth billions of dollars and the 
opportunity to discuss the economic problems of Adana with PM 
Erdogan. 
 
¶3.      SABAH (GUNEY):  During their meeting with PM Erdogan and 
the State Minister Kursat Tuzmen, Abdulkadir Konukoglu, Assembly 
Chairperson of the Gaziantep Chamber of Industry, Nejat Kocer, 
Chairperson of the Gaziantep Chamber of Industry and Mehmet 
Aslan, Chairperson of the Gaziantep Chamber of Commerce, 
submitted an alternative incentive program scheme to Erdogan. 
Mehmet Aslan reportedly pointed out to the grave fact that 
entrepreneurs are withdrawing their investment plans in 
Gaziantep and being attracted by Syria, such as (oppotunuities 
in) Aleppo. 
 
 
 
 
REID