05ANKARA4481
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, July 16-31,
Tue Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, July 16-31, 
2005 
 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. Published by Sabah on Sunday, July 17: 
 
  TITLE:  If an Imam would do this 
 
  BEGIN TEXT:  A former imam has been found to be a pimp. 
  53-year-old former imam Mutallip Var was arrested red- 
  handed for selling women. 
 
  "Yes, he sells us," accused one of three foreign women 
  that the former imam tried to sell to the gendarmerie. 
  The women said that Var sold them to men and received 
  money for it. 
 
  Former imam Mutallip Var was caught red-handed selling 
  three foreign women in Samsun.  Gendarmerie teams, acting 
  on information that women were being sold in the Milic 
  holiday resort region of Terme, contracted with Var, a 
  former imam, for three women for two hours for a price of 
  80,000 YTL.  The team, meeting with the imam and three 
  women, giving marked money, got into a car with the three 
  women and left the scene. 
 
  "I was only a broker" 
 
  The other team arrested the imam and his taxi driver in a 
  pine grove on the Milic River.  Var, who in 1975 was 
  excommunicated, refusing the charge while being 
  interrogated, said he was only a helper and for that got 
  20 million TL.  Var was released until his court case can 
  be heard.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by B92 News Serbia on Monday, July 18: 
 
     TITLE:  Progress in regional crime cooperation 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Belgrade-Monday-An agreement has been 
     signed in Belgrade which will result in better regional 
     cooperation in dealing with organized crime. 
 
     The agreement on funding the Secretariat of the South- 
     East Europe Prosecutors Advisory Group was signed by 
     Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic, the US ambassador to 
     Belgrade, Michael Polt, and the deputy head of the OSCE 
     Mission in Serbia-Montenegro, Douglas Wake. 
 
     The organization, which will be based in the Federal 
     Government building in Belgrade, is intended to enable 
     the provision of legal assistance to countries in the 
     region, such as assistance in investigation and pursuit 
     of international criminal groups who are involved in 
     organized crime and human trafficking.  The secretariat 
     is to have a total of thirteen members and Djordje 
     Mancic from Serbia-Montenegro has been nominated to 
     lead it. 
 
     Stojkovic said that after the signing that it was a 
     demonstration of the trust placed by the international 
     community in Serbia-Montenegro and emphasized that the 
     state organs would do everything possible to enable 
     prosecutions to function as they should. 
 
     Polt said that, with the establishment of the 
     secretariat, the state union had sent a signal to the 
     countries of the region that it was prepared for 
     cooperation. 
 
     State prosecutors of Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
     Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, Macedonia, Moldavia, 
     Romania, Slovenia, Turkey and Croatia join Serbia- 
     Montenegro in the initiative. 
 
     The organization was founded in Belgrade in December, 
     2003, on the initiative of Serbia-Montenegro.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by People's Daily Online 
(http://english.people.com.cn/) on Tuesday, July 19: 
 
     TITLE:  Prosecutors' organization opens its secretariat 
     in Belgrade 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A Southeast European prosecutors' 
     organization opened its secretariat in Belgrade on 
     Monday with the aim of helping prosecutors in the 
     region fight against organized crimes. 
 
     The secretariat of the South East Europe Prosecutors 
     Advisory Group (SEEPAG) was set up after the signing of 
     an agreement on financing between the Serbian Justice 
     Ministry, OSCE Mission to Serbia-Montenegro, and the US 
     Embassy in Belgrade. 
 
     The secretariat headed by Serbia-Montenegro Djordje 
     Mancic, would facilitate mutual legal assistance 
     between 12 Southeast Europe countries as well as the 
     assistance in the investigation and prosecution of 
     trans-border crime and human trafficking. 
 
     Serbian Minister of Justice Zoran Stojkovic said the 
     signing of the agreement was proof of trust in Serbia- 
     Montenegro and the Serbian government and their 
     readiness to combat organized crime.  It also shows 
     that the country has enough resources to create a 
     communication center for all 12 prosecutors from the 
     region. 
 
     SEEPAG is a multinational mechanism that facilitates 
     cooperation among the prosecutors from Albania, Bosnia- 
     Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Hungary, 
     Macedonia, Moldova, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro, 
     Slovenia and Turkey.  It was formed in December 2003 at 
     the initiative of Serbia-Montenegro.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by Athens News Agency on Friday, July 22: 
 
     TITLE:  Greek Disband Ring of Immigrant Smugglers, Make 
     Four Arrests 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSCRIBED TEXT:  Police have disbanded an 
     organized ring of immigrant smugglers, who used to 
     bring illegal immigrants from Asian countries into 
     Greece, and arrested four Iranians on Thursday aged 
     between 22 and 31. 
 
     The four, together with another Iranian and an Afghani 
     who are still at large, brought 12 illegal immigrants 
     from Turkey in a speedboat and kept them captive in an 
     apartment until payment was made of an amount ranging 
     between 1,000 and 4,000 euros each, which had been 
     agreed for their transfer. 
 
     The illegal immigrants were being kept under appalling 
     conditions, they were given little food and were being 
     threatened to oblige their relatives to pay their debts 
     to enable them to be freed. 
 
     Police found seven illegal immigrants in the apartment, 
     whom they freed, while investigations are continuing 
     for the arrest of the remaining members of the ring. 
     END FBIS TRANSCRIBED TEXT. 
 
¶6.  Published by Hurriyet on Friday, July 29: 
 
     TITLE:  Thirty Thousand Deported for Prostitution in a 
     Decade 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Turkish National Police responded with 
     figures to the U.S. State Department and the UN, which 
     accused the Turkish police of not fighting enough 
     against human trafficking. 
 
     According to the statistics of the TNP, from 1996 to 
     2005 (June), a total of 30,073 foreign women who were 
     involved in prostitution were deported. 
 
     In 2004, 239 women from 11 neighboring countries who 
     were forced into prostitution were saved from the hands 
     of human traffickers.  This figure for the first six 
     months of 2005 was 126 from 12 neighboring countries. 
 
     In 2004, 227 human traffickers were captured and action 
     was taken against them.  This figure was 251 for 2005. 
 
     Sixty-seven of the 78 people who were captured for 
     human trafficking and put in jail were discharged to be 
     tried on release.  Five foreigners were deported and 63 
     people are wanted. 
     In the last five years a total of 241 foreign women 
     were deported for carrying contagious diseases.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Published by Radikal on Friday, July 29: 
     TITLE:  Turkey Turns Into Prostitution Center 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Turkish National Police data confirmed 
     the UN and U.S. reports that noted that a great 
     majority of women kidnapped for prostitution were 
     employed in Turkey. According to the statistics of the 
     TNP, in a decade more than 30,000 foreign women were 
     captured and deported for being involved in 
     prostitution. 
 
     According to statistics of the TNP Foreigners, Borders 
     and Asylum Department, the number of foreign women who 
     were deported for prostitution were: 
     1996      3069 
     1997      4083 
     1998      4920 
     1999      3643 
     2000      3529 
     2001      3504 
     2002      2559 
     2003      1775 
     2004      1990 
     2005      1001 
 
     The total number of foreign women who were captured for 
     prostitution in the past decade was 30,073. 
 
     In the last five years 2372 foreign women were captured 
     in Trabzon and 241 of them were carrying contagious 
     diseases. 
 
     As a result of the work jointly performed in the last 
     two years with the source countries and NGOs, 365 
     foreign women were saved from prostitution.  Among them 
     were 91 Moldavians, 71 Russians, 60 Ukrainians, 31 
     Kyrgyz, 26 Azeris, 21 Georgians, 18 Romanians, 14 
     Kazakh, 14 Uzbek, eight Belarusian, one Bulgarian, one 
     Iranian and four Turkomans. 
 
     Judicial action was taken against 251 people who forced 
     foreign women into prostitution and 78 of them were 
     arrested while 67 of them were released pending trial. 
 
     Turkey, which has turned into a destination country in 
     women trafficking for prostitution, has been a subject 
     to two separate reports by the UN and the U.S. this 
     year. 
 
     According to the UN report, 40 percent of the kidnapped 
     women for prostitution were forced to work in Istanbul, 
     while 16 percent in Antalya and Ankara. 
 
     In the U.S. "Human Trafficking Report" Turkey was 
     listed in Tier 2 among states that have turned into 
     destination countries.  END TEXT. 
 
MCELDOWNEY