05ANKARA6838
Visit to Turkey by USAID Avian Influenza Official
Mon Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RUS, OES/STC, EB/TPP/ATP, EB/TPP/BTA 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USAID FOR TROSTLE 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER/PBUDASHEWITZ 
FAS FOR ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
VIENNA PASS APHIS 
BRUSSELS PASS APHIS/FERNANDEZ 
GENEVA PASS HEALTH ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR KPAO TBIO AMED TU CASC
SUBJECT:  Visit to Turkey by USAID Avian Influenza Official 
 
¶1.  Summary.   In the month since the outbreak of Avian 
Influenza in Turkey, international and bilateral partners 
have been examining Turkey's response as a possible model 
for other countries and exploring possible deficient areas 
in which to collaborate with Turkey in case of any future 
outbreaks.  Although Turkey's response to the outbreak was 
well regarded, the government's ability to respond to 
multiple outbreaks, the need to educate both farmers and 
consumers on the virus and lack of supra-governmental 
coordination need to be addressed, hopefully before any new 
outbreaks occur.  Embassy recommends that USAID work through 
Embassy to focus support to Turkey on 
surveillance/containment training and communication. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
Visit By USDAID Official 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  On November 15 and 16, the Deputy Director of USAID's 
Avian and Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Response Unit, Dr. 
Murray Trostle, and EmOffs discussed the current situation 
and opportunities to collaborate with Turkish officials in 
the Ministries of Agriculture and Health, Turkish private 
poultry sector representatives as well as International 
Organizations like the World Bank and FAO and the EU Mission 
to Turkey.  Since the outbreak, Turkey has been the focus of 
many other delegations seeking information and supporting 
coordination efforts.   The EU, World Bank and FAO have sent 
delegations to Turkey recently, Thailand sent AI speakers 
during the past two weeks and Canada plans to send 3 
veterinarians to Turkey in the coming week. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A Short Recap of the Outbreak 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Avian Influenza was first detected on a private turkey 
farm in the northwestern region of Balikesir, Turkey on 
October 1 with H5N1 confirmed on October 7.  By all accounts 
the government's response to the outbreak was effective and 
swift.   The affected area was quarantined, all birds in the 
area were culled and the information provided to the public 
was clear and definitive.  In addition, compensation to 
farmers was expedited, which will hopefully encourage 
reporting of any future outbreaks.  There have been no human 
cases of infection and the virus remains a bird disease at 
this time. 
 
------------------- 
Still Some Concerns 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  Despite the excellent response by the Turkish government 
to the outbreak, a number of concerns still exist and were 
corroborated by others during many of Dr. Trostle's 
meetings.  Of the concerns noted: 
--The need for greater surveillance of migratory birds. 
--The need for greater coordination among various Ministries 
in the Turkish government and the establishment of a supra- 
ministerial with authority to direct all agencies to act in 
the case of other outbreaks or a human pandemic. 
--The need for a more thorough surveillance and reporting 
system, particularly from small farms. 
--The availability of an adequate compensation fund (either 
monetary or in-kind), which would encourage small farm- 
holders to report any outbreaks. 
--The need for some sort of public education system, 
providing clear and accurate information to producers as 
well as consumers on the virus. 
--The need for training veterinarians for rapid containment, 
particularly in managing multiple outbreaks. 
 
¶5.  Other organizations noted that the Turkish government 
has also requested specific equipment to combat AI.  In 
particular, for agriculture, the government has requested 
incinerators to dispose of large numbers of animals, animal 
vaccines, protective equipment for workers, and upgrading of 
diagnostic equipment.  On the health side, the government is 
requesting protective equipment for health workers and 
supplies of antivirals including Tamiflu.  Most of the 
equipment and medicines will be provided under existing 
programs operated by the World Bank and European Union. 
Obviously, should the situation shift from containing a 
strictly animal disease to a pandemic affecting humans, 
these needs will change. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Possible Avenues of Collaboration 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Given the level of activity already focused on Turkey 
some sort of information sharing among the GOT, IO's and 
Embassies will be needed in order to avoid any redundancy in 
programs. The World Bank may be best suited for this role 
given their presence in Turkey.  For the United States, Dr. 
Trostle and Embassy State and FAS representatives believe 
that some form of technical assistance would be most useful 
to complement some of the work of other countries and 
organizations.  In particular, Post has the following 
suggestions with the caveat that these may change should the 
situation warrant. 
 
--------------------------- 
A Real Need for Training... 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7.  First, Turkey would benefit from some type of technical 
training for local veterinarians and farmers.  Most 
officials indicated that knowledge levels at central 
government offices, particularly in Ankara, Istanbul and 
Izmir were sufficient, but that in more rural areas there 
has been little dissemination of information.  As a result, 
some recurring training in several areas of the country 
could be beneficial in stemming any animal outbreaks.  Post 
could draw effectively on farmers unions, poultry 
associations and Ministry contacts to disseminate 
information and organize this effort.  Currently, many 
countries are sending random speakers to the country.  Post 
therefore emphasizes the need for recurring efforts.  This 
would hopefully encourage the development of a mechanism to 
address any future outbreaks of AI or other diseases.  Post 
also believes strongly that in-country training would be 
much more effective in reaching a larger portion of the 
population. 
 
---------------------- 
..And Public Education 
---------------------- 
 
¶8.  Second, we believe that the creation of a public 
education program is essential.  Although, only 9000 birds 
had to be culled as a result of the one outbreak, poultry 
consumption decreased by 90 percent following the outbreak 
and is currently only 50 percent of normal.  In addition, 
small and subsistence farmers need to be educated on the 
need for reporting and the proper steps that should be taken 
in case of any bird deaths.  One possibility in addressing 
this issue would be to draw on information used worldwide on 
the outbreak, which could be tailored to the Turkish needs. 
The information could be disseminated through various local 
organizations. 
 
-------------------------- 
Comment: Turkey as a Model 
-------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Turkey could serve as a model for many countries, 
particularly in the region, in responding to this crisis. 
Any collaborative efforts could benefit ongoing efforts in 
other countries, particularly those at the same level of 
development.  Although the reaction by government officials 
was good, it is the combined efforts by Turkey's private and 
public sector, which stand out.  Fostering this cooperation 
and sustaining future efforts could encourage other 
countries in this 
effort. 
 
¶10. Embassy PA arranced for Mr. Trostle to conduct an 
interview with the Anatolian News Agency to note U.S.-Turkey 
collaboration on this issue, as part of overall bilateral 
relationship. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY