05ANKARA1010
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001010 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
PM Erdogan: US, Turkey Understand Each Other - Sabah 
Schroeder to Bush: Iran Is Not Like Iraq - Hurriyet 
Bush, Schroeder Agree: Iran's Nukes Won't Be Allowed - 
Milliyet 
Germany Provides Bush Support - Turkiye 
US Grants $9 Million for Education - Sabah 
Turkey Not Invited to Aid to Palestine Conference in London 
- Milliyet 
Pope Says Assassination Attempt on Him Backed By the Soviet 
Ideology - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Erdogan Issues Warm Message: US Is Our Ally - Radikal 
Washington Awaits Ankara's Response on Use of Incirlik 
Airbase - Cumhuriyet 
US Grant Supports Turkish Schools - Radikal 
Bush Thanks Germany, Warns Iran, Syria - Zaman 
77 Percent of Germans Do Not Trust Bush - Yeni Safak 
Kurds, Turkmen, Sunnis Fully Support Jaafari - Yeni Safak 
Bush Sends Condolences to Iran, Offers Help - Cumhuriyet 
81 Percent of Americans Prefer a Woman President - 
Cumhuriyet 
Lebanese PM Ready to Resign - Radikal 
Interpol Warns of Biological Attack By Al-Qaida - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
PM Erdogan Confident of Strong Ties With US:  PM Tayyip 
Erdogan said Turkey maintains friendly relations with the 
United States.  Erdogan told an AK Party group meeting on 
Wednesday that communication problems that emerged 
sporadically between friendly allies will not harm bilateral 
ties.  He said Turkey's interests with regard to regional 
peace necessitated that communication channels be kept open. 
`We have always stated that we want a democratic and 
integrated Iraq in which Iraqi people can use their right to 
self-administration,' Erdogan noted, adding that Turkey 
expected coalition forces to restore peace and stability in 
Iraq.  Erdogan later told a private all-news channel that 
the presence of Turkish contractors in Iraq indicated one 
fact: Cooperation and togetherness with the US. 
"Cumhuriyet" claims that Erdogan's remarks claiming strong 
ties with the US brought only limited relief to the strained 
relations between Ankara and Washington.  US sources 
allegedly told the paper that keeping US-Turkey relations on 
firm ground would take time, and that it depended on a 
steadfast commitment by PM Erdogan. 
 
US Awaits Turkey's Response on Use of Incirlik Airbase:  The 
US is waiting for Turkey's response to an application for 
the use of Incirlik Airbase as a logistical cargo hub for 
delivering equipment to American operations in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, writes "Cumhuriyet."  MFA spokesman Namik Tan 
said at a weekly press conference that the request was being 
evaluated.  The AK Party government is planning to approve 
the US request under an earlier cabinet decision made in 
line with UN resolutions on Iraq, "Cumhuriyet" speculates. 
However, the Turkish government is afraid of public 
reaction, and is worried that such a shift will diminish 
Turkey's border trade with Iraq, says the paper. 
 
Erdogan Advisor Sees No Tension in Ties With US:  Turkey-US 
Parliamentary Friendship Group chairman and PM Tayyip 
Erdogan's advisor Egemen Bagis stressed to a general 
assembly of the Turkish-American Business Council the 
significance of Turkey-US relations: `There is no strain in 
bilateral ties.  Both countries collaborate in the Balkans, 
the Middle East and the Caucusus.'  Bagis noted that PM 
Erdogan, few days after the March 1 rejection of deployment 
of US troops in Iraq through Turkish soil, had taken a 
significant political risk by convincing the parliament to 
open Turkish airspace to US aircraft.  Turkey later provided 
significant logistical support to coalition forces, Bagis 
added.  On the Bush-Erdogan meeting at the NATO summit in 
Brussels Tuesday, Bagis said both leaders understood and 
respected one another's sensitivities.  He also said that 
Turkey's `sensitivities' on US actions in Iraq are no 
greater than those of other European and Middle Eastern 
countries. 
 
Turkish Delegation to Meet Talabani:  A Turkish delegation 
of senior officials from the MFA and TGS will travel to Iraq 
today to meet with Jalal Talabani, "Hurriyet" reports.  Both 
Turkey and Iraq want the visit to remain discreet, claims 
the paper.  The Turkish delegation, headed by Iraq Special 
Envoy Osman Koruturk, went to Diyarbakir Wednesday and will 
proceed to northern Iraq today.  Turks will warn Talabani 
against `provocative' statements on Iraq's territorial and 
political unity and on the status of Kirkuk, says the paper. 
Talabani will be also told that if elected president, he 
should reach out to all Iraqi people, including the Sunnis, 
according to "Hurriyet."  On Wednesday, MFA Spokesman Namik 
Tan spoke positively of Talabani and of Ibrahim Jaafari, the 
leading candidate for Iraq prime minister.  `They are both 
experienced statesmen who know Turkey well,' Tan said, 
adding that Jaafari held `fruitful' talks with PM Erdogan 
and FM Gul during his visit to Ankara in December. 
 
US Grant for Turkish Schoolchildren:  US Ambassador Eric 
Edelman paid a visit to an elementary school in Ankara 
Wednesday to see the use of a $9 million US loan given to a 
World Bank project for reducing social risks in Turkey, 
papers report.  Ambassador Edelman was accompanied by the 
Minister of Education Huseyin Celik.  `US-Turkey 
relationship is one of shared values and shared principles,' 
Edelman said, and stressed that every child should have the 
opportunity, no matter what their social, religious or 
ethnic background, to have the best possible education. 
Minister Celik expressed gratitude to Edelman for the grant, 
and said that Turkey had no strain in ties with the US, a 
country which is a Turkish partner and ally, papers report. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Transatlantic Relations 
 
"The US and Europe" 
Hadi Uluengin comments in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (2/24): 
"It seems President Bush recognized the importance and value 
of Europe during his second term.  His trip demonstrates his 
intention to focus on European political and strategic 
issues. . The meeting between Bush and Chirac not only 
improved bilateral relations but indicated the change in the 
Bush administration's approach to major issues such as Iraq, 
Iran, and Syria.  Bush demonstrated a style of leadership 
that includes working with his European partners.  Chirac 
also presented a flexible stance.  It is also important that 
Bush touched on Middle East issues, particularly the need 
for a Palestinian state. . A conclusion can be drawn, with 
cautious optimism, in the aftermath of the Bush visit to 
Europe: during his second term, President Bush seems ready 
to work for the normalization of transatlantic relations. 
This is a positive development that benefits all humanity." 
"How to Improve the Relations" 
Sami Kohen opines in the mass appeal Milliyet (2/24): 
"Apparently the growing debate about `anti-Americanism' in 
Turkey have caused serious disturbances in both Washington 
and Ankara.  Officials are now trying to ease tensions over 
this issue.  Naturally, everyone who understand the 
importance of US-Turkey relations finds this initiative 
useful.  It is too much, however, to expect the elimination 
of an anti-American  atmosphere in Turkey overnight.  There 
are marginal circles in Turkey who dislike the US because of 
its ideological obsessions.  In addition, it will take 
longer to eliminate the anti-American sentiment that grew up 
within the general public as a result of the Bush 
Administration's policies.  Media, NGOs, politicians, and 
government officials in both countries have a great 
responsibility to ease the tension in bilateral relations. 
No doubt, the Turkish people are disappointed that the US 
did not fulfill their expectations in northern Iraq and the 
fight against PKK terrorism.  These factors play an 
important role in anti-American sentiments.  However, these 
problems cannot be solved by creating hostile feelings 
toward the US.  The only solution lies in acting with common 
sense and restraint and continuing our cooperation." 
 
"Did Bush Convince Europe?" 
Ibrahim Karagul argues in the Islamist "Yeni Safak" (2/24): 
"Europeans had certain objections regarding Bush's policies. 
In the aftermath of the Bush visit to Europe, there is no 
significant change in those reservations.  Unlike the Bush 
administration, European leaders such as Schroeder and 
Chirac continue to defend the importance of the United 
Nations and the need for reform within NATO in order for the 
Europeans to play a decisive role in global affairs. 
European leaders continue to express uneasiness over US 
influence in eastern Europe.  . The differences will never 
come to an end unless the US gives up vying for sole global 
leadership.  Those who expect better relations between the 
US and Europe will have to wait for a long time.  President 
Bush's visit to Europe was a failure.  We can only expect 
growing anti-American sentiment in Europe even more than 
before." 
 
EDELMAN