05ANKARA5157
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 005157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Azerbaijan Supports `TRNC' Despite Greek Pressure - Hurriyet 
Israel, Pakistan Handshake in Istanbul - Hurriyet 
EU Postpones Vote on Counter-Declaration - Hurriyet 
Turkey Criticized on Pamuk Case - Hurriyet 
Historic Summit in Istanbul - Milliyet 
Gul: We will not Open Our Ports to Greek Cypriots - Milliyet 
Bomb Explosion Kills Terrorist in Bursa - Milliyet 
Cyprus Pressure at EU Summit - Sabah 
First Women Religious Affairs Officials Appointed - Milliyet 
No Obstacles Before October 3 Accession Talks - Milliyet 
PKK Gains Supporters in Europe - Aksam 
A New Role for Turkey in the Middle East - Vatan 
EU Counter-Declaration Postponed Until Next Week - Vatan 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
EU Does Not Present Turkey With New Conditions - Radikal 
Denmark Responds to General Buyukanit on Roj-TV - Radikal 
Gul: Turkey will not Allow Itself to be Exploited -Radikal 
EU Pressures Ankara to Recognize Cyprus - Cumhuriyet 
Denmark Waits for Evidence on Roj-TV - Cumhuriyet 
Sakra Had Been Planning to Meet Suicide Bombers in Istanbul 
- Zaman 
 
BRIEFING 
 
EU Accession:  All papers today gave extensive coverage to 
yesterday's meeting of EU foreign ministers in Wales.  The 
ministers are reportedly working on a declaration that would 
increase pressure on Turkey to opens its ports and airports 
to Greek Cypriots and, ultimately, to recognize Cyprus. 
"Hurriyet" reports that France is insisting on Turkey's full 
recognition of Cyprus, but adds that the French say they are 
not planning to block the start of EU accession talks with 
Turkey now scheduled for October 3. "Sabah" claims that the 
talks have reached an impasse over the Cyprus issue, thereby 
delaying the release of the counter-declaration for at least 
a week.  At a press conference prior to his departure for 
the UK, Gul said that `Turkey has fulfilled all the 
objective criteria for the start of  negotiations, and now 
expects EU members to keep the promises they made on 
December 17.  I believe that negotiations will begin on 
October 3 as planned.'  "Turkiye" and "Radikal" quote FM Gul 
as saying that `no one should use Turkey for their domestic 
political aims.  We will not allow Turkey to be exploited by 
anyone.'  Gul added that `things that are expected from full 
members of the EU should not be expected of those in the 
process of seeking membership.  Ports and airports are part 
of the service sector.  Everyone knows the meaning of the 
Customs Union.'  Turkish dailies report that Prime Minister 
Erdogan, speaking during his visit to Italy, reiterated 
yesterday that Turkey will not accept any new conditions for 
the start of talks with the EU. 
 
Jones-Abizaid Visit:  "Cumhuriyet" reports that CENTCOM 
Commander General John Abizaid and EUCOM Commander General 
James Jones will visit Ankara September 8-9 to discuss the 
PKK presence in Iraq with Turkish military leaders.  Citing 
diplomatic sources, the paper claims that the Turkish side 
is preparing a report to present to the generals detailing 
PKK activities in Iraq, and urging the United States to 
prevent PKK infiltration from Iraq into Turkey and to `clean 
out' PKK camps in the Kandil Mountains. 
Arinc Speaks on "Kurdish Problem":  Parliament Speaker 
Bulent Arinc said that people should become hung up on the 
term `Kurdish problem,' which the Prime Minister mentioned 
during his recent visit to Diyarbakir.  `Turkey has a 
Kurdish problem, or a terrorism problem, or a southeast 
problem,' the speaker said.  `The important thing is that we 
need to take courageous measure to resolve it,' he added. 
Arinc said that such measures should include `more freedom 
and more democracy.' 
 
Denmark Waits for Evidence on Roj TV:  Several  papers 
report that Danish Ambassador Christian Hoppe said that 
Turkey had never approached him with a complaint about Roj- 
TV, which is alleged to have affiliations with the PKK and 
broadcasts from denmark.  Ambassador Hoppe stressed that 
Denmark recognizes that the PKK is a terrorist organization, 
and said his country is open to talks with Turkey regarding 
ROJ-TV if it is shown to be a mouthpiece for the PKK. 
 
The Hizbullah Debate:  "Hurriyet" and "Milliyet" report 
about the ongoing debate over the origins of Turkish 
Hizbullah follwing a claim by Turkish Air Force Commander 
General Faruk Comert that he had warned the governor of 
Diyarbakir back in the 1990s that it was dangerous for the 
state to use Hizbullah against the PKK.  Former Interior 
Ministry undersecretary Muzaffer Ecemis rejected Comert's 
claims, pointing out that he had been the governor in 
Diyarbakir during the period under discussion.  Ecemis 
denied that he had been visited or warned by General Comert. 
Ecemis said that the state has its own forces to fight 
against terrorist organizations, and would never use one 
terrorist organization against another. 
 
Terror in Bursa:  "Milliyet" reports that a 27-year-old man 
died in bomb blast when the explosives he was carrying 
detonated before he could reach his intended target.  The 
man, identified as Bulent Akcicek, was apparently planning 
to place the bomb in a nearby metro station.  Police said 
that Akcicek was affiliated with the Selef Group, an 
organization with ties to al-Qaida that probably played a 
role in the Istanbul bombings of November 2003. 
 
PKK Cultural Activities in Europe:  "Aksam" reports on its 
front page that the PKK is stepping up its social and 
cultural activities in European countries at the same time 
it is increaing its bloody attacks in Turkey.  For example, 
the PKK is organizing a bicycle tour in Germany under the 
slogan `Free Ocalan.'  Kurdish associations have arranged a 
football tournament and a march from Brussels to Cologne to 
raise funds for the `free Ocalan' campaign.  Remzi Kartal, a 
suspected PKK leader who is wanted by Interpol, was present 
for the start of the march. 
 
Israel-Pakistan Meeting in Istanbul:  All papers report on 
the meeting held yesterday in Istanbul between the foreign 
ministers of Israel and Pakistan.  "Milliyet" notes that 
this was the first ever high-level diplomatic meeting 
between the two countries.  Turkish State Minister Mehmet 
Aydin and Prime Ministry advisor Egemen Bagis hosted the 
meeting on behalf of PM Erdogan.  "Sabah" says the meeting 
represents an important step for peace in Middle East. 
"Radikal" claims that the meeting was the result of a `two- 
year'effort' by Prime Minister Erdogan to mediate open 
diplomatic contact between the two countries.  "Vatan" also 
praises Turkey's role as a mediator' between two countries 
that have remained hostile to one another 57 years.  Papers 
highlight international press coverage of the meeting, 
stressing in particular the role played by Turkey as a 
`bridge of peace' in the Middle East. 
 
Orhan Pamuk Case:  "Hurriyet" reports that Turkey is facing 
growing criticism over its decision to bring criminal 
charges against the renowned novelist Orhan Pamuk.  The 
International Writers' Union (PEN) said in an open letter 
that `this is not the proper approach for a country trying 
to gain access to the European Union.'  Meanwhile, 
"Hurriyet" reports that Pamuk will likely be tried under the 
Turkey's old criminal code, as his comments were made before 
the recent changes took effect.  Consequently, he would face 
a maximum of one year in prison if convicted, not three 
years as initially reported. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Hurricane Katrina; Egypt Elections 
 
"More Powerful than the Superpower" 
Sami Kohen commented in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (9/2): 
"Hurricane Katrina demonstrated the power of nature, and 
left even the US superpower helpless.  But the US has enough 
resources and the capability to limit the effects of the 
hurricane.  It is expected that the country's wealth will 
lay the ground for the victims to return to their normal 
lives within a reasonable time frame. . On the other hand, 
hurricane Katrina has had a serious impact on the US 
economy.  The estimated cost of damage is around 25-30 
billion dollars, enough to create a negative impact on the 
US economy, which is already going through a difficult 
period because of the Iraq war.  The Bush administration has 
decided to use some of the strategic oil reserves, but a 
significant decline of oil prices from the current 70 dollar 
level seems unlikely.  The impact of the hurricane on the 
American economy will create aftershocks on the world 
economy, including in Turkey.  . The hurricane has also 
revealed another side of the US as well -- the country's 
overlooked problems of poverty and unemployment.  Global 
warming is also a problem that the Bush administration 
continues to ignore.  There is one more fact that should 
tell something:  Washington could not answer the calls from 
the three hardest-hit states for more security personnel to 
serve in the disaster area, because most of these units' 
personnel are currently serving in Iraq." 
 
"The Disaster Teaches Many Lessons" 
Hakan Celik argued in the mass appeal-sensational "Posta" 
(9/2): "Hurricane Katrina has left the superpower in a 
helpless situation.  The only thing the US could do was to 
give an early warning for evacuation.  There are many 
lessons to take from this, especially for those who force 
ecological change in nature.  The US is one of them. 
Rapidly growing industrialization causes atmospheric gas 
emissions, which turn the global climate balance upside- 
down.  . The Bush administration refused to sign the Kyoto 
agreement, and seemed not eager to join steps for 
environmental protection until hurricane Katrina.  If the 
hurricane cannot push the Bush administration to change its 
environmental policy, there will be more environmental 
disasters ahead for humanity." 
 
"Mubarak and Egypt" 
Erhan Basyurt wrote in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(9/2): "Egypt continues to be the most influential and the 
most strategically-located Arab country in the Middle East. 
With its 3,000 years of history, Egypt is currently on the 
verge of organizing a presidential election with multiple 
candidates for the first time in its history. . The 
democratization goal of the BMENAI is one of the reasons for 
this development in Egypt.  A democratic transformation in 
Egypt could create an impact on the entire Arab, and 
ultimately lead to an acceleration of the democratization 
process.   The September elections in Egypt will be historic 
both for that country and for the Middle East.  But it will 
be disappointing both for Egyptians and the international 
community if Hosni Mubarak were to be reelected." 
 
MCELDOWNEY