05ANKARA3181
PSI: TURKEY PRESS RELEASE TO MARK 2ND ANNIVERSARY
Tue Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071357Z Jun 05UNCLAS ANKARA 003181 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL TU
SUBJECT: PSI: TURKEY PRESS RELEASE TO MARK 2ND ANNIVERSARY 
OF PSI 
 
 
¶1.  The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs marked the 2nd 
Anniversary of the Proliferation Security Initiative with a 
formal press release expressing Turkey's support of this 
important initiative along with the government's commitment 
to host a PSI exercise in the spring of 2006.  This release 
was provided to all major press outlets in Turkey and 
reported in news reports. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of Press Release: 
 
N0: 90- May 31, 2005, announcement on the occasion of 2nd 
anniversary of the Proliferation Security Initiative 
 
PSI (Proliferation Security Initiative) was launched by 11 
countries 2 years ago on May 31, 2003.  Turkey announced its 
support to the Initiative, which was consolidated on December 
2003 within the framework of the UNSC Resolution 1540 dated 
April 28, 2004 calling member states to take precautionary 
measures against illegal trade of WMD, to strength their 
national controls and legislation on the matter and to 
develop international cooperation. 
 
Important improvements have been shown since the 
implementation of this Initiative aiming at filling in gaps 
of the current international agreements for nonproliferation 
of WMD, launchers and other related materials, the control 
regimes and national export control systems.  Number of 
states supporting this Initiative is more that 60.  They 
adopted the "Paris Interdiction Principles", the primary 
document of this Initiative containing introdiction 
information. 
 
Turkey has been following up and supporting activities 
conducted within the framework of this Initiative, including 
interdiction operations.  Our country, at the same time, has 
taken necessary steps in improving coordination between 
related institutions and making arrangements in domestic law 
in light of UNSC Resolution 1540 and PSI implementations.  We 
aim at increasing our contribution to this Initiative in the 
coming years.  Within this context, we have decided on 
hosting land/air/sea exercise in the East Mediterranean in 
¶2006.  Related activities for this event are being carried 
out by the TGS along with other institutions. 
 
Turkey gives great importance to make contributions to the 
PSI implementations, which constitute considerable dimension 
of the international community's fight against terrorism. 
Being aware of the importance of international cooperation in 
fight against terrorism, our country will continue with its 
endeavors in all platforms on the matter. 
 
End text. 
MOORE