05ANKARA4490
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 004490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 2, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Ankara Urges US to Take Concrete Steps Against PKK - Sabah 
US Supports Ecumenical Patriarchate - Milliyet 
Iraqi Kurds Press for Kirkuk, Independence - Hurriyet 
US Loses Its Most Loyal Ally: King Fahd Dies - Sabah 
Rumsfeld: Iraq Pullout Will Not End Terror Attacks - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkey Urges US to Close PKK Office in Kirkuk - Cumhuriyet 
EU: Iraq Exports Terrorism - Cumhuriyet 
US Presses Iraqis To Meet mid-August Deadline - Zaman 
Burns Cancels Uzbekistan Visit Over Base Crisis - Zaman 
Fahd Dies, Abdullah the New King - Zaman 
Fahd Raised US-Saudi Ties to their Highest Level - Yeni 
Safak 
Fresh Nuclear Crisis With Iran - Radikal 
Iran Agrees to Delay Nuclear Program for 2 Days - Yeni Safak 
Garang's Death Shocks Sudan - Radikal 
Garang Killed in Suspicious Helicopter Crash - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
DAS Bryza Visits Ankara:  US Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
State Matt Bryza said in Ankara on Wednesday that Turkey, 
Iraq, and the United States will hold the second trilateral 
meeting on the PKK in Washington later this week to discuss 
possible steps to eliminate the PKK threat against Turkey 
from northern Iraq, papers report.  Bryza told the press 
after meeting high-level officials at the Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) yesterday that the opening of a PKK office in 
Kirkuk `goes against US and Iraqi policies.  `We see the PKK 
and its political extensions as terror organizations.  There 
is no place for the PKK in a free and united Iraq,' Bryza 
stressed.  Ankara gave Bryza the message that Turkey expects 
concrete measures by the US against the PKK, "Sabah" 
claimed.  "Hurriyet" notes that Bryza offered the Turks 
cooperation in law enforcement against the PKK, help in 
cutting the terror organization's financial resources in 
Europe, and closer monitoring of PKK militants.  The Turkish 
Embassy in Baghdad asked both Iraqi and US officials to 
close the PKK office in Kirkuk, papers report.  Meanwhile, 
"Vatan" claimed that the PKK and its front organizations 
have 16 offices in Kirkuk alone, and more in Mosul and 
Baghdad. 
 
Spokesman Casey on the Ecumenical Patriarchate, Cyprus:  `We 
encourage the government of Turkey and all governments to 
provide the maximum opportunity for people to freely express 
their religious beliefs and opinions,' State Department 
acting spokesman Tom Casey responding to a question on the 
Greek Orthodox Patriarchate in Istanbul.  State Minister 
Mehmet Ali Sahin had warned that the Government could 
initiate legal action against the Patriarch for `going too 
far' in asking for `privileges' for his community.  `We 
support the Ecumenical Patriarch in Istanbul and talk with 
the Turkish Government on a regular basis about the 
Patriarchate.  The United States is committed to religious 
freedom, not only in Turkey but around the world,' Casey 
said.  Asked to comment on a Turkish declaration stressing 
non-recognition of Nicosia by Ankara, Casey said that the US 
policy is to seek a solution to the dispute on the island on 
the basis of the Annan plan.  `The Secretary General has 
spoken with the parties, and asked them to come up with 
ideas and suggestions on how to proceed.  That's where we 
are, and that's where our focus is on Cyprus,' Casey noted. 
 
Turkish Police Interrogate Terror Suspects at Abu Ghraib:  A 
special Turkish police team interrogated Sadettin Aktas and 
Burhan Kus, suspected of involvement in the November 2003 
terrorist bombings in Istanbul, at Abu Ghraib prison in 
Baghdad in the presence of US officials, papers report.  The 
two suspects were arrested in Iraq last month.  Reports 
claim that Gurcan Bac, an explosives expert and the alleged 
number-two man in the plot, was killed by US troops in Iraq 
earlier this year.  The whereabouts of another top militant, 
Abdulkadir Karakus, remain unclear.  Reports say that US 
officials allowed the interrogation of Aktas and Kus because 
their extradition process is expected to take some time to 
be completed. 
 
Ankara Awaits EU Reaction to Turkish Declaration on Cyprus: 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said there are `no 
obstacles' to the opening of EU entry talks with Turkey on 
October 3 now that Ankara has expanded its customs union 
agreement with the EU by signing a protocol to cover the 
newest members of the bloc, including Cyprus.  Rehn said 
accession talks with Turkey would begin on October 3 as 
planned.  He noted that Ankara's declaration of continued 
non-recognition of the Greek Cypriot administration by 
Turkey would be examined by the EU.  Rehn stressed that the 
declaration `does not appear to block implementation' of the 
protocol.  Turkey is afraid that the EU may release a 
document to counter Ankara's declaration, and that Turkey's 
opponents may press for adding new conditions to the 
negotiations framework document, including access to Turkish 
ports and airports by the Greek Cypriots.  Cyprus, Greece, 
France, Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg 
are reportedly unhappy with the Turkish declaration.  Papers 
also note that the declaration released by Ankara has not 
been officially accepted by the EU. 
 
High Military Council (YAS) Convenes:  Turkey's High 
Military Council (YAS) convened on Monday to discuss 
promotions and expulsions in the military, papers report. 
Dailies estimate that up to 10 officers could be dismissed 
for involvement in radical religious activities.  Dailies 
expect Prime Minister Erdogan to note his objection to the 
expulsions, as he has in past years.  Papers also expect the 
YAS to discuss tougher measures to prevent corruption in 
military. 
 
Leftist Terror Organization Plans Attack Against BTC 
Pipeline:  Turkish police have reportedly uncovered a 
terrorist organization's plans to carry out an attack 
against the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) oil pipeline.  The 
discovery was made during an investigation of Eyup Beyaz, a 
member of the outlawed radical leftist DHKP-C (Dev-Sol) 
group, who attempted to carry out a suicide bombing in 
Ankara last month.  Beyaz was killed by police before he 
could detonate his bomb.  Security measures along the 
pipeline have been enhanced, officials said. 
 
Karamanlis Postpones Turkey Visit:  Greek Prime Minister 
Kostas Karamanlis has postponed a trip to Turkey scheduled 
for August, international wire services report.  `PM 
Karamanlis will visit Turkey later in the autumn,' a Greek 
official said.  Greek officials did not elaborate on why the 
trip, which would have been the first official visit by a 
Greek PM to Turkey in over 46 years, had been postponed. 
 
Iraqi Turkmen Demand Constitutional Rights:  Iraqi Turkmen 
Front (ITF) Ankara representative Ahmet Muratli told "Yeni 
Safak" that the Turkmen will boycott the new Iraqi 
constitution if their language is not recognized in the 
constitution draft.  Muratli said the Turkmen want to be 
recognized as one of the constituent peoples of Iraq, and be 
granted the right to self-determination.  Muratli noted that 
the PKK has entered the political process in Iraq, and 
recalled that PKK-affiliated parties had entered the January 
general elections.  `PKK members continue coming to Kirkuk. 
In the future, they may demand land from the Turkmen.  The 
US must solve this problem,' Muratli said.  Muratli claimed 
that the PKK is being supported by the KDP and PUK. 
 
European Parliament to Hold Kurdish Conference:  A group of 
leftist parliamentarians in the European Parliament plans to 
host a conference on `the EU, Turkey, and the Kurds' in 
Brussels September 19-20, "Cumhuriyet" reports.  European 
Parliament Speaker Joseph Borrell and EU Expansion 
Commissioner Olli Rehn will participate in the conference, 
as will former DEP lawmakers Leyla Zana and Hatip Dicle, 
Peter Galbraith (described as an American "expert" on the 
Kurdish question), the wife of former French President 
Francois Mitterrand, author Orhan Pamuk, Human Rights 
Association (IHD) Chairman Yusuf Alatas, and Diyarbakir 
Mayor Osman Baydemir. 
 
PKK Releases Abducted Mayor:  The PKK has released Hasim 
Akyurek, mayor of Yaylidere in Turkey's eastern province of 
Bingol, whom the Kurdish militants abducted last week. 
Akyurek, a member of Turkey's ruling AK Party, said his 
captors had treated him well.  `The PKK militants told me 
they had observed a ceasefire with Turkey for seven years, 
but could find nobody in the government to speak with them,' 
Akyurek said following his release.  PKK militants also told 
Akyurek that they planned to release a Turkish soldier they 
abducted last month. 
 
IBDA-C Launches Magazine In Support of Al-Qaida:  "Aksam" 
and "Cumhuriyet" report on a new magazine, "Kaide," that is 
being published by the radical Islamist group IBDA-C 
(Islamic Great Eastern Raiders) in support of Al-Qaida.  The 
magazine reportedly hit the newsstands July 28, and 10,000 
copies have been printed.  Commentaries in the magazine are 
`chilling,' according to "Aksam."  An article entitled "El- 
Kaide is Liberating the World" covers a full two pages in 
the magazine's first issue.  Attacks in which women and 
children died are being described as "actions in which 35 
Jews were among the dead."  The founders of the magazine say 
they support the idea of El-Kaide `as a concept.' 
 
NGO Head Fined for Using Kurdish Name:  "Hurriyet" reports 
that Ridvan Kizgin, provincial head of the Human Rights 
Association (IHD) in the mainly Kurdish city of Bingol, was 
fined 1,120 YTL for using the city's former Kurdish name in 
a letter to the governor's office.  Kizgin has appealed the 
decision, and seeking to have the fine canceled. 
 
Kurdish Language Schools Close Doors:  Kurdish language 
schools in Istanbul, Diyarbakyr, Van, Kyzyltepe, Adana, 
Sanlyurfa, Batman and Dogubeyazyt have closed due to lack of 
interest, "Cumhuriyet" reports.  School administrators said 
in a statement that the Kurds in Turkey were not interested 
in going to language schools, but would like to receive 
public education in Kurdish. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  King Fahd; Uzbekistan 
 
"Death of the King" 
Nuh Gonultas wrote in the conservative-sensational "DB 
Tercuman" (8/2): "The Saudi royal family is facing a tough 
period following the death of King Fahd.  The events of 
September 11 marked a new beginning for Saudi Arabia, which 
faced a debate over the legitimacy of the Saudi regime and 
its relationship with the US.  King Fahd used to support the 
US at all costs.  But the new ruler, King Abdullah, is known 
for his stance against the Bush administration's foreign 
policy, especially its Iraq policy.  There is also an 
unsettled issue over oil prices between Riyadh and 
Washington, with Saudi Arabia remaining the largest oil 
producer in OPEC.  American financial circles are worried 
about the continuing decrease in Saudi investment in the US 
because of anti-Americanism that began following 9/11. 
Saudi Arabia is facing difficult times ahead in its 
relations with the US, because Riyadh is not acting 
enthusiastically in the war on terrorism." 
 
"The King Died, Long Live the New King" 
Erdal Safak commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (8/2): 
"Saudi King Fahd died and crown prince Abdullah, his 82-year- 
old half brother, was appointed as the new monarch.  This 
means that the old generation will continue to rule the 
country for a while longer.  They are old, conservative, and 
against all kinds of social reform.  King Abdullah, who has 
been the de facto ruler for the last ten years, is exerting 
great efforts to save the regime.  In order to ease tension 
in the country, he opened the way for some new steps, 
including a discussion about women's rights and holding 
elections for local administrations.  But Abdullah has 
continued to jail people who act against his wishes.  Will 
these few, limited measures be sufficient to save the 
kingdom?  Unless certain reforms are implemented in the 
education system, King Abdullah and his dynasty cannot have 
peace, and the war against bin-Laden cannot be won.  The 
regime in Saudi Arabia will have a hard time until a younger 
and more liberal administration replaces the current one. 
Of course, that is, if the regime can survive until then." 
 
"Kerimov vs. Bush" 
Yilmaz Oztuna wrote in the conservative-mass appeal 
"Turkiye" (8/2): "Uzbekistan President Kerimov has taken a 
stand against George Bush, asking Washington to close down 
its bases in the country.  Kerimov's move is not a surprise, 
and is related to recent events in the former Soviet 
republics.  The democracy movement in Andijon started as a 
riot, in which the US was believed to have played a strong 
role.  But the events in Andijon did not end as they did in 
Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, and Ukraine.  Moreover Washington has 
accused Tashkent of opening fire against civilians.  The 
response from Kerimov came swiftly.  Kerimov is clearly 
telling Washington that `Uzbekistan is my business.  Keep 
your nose out of it.'  So he set a deadline for the US to 
evacuate the American airbase there within 6 months. 
Kerimov seems unaware that the Soviet era is over.  In 
today's world, everybody interferes in everyone else's 
business." 
 
MCELDOWNEY