05ANKARA6353
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 006353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Saddam Defies the Court - Sabah 
A Kurdish Judge for the ArabSaddam - Hurriyet 
Iran, Kuwait, Israel Rejoice Over Saddam Trial - Milliyet 
EU Begins Screening Process for Turkey - Aksam 
Barroso: Bush Supports Turkey's EU Membership - Turkiye 
Barroso: Turkey Must Remake Its Image in Europe - Milliyet 
Boeing: Turkey to Buy 180 Passenger Planes - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Hadley: We Must Encourage Moderate Islamists - Radikal 
Saddam Challenges Court, Pleads Not Guilty - Cumhuriyet 
EU: Turkish Bureaucracy Resists Reforms - Yeni Safak 
Kyrgyz Parliamentary Delegation Visits Northern Cyprus - 
Radikal 
Erdogan to Take 36 Million USD to Pakistan - Yeni Safak 
Earthquake Death Toll 100,000 in Pakistan - Yeni Safak 
UNICEF: 10,000 Children Face Death Risk in Pakistan - 
Radikal 
Schroeder, Merkel Fight over Turkey - Yeni Safak 
Armenia Wants to Build New Nuclear Power Plant - Radikal 
Fundamentalist Violence in Algeria: 20 Killed - Cumhuriyet 
Hurricane Wilma May Reach Florida By Weekend - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Hadley Addresses Council on Foreign Relations:  President 
Bush's National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley said in a 
speech to the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) yesterday 
in New York that a struggle is under way for the `soul of 
Islam,' an ideological struggle for the support and loyalty 
of the Muslim world, "Radikal" reports.  Winning this 
struggle will require a direct challenge to the extremist 
voices within Islam, Hadley said.  Hadley noted that the 
world has seen the terrorists' vision of governance in 
Afghanistan under the Taliban regime, which `imposed an 
artificial conformity that eliminated individual freedom, 
enslaved women, destroyed the nation's cultural history, and 
ruled by terror.'  The antidote, Hadley said, is `democracy, 
justice and the freedom agenda.'  `This is obviously not 
something the American government can do.  It is Muslim 
voices from around the world that must take up this 
challenge,' Hadley stressed, and added:  `Muslim clerics and 
legal scholars in the United States and elsewhere have 
issued statements condemning terrorism.  We must champion 
these efforts and empower other moderate voices throughout 
the Muslim world that stand for peace and tolerance.' 
Hadley warned that `withdrawal from the fight' will not make 
the threat go away. 
 
MFA on Iraq, PKK:  Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) Spokesman 
Namik Tan said at a weekly press briefing on Wednesday that 
Turkey is closely following and supports the political 
process in Iraq.  `It will be useful to send a team to Iraq, 
under the auspices of the UN, to monitor the parliamentary 
elections in the country,' Tan said, stressing the 
importance of broad participation in the December polls. 
Commenting on Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan's statements 
regarding the outlawed PKK, Tan said that the US was one of 
the first countries to declare the PKK a terrorist 
organization.  `We naturally expect a friendly and allied 
country like the US to fulfill its responsibilities stemming 
from that friendship and alliance,' Tan said. 
 
Erdogan to Visit Earthquake-Stricken Pakistan:  Prime 
Minister Tayyip Erdogan, accompanied by businessmen and 
humanitarian aid agencies, headed to Pakistan on Thursday to 
show Turkey's support for the quake-stricken country. 
Erdogan took to Pakistan 36 million USD in assistance and 
five cargo planes with relief supplies.  Erdogan will meet 
with Pakistani President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz 
in Islamabad before returning home later in the day. 
 
EU Kicks Off Turkey Screening Process:  The EU meeting which 
will mark the opening of Turkey's EU screening process will 
take place on Thursday in Brussels, papers report.  A 30- 
member Turkish delegation, consisting of science and 
technology experts, will meet with EU officials to initiate 
the screening of the first chapters to be broached during 
the negotiation process -- science, education, and culture. 
The talks will be made up of 35 chapters in which Turkey 
will try to bring its entire system into line with EU 
legislation.  The screening process is expected to continue 
until September 2006. 
 
EU: Turkish Bureaucracy Resists Reforms:  The EU Commission 
Progress Report on Turkey will stress that judiciary and 
institutions such as the Foundations Directorate, the media 
watchdog (RTUK), and the Higher Education Board (YOK) are 
resisting EU reforms, the all-news channel CNN-Turk reports. 
The Commission told Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) officials 
in Brussels last week that despite progress in legal 
arrangements, the implementation of reforms has been 
problematic in Turkey.  The Commission advised the Turks to 
end the resistance displayed by the Turkish bureaucracy. 
The Commission, believing that the influence of the military 
in politics is still strong in Turkey, said that statements 
by the military must be restricted to defense and security 
issues. 
 
Allawi Due in Ankara:  Former Iraqi Prime Minister Iyad 
Allawi will visit Ankara on Friday for talks, papers report. 
Allawi, leader of the Iraqi National Accord, will be 
received by Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and hold talks 
with Turkish officials on the existing situation and 
possible developments in Iraq. 
 
Erdogan to Britain Next Week:  Prime Minister Erdogan is to 
visit the UK October 27 to press for a breakthrough on the 
Cyprus problem, "Turkiye" reports.  Erdogan will propose to 
EU leaders in London that the EU lift all restrictions on 
northern Cyprus, and will stress that the Turks are ready to 
negotiate with the Greek Cypriots within the framework of UN 
initiatives, according to the report. 
 
Turkey to Respond to Greek Cypriot Exercise:  Papers report 
that the Turkish Air Force intends to respond to the Greek 
Cypriots' decision to hold the Nikiforos military exercise 
by flying F-16s over the island and landing them on the 
airstrip in Gecitkale.  "Radikal" claims that the Turks have 
informed the United States of their intention to counter the 
Greek Cypriot exercise with a `Toros' exercise.  `Toros' has 
not been held for the past four years.  The article claims 
that Turkish land and naval forces will also be involved in 
the exercise. 
 
Kyrgyz Delegation Calls in Turkish Cyprus:  Papers report 
that a Kyrgyz parliamentary delegation arrived in northern 
Cyprus as the guest of `TRNC' Foreign Minister Serdar 
Denktas on Wednesday.  The Kyrgyz delegation of 3 deputy 
ministers and 15 lawmakers arrived at Ercan Airport on a 
Cyprus Turkish Airlines (KTHY) plane from Istanbul.  Arslan 
Maliev, the head of the delegation, said that the Turkish 
and Greek Cypriots made their positions clear in the 
referendum held in April last year, and that the world had 
seen which side had `good intentions.'  `The isolation of 
the Turkish Cypriots should end at once,' Maliyev said.  The 
Kyrgyz delegation will meet with `state and government 
officials,' and visit universities and historical sites on 
Thursday before departing northern Cyprus over the weekend. 
Aksu Visits Russia:  Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu 
discussed international terrorism and cooperation against 
international organized crime with his Russian counterpart 
Rashid Gumarovich Nurgaliyev on Wednesday in Moscow, dailies 
report.  Nurgaliyev said after meeting with Aksu that Russia 
and Turkey exchanged information with regard to more than 
900 subjects in the first nine months of 2005 through the 
mediation of Interpol.  The majority of the information 
exchange was about economic crimes, he said.  The two 
ministers also discussed the issue of extradition of 
criminals.  The Russian Interior Ministry said that the two 
ministers decided to hold the next meeting of the Russian- 
Turkish working groups in Ankara in 2006. 
 
University Rector Detained on Corruption Charges:  The 
Higher Education Council (YOK) Rectors Committee held an 
extraordinary meeting yesterday to discuss the arrest of 
Professor Yucel Askin, rector of Yuzuncu Yil University in 
the eastern province of Van, on charges of corruption, 
papers report.  In a statement after the meeting, YOK 
chairman Erdogan Tezic stressed that Professor Askin had 
been detained because he was `trying to protect the secular 
order at the university.'  `Standing by Askin means standing 
by the republic,' Tezic said.  The rectors of 70 
universities signed a joint letter protesting the arrest of 
Askin on `baseless charges,' and accusing the government of 
attempting to give Turkish universities an Islamic identity. 
The rectors agreed to go to Van on Sunday in a show of 
support to their imprisoned colleague.  Meanwhile, 
"Milliyet" reports that in the 2006 draft budget, the AKP 
government had reduced the funds apportioned to Van 
University and the YOK.  The paper underlines that no cuts 
were made in the budgets of other educational institutions. 
 
Kirkuk-Ceyhan Oil Pipeline Reopens After Six Weeks:  The 
pumping of oil has recommenced through the Kirkuk-Ceyhan 
pipeline, which had been bombed some six weeks ago by Iraqi 
insurgents.  The pipeline runs from the oil-rich Kirkuk area 
in northern Iraq to the port of Ceyhan on Turkey's 
Mediterranean coast, and has a capacity of 1.5 million 
barrels a day.  Iraqi oil officials stated that the pipeline 
has been repaired and is now pumping 700,000 barrels a day 
at pre-war prices to storage facilities in Ceyhan. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq/Saddam's Trial 
 
"Who is Holding the Trial?" 
Okay Gonensin commented in the mass appeal "Vatan" (10/20): 
"All political trials bring the same crucial question to 
mind: Who is really holding the trial?  In the case of 
Saddam, he is being tried by the American administration and 
pro-American Iraqis.  This factor weakens the ones who are 
presiding at the trial and strengthens the one who is being 
tried.  Following the US occupation, Iraq was essentially 
divided into three.  Shiites do not hide their sympathy for 
the Iranian administration, while the Kurds are doing their 
best to be supportive of the US at all costs so that the can 
reach their ultimate goal -- an independent Kurdish state. . 
The acquittal of Saddam at this trial is very unlikely.  But 
the verdict will not have a significant impact, either on 
his supporters or his opponents. . Saddam Hussein was a 
cruel and archaic dictator.  But if he is able to survive in 
the 21st century, he should express his appreciation to the 
US administration more than anyone else." 
 
"Iraq Disintegrates, But Do we have a Plan B?" 
Cuneyt Ulsever commented in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(10/20):  "The only thing certain about the Turkish 
government's Iraq policy is the desire to protect Iraq's 
territorial integrity.  It is obvious that the American 
struggle is also concentrated in that direction.  But with 
every passing day, it becomes more clear that the US is not 
being successful in this struggle.  Although the 
constitutional referendum resulted in a majority of `yes' 
votes, implementing the constitution seems almost 
impossible.  Moreover, even if the constitution is 
implemented, it contains many clauses that encourage the 
country's dissolution.  Meanwhile, there is a growing desire 
in the US to pull out of Iraq as quickly as possible.  So 
the possibility of Iraqi disintegration increases with every 
passing day.  What is our plan B for this strong 
possibility?" 
 
"The Trial of Saddam" 
Turgut Tarhanli wrote in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(10/20):  "Saddam's trial should have taken place in an 
international forum made up of UN-designated international 
judicial officials.  All the charges he faces are crimes 
under international law.  Even chiefs of state can not be 
immune from such charges.  There could be two reasons for 
him not being tried by the international courts: It could be 
an effort by the occupation forces to protect their 
influence in Iraq during the legal process.  Or it could be 
part of an effort to use Saddam's trial as a positive 
turning point in the power struggle going on in the country. 
In the end, Iraq remains the same Iraq, and the current 
trial is about as legitimate as the ones that took place 
before 2003." 
 
"Saddam Should Be Tried, But What About You?" 
Ibrahim Karagul argued in the Islamist-opinion maker "Yeni 
Safak" (10/20): "Of course Saddam should be tried, but this 
must take place in an international court.  There will never 
be a fair ruling coming from a court made up of those who 
hate him. . Those who were oppressed are becoming more cruel 
than their previous oppressor.  There have been many crimes 
against humanity since the occupation began, including 
massacres in Fallujah and Tal Afar, and torture centers in 
northern Iraq.  Who will bring those crimes before a court? 
. Yes, Saddam should be tried.  He has to pay for the agony 
he caused.  He is a dictator and he is guilty.  But those 
who try Saddam are also guilty.  Who is going to judge 
them?" 
 
MCELDOWNEY