05ANKARA2667
TURKEY'S BORON IS NOT BORING
Mon May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOE FOR CHUCK WASHINGTON 
USDOC FOR 4212/ITA/MAC/OEURA/CPD/DDEFALCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EMIN ENRG EINV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S BORON IS NOT BORING 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: As the holder of the world's largest Boron 
reserves, Turkey is eager to derive economic value from this 
mineral.  Among a variety of applications in industry, use of 
Boron for fuel cells and the potential hydrogen economy is 
most promising.  Turkey's relatively new Boron Institute aims 
to foster research and development in new applications.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. In a meeting May 3 with Embassy Officer, National Boron 
Research Institute President Erk Inger and Board Member Funda 
Altun made the following points: 
 
-Turkey holds the world's largest Boron reserves (563 million 
tons or 64 % of the world's known reserves), compared to 
Russia (100 million tons) and the U.S. (80 million tons). 
The U.S. is the biggest producer and consumer of boron.  92 % 
of Turkey's production is exported to the U.S. 
 
-Boron is used in agriculture, timber preservation, civil 
works, textiles, paper, ceramics, glass, chemicals, medicine, 
metallurgy, cleaning products and more.  The Boron Institute 
enthusiastically notes over 250 uses of boron.  In the energy 
sector, boron can be used for energy storage, fuels, and 
insulation.  There are specialized potential application in 
nuclear power plants and magnetic levitation transportation. 
The greatest enthusiasm is reserved for use of sodium 
borohydrate (and potentially other boron-based chemicals) for 
fuel cells to help "catalyze" the next energy frontier--the 
prospective hydrogen economy. 
 
-Turkey's National Boron Research Institute was established 
in 2004 and is dedicated to the goals of supporting R&D 
activities to develop new technologies and applications for 
use of boron products and seeking to increase the consumption 
of boron products in Turkey and the world.  In collaboration 
with the Turkish Atomic Energy Agency, the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Energy (MENR), and Eti Mining (the 
state boron mining company), the Boron Institute held the 
first National Workshop on boron April 28-29.  The workshop 
aimed to facilitate cooperation on research and policies to 
speed up deriving economic value from boron mineral resources 
(by both increasing consumption and carrying out higher value 
production in Turkey).  MENR Minister Guler said, "we have 
much more to do with boron.  Our objective is to use our 
underground resources for the economy." 
 
¶3.  Comment: Although not rich in hydrocarbons, Turkey is 
rich in some minerals, particularly boron.  A current Turkish 
best-seller "Metal Storm" depicts the anti-American fantasy 
of the seizure of Turkey's boron reserves by the U.S. 
military.  Stressing that U.S. interest was not of this 
nature, Embassy Officer and Turish Boron Institute officials 
discussed possibilities for commercial and research 
cooperation on boron applications.  Istanbul will host the 
International Hydrogen Energy Congress and Exhibition July 
13-15, which will be an opportunity to highlight boron's 
potential role.  Turkey's International Center of Hydrogen 
Energy Technologies and Boron Institute will be show-cased. 
(Note: Turkish press reports indicate that California 
Governor Arnold Schwarzeneger will attend the July hydrogen 
conference.) 
EDELMAN