05ANKARA1205
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE
Mon Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
USDOE/NNSA FOR TPERRY 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE 
(FEBRUARY 2005) 
 
REF: A. STATE 146478 
     ¶B. ANKARA 810 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1.      Summary:  EXBS advisor's primary focus this month was 
on the two Department of Commerce (DOC) sponsored projects, 
Internal Control Program (ICP) and Product Identification 
Tool (PIT) along with coordinating the participation of 
Turkish delegations in PSI events. EXBS Advisor was able to 
utilize the visit of DOC contractors for the PIT presentation 
to also meet with GOT representatives working on the ICP 
project.  These meetings greatly assisted in moving the ICP 
project to a decision level within the GOT.  EXBS Advisor's 
work on PSI issues included the delivery of exercise 
information, participation in meetings with senior MFA and 
Turkish General Staff officials and coordination of support 
in preparation of a high level delegation to travel to the 
next Operational Experts Group meeting.  Finally, EXBS 
advisor continued negotiation of the NP Cooperation 
Agreement, brokering potential wordings between Ankara and 
Washington to complete the final draft. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.      Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent Reporting 
Period 
 
1)        February 1-  EXBS Adviser participated in the PIT 
introductory meetings and presentations to members of the 
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Customs and Foreign 
Trade.  These meetings included demonstration of the features 
of the tool, customization methodology and project plan. 
EXBS Advisor presented a briefing on how PIT can assist in 
facilitating the interaction between customs inspectors, 
customs command center/headquarters and licensing authorities. 
 
2)        February 2-  EXBS Adviser participated in the 
second day of PIT presentations at Turkish Customs.  These 
meetings dealt more with the development and customizations 
of the PIT to meet Turkish needs.  GOT officials expressed 
interest in a server based version that could be integrated 
into their existing computer system.  Turkish Customs 
requested additional time to review the prototype PIT 
software brought by the DOC contractor and to make a final 
decision on whether to proceed with the project by the end of 
the month. 
 
EXBS Advisor participated in meetings with DOC contractors 
and UFT to review the status of the ICP project.  UFT 
organized a question and answer session for potential 
sub-contractors that are being considered for the Turkish 
customization of the ICP.  During this session 
representatives discussed the project plan, role of the 
sub-contractor, reporting requirements and other details of 
the project.  At the conclusion of the meeting, each 
sub-contractor candidate was allowed time to determine their 
capabilities to fulfill the requirements.  UFT expects to 
have a decision on the sub-contractor by the end of the month. 
 
3)        February 4-  EXBS Adviser met with  Arms Control 
and Disarmament Head of Department Sabri Ergen to conduct 
monthly update meeting on all current projects in progress in 
Turkey, including Internal Control Program (ICP), Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT), Product Identification Tool 
and Second Line of Defense (SLD).  Ergen also provided EXBS 
Advisor with the latest Turkish comments concerning the NP 
Cooperation Agreement.  These comments were reported to 
Washington for consideration. Finally, EXBS Advisor discussed 
Turkey's involvement in PSI and the next PSI experts working 
group, in which Turkey is considering sending a significant 
delegation. 
 
4)        February 8-  EXBS Advisor met with Department Heads 
for Customs Enforcement Mehmet Guzel and Ender Gurleyik to 
reviewed the status of CIT and the PIT project.  EXBS Advisor 
explained the need to complete the first draft of the CIT 
training plan prior to the next CIT event in April.  This 
will allow a full review of the plan prior to the DOE team 
visit, for incorporation into future activities.  EXBS 
Advisor also expressed desire to accompany any upcoming 
Customs officials' visits to the border areas of Turkey. 
 
5)        February 11-  EXBS Advisor met with MFA Energy 
Department First Secretary Basak Tug to discuss the status of 
truck detected to be carrying nuclear material at the 
Turkish/Georgian border.  The material was located by the 
U.S. provided portal monitors that were installed at the 
border crossing facility. Information on this meeting was 
reported in ref b. 
 
6)        February 23-  EXBS Advisor participated in a 
meetings with BG Haldun Solmazturk, Department of Disarmament 
and International Security, Turkish General Staff 
Headquarters.  The meeting included a discussion of Turkey's 
participation in PSI, specifically the upcoming Operational 
Experts Group and exercises sponsored by Spain and Portugal. 
Solmazturk stated that Turkey is considering in hosting an 
exercise in 2006 that will most likely occur in the Med. 
 
7)        February 24-  EXBS Advisor met with MFA DDG for 
Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric. EXBS Advisor 
discussed Turkey's participation in the PSI, specifically the 
next PSI experts working group and upcoming exercises in 
Portugal and Spain.  Meric stated that Turkey intended to 
send an observer to the Portuguese exercise and actual assets 
to the Spanish exercise, and was still considering hosting a 
2006 PSI exercise.  Finally, Meric provided an update on the 
status of the NP Cooperation Agreement, stating that the 
Agreement is currently receiving inter-ministerial review 
which should be completed by early March;  if there are no 
objections, steps can be taken to officially sign the 
agreement and seek parliamentary approval. 
 
¶B.      Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None. 
 
¶C.      Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.      Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.      Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security 
 
1)        GOT submitted a reply to the United States comments 
concerning the NP Cooperation Agreement.  The United States 
quickly reviewed these comments and provided GOT the latest 
approved update on the NP Cooperation Agreement.  It is 
believed that if these comments can be accepted as written, a 
signing ceremony for the Agreement could occur this spring 
with ratification by the Turkish Parliament by the end of 
summer. 
 
2)        GOT stated that it would be improper to take any 
further steps in the Second Line of Defense project until the 
official signing of the NP Cooperation Agreement.  Following 
the signing of the Agreement, a review of the appropriate 
actions under this project will be reviewed to ensure that 
actions taken will not violate parliament's prerogatives 
before it ratifies the agreement.  All visits by SLD 
personnel should be postponed at least until the signing of 
the Agreement. 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.        Mar 21- Apr 5, 2005 - EXBS Advisor to conduct 
program consultations in Washington DC. and leave. 
 
¶B.        Apr 18- 22 - DOE NNSA to conduct CIT Refresher 
Course and project review. 
 
¶C.        May 23- 27 (tent)- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT 
Instructor Training. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues- None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
EDELMAN