05ANKARA7453
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 007453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 20, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Tuesday, December 20, 2005 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Bush Confessed his Mistakes in Iraq - Sabah 
Bush Admits that there were no WMDs in Iraq - Vatan 
NATO: PKK is a Terrorist Organization - Milliyet 
A Blow from NATO to PKK - Turkiye 
US Ambassador Wilson: PKK is Threat to the Whole World - 
Turkiye 
NATO Control for All of Afghanistan - Hurriyet 
Government asks for Patience in Pamuk Case - Aksam 
Ambassador Wilson: Turkey Will Resolve Freedom of Expression 
Problems - Aksam 
Harsh Reaction from Government to Lagendijk - Hurriyet 
Folklore Costumes Cause Controversy - Milliyet 
CHP Leader Baykal Meets with President Sezer - Vatan 
CIA Seeks Turkish Teachers - Milliyet 
Ahmedinejad Bans Western Music in Iran - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Government Disagrees on Article 301 of Penal Code - Radikal 
Turkey Presses NATO to Include PKK on Terror List - Radikal 
TRNC (Northern Cyprus) Parliament Passes Property Law - 
Radikal 
Bush Admits that his Mistakes in Iraq War led to Terrible 
Losses - Cumhuriyet 
American Radar for Syrian Border - Radikal 
More Turkish Troops will be Deployed in Afghanistan - Zaman 
Warm Messages from US Ambassador to Businessmen - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
NATO Secretary General Scheffer's Visit:  Today's papers 
cover the NATO chief's visit to Ankara.  "Hurriyet" reports 
that Scheffer, during his meetings yesterday, suggested that 
NATO control in Kabul and surrounding areas be expanded to 
cover the rest of Afghanistan, and asked PM Erdogan for 
Turkish support on this issue.  "Radikal" reports that 
Turkey urged NATO to upgrade its terror list to include the 
PKK.  "Sabah" says Scheffer stressed that he personally 
considers PKK a terrorist organization.  However, unless all 
26 members of NATO agree, it is not possible to upgrade the 
terror list. 
 
Article 301 Controversy:  "Radikal" reports that the members 
of the government had a heated debate regarding the Turkish 
penal code.  Chief EU negotiator Ali Babacan proposed that 
the government change article 301 of the penal code in order 
to remove all obstacles to freedom of expression.  Justice 
Minister Cemil Cicek, in return, rejected Babacan's proposal 
by saying that jurists should deal with judicial issues and 
economists should deal with economic issues.  Meanwhile, 
regarding the Pamuk case, "Hurriyet" says that Justice 
Minister Cicek might not grant permission for the trial to 
continue, and in that case, the suit against Pamuk would be 
dropped. 
 
Government Reacts to Lagendijk Comments:  "Cumhuriyet" 
reports that Government spokesman Cemil Cicek condemned 
Joost Lagendijk's comment that the Turkish military "enjoys' 
fighting the PKK as it keeps them at the center of 
attention. Cicek said that foreign visitors should be more 
respectful of Turkey's values.  Lagendijk is co-chairman of 
the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Commission. 
Ambassador Wilson in Istanbul:  "Aksam" reports that US 
Ambassador Ross Wilson visited Topkapi Palace yesterday. 
Referring to the Pamuk case, the Ambassador commented that 
Turkish people will resolve problems regarding freedom of 
expression themselves.  The US appreciates all the reforms 
PM Erdogan and his government implemented; however, Turkey 
has great difficulties ahead of it and more detailed reforms 
are needed to overcome these difficulties.  "Turkiye" quotes 
Ambassador Wilson as saying that `The PKK presence in 
Northern Iraq is a threat not only for Turkey but for the 
whole world.  We will fight against the PKK together with 
Turkey.  The PKK is an important part of our 
counterterrorism efforts.  "Yeni Safak" says that Ambassador 
Wilson came to Istanbul to meet with Turkish businesspeople 
at the Turkish-American Business Council. He delivered a 
genuine and warm message to the group, and promised more 
American investment in Turkey. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:   Afghanistan; Iraq 
 
"NATO and Afghanistan in 2006" 
Fikret Ertan commented in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(12/20):  "The year 2006 will be busy for both NATO and the 
United Sates.  The Secretary General of NATO has been 
actively working to expand the power of the International 
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by increasing the number of 
military personnel.  The required number is around 7,000 and 
Secretary General Scheffer is knocking on every NATO 
 
SIPDIS 
member's door for this reason. NATO presence is going to be 
expanded in 2006 and the US `Operation Lasting Freedom' will 
also continue in Afghanistan.  There are about 20,000 
American soldiers engaged in this operation currently 
stationed in Afghanistan, but the US wants to reduce its 
presence and delegate more to ISAF and NATO. So far these 
efforts have not been very successful.  Unlike the US 
presence, the ISAF-NATO force will not be a combatant force. 
ISAF likes to define its responsibility as assisting Afghani 
forces with stability and security.  However, there is still 
an unanswered question here:  What will happen if and when 
ISAF forces encounter Taliban and Al-Qaeda elements?  There 
is also a potential area for some confusion in terms of 
overall command structure as both ISAF and the US forces 
will engage in activities under separate commands.  In any 
case the year 2006 will be a very important year for 
Afghanistan and the Afghanistan-NATO relationship." 
 
"Is It the End or the Beginning?" 
Haluk Ulman observed in economic-political "Dunya" (12/20): 
"Is it really possible to achieve internal peace and order 
in Iraq in the aftermath of the elections?  I believe it is 
too early to be optimistic.  Along with the Sunni-led 
insurgency, Iraq is also suffering from the lack of a 
national identity.  Elections were held on either ethnic -- 
Arab and Kurd -- or religious -- Shiite or Sunni -- 
premises.  This signals a very dangerous division in the 
country which makes unity almost impossible. Within each 
group there are divisions as well. Shiites are divided into 
four groups while Sunnis into two.  The Kurds seem to be the 
only unified group. The parties of Talabani and Barzani 
managed to form a unified list covering a total of eight 
groups.  Kurds also enjoy the full support of the US as well 
as certain privileges as defined in the constitution.  From 
now on the Kurds will focus on expanding their territory to 
include oil-rich Mosul.  All of these are sufficient 
indicators for potential chaos not only in Iraq but in the 
entire region.  Nothing has ended in Iraq. In fact things 
are just beginning.  And it will continue to be a headache 
for all of us, including the US, in the days to come." 
 WILSON