05ANKARA6671
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (OCTOBER
Sat Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, JHARTSHORN, VLE 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DSILLIMAN, SYOUNTCHI 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC IZ KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (OCTOBER 
2005) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
  ¶1.      Summary:   EXBS Advisor continued to monitor NP 
projects that are underway in Turkey, including Internal 
Control Program (ICP), Commodity Identification Training 
(CIT), Product Identification Tool (PIT).  EXBS Advisor also 
coordinated Turkish participation in CIT Instructor Training, 
a Black Sea workshop  and TRACKER Training.  Finally, EXBS 
Advisor accomplished a detail review of the Turkish Export 
Control System with members of the Center for International 
Trade and Security/University of Georgia. This review 
included detailed meetings and visits to export control 
points (land, sea and air border crossings). End Summary 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          October  6- EXBS Advisor and Acting Pol Mil 
Counselor met with MFA Arms Control and Disarmament Head of 
Department Osman Yavuzalp as a follow-up to the meetings held 
during visit of U/S Joseph to Ankara.  EXBS Advisor provided 
information concerning the desire of the United States to 
cooperatively test uranium powder that was seized in Istanbul 
in August.  Yavuzalp stated that GOT is interested in 
participating in a joint forensic study of the powder, but it 
is also concerned about disrupting the legal process.  Since 
the powder is evidence in a crimal investigation, 
consultation with the prosecutor's office must be 
accomplished before a decision to share a sample can be 
properly made.  In addition, Yavuzalp provided additional 
information in support of the visit by the University of 
Georgia research team. 
 
2)          October 11- EXBS Advisor met with Turkish Customs 
General Directorate Export Control Head of Department Sevilay 
Turksen.  EXBS Advisor stressed the importance of the 
selection of a qualified contractor in order to complete the 
customization of the Product Identification Tool (PIT). (This 
project has awaited the selection of a contractor in order to 
move forward to the next stage of development.)  Turksen was 
aware of the importance of this selection.  She said she was 
aware the Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade had recently 
selected a contractor for the Internal Control Program, and 
that Custom would like to discuss with UFT to determine if 
this company would be a good fit for their project too.  EXBS 
Advisor thanked Turksen for her support of the recent CIT 
training, and for the participation of GOT members in the CIT 
Train-the-Trainer course being held in Richland, Washington. 
EXBS Advisor informed Turksen that another course is being 
planned for Ankara after the first of the year. 
 
3)          October 12- EXBS Advisor and EconOff met with MFA 
Head of Maritime Department Basat Ozturk. Items discussed 
included security and safety in the maritime environment, 
CSI, and coordination of maritime cooperation.  Ozturk 
provided EmbOffs with a GOT draft agreement that would 
implement CSI. 
 
4)          October 21- EXBS Advisor met with Guven Begec, 
MFA Arms Control and Disarmament First Secretary to discuss 
various non-proliferation issues and deliver appropriate 
talking points.  Begec outlined the agenda that had been 
prepared for the visit of the University of Georgia, Center 
of International Trade team that visited the following week. 
Begec informed EXBS Advisor that the NP Cooperation Agreement 
is currently before the appropriate parliamentary committee 
and should move quickly to the full parliament.  EXBS Advisor 
inquired as to Turkish participation in the upcoming PSI 
exercise in the Indian Ocean.  Begec responded that Turkey 
will not be participating in this exercise as most of its 
focus in on their own exercise next spring, however they will 
be sending a 6-person delegation to the upcoming Regional 
Operational Experts Working Group meeting in Hamburg, where 
Turkey will do a comprehensive presentation on their 
exercise, Anatolian Deer.  Finally, EXBS Advisor informed 
Begec of the work that was being accomplished to bring the 
heads of the Turkish, Iraq and Jordan Atomic Energy 
Authorities together for a meeting.  The purpose of the 
meeting is to build the cooperation between the three 
countries to improve the nuclear safety program in Iraq.  It 
is hoped that this meetings can be scheduled to take place in 
the near future. 
 
5)         October 24-28 - EXBS Advisor coordinated  and 
participated in review of the Turkish export control system 
conducted by the Center for International Trade and Security/ 
University of Georgia.  The review of the system included 
meetings with various GOT organizations including MFA, 
Customs, Foreign Trade, and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority 
along with visits to a seaport in Istanbul, the International 
Airport in Istanbul and the land border crossing with 
Bulgaria.  EXBS Advisor also coordinated meetings with trade 
unions and with the EU Commission to provided the visiting 
delegation a diverse view of the Turkish system.  The UGA 
team successfully collected a wide range of information that 
will be summarized in an official report.  This report will 
help the EXBS Advisor to increase cooperation between the 
U.S. and Turkey. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: 
 
1)         October 10-14 CIT Instructor Training- Three 
members of the Turkish Core Technical Group for CIT attend 
instructor training at National Laboratory in Richland, 
Washington. 
 
2)         October 11-13 Black Sea/Caspian Sea Conference- 
Three members of the Turkish Coast Guard attended the 
U.S./Azeri sponsored Black Sea/Caspian Sea Conference in 
Baku, Azerbaijan. 
 
3)         October 24-28- Two members of the GOT (one Foreign 
Trade expert and one Customs expert) attended the TRACKER 
workshop in Oxford, England. 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: None 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Nov 14-18- EXBS Advisor on annual leave. 
 
¶B.         December 5- 9(tent)- DOE INECP to present End 
Use/End User workshop to GOT officials. 
 
¶C.         January (tent)- DOE INECP to conduct CIT Train the 
Trainer course in Ankara. 
 
¶D.         January (tent)- DOE SLD to visit Turkey to 
complete SLD Implementation Agreement and begin scheduling of 
installation of new SLD equipment. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY