05ATHENS2134
CSI: ONE YEAR LATER
Fri Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Athens
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ATHENS 002134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EWWT GR KTIA PTER
SUBJECT: CSI: ONE YEAR LATER 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary: One year after the signing of the 
Container Security Initiative (CSI), the program continues to 
operate in the Port of Piraeus.  Unfortunately, staffing and 
efficiency problems are marring the effectiveness of the 
program. The GoG has requested a one-year extension for the 
use of a non-intrusive container inspection device, 
originally borrowed from Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
before the Olympic Games.  The extension has been requested 
to allow the GoG time to procure its own inspection 
equipment, a move mandated and financially supported by the 
EU.  CPB has provisionally approved a six month extension 
contingent upon the assignment of additional Greek customs 
staff to the CSI program.  End summary. 
 
STAFFING AND EFFICIENCY 
----------------------- 
¶2. (SBU)  The CSI program celebrated its one year anniversary 
in Greece last month.  Though Greece has cooperated well with 
CBP in establishing the CSI, Greece,s main difficulty in 
supporting this initiative is the lack of sufficient 
inspectional staff in the Port of Piraeus.  Though CBP 
trained 25 to 30 police and customs officers in the proper 
use of the non-intrusive imaging (NII) equipment before the 
Olympics, staffing has since been drastically reduced to only 
two employees. Most trained officers were assigned only to 
assist in Piraeus during the Olympic Games  (note: two 
employees are required to operate an NII machine). 
Therefore, in the absence of one Greek staffer, through leave 
or illness, inspection is impossible without assistance from 
CBP officers.  CSI program guidance also recommends a third 
staff member be present to maintain a secure perimeter around 
the inspection site.  The Port Authority maintains that 
another dedicated staff member is not required because of the 
placement of the inspection facility with a secure zone. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  The efficiency of the CSI program is being affected 
by the poor location and insufficient size of the NII 
inspection site.  Due to these constraints, only three to 
twelve containers are scanned per day, a number that could be 
30-40, given even a handful more employees and better 
positioning of the inspection site.  USCBP officers have 
raised this issue with their Greek counterparts and are 
exploring remedial options. 
 
EXTENDING LOAN ON INSPECTION EQUIPMENT 
-------------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU)  In support of the 2004 Olympic Games, CBP and GoG 
signed an MOU lending two NII machines to the GoG.  It was 
agreed that the Greek Customs Service would return one 
machine following the Games, which was done, and the other 
after one year.  In an August 9 meeting with Apostolos 
Tsigakos, advisor to Deputy Minister of Finance Adam 
 
SIPDIS 
Regouzas, ICE Attache and CBP CSI Team Leader were asked for 
a one-year extension on the loan of the remaining NII machine. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The impetus behind this request is a move by the EU 
to support the installation of non-intrusive imaging devices 
at key Greek land and sea ports of entry.  The EU will cover 
seventy-five percent of the 16 million euro cost, with the 
GoG funding the remainder.  It seems likely, therefore, that 
the GoG will at least delay, if not cancel, the tender 
circulated by the previous PASOK government for one NII 
machine for CSI so that it can be included in a new tender 
along with the EU funded procurements. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  CBP HQ has agreed to a six month extension of the 
loan of the NII equipment on the condition that two 
additional Greek Customs Officers be assigned to CSI as well 
as an improvement in the inspection site to increase the 
number of inspections.  Assurances that these conditions will 
be met were given by Mr. Tsigakos at the August 9 meeting. 
Prior to the end of the six month extension, CBP will 
consider a GoG request for any additional loan of NII 
equipment. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Comment:  In the lead up to the Olympic Games, the 
GoG made great strides to effectively implement the CSI. 
Following the successful conclusion of the Games, GoG has 
paid less attention to inspection, much to the frustration of 
CBP officers assigned to the Port of Piraeus.  Post will 
continue to support GoG efforts, however, and push for 
additional GoG resources to be devoted to the program.  With 
the EU pushing for the expansion of the program, however, and 
its willingness to provide substantial financial support, the 
GoG will hopefully proceed with effective execution and 
expansion of CSI.  End comment. 
RIES