05BAGHDAD2521
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ GOVERNMENT PROGRAM, AND
Wed Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002521 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, 
INR/P 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ GOVERNMENT PROGRAM, AND 
TERRORISM; BAGHDAD 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The major themes in the daily newspapers on 
June 15 were the process of drafting the constitution, the 
political situation and security. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "The government's program" (Al-Ittihad, 6/15) 
¶B. "Our weapon and their weapon" (Al-Adala, 6/15) 
 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "The government's program" (6/15) 
 
Al-Ittihad (affiliated with PUK led by Jalal Talabani) 
published a page four editorial by Abdul Munim Al-Assam 
about Al-Jafari's political program: 
 
"All politicians know that a government's program must call 
for unity and represent the diverse voices of all people it 
represents. A successful program doesn't only speak in the 
name of the majority, nor does it represent the authority 
of a specific leadership. A successful program must 
encourage all political parties, parliamentary blocs and 
civil society organizations to participate in the political 
process without restraint. A successful program must strive 
to end all conflicts and disagreements amongst all 
political parties and sects. It must also call for the 
reconciliation of all its members. 
 
Unless there is unity, trust, and cooperation in the 
government, its promises will not be trusted, it will not 
be able to achieve its goals and the hopes and dreams of 
its people will not be realized. 
 
A successful program avoids mismanagement and its programs 
are creatively drafted.  It must include all of the joint 
visions and opinions of its people and it must represent 
the ambitions of all sects, ethnicities, and societal 
components. 
 
Writing the government's program is a difficult process. 
Politicians must be able to use the science of tactics, the 
art of reconnaissance, and the skill of an economics 
professor. The program must avoid using confusing idioms 
and never include deceit. 
 
I recall these points when reading Al-Jafari's political 
program.  It reads more like a testament of his own 
personal viewpoint than like a political program.  In fact 
Al-Jafari's program is so far from being a true political 
program that it is like the difference between a star and a 
moon." 
 
 
¶B. "Our weapon and their weapon" (6/15) 
 
Al-Adala (affiliated with SCIRI) published a third-page 
editorial by Dr. Ali Khalif about the developments of the 
security situations in Iraq: 
 
"Day by day we see that the security situation is getting 
better. We have noticed that the efforts of Operation 
Lightning have started to yield tangible results.  The 
number of terrorist attacks has started to decrease. This 
gives us hope that terrorism will end within the next few 
days.  The cooperation between the Ministries of Defense 
and the Interior has brought us this improvement in the 
security situation. 
 
However, there has been a wave of statements in the media 
that have attempted to characterize Operation Lightning as 
a negative undertaking.  No matter what they have said, we 
are certain that the brave men of Operation Lightning will 
terminate terrorism.  We are also certain that our security 
forces are able to provide security and stability in Iraq 
and will continue to do so once the terrorists are gone. 
 
As we have always said and will continue to say, the future 
will be for honest Iraqis. Iraq has no place for 
terrorists.  The government is putting an end to the 
terrorists so of course they are attempting to stop the new 
day from dawning in Iraq. 
 
The terrorists are trying to recreate instability in our 
country by their chaotic and random attacks.  But they will 
not succeed.  It is their ignorance and hatred that will be 
their undoing.  They have played out their hands and have 
nothing more to do but admit their incompatibility with the 
future and surrender. 
 
They cannot stop Iraqis from building a united and 
democratic Iraq.  Vice President Adel Abdul Mahdi said that 
Iraq's enemies are armed with ferocity, terrorism, car 
bombs and beheadings.  They want to stop our progress and 
we must be armed with our people's support.  He also said 
that we must rehabilitate our security forces. 
 
Therefore, it is clear what weapon terrorism uses and its 
ideology is known to everyone. At the same time, the 
government's weapon is also clear.  It is represented by 
the brave Iraqi people, who defeated terrorism on Election 
Day and will continue to defeat it in each upcoming battle 
because the future is for Iraq and honest Iraqis." 
 
JEFFREY