05BAGHDAD4272
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004272 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
 
REFERENDUM, NATIONAL RECONCILIATION; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, and 
National Reconciliation were the major editorial themes of 
the daily newspapers on October 17, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Iraq Between Two Constitutions: Regardless of Results" 
(Asharq Al-Awsat, 10/17) 
¶B. "Significant Step and Huge Accomplishment" (Al-Adala, 
10/17) 
¶C. "Rice Announces Results Before the Vote Count" (Al-Quds 
Al-Arabi, 10/17) 
¶D. "Now.Towards Reconciliation"  (Al-Hayat, 10/17) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
[Editor's note: due to the four-day national referendum 
holiday, Iraqi newspapers are in limited production; only 
one (Al-Adala) has resumed publication today] 
 
¶A. "Iraq Between Two Constitutions: Regardless of Results" 
(Asharq Al-Awsat, London-based, independent, Saudi owned, 
published this page-ten editorial by Jabber Habib Jabber) 
 
"When I was still a student at the Faculty of Law & 
Politics, I remember a Moroccan colleague of mine asking me 
who Saddam's successor, following his death, would be. In 
fact, I could not speak about that issue because it would 
have caused problems for me and for that reason I told him 
to ask the relevant professor. Today, I remember that event 
when I see how media outlets and TV news channels freely 
discuss constitutional issues without any fear of 
retribution from the government. 
 
"Some Pan-Arab channels have dedicated themselves to 
speaking out against the Iraqi constitution and have tried 
to illustrate that it was drafted by the Americans; some 
channels described those who drafted the Iraqi constitution 
as traitors and collaborators. However, those who criticize 
the current Iraqi constitution must know that this 
constitution was drafted for a country that is characterized 
by diversity and this constitution moves Iraq from 
disharmony to harmony. 
 
"This constitution was drafted on the ruins of a dictatorial 
regime that has distorted Iraqi identity. The current Iraqi 
constitution respects Shariah while respecting and applying 
democracy and human rights. This constitution, on which 
Iraqis voted, represents the seventh constitution in Iraq's 
history. It seems that this constitution and the first one 
in 1925, are the only two Iraqi constitutions that were 
drafted by an elected assembly while all others were written 
by rulers. It is interesting that these two constitutions 
were drafted under occupation; this first under British 
occupation and the current one under American occupation. 
 
"Usually constitutions are drafted by rulers, an elected 
assembly or through a public referendum. The current 
constitution allows any three provinces to reject it, giving 
the minority the right of veto. In fact, it has even given 
rights to small minorities to reject the constitution. I do 
not think there is any former constitution that has given 
the Iraqi people the same guarantees and rights as the 
current constitution. We know that even the United States' 
constitution allowed up to six states to reject it and that 
was during a time when the United States was comprised of 
only thirteen states. 
 
"The Americans have been hopeful that the Sunni Arabs would 
join the political process through their participation in 
the drafting of the constitution to ensure its success. For 
this reason, the recent American move has caused dissenting 
Iraqi politicians to become more flexible and make 
compromises to Sunni Arabs in order to achieve national 
consensus. 
 
"I think that the chances of the constitution's rejection 
are improbable. However if this happens, armed groups in 
Iraq will think that they are able to disrupt the political 
process. In addition, these groups will believe that they 
have popular support and rejection of the constitution will 
increase sectarianism in the political process and this will 
cause those who made compromises to retract them. Amid hope 
for the future, Iraqis went out to vote in order to build 
their costly democracy." 
¶B. "Significant Step and Huge Accomplishment" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three editorial by Dr. Ali Khalif) 
 
"Iraqis went out on October 15 armed with a challenge and a 
hope that a shining future would be realized through a new 
constitution. It was a big day filled with happiness while 
Iraqis decided to leave everything behind and to choose 
their way forward, by themselves, and announced their 
approval for the constitution as a gateway to progress 
towards democracy and freedom. 
"Regardless of a positive or negative outcome, what we have 
seen on the great referendum day is the happiness that has 
appeared on the faces of Iraqi voters while they were 
walking long distances to go to polling centers to cast 
their votes. The fact that no one can deny or hide is that 
Iraqis have defeated the terrorists. 
 
"Whatever we say about the referendum day is not an 
exaggeration because this day has broken the backs of 
terrorists and their supporters. Those who had bet on the 
failure of the political process and the government should 
reconsider their positions. 
 
"What Iraqis have registered through their votes has 
emphasized a real willingness in practicing the democratic 
process. However, what Iraqis have achieved would never have 
happened unless there were sacrifices by the people and 
their friends [Coalition Forces] who helped in practicing 
this democratic process. Therefore, the blood of freedom has 
been mixed [between Iraqis and Coalition Forces]. Many 
victims have fallen in Iraq in order to establish freedom 
and democracy for all Iraqis. 
 
"The most marvelous thing from the referendum is that voters 
cast their votes freely without any pressure. The era of 
dictatorship and tyranny is over, and it is now time for 
freedom and democracy to prevail in the new Iraq." 
 
¶C. "Rice Announces Results Before the Vote Count" 
(Al-Quds Al-Arabi, independent, Palestinian owned, London- 
based anti-coalition published this page nineteen 
unattributed editorial) 
 
"The U.S. Secretary of State Condolezza Rice announced the 
results of Iraqi voting on the draft constitution, even 
before the IECI had given its account, when she commented in 
London that the Iraqi people had likely approved the 
constitution. 
 
"These statements mean that the U.S. administration is 
determined to go forward with its political process in Iraq 
and that all measures have been taken to pass the 
constitution regardless of the results of voting. What needs 
to be closely monitored in the coming days is the 
announcement of final results of the referendum-particularly 
the percentages from the four majority Sunni provinces. 
 
"The U.S. administration made a clever move by rejecting the 
TNA amendment to the election law ensuring that the voting 
process would be honest and announcing it would be committed 
regardless of the outcome of the referendum. 
 
"According to Saleh Al-Mutlak, the spokesman for the [Sunni] 
National Dialogue Council, `The monitors at the voting sites 
said Iraqis gave a strong `No' for the constitution that 
aims to divide Iraq and alienate people from their 
surroundings.' 
 
"The primary results reported that Sunnis voted `No' (by 
more than 70%) in Salahadin and Al-Anbar provinces, but the 
`Yes' percentage in Mosul province reached 70%, meaning the 
rejecters may not reach numbers necessary to reject the 
constitution. The new constitution, whether approved or not, 
is considered a recipe for sedition in Iraq, it enhances 
sectarianism and psychological division among the people of 
Iraq. 
 
"President Bush praised the voting process, and he is right 
in that, because what he is trying to impose in Iraq serves 
his agenda; not Iraqi's national agenda. The U.S. wants to 
prove that the political process is working well in Iraq and 
that the upcoming elections are proof of democracy, while 
the reality on the ground is totally different. Car bombs, 
the lack of security or water, power shortages, and the 
Iraqi government's retreat to the Green Zone are all 
examples of that reality." 
 
¶D. "Now.Towards Reconciliation" 
(Al-Hayat, London-based, independent, Saudi owned, published 
this page-nine editorial by Deputy Editor Abdul Wahab 
Badrkhan) 
"There was a rush by the U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice and some other European officials in their statements 
concerning the referendum on the Iraqi constitution. Rice 
spoke about the matter as if she knew the result of the 
referendum in advance. It seems that she knows that the 
result will be so positive that the U.S. administration will 
be able to think for awhile about how to celebrate the new 
victory in Iraq. 
 
"The primary results have shown that Salahadin and Al-Anbar 
have totally rejected the constitution. At the same time, 
there is a percentage of rejection in other provinces. This 
percentage of rejection must be carefully analyzed. We know 
that the overwhelming majority will settle the fate of the 
constitution. However, the previously unsettled 
disagreements about the constitution will force politicians 
to make amendments to the document. 
 
"It was clear that this constitution was aimed to make a 
specific move in Iraq although this country is not yet ready 
for one. For this reason, the idea of national 
reconciliation was presented again but hasn't been 
implemented because those who drafted the constitution have 
refused the idea of national reconciliation from the 
beginning and continue to reject this idea. They think that 
by rejecting it they will be able to exploit the current 
chaos in Iraq to implement their agendas. The Secretary 
General of Arab League, Amr Musa, has made reconciliation 
his purpose for visiting Baghdad. This visit comes at an 
appropriate time although some Iraqi groups believe it's too 
late. 
 
"We had hoped that the drafting of the constitution would be 
a type of reconciliation conference which we thought would 
encourage Iraqis to discuss their future. But, this hasn't 
happened and we hope that, at the very least, the proposed 
constitution will unite the country. However, this also has 
not happened. In fact, this constitution weakens the central 
government at the expense of territories and provinces. It 
also puts national resources under the control of specific 
areas at the expense of the country as a whole. It was 
obvious that this constitution is appropriate for a divided 
rather than united country. 
 
"The Chairman of the Iraqi Center for Development and 
National Dialogue, Mahdi Al-Hafuz, has done well when he 
called for holding a conference for national reconciliation 
and unity. This conference will support and legitimize the 
Arab League's delegation to Iraq. The Iraqi government 
should have called for holding such a conference rather than 
saying that Iraqis do not need reconciliation. Those who 
call for holding such a conference today look for a united 
political statement that can save the country. Their goal is 
to restore and reinforce national unity through inclusive 
national dialogue. We do not know if this conference will 
succeed; but I think it is on time because all hopes of 
reaching national agreement through the constitution are 
gone." 
 
KHALILZAD