05BAGHDAD4868
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Tue Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 004868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY, SADDAM HUSSEIN TRIAL; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials were the 
upcoming election and Saddam's trial. 
 
Analysis: Independent Al-Mashriq published a page-ten column 
entitled, "The Trial. The Game" critiquing the mechanics of 
the trial and arguing that it should have been an 
international trial rather than an Iraqi one. The writer 
accused the Americans of politicizing the trial; it was "the 
Americans who deliberately chose Dujail as the first case, 
for political reasons-they regard Saddam's policy from 1980- 
2003 as red lines that cannot be discussed." 
 
Independent As-Sabah Al-Jadeed's front-page editorial opined 
that it was important that the government fully investigate 
the assassination attempt that targeted Allawi during his 
recent visit to Najaf. 
 
Quasi-independent As-Sabah's front-page editorial, 
"Independence" highlighted the importance of the Iraqi Media 
Network (its parent organization) remaining free and 
independent. 
 
KDP affiliated Al-Taakhi wrote a page-three editorial on, 
"Why Our Votes Are Made of Gold" which dealt with its usual 
topic of late-the importance of voting for the Kurdish 
Alliance (list 730). 
 
The Shi'a Ad-Dawa newspaper published page-seven editorial, 
"Yes to the UIA" praising the list "because it was supported 
by the religious authority during the former election and 
its members have a long history of struggling against the 
former regime." 
 
Al-Adala continues dedicating page-five to editorials about 
the coming election. Al-Bayna's front-page editorial, "The 
Days of the Dictator Are Short" was critical of the trial 
and remarked sarcastically, "the bereaved fear that 
witnesses will withdraw from this trial as the lawyers have 
done previously. Perhaps if such weakness continues Saddam, 
the characteristic leader, may order the dissolution of this 
trial." 
 
Baghdad published a page-two editorial entitled "Read" that 
indirectly criticized the UIA list for making use of 
Qur'anic verses for electoral advertising. Another 
editorial, "The Impartiality of Al-Sistani" dealt with how 
some electoral lists are trying to use Al-Sistani's name to 
support their lists. The editorial warned, "those who claim 
to defend religion and the religious authority must distance 
those elements from political competition." END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Impartiality of the Election" (Al-Fourat, 12/6) 
¶B. "Saddam Says Long Live Iraq" (Al-Bayyan, 12/6) 
¶C. "Between Optimism and Pessimism" (Ad-Dustoor, 12/6) 
¶D. "Only To Win Votes" (Al-Mada, 12/6) 
¶E. "Hitting Below the Belt" (Az-Zaman, 12/6) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Impartiality of the Election" 
(Al-Fourat - independent, anti-coalition, published this 
page-two editorial by Majed Fadhel Az-Zaboon) 
 
"The upcoming election represents an important step to 
overcome the consequences of the American occupation of 
Iraq. In the upcoming election, there will be wide 
participation from all Iraqi political groups, including 
groups that boycotted the former election, and this will 
establish a parliament and government that lasts for four 
years; a government that will be able to make more active 
decisions than the former transitional governments, which 
led the country for just a few months. Therefore, citizens 
are looking forward to seeing a national accord government 
that puts the interests of citizens above all political and 
personal considerations and interests. This government must 
also start reconstruction and improve the conditions of the 
people. 
 
"In spite of this optimism, a large number of citizens fear 
that occupation forces and neighboring countries will 
interfere in the upcoming election or affect its results. 
This issue will cause unfavorable consequences so for this 
reason we should choose honest figures to monitor this 
election. Those figures must be well known for their 
integrity and justice so that we will be able to overcome 
any significant mistakes that may happen during the 
election. In addition, voters must have freedom to choose 
and distance themselves from any influences that may affect 
their choice. 
 
"The upcoming electoral process will put Iraq in front of a 
real challenge--between falling into an abyss and moving 
forward towards a new future. The next government must be 
composed of scientific and qualified figures who are famous 
for their loyalties to the country. In this way, we will be 
able to conquer sectarianism and begin reconstruction. It is 
very important for the next parliament to appoint the 
suitable man in the suitable place." 
 
¶B. "Saddam Says Long Live Iraq" 
(Al-Bayyan - affiliated with Ad-Dawa (led by Al-Ja'fari), no 
bias, published this page-five editorial by Salim Rasoul) 
 
"I and the citizens of Dujail would like to reproach our 
people for not participating in demonstrations during 
Saddam's trial. We know that there were demonstrations in 
Najaf, Sadr City and some other areas in Baghdad but these 
demonstrations were small compared to Saddam's massacres. I 
think our people should interact to show our suffering and 
demonstrate how much we were tyrannized during the era of 
the former regime. We must put pressure on this weak and 
very transparent trial. We know that the Iraqi people will 
demand strict punishment for the rat. 
 
"I have seen with my own eyes a group of people erecting a 
tent at a gate of the Green Zone shouting slogans demanding 
strict punishment for the criminal Saddam. I said that 
millions of people should join this group so that the entire 
world will know that all Iraqis demand the execution of 
Saddam. Perhaps, those who benefited from the oil coupons 
[i.e. corruption] like Ramsey Clark and the Qatari former 
minister of justice would feel ashamed because they are 
standing against the will of the Iraqi people. 
 
"Why is the court so cold? This is Saddam and his name 
evokes memories of dark nights, terrible prisons and 
innocent blood and tears. Saddam said in one of his useless 
speeches in front of the cold court, `Long live Iraq.' I do 
not know how he can greet Iraq with such a salutation. How 
can he address Iraq while he destroyed its economy? How can 
he speak to Iraq while he devastated Iraqis? But, then again 
what should we expect from Saddam. We feel sad when we see 
Saddam give his useless bombastic and speeches in court." 
 
¶C. "Between Optimism and Pessimism" 
(Ad-Dustoor - independent, no bias, published this front- 
page editorial by Bassim Al-Sheikh) 
 
"If we think about what will happen after convening the 
election we will see that we have two choices, either 
optimism or pessimism. The optimist will see that violence, 
fear, terrorism, death and corruption will come to an end 
with the stabilization of the situation in Iraq. On the 
other hand, the pessimist will see that the upcoming stages 
will be dangerous and more disastrous than the current 
period. 
 
"Optimists are people who lived and suffered during a 
difficult era and they think that their conditions will 
improve. This group of people hopes for a better future. In 
contrast, pessimists are obsessed with melancholy and they 
believe that the Iraqi situation is on the verge of an 
abyss. This group of people thinks that the upcoming 
election will push Iraq towards the deepest abysses. 
 
"Between the two theories, Iraqi society is still under the 
control of the pessimists and optimists. However, rational 
optimism and pessimism can better analyze the Iraqi scene. 
We understand sometimes that we feel weak and unsatisfied 
but at the same time we need to have a little bit of 
satisfaction with our future. I think we have all the 
standards that enable us to overcome the current crisis. 
After holding the election there will be a new permanent era 
and this stage will depend on political stability, which 
will result from a popular determination that represents all 
spectra of Iraqi society." 
 
¶D. "Only To Win Votes" 
(Al-Mada - independent, no bias, published this back-page 
editorial by Amna Abdul Aziz) 
 
"Election fever is picking up its pace as the countdown 
continues. Electoral campaigns have addressed the most 
significant problems suffered by people and offered 
solutions, especially to the problems of security, 
unemployment, and other promises culminating in granting 
each Iraqi citizen a piece of land!! 
 
"One of the posters had the map of Iraq surrounded by 
darkness with a flash of light in the center where the 
candidate's picture was located, indicating that all 
electricity problems would end with that candidate wining 
the elections. The poster also contained the phrase, 
`Terrorism and power shortages are two sides of the same 
coin.' 
 
"The truth is that power shortages have worsened these days 
as we approach the elections which have also been associated 
with many assassinations and terrorist attacks to coincide 
with the start of the countdown towards the elections. 
 
"It is true indeed that power shortages and terrorism are 
two sides of the same coin, but will these two sides come to 
an end if this candidate were to win the ballot, or will it 
appear to be another set of unfulfilled promises that have 
no aim other than to gain votes." 
 
¶E. "Hitting Below the Belt" 
(Az-Zaman - independent, anti-coalition, published this page- 
five editorial by Ali Al-Jaberi) 
 
"The countdown for the upcoming election has begun and 
electoral competition fever has increased among candidates 
and electoral lists. This electoral conflict aims to gain 
votes of the Iraqi people. The electoral campaign has 
started by launching electoral promises, slogans and dreams 
and all lists have started to speak about the importance of 
achieving people's demands and wishes. It seems that they 
can make all our dreams come true but [only] after the 
election. 
 
"The first stage of the electoral campaign witnessed a 
diversity of slogans and posters. Many candidates imagine 
themselves the new leaders of Iraq. Wherever we go in 
Baghdad we will see posters carrying photos for a new 
dictator. We all know that slogans are not always useful. In 
addition, we realize that intentions of many competitors are 
malevolent because most of them dream of power and control. 
However, the second stage of the electoral campaign has 
witnessed a significant development. We started to see some 
electoral posters ripped down and other electoral ads banned 
from being distributed in some areas that are controlled by 
specific lists. Moreover, some electoral lists started to 
hit below the belt in an attempt to crush and destroy their 
competitors. 
 
"It is impossible to say that the stage of hitting below the 
belt represents a popular phenomenon. It seems that this is 
an organized campaign funded by some electoral lists to 
weaken their competitors. But, I am sure that Iraqi voters 
will not be deceived by such tricks. This kind of electoral 
competition is devoid of democracy and civilization. It 
seems that those who conduct these acts know that they 
cannot gain a parliamentary seat unless they destroy their 
competitors. 
 
"In any case, Iraqi voters will be free from all control 
when they reach the ballot boxes to cast their votes. I am 
surprised by the attitude of the Independent Electoral 
Commission of Iraq (IECI) and the current government for 
allowing this [mis]behavior to happen. They should have put 
an end to these practices. The IECI and government are 
responsible for providing suitable conditions and ensuring 
all political lists' rights. Additionally, they must protect 
all lists and candidates from, at least, hitting below the 
belt. We do not care if the hitting was above the belt 
because it will not cause damage." 
 
KHALILZAD