05BAGHDAD4198
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 11, 2005
Tue Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 11, 2005 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions of the future of the Iraqi political 
system, support for the constitution, Arab-Iraqi relations, 
and the importance of a permanent constitution were the 
major editorial themes of Iraqi, Arabic language websites on 
October 11, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "The Problem Is Iraqi-First and Foremost" (Iraq 4 All 
  News, 10/11) 
¶B. "Let's Save Ourselves" (Kitabat, 10/11) 
¶C. "We Don't Welcome Musa Conference, We Demand a 
Constitutional Modification" (Al-Nahrain, 10/11) 
¶D. "Iraq Is Temporary, the Constitution Is Permanent!" 
(Independent Iraqi News Agency, 10/11) 
 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Problem Is Iraqi-First and Foremost" 
(Editorial by Abdul Wahab Baderkhan - Iraq 4 All News - 
http://iraq4all.org/viewnews.php?id=10292 ) 
 
"The new system in Iraq has not been born yet; it is only 
natural that the system needs time to settle down and show 
its character. It is hoped that the constitution and the 
referendum will mark an official start for this system. It 
would be difficult to say that there is `no problem' with 
this constitution; everyone knows there is a problem, and it 
will not be solved by winning votes from registered voters. 
 
"If there was not a problem, the National Assembly would not 
have had to pass its [new] definition: `more than two 
thirds,' before acquiescing to U.N. objections. Regardless 
of its necessity, that definition was an inappropriate, 
overt attempt at fraud; more importantly, it revealed a 
tendency to misinterpret documents to manipulate results. It 
was a sound step to revoke the decision, but the harm has 
been done. There will be a long lasting effect in the souls 
of people, as the attempt [to change the definition] 
undermined respect for laws. 
 
"The problem is that the view from the inside differs from 
the view from the outside. Sometimes it might seem to those 
inside that a solution has been reached and the problem has 
been resolved, while the picture from the outside reveals 
the damage inflicted on the country and its future. 
 
"If Iraqis argue among themselves, it means that many 
principles have not been taken into consideration, and it is 
an Iraqi affair. But it has demanded the intervention of the 
American ambassador in intense negotiations. Other external 
sources were asked to help, including international research 
centers and constitutional experts, to reach acceptable 
drafts, as if the problem was in the constitution itself. 
Unfortunately, Iraqis concerned with the constitution have 
dealt with this issue as they did with the former governing 
council, and later on, the TAL, the transitional government, 
the elections, the resulting elected government, and finally 
the constitutional drafting process. But this time thQmmitted the bigge 
st mistake of all. Previously, 
circumstances might have justified mistakes, but this time 
there is no one to blame. 
 
"The government shows a great deal of confidence in the 
constitution's success, and this might be understandable 
considering the circumstances, but this does not rule out 
the fact that an essential sector of society opposes the 
constitution. This faction's final position will mean the 
necessary pre-referendum national reconciliation has not 
been achieved, which will further delay the stabilization of 
the system. We are facing an Iraqi-Iraqi crisis, first and 
foremost." 
 
¶B. "Let's Save Ourselves" 
(Editorial by Hasan Abdul Razaq - Kitabat - "Writings" - 
http://www.kitabat.com/i8928.htm ) 
 
"Chaos, corruption, and death claim innocent lives every 
day; delayed reconstruction, unemployment.are all related to 
the absence of law and order. A government empowered by laws 
and authorities that enable it to efficiently lead the 
country-and all of the [above-mentioned] issues-are related 
to the absence of a constitution that would form a strong 
basis for building a secure and stable society. 
 
"Iraq, in its current situation, is in great need of a 
constitution that enables it to stand on its own feet. The 
`transitional' status is good for achieving nothing; no 
matter how long the period or how great the assets, it 
simply lacks the legal support that would repel opponents 
who launch attacks. 
 
"The current draft of the constitution is not flawless or 
without points of disagreement among Iraqis of different 
backgrounds. It requires discussion and assessment; despite 
all of this, and taking into consideration the current 
circumstances, this constitution represents a ray of hope in 
the tunnel that we entered four and a half decades ago-the 
tunnel of military governments whose interests were not 
served by people knowing the meaning of the term 
`constitution.' I do not believe that any solution is at 
hand other than holding on to this cornerstone and declaring 
that we will overcome this critical period and we will carry 
our country to safety." 
 
¶C. "We Don't Welcome Musa Conference, We Demand a 
Constitutional Modification" 
(Editorial by Ala'a Al Methji - Al-Nahrain - "The Two 
Rivers" - 
http://www.nahrain.com/d/news/05/10/11/nhr011 1c.html ) 
 
"We witnessed many ideological, intellectual, and political 
conflicts in the region over the past decades, which 
resulted in wars and material and immaterial assassinations. 
Our Middle East arena was crowded with differences and the 
conflicting parties (good and evil) were doing their best to 
exclude the others. Then the civil war in Lebanon began, 
followed by the Iraq-Iran war and the first Gulf war and, 
before all of that, the conflict in Iraq. 
 
"All the countries of the world adopted stances; the Arab 
countries supported the ousted regime.The regime was killing 
this, oppressing that, arresting this Shiite cleric, and 
executing another until Iraq was torn and most Shiites were 
killed. The Protector of the Eastern Gate [Saddam Hussein] 
killed around half a million Shiites in two weeks after he 
invaded Kuwait. Despite all of this, the Arab countries were 
not able to say a single word about `national 
reconciliation.' Shiite leaders appealed to the Arab League 
to say something about the killi]jiite Arabs. But 
silence prevailed and politicians dealt with the matter as 
if it was not part of their duties. 
 
"After that the Arab League's stance differed; they say they 
are `with the Iraqi people' and they interfered flagrantly 
in Iraq's internal affairs. What is new, oh Arab League?! 
Have you just now heard the news of Al-Anfal? Have you just 
heard about the mass graves? The answer is no, but we are 
with the Sunni Arab master and the slave should not disobey 
his master. A Shiite is an Arab, but of a slave's status. A 
Kurd is an Iraqi, but of a slave's status. This is the 
double standard that the Arab League adopts. The Arab League 
cannot accept Shiite Arabs as first class Arab citizens. 
 
"Amr Musa and Al-Saud started to activate the Ba'athists 
role in the political process. We say to the Arab League 
Secretary General that you are late in your project and it 
 
SIPDIS 
would have been better to send your delegate when the Iraqi 
people were slaughtered from North to South in the era of 
the Arab hero, Saddam Hussein. 
 
"I suggest modifying the new Iraqi constitution and 
including the phrase: `Sunni Arabs are part of the Arab 
world' and another phrase for Kurds and Shiite Arabs: `Kurds 
and Shiites are part of the Islamic world.' If brothers of 
Sunni Arabs refuse, as always, then we will suggest 
referring the issue to the people to vote on this item. I 
hope that our National Assembly representatives care about 
their voters' interests, not the Arab Nation that sends us 
car bombs every day-the Arab nation that blames us in its 
poisonous media. We also say to Amr Musa: `enough, enough,' 
and if you finish your conference then take your beloved 
Ba'athists with you because we do not need them." 
 
¶D. "Iraq Is Temporary, the Constitution Is Permanent!" 
(Editorial by Hameed Abdul Allah - Independent Iraqi News 
Agency - http://www.normal.iraq- 
ina.com/showarticles.php?id=1463 ) 
"Observers notice that everything in the new Iraq is 
temporary except for the constitution, which is unique in 
its permanence. 
"Suddenly Iraq became a temporary country with its political 
system, government, rules, instructions, parliament, police, 
army, and perhaps with its borders and flag. Discussions 
about sovereignty and independence are prohibited because 
everything about sovereignty and independence bothers the 
new Iraqi politicians, who promised to sacrifice their 
souls, money, posts, and privileges to maintain `Iraq's 
sovereignty, integrity and independence.' What more do you 
want from your politicians?! 
 
"I remember that one of the politicians who came to Iraq 
after his `struggle' with `modifications, eruptions, 
illuminations, and imitations' was asked by a journalist: 
`How will you bring independence to Iraq after you get rid 
of Saddam's regime?' He answered enthusiastically: `We will 
return sovereignty and independence to Iraq even if we pay 
the price with our blood.' He stressed: `We will sacrifice 
our souls to maintain Iraq's independence!' 
 
"This is not the point, but what attracts the attention of 
observers and political analysts is the constitution. It 
fills Iraq with disagreement and differences, debates and 
discussions, confrontations and car bombs, battles with 
words, hands, pistols and machine guns. This constitution is 
the sole document; its permanence is desired in a country 
whose government and parliament are temporary, its fate 
ambiguous, and its future unknown. 
 
"If you feel hungry, then eat articles of the constitution. 
If you are afraid, put the constitution under your pillow to 
bring safety and comfort. If there is no gas or kerosene, 
then let the contents of the constitution warm you up. And 
if you do not have ration card items, remember that you have 
a constitution that defends your rights. 
 
"Security and stability are not important for Iraq to 
prevail. The most important thing is to tell nations that we 
have a constitution that was written in ink, sweat, and 
blood. We are the model. We should be followed, as we are 
the sample that will be exported to the neighboring 
countries who export terror to us.!" 
 
KHALILZAD