05BAGHDAD4929
AVIAN FLU UPDATE: POULTRY CONSUMPTION LAGS
Sat Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101559Z Dec 05UNCLAS BAGHDAD 004929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FOR FAS/OFSTS, DLP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD IZ USTR
SUBJECT: AVIAN FLU UPDATE: POULTRY CONSUMPTION LAGS 
DESPITE END OF IMPORT BAN 
 
REF: A) BAGHDAD 4823, B) STATE 216147 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  From November 26-30, Embassy 
Agriculture Attache and Senior Agricultural Advisor 
visited Kurdish governorates and met with the 
Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) Minister of 
Agriculture to follow up on U.S. poultry imports 
since the lifting of the import ban on poultry (ref 
A).  According to private sector sources, 
consumption of poultry in Iraq has decreased 25 
percent since the discovery of highly pathogenic 
avian influenza (HPAI) in Turkey.  Post has 
disseminated widely the information provided in 
reftel B to relevant Iraqi officials.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. During Iraq's recent import prohibition on 
poultry, the information included in reftel A was 
provided to all relevant GOI ministries and to 
Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) officials -- the 
latter having direct control of the major point of 
entry with Turkey at Ibrahim Khalil (aka Habur 
Gate).  (NOTE: The information provided urged 
compliance with World Organization for Animal Health 
and World Trade Organization protocols. These 
emphasize that all actions taken to protect Iraq 
from avian influenza should be based on sound 
science and that, as an AI-free country, products 
from the U.S. pose no risk to either human or animal 
health.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶3.  From November 26-30, Embassy Agriculture Attache 
and Senior Agricultural Advisor visited the Kurdish 
governorates.  On November 27, they met with the KRG 
Minister of Agriculture to follow up on the poultry 
import ban, again stressing the points provided by 
reftel A.  The trip also included a short visit to 
the Ibrahim Khalil border complex, where Mission 
officers met with the facility director and the 
principal animal quarantine officer.  The KRG 
officials all knew of U.S. concerns regarding the 
import ban and agreed to work closely with the 
Mission in addressing any related issues in the 
future. 
 
¶4. Although security conditions make it difficult to 
gauge effectively the impact of the highly 
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) situation on 
domestic poultry consumption, private sector trade 
contacts indicate that consumption has fallen 25 
percent since the HPAI finding in Turkey and the 
subsequent closing of the border, which received 
extensive local media coverage.  While in Kurdistan, 
however, the Embassy officers visited a modern 
supermarket where they noted Brazilian poultry 
products (frozen whole birds and processed products) 
on sale.  Traders handling U.S. poultry products 
indicate their major market in Iraq is the Baghdad 
area.  The traders with whom the Mission has 
communicated all agree that increased promotion of 
poultry is needed. 
 
¶5. Post appreciates the additional background 
provided in reftel B and will continue to monitor 
the situation. 
 
KHALILZAD