05BAGHDAD3905
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Wed Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
CORRUPTION, TERRORISM; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Corruption and 
Terrorism were the major editorial themes of the daily 
newspapers on September 21, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "We Are Waiting for the Coming Election" (As-Sabah Al- 
Jadeed, 9/21) 
¶B. "The Essence of Political Statements" (Al-Adala, 9/21) 
¶C. "Is the Constitutional Drafting Process Enough?" (Al- 
Ittihad, 9/21) 
¶D. "Why" (Al-Manar Al-Yawm, 9/21) 
¶E. "Corruption, Terrorism, and the Victimization of the 
Iraqi People" (Al-Ittihad, 9/21) 
 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "We Are Waiting for the Coming Election" 
(As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, independent, published this page-eight 
editorial by Mu'ayyad Abdul Zahra) 
 
"Iraq political parties have convened several forums and 
meetings in preparation for the upcoming elections. In the 
meantime, new political movements have started to appear to 
compete with the current parties. For instance, we have 
heard that the United Front for Democrats has gathered 
together with several liberal movements (such as the Iraqi 
National Free Front led by Haitham Al-Hassani, the Arab 
Iraqi Movement led by Hussam Al-Ali, Iraq's Free Parliament 
that includes many politicians, and Iraq's Gathering headed 
by Adnan Al-Dulaimi and another movement has the same 
previous name led by Nuri Al-Rawi the former minister of 
culture). 
 
"In addition to those activities, we have heard that there 
is a new party called the Foundation's Gathering led by Nuri 
Al-Badran. At the same time there has been an initiative led 
by Dr. Iyad Allawi to mobilize about one hundred and twenty 
political parties and figures that include all Iraqis from 
across the spectrum. He wanted to form this alliance in 
order to gather all liberal and national groups in Iraq 
under the umbrella of the National Unity Conference. 
 
"Those political initiatives started presenting their 
platforms and organizing their alliances to play a role in 
the upcoming political process. It seems that competition 
will be very fierce and accompanied by rivalries that will 
include accusations and political clashes amongst the 
various groups. The recent news reports about corruption and 
bribery seems to coincide with the preparations for the 
coming electoral campaign. Perhaps, those accusations will 
make the political process more heated." 
 
¶B. "The Essence of Political Statements" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three editorial by Dr Ali Khalif) 
 
"Political statements must clearly indicate their real 
meanings without ambiguity. Many statements have been issued 
concerning terrorist attacks in Iraq and in particular the 
recent campaign by Zarqawi proclaiming war against the 
Shiites. But, some associations have issued statements 
ambiguous statements about Zarqawi that make it difficult to 
determine if they support or reject him. 
 
"They have not condemned Zarqawi but rather have given him 
religious advice to stop threatening people. If Zarqawi has 
been responsible for the massacres of Ashura, Al-Musayyeb, 
Karbala and Kadumiya and many other attacks, how can they 
regard him as a man of religion? The problem is that those 
statements advise Zarqawi not to target Shiites but tacitly 
condone attacks on the government and its civil and military 
facilities. I think this a clear provocation for violence. 
Moreover, those statements have warned the Iraqi people not 
to go to Karbala during the Sha'ban pilgrimage so that they 
will not be subjected to terrorist attacks. 
 
"I believe that we must thank them for issuing such 
statements because they claim they care about pilgrims' 
safety. But, they should have issued statements warning 
Zarqawi not to attack Shiite pilgrims rather than telling 
people not to go to Karbala to participate in their holy 
rituals freely. For this reason, there must be a very clear 
stance that either indicates they support Zarqawi and his 
terrorists or they are against him. They should not have 
issued statements that include some ambiguous phrases that 
are difficult to comprehend. The Iraqi people have clearly 
identified their enemy and for this reason statements must 
correspond with this fact. We welcome and appreciate anybody 
who condemns terror. However, this condemnation must include 
clear and accurate phrases and it must reflect a consistent 
stance." 
 
¶C. "Is the Constitutional Drafting Process Enough?" 
(Al-Ittihad, daily, pro-coalition, affiliated with PUK led 
by Talabani, published this page-four editorial by Hamid 
Tarish Al-Saidi) 
 
"Working for the will of the Iraqi people is the essential 
factor in properly applying the mechanics of the 
constitution and exercising its articles. Lack of will 
yields an empty constitution that is nothing but a nicely 
composed document, as was the case with the constitution 
during our tyrannical times when it contained a lot of words 
with little effect. Furthermore there is little use in 
affecting political change--this is the case nowadays in 
Iraq, although there have been several successive 
governments the results have all been deprivation, illness, 
and oppression due to the government's lack of will. 
 
"There is no doubt that promoting legal, political, and 
cultural awareness helps individuals to recognize and assert 
their interests secured through the draft constitution. One 
cannot imagine people demanding certain rights and freedoms 
and protesting violations without having any idea about 
constitutional protection as disseminated through the draft 
constitution. They should know the limits of the 
government's reputation for truthfulness and its ability to 
conduct internal investigation in the event of 
constitutional violations. 
 
"This is where education plays a vital role in establishing 
awareness of the constitution and its rights and freedoms. 
It is no shock to find an increase in illiteracy that is 
largely hidden among us-there is general lack of awareness 
and astuteness in Iraqi society and this is exactly what the 
former regime intended to ensure the continuity of its 
authority. Based on the heritage of our civilization and the 
multicultural composition of our society it shouldn't be 
difficult to reach new levels of education and knowledge. 
 
"The daily suffering and dilemmas confronting Iraqi citizens 
has contributed to isolating them and distracting them from 
real issues that prevent them from decision making and 
reaching their intellectual potential; this may contribute 
to a popular rejection of the political process and the 
efforts for Iraqis to secure their rights. 
 
"Thus, we should acknowledge the fact that it is not enough 
to have a draft constitution that includes beautiful ideas, 
but we must also possess sufficient mechanisms to enact and 
enforce the constitution while closing the loopholes and 
making it airtight." 
 
¶D. "Why" 
(Al-Manar Al-Yawm, independent, no bias, published this back- 
page editorial by Mahdi Abbas) 
 
"Why are innocent Iraqis being killed everyday in Al- 
Kadumiya, Baghdad Al-Jedida and other Iraqi cities? What 
have they done to be condemned by car bombs? Is it Iraq's 
destiny to suffer death, destruction and wars as a part of 
their life? Our war with Iran led to hundreds of thousands 
of Iraqi souls being killed in addition to large numbers of 
soldiers missing in action and prisoners of war who spent 
many long years in captivity that created a cadre of the 
semi-dead. Then, the second Gulf War flared up to destroy 
what was left of our youth and killed thousands of Iraqis in 
addition to mentally and physically disabling thousands of 
others. Since then, the American invasion of Iraq has come 
under the slogan of establishing democracy and freedom that 
will set a good example for the entire Middle East. However, 
our conditions have worsened day after day since the 
invasion. 
"Everyday, dozens of souls are killed and most are unarmed 
civilians who just want to earn a living. But, when will 
this Iraqi bleeding stop? When will the Iraqi people feel 
secure and safe like other normal humans in the world? We 
envy our Syrian, Jordanian and Iranian neighbors whenever we 
visit them because we make a comparison between our current 
situation and theirs. Blood, death, killing and explosions 
have become a usual sight that our children and elderly have 
become used to seeing everyday. This may destroy our 
children's spirits and create many psychological problems 
for them. 
 
"Our children feel sorrow when they are watching children's 
shows on Pan Arab satellite channels because they see other 
children play and enjoy life while Iraqi children cannot 
have normal lives like other children due to the threat of 
being wounded or killed by car bombs. In addition, U.S. 
military convoys pose a danger as do crowds that gather. 
 
"There is nothing left for Iraqis aside from their dreams. 
They can dream of security and stability and they can dream 
of going to the theatre and cinema and spending evenings 
outdoors in safety; may God help them until their dreams 
materialize." 
 
¶E. "Corruption, Terrorism, and the Victimization of the 
Iraqi People" 
(Al-Ittihad, daily, pro-coalition, affiliated with PUK led 
by Talabani, published this page-three editorial by Abdul 
Hadi Mahdi) 
 
"Iraq is a country of great wealth and I believe this is a 
real fact. When the last war began, political analysts and 
Iraq specialists expected that the country would be very 
wealthy and have the ability to reconstruct its 
infrastructure and pay its debts through oil revenues. If 
the fortune and oil revenues of Iraq are used productively 
then Iraq will not need any assistance from others--it still 
has many resources in spite of the wars and the disasters 
that befallen it. Session 67 of the Transitional National 
Assembly turned out to be a big shock due to corruption and 
the waste of public funds. These violations occurred because 
of administrative corruption that spread throughout 
government directorates and institutions. Horrible numbers 
exceeded all the expectations when it was discovered that 
billions of dollars had been wasted. This corruption only 
deepened Iraq's wounds. 
 
"The Iraqi people were surprised to know that the most 
egregious thefts happened in the Ministry of Defense which 
is supposed to be responsible for protecting the new Iraq 
from its enemies. The embezzlement from the Ministry of 
Defense is equal to the budget of many countries so how can 
Iraqis trust those who are stealing their country? And other 
ministries are no different, they're mired in corruption as 
well . Iraq needs a strict and "forceful policies towards 
anyone who tries to steal from Iraqis. Our country still has 
wound from the former era. Additionally, the TNA, which 
represents millions of Iraqis, should take firm stance 
against this disaster. It must reveal all of the names of 
those who involved in corruption. 
 
"Corruption is more dangerous than terrorism and the 
National Assembly must see that officials who are convicted 
submit to justice and return what was stolen. Moreover the 
subject should not become a political issue-that would only 
deflect from the issue and obscure the facts in a way that 
would hinder a solution to this tragedy. We hope that all 
political parties, especially those that participated in the 
Transitional Government, will take the lead in issuing clear 
statement that reject any members who may be convicted of 
corruption. Corruption is a big disaster that needs to be 
dealt with by extracting its roots. Those who are 
responsible for the fortunes of the people and then at the 
same time steal from them have already forsaken their 
principles and participated in the killing of their people." 
 
SATTERFIELD