05BAGHDAD3392
SPECIAL MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI EDITORIAL SUMMARY,
Wed Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, 
INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: SPECIAL MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI EDITORIAL SUMMARY, 
AUGUST 16, 2005 
 
SUMMARY:  The major editorial themes in Iraqi newspapers on 
August 16, 2005 focused on the constitution; specifically 
the issues of federalism, the role of Shari'a, federalism 
and the lack of sound economic policy. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "Our Constitution in a Free Space Now" (Al-Adala) 
¶B. "Economical Notes about the Iraqi Constitution" (Al- 
Mutamar) 
¶C. "The Meaning of Federalism" (Al-Mashriq) 
¶D. "About the Constitution Too" (Al-Zaman) 
¶E. "Federalism Experience Success in Iraq" (Al-Zaman) 
¶F. "Our Constitution...Our Future" (Baghdad Newspaper) 
¶G. "Federalism and the Unified Iraq" (Al-Sabah) 
 
------------ 
COMMENTARIES 
------------ 
 
¶A. "Our Constitution in a Free Space Now" 
(Al-Adala Newspaper (SCIRI) in Arabic P 2 Article by Dhia 
Abdul-Razak) 
 
The author believes that Islam and Shari'a should be the 
primary source for the new constitution and its laws, but 
not the only source.  He claims to represent the educated 
Muslim Shi'a of Iraq and indicates that they support current 
Iraqi government policy.  He states that SCIRI and most 
Shi'a want a strong inclusion of Islam in the new 
government, but do not want a government similar to that in 
Iran.  He urges the reader to give the drafting committee 
enough time to properly finish a constitution that the 
public will appreciate and respect.  "The average Iraqi is 
anxious for the constitutional draft announcement, as it 
represents a decisive moment for the political future of 
Iraq." 
The constitution differs from others in the Arab and third 
world, as it is being drafted under mutual free will and a 
democratic process after decades of a dictatorial 
government.  All Iraqi political blocs, sects and even 
individuals have been free to participate in the drafting of 
the constitution, and express their demands.  It is natural 
that there will be disagreements and compromises that will 
result in the need for more time.  However, a thoughtful and 
deliberate process will result in a strong, healthy 
constitution, capable of assisting the Iraqis in weather 
their current and future crises. 
 
¶B. "Economical Notes about the Iraqi Constitution" 
(Al-Mutamar Newspaper in Arabic Article by Kamil Abbas 
Mahdy) 
 
The author criticizes the initial draft of the constitution, 
stating that it fails to protect the economic rights of 
Iraqis.   He states that the language in the constitution 
fails to give the national wealth of Iraq to all of the 
people, rather it relates the wealth directly to the 
provinces.  "It fails to address important points such as 
environmental protection and proper financial 
administration."  He specifically refers to section three, 
item 6a, where the draft constitution addresses the 
government's responsibility for preparing general budget and 
development plans, and indicates that it should include a 
general financial policy for the country, including the 
provinces, governorates and governmental directorates.  He 
says that it does not adequately address the government's 
responsibility in identifying commercial policies, capital 
transfer and organizing the economical environment's 
policies.  He also says the constitution draft fails to 
clarify the government's responsibility to address economic 
and social issues like unemployment, social insurance, human 
resources development and public services, besides woman 
rights.  "The shape of the drafted constitution is not good 
for a modern country." 
 
¶C. "The Meaning of Federalism" 
(Al-Mashriq Newspaper in Arabic P 7 Editorial by Shamil 
Abdul Qadir) 
 
"Iraqi politicians do not have a clear and specific 
understanding of federalism. For a majority of Iraqi 
politicians, it is simply a word that they are being told to 
agree with or disagree with.  Many politicians do not 
distinguish between federalism and non-centralism, autonomy 
and local government, or between administrative and 
provincial federalism. Also, there are some who do not 
discriminate between independence and separation when 
discussing Iraqi national identity."  The author goes on to 
claim that the Kurds have the right to oppose putting 
federalism to a vote because at this time both the 
politicians and the Iraqi people do not fully understand 
federalism. 
The author supports the Kurdish idea of federalism saying, 
"Why should we oppose federalism in Iraq while this 
experiment has been successful in many other countries?" He 
indicates that the Kurdish leaders do not want to separate 
from Iraq.  "There is no statement for any Kurdish leader 
now or in the past that calls for separation.  These 
accusations come from Iran and Turkey." 
 
¶D. "About the Constitution Too" 
(Al-Zaman Newspaper in Arabic P 6 by Mohammed Sa'doun Al 
Sbahi) 
 
"All of Iraq's political leaders should participate in 
writing the constitution."  The author says that the few 
people who are writing it now were elected last January 
30th.  Iraq's elections caused a lot a trouble for the 
Iraqis.  It doesn't matter that these problems are common 
for new democracies especially when it is being attempted in 
a country that suffered under a totalitarian nightmare for 
over three decades.  The writer warns that the Sunnis, 
Shiites, Turkomen, Kurds, or Assyrians want to control their 
own interests.  It is important for everyone in Iraq to 
participate in writing the constitution because it is a 
national privilege. 
 
¶E. "Federalism Experience Success in Iraq" 
(Al-Zaman in Arabic P15 Article by Laila Al-Jnabi) 
 
The author states that the success of Iraq's federal system 
depends upon the government adopting the opinions of the 
majority.  She stresses that the government must begin 
political programs that ensure Iraq's unity.  She supports 
the idea of federalism by saying "since our country is made 
up of many religions, many ethnicities and many cultures, 
federalism ensures Iraq's unity. 
 
¶F. "Our Constitution . . . Our Future" 
(Baghdad Newspaper in Arabic P 3 a reaction editorial to the 
Al-Iraqiya show "Our Constitution...Our Future" by Ahmed Al- 
Hili) 
 
"There is a concern among many moderate Iraqis who don't 
want religion to be included in every aspects of life, that 
the constitution places too much emphasis on religion," the 
author states.  This is especially true for secularists and 
the people who hold views that can be considered leftists. 
He criticizes the show "Our Constitution ... Our Future," 
because the hosts were chosen from the Iraqi Alliance List 
which means they represent a particular point of view that 
is against pluralism.  He added that most of the guests 
(members of the National Assembly) debated with their 
counterparts in an unfair manner.  They pretended to be 
smarter than them, and made decisive judgments about what 
Islam allows and what is prohibits.  It's worth mentioning, 
the author says, that the National Assembly representatives 
(all are from IAL) tried to infer that Iraq is different 
than other countries.   They also said that issues such as 
personal freedom, establishing human rights, and emphasizing 
the role civil society and intellectual pluralism are 
impossible in our society as they go against our values, 
customs and traditions. 
 
¶G. "Federalism and the Unified Iraq" 
(Al-Sabah Newspaper in Arabic P 27 Article by Muhammad Mehdi 
Alasifi) 
 
The author states that he rejects federalism.  He cannot 
accept the idea of Iraq being split up into parts.  However, 
he believes that it is the legal right for the Kurds, the 
Shi'is and the Sunnis to govern themselves.   The Kurds and 
the Shi'is are important members of Iraq's society.  They 
share the same sufferings and had their culture, their 
language, their civilization, and their traditions denied to 
them during the reign of Saddam Hussein.  The author 
stresses that Iraq is made up of many parts and federalism 
will only lead to division and separation.