05BAGHDAD4452
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Mon Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
 
REFERENDUM, NATIONAL RECONCILATION; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, and 
National Reconciliation were the major editorial themes of 
the daily newspapers on October 30, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Message #2 to Mr. Saleh Al-Mutlag" (Al-Ittihad, 10/30) 
¶B. "21.41%" (As-Sabah, 10/30) 
¶C. "This Morning" (As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 10/30) 
¶D. "The Power of the United Iraqi Alliance" (Al-Adala, 
10/30) 
¶E. "Our Constitution and Proven Facts" (Al-Bayyan, 10/30) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Message #2 to Mr. Saleh Al-Mutlag" 
(Al-Ittihad - affiliated with PUK, led by Jalal Talabani, 
pro-coalition, published this page-four editorial by Abdul 
Munim Al-Assam) 
 
"Objectivity obliges me to bless your participation in the 
political process; this is the correct way to rebuild our 
new Iraq. However, the neutral observer is confused 
regarding your attitude towards terrorism since the main 
goal of the political process is to defeat terrorism. We 
wonder what the real reason is for the daily killing of 
innocent civilians, assassinations of Iraqi officials and 
employees, blasting of oil pipelines, sowing sedition among 
Iraqis, attacking electricity towers and water lines all at 
a time when Iraqis need to be reconciling with one another. 
Many observers are suspicious about your specific comments 
regarding daily violence in Iraq, especially your exemptions 
of violence towards the actions of the Al-Zarqawi terrorist 
group and former Ba'athists who are responsible for violent 
activities in Iraq. 
 
"Nonetheless, at times I have tried to find excuses for your 
political position-that you're trying to represent your 
constituents at a sensitive time. However, I have noted that 
you have permitted and excused terrorist actions and killing 
through different statements. 
 
"I cannot discern the features of the political group you 
are representing-you said that you don't represent: Sunnis, 
Saddam and his regime, the Western provinces or other 
contentious areas, objectors or other marginalized 
parties-so it seems that you are monopolizing Iraqi 
nationality and that you represent the group which deserves 
to control the country through war or peace. 
 
"We are even more confused about the political platform you 
are committed to when you reject Kurdish federalism and the 
deterrence of terrorism-you reject almost everything. A 
member in the constitutional committee said that he wonders 
what Saleh Al-Mutlag wants in the draft constitution and 
described you as a big `No' that has been amended to the 
list of articles in the draft constitution. 
 
"We should not expand our disputes regarding what is right 
and wrong in the complicated Iraqi political process and we 
should let reality judge the situation. Some politicians 
claim the right to proselytize while the rest of us are 
relegated to listening. Perhaps Mr. Saleh Al-Mutlag does not 
support political change in Iraq since he ignores violent 
actions against innocent people in Iraq." 
 
¶B. "21.41%" 
(As-Sabah - Iraqi Media Network, pro-coalition, published 
this front-page editorial by Mohammad Abdul Jabbar) 
 
"This is the percentage of those who voted `No' to the 
constitution, which is not an insignificant number. The 
constitution is a document for state-building, not a simple 
majority-rules precept for the political process. With that 
logic we can say the constitution is not solely a majority 
constitution, but rather it is the constitution for all 
Iraqis and for the Iraqi state which means that everyone 
should be committed to it and work according to its rules. 
Let us assume that the next government is formed by those 
who voted `No'--does that mean they have the right to 
violate the constitution? The answer is no, because the 
constitution is the supreme law in the Iraqi state and the 
roadmap for Iraqis whether they voted yes or no, whether 
they are in the government or in the opposition. 
 
"The constitution is legal and the decision of the majority 
is respected, but for the safety of the political process we 
need to devote much thinking to this percentage-not merely 
to convince those who are represented by the percentage, or 
to change the minds of others but instead to ensure their 
participation in the political process. Therefore, we need 
to establish a bridge of trust between those [who rejected 
the constitution] and the majority who approved the 
constitution. It is necessary for those who rejected the 
constitution to have representation in the coming 
parliament; they can seek amendments to the constitution-- 
from inside the parliament. 
 
"Our political process is flexible and can be developed, 
which is a good thing in our country, therefore we should 
expect that new amendments to the constitution will grant 
new guarantees to those who rejected it in the referendum. 
The guarantees will enhance trust among the two factions so 
rejecters can join the new government. A lot of effort is 
needed in order to get everyone to understand that the 
constitution is for all, without exception and for the 
interest of our country." 
 
¶C. "This Morning" 
(As-Sabah Al-Jadeed - independent, no bias, published this 
front-page editorial by Ismail Zayyer) 
 
"We agree with those who did not participate in the former 
election, that Iraq must be united and strong. We also agree 
that it is necessary to give those who did not participate 
in the former election a chance to have a role in the future 
of Iraq. If they participate in the upcoming election they 
will be able to amend the constitution. 
 
"However, I would like to tell those who wept for Iraq's 
Arabism, on Al-Jazeera and Al-Arabiya channels, that they 
should have looked at the social, economic and ethical 
points in the Iraqi constitution rather than focusing on the 
identity of Iraq. I challenge anyone to find a shortage or a 
weak point in the Iraqi constitution concerning legislation 
on: health, social security and education. 
 
"On the other hand, we must not be soft on the 
constitutional committee and declare that this committee has 
not committed any infringements. There are millions of 
Iraqis who voted `yes' to the constitution because they 
wanted to revive hope for a better Iraq. At the same time, 
we cannot blame those who voted against the constitution. 
But, the most important thing is that we must not let our 
people again encounter the frustrations and obstructions 
that accompanied the constitutional process. We have to 
prepare for the coming period and the one following the 
election in order to avoid a waste of time. The Iraqi people 
do not deserve such a waste." 
 
¶D. "The Power of the United Iraqi Alliance" 
(Al-Adala - affiliated with SCIRI, led by Abdul Aziz Al- 
Hakim, no bias, published this page-three editorial by Ali 
Khalif) 
 
"The current Iraqi government has achieved many 
accomplishments if we compare them to the age of the 
government. Those accomplishments were implemented in spite 
of our enemies who have persistently tried to focus on the 
negative elements of this government. When we speak about 
the current government's accomplishments we mean the United 
Iraqi Alliance (UIA) and its accomplishments on security, 
the success of the referendum and some economic issues. 
 
"The name of the UIA has been associated with blessings from 
the religious authority in the holy city of Najaf. For this 
reason, it has a wide popularity and it will present a 
platform for the upcoming election that will complement the 
current one. 
 
"Iraqi citizens must have real representatives who can 
satisfy the public's anticipations and demands. As everyone 
knows, the UIA includes prominent figures in Iraq and has 
the resolve to guarantee and achieve its people's wishes. 
Naturally, the Iraqi soul sympathizes with any soul that has 
suffered from tyranny. For this reason, we feel astonished 
when we see some politicians and political parties try to 
forget about massacres perpetrated by the former regime and 
its remnants. 
 
"We feel surprised when we see some of these political 
parties attempt to influence the Iraqi people by waging a 
campaign against the current government. They try to tell 
citizens that they made a big mistake when they elected the 
UIA's list during January's election. This group says that 
the current government did not achieve anything for its 
people because there is still a lack of essential services. 
 
"In fact, the Iraqi people have instinctive love toward the 
UIA's opinions and they are aware that terrorism will fight 
this government. The spirit of the religious authority's 
thoughts is present in the UIA whether or not the religious 
authority supported it. Honestly, Iraqi citizens obviously 
know which list the religious authority will support. 
Anyway, the UIA will strongly participate in the upcoming 
election especially since the Sadr Trend has joined this 
alliance--and we are sure the UIA will win the election." 
 
¶E. "Our Constitution and Proven Facts" 
(Al-Bayyan - affiliated with Ad-Dawa (led by Al-Ja'fari), no 
bias, published this back-page column by Karim Al-Baydhani) 
 
"The disharmonious notes are still sounding off about the 
constitution-which was passed by 79% of the Iraqi people in 
a uniquely democratic process. 
We heard recently that there are some groups trying to 
provoke people in order to reject the constitution, since 
its passage, by saying that this constitution is 
illegitimate, null and void and created by the occupation. 
 
"In fact, the occupation has nothing to do with this process 
because the occupation's withdrawal will not change, add or 
reduce anything. The 79% approval rate will remain the same 
whether or not the Americans leave Iraq. The constitution 
will endure even though it was changed, because this is the 
destiny of the new Iraq. 
 
"Our efforts to draft a constitution will not be changed and 
those who draft it would redraft it again as long as there 
is a majority. Moreover, the permanent constitution 
represents company with the most developed democracies in 
the modern world. I am sure that those who are still 
supporting dictatorship will lose in the end. The winds of 
democracy will devastate them and this new country will be 
established according to democratic standards rather than 
sects, ethnicities and nationalities." 
 
SATTERFIELD