05BAGHDAD5097
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Fri Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 005097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes of today's editorials were 
Thursday's parliamentary election, the crisis resulting from 
increased fuel prices, and the trial of Saddam Hussein. 
 
Analysis: In its back-page editorial, "Alliances with the 
People," independent Az-Zaman took a shot at political 
alliances based on narrow interests. The editorial argues 
that victorious parties should support the Iraqi people 
before entering political alliances. 
 
Independent Ad-Dustoor stressed in its first-page editorial, 
entitled "We Need the Force of Law," that the IECI must take 
strict measures to ensure that its employees will not repeat 
the same mistakes in future elections. In independent Al- 
Fourat's second-page editorial, the author vehemently 
criticizes the government's decision to increase fuel 
prices. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Dangerous Practices and Tampering with National 
Willpower" (Dar As-Salam, 12/22) 
¶B. "A Mechanism We Must Respect" (Al-Bayyan, 12/22) 
¶C. "Did the Independent Commission Lose Its Independence?" 
(Al-Mashriq, 12/22) 
¶D. "This Morning" (As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 12/22) 
¶E. "Mistake" (As-Sabah, 12/22) 
¶F. "Clear Conviction" (Al-Adala, 12/22) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Dangerous Practices and Tampering with National 
Willpower" 
(Dar As-Salam, affiliated with the Iraqi Islamic Party, 
published a front-page unattributed editorial critical of 
electoral violations throughout the process. The editorial 
reads in part) 
 
"The Iraqi people turned out in large numbers to vote in the 
parliamentary elections. But the government's parties' 
dangerous and harmful practices, which included rigging and 
tampering with votes, shocked Iraqis. For this reason, 
Iraqis have started to distrust the legitimacy of the 
elections. Unfortunately, some political groups seek to gain 
an [unfair] advantage in the political equation by using 
illegal methods. They claim false victories by filling 
ballot boxes with rigged ballots. Rigging and fraud will 
never result in glory or victory." 
 
¶B. "A Mechanism We Must Respect" 
(Al-Bayyan, affiliated with the Islamic Ad-Dawa Party, 
published a third-page editorial by Zainab Al-Khafaji about 
appealing the election results. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"The IECI is the only authority that can appeal the results 
of the election. Nobody can interfere with, or suspect, the 
IECI's work because it is independent, meaning that it has 
no affiliation with any specific political group. Those who 
call for contesting the election results started to accuse 
the entire electoral process of being rigged and forged. 
These accusations disrupt the harmony that Iraqis wanted to 
achieve by holding the election. The IECI will settle this 
case based on legal procedures. It is unfortunate in this 
golden period in Iraq to see some groups abandon democratic 
principles and create chaos in the community. We need new 
horizons to rebuild our state and we do not want to chase 
our old, fruitless disagreements." 
 
¶C. "Did the Independent Commission Lose Its Independence?" 
(Al-Mashriq, independent, published a seventh-page column by 
Shamil Abdul Qadir about election violations. The editorial 
reads in part) 
 
"There is no entirely honest election in the entire world. 
[President] Bush won the last election after a temporary 
halt, during which he was accused of rigging votes. The 
recent Iraqi election also included large scandals of 
rigging and violation. The preliminary results can be 
considered a disgraceful violation. It is not right for the 
IECI to announce results without studying the violations 
that were submitted. The ink was very easy to rinse off 
using any bleaching fluid. We can imagine thousands of 
voters voting multiple times at locations that were 
controlled by militias. Many voters in Al-Anbar were not 
able to cast their votes because there were not enough 
ballots or polling centers. Moreover, we heard that in 
Nasiriya an armed group belonging to a large political party 
set fire to buildings that belonged to Allawi's list. We do 
not want to accuse anyone, but we had hoped that the IECI 
would truly be independent. Unfortunately, the IECI has lost 
its independence in Iraq." 
 
¶D. "This Morning" 
(As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, independent, published a front-page 
editorial by editor in chief Ismael Zayyer, emphasizing the 
weakness of Saddam's trial. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"We cannot find any justifiable reason for the behavior 
exhibited in Saddam's court. It seems that the five previous 
sessions proved that this court is weak-especially with 
regard to the suspects' violations of the court's orders. 
The dignity of the court is a very important issue and the 
judge must punish anyone who violates its rules. But we have 
noticed the criminal Barazan clearly violating these rules. 
Today, we give those who killed and displaced millions of 
Iraqis a chance to enjoy freedom. But for the sake of God, 
martyrs, and the honor of Iraq, I call on the court to 
correct its behavior. We want professional judges who 
understand the huge responsibility they hold on their 
shoulders." 
 
¶E. "Mistake" 
(As-Sabah, independent, published a front-page editorial by 
editor in chief Muhammad Abdul Jabbar about the government's 
decision to increase fuel prices. The editorial reads in 
part) 
 
"The Council of Ministers has made a mistake by announcing 
its decision to increase fuel prices. It should have 
prepared the public before coming to this decision. In 
addition, it should have taken necessary measures to reduce 
the damage that this decision will do to the nation's poor. 
The Council of Ministers did not take any measure, perhaps 
because it was afraid of the people's reactions that could 
have negatively affected the election. Such a decision 
needed detailed discussion by the National Assembly. Perhaps 
people's angry demonstrations against this decision will not 
annul it, but we hope that this will be a positive lesson 
for the next government." 
 
¶F. "Clear Conviction" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published a third-page 
editorial by Ali Khalif about Saddam's trial. The editorial 
reads in part) 
 
"Iraqis watched the dictator's trial and they listened to 
the profanities that were used by the suspects. Without a 
doubt, the forthcoming sessions will allow the dictator and 
his followers to convict themselves without any help. 
Furthermore, this will prove to the entire world how those 
suspects dealt with Iraqis. There are some who are still 
deceived by the dictator and his false slogans. In any case, 
the forthcoming sessions will reveal the secret of the Ad- 
Dujail massacre." 
 
KHALILZAD