05BRASILIA1672
BRAZIL: RESPONSE TO UNCHR REFORM DEMARCHE
Thu Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 001672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KUNR BR UNCHR TIP
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: RESPONSE TO UNCHR REFORM DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. STATE 114051 
     ¶B. STATE 111657 
 
¶1. (SBU) On June 22, Poloffs delivered reftel points to Human 
Rights Division Deputy Director Marcia Ramos at the Brazilian 
Ministry of External Relations (MRE).  Ramos reviewed our 
points with interest and agreed that the UNCHR was in need of 
reform.  Ramos told Poloffs that the GOB is in favor of 
creating a legitimate UN human rights council to elevate the 
importance of human rights worldwide, and to eliminate 
selectivity and politicization in the CHR. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Although Ramos could not respond to every point we 
presented, she highlighted the following points: 
 
--The GOB is in favor of creating a human rights council, 
which would be a sheltered body to stress the importance of 
human rights in the United Nations.  Based on the GOB's 
interpretation of SYG Kofi Annan's proposal, the new council 
would be at the same level as ECOSOC and the Security Council 
to give leverage to human rights groups. 
 
--The GOB adamantly believes that peer review is necessary to 
eliminate selectivity and politicization in the council. 
Ramos emphasized that the GOB is in favor of a legitimate, 
independent body to evaluate the human rights situation in 
all countries and peer review will allow this to happen.  The 
GOB will propose that the new council collaborate with the 
OHCHR on a global report on human rights.  (NB: The GOB has 
been pushing, unsuccessfully, for the publication of such a 
report since 1996.) 
 
--Ramos stated that the GOB has no position yet on the 
elimination of the Subcommission for the Promotion and 
Protection of Human Rights. 
 
--The GOB is neither for nor against eliminating the country 
resolution system, but is interested in seeing how this 
system will fit in the framework of the future council. 
 
--Ramos stated that the GOB wants to maintain the 
Commission's current composition in the new council.  She 
then said that the GOB is "actually not very attached it." 
According to Ramos, the GOB is willing to evaluate other 
proposals, though Brazil is opposed to a universal membership 
proposal supported by Singapore. 
 
--The GOB is not in favor of imposing election criteria for 
membership into the new council, arguing that all countries 
should be eligible for membership since no country has a 
clean human rights record.  Allowing membership access to all 
countries, Ramos said, would bring objectivity to the 
council.  The GOB also believes that the new council should 
have equitable geographical representation. 
 
--The GOB is also in favor of increasing the OHCHR's budget, 
and giving the council flexibility in determining how best to 
allocate funds by unearmarking voluntary donations. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ramos mentioned the high-level meeting, which will 
be held in Puebla, Mexico, June 30-July 1, to formulate a 
working paper for the plenary meeting in New York in 
September.  She requested more information about who will 
represent the USG at this meeting because the GOB will soon 
create its delegation. 
 
 
DANILOVICH