05CAIRO8024
ACADEMIC YEAR 2006/2007 FULBRIGHT EGYPTIAN
Tue Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181215Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 008024 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/PPD  DBENZE; ECA/A/E/USS  JKREISER 
 
E.O. 12958:  NA 
TAGS: OEXC SCUL
SUBJECT: ACADEMIC YEAR 2006/2007 FULBRIGHT EGYPTIAN 
STUDENT PROGRAM 
 
 
¶1. CECEUS/E received 147 applications from Cairo-based 
and regional universities, government and private 
organizations, for academic year 2006/2007 Egyptian 
Student Program (5 in accounting, 6 in archeology, 31 in 
fine and performing arts, 6 in business administration, 1 
in computer supervision, 2 in development, 1 in drug 
abuse, 9 in economics, 11 in education, 2 in Egyptology, 
2 in finance, 2 in gender studies, 1 in geography, 3 in 
history, 2 in human rights, 9 in law, 4 in library and 
information science, 10 in linguistics, 7 in literature, 
one in marketing, 5 in mass communication, 7 in political 
science, 2 in psychology, 5 in sociology/anthropology/ 
refugee studies, 2 in statistics, 5 in TEFL, 3 in tourism 
m 
and hotel management, 2 in translation, and 1 in urban 
design). 
 
¶2. After a merit-based review conducted by specialists in 
the candidates' fields of specialization, 103 candidates 
were deemed eligible for interviews.  Ten binational 
selection committees, including at least one professor in 
the field of specialization and a Post representative, 
interviewed the candidates.  Criteria for selection 
included: seriousness of purpose; leadership potential; 
knowledge of field of specialization; potential impact of 
the M.A./Ph.D. topic on the field of the applicant in 
Egypt; and English language proficiency. The interviewing 
committees recommended 24 candidates to be considered by 
the final selection committee. 
 
¶3. On October 12, the Board as a final selection 
committee reviewed and discussed the 24 candidates.  It 
was attended by the following board members: Dr. Ali 
Abdel Rahman Youssef, President, Cairo University and 
Chairman of the Board; Dr. Abbas Ali Metwali El 
Hefnawi, President, Menoufeya University, Dr. Abdallah 
Barakat, Secretary General, Supreme Council of 
Universities, Dr. Ahmed Bahaa El Din Khairy, First 
Under Secretary for Cultural Relations and Missions, 
Ministry of Higher Education; Mr. Anthony Vance, 
Associate Mission Director, USAID, Ms. Elizabeth 
Thornhill, Cultural Affairs Officer, American Embassy; 
and Mr. Thomas Thomson, Vice President and Country 
Executive, Sidikrir Project. They recommended 19 
principal and 5 alternate candidates. 
 
¶4. Total funds required to fund all 19 principal 
candidates are USD 537,464.00.  Total available funds for 
academic year 2006/2007 Egyptian Student Program are USD 
322,000.00. The Commission requests additional funds of 
USD 215,000.00 to fund all nineteen principal candidates. 
The grant benefits are as follows: monthly allowance 
based on USG maintenance rates for students as published 
by IIE; settling-in allowance of USD 500; research 
allowance of USD 750; cultural allowance of USD 500; 
excess baggage allowance of USD 400; round-trip 
international travel ticket; accident and sickness 
coverage through Department of State accident and 
sickness program for exchange; and contribution to 
tuition fees of USD 15,000 for degree students and USD 
5000 for arts students. This grant does not cover costs 
for dependents. 
 
¶5. AY 2006/2007 principal candidates in alphabetical 
order are as follows: 
 
¶A. Mr. Ahmad Hamid M. Abbas, Lecturer in Art, Architecture 
and Interior Design, Performing and Visual Arts 
Department, the American University in Cairo. He seeks to 
pursue an M.A. degree in Design/Art approach to 
industrial, product and interior design or interior 
architecture (Degree grant). 
 
¶B. Mr. Ahmed M. A. El Gody, Senior Lecturer and Director, 
Media Lab, Faculty of Mass Communication, Modern Science 
and Arts University. He seeks to conduct research and 
collect data related to his Ph.D. thesis in the field of 
Journalism (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶C. Ms. Asmaa Kamel Shehata, Teacher of English, As-Salam 
College Language School. She seeks to pursue an M.A. 
degree in Education (Degree grant). 
 
¶D. Ms. Ayah M. Sameh El Said, Researcher Analyst, 
Egyptian Center for Economic Studies. She seeks to pursue 
an M.A. degree in Economics/International Macroeconomics/ 
International Finance (Degree grant). 
 
¶E. Ms. Azza Anwar Raslan, Attorney at Law, Al Ezz Group. 
She seeks to pursue an L.L.M. in Anti-Trust Law (Degree 
grant). 
 
¶F. Mr. Bassem M. Abbas, Trombone Player, Cairo Opera 
House. He seeks to conduct field research and take master 
classes in Music/Trombone (Arts grant). 
 
¶G. Ms. Eman I. Gawish, Teacher of English, Nursery 
Department, Kaumeya Language School. She seeks to pursue 
her M.A. in Early Childhood Education (Degree grant). 
 
¶H. Mr. Hazem Gamal A. Shebl, Technical Director, 
Performing and Visual Arts Department, the American 
University in Cairo. He seeks to conduct field research 
and take master classes in Performing/Visual Arts (Arts 
grant). 
 
¶I. Ms. Iman A. Y. El Ayouty, Teaching Assistant, The Arab 
Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transport. 
She seeks to conduct research and collect data related to 
her Ph.D. thesis in Economics (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶J. Mr. Kamal Kamal El Gazzar, Cataloguer, System Support 
Librarian, Library of Modern Science and Arts University. 
He seeks to conduct research and collect data related to 
his M.A. thesis in Library and Information Science Non- 
degree grant). 
 
¶K. Ms. Miray Magdi K.  Zaki, Systems Analyst, Linkdotnet. 
She seeks to pursue an MBA degree in International 
Business and Finance) (Degree grant). 
 
¶L. Mr. Mohamed Abdel Halim, Assistant Director, The 
Egyptian Small And Micro-Enterprise Association. He seeks 
to pursue an MBA in Medium, Small and Micro Enterprise 
(Degree grant). 
 
¶M. Ms. Noha Gamal Said, Assistant Lecturer, Faculty of 
Engineering, Ain Shams University. She seeks to conduct 
research and collect data related to her Ph.D. thesis in 
the field of Urban Design (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶N. Mr. Omar M. Nour Farahat, Associate, Baker and 
McKenzie Law Firm. He seeks to pursue an L.L.M. degree in 
Business Law (Degree grant). 
 
¶O. Ms. Radwa M. Badran, Teaching Assistant, Faculty of 
Commerce, Tanta University. She seeks to conduct research 
and collect data related to her M.A. thesis in the field 
of Cost Accounting (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶P. Ms. Rehab M. Shebl Zaher, Ph.D. Researcher, Faculty of 
Tourism and Hotel Management, Helwan University. She seeks 
to conduct research and collect data related to her Ph.D. 
thesis in the field of Tourism Studies (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶Q. Mr. Said A. Hassan, Conservator of Antiquities, Supreme 
Council of Antiquities. He seeks to conduct research and 
collect data related to his M.A. thesis in Conservation of 
Antiquities (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶R. Ms. Samar Gamal Nour, Teaching Assistant, Political 
Science Department, the American University in Cairo. She 
seeks to purse an M.A. degree in Political Science (Degree 
grant). 
 
¶S. Ms. Sonia Farouk Farid, Assistant Lecturer, Faculty of 
Arts, Cairo University. She seeks to conduct research and 
collect data related to her Ph.D. thesis in Hispanic- 
American Literature (Non-degree grant). 
 
 
¶6. AY 2006/2007 alternate candidates in alphabetical 
order: 
 
¶A. Mr. Abdallah M. Kamel, Demonstrator, Faculty of 
Archeology, Cairo University. He seeks to conduct 
research and collect data related to his M.A. thesis in 
Restoration and Conservation of Monuments (Non-degree 
grant). 
 
¶B. Ms. Nermine M. Atta, Researcher, EAIS/SCA Archeology 
Department, Egyptian Antiques Information System. She 
seeks to conduct research and collect data related to her 
Ph.D. thesis in Egyptology (Non-degree grant). 
 
¶C. Ms. Omnia F. Abdel Wahab, Researcher, Contact Car 
Trading. She seeks to pursue her MBA in Finance (Degree 
grant). 
 
¶D. Dr. Rasha M. Abd El Hady, Lecturer, Faculty of Arts, 
Alexandria University. She seeks to conduct field 
research and take master classes in Ceramic Sculpture 
(Arts grant). 
 
¶E. Ms. Samaa H. A. Hosney, Teaching Assistant, Faculty of 
Economics and Political Science, Cairo University. She 
seeks to conduct research and collect data related to her 
M.A. thesis in Statistics. 
 
¶8. CECEUS/E has forwarded copies of application forms for 
principal and alternate candidates to the Department of 
State and AMIDEAST via express mail.  Passport copies and 
complete medical forms will follow later. 
 
¶9. FSB approval is requested for the 24 candidates. 
Regards. Ricciardone