05CAIRO5652
THIS MEANS WAR":  EGYPTIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF
Mon Jul 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 005652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC EG
SUBJECT:  "THIS MEANS WAR":  EGYPTIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF 
SHARM EL SHEIKH TERRORIST ATTACKS 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Egyptian TV covered the July 23 Sharm El 
Sheikh bombings extensively throughout the day.  TV images 
immediately after the attacks showed emergency workers 
removing bodies from the bomb sites and assisting the 
injured, while government officials and intellectuals gave 
phone interviews condemning the terrorist bombings.  The 
print press gave banner headline coverage and lead with 
graphic images of the destruction on July 23 and 24. 
Commentary on TV and in print ranged from criticism of Al- 
Qaeda, to the Egyptian government, to U.S. foreign policy 
in Iraq and the region as being the cause of terrorism. 
Notably, many commentators used the word "war" to 
characterize the attacks in Sharm.  USG statements 
condemning the attacks and offering condolences to the 
victims received wide coverage.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Print coverage:  The day of the July 23 Sharm terrorist 
attacks, the pro-government press gave banner headline 
coverage to terrorist attacks in Sharm El Sheikh with 
images of the destruction.  "A String of Terrorist 
Explosions Shake Sharm El Sheikh" read the headline of 
leading daily Al-Ahram (circulation: 750,000).  Akhbar Al- 
Youm (circulation: 1,000,000) reported "Terrorist 
Explosions Shake Sharm El Sheikh."  English-language daily 
Egyptian Gazette (read largely by tourists and visitors to 
Egypt) lead with the headline "Mubarak vows to pursue 
'Battle on terror.'"  Pro-government Al Gomhouriya's 
(circulation 200,000) Editor-in-chief commented on the 
terrorist bombings, writing "this means war."  The day 
after, on July 24, the independent and opposition press 
gave banner coverage to the attacks.  "Mubarak:  We Won't 
Surrender to the Scourge of Terrorism and We Won't Neglect 
Egypt's Security" read the headline of independent Nahdet 
Masr (circulation: 20,000).  Opposition Al-Wafd 
(circulation: 50,000) led with the headline "83 Killed and 
199 Injured in Sharm El Sheikh Explosions"; while 
independent Al-Masry Al-Youm (circulation: 50,000) reported 
"Al-Qaeda Officially Targets Egypt; 'Saturday Massacre' 
Threatens the Fairy Tale of Sharm El Sheikh." 
 
¶3.  TV coverage:  Egyptian TV covered the attacks 
extensively on July 23.  TV images immediately after the 
attacks showed emergency relief workers at work moving body 
bags and attending to victims.  President Mubarak's 
condemnation of the attacks was broadcast live on Egyptian 
TV on July 23.  "The ugly face of terror has reappeared," 
Mubarak said. "It is a blind terror sweeping the world 
around us, intimidating innocents and targeting them 
wherever they are.  Now it has reached Sharm El Sheikh, the 
symbol of peace.  This criminal, cowardly act is aimed at 
shaking Egypt's security and stability and at harming its 
sons and its guests." 
 
¶4.  Print commentary:  "While we reject the attacks, there 
will always be a link between the terrorist bombings in 
Madrid, London, and Sharm with the Anglo-American 
occupation of Iraq and Israeli aggression," wrote the 
Editor-in-chief of Al-Wafd, Abbas Al-Tarabilly, on July 24. 
A columnist in Al-Ahram on July 24 hinted that the Sharm 
attacks might be "retaliation" for the way the Egyptian 
government investigated the October 2004 Taba bombings. 
The same day, Al-Ahram's Editor-in-Chief, Osama Saraya, 
made note of the date of the Sharm attacks, Egypt's 
National Day, warning the government and the public to stay 
alert during future holidays.  And a well-known Al-Ahram 
commentator sharply criticized those who "enjoy killing 
innocent people." 
 
¶5.  TV commentary:  Throughout July 23, TV hosted 
government officials, intellectuals, and journalists who 
offered commentary and condemnation.  Commentary ranged 
from criticism of Al-Qaeda and its killing of innocents, to 
poverty and corruption as the cause of terrorism (a veiled 
critique of the Egyptian government), to U.S. foreign 
policy in Iraq and the region.  Many commentators used the 
word "war" to characterize the attacks in Sharm.  Several 
commentators remarked that Sharm El Sheikh was seen by 
extremists as a target, as the city had hosted anti- 
terrorism conferences and President Mubarak spends large 
amounts of time there.  Adel Hamuda, Editor-in-chief of 
weekly independent newspaper Al-Fajr (circulation: 50,000) 
claimed on Egyptian TV on July 23 that a "powerful group" 
was behind the attacks, given the costs it would take to 
carry them out.  Dr. Refaat Al-Said, Chairman of the 
Tagamou party, also spoke on Egyptian TV, claiming that 
Egypt's "real crisis" is the "status quo" and called on 
Arab nations to fight terrorism together.  A businessman on 
the popular Channel 1 program Malaff Khass ("Special File") 
called on other businessmen to "speed up their projects" in 
Egypt to relay the message that "terrorism will not 
succeed."  On Channel 2's Al-Bayt Baytak ("Make Yourself at 
Home"),  Muhammad Salah, Editor-in-chief of the Saudi-owned 
daily Al-Hayat, claimed that "sound religious education" 
was needed to prevent extremists groups from exploiting and 
misleading people into committing terrorist attacks.  A 
journalist appearing on Dream TV's program "10 p.m." 
stated, "Let's admit to ourselves that there are sleeping 
terrorist cells in Egypt that are armed and well financed"; 
while Al-Nabawi Ismail, a former Minister of Interior, 
hinted that Israel might have something to do with the 
financing and organizing of the attack. 
 
¶6.  USG statements covered:  Egyptian TV placed the White 
House's July 23 condemnation of the bombing and condolences 
to the victims as the top news story following reports on 
President Mubarak's speech to the nation.  Secretary Rice's 
statement of condemnation of the terrorist bombings during 
her meeting with Palestinian PM Ahmed Qurei' was covered by 
Egyptian TV and news services.  On July 24, the Egyptian 
press  pro-government, opposition, and independent 
highlighted White House and Secretary Rice's statements of 
support on its front pages and international news sections. 
Post's condemnation of the bombings and its warden message, 
published on its public website, was covered on July 24 by 
several independent newspapers, receiving front page 
coverage in independent daily Nahdet Masr. 
 
JONES