05CANBERRA779
FIRST AUSTRALIAN HOSTAGE IN IRAQ WILL NOT ALTER
Wed May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Canberra
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CANBERRA 000779 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL AS IZ
SUBJECT: FIRST AUSTRALIAN HOSTAGE IN IRAQ WILL NOT ALTER 
GOA POLICY 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  The GOA responded strongly to the first 
kidnapping of an Australian citizen in Iraq by decrying the 
actions of the insurgents who seized him, rejecting their 
demands for a withdrawal of Australian troops, and affirming 
that Australia's commitment to Iraq would not waiver.  Short 
of giving in to the hostage-takers, the GOA has pledged to do 
all it can to assist its citizen, Douglas Wood, and has sent 
an emergency task force to Iraq to work with Iraqi and 
Coalition authorities to try to obtain the Australian's 
release.  The GOA has also asked the UN for assistance.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Australian leaders said publicly on May 2 and 3 that 
the GOA would do everything within its power to help 
63-year-old Australian citizen/American resident Douglas 
Wood, the first Australian to be kidnapped in Iraq.  Both 
Prime Minister Howard and Foreign Minister Downer made clear, 
however, that Australia would not accede to the terrorists' 
demands that Australia pull its troops out of Iraq.  In a 
video released on May 2 by his captors, Wood pleaded with 
President Bush and Prime Minister John Howard to withdraw 
troops in order to save his life.  The "Shura Council of the 
Mujahedden of Iraq" claimed responsibility for the kidnapping 
and released a statement with the video tape saying its 
actions were timed to coincide with Australian Defense 
Minister Robert Hill's weekend visit to Iraq.  Australian 
press also speculated that the kidnapping was related to the 
recent deployment of 450 additional Australian troops to 
southern Iraq.  According to media reports, Wood, an engineer 
who has been a California resident since 1992, was working on 
construction projects in Iraq when he was seized.  His 
American-citizen wife Pearl identified him in the videotape. 
 
¶3.  (U) Prime Minister Howard told the press that it has been 
his "great dread" that an Australian would be taken hostage 
at some point.  The PM announced that a special interagency 
task force headed by Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
(DFAT) Deputy Secretary Nick Warner, and including Australian 
Federal Police and Defense Department personnel, would arrive 
in Iraq on May 3 to liaise with Iraqi and Coalition 
authorities.  Howard said his government would do everything 
it could to secure Wood's safe release, consistent with the 
GOA's position of not giving in to hostage takers.  "We won't 
alter (our) position: we can't have the foreign policy of 
this country dictated by terrorists," the PM declared. 
 
¶4.  (U) Foreign Minister Alexander Downer reiterated Howard's 
position and reinforced that Australia would not pay a ransom 
or change its policy in response to kidnappings.  "We are not 
sub-contracting our foreign policy to terrorists," Downer 
said.  He believed to do so would only encourage terrorists 
and kidnappers around the world to take more Australians 
hostage.  "It's going to be very important, not just for 
Iraqis but for the world, that we stick with the Iraqis and 
help them promote their democracy, help Iraq become a free 
country, and to pull out now would be the worst thing 
imaginable."  Downer said the GOA response team would 
consider speaking with the hostage takers to persuade them to 
"desist from an utterly cruel, callous and inhumane" act. 
Defense Minister Hill, meanwhile, attempted to manage 
expectations, commenting on a radio program that he was not 
confident the efforts to free Wood would be successful. 
 
¶5.  (U) Australian media also reported FM Downer's request to 
Secretary General Annan for the UN's help.  The Secretary 
 
SIPDIS 
General reportedly sent instructions to UN officials in Iraq 
to provide all possible assistance to the Australians.  The 
GOA is also hoping that tribal and religious leaders in Iraq 
will play a role in facilitating Wood's release, as they have 
in previous hostage situations. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) DFAT Iraq Task Force Director Bassim Blazey told 
Polcouns that FM Downer was planning an interview with 
al-Jazeera on May 3 while in Washington to appeal for Wood's 
release.  Australian Ambassador to Iraq Harold Brown was 
cutting short his vacation and returning to Iraq to assist 
with the situation.  Blazey said the GOA was in contact with 
Wood's family in California and that so far they appeared to 
be reacting to the situation as calmly as possible, agreeing 
with the GOA policy of not paying ransom to hostage-takers. 
Finally, Blazey expressed appreciation for the "excellent" 
cooperation the Australians were receiving on the ground in 
Baghdad from the U.S. 
 
¶7.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
STANTON