05CARACAS202
PROJECT PROPOSALS: VENEZUELAN NGO TAKES ON TIPS
Mon Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CARACAS 000202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/G/TIP ETERNO, MENARES-BURY, WHA/PPC MPUCCETTI 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SMIG KCRM KWMN ELAB EAID VE
SUBJECT: PROJECT PROPOSALS: VENEZUELAN NGO TAKES ON TIPS 
 
REF: STATE 265981 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Per reftel instructions, Embassy is submitting a 
proposal by the NGO FUNDACEM for funding consideration.  The 
proposal includes research to understand Venezuela's 
trafficking problem culminating in a published report, 
developing training and public awareness materials, workshops 
with government authorities and NGOs, public awareness 
seminars for the general population, and legal and 
sociological assistance for victims.     In June 2004 
Venezuela was dropped from Tier 2 to Tier 3 in the Annual 
Trafficking in Persons Report because the GOV did not 
acknowledge trafficking as a significant problem or meet 
minimum standards for combating trafficking as established in 
the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 
¶2003.  FUNDACEM has GOV buy-in, previous experience with 
studies and projects, and a network of NGOs making their 
project both attractive and sustainable.  A list of five 
additional project proposals submitted to Embassy appear at 
paragraph 5.  We would also recommend the physical 
infrastructure project as a second priority if funding is 
available.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) In June 2004, Venezuela dropped from Tier 2 to Tier 3 
per criteria established in the Trafficking Victims 
Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003.  While Venezuela is a 
source, transit, and destination country for women and 
children trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation, 
in 2003 the GOV did not acknowledge trafficking as a 
significant problem and made no substantial efforts to comply 
with minimum standards to combat it.  While human rights 
organizations and police have received some complaints about 
trafficking, no comprehensive statistics about trafficking 
exist in Venezuela. 
 
¶3. (U) There has been some minor progress in 2004 and early 
¶2005.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) chaired an 
interdepartmental working group created in January to develop 
plans to combat trafficking in persons.  While the plans are 
unimplemented, the working group does exist, with the Crime 
Prevention section of the Ministry of Interior and Justice 
identified as the lead organization in the GOV,s emerging 
efforts to combat trafficking.  The International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) is holding a two-day 
anti-tip conference under the auspicious of the OAS in 
Caracas Jan. 27-28.  Representatives from the Crime 
Prevention section will be there.  Also, the Crime Prevention 
representatives asked CEM, not INAMUJER, to coordinate with 
other women's NGOs to participate in a meeting to begin 
discussing the trafficking situation. CEM has been working on 
women's rights issues for 12 years and has recently created 
and is continuing to work on a national NGO network of 
women's groups.  Although progress is slow, the USG's efforts 
have increased awareness of trafficking in persons as a 
growing regional and national problem both within the GOV and 
the NGO community that focuses on women and children. 
 
------------ 
The Proposal 
------------ 
 
¶4. (U) TITLE: Spotlighting and Fighting Trafficking in Women 
of All Ages in Venezuela 
 
ORGANIZATION: FUNDACEM, the operational arm of the Center for 
Women's Studies (CEM) Universidad Central de Venezuela 
 
DURATION: 18 months 
 
DESCRIPTION: The project is to be carried out in 4 stages 
including: research, preparation of materials for training 
and distribution, seminars and working groups to raise 
awareness and training with authorities and the general 
public, and publication of results. The project includes 
researching the problem of trafficking in Venezuela, 
collecting and analyzing statistical information as well as 
information presented throughout the awareness and prevention 
training, and publishing the results. CEM will prepare 
materials for training working groups, the authorities, and 
for a public information campaign. Awareness and prevention 
training is to be directed at anti-trafficking actors in 
Venezuela like the police and prosecutors, the Ministries, 
the Protection Councils, the judicial system, service 
providers (medical, etc. and NGOs through working groups and 
forums with speakers.  CEM's project proposal also includes 
an informational campaign to raise awareness for the general 
public,  and workshops throughout the country given by 
various NGOs (most of which have previously dealt with 
prostitution or violence against women and children).  The 
project would also provide funding for legal and sociological 
attention for victims and women at risk. 
 
JUSTIFICATION: CEM's proposal is a comprehensive program that 
addresses Venezuela's lack of information about its 
trafficking in persons problem, the absence of public 
awareness, and the authorities' lack of training and 
trafficking information. It addresses victim care with legal 
and mental counseling.  The strengthening and training of a 
NGO network to address anti-trafficking needs would be a 
positive and effective asset for sustainability of 
anti-trafficking programs. The CEM has both previous 
experience working with the GOV and buy-in from the GOV as 
evidenced by the Crime Prevention sections request for 
assistance on an anti-trafficking meeting with other NGOs. 
 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Increased visibility of the 
trafficking in persons problem, distribution of printed 
materials throughout Venezuela in different geographical and 
social areas, increased capacity for the authorities to 
combat trafficking and specific action plans to prevent 
trafficking and assist victims, putting trafficking in 
persons on the agenda for NGOs and human rights groups, and a 
significant number of personnel trained to assist victims and 
provide further training. 
 
EVALUATION PLAN: CEM directors will evaluate progress every 
trimester, meeting with trained government officials and NGO 
representatives.  They will attend follow-on workshops and 
training sessions and analyze reports from experts working to 
assist victims. 
 
BUDGET BREAKOUT: In USD 
 
Administrative/Professional assistance staff    12,000 
Research 
9,000 
Preparation of Working Groups-team and design   12,000 
Editing of Final Report                                3,000 
 
Design and printing of publicity materials            12,000 
Logistics/Publicity for working groups/seminars 30,600 
Regional Experts and Speakers                   20,500 
Bank Costs                                            14,865 
 
TOTAL                                                 113,965 
 
PROPOSED FUNDING MECHANISM: Grant 
 
EMBASSY POINT OF CONTACT: Carolina Hidea, Political Section. 
Phone: (0212) 907-8493. Fax: (0212) 907-8033. Email: 
hideac@state.gov. 
 
¶5. (U) Five other proposals were submitted but not selected. 
None were as comprehensive as the chosen proposal and limited 
to certain states or populations.  The CEM also has 
government buy-in and is well established with the ability to 
sustain the project after USG funding expires. 
 
--A House and Home. Submitted by: Women,s Association for 
Well-being and Reciprocal Assistance (AMBAR) (NGO). Budget 
$129,375. Shelter for victims of trafficking. 
 
--International Trafficking in Women for Sexual Exploitation 
in Venezuela. Submitted by: IOM. Budget $120,000. Based off 
Peru project. 
 
--Information Campaign to Confront the Sexual Exploitation of 
Children and Trafficking in Persons.  Submitted by: AMBAR. 
Budget $116,000. 
 
--Training the Authorities for Trafficking in Persons and 
Information Exchange. Submitted by: AMBAR. Budget $95,750. 
 
--A Childhood and Adolescents Free of Smuggling, Trafficking 
and Exploitation. Submitted by: UNICEF. Budget $135,000. 
 
¶6. (U) As a second priority, Embassy recommends "A House and 
Home" project with an 18 month duration submitted by AMBAR as 
a physical infrastructure project. AMBAR has worked on 
large-scale projects with victims of sexual exploitation in 
the past including an assistance and rehabilitation program 
limited by funding. 
 
DESCRIPTION:  The purpose is to create a shelter for women, 
children and adolescents who were victims of trafficking or 
sexual abuse.  Psychological, medical, legal, and 
educational/professional training services and a familial 
environment would be provided to prepare the children for 
reentry into their family (when possible) or societal group. 
Services would also be provided to parents and family members 
of those living in the shelter, especially through workshops 
and specialized training.  Some specialized professionals 
would need to be hired and additional training provided to 
current staff members. Follow-up with victims would occur 
after they left the shelter through home visits and monthly 
meetings at the shelter. With a trained staff and facilities, 
the project that began with USG funds could continue 
indefinitely. 
 
 
 
BROWNFIELD