05DAMASCUS6624
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Egypt, Syria/Iran,
Thu Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DAMASCUS 006624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Egypt, Syria/Iran, 
Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian Territories (12/21-22) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers on 12/21 reported President Asad's 
meeting with Egyptian President Mubarak, which focused on 
Lebanon and Iraq. 
On 12/22 papers reported a press statement by British PM 
Blair expressing his government's readiness to start a 
positive and constructive dialogue with Syria according to 
"a clear vision." Papers also reported a statement claiming 
that US Ambassador Scobey may return to her post in Damascus 
next month. 
Papers also reported President Asad's meeting with Iranian 
Vice-President Dr. Hussein Dahqan, who conveyed a message 
from Iranian President Ahmadinejad on the situation in the 
region and bilateral relations between the two countries. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"The Cairo Summit between President Asad and President 
Mubarak focuses on latest developments in the region. 
Presidents Asad and Mubarak review regional issues and the 
international investigation into the al-Hariri 
assassination. FM Shara: Syria contributed positively in 
improving the climate of the region.... There are no 
differences between the Syrian and Lebanese peoples.... 
There are Lebanese tools exploited to achieve narrow 
visions. Egyptian FM Abu al-Ghait: Egypt is satisfied with 
development of relations with Syria.... The summit comes 
within the framework of regular consultations." (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 12/21) 
"The UN stresses that Mehlis' statements on Syria's alleged 
relations with the assassination of former Lebanese PM al- 
Hariri are not accurate and his report to the UN represents 
the official stand" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/21) 
"Hizbollah casts doubts on the Al-Saniora government's 
desire for dialogue" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 12/21) 
 
"President Asad congratulates Algeria's President Boutaflika 
on recovery and accepts credentials of new Yemeni and South 
African Ambassadors. President Asad receives message from 
Iranian president Ahmadinejad on the situation in the region 
and Syrian-Iranian relations. President Asad discusses 
current developments in the region and mutual cooperation 
with Iranian Vice-President Dahqan" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 12/22) 
"Lebanese President Lahoud: I will not attend any cabinet 
session without the presence of Ministers representing the 
Amal Movement and Hizbollah. Lebanese Prime Minister Al- 
Saniora admits his mistake [in taking the decision on 
forming an international tribunal without obtaining a 
unanimous vote]. Head of the Supreme Shiite Council 
Fadlallah: The Lebanese people are capable of achieving 
internal stability" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/22) 
 
"British Prime Minister expresses readiness for a 
constructive and positive dialogue with Syria. US Ambassador 
Scobey may return to post next month" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 12/22) 
 
"Russian Parliament members express support for Syria" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/22) 
 
"One Palestinian martyred, eight injured in the West Bank. 
Jerusalem's inhabitants are prevented from taking part in 
the elections. Israeli War Minister Mofaz precedes his 
meeting with Suleiman [Head of Egyptian Intelligence] by 
threatening to invade the Gaza Strip" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 12/22) 
 
"Iraqi election losers unite to contest results of 
elections" (Government-owned Syria Times, 12/22) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
"Chorus of Sedition" 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive and constructive dialogue with Syria according to 
"a clear vision." Papers also reported a statement claiming 
that US Ambassador Scobey may return to her post in Damascus 
next month. 
Papers also reported President Asad's meeting with Iranian 
Vice-President Dr. Hussein Dahqan, who conveyed a message 
from Iranian President Ahmadinejad on the situation in the 
region and bilateral relations between the two countries. 
 
commented (12/21): "It is high time for the Lebanese to 
realize that their problem is not with Syria, but with the 
chorus that day and night plays the discordant tune of 'the 
Syrian conspiracy' to push Lebanon and the Lebanese towards 
internationalization.... 
 
"The crisis is in fact fabricated. It is certainly not 
between Lebanon and Syria, but between Syria and foreign 
forces that pull some strings in Lebanon. 
 
"Why are random accusations being made against Syria? Why 
are the Israeli factor and the Zionist-American scheme 
ignored whenever a murder is committed in Lebanon...? The 
chorus of screamers in Lebanon is in fact raising the 
demands that others make against Syria, not the demands of 
the majority of the Lebanese, who increasingly fear a return 
of the climate of division and fragmentation that will pave 
the way to a new civil war, while they have not yet 
forgotten the tragedies of the previous one...." 
 
"A Hopeless Case" 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (12/21): "Lebanese political leader Walid 
Junblatt's accusations against Syria are hellish 
imaginations.... 
 
Junblatt said recently that Syria terrorized Detlev Mehlis, 
chief of the International Investigation Commission into the 
Al-Hariri assassination.... This conclusion is horrible. 
Mehlis never said anything of the sort.... Junblatt accused 
Syrian security agents of sweeping Lebanon, but he did not 
ask himself why the Lebanese security agencies have never 
arrested a Syrian agent.... Junblatt probably considers the 
majority of the Lebanese people, who support Syria, to be 
Syrian security agents.... 
 
"The problem is that Junblatt offers all these imaginary 
items without presenting evidence or solutions.... Junblatt 
says something and its direct opposite at the same time. If 
this shows anything, it shows the extent of his political 
panic and his arrival at a dead end. The Lebanese people can 
no longer be deceived by the campaigns of deception and 
forgery. They know that the attempt to escape from a problem 
by creating further trouble has become a characteristic of 
some politicians. This is why many nationalist forces in 
Lebanon are calling for reconsideration of all previous 
steps." 
 
"What Follows Resolution 1644?" 
 
Dr. Turki Saqr, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
said (12/21):  "The strong Syrian domestic front has foiled 
foreign bets and plans against Syria.... 
 
"The post-Resolution 1644 stage requires two basic things: 
First, we must not be confident that Syria has overcome the 
difficult and delicate stage. The above-mentioned resolution 
might turn much worse at any moment, especially since it was 
fully based on Resolution 1636. Second, we must not forget 
that the domestic front has been Syria's source of power in 
all its battles and confrontations. The aim of the lies and 
psychological warfare is to exhaust Syria domestically. The 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive and constructive dialogue with Syria according to 
"a clear vision." Papers also reported a statement claiming 
that US Ambassador Scobey may return to her post in Damascus 
next month. 
Papers also reported President Asad's meeting with Iranian 
Vice-President Dr. Hussein Dahqan, who conveyed a message 
from Iranian President Ahmadinejad on the situation in the 
region and bilateral relations between the two countries. 
 
main response lies in turning serious attention to the 
homefront without delay or reluctance. The first sign of 
such attention would be parallelism and harmony between 
political reform and economic reform, and the improvement of 
citizens' living conditions as a top priority. If haste is 
unacceptable, speed is not. We have wasted much time talking 
about reforms and the fight against corruption. Now it is 
time for work." 
 
"False Courage and Lost Virtue" 
 
Isam Dari, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(12/21): "President Bush made a series of confessions last 
week, believing this might be seen as courage and, 
consequently, might lead to an improvement of his 
popularity.... Bush's confession that he invaded Iraq on the 
basis of wrong information and his statement that he ordered 
spying on American citizens led to further embarrassment for 
him and his administration and exposed part of the dirty 
American policy, which is based on lies and violation of the 
American Constitution and the principles of international 
law." 
 
"Bush's admission will not bring 100,000 dead Iraqis back to 
life or build a country that has been destroyed by the 
American army.... 
 
"The American people are paying a heavy price for the US 
Administration's reckless policies and adventures, while the 
rest of the world is suffering from a US policy that is 
based on lies and fabrications...." 
 
"Wild and Tame Weapons" 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (12/22): "There was a new fabricated report in The 
New York Sun, quoting a former Israeli Chief of Staff as 
saying that Iraq transferred its alleged chemical weapons to 
Syria a few weeks before the American invasion.... 
 
"Israel, which possesses all types of weapons of mass 
destruction, has returned to the same old allegation that 
Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, an allegation that has 
proven false.... 
 
"The allegation coincided with President Bush's admission 
that American intelligence reports on Iraq's weapons were 
wrong.... The former Israeli Chief of Staff called for 
holding investigations into these chemical weapons.... If 
the US administration invaded and occupied Iraq on a false 
pretext, who can guarantee that it will not, under Israeli 
pressure, fabricate more excuses to implement its plans 
against Syria and the region? 
 
"International accusations and inspections should be 
directed at Israel's huge weapons arsenal, which has been 
used to kill and displace hundreds of thousands of 
Arabs...." 
 
"Where Is Europe's Interest in What Is Going on?" 
 
Muhammad Ali Buza, an editorialist in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented (12/21): "The European position and role 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive and constructive dialogue with Syria according to 
"a clear vision." Papers also reported a statement claiming 
that US Ambassador Scobey may return to her post in Damascus 
next month. 
Papers also reported President Asad's meeting with Iranian 
Vice-President Dr. Hussein Dahqan, who conveyed a message 
from Iranian President Ahmadinejad on the situation in the 
region and bilateral relations between the two countries. 
 
in the region is ineffective.... Europe is not assuming its 
historical responsibility to bring about peace and security 
in this troubled part of the world. 
 
"The EU's summit proclamation in Brussels expressed concern 
over Israeli practices in Jerusalem and renewed the call for 
an end to Israeli settlement activities.... Europe is 
offering nothing but repeated sweet words meant for Arab 
consumption.... 
 
"The European discourse tolerates Israel's policies of 
aggression, growing Judaization, destruction of people and 
property, and killing of peace. The European position leaves 
Washington and Tel Aviv free to impose their agenda on the 
region, which is not in Europe's interest...." 
 
Johnson-Casares