05DAMASCUS6662
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Sudan, Lebanon,
Tue Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #6662/01 3611549
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271549Z DEC 05
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6341
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5684
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3588
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2047
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6831
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0670
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4183
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0418
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6569UNCLAS DAMASCUS 006662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Sudan, Lebanon, 
Iraq, Palestinian Territories (12/27) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers today reported President Asad's 
message to Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir conveyed 
by Deputy Foreign Minister Walid Mouallem on current Arab 
developments, bilateral relations and coordination for the 
forthcoming Arab summit scheduled in Khartoum. Mouallem and 
Mustafa Othman Ismael, the Political Advisor of Sudanese 
President, exchanged opinions on the Sudanese initiatives 
for boosting Arab solidarity. 
 
On Lebanon, papers reported current Lebanese contacts to 
hold a plenary session at the Lebanese Prime Ministry that 
includes ministers of Hizbollah and the Amal Movement, and 
featured statements by Lebanese parties rejecting 
internationalization and isolating Lebanon from Syria. 
 
As for developments in the Palestinian territories, papers 
reported Sharon's plan to expand settlements around 
Jerusalem and the Palestinian Authority's intention to 
complain to Washington, which it is claimed, has already 
calmed Palestinian fears of expanding Israeli settlements. 
 
The tense situation in Iraq continued to be a major theme in 
Syrian media, which reported controversy over the results of 
Iraqi elections and cited more Iraqi calls for a national 
unity government. Headlines featured a statement by General 
Peter Pays, US Chief of Staff, as saying that Iraqis want 
American and foreign troops to quit Iraq as soon as 
possible. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"A Message from President Asad to his Sudanese counterpart 
Omar Hasan al-Bashir on current Arab developments and the 
forthcoming Arab summit in Khartoum. Deputy Foreign Minister 
Walid al-Mu'allem discusses in Sudan the importance of 
boosting Arab solidarity within the framework of existing 
Arab institutions" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/27) 
"Lebanese parities reiterate rejection of internationalizing 
and isolating Lebanon from Syria. Lahoud underscores the 
importance of reconciliation and participation of all 
parties in the Prime Ministry's meetings" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 12/27) 
"Berri [Speaker of Lebanese parliament]: UNSC Resolution 
1559 has ignored Israeli occupation and Israeli violations 
of Lebanese sovereignty" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 12/27) 
"Sharon goes to extremes in ignoring the Palestinian right 
of return to gain votes in elections. Sharon expands 
settlements around Jerusalem. The Palestinian Authority 
seeks Washington's help and warns against isolating Gaza" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/27) 
"Iraqi calls for a national unity government. Demonstrations 
in Baghdad rejecting the election results. Three US marines 
killed in Baghdad. Ukrainian president contemplates pulling 
his troops from Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/27) 
"General Pays [US Chief of Staff]: Iraqis want us to quit as 
soon as possible" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/27) 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
"How 2006 Becomes a Really New Year" 
 
Dr. Khalaf al-Jarad, chief editor of government-owned 
Tishreen, said (12/27): "Lebanon was hit by a serious 
political earthquake in February 2005 through the 
assassination of former Lebanese PM Rafiq al-Hariri and the 
subsequent developments.... The work of the International 
Investigation Commission into the Al-Hariri assassination 
was exploited to besiege Syria and torpedo its strong and 
natural fraternal relations with Lebanon.... 
 
"On the domestic level 2006 might be a quality year if 
government performance is based on a critical review of our 
performance in 2005 and in all fields.... There must be 
clear programs with timetables and accountability within the 
comprehensive development and reform process in the 
country.... 
 
 
"As the challenges that Syria faced in 2005 were absorbed, 
thanks to the spontaneous national cohesion and the will to 
confront foreign pressure, it is necessary to reactivate the 
elements of steadfastness and domestic dynamism which are 
based on socio-economic activity and a political culture 
based on dialogue and respect for opposing opinions under 
the roof of the homeland with all its sectors, groups, and 
individuals...." 
 
"Not only for Syria, but for Protecting the Heart of 
Arabism" 
 
Elias Murad, chief editor of government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
editorialized (12/27): "The Syrians, who hoisted Syrian 
flags and expressed their love for their country and their 
readiness to defend it against foreign threats, were doing 
so out of their belief that their country is targeted 
because of its pan-Arab positions and defense of Arab 
causes. In this sense, Syrians were engaged in a national 
Arab activity rather than in a narrow Syrian exercise. 
 
"When Syrians express their readiness to make sacrifices for 
the sake of their country, they in fact make a loud public 
statement that they are ready to continue shouldering the 
national responsibility of protecting Arab territory, 
safeguarding Arab rights, and defending the just Arab 
cause.... 
 
"Some Lebanese politicians and writers have been involved, 
knowingly or unknowingly, in an effort seeking to deepen the 
feelings of hostility and division between Syria and 
Lebanon.... Syria will always stick to its pan-Arab 
principles and renounce regionalism...." 
 
"God to Bush: Get out of Iraq" 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, chief editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (12/26): "A series of American officials made 
statements confessing that mistakes were made concerning the 
Iraq war.... Withdrawal from Iraq has effectively begun with 
the announcement that the number of American troops there 
will be reduced.... 
 
"God, who told Bush to go to Iraq to spread democracy, will 
soon tell him: Bush, this is enough. You made many mistakes 
and you have to sit on the confession chair and say: Sorry, 
Iraqis. I made a small mistake: instead of spreading 
democracy I spread misery and other things.... 
 
"Syria, in its positions, looks at the essence of things, 
not at the surface. It always proves to be right and 
wise.... It would be wrong to believe that the US 
confessions about the mistakes that were committed against 
Syria will come in one go, but many voices have begun to 
realize that this country is on the right track...." 
 
"Harvest of the Policy of Illusions" 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jamali, an editorialist in government- 
owned Al-Thawra, wrote (12/27): "Why 2005 was a bad year for 
President Bush. US policy has failed at home and abroad, 
especially in Iraq, and the Middle East in general. 
 
"The United State failed to win international support for 
its policies.... The world has become less safe after the 
invasion of Iraq. 
 
"Scandals of the American secret prisons in Europe, the big 
human losses in Iraq, and the tendency to reduce freedoms at 
home... all this made the American people wake up to see the 
tragic situation brought about by neoconservative policies, 
which surpassed the consequences of the Vietnam war.... 
 
"We hope that Bush will learn the lessons from his wrong 
policy and will pursue a balanced policy based on dialogue 
 
and respect for the interests of the world...." 
 
Johnson-Casares