05DAMASCUS5961
Damascus Media Reaction: Mehlis Report, Syria/Iran,
Tue Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAMASCUS 005961 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Mehlis Report, Syria/Iran, 
Asad's Speech, Iraq, Iran (11/15) 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Syrian papers today reported President Asad's 
messages to Arab and world leaders, the Security Council 
member states, the current chairman of the Arab Summit, the 
current chairman of the Organization of the Islamic 
Conference and Nonaligned Nations, the UN SecGen, and the 
Arab League secretary general, on cooperation with the 
international investigation commission and the relevant 
Syrian proposals. 
 
Papers also reported President Asad's meeting with Iranian 
Foreign Minister Mottaki, who conveyed a message from 
Iranian President Ahmadinezhad. All papers reported 
Mottaki's press comments after his meeting with FM Shara, 
saying that he exchanged views with Syrian officials on the 
initiatives put forward by Iraq's neighboring states to 
bring the Iraqi crisis to an end through direct involvement 
of Iraqi people.  Mottaki also said that he reviewed the 
facts behind the assassination of former Lebanese PM Al- 
Hariri, but he avoided any talk about mediating between 
Syria and Lebanon. He said that Syria has cooperated with 
the international commission of inquiry into the Hariri case 
and that the commission is expected to follow up the case 
free of political influence. Mottaki also said that he has 
examined "suspicious US provocations in the region," 
complaining that "the US is exploiting every event to 
further its interventionist goals." 
 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad sends messages to leaders of fraternal and 
friendly countries, the Security Council member states on 
cooperation with the international investigation commission 
and the relevant Syrian proposals" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 11/15) 
 
"President Asad receives a message from Iranian President 
Ahmadinezhad and discusses regional and international 
developments and pressure on Syria with Iranian FM Mottaki" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 11/15) 
 
"Syrians in Al-Quneitra stage sit-ins and address a message 
to Annan: We insist on our right to restoration of the 
Golan" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/15) 
 
"Lebanese politicians criticize Al-Saniora's government for 
failure to carry out its promises. Hizbollah: We shall not 
allow anybody to fool us" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/15) 
 
"Sharon: We support the Al-Sanior'a government and the 
disarmament of Hizbollah. Sharon and Rice criticize Syria 
and Iran" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/15) 
 
"Arab member of the Kenesset, Talab al-Sane', calls for 
solidarity with Syria: Syria's confrontation of pressure 
protects stability in the region" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 11/15) 
 
"An Arab League ministerial consultation on Iraq will be 
held in Cairo on Friday. The Gulf Cooperation Council 
welcomes the reconciliation conference" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 11/15) 
 
"The UN warns against human rights violations in Iraq. The 
UN Human Rights report focuses criticism on armed militias 
and the Iragi government and ignores practices by the 
occupation troops" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/15) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
"Beyond the News: The Red Lines" 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented: "In his speech, President Asad gave warning about 
the present serious stage, in which the nation's past, 
present and future have become a target. He said that they 
[Americans] want to wipe out our identity and history and to 
take away our future. 
"President Asad's speech to the nation cannot be 
summarizeed, and we cannot interpret what is already 
understood and clear. If danger is surrounding Syria today, 
tomorrow it will affect everyone, foremost among them those 
who have chosen to be governed by the will of ambitious 
strangers.... 
"Syria is a target regardless of what it does and how it 
cooperates. The weapon of lies exists and has been tested. 
They lie about the simplest matters, even about addressing 
an invitation for someone to attend a certain conference. 
They also lie about the Iraqi, Palestinian and Lebanese 
issues and entice whomever they want and intimidate whomever 
they choose. Moreover, woe upon those who stand up to this 
conspiracy and defend independence and sovereignty, if this 
independence and this sovereignty were to contradict their 
plans for colonial trusteeship. 
"From the very beginning, there have been lies and false 
accusations, and, from the very beginning, the expression 
'not enough' has prevailed. Also, from the very beginning, 
intentions have been exposed and Syria has been a target. 
Moreover, right from the beginning, we have chosen to hold 
our heads high and defend right, justice, sovereignty and 
freedom, for these are red lines over which we can never 
bargain." 
"False Testimony and Fabrication of Proof" 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented: "The story of the Syrian detainee in 
Ankara, who was intimidated and terrorized to give false 
testimony against Syria, is a new episode in the series of 
attempts to incriminate Syria in the Al-Hariri 
assassination.... 
 
"If the Al-Saqqa story is added to the Al-Siddiq false 
testimony and to the falsifications and contradictions in 
the Mehlis report, all these prove several facts. In the 
lead is the full acquittal of Syria of the crime of the Al- 
Hariri assassination.... 
 
"The other important fact is that the parties that persist 
in fabricating false testimony against Syria know quite well 
who killed Al-Hariri. These parties strive to hide this fact 
to incriminate Syria and to achieve the vicious goals of US 
and Israeli circles and wealthy Lebanese politicians who are 
their agents.... 
 
"If Mehlis seeks the truth, he must look for those who 
intimidated Al-Saqqa, and the parties that support them." 
 
Seche