05HALIFAX92
PROPOSED SPACE LAUNCH ALARMS NEWFOUNDLAND GOVERNMENT
Fri Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS TSPA CA
SUBJECT: PROPOSED SPACE LAUNCH ALARMS NEWFOUNDLAND GOVERNMENT 
 
¶1.  CG was called afternoon of April 8 by Robert Thompson, the 
senior civil servant of the Newfoundland-Labrador government, 
who expressed the province's concerns about a proposed Titan IV 
launch from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station.  Thompson noted 
that the hazard area of the proposed launch included the 
Hibernia and Terra Nova oil production platforms, as well as a 
drilling rig operating in the area.  For safety reasons the 
operators of the platforms would halt oil production and 
evacuate all 250 personnel until after the launch.  The Hibernia 
platform operators say that they would need to start shutdown 
and evacuation 96 hours in advance of the proposed launch. 
Evacuation would minimize the risk to life, but would entail a 
major loss of revenue to the platform operators and the 
province.  In the worst case, debris landing on an evacuated 
production platform could cause a major environmental and 
economic problem. 
 
¶2.  Thompson's primary concern was that the USG put in place 
some sort of risk reduction measures so that the hazard area 
would not include major offshore oil production facilities.  He 
was also concerned about information flow, noting that Premier 
Williams was receiving conflicting reports:  the province was 
first told that the launch had been postponed indefinitely, then 
heard that it was re-scheduled for April 13.  They are seeking 
clarity about USG plans for the launch. 
 
¶3.  COMMENT:  Offshore energy production is a major source of 
economic activity in Newfoundland-Labrador.  Shutting down oil 
production for several days would have a significant financial 
impact.  It would also fairly directly impact U.S. energy 
security since most of the oil from Hibernia is ultimately 
exported to the U.S.  In addition, U.S. firms are involved in 
the operation of the production and drilling operations and 
would be hurt financially as well.   From a public relations 
standpoint, having to close the platforms would be a serious 
problem.  END COMMENT. 
 
HILL