05HARARE1549
FY 2006 Re-declaration of Disaster in
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141024Z Nov 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE/AF FOR NEULING 
AID FOR DCHA/OFDA FOR PRATT, MARX, GOTTLIEB, ISAACS 
DCHA/FFP FOR PETERSEN, MUTAMBA, DWORKEN 
AFR/SA FOR LOKEN, COPSON 
BRUSSELS FOR LERNER 
PRETORIA FOR DISKIN, HALE, SINK 
NAIROBI FOR SMITH, BROWN 
GABORONE FOR CASHION, BROWN 
ROME FOR FODAG 
NSC FOR JMELINE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAGR PREL US ZI
SUBJECT:  FY 2006 Re-declaration of Disaster in 
Zimbabwe for Complex Emergency 
 
Ref: (a)  Harare 1507  (b) Harare 1447 
 
     (c)  Harare 1330  (d) Harare 1489 
 
-------- 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.   The humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe is 
deteriorating due to a variety of factors, including: 
continued economic and especially agricultural collapse 
brought about by government mismanagement and 
corruption, the government's displacement of large 
numbers of families, in urban areas through its 
Operation Restore Order, and in rural areas due to 
renewed commercial farm takeovers.  Close to 6 million 
people country-wide may require food assistance until 
the next harvest in April 2006.  The Ambassador has 
determined that the continuing complex emergency in 
Zimbabwe is of sufficient magnitude to warrant USG 
humanitarian assistance in FY 2006. 
 
----------- 
Background 
----------- 
 
¶2.   Zimbabweans are caught in a downward spiral of 
increasing poverty and food insecurity caused by the 
GOZ's counter-productive economic policies.  The high 
HIV/AIDS prevalence and the general collapse of the 
rule of law are also contributing factors.  The sharp 
economic decline and hyperinflation in Zimbabwe (by 
some estimates approaching four digits) are having dire 
consequences on the country's population, notably 
extremely high unemployment, the deterioration of 
social services, shortages of basic goods and fuel, and 
eroded purchasing power. 
 
¶3.   During the 2004-2005 growing season, parts of 
Zimbabwe suffered from drought conditions that 
exacerbated poor government policies and resulted in an 
extremely poor harvest.  Estimates of 2005 maize 
production range from 350,000-600,000 MT, compared to a 
national requirement of some 1.8 million MT.  The 
Government of Zimbabwe (GOZ) has announced that it will 
import 1.2 million MT of maize to fill the gap. 
However, independent observers question whether the GOZ 
has sufficient foreign exchange to import such a 
quantity and whether the most vulnerable populations 
will be able to access this food.  International 
observers estimate that as many as 5.8 million people 
may require assistance to meet their food needs during 
this hunger season (Reftel A).  Regardless of rainfall, 
the FY 2006 harvest is also expected to be poor given 
the unaffordability of seeds for most poor households 
and the general unavailability of other inputs, 
particularly fuel and fertilizer (Reftel B). 
 
¶4.   Internal displacement and urban vulnerability have 
also substantially increased over the past five months, 
largely due to the GOZ's Operation Murambatsvina 
(Restore Order), which destroyed thousands of homes and 
businesses deemed "illegal" by the government (Reftel 
C).  According to, the report of the UN Special Envoy, 
the operation resulted in the displacement of some 
700,000 people and indirectly affected up to 2.4 
million people.  Five months after the operation, many 
households are still living in the open or are crammed 
into dwellings which were not destroyed.  Although 
urgent needs remain in shelter, water and sanitation, 
health, and protection, humanitarian access to the 
affected populations has been extremely problematic 
(Reftel D). 
 
----------------------------- 
Current Humanitarian Response 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5.   The Government of Zimbabwe (GOZ) has refused to 
appeal for international food assistance but has stated 
that it will accept assistance if provided.  WFP is 
currently expanding its food aid program in order to 
reach some 4 million vulnerable people by the height of 
the hunger season in January.  The GOZ has not yet 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding with WFP, which 
outlines procedures for food distribution.  The GOZ 
has, however, given WFP written approval of its list of 
proposed NGOs to distribute food, which included 
approval for the consortium of NGOs funded bilaterally 
by USAID's Office of Food for Peace (FFP) known as C- 
SAFE.  USAID/FFP provides funding to the C-SAFE NGOs to 
feed 600,000 people in addition to those covered by 
WFP's food program. 
 
¶6.   In September 2005, the UN circulated a Common 
Response Plan requesting some $30 million to address 
the needs of populations adversely affected by 
Operation Murambatsvina.  The government, however, has 
been uncooperative for which they were criticized this 
month by UN Secretary General Annan.  In collaboration 
with NGOs and donors, the UN is also preparing a 
consolidated appeal (CAP) to address the wider, 
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe.  The 
CAP will likely be launched in November 2005. 
 
¶6.   In FY 2005, USG humanitarian assistance to 
Zimbabwe totaled over $46 million from USAID/FFP, and 
from USAID's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance 
(OFDA).  Of this amount, over $1.7 million was provided 
by OFDA specifically to address the victims of 
Operation Murambatsvina. 
 
---------------- 
Mission request 
---------------- 
 
¶7.   Based on the complexity and magnitude of the 
continuing crisis the Ambassador believes that the GOZ 
has neither the resources nor the capacity nor the 
willingness to respond effectively to Zimbabwe's 
humanitarian situation.  Therefore, the Ambassador 
exercises his disaster assistance authority to declare 
Zimbabwe to be in a state of complex emergency, and 
requests continued assistance from USAID/OFDA and 
USAID/FFP during FY 2006 to meet humanitarian needs in 
Zimbabwe. 
 
Schultz