05LIMA3379
NEW PRO-CHAVEZ PUBLICATION IN LIMA
Fri Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 003379 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA FOR BFRIEDMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL PE VE
SUBJECT: NEW PRO-CHAVEZ PUBLICATION IN LIMA 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  A pro-Chavez, leftist publication entitled 
"Wankar" ("the Song of the People" in Quechua) recently 
appeared in Lima.  The first issue has a slick paper cover 
with a dramatic color photo of Chavez sporting his commando 
cap, his fist raised in the air.  The masthead of the 
magazine as well as the subjects and/or authors of most of 
the articles are members of the Peruvian Communist 
Party-Patria Roja (PCP-PR).  The high quality of the cover 
graphics, the timing of the magazine's appearance, its low 
price, and the prominent way in which the publication 
features Hugo Chavez all suggest outside financing.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  A pro-Chavez, leftist publication entitled "Wankar" ("the 
Song of the People" in Quechua) recently appeared in Lima. 
Embassy's copies were purchased at Jockey Plaza, an upscale 
suburban shopping mall.  The magazine's appearance was 
obviously intended to coincide with both national strike days 
(July 14) and the recent visit of Venezuelan President Hugo 
Chavez.  The first issue has a slick paper cover with a 
dramatic color photo of Chavez sporting his commando cap, his 
fist raised in the air.  Accompanying text reads: "The Sword 
of Bolivar in Peru: Welcome President Chavez!"  A subtitle 
for the publication itself states that the magazine will be 
"the voice of those from below."  The magazine sells for two 
soles (about USD .65). 
 
¶3.  The inside of the publication does not share the 
technical sophistication of the cover.  Paper quality is far 
less and occasionally the layout is poor.  The magazine 
dedicates significant space to the creation of "a broad 
front" (El Frente Amplio), a recent effort to bring together 
over 30 Peruvian leftist parties, a number of them tiny 
splinter groups, to advocate social revolution.  The 
directors of the magazine as well as the subjects and/or 
authors of most of the articles are members of the Peruvian 
Communist Party-Patria Roja (PCP-PR),though some members of 
other leftist/marxist groups are also represented.  Among 
those listed are Alberto Moreno, PCP-PR Secretary General, 
and Hector Bejar, a former 1960s-era "foquista" and 
contemporary activist for peasants' and miners' rights.  One 
American is listed on the masthead, James Petras, a 
sociologist from SUNY Binghamton, although Petras is not 
listed as author of any of the articles in the magazine. 
 
¶4.  Magazine articles deal with the political opportunities 
offered by the allegedly imminent fall of the United States 
("the new Babylon"), the formation of the Broad Front by the 
Peruvian left, mine conflicts, environmental destruction, 
opposition to coca eradication, revolution in Bolivia, the 
CIA, and recent leftist youth meetings, both in Peru as well 
as the recent 13th World Festival of Students in Caracas. 
Quechua words and phrases are liberally sprinkled throughout 
with a final article that profiles a recently-deceased 
leftist scholar of Quechua, Alfredo Torero.  The magazine 
refers readers to a website, www.frenteamplio.org.  The web 
page states that it is under construction. 
 
¶5.  COMMENT: While Wankar's content is symptomatic of 
historic PCP-PR propaganda, the high quality of the cover 
graphics, the timing of its appearance, its low price, and 
the prominent way in which the publication features Hugo 
Chavez all suggest outside financing.  The first issue 
promises further ones to follow, but none have to date.  END 
COMMENT. 
STRUBLE