05LIMA4411
HIP-HOP ANTI-DRUG PROGRAM
Thu Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 004411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA (MDCONNERS/GADAMS/SLEBENS) 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PE
SUBJECT: HIP-HOP ANTI-DRUG PROGRAM 
 
 
¶1. From October 1 to 4, 2005, PAS and Peruvian anti-drug NGO 
Cedro organized a five-day Hip-Hop/rap program with U.S. group 
Havikoro in underpriveleged neighborhoods in Lima, Callao, and 
the provincial city of Trujillo.  The program sent a positive 
anti- drug message to disadvantaged Peruvian youth and included 
workshops and concerts with local rappers and breakdancers. 
Media coverage of Havikoro and their program activities was 
extensive.  Over 600 people, including members of the Community 
of the Buen Pastor, an organization for recovering drug addicts, 
attended the three workshops.  The concert in Lima was also a 
success with over 700 hip-hop fans treated to two local rap 
groups, a local break-dance group, and Havikoro.  The Peruvian 
rap groups and Havikoro preached a healthy, anti-drug lifestyle 
while the Peruvian break-dance group, composed of street children 
who formerly break-danced for change on street corners, injected 
a message of hope in the program. 
 
¶2. The workshops in the lower-class districts of Los Olivos, 
Callao and Comas were attended by a total of 600 young people who 
danced and showed off their own break-dance moves.  Over 600 hip- 
hop fans enjoyed two hours of break dance, rap and DJ spinning in 
the stunning, new Municipal Theater in El Callao.  Havikoro 
closed the concert with a show that included interaction with the 
audience, gags, live dance and music.  In the provincial city of 
Trujillo the program reached over 400 people, some of whom had 
traveled from nearby cities. 
 
¶3. Media coverage: PAS made an agreement with a local radio and 
TV channel to promote the program in exchange for publicity for 
the radio channel on promotional posters and flyers.  The whole 
program was heavily covered by local newspapers, radio stations 
and nationwide TV programs, and included interviews with Havikoro 
and local Peruvian groups. Total placements related to the 
program include four web page articles, five newspaper and 
magazine articles, four TV spots, and four radio interviews. We 
are particularly pleased with a large story published La 
Republica's Sunday cultural magazine, a very influential center- 
left daily with an average circulation of 28,000. 
 
¶4. Results: This program directly supported the post's Disruption 
of Criminal Organization's MPP goal.  Specifically, the program 
encouraged the rejection of illicit activities by showing such 
drug-related behavior as threatening to the communities' and 
individuals' future economic opportunities and social well-being. 
PAS Lima reached thousands of youths in marginalized 
neighborhoods with this program, many of whom are continually 
exposed to illicit drugs and drug trafficking.  Havikoro and 
local Peruvian groups presented break-dancing and rapping as 
healthy alternatives to drugs, violence and mischief. 
Additionally, the program provided an excellent opportunity for 
underprivileged youth to see the United States and the Embassy in 
a positive light.   PAS plans to continue supporting programs 
that target at-risk and disadvantaged young people. 
 
¶5. U.S. support: This Program was funded with FY05 WHA PD funds. 
Our appreciation goes to WHA/PD, Steven Lebens, for his close 
coordination with post.  Post highly recommends Havikoro for 
presentations and workshops throughout Latin America.  Note that 
two of Havikoro's five members speak Spanish. 
 
STRUBLE