05MANAMA621
DIPLOMATIC NOTE ON ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARDS
Tue Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261117Z Apr 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAMA 000621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARPI, S/WCI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KAWC PTER ASEC PREL OPDC BA
SUBJECT: DIPLOMATIC NOTE ON ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARDS 
FOR BAHRAINI DETAINEES 
 
REF: A. MANAMA 558 
 
     ¶B. STATE 65586 
     ¶C. STATE 64400 
     ¶D. MANAMA 505 
     ¶E. STATE 57663 
 
¶1.  This is an action message; please see para 2. 
 
¶2.  The Embassy received Diplomatic Note number 19/1/5-41677 
of April 19, 2005 from the MFA covering information to be 
included in the GTMO Administrative Review Boards for 
Bahraini detainees Salman bin Ibrahim Al Khalifa, Issa Al 
Murbati, Juma Al Dosari, and Abdulla Al Noaimi (reftels). 
The note proposes the formation of a bilateral working group 
to consider on a case-by-base basis the return of Bahraini 
detainees at GTMO to Bahrain, and requests a response from 
the USG.  Action Request:  Please provide cleared language 
for a formal response to the GOB.  (Note:  Post faxed and 
pouched the diplomatic note and attachments to NEA/ARPI.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶3.  Begin text of diplomatic note: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America, and has the honor to refer to the Embassy's 
communications of 6 and 13 April, 2005, regarding the 
following Bahraini nationals held by the United States at 
Guantanamo Bay: 
 
Shaikh Salman Bin Ebrahim Bin Mohammed Al Khalifa 
Issa Ali Abdullah Al Murbati 
Juma Mohammed Abdul Latif Al Dosari 
Abdullah Majed Al Noaimi 
 
The Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain, as a close and 
long-standing ally of the United States of America, welcomes 
the information regarding the proposed Administrative Review 
Boards, and confirms its willingness to accept return of the 
above individuals. 
 
The Government has informed the families of the individuals 
of the United States' request for information, and has the 
honor to attach statements and submissions received in 
response.  The families have also stressed to the Government 
that, to the best of their knowledge, their relatives were 
not enemy combatants and would not have engaged in any 
terrorist or other unlawful or improper activity.  The 
families believe that their relatives simply had the 
misfortune to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. 
 
The Government also attaches herewith certificates from the 
Ministry of Interior concerning the conduct of the 
above-named individuals, along with a memorandum from the 
same Ministry setting out the legal and other procedures 
relating to the return of the detainees. 
 
The Kingdom of Bahrain shares a common interest with the 
United States in returning the detainees, and is committed to 
combating terrorism in all its forms. 
 
Further, both sides share a common goal in maintaining the 
security and stability of the Kingdom of Bahrain and in 
protecting citizens, residents and visitors from the threat 
of terrorism. 
 
The Government will therefore work closely with the United 
States to satisfactorily address all issues arising from the 
return of the above individuals, and in particular to assess 
appropriate measures, including the possibility of 
investigations and criminal prosecutions, that might be taken 
upon the detainees' return.  The Government notes that 
Bahrain's Penal Code allows prosecutions for crimes committed 
outside Bahrain, and that individuals under investigation can 
be remanded in custody or, if released on bail, can be put 
under stringent bail conditions, including a travel ban, and 
the requirement to report regularly to a police station. 
 
In this regard, the Government has the honor to propose that 
a working group be set up between Bahrain and the United 
States to consider the return of the detainees on a 
case-by-case basis.  Such a group would include appropriate 
security, law-enforcement and legal officials from both 
sides, and would review any relevant information and evidence 
in possession of the U.S. authorities with respect to each 
detainee. 
 
The working group would also consider the measures that might 
be taken with respect to individual detainees upon their 
return, in light of the legal and constitutional provisions 
in force in the Kingdom of Bahrain.  As part of its 
obligations to maintain security and to fight terrorism, the 
Government of Bahrain is prepared to coordinate such measures 
as may be appropriate in accordance with its constitution and 
laws, and with the evidence and information provided. 
 
The Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain looks forward to 
receiving the United States' response to the above proposal, 
and to agreeing on the composition and modalities of the 
proposed working group as soon as possible. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
End text. 
 
MONROE