05PARIS8418
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Syria - Assassination of
Tue Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131202Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 008418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Syria - Assassination of 
Gebrane Tueni WTO Ministerial 
PARIS - Tuesday, December 13, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Syria - Assassination of Gebrane Tueni 
WTO Ministerial 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
A number of domestic social and economic stories dominate 
today's front pages, the most notable being Le Parisien and 
its banner headline: "The President Answers Our Readers." 
Inside, nine-pages are devoted to the President answering the 
fifty questions put to him by readers in a previous issue. 
Many of the questions are a follow-up to the unrest in the 
suburbs last month: they deal with housing, schooling, 
apprenticeship, unemployment and colonialism. 
 
Catholic La Croix devotes its lead, "Attacks in Beirut, 
Damascus in the Line of Fire" and editorial, to the 
assassination yesterday of Gebrane Tueni in Beirut, while Le 
Figaro titles its front-page article: "Syria Behind a New 
Attack in Beirut." Liberation carries a picture of Tueni and 
states underneath: "An Anti-Syrian Gunned Down in Lebanon." 
(See Part C) Le Figaro interviews Gisele Khoury, a journalist 
and the widow of a slain Lebanese journalist: "The Syrians are 
clearly behind. The international community must investigate 
these political assassinations. and also stop the negotiations 
that seem to be going on with Syria behind our backs for a 
political solution." 
 
The WTO Ministerial in Hong Kong was widely covered in the 
electronic media, with a consensus about the limited chances 
for success, and the growing role of NGOs. The commentator on 
France 2 television said: "The NGOs outnumber the official 
representatives to the conference. They may even up-stage its 
official opening." Le Figaro carries several op-eds on the 
negotiations. Zaki Laidi asks: "Is Europe Guilty?" (See Part 
C) while the President of the Farmers Association pens an op- 
ed explaining why agriculture must be taken out of trade the 
negotiations. In an interview in Le Parisien, Agriculture 
Minister Dominique Bussereau says: "Agriculture is not a 
sector like the others. It is a highly strategic sector. Look 
at the efforts the Americans are making to safeguard their 
sector. France, a major player in agriculture, industry and 
the service sector has always said these three sectors should 
be treated on the same level." Le Monde devotes a special 
section to the WTO: "A Powerless Institution." Le Monde 
comments: "Ten years after its creation, the WTO has limited 
means and has yet to prove its worth. Multilateralism is 
threatened." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Syria - Assassination of Gebrane Tueni 
 
"At the End of the Tunnel, Freedom" 
Dominique Quinio in Catholic La Croix (12/13): "Once again 
terrorism has hit Lebanon, killing a Christian legislative 
representative and renowned journalist. This is the thirteenth 
attack since Hariri's assassination. They have all targeted 
high-profile figures, who were clearly anti-Syrian. Syria is 
once again in the line of fire, although it denies all 
accusations. Tueni's death occurred as the UNSC was examining 
the conclusions of the report on Hariri's assassination. The 
interim report clearly fingered Syrian intelligence and asked 
for Syria's full cooperation. Tueni's death will re-enforce 
the determination of all those - the UN, Europe and the U.S.- 
who want to help Lebanon free itself from all foreign 
intervention. Many dream of a Lebanon where, in the midst of a 
convulsing Middle East, `a miracle' of coexistence between 
communities and a `miracle' of democracy are still possible. 
Some are trying to kill this dream. The international 
community, and France in particular, owe the Lebanese 
unfailing support. As a tribute to those who have lost their 
lives for a dream." 
"France's Initiative at the UN" 
Jean-Christophe Ploquin in Catholic La Croix (12/13): "France, 
the engine leading the international community in the Syrian- 
Lebanese crisis, reacted quickly and firmly to the 
assassination. The terrorist violence (in Lebanon) re-enforces 
the feeling in the French capital that the UNSC must pursue 
the logic of resolution 1559 and the call for Lebanon's 
independence. Today, France will be putting forward a new 
initiative at the UN asking for the investigation into 
Hariri's murder to continue despite the withdrawal of Detlev 
Mehlis. Meanwhile, the message from Syria is interpreted by a 
French diplomat: `You wanted Syria to withdraw? Now you have 
it and the instability that goes with it.' The Lebanese are 
afraid that a lack of persistence from the international 
community might leave them in the midst of internal divisions 
and open to influence from their powerful neighbor. This is 
why France will try to get a quick answer from the UNSC about 
the Mehlis report. France has been locked into a strong-arm 
struggle with Syria for the past two years in its attempts to 
push Syria out of Lebanon. France's biggest success in this 
regard is having brought the U.S. into this endeavor. The same 
diplomat offers this thought: `We convinced the U.S. that its 
ambition for democracy in the Middle East could not be 
convincing unless Lebanon, the Arab nation where democracy was 
rooted, could not flourish.' Syria for its part was taken 
short by this close coordination between France and the U.S." 
 
"Syria's Murky Role" 
Hubert Coudurier in regional Le Telegramme (12/13): "These 
repeated attacks and assassinations of anti-Syrian figures are 
forcing the Lebanese people to lose hope. What is making the 
Syrians so certain of their impunity, after having opted for a 
low profile and assured Washington of their cooperation in the 
Harriri investigation? Especially just when the Mehlis report 
was due? One has to wonder whether Bachir Al-Assad does not 
entertain a relationship with small Islamic cells in Lebanon 
that may have replaced Syria's secret service." 
 
WTO Ministerial 
 
"WTO: Is Europe Guilty?" 
Zaiki Laidi in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/13): "Why is 
everyone pointing a finger at Europe, and is this accusation 
founded? The European agricultural market is four times more 
protected than the U.S. market. Hence the formal offensive by 
the U.S. and Brazil to get Europe to lower its tariffs. But is 
Europe guilty? Liberalizing agriculture, an enviable goal, 
would not benefit all developing nations. Every serious study, 
whether French or American, has proven it is impossible to 
evaluate the global worth of a liberalized agricultural market 
simply because it all depends on the situation of each 
nation." STAPLETON