05PARIS7284
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Middle East - Iraq - Syria
Tue Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007284 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Middle East - Iraq - Syria 
GWOT 
PARIS - Tuesday, October 25, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Middle East - Iraq - Syria 
GWOT 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Domestic social, political and economic news dominate today's 
front pages, except for Les Echos which devotes its lead and 
editorial to the nomination of Ben Bernanke to replace 
Greenspan "the Magician." According to Les Echos, financial 
markets "are reassured by President Bush's choice." In his 
editorial Jean-Marc Vittori comments on Bernanke's pet peeve: 
deflation: "Bernanke is a moderate Republican and a fervent 
economist. In an economy marked by growth but undermined by 
debts, Bernanke will probably try to navigate between the 
pitfalls of inflation and deflation. Something that may appear 
paradoxical, considering that America's inflation is at its 
highest. Welcome to the monetary policy of the 21st century." 
 
The other exception in today's reporting is Catholic La Croix 
which devotes its lead, "France Re-Enforces its Anti-Terrorist 
Arsenal," editorial and several articles to the fight against 
terrorism, as France's government begins to debate new anti- 
terrorism measures. Liberation reports on the confessions of 
repenting Jemaah Islamiya leader Nasir Abas, who "reveals" the 
inner workings of the Indonesian Islamic group. (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro devotes a full page to Iraq's Sunni insurrection and 
another to Syria's regime "under pressure at the UN." (See 
Part C) 
 
The front-page of Le Parisien headlines: "State of Emergency 
in Florida" and quotes Governor Jeb Bush saying that the 
"risks are even higher after the storm than during the storm." 
According to France Soir: "The American authorities seem not 
to know how to react anymore faced with the threat of a 
hurricane." France Soir's Jean-marc Tanguy writes: "Friday, 
the American Ambassador in France Craig Stapleton thanked the 
French divers in the name of the population of Louisiana. 
Overcome by this show of appreciation, the divers who belong 
to the French `marine nationale.'" described the warm welcome 
that they got in Louisiana." 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Middle East - Iraq - Syria 
 
"Syrian Regime Under Pressure at UN" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/25): 
"Negotiations are underway at the UN about a resolution that 
will be Syria's last chance to cooperate in the investigation 
into Hariri's assassination. The notion of `targeted 
sanctions' is a possibility. France is eager to `take the time 
necessary for a resolution that pleases everyone.' But on the 
American side, the time has come to be firm. The alchemy of a 
consensus, which seemed to have worked until now may be more 
difficult to sustain. as the U.S. and the British call for an 
`urgent and strong reaction.'" 
 
"The Sunni Insurrection Toughening in Iraq" 
Georges Malbrunot in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/25): "The 
tactical alliance between Islamic radicals of al-Zarqawi and 
former Baathists who remain faithful to Saddam Hussein is re- 
enforcing Iraq's Sunni rebellion. While foreigners are often 
behind suicide car bombings, which target Iraqi civilians, 
former Iraqi soldiers target American convoys. The first 
consequence of this joint approach is a `professionalization' 
of the guerrilla war. The Americans are convinced that despite 
their differences, a tactical alliance was sealed between the 
two groups after the battle of Falluja in 2004." 
 
GWOT 
 
"Democratic Prevention" 
Dominique Quinio in Catholic La Croix (10/25): "Terrorism 
forces nations which have been targeted to defend themselves 
in such a way that the guarantees provided by the right of law 
are sometimes mistreated. At times certain categories of 
individuals suffer because of their religion or the color of 
their skin. Great Britain, the great champion of Habeas Corpus 
is thus undermining its sacrosanct principles with this new 
obligation to carry a national identity card. France's new 
anti-terrorist measures should re-enforce the existing legal 
system but remain within the boundaries of civil liberties. 
The aim is to prevent possible attacks through the monitoring 
of Islamic networks and their telecommunications. To advertise 
this also serves as a deterrent. France remains a target of 
terrorism. It appears to have thwarted several attempts 
through its specialized intelligence services. Still, complete 
security is impossible because networks are volatile, suicide 
bombers are determined and manufacturing a deadly device 
requires feeble means. This legislation will be up for 
revision after three years. To fight terrorism without the use 
of terrorist methods." 
 
"Confession" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (10/25): "The 
confessions if Nasir Abas of Jemaah Islamaiya is a first, at 
least in France. This former repented Islamic leader is 
probably not telling all. But it is clear that Islamic 
terrorism has roots that go far beyond Europe. This confession 
helps to better understand the threat that weighs in on all 
countries where youth are being manipulated in the name of an 
ideology of terror. International terrorism finds its recruits 
wherever there is injustice and wherever religion is used to 
fuel conflicts. The desire for vengeance is used by preachers 
who feed feelings of hate all the more easily because they do 
their preaching behind the closed doors of religious schools. 
Here they instill the feeling that all the suffering of the 
Muslim world is caused by the West and that the remedy lies in 
Djihad. The weapons of massive terror are manufactured in 
training camps established in geographical zones of political 
anarchy. Bin Laden no longer has an active role: he has simply 
provided the model. Democracies must destroy these workshops 
and think about ways to defuse them."  STAPLETON