05PARIS329
UNESCO "CULTURAL DIVERSITY" CONVENTION
Tue Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 16 PARIS 000329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL PGOV PREL EU ETRD UN
SUBJECT:  UNESCO "CULTURAL DIVERSITY" CONVENTION 
NEGOTIATIONS:  FULL STEAM AHEAD FOR SOME, DESPITE LACK OF 
AGREEMENT ON BASICS 
 
REF:  2004 July Draft Convention Prepared by Expert 
 
Committee (July 2004 Draft Convention) 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Adopting a Convention on Cultural Diversity at 
the October 2005 UNESCO General Conference remains the 
apparent goal for some key UNESCO members, despite the sharp 
differences on fundamentals shown during 14-17 December 
Meetings of Working Group ("Drafting Commission") charged 
with suggesting revisions to the July 2004 Draft Convention. 
Under UNESCO rules, this timetable seems to require 
distribution of the final UNESCO Secretariat report to 
Member States by 3 March 2005.  (Paragraphs 1-14.) 
 
Interventions at Drafting Commission meetings showed 
disagreement about the scope of the Convention, whether it 
should focus on the commercial aspects of culture; whether 
it should take precedence over current international 
obligations, including WTO obligations; and the proper ambit 
of intellectual property law.  (Paragraphs 15 to 53.) 
 
Interventions also expressed equally sharp differences on 
basic procedural matters, including modalities for 
representation of EU Member States, the scope of the 
Drafting Commission's mandate and the format of its report. 
(Paragrpahs 54 to 69.) 
End summary. 
 
Background 
------------ 
 
¶2.   The UNESCO-sponsored negotiations concerning a possible 
Cultural Diversity Convention are based on a formal 
Resolution (Reso. 32C/34) adopted at the Thirty-Second 
Session of the UNESCO General Conference, held in October 
¶2003.  (Note.  The General Conference, which includes 
representatives of all 190 UNESCO Member States, meets 
biennially and is the highest policy-making authority in 
UNESCO.  End note.)   By Resolution 32C/34, the General 
Conference: 
 
     Invites the Director General to submit to the General 
     Conference at its Thirty-Third Session a preliminary 
     report setting forth the situation to be regulated and 
     the possible scope of regulation action proposed, 
     accompanied by a preliminary draft of a convention on 
     the protection of the diversity of cultural contents 
     and artistic expressions. 
 
(Note.  General Conference Reso 32C/34 was preceded by many 
other official UNESCO statements generally concerning 
Cultural Diversity (e.g., the November 2001 declaration on 
Cultural Diversity, an 11-12 December Ministerial 
Declaration following a UNESCO-sponsored Meeting of Culture 
Ministers; a 14-15 June 1999 Statement of an Expert Group 
(organized in collaboration with the French UNESCO 
Commission and supported by the Canadian and French 
Governments) and a March-April 1998 Intergovernmental 
Conference on Culture and Development.  End note.) 
 
¶3.  Pursuant to normal UNESCO procedures, an Expert 
Committee, comprised of fourteen experts from different 
Member States, was convened.  It submitted the July 2004 
Draft Convention (Ref ), which was followed by a 20-24 
September Intergovernmental meeting of UNESCO Member State 
representatives ("First Intergovernmental Meeting"). 
 
¶4.  At the First Intergovernmental Meeting, UNESCO Member 
State representatives elected Kader Asmal, a respected South 
African jurist and long-time law professor at Dublin's 
Trinity College, as Chair of the process to assist the 
UNESCO Director General compile a report to submit to the 3- 
21 October 2005 General Conference per Reso. 32C/34.   Artur 
Wilczynski, a Canadian diplomat based in Quebec, was elected 
as the Rapporteur. 
 
¶5.  Per Asmal's guidelines, representatives were allowed to 
make only a limited number of interventions, each generally 
no more than five minutes long.   These interventions 
revealed disagreement on fundamental matters, such as: the 
scope of the Convention (e.g., whether "cultural content" 
such as matters touching on language and religion should be 
included), definition of terms (e.g., whether "cultural 
diversity" and "cultural goods and services" should be 
defined at all, and, if so, how), the role of government in 
settling policy affecting cultural matters, and whether 
obligations in this convention would supercede those in 
current international law. 
 
¶6.  The First Intergovernmental Meeting also established a 
November 15 deadline for submission of Member State formal 
comments on the July 2004 Draft Convention.  A second 
Intergovernmental meeting was scheduled for 31 January-12 
February 2005 (Second Intergovernmental Meeting.)   Despite 
the lack of agreement on essential components of a 
convention, a Drafting Commission was appointed and 
instructed to begin work on 14-17 December. 
 
¶7.  The Drafting Commission is made up of representatives 
from 24 countries.  UNESCO's six geographically-based 
electoral groups each selected four representatives to serve 
on the Drafting Commission. 
 
Group 1:  Finland, France, Switzerland, USA 
Group 2:  Armenia, Croatia, Hungary, Russia 
Group 3:  Barbados, Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador 
Group 4:  China, India, Japan, Korea 
Group 5a: Benin, Nigeria, Madagascar, Senegal 
Group 5b:  Algeria, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, United Arab 
Emirates 
 
The Timing Conumdrum, or Why Drafting a Convention Comes 
Before Agreement on What Should Go Into It 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶8.  The timetable for the Drafting Commission's work seems 
driven by the expressed desire of some influential UNESCO 
Member States to adopt a Convention on Cultural Diversity at 
the 3-20 October 2005 General Conference.  To do this under 
UNESCO Rules, the Director-General's final report be sent to 
Member States seven months in advance of the opening of the 
General Conference, or by 3 March 2005. 
 
UNESCO rules, Section E, Article 10, Rule 3 provides: 
 
     On the basis of the comments and observations 
     transmitted, the Director-General shall prepare a final 
     report containing one or more texts, which shall be 
     communicated to Member States at least seven months 
     before the opening of the session of the General 
     Conference. 
 
Introductory Niceties, Election of Chairman and Rappateur 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶9.  UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura's 14 December 
opening remarks urged the Drafting Commission to express its 
work in "clear legal language" and to identify choices where 
irreconcilable differences appear.  He said that the revised 
Convention and invitations to the Second Intergovernmental 
Meeting would be sent out to Member-States just before 
Christmas. 
 
¶10.  In his introductory speech, Chair Kader Asmal said that 
the Drafting Commission had before it a three-pronged 
challenge: refining the concept and definitions of the 
Convention; meeting the political challenge of articulating 
the rights and obligations set forth in the Convention, and 
transforming the conceptual and political ideas into legally 
sufficient language. 
 
¶11.  Mounir Bouchenaki, the Assistant Director General for 
Culture (the top culture official in UNESCO) spoke briefly, 
explaining that under UNESCO rules, a Category 2 
Intergovernmental meeting, such as the September 2004 
meeting, may create Working Groups, such as the Drafting 
Commission.   The Drafting Commission did not need to adopt 
rules, but it should elect a Chairman and Rappateur, 
Bouchenaki concluded. 
 
¶12.  The Swiss delegate then nominated a Finn, Jukka Liedes, 
whose name had first been circulated in connection with the 
Drafting Commission Chairmanship in the lead up to the First 
Intergovernmental Meeting.   The Senegalese Ambassador 
objected to the Liedes nomination, saying that his country 
should have been consulted, and proposed the name of a 
candidate from Benin.  (Comment. This seemed to come as a 
surprise, as the Finn had been regarded as the only 
candidate.  End Comment.)  After a coffee break, the Finn 
was accepted by general consent as the Chair and the 
Beninese as the Rappateur. 
 
¶13.  Wilczynski, the Quebec-based Canadian diplomat who was 
selected as Overall Rappateur at the First Intergovernmental 
Meeting, sat by the side of the Beninese Rappateur reporter 
during all sessions, made interventions on issues of 
process, and took copious notes.  He seemed largely 
responsible for drafting the text of the alternate options 
discussed by the Drafting Commission 15-17 December and 
helped write the Secretariat's report of the proceedings of 
the Drafting Commission. 
 
¶14.  Liedes announced a proposed schedule that anticipated a 
review of the entire July 2004 Draft Convention by the end 
of the 14-17 December meetings.  He noted that the Drafting 
Commission could be "reactivated" during the Second 
Intergovernmental Meeting.   He ruled that observers from 
Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs) and Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs) would be given the floor only if time 
allowed.  (Note.  The Drafting Commission's pace fell behind 
the Chair's proposed schedule and observers from NGOs and 
IGOs, which had submitted several hundred pages of comments, 
did not speak at all.  Member States who attended as 
observers were also not allowed to speak, contrary to 
expectations, which caused some bad feelings on the part of 
these States about the work of the Drafting Commission.  End 
note.) 
 
Second Part of First Day:  Title, A Few Other Items 
Discussed 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶15.  After a skirmish about representation of EU Drafting 
Commission members (see paragraphs 54-57), the Chair turned 
the discussions to the title, noting that Member States had 
submitted some twenty proposals and that this would be the 
Commission's first exercise in streamlining. (Note.  Most of 
the proposals in the formal written submissions contained 
one or more elements of the July 2004 Draft Convention 
title, which follows the wording of Reso. 32C/34 and reads: 
"A Convention on the Protection of the Diversity of Cultural 
Contents and Artistic Expressions." End note.) 
 
¶16.  The USG explained its view that the word "protection" 
was ambiguous in that it could refer either to traditional 
trade protectionism, quotas, etc.  Therefore, the USG 
advocated substituting the more affirmative concept of 
"promotion."  Others (e.g., Saudi Arabia, Brazil, 
Switzerland, Magadascar, Benin, India, Yemen and the United 
Arab Emirates) suggested leaving "protection," but adding 
"promotion."  The French rep referred to the suggestion in 
Canada's written submission to substitute "preservation" for 
"protection."  This suggestion was included several times in 
"options" for discussion at the Drafting Commission. 
 
¶17.  There was also disagreement about "cultural contents 
and artistic expressions." 
 
     France maintained that "cultural expressions" was a 
     more precise and manageable concept and should be used 
     in the title and throughout the document.   China and 
     India supported the French view. 
 
     The United Arab Emirates opposed this formulation and 
     pointed out that "cultural expressions" resulted in an 
     exclusive focus on commercial matters. 
 
     Brazil insisted that the idea of cultural contents be 
     included in the title. 
 
     Saudi Arabia and Switzerland advocated "cultural 
     contents and expressions," but the Saudi added that the 
     October 2005 General Conference would have to approve 
     the elimination of "artistic," since the October 2003 
     General Conference Resolution specified "cultural 
     contents and artistic expressions." 
 
¶18.  Magadascar suggested "cultural diversity," noting that, 
in common parlance, one referred to the "cultural diversity" 
convention.  Japan, Ecuador and the United States also 
supported "cultural diversity."  (Note.  Ecuador later 
offered "preservation and promotion of cultural diversity in 
all its expressions."  End note.)  In an apparent reference 
to the October 2003 General Conference discussions, however, 
the Saudi noted that the General Conference had already 
rejected the "cultural diversity" formulation for the title. 
 
¶19.  The Chair suggested that the final report should 
articulate three possible formulations.  However, when he 
attempted to say what those were, he produced five, then 
realized he could not limit it.  The final report included 
16 options.  (Note.  Intertwined and contentious issues 
appear repeatedly in the July 2004 Draft Convention.  Thus, 
as the Drafting Commission representatives moved through the 
text, they often took up an already-much-discussed topic, 
albeit perhaps from a slightly different angle. During the 
third day, 16 December, the Chair adopted a suggestion that 
the Drafting Commission make up a list of "horizontal" 
issues for presentation to the Second Intergovernmental 
Session.  That way, States would not have to repeat the same 
objection every time a particular issue appeared in the 
text.  At the conclusion of the Drafting Commission meetings 
on 17 December, however, the Chair withdrew the list after 
Drafting Commission members could not reach agreement on its 
components.  See paragraphs 65-69.  End note.) 
 
¶20.  Upon resumption of the session after lunch break, 
Member State reps agreed to leave the title to the end of 
the sessions, after contents of the draft Convention itself 
would have become clearer.  This was followed by an 
abbreviated discussion of whether the annexes should be 
dropped, per the many written comments that generally 
recommended eliminating the annexes.  After it became clear 
that would be no quick agreement, the Chair moved the 
discussion to Articles 1 (Objectives) and 2 (Guiding 
Principles). 
 
Disagreements Continue-About "Cultural Expressions" 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶21.  During the afternoon session of the first day, the 
Saudi delegate reiterated his objection to the phrase 
"cultural expressions," which is used throughout Article 1, 
again saying that it was as an impermissible narrowing of 
the "cultural-contents-and-artistic-expressions" mandate of 
Reso. 32C/34, as it constituted the directions of the 
General Conference.  (Note.  In response to a later Saudi 
objection along the same lines, Assistant Legal Advisor Tom 
Donaldson said that Legal Advisor Yusuf, after reviewing the 
matter, had opined that the report of the Drafting 
Commission's need not track the terms of the October 2003 
General Conference Resolution.  End note.) 
 
About "Cultural Goods and Services" (Article 1b) 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶22.   France, appearing to quote the EU Member States' joint 
written comments, said "recognition of the specific dual 
(cultural and economic) nature of specificity of cultural 
goods and services" was a critical part of the Convention. 
Lebanon, Senegal, Brazil, Barbados, Croatia and Switzerland 
concurred.  Croatia referred to the long history of the term 
"cultural goods and services" in UNESCO documents. 
 
¶23.   The USG explained that its formulations used the terms 
"culture" and "cultural diversity," thereby emphasizing the 
importance of cultural vehicles in daily life in broad 
terms.  The USG formulation did not employ the term 
"cultural goods and services," which, in the USG view, is an 
unworkable concept, since every human product reflects the 
culture of its creator.  The Algerian and Japanese 
representatives supported the USG formulation.   When the 
Chair asked for a show of hands, the USG, Japan, India, UAE 
Saudi Arabia, China and Benin supported the USG formulation, 
while fourteen supported the original text, which employs 
the "cultural goods and services" terminology.  (Note. 
Beginning the second morning, per the Chair's request, the 
Secretariat distributed "options," which it drew from the 
 
SIPDIS 
formal Comments submitted by Member States.  The Chair 
solicited a show of hands at the conclusion of the 
discussion of a particular section, and counted the votes, 
saying that this was in order to "gauge support" for the 
various options.  At this stage of the proceedings, 
countries were voting for more than one option.  Discussions 
about working methods reported paragraphs 54 to 69 below. 
End note.) 
 
¶24.   The Japanese rep introduced a new phrase into the 
debate: "cultural activities," which, like the USG 
formulation, focused on the process whereby culture is 
integrated into daily life.  The GOJ rep said that this term 
did not overlap with trade law terminology and emphasized 
that it would permit a Cultural Diversity Convention to 
develop in harmony with other international obligations. 
 
¶25.  The Japanese delegation did not have the opportunity to 
explain the idea at any length, however.  The Japanese had 
missed the deadline set for formal written comments and 
therefore the Secretariat had not included the Japanese 
suggestions in the "options" set forth on the materials it 
distributed.   Apparently motivated in part by this 
practical consideration, the Chair ruled that the GOJ 
suggestion would not be considered.  (Note.  Japan has since 
distributed widely written and electronic copies of its 
suggestions.  End note.) 
 
¶26.  Throughout the remainder of the sessions, the Japanese 
interventions almost invariably referred to the GOJ "regret" 
at not being able to explain the concept of "cultural 
activities" further and to the GOJ intention to re-introduce 
the concept of "cultural activities" at the Second 
Intergovernmental Session. 
 
About "Cultural Policies" (Article 1c) 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶27.  Saudi Arabia, citing its position in favor of 
strengthening the sovereign rights of states, supported the 
third option which "reaffirmed the sovereign rights of 
States" to maintain and adopt "policies and measures" that 
the State "deems appropriate" to protect cultural diversity. 
(Note.  Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates 
consistently advocated strengthening the role of the State 
in setting cultural policy.  From time to time, they 
articulated this position as an "Arab" position, and Egypt's 
formal written comments emphasize a strong State role.  End 
note.)  China and Korea's interventions cited notions of 
state sovereignty in supporting the primacy of the State in 
settling cultural policy. 
 
¶28.   The USG stated its support for Option Six, but with 
the reservation that it should not include the word 
"protect." The Secretariat later issued a revised draft, 
which removed the word "protect" from the Option Six. 
 
¶29.   France, saying it spoke on behalf of EU States, said 
that affirming the state's role in maintaining, adopting and 
implementing cultural policies was at the core of the 
Convention.  France then moved to amend the third option, 
which it also apparently viewed as the most forceful 
statement, to include the word "implement" and stated its 
support for the version as amended.  Strong support for the 
French amendment was expressed by Benin and Senegal.  (Note. 
The Chair's gauging of the measure of support at the end of 
the debate on this section showed 15 countries in support of 
Option Three.  End note.) 
 
¶30.  The USG said that `sovereign rights" would not need to 
be reaffirmed, a position that Ecuador supported, noting 
that UNESCO Member States, as sovereign countries, already 
possessed the rights set forth in option three and that it 
would support option one, which "recommended and encouraged" 
states to take certain measures.   (Note. Interventions 
questioning whether the wording of certain provisions was 
fully compatible with the concept of sovereign states 
characterized later interventions concerning Article 2 
(Principles).  End note.) 
 
And so on 
---------- 
 
¶31.  Article 1 (d), concerning government's role in 
encouraging cultural exchanges, brought forth a discussion 
on whether government should "create conditions" that would 
lead to such exchanges (USG; Russia) or "establish a 
framework."  At the end of the discussion, the Chair's 
measurement of support revealed that both formulations 
received about the same amount of support. 
 
¶32.  Article 1(e), which calls for a "wider and more 
balanced" exchange between "cultures and civilizations," 
drew interventions focused on the possible trade 
connotations of "more balanced."  The USG and Senegal, among 
others, wanted to omit "more balanced" so as to remove the 
trade/commercial implications; France said "more balanced" 
was part of the point; while Costa Rica and others favored 
diluting the trade flavor by adding references to a culture 
of peace.   Saudi Arabia urged the deletion of 
"civilizations."  The Chair, again counting hands, said that 
omitting "civilizations" and the adding "culture of peace" 
received "widespread" support, while the elimination of 
"more balanced" received limited support. 
 
¶33.  Article 1(f), which requires signatories to "foster 
respect" for diversity of cultural expressions "at the 
national and global levels," occasioned some discussion 
about the term "foster," with some advocating "affirm." 
Introducing a theme that would be sounded several times over 
the next few days, some intervenors pointed out that local 
government plays an important role, especially in federal 
systems of government.  The original language of Article 1 
(f) received  "widespread" support, per the Chair's count, 
after the addition of "local" to the latter phrase. 
 
¶34.  Article 1(g), concerning "global partnerships. 
fostering the capacity of developing societies" to support 
cultural diversity, drew a detailed intervention from the 
Brazilian rep, who emphasized the connections between 
cultural and economic development. The Indian Ambassador 
suggestion to change "societies" to "countries" was 
accepted, but her suggestion that capacities in both 
developed and developing countries should be strengthened 
was not.   Others noted with approval the "partnership" 
element.  The Chair counted a show of hands and concluded 
the original text with the substitution of "countries", had 
"widespread" support.   (Note.  The USG made an intervention 
about the word "protect," which was used in several of the 
options, but agreed to forebear from raising the issue 
again, in view of the growing sentiment to compile a list of 
"horizontal issues" at the end of the Drafting Commission 
sessions.  End note.) 
 
More of the Same in Discussions of Articles 2 (Principles), 
3 (Scope) and 4 (Definitions) 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶35. After lunch break on the second day, 15 December, the 
Chair turned the discussions to Article 2 (Principles). 
The interventions generally repeated points made earlier, 
with some additions.  The words "free access" (Principle 
Three) generated discussion about Intellectual Property 
Rights (IPR) implications.  There was strong agreement in 
the room that the convention should not be used to create a 
"right of access" to specific cultural expressions, given 
the possible IPR implications (Ecuador, France, Japan, 
Senegal, USG, Switzerland) though India pointed out that 
this convention could be used to create this right.  (Note. 
India's formal written comments, however, take the position 
that this Convention should not affects its rights and 
obligations under existing international obligations. End 
note.) 
 
¶36.  Concerning Principle Five, the Chair agreed with the 
USG position, noting that that the word "right" should not 
be used to describe a concept that has not yet been 
established as a "right."  (Comment.  This was one of the 
few substantive comments the Chair made, but it did not seem 
to deter many reps from approving new applications of the 
word "right."  End comment.) 
 
¶37.  Regarding Principle Six (Principle of International 
Solidarity and Cooperation),, there was some discussion of 
the US comment that a principle should not be written with 
mandatory language ("shall) but Costa Rica, India and France 
insisted strongly that this principle should be written as a 
mandatory obligation.  The GOJ noted that the term 
"industries" required clarification, but Brazil strongly 
argued that "industries should be referenced because they 
are the very entities in need of assistance in Brazil. 
According to the Chair's count, 17 States voted in favor of 
retaining "shall" and "industries.") 
 
¶38.  Elimination of a contentious comparison between bio- 
diversity and cultural diversity (Principle Seven) received 
general support. 
 
¶38.  The third day, 16 December, began with discussions on 
Articles 3 (Scope) and 4 (Definitions, including: "culture," 
"cultural diversity," "cultural expression" "cultural goods 
and services" "cultural industries" and "cultural policy"). 
Interventions generally repeated points previously made, but 
there were some notable or new points.   In the discussion 
of "cultural goods and services" and "cultural industries," 
reps: 
 
     Generally took the view that the terms could be 
     defined.  (Note.  The USG and Japan were exceptions. 
     End note.) 
 
     Favored eliminating "have or may generate intellectual 
     property rights" from the definition. 
 
     There was strong support for elimination of Annex 1, a 
     "non-exhaustive" list of "cultural goods and services." 
     Brazil, France and Senegal argued, however, that the 
     Drafting Commission did not have the authority to 
     delete any text (though in substance France agreed it 
     should be deleted).  The Chair agreed and announced 
     that none of the annexes would be deleted in his 
     report. 
 
¶40.  In the discussion of "cultural policies:" 
 
     The Chair pointed out that one option specified that 
     the policy must have cultural matters "as its 
     predominant aim," while all other options read "address 
     or affect any aspect of cultural expressions."  The 
     Chair noted that the broader formulation would likely 
     be difficult to interpret and apply.  Drafting 
     Commission members, not including the USG, nonetheless 
     generally indicated preference for the broader 
     language, however. 
     Japan expressed "great concern" about possible overlap 
     between this Convention and the 2003 Intangible 
     Heritage Convention (IHC). (Note.  Devising procedures 
     to sort out the overlap between the 1973 World Heritage 
     Convention and later UNESCO documents, in particular 
     the IHC, was an important agenda item during the just- 
     concluded 6-11 December 2004 World Heritage Committee 
     (WHC) meeting.  The Japanese, who play an important 
     role in activities across UNESCO's spectrum, are both 
     members of the WHC and vigorous supporters of the IHC 
     and have consistently expressed concern about fitting 
     the IHC into the panoply of UNESCO normative documents. 
     End note.) 
 
     Drafting Commission members generally (but not 
     unanimously) favored eliminating Annex II, the "non- 
     exhaustive" list of cultural policies. 
 
¶41.  In discussions on other definitional terms, some 
favored eliminating as unnecessary terms not used in the 
operative sections of the July 2004 Draft Convention 
("culture," "cultural capital" and "cultural diversity"). 
India, supported by others, noted that "cultural heritage" 
was more appropriate than "cultural capital," which had an 
overly commercial connotation.   That line of analysis, 
however, resuscitated Japanese concerns about possible 
confusion between this Convention and the Intangible 
Heritage Convention and 13 members voted to delete the 
definition of cultural capital. 
 
¶42.  In the discussion of "cultural expressions," the Chair 
recognized "substantial support" for both the original text 
and Option 4, the USG proposal.  There was no support for 
Option 2, Canada's written submission.  Nonetheless, the 
remarks from the Drafting Commission Report note limited 
support for Option 2, "some" support of Option 4, and 
"strong" support for the original. 
 
¶43.  The Chair's firm announcement that the Drafting 
Commission would create a list of "horizontal" terms for 
presentation to the Second Intergovernmental Sessions came 
during the discussions on definitions.   (Comment. 
Thereafter, it seemed that many reps, including the USG, 
tried to focus on new points, on the apparent understanding 
that concerns already expressed would be included on the 
list of "horizontal" terms. End comment.) 
 
Questions About Nature of Rights and Obligations (Articles 5 
through 10) and Consistency with Existing International Law 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶44.  USG interventions and its formal written comments 
requested that the phrase "consistent with other 
international agreements" be inserted at various points in 
the statement of rights and obligations so as to clarify 
that the Convention would not run contrary to current 
international law.  Several other intevenors (e.g., Japan, 
Russia, India and Barbados) noted the importance of this 
issue. 
 
¶45.  Russian interventions at several points emphasized the 
ambiguity of the phrase "existing" legal obligations. 
Existing when?  At the time the General Conference adopts 
it?  Or when individual States ratify it?  Or when the 
document of accession is filed?  If either of the latter 
two, then the reference to "existing" would be different for 
each signatory, which would make application of the 
Convention very difficult indeed.  Moreover, what about 
future obligations, including future obligations in the WTO, 
the Russians wondered. 
 
¶46. The problem about consistency with current international 
obligations was especially apparent in discussions of 
"measures which in an appropriate manner reserve a certain 
space for domestic cultural goods and services"  (July 2004 
Draft Convention Article 6.2 (a)) and "public financial aid" 
(July 2004 Draft Convention, Article 6.2 (c)).   The Chair 
appeared to indicate that consistency with international law 
would be treated as a "horizontal" issue. 
 
¶47.  In other matters concerning Articles 5 and 6: 
 
     China and South Korea advocated changes that would 
     emphasize the sovereign power of the Member-States. 
     (July 2004 draft Convention Article 5) 
 
     Russia objected to the reference "both within their 
     territory and at the global level" (July 2004 Draft 
     Convention Art. 5.1), pointing out that the obligations 
     of a state are necessarily different within its borders 
     than outside them. 
 
¶48.  The final day, 17 December, began with interventions 
concerning Article 7 ("Obligation to Promote the Diversity 
of Cultural Expressions").  The wording ("States Parties 
shall provide...) sparked concern about the addition of 
substantial legal obligations, especially when combined with 
seemingly expansive phases, such as: "access to (domestic) 
cultural expressions" and "cultural .goods and services 
representing cultural diversity."  Ecuador and Japan 
concurred with the USG suggestion to replace "shall provide" 
with softer terms, perhaps "undertaking" or "endeavoring to 
create conducive environments." 
 
¶49.  Others, such as the EC Commission rep who took France's 
chair for this discussion, voiced concern about possible 
inconsistency with Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Law. 
He later noted to poloff privately that IPR Law was 
"delicate" and "complex" and that IPR references in 
"operative" statements were therefore "risky." He told 
poloff that the EC would prefer that any reference to IPR 
law be moved to a hortatory section, where it would clearly 
be without operational effect.  This was the position of 
most Drafting Commission members.  Only a few voted for the 
current text of Article 7.2. 
¶50.  Intervening from his position as Rappateur, Benin's 
representative referred to concerns about the protection IPR 
afforded to cultures in which creativity was often a 
collective process, sometimes spread out over many decades. 
He, along with several other African and Caribbean 
intervenors, also stressed the importance of this section to 
developing countries and asked that counterfeiting be added 
to the language "strengthening of measures against piracy" 
now set forth in Article 7.2(b). 
 
¶51.  Interventions concerning Article 8 ("Obligation to 
Protect Vulnerable Forms of Cultural Expression") re-ignited 
concerns earlier expressed by Japan and others about how to 
define vulnerability and the creation of a potentially 
unnecessary new institution.  Ecuador, France and Japan 
noted that this matter was of central importance and should 
be referred to the Second Intergovernmental Meeting for 
determination.  India said that the protection of vulnerable 
cultures was a national issue, not appropriate for 
international bodies. 
 
¶52.  Interventions on Article 9 ("Obligation of Information 
and Transparency") and 10 ("Obligation of Public Awareness 
and Education") generally supported the goals, but some 
(e.g., Japan) renewed objections the creation of 
obligations.  Barbados, apparently aiming to soften overly 
preemptory terms  "competent authorities in charge" in 
Article 9, suggested substitution of "point of contact 
responsible for information sharing," which seemed to be met 
with general approval, as did a suggestion to soften the 
terminology of the notification and record-keeping 
requirements in Article 9(d).   The discussion of Article 10 
included well-received suggestions to substitute "awareness 
building" for "public relations" and to include "regional" 
organizations. 
 
¶53.  Interventions on the last article to be discussed, 
Article 11 ("Responsibility and Participation of Civil 
Society") generally emphasized the importance of civil 
society, but noted that the word "responsibility" is 
somewhat inapt, given that civil society was independent of 
government and would not be a signatory to this Convention. 
 
PROCEDURAL DISAGREEMENTS 
Representation of EU Member States in the Drafting 
Commission 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶54.  During his first intervention, on 14 December, the 
representative of France stated that he represented the 
European Union Member States who were also members of the 
Drafting Commission (Finland, Hungary and France).  (Note. 
Croatia, a EU applicant, was initially included in the group 
of EU Member States, the French representative having 
explained that "the single homogenous voice of the EU now 
extends to Croatia and Romania," but Croatia began to make 
interventions in its own name shortly after the meetings 
began.  End note.)  Because of the internal distribution of 
competence, the French representative explained, the 
European Commission representative would also speak when 
some areas were discussed. 
 
¶55. Brazil, Benin, Japan and Costa Rica responded that it 
was inappropriate to take up the modalities of 
representation of EU Member States in the Drafting 
Commission, but that they did not want the matter to hold up 
the work of the Drafting Commission.  Senegal and 
Switzerland took a different view, saying that the entire 
matter was an internal issue among the twenty-five EU member 
countries and would not jeopardize the work of the Drafting 
Commission. 
 
¶56.  During his first intervention on substance, the 
delegate from France responded to the Chair's invitation to 
speak by asserting that the EU had the floor.  The USG, in 
its next intervention, noted its respect for the right of 
the French delegation to take guidance from the European 
Union, but said that this was a meeting of Member States 
selected to be on the Drafting Commission, and therefore the 
European Union could not take the floor.  The Chair agreed, 
and for the remainder of the meeting, France spoke as 
France, though it was clear they purported to represent the 
European Union.  Neither Finland nor Hungary made any 
interventions. 
 
¶57.  EU Participation also became a problem during the 
"voting" on language.  Each participant was asked to raise 
his or her hand to indicate which "option" (see below) his 
or her delegation preferred.  On several occasions, the 
delegate from France would raise both hands (and on one 
occasion even indicated three hands) because Hungary, 
Finland or both were not in the room when the voting was 
held.    As this first happened in the evening, after many 
hours of difficult negotiations and little progress, it 
seemed that most delegates considered this as a joke.  At 
the end of the third day, however, the USDel realized the 
Chair was counting these as votes.  USDel immediately called 
a point or order and asked the Chair if he was counting 
France's vote twice.  When the Chair admitted that he was, 
since France was voting on behalf of Hungary who was not in 
the room at the time, USDel objected.   For the remainder of 
the meeting, Hungary and Finland were consistently in the 
room for voting, and the problem did not arise again. 
 
Working Methods 
Should Interventions Reflect National Interests?  Or 
Technical Drafting Issues? 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶58. Throughout the Drafting Commission meetings, some 
representatives (e.g., Ecuador, Barbados) noted with regret 
that many interventions seemed to embody exclusively 
national interests, not technical drafting ones.  This, they 
said, was not fair to the approximately 150 Member States 
not represented on the Drafting Commission.  Drafting 
Commission reps also cited the lack of fairness when 
recommending that all policy questions be referred to the 
Second Intergovernmental Meeting. 
 
Should Disagreement Be Shown By Brackets (USG Preference) or 
By Variant Texts? 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶59.  At several points, the Chair talked about finding 
methods to reflect the disagreement.  USDel made several 
interventions stating a preference for the use of brackets 
instead of options, and stating the understanding that the 
entire text and each option would be bracketed.  On several 
occasions, the Chair stated that the entire text and every 
option was understood to be bracketed. 
 
Chair Settles on Variant Texts 
------------------------------- 
 
¶60. Beginning with the second day, the Secretariat compiled 
written comments into 6 or 7 options, grouping and combining 
those written comments that were similar.  However, the 
Drafting Commission was not allowed to either revise the 
options that were suggested, nor provide new text (this was 
a problem for Japan, who had brought along substantial 
changes to the text, to be submitted to the drafting group). 
 
¶61. The Drafting Commission reps were asked to limit 
comments to preferences between the suggested options, but 
some offered comments on every option.  In order to speed 
things up, the Chair suggested a show of hands for which 
options delegations "could live with."   For the first day 
of this technique (Day 2 of the meeting) members would 
"vote" for any option they could live with - sometimes two 
or three of the suggested options.  By the third day of the 
meeting, the group had fallen into the practice of "voting" 
for only 1 option, thereby indicating their preference. 
Some participants commented that they could support one of 
several, but then voted in favor of only one. 
 
¶62. Many delegations, including the US, objected repeatedly 
early on to this process, pointing out that the Drafting 
Commission had been selected to refine language, not to vote 
on policy matters, and that voting was not fair to the 
Member States not represented on the Drafting Commission. 
As the sessions wore on, however, it seemed that Drafting 
Commission members generally accepted the "voting" 
procedure. 
 
Language of Drafting Commission's Report 
------------------------------------------ 
¶63. On the third day, the Chair produced sample language 
that he planned to use to summarize the discussion.  Despite 
previous USG complaints about the use of voting, and a clear 
statement of our preference for bracketing unagreed 
language, the sample language included terms such as "the 
majority of those present supported Option 3" and there were 
no brackets. 
 
¶64. In response to objections, the Chair later introduced 
language that did not include any references to the level of 
support expressed for any one option, only references to 
comments made during discussion.  Of the 24 member states on 
the drafting group, only Japan, Saudi Arabia and USA 
supported this text - nine other delegations complained that 
it did not include the results of the voting.  If the voting 
was not counted, then what was the point of the drafting 
group, as the options themselves could be compiled just as 
easily by the Secretariat without the drafting group. 
(Note.  The format the Chair eventually used adjectives, 
such as "some," "considerable," "limited" to identify levels 
of support.  No brackets are used.  End Note.) 
 
Identifying "Horizontal" Issues 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶65. During the third day, in which discussions were still 
focused on definitions, the Chair adopted the suggestion 
that the Chair adopted a suggestion to make up a list of 
"horizontal" issues for presentation to the Second 
Intergovernmental Session, thereby obviating identical 
objections every time a particular issue appeared in the 
text. 
 
¶66.  In connection with the discussion about reflecting the 
format of the "voting" procedure, Saudi Arabia and USDel 
both made the statement that the success of the drafting 
group was in highlighting the key issues, the so-called 
"horizontal" issues, to be considered by the Second 
Intergovernmental Meeting. 
 
¶67. On the fourth and final day, 17 December, the Chair 
introduced his draft of a list of horizontal issues."  The 
list: 
 
     Included terms such as "cultural contents;" "cultural 
     diversity" "cultural goods and services" and 
     "protection, preservation and safeguarding." 
     Referred to the choice between "States-Parties" and 
     "Contracting Parties," the latter formulation suggested 
     by France and also set forth in the EU Comments (Ref 
     C). 
 
     Noted that questions had arisen concerning the content 
     and placement of provisions concerning intellectual 
     property. 
 
     Set forth in general terms the question of whether 
     "shall" or "should" was the better term to use in 
     describing obligations under the Convention. 
 
¶68.  Drafting Commission reps, seemingly testy after three 
full days of what seemed repetitive and not fruitful talks, 
raised many objections. 
     France, said that "cultural diversity" was not a 
     horizontal issue, as it was only once in the July 2004 
     Draft Convention and had no "operational" function. 
     The USG response noted that the USG had tailored its 
     interventions on the assumption that "cultural 
     diversity," a key term in the USG vision, would be 
     submitted to the Second Intergovernmental meeting. 
     (Note.  As the USG envisions it, "culture" and 
     "cultural diversity" would substitute for "cultural 
     goods and services," "cultural expressions" and other 
     problematic terms.  End note.) 
 
     Brazil and Costa Rica objected to the inclusion of 
     intellectual property law. 
 
     Many reps pointed out that the use of "shall" versus 
     "should" was a policy choice, with different outcomes 
     depending on the particular provision under discussion. 
 
¶69.  In apparent response to the rapid-fire interventions, 
virtually all of which found fault with the list, the Chair 
withdrew the list. 
 
¶70.  USDel's last intervention expressed serious 
reservations about the process used during the meeting and 
the value of the product that would result.  Senegal 
concurred with USDEL and expressed appreciation that the US 
had flagged these concerns.  Benin added that the African 
states had had high hopes for this meting, but that the 
meeting had not achieved what they had hoped. 
 
¶71.  The sessions came to an end shortly thereafter, after 
reps praised the Chair's hard work and his professional, 
evenhanded and calm demeanor. 
Oliver