05PARIS8458
USUNESCO: TEXT OF LETTER-UNESCO EXECUTIVE BOARD
Wed Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141645Z Dec 05UNCLAS PARIS 008458 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO FR
SUBJECT:   USUNESCO: TEXT OF LETTER-UNESCO EXECUTIVE BOARD 
ROTATION 
 
 
¶1.  The following letter on Executive Board rotation was 
received December 14 from the Finnish delegation, the current 
chairs of electoral Group I.  Please advise. 
 
QTE 
 
To Members of Electoral Group I 
 
Re:  Meeting between the President of the General Conference 
and chairs of the various electoral groups on 
"Methods of rotation of membership of the Executive Board" 
to be discussed by all regional groups 
 
Dear Sir/Madam, 
 
The final report by the ad hoc working group on the relations 
between the three organs of Unesco (33 C/17) contains two 
recommendations on the membership of the Executive Board: 
 
¶1.  R. 20 The working group observed that the large size (58 
members) of the Executive Board is in part affecting its 
capacity to fully debate the large number of items on its 
agenda. Although the group did not reach a unanimous 
agreement, it is recommended that the issue of the reduction 
in the size of the Executive Board be addressed by the General 
Conference under a separate item. 
 
¶2. R. 21 The working group recommends that the General 
Conference consider the adoption of procedures that will 
ensure significant rotation of membership of the Executive 
Board, and afford all Member States the opportunity to 
participate in the organ. 
 
As the original proposals did aim at measures to eventually 
reduce the size of the Executive Board, the debate in the G.C. 
Commission I reflected such opposition to the idea of reducing 
the size of the Executive Board that it was decided to 
concentrate, for the time being, on measures aiming at 
ensuring effective rotation in the membership of the Executive 
Board. Thus the text of recommendation 21 (as incorporated in 
resolution 33 C/Res. 92 /to be edited) reads as follows: 
 
"Invites the President of the General Conference to consult 
the different regional groups regarding methods of rotation of 
membership of the Executive Board, and to report to the 34th 
Session of the General Conference the results thereon". 
 
To this end a meeting was held last week between the chairs of 
various regional groups called upon by the President of the 
General Conference. Considering that there will be, at the end 
of the year 2005, a change of the chairmanship in all regional 
groups, it was agreed that all present chairs inform the 
future presidencies of their respective groups of the 
forthcoming rotation issue. 
 
To this end the current Presidency of Group I has consulted 
France, the future Presidency of the Group I, and it has been 
mutually agreed to request Members of Group I to start to 
deliberate different rotation models in Group I that will 
initially be discussed in a meeting to be organised by the 
next Presidency of Group I early next year. The idea is to 
have an open-minded innovative approach to the rotation and 
different rotation models/modifications could be brought to 
the Group's discussions. In this context I would also like to 
refer to the introductory discussions on this issue already 
held during the US Presidency of Group I. 
 
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you 
all for the good co-operation during the past year and welcome 
France, the Group's new Presidency for the year 2006. 
 
Seasons Greetings & Best Wishes for the Year 2006 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pia Hillo 
Deputy Permanent Delegate 
Presidency of Electoral Group I 
 
UNQTE 
OLIVER