05PARIS7085
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraqi Constitution
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraqi Constitution 
Secretary Rice - Iran UNESCO - Cultural Diversity 
 
SIPDIS 
PARIS - Monday, October 17, 2005 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraqi Constitution 
Secretary Rice - Iran 
 
SIPDIS 
UNESCO - Cultural Diversity 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The threat of an avian flu epidemic and how the government is 
both preparing and informing the public is one of today's 
major front page and editorial stories. As the EU-25 Foreign 
Affairs Ministers meet in Brussels for their first joint 
session on the issue, Le Figaro headlines: "Europe Facing the 
Avian Flu." La Croix devotes its lead to "All That Still 
Remains Unknown" and in her editorial Dominique Quinio 
emphasizes that a "margin of uncertainties" remains. Financial 
La Tribune also devotes its editorial to "a propagation that 
has Europe worried." Pascal Aubert, like Quinio in La Croix 
analyzes the government's use of "the principle of precaution" 
which should be "used but not abused." 
 
Iraq and the vote on the Constitution are today's major 
international story, sharing top billing on front pages with 
the avian flu. "Iraq Takes One More Step Towards Democracy" is 
Le Figaro's second front-page headline. In his editorial 
Pierre Rousselin warns about "the Lebanisation" of Iraq but is 
also hopeful for Iraq's future. In regional La Republic du 
Centre Jacques Camus warns: "The Americans would be mistaken 
to take their desires for fact. A `yes' victory carries its 
own risks." (See Part C) 
 
Popular right-of-center Le Parisien interviews Pascal Boniface 
of IRIS: "The high voter turnout means the Iraqis want to take 
their future in hand. But we must not be lulled into feeling 
that this vote will resolve every problem. As long as foreign 
troops remain in Iraq there cannot be peace. The big winners 
are the Kurds and the Shiites. The Sunnis are left in the 
middle with nothing." Boniface also comments on the imminent 
trial of Saddam Hussein: "It would have been better if the 
trial took place before an international court. No one must 
`forget' that for a while, the West gave its support to 
Saddam. This could open the floodgates of certain 
revelations." 
 
Secretary Rice's visit to Paris is prominently reported, with 
 
SIPDIS 
emphasis on the shared determination adopted by France and the 
U.S. towards Iran. (See Part C) 
 
Left-of-center Liberation reports on today's vote at UNESCO 
where "Cultural Ministers will vote to adopt an international 
convention on art and culture. which will thus be excluded 
from trade negotiations. Hence America's ire." (See Part C) 
 
Culture Minister Donnadieu de Vabres is interviewed: "The 
truth is that there is the threat of (a U.S.) domination and 
uniformization. France is no longer alone. The EU-25 is 
united. The Americans did not realize the extent of the 
international mobilization. I am surprised by the stance of 
the U.S., by its stern attitude. It is probably triggered by 
the success of the convention. This is not a judicious 
attitude. The U.S. should promote cultural diversity rather 
than harp on the fact that they are misunderstood." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraqi Constitution 
 
"Iraqi Hopes" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/17): "The 
Iraqis voted on a text which remains vague and does not settle 
the country's growing divisions. The Constitution's only hope 
of being adopted in certain Sunni provinces lies in a last- 
minute loophole, which opens the door to amendments after its 
adoption. But the constitutional exercise in Iraq is akin to 
fitting a round peg into a square hole. The Sunnis have every 
reason to fear they might be the big losers. The Constitution 
opens the door to the country's break up with the appearance 
of two entities in oil-rich regions: the Shiites and the 
Kurds. But in Iraq chaos has reached such proportions that the 
stakes lie elsewhere: even if the Constitution is not perfect, 
what must be remembered is that the Iraqis, Sunni included, 
voted, in spite of the continuing degradation of the security 
situation. It is to be hoped that one day, the political 
process will overcome violence. It is essential that we stop 
the process of `lebanization' in Iraq, which lurks behind the 
constitutional faade of unity. This is the challenge facing 
the Iraqis, all Iraqis. And the requirement for the 
coalition's withdrawal." 
 
"The Risks" 
Jacques Camus in regional La Republique du Centre (10/17): "On 
Sunday, unverifiable information circulated as to the victory 
of the `yes.' But America would be wrong to prematurely take 
its desires for fact. Even a victory of the `yes' would carry 
risks. The offer made to the Iraqis could lead to the 
country's break up and regional `separatism.' Will Iraq make 
peace with its painful past, with the Shiites and the Kurds 
cultivating their separateness to the detriment of the Sunnis? 
It is a mistake to ignore the fact that results will be known 
on Thursday, the day after the start of Saddam Hussein's 
trial. More than the Constitution, the trial will stand as a 
test of Iraq's political and democratic maturity." 
 
Secretary Rice - Iran 
 
SIPDIS 
 
"The U.S. and France Share Determination Against Iran" 
Natalie Nougayrede in left-of-center Le Monde (10/17): "On her 
previous visit to France Secretary Rice remained very discreet 
on the subject of Iran. But last Friday Iran occupied a 
position of choice in her meetings with President Chirac and 
FM Douste Blazy. Intense consultations are on about Iran but 
also about Syria. America and France's diplomacy have together 
warned Iran and asked for a resumption of negotiations with 
the EU-3. Rice's impromptu visit to Moscow proves that the 
U.S. wants to find a common ground with Russia in how to deal 
with Iran. Separately, the French and the Americans advertised 
their shared views on Syria and Lebanon. According to a Times 
of London report, the Americans have offered a deal to Syria 
in exchange for cooperation in the Hariri assassination." 
 
"Washington Increases Its Pressure on Iran" 
Arnaud de La Grange in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/17): "One 
thing is certain: American diplomacy is on the offensive. 
Secretary Rice has just made the rounds in order to drum up 
 
SIPDIS 
support in favor of the threat of sanctions to counter Iran's 
obstinacy. London and Washington, not surprisingly, exhibited 
their shared views on the issue. But Secretary Rice was also 
pleased with the warm support given by Paris: `The British, 
the French - yes you heard me, the French - the EU-3, they 
have all been very clear.' Secretary Rice also warned Iran 
against aiding Iraq's insurgents. A link between WMD and 
terrorism which brings another similar link to mind." 
 
UNESCO - Cultural Diversity 
 
"Cultural Diversity Comes to UNESCO" 
Vincent Noce in left-of-center Liberation (10/17): "The U.S. 
did all it could to keep UNESCO from adopting a convention 
which grants cultural diversity its own status, setting it 
outside trade negotiations. Hence America's ire. But the U.S. 
found itself alone in the fight, abandoned not only by the 
Australians and Japan, but also by Great Britain, which has 
been playing up its European role. The Americans are all the 
more unhappy because this will set a precedent: This is the 
first time that the EU has given the European Commission a 
mandate to negotiate in this type of debate. A few days ago 
Secretary Rice sent a letter to her counterparts asking for 
 
SIPDIS 
the vote to be postponed and threatening a break within 
UNESCO. Rice claims that the convention legitimizes `human 
rights violations' under the guise of cultural linguistic 
policies. But more seriously, the U.S. Secretary of State is 
denouncing a `protectionist' policy. The Canadian Minister 
symbolizes the general feeling when she `deplored Rice's 
aggressive and violent terms.' If the U.S. is dropped by Anglo- 
Saxon countries who are close allies, it may be because they 
themselves feel threatened." STAPLETON