05PARIS6914
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Middle East Iran European
Fri Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Middle East Iran European 
Issues: Turkey 
PARIS - Friday, October 07, 2005 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Middle East 
Iran 
European Issues: Turkey 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Prime Minister Villepin was the guest of a two-hour television 
talk show last evening. His performance is today's major front- 
page story. Popular Le Parisien calls him a "Charmer" while Le 
Figaro headlines "Villepin Defends His Choices." Liberation 
devotes its editorial to his Gaullist political line. The 
subject of illegal immigration makes today's front page in 
Liberation while Le Figaro speaks of "the Challenge of 
Immigration" in its editorial, just as Interior Minister 
Sarkozy warps up a one-day trip to Libya to contain African 
immigration to Europe. 
 
The economic and financial press report on the launching of 
the A350, "without European subsidies." EADS co-President 
Thomas Enders is interviewed in Les Echos: "The question here 
for Airbus is to fight with equal weapons with Boeing. If the 
EU and the U.S. want to define new rules, fine. But as long as 
there is no new system, we must take into account the fact 
that Boeing receives public and indirect subsidies. I have 
never understood why the reimbursable advances, with interest, 
from our governments are criticized more than Boeing's 
subsidies. We want to avoid a lengthy procedure before the 
WTO. Our gesture  confirms our desire to find a solution to 
the conflict through negotiations. And we expect Boeing to 
adopt a conciliatory initiative. It is neither in our interest 
nor in the interest of Boeing to launch a trade war. We want 
equal rules of competition." 
 
Liberation reports on the proposed Bill against torturing 
prisoners "ardently defended by Senator McCain. A challenge to 
the White House, which is threatening to veto the Bill. But 
few have taken the threat seriously: opposing one's veto to a 
text that prohibits torture would not go down well." 
 
The publication in France of a book by former U.S. soldier 
Jimmy Massey titled "Kill, Kill, Kill" which was announced 
yesterday in communist l'Humanite is front-paged in popular 
right-of-center France Soir: "We Are Murdering Civilians" 
Massey is quoted. Inside, a two-page spread reports on 
Massey's experience and interviews the former Marine: "The 
difference between Lynndie England and us, is that she was 
caught." 
 
The EU-Turkey negotiations elicit a harsh commentary from 
columnist Ivan Rioufol. In other international news, the role 
of Iran to destabilize Iraq is reported in Le Figaro while La 
Croix reports on King Abdallah of Jordan's role in bringing 
together Sharon and Mahmoud Abbas. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Middle East 
 
"Abdallah of Jordan, Mediator of Peace" 
Agnes Rotivel in Catholic La Croix (10/07): "Mandated by the 
Americans, Abdallah of Jordan can be proud of having brought 
together two men who were no longer speaking to each other. 
The meeting between Sharon and Mahmoud Abbas is scheduled for 
October 11. King Abdallah is naturally following in his 
father's footsteps. President Bush, who wants to get Arab 
leaders more involved in resolving their region's conflicts, 
wants to believe that by sending King Abdallah as his 
messenger, the message has a better chance of being heard than 
if it comes directly from the Bush administration. Especially 
considering the atmosphere of mistrust that prevails in the 
Arab world about Washington-led initiatives." 
 
Iran 
 
"London Denounces Iran's Interference in Iraq" 
Georges Malbrunot in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/07): "After 
the U.S. and Saudi Arabia, it is London's turn to accuse Iran 
of helping the Iraqi rebellion. It is not in Iran's interest 
to see the Americans succeeding in Iraq. The emergence of a 
Shiite democracy in Iraq could indeed weaken the Iranian 
Mullahs. Since the beginning of the summer, a new piece of the 
puzzle has emerged, with Iran helping Sunni armed groups. Iran 
does not want to put all of its eggs in the same basket: 
helping the pro-American Shiite leaders in Baghdad does not 
preclude logistical aid to the anti-American Shiite militia." 
 
European Issues: Turkey 
 
"Turkey in Europe: the Price to Pay for Contempt" 
Ivan Rioufol in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/07): "To a large 
majority, the people of Europe have said no to Turkey. This is 
why the betrothal with Ankara imposed by the EU-25 is an 
insult to democracy. The EU is courting its own death when it 
does not listen to its people or accept to analyze their 
reactions to globalization. Once again the EU leaders' angelic 
stance is clashing with the people's clairvoyance. By inviting 
Turkey to join in this European profit-based economic club, 
the elites hope to keep at bay the clash between 
civilizations. But who says that Turkey's 90 percent Muslim 
population is ready to give up its identity? Austria tried by 
itself to be the European people's advocate. No country came 
to its rescue: Austria had to capitulate in the face of an 
imperial Turkey aided by the U.S. . It is highly improbable 
that Europe will be able to impose its values on Turkey. And 
who can guarantee that `European' Turkey will give up its so- 
called moderate `Islamism?' There is a fascination among 
European leaders with Islam and its proselytism. The price to 
pay will be a `Balkanization' of Europe." STAPLETON