05PARIS8327
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Secretary Rice to Europe -
Thu Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 008327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Secretary Rice to Europe - 
Alleged CIA Secret Prisons 
Iraq 
U.S. Military Deployment in Eastern Europe 
 
PARIS - Thursday, December 08, 2005 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Secretary Rice to Europe - Alleged CIA Secret Prisons 
 
SIPDIS 
Iraq 
U.S. Military Deployment in Eastern Europe 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Front pages and editorials focus on the latest controversy 
involving Interior Minister Sarkozy and France's history as a 
colonial power. But articles continue to report on Secretary 
Rice's visit and the controversy over alleged CIA flights and 
prisons. Le Monde carries the story on its front page. 
President Bush's latest speech on Iraq is analyzed in Le 
Figaro. In regional L'Alsace, the editorial comments on the 
latest U.S. military base in Romania, "a strategy that is sure 
to accentuate Putin's paranoia." (See Part C) Regional 
L'Alsace also reports on Secretary Rice's remarks in Kiev 
about torture: "In Kiev, Secretary Rice insisted on the fact 
that the U.S. did not authorize either torture, nor treatments 
that are debasing, in an attempt to pass on a message which is 
not going through easily." 
 
Le Monde carries an op-ed by U.S. Ambassador to NATO Victoria 
Nuland entitled "New Horizons for NATO." "North America, 
Europe, NATO and the EU have a major role to play together and 
separately for our future and to promote freedom. It is when 
we are united that our efforts are most effective." 
 
France's Environment Minister Nelly Olin pens an op-ed in Le 
Figaro entitled: "Climate: It Is Not Too Late." "The challenge 
we are facing can be met. But it requires commitment and a 
strong mobilization. And the truth is that new options and new 
actors are needed. Developing nations must be committed. We 
also need the commitment of the U.S. President Bush's refusal 
to sign Kyoto puts us in a delicate position. Research and new 
technologies is fine, but we also need economic incentives. It 
is a good thing that the States from the North Eastern 
corridor are preparing a system of exchange for emission 
quotas and that California is committed to reducing gas 
emissions." President Chirac who addressed the Montreal COP-11 
conference via DVC is quoted in Les Echos: "We need exemplary 
international cooperation within a re-enforced multilateral 
and long-term system." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Secretary Rice to Europe - Alleged CIA Secret Prisons 
 
SIPDIS 
 
"Europe Embarrassed About CIA Flights" 
Alexandrine Bouilhet in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/08): 
"Ever since it was revealed, the controversy has been 
embarrassing European governments. Yesterday in Brussels it 
was discreetly mentioned, but despite Washington's 
justifications, the tone remained courteous. Most Europeans 
chose to adopt a low profile on the issue in order not to 
offend the `iron lady,' especially, and according to a 
diplomat from the `Old Europe' ` since most governments were 
probably aware of what was going on and since intelligence 
services are cooperating in the fight against terrorism.' This 
is exactly what Secretary Rice alluded to in her statement 
before leaving the U.S. . Embarrassed or taken by surprise, 
European governments have yet to admit to anything that might 
be compromising, hoping the story will go away. Meanwhile, 
legal investigations in Europe may add to their embarrassment, 
with questions about who knew, and who knew what. Legally, 
some governments may be liable for complicity in abductions or 
acts of torture. Even if in matters of national security, 
proof is always difficult to get." 
 
"The EU Plans to Investigate" 
Jean-Pierre Stroobants in left-of-center Le Monde (12/08): 
"Rice's contention that the U.S. has used only legal means, 
which exclude torture, in its fight against terrorism, did not 
elicit an official reaction from the European Commission: this 
is probably a way for Brussels to signify its skepticism and 
its dissatisfaction. Unofficially, Brussels considers that 
Secretary Rice did not answer the questions put to her. But 
 
SIPDIS 
several European experts believe that the investigations into 
alleged CIA secret prisons will be very difficult. The CIA 
probably closed said prisons the minute the information was 
leaked." 
 
Iraq 
 
"Bush Says Reconstruction in Iraq Is Progressing" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/08): "Hoping 
that repetition will have an effect, President Bush gave his 
latest speech on Iraq demonstrating a new approach to his 
`strategy for victory,' and hoping to convince public opinion. 
The new communications strategy is the work of Peter Feaver 
who believes that support for the war depends on the level of 
confidence in public opinion that there is indeed a chance for 
victory. Hence the repetition on the part of the Bush 
administration on the progress achieved in Iraq and the 
importance of what is at stake. But to date, this new public 
relations offensive has born few results." 
 
U.S. Military Deployment in Eastern Europe 
 
"A Foothold in Romania for U.S. Army" 
Patrick Fluckiger in regional L'Alsace (12/08): "It is, as 
always, in the name of the fight against terrorism that the 
Americans are setting up military bases near Romanian oil 
fields, and on Russia's doorstep. This strategy is sure to 
accentuate the paranoia expressed by Putin, who never misses 
an opportunity to say that the West is looking to destabilize 
his country. The Kremlin will also take this opportunity to 
come down even harder on any democratic ambition exhibited by 
those Republics that still remain faithful to him. Eastern 
nations which play into the hands of the Americans in this way 
contribute to maintaining the tension that had supposedly 
disappeared with the Cold War." STAPLETON