05PRAGUE1263
CZECHS WELCOME IRAQI DRAFT CONSTITUTION
Tue Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Prague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PRAGUE 001263 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IZ EZ PREL PGOV
SUBJECT: CZECHS WELCOME IRAQI DRAFT CONSTITUTION 
 
REF: STATE 158420 
 
1) In response to reftel issues the Czech Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs made the following statement Aug 30: 
 
2) Begin statement: 
Declaration of the Czech Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the 
Work Towards the Proposed Iraqi Constitution. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic 
welcomes the draft of the new Iraqi Constitution and its 
approval by the Presidential Council as a basic step on the 
road to democracy and prosperity of Iraq, which reflects the 
interests of its population. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs especially appreciates the 
fact that, in spite of the difficult conditions, and threats 
of insurgents, the draft is a result of a democratic 
discussion among the representatives of all Iraqi communities 
and political subjects. We believe the continuing democratic 
discussion within Iraqi society enables the overcoming of 
divisions and reservations among some representatives, and 
will bring the political process to a successful conclusion. 
The next milestone is the referendum on the constituion 
planned for October 15, 2005. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is convinced that the 
successful continuation of the political process will improve 
the security situation and speed Iraq's economic recovery. 
 
The Czech Republic is determined to continue to cooperate 
with the international community in helping Iraq on the path 
to democracy, stability and economic prosperity. 
End statement. 
 
3) Additionally, Embassy spokesperson Aug 30 met with two 
prominent Czech journalists (who specialize in the Iraq 
conflict) to express U.S. support for the Iraqi 
constitutional process. 
MUNTER