05QUITO2886
MEDIA REACTION:  BOLIVIA; IMMIGRATION
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002886 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, WHA, WHA/AND, WHA/PDA 
DIRONDCP FOR PA 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPRC KIRC KPAO EC
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION:  BOLIVIA; IMMIGRATION 
 
¶1.  "Evo or not Evo," a column (12/12) by Grace 
Jaramillo in Quito's leading centrist "El Comercio" 
(circ. 70,000) 
 
Quote:  "Difficult, extreme dilemma.  Bolivian 
democracy seemed to have been strengthened with the 
semi-parliamentary political scheme where no elected 
president could be sworn in without a guarantee of 
enough support to govern.  This political reform 
seemed to be the most appropriate for the particular 
circumstances of political instability and regional 
divisions that have characterized Bolivia. . .Now, 
this visionary reform may have become a trap with 
unforeseeable consequences. 
 
"In this election, there is neither a middle position 
nor the possibility of bridging political positions 
that are so contradictory. . . Bolivia has crossed 
the threshold of democratic order, because for quite 
some its political class has failed to recognize the 
level of social inequity and marginalization. . . 
Such extreme marginalization has made Morales' 
reformist and anti-imperialistic rhetoric appealing 
for the poorest and has added to his followers.  But 
it is not that simple, Evo does not have a clear plan 
to govern, his threat of nationalizing multinational 
companies is causing chills to the more moderate. . . 
Bolivia is walking on the edge of the abyss." 
 
¶2.  "Tear Down those Walls," an editorial (12/19) in 
Guayaquil's (and Ecuador's) leading center-right "El 
Universo" (circ. 140,000) 
 
Quote:  "The WTO meeting in Hong Kong showed that 
industrialized nations desire for a world free of 
barriers for themselves, but with even higher walls 
for the rest. . . All European countries have 
toughened their legislations to make immigration from 
the Third World even more difficult and the US 
Congress just approved the building of a one thousand- 
kilometers long wall in various sections of its 
border with Mexico with the same goal . 
 
"Industrialized nations:  tear down those new walls 
of shame!" 
 
¶3.  "The Third Wall," an editorial in Guayaquil's 
centrist "Expreso" (circ. 28,000) 
 
Quote:  "Now the Congress of the US, the country that 
supports globalization, the one that places itself in 
the forefront of freedom for the people, the one that 
proclaims itself to be the example of 
internationalism, has just approved the President's 
plan to erect a "double wall" in some parts of 
California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas. . .The 
right wing in the US has celebrated [the proposal] 
with exaggerated enthusiasm - a dangerous attitude. . 
.Naturally, in Latin America there was a response of 
rejection towards the so-called law that criminalizes 
immigrants ." 
 
JEWELL