05QUITO2876
MEDIA REACTION: BOLIVIAN ELECTIONS AND
Fri Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002876 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, WHA, WHA/AND, WHA/PDA 
DIRONDCP FOR PA 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPRC KIRC KPAO EC
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: BOLIVIAN ELECTIONS AND 
VENEZUELA 
 
¶1.  "Evo Morales' Logic" editorial (12/16) in Quito's 
leading centrist "El Comercio" (circ. 70,000) 
 
Quote:  ". . . Evo Morales is leading the polls; he 
won't make it in the first round and probably some 
parliamentary alliance will choose his opponent. 
Thus, in the revolutionary Latin American logic -- 
nationalistic, populist and anti-American -- the 
cycle of democratic options will be exhausted and the 
future of Bolivia will be more uncertain than ever 
before. 
 
"Although it is difficult to explain this behavior 
that surfaces wildly in the highlands and in other 
areas of Latin America, what is even more 
incomprehensible is the historical role of the U.S. 
 
"The difference with European powers in this field is 
noteworthy.  They embarked in cruel and repressive 
confrontations with native Africans in order to 
thwart independence; however, later on, in 
compensation or out of bad conscience, they developed 
assistance policies for their former colonies.  On 
the contrary, the relationship between the U.S. and 
the rest of the continent since independence is 
marked by an imposed unilateralism . or indifference. 
 
"In this context, the emergence of atypical, 
rhetorical leaders who rally par excellence and are 
prone to stage impossible revolutions is natural. 
 
". . . after Sunday's electoral outcome in Bolivia, 
we will have to measure the collateral effects it 
will have on South America's poorest economy. . ." 
 
¶2.  "Chavez Consolidates," a column (12/15) by Raul 
Falconi in Guayaquil's conservative "El Telegrafo" 
(circ. 8,000) 
 
Quote:  "Recent congressional elections in Venezuela 
give President Chavez a clear mandate for creating a 
Bolivarian constitution. . .  Chavez has maintained 
his unbeatable electoral support despite powerful 
opposition from the U.S., and from traditional 
political parties that have lost control of the 
country and of the upper middle class. 
 
"The President has become, in addition, a relevant 
actor in Latin American politics lately. . .With 
Venezuela, MERCOSUR secures an economic bloc 
increasingly powerful that will be able to negotiate 
with the U.S. with more equity. . .Venezuela, 
sustained by its President's policies and its oil 
wealth is heading toward becoming a real regional 
power with a strong international presence.  We'll 
certainly have Chavez's presence for a while." 
 
JEWELL