05ROME537
IRAQ:  ITALIAN SENATE APPROVES CONTINUED FUNDING
Thu Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ROME 000537 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MOPS MARR IT IZ IRAQI FREEDOM AFGHANISTAN
SUBJECT:  IRAQ:  ITALIAN SENATE APPROVES CONTINUED FUNDING 
FOR IRAQ MILITARY MISSION 
 
REF:  04 ROME 2947 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The Italian Senate has approved funding for 
Italy's continued military mission in Iraq.  We expect the 
Chamber to follow suit when the measure is scheduled for a 
vote in the lower house in the coming weeks.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  On February 16, the Italian Senate approved financing 
for the Italian military mission in Iraq through June 30, 
2005, by a vote of 141 in favor, 112 against.  (Funding for 
missions abroad is always granted in six-month increments.) 
The center-right governing coalition was joined in 
supporting the measure by the small Union of Democrats of 
Europe (UDEUR), a not-overly-dedicated member of the center- 
left opposition.  The remainder of the opposition voted 
against.  Minister for Reforms Calderoli (Northern League) 
speculated that the release of a video showing Italian 
hostage Giuliana Sgrena in tears begging for help 
-- broadcast shortly before the vote -- may have been 
intended to influence the vote. 
 
¶3.  The Chamber of Deputies must still approve the decree 
before it becomes law.  While no date has yet been set for 
Chamber debate, that vote is also expected to pass, given 
the Government's support for the Iraq mission and its 
majority in Parliament. 
 
¶4.  The center-left opposition coalition led by Romano Prodi 
decided on February 10 to vote against the Iraq funding 
decree.  Until that decision was taken, some centrists in 
the opposition, including Daisy coalition leader Francesco 
Rutelli, strongly questioned whether the center-left could 
continue to oppose Italian involvement in Iraq in the wake 
of the Iraqi elections and UNSYG Kofi Annan's recently 
renewed call for international support for Iraq.  In the 
end, however, the opposition called on the Government to 
promote a special meeting of the EU Council to develop an EU 
strategy to consolidate democracy in Iraq, form an inclusive 
representational government, and adopt a constitution "that 
protects the rights of all the components of Iraqi society." 
The left also demanded that the Security Council request a 
"change in mandate and an end to foreign military presence" 
in Iraq. 
 
¶5.  PM Berlusconi took the unusual step of addressing the 
Senate on February 15 to open debate on the measure. 
Berlusconi firmly supported the decree and Italy's continued 
mission in Iraq until the Iraqi government "feels itself to 
be secure."  He called on moderate members of the opposition 
to "find the courage to vote in favor of our soldiers in 
Iraq", and asked rhetorically:  "How can it be that the 
opposition, which invoked strong UN involvement for so long, 
will vote for the withdrawal of our troops now that the 
strategy the UN established is taking shape and having 
success?" 
 
¶6.  Baghdad minimize considered. 
SEMBLER 
 
 
NNNN 
	2005ROME00537 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED