05SANAA1328
LIMITED KORAN DESECRATION PROTESTS IN SANAA
Wed May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181005Z May 05UNCLAS SANAA 001328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER KJUS YM
SUBJECT: LIMITED KORAN DESECRATION PROTESTS IN SANAA 
 
REF: A. SANAA 1305 
 
     ¶B. SANAA 1301 
 
¶1. Summary:  The recent Newsweek piece alleging desecration 
of a Koran in Guantanamo Bay sparked small protests among 
students at Sanaa's universities.  The non-violent protests 
were contained by police and were not covered by the local 
press.  Despite strong opposition to many U.S. policies, most 
young people in Sanaa are more concerned at this time with 
the quality of education than any other issue.  End summary. 
 
¶2. An eyewitness reported small demonstrations at the New 
Sanaa University of about 100-150 students.  Many were 
holding placards exclaiming "Don't disgrace the Holy Koran" 
and other slogans, which students also chanted over a 
loudspeaker.  The demonstrations remained peaceful, and were 
contained by police.  There were simultaneous demonstrations 
at the Old Sanaa University, which were smaller in scope and 
heavily controlled by a riot squad checking the IDs of each 
student entering the campus.  The eyewitness said there were 
no gatherings in Liberation Square, a common meeting place 
for political dissent. 
 
¶3. Econoff met May 15 with approximately fifty students at 
the National Institute for Administration, located on a 
separate campus from the Sanaa universities.  The students at 
this university were unaware of any demonstrations related to 
the alleged Koran desecration, and believed that the protests 
were in response to an ongoing faculty strike at the 
universities.  The students had stayed up studying for their 
exams, they said, only to find out they were cancelled, 
prompting the protests.  No one in the group said they were 
planning to demonstrate and did not know anyone who would, 
despite universal outrage at the alleged events in Guantanamo 
Bay. 
 
¶4. Comment.  Yemenis remain largely unaware of anti-U.S. 
demonstrations at Sanaa's universities, despite the fact that 
some small protests did take place.  This can be attributed 
to the lack of coverage in the Yemeni press, which focused 
mostly on international developments (ref A).  Barring future 
revelations, it is unlikely that protests in Yemen will 
continue.  Despite strong emotional opposition to U.S. policy 
in Guantanamo Bay and strong religious tendencies among 
students, most young people are more concerned with their 
education and other immediate concerns.  End comment. 
Krajeski