05SAOPAULO1356
INCREASED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY AT SAO PAULO'S
Fri Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Sao Paulo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAO PAULO 001356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS, DS/DSS, DS/IP/WHA, DS/IP/ITA, 
DS/DSS/OSAC, WHA/EX AND WHA/BSC,CA/OCS/ACS/WHA, POSTS FOR 
RSO AND PSO, PASS TO TSA AND DHS AT POSTS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC BR CA KCRM SC
SUBJECT: INCREASED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY AT SAO PAULO'S 
GUARULHOS AIRPORT 
 
 ¶1. (U) Two incidents involving American citizens within the 
last month at or near Sao Paulo's Guarulhos International 
airport have highlighted what has already been perceived by 
many as a significant rise in criminal incidents targeting 
travelers moving through the airport. In both cases the 
victims appeared to be targets of opportunity as opposed to 
being American. 
 
 ¶2.  (U) On 12/09/2005, the local newspapers reported that an 
American citizen named David Lee Collson was assaulted by two 
unidentified Brazilian males in a bathroom at the airport. 
The attackers knocked Collson unconscious and robbed him of 
approximately $900 dollars. No further details were provided 
except that Collson was a tourist visiting his Brazilian 
girlfriend. Collson was reportedly taken to a local hospital 
were he was treated and released. Attempts to contact Collson 
by the Consulates American Citizen Services were negative. 
RSO has contacted Brazilian law enforcement authorities for 
additional information. 
 
¶3.  (U) On 12/07/05 RSO received information from local 
Monsanto Co. security representatives that on 11/02/2005, two 
of their US contractors, along with a Brazilian military 
police driver, were riding in a luggage van to the airport 
when they became victims to an attempted carjacking near the 
Caesar Park hotel, approximately 10 minutes away from the 
airport. One motorcycle with two passengers, one armed with a 
handgun and one vehicle with four passengers, all armed with 
the same type handgun, attempted to force the van off the 
road. The military police officer used evasive maneuvers and 
continued driving, at one point reportedly almost forcing the 
other vehicles off the road and preventing them from passing 
the van.  The incident was short in duration and the 
attackers peeled off, either fearing exposure from their 
close proximity to the airport or frustrated from the 
resistance. No shots were fired and there were no injuries. 
Monsanto did not file a police report since they were 
departing immediately from the country. RSO has contacted 
Brazilian law enforcement authorities for additional 
information. RSO advised Monsanto that RSO or OSAC in 
Washington DC should be advised immediately in incidents such 
as these. 
 
¶4.  (U) The media reports surrounding the first incident 
featured a startling statistic that the Military police has 
cut its police presence at the airport by 70%, from fifty 
officers to 15. RSO contacted the Brazilian Military Police 
and verified that the actual figure was 50%, still a 
significant reduction in security and a significant concern 
given that Guarulhos airport in Sao Paulo is the major 
airline hub for South America. 
 
¶5.  (U) RSO Actions: RSO disseminated the details of these 
incidents to all US Consulate employees with a security 
notice. The notice also reminded employees to take the proper 
security precautions as previously recommended by the RSO 
office. All American employees and their dependents have 
already been instructed to take personal security and safety 
precautions during their mandatory in-brief upon arrival at 
this critical crime threat post and schedule refresher 
security briefings for those who have been at post for more 
than one year. A Consular Warden message was also issued and 
RSO is coordinating with OSAC in Headquarters for a similar 
security posting on the website. RSO will provide additional 
information should it become available. 
MCMULLEN