05SANTODOMINGO3161
CUBA: REVIEW OF SUSPENSION OF LIBERTAD ACT TITLE
Mon Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santo Domingo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 003161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, 
USSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CU ETTC DR PREL SMIG EINV ETRD
SUBJECT: CUBA: REVIEW OF SUSPENSION OF LIBERTAD ACT TITLE 
III - DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: A. STATE 108052 
 
     ¶B. 04 SANTO DOMINGO 6466 
     ¶C. 04 SANTO DOMINGO 6584 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Subsequent to the inauguration of the 
administration of President Leonel Fernandez last year, the 
Dominican Republic shifted its vote on the Cuba resolution at 
the annual UN Human Rights Committee meeting from "yes" (with 
the United States) in 2004 to "abstain" in 2005.  However, 
there has been no other marked change in the Dominican 
Republic's situation with regard to Cuba.  Interaction is 
limited to officially agreed exchanges involving small 
numbers of Cuban sports coaches and Dominican medical 
students and visits to Cuba by private Dominican tourists. 
The Fernandez administration has continued to take a low 
profile on Cuban issues.  In response to Ref A, Embassy 
considers that U.S. national interests and Dominican 
Government actions justify renewal of the waiver of Title III 
of the Libertad Act with regard to Dominican businesses.  End 
summary. 
 
Dominican businesses and Cuba 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) As in our last report (Ref B), Embassy considers 
that U.S. national interests and the actions of the Dominican 
Government justify a renewal of the waiver of Title III of 
the Libertad Act with regard to Dominican businesses that may 
be involved in joint ventures with the Government of Cuba or 
significant trade with Cuba.  Embassy inquiries have not 
resulted in identification of any Dominican companies or 
entities with investments or joint ventures that would 
trigger Title III concerns.  There is very little Dominican 
investment in Cuba, and Embassy has no information about any 
conflict between Dominican investors and U.S. citizens with 
property claims in Cuba.  Embassy has not received complaints 
by any U.S. citizens against any Dominican company related to 
any investment in Cuba or Dominican Republic-Cuba trade. 
 
 
Dominican votes at the UNCHR 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (U) In April, during the annual meeting of the UN Human 
Rights Commission in Geneva, the Dominican Republic abstained 
on a resolution calling for continuation of the UNCHR's 
scrutiny of the human rights situation in Cuba.  The 
resolution, sponsored by the United States, was approved. 
This represented a Dominican shift from last year, when under 
the administration of former President Mejia the Dominican 
Republic cast a decisive vote approving a resolution on Cuba, 
 Also in April, 2005, the Dominican Republic joined the 
United States in opposing a Cuban-sponsored resolution 
criticizing treatment of detainees at Guantanamo. 
 
Cuban-Dominican technical cooperation and exchanges 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU) The administration of President Fernandez has 
continued to take a low profile on Cuban issues.  Recently 
the local press ran a photo of about 15 Cuban sports coaches 
visiting the Dominican Republic to help train local athletes, 
and reported a sister-city arrangement between the mayor of 
the north coast city of Puerto Plata and the Cuban city of 
Matanzas.  MFA Americas Director Francia Sencion told poloff 
on May 17 that there has been no increase in the number or 
diversity of exchanges since the annual Cuban-Dominican Mixed 
Commission meeting last November, notwithstanding statements 
to the press by both sides at that time favoring increased 
bilateral cooperation.  The main activities, which are valued 
by Dominican authorities, continue to be medical studies in 
Cuba provided to indigent Dominicans and exchanges of sports 
trainers to improve performance of Dominican athletes. 
 
¶5. (SBU) According to Sencion, 50 Dominicans per year 
continue to receive all-inclusive scholarships at a medical 
school in Havana; at any time there are some 200-250 students 
enrolled in various stages of their medical education.  These 
students are vetted by Dominican authorities to ensure they 
are among the brightest Dominican youth and are from 
low-income families.  She has visited the medical school and 
was impressed by the quality of the instruction and the 
students' apparent success in learning in that environment. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Dominican Government and sports associations 
also appreciate the periodic visits by Cuban sports trainers, 
who are considered to be skilled and effective.  The Cubans' 
training assistance has significantly boosted the performance 
of Dominican athletes, as evidenced for example by their 
winning many medals during the Panamerican Games that were 
held here in 2003. 
 
¶7. (SBU) There has been no increase in the level of activity 
in other areas highlighted by the agreed cooperation and 
exchange program for 2005, according to Sencion.  These areas 
(Ref C) include primary sanitation systems, agriculture and 
animal husbandry, culture, science and technology, higher 
education, women's issues, fishing industry, and physical 
planning. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sencion was unaware of the date for the next mixed 
commission meeting, which had been planned for September of 
this year in Havana.  Technical Secretary of the Presidency 
Temistocles Montas, a top official close to President 
Fernandez, heads the Dominican side in these annual talks. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Embassy contacts occasionally tell us they have 
visited Cuba as tourists.  Embassy's impression is that the 
number of such visitors is small. 
10.(SBU) According to local press, a 2002 bilateral accord on 
"administration of criminal sentences" provides for exchanges 
of prisoners sentenced as resident aliens so they can serve 
their prison time in their country of nationality.  Cuban 
authorities reportedly have approved the first Dominican 
Government request for transfer of a prisoner, who was 
arrested in 2002 shortly before the agreement was signed, 
convicted, and sentenced to seven years for attempting to 
smuggle Cuban baseball players to the Dominican Republic 
using false passports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kubiske