05SANJOSE2560
SAN JOSE ACTIVITIES FOR INTERNATIONAL
Fri Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 002560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR ECA/A INFO WHA/PD-RQUIROZ, 
WHA/PD-NKLOPFENSTEIN 
 
TAGS: OIIP CS OEXC SCUL KPAO
SUBJECT: SAN JOSE ACTIVITIES FOR INTERNATIONAL 
EDUCATION WEEK 
 
 
In celebration of International Education Week, 
November 14-18, Embassy San Jose will program four 
events: 
 
¶1.   On November 14, Post, in conjunction with Costa 
  Rica's Binational Center, will host a "Study in the 
  U.S. Symposium."  This event will feature an 
  introduction to International Education Week and its 
  importance to the U.S. government by the CAO, a talk by 
  the Binational Center's Educational Adviser, a 
  presentation by a Consular Officer on student visas, a 
  presentation by a visiting representative from a U.S. 
  university, and a panel of former Costa Rican 
  participants in the Fulbright Program who will talk 
  about their experience studying in the U.S.  Post will 
  invite university contacts, university and high school 
  students, and high school guidance counselors to the 
  event. 
 
¶2.   On November 15, Post, in conjunction with Costa 
  Rica's National University, will host a DVC on "Systems 
  for University Library Resource Sharing" for the public 
  university library community in Costa Rica.  Costa 
  Rica's public universities are in the nascent stages of 
  establishing a network to share library resources and 
  are interested in how this has been done in the U.S. 
 
¶3.   On November 16, Post will hold a reception in 
  honor of current and former participants in the 
  Fulbright Program.  Newly-arrived Ambassador Langdale 
  will attend this event and speak on the importance of 
  educational exchanges, like the Fulbright Program, in 
  promoting mutual understanding.  A visiting U.S. 
  delegation from the civic education organization 
  Civitas will also attend the reception.   The 
  delegation will be headed by New Mexicos's Secretary of 
  State, Ms. Rebecca Vigil-Giron and State Bar of Texas 
  President, Mr. Eduardo Roberto Rodriguez; a 
  representative from the group will give remarks about 
  the work of Civitas in Costa Rica and abroad, and 
  inform the guests of opportunities for involvement in 
  its work. 
 
¶4.   The Embassy's support to the Civitas network is 
  not limited to IEW.  It is continuous commitment, 
  through the work of its Cultural Affairs Assistant, 
  whose responsibilities include serving as program 
  coordinator and partnership liaison between the local 
  NGO and its U.S. partners in New Mexico and Texas.  For 
  the November Civitas visit, Post will provide 
  transportation for the delegation and support material 
  for two teacher training workshops scheduled during the 
  week.  The workshops will focus on the civic education 
  programs developed by the Center for Civic Education. 
  One will revolve around the four basic concepts of 
  democracy (responsibility, authority, justice and 
  privacy) and the other will focus on improving 
  constitutional understanding and knowledge among high 
  school students. 
 
¶5.   On November 17, Post will work with Costa Rica's 
  national university accreditation organization to 
  sponsor a DVC on "The Effect of Accreditation on U.S. 
  Universities" for the Costa Rican university 
  accreditation officials and university officials. 
  University accreditation in Costa Rica is relatively 
  new, and accreditation officials are interested in 
  learning from the U.S. model. 
 
THANKS AND REGARDS, 
 
FRISBIE