05SANTIAGO2394
MEDIA REACTION - IRAQ
Wed Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santiago
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTIAGO 002394 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR R/MR, I/PP, WHA/BSC, WHA/PDA, INR/IAA, PM, 
STATE FOR INL, INR/R/MR, NEA/IR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR KPAO OPRC PTER CI IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION - IRAQ 
 
 
On November 23, conservative, influential newspaper-of- 
record "El Mercurio" (circ. 16,807) carried a column by 
international commentator Karin Ebensperger entitled, 
"Iraq: Bush and Legitimacy."  Quotes: 
 
"The U.S. Constitution has always impressed me.  It is 
one of the most important works in man's political 
history...understandably something of which Americans 
are proud. 
 
That is why I am very critical of the way in which 
Washington sometimes carries out its foreign policy.  A 
society that began with visionary "Founding Fathers" 
who sought a balance between national interests and a 
moral focus on life is on occasion ruled by presidents 
who use those elevated principles to act in a 
questionable manner in other countries. 
 
The invasion of Iraq is an example of this double 
standard, in that Washington acts for its interests 
while it preaches noble ideals.  There is still 
discussion on whether President Bush set upon Iraq for 
oil...or to end the task his father chose to 
postpone...or because he felt pressured after the 
terrorist attacks on the Twin Towers and the Pentagon. 
 
What we do know today is that the invasion did not 
contribute to the anti-terrorism fight: it was never 
proven that Hussein...had ties to Al Qaeda and the 
weapons of mass destruction were never found. 
President Bush did not perform at the level expected of 
a leader of a great democracy, in which legitimacy is 
conferred by the truth of the information given to the 
people. Even if he did not act as a statesman upon 
invading and he did not foresee the total collapse of 
post-Hussein Iraq, Bush can still improve matters.  The 
manner of the withdrawal from Iraq and the conditions 
in which that country is left will be more important 
for history." 
 
KELLY