05TAIPEI3372
Taiwan Seized large amount of Endangered Tiger
Fri Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/PD AND EAP/TC 
 
FROM AIT KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR TW KS ETRD SENV ESTH
SUBJECT: Taiwan Seized large amount of Endangered Tiger 
Bones 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  On July 1, 2005 at the Port of Kaohsiung, 
Kaohsiung Customs seized a large amount of tiger bones that 
were smuggled into Taiwan from Jakarta.  Local law 
enforcement agents are questioning the importer, the owner 
of local Chew Long Trading Co., who may be charged for both 
conducting smuggling operations and violating Taiwan's 
wildlife conservation law.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  While conducting routine inspections on inbound cargo, 
Kaohsiung Customs officials discovered about 140 kg of tiger 
bones hidden among deer antlers in a container on a 
container vessel, which arrived from Jakarta to Kaohsiung 
Port on July 1.  Along with the bones, the inspectors also 
found 400 kg of pangolin scales and five pieces of carved 
ivory.  According to the inspectors, the contraband was 
packed in plastics bags, put into paper cartons and hidden 
among hundreds of pieces of deer antlers.  The importer was 
Chew Long Trading Co., located in Kaohsiung City. 
 
¶3.  Customs had forwarded the confiscated bones to National 
Pingtung University of Science and Technology for 
verification.  It was determined that the bones were taken 
from Panthera Tigris, an endangered tiger species that 
mostly inhabits jungles and canebrakes of Asia.  The 
Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau (MJIB) maritime 
field office in Kaohsiung is investigating the case. 
According to Customs officials, tiger bones and pangolin 
scales are on the wildlife conservation list, which are 
banned for trade.  Trading of ivory products requires 
official approval from authorities of both the importer and 
exporter.  MJIB officials noted that the owner of the 
trading company had failed to submit the required 
certificate of approval needed to import ivory products and 
had also conducted illegal transportation of wildlife 
pieces.  The owner may be charged for violation of Taiwan's 
wildlife conservation law. 
 
¶4.  According to Customs officials, the tiger bones and 
pangolin scales were smuggled into Taiwan in order to be 
used as traditional medicines.  Tiger bones are usually 
ground into powder or they are sometimes cut into segments 
and soaked in wine.  Uneducated local people believe that 
tiger bones can be used to cure a variety of health 
problems, including fevers and rheumatism, and people also 
believe that pangolin scales can be used as a medicine for 
breast augmentation.  Customs officials estimated that the 
seized items may have a market value of USD 170,000. 
 
Thiele 
 
Paal