05TAIPEI1512
TAIWAN MAKING SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENTS ON TIP
Tue Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 001512 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AIT/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC TW TIP
SUBJECT: TAIWAN MAKING SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENTS ON TIP 
 
¶1. (U) Action Request see paragraph 7. 
 
¶2. (U) AIT officers visited the Hsinchu Detention Center on 
March 29 and found the situation considerably improved for 
TIP victims since the November 2004 G/TIP visit.  Ministry of 
Interior (MOI) authorities have made substantial efforts to 
improve protection of TIP victims at the facility and told 
AIT of plans for further improvements. 
 
¶3. (U) During their March 29 visit to the Hsinchu Detention 
Center, AIT officers noted the following improvements: 
 
(A) A separate facility has been designated for minors and 
TIP victims.  Each female illegal immigrant detained is 
screened by law enforcement authorities and social workers, 
who interview her and examine her circumstances in order to 
determine if she is an actual TIP victim.  Those women 
designated as victims are then placed in this separate 
facility, where they are provided special treatment, 
including access to social workers, counseling, relative 
freedom to move about the facility, books and magazines, 
recreation time, crafts, better housing conditions, and 
television.  New bathroom facilities are under construction 
for the TIP victims in this separate building. 
 
(B) The demeanor and attitude of the women living in the 
separate facility has markedly improved since the November 
2004 visit to the Hsinchu Detention Center.  They no longer 
live in a rigid military-like environment and are generally 
free to do what they wish within the facility.  (Note: the 
facility still has bars on the windows, but officials told 
AIT they hope to build a new facility that would not have 
bars but still be secure since most women do not want to 
return to Mainland China and would leave.) The women seemed 
relaxed and did not appear threatened by their environment. 
In a separate ward for women with infants, all of the babies 
appeared healthy and the mothers appeared content, smiling 
frequently and chatting with AIT officers. 
 
¶4. (U) MOI and National Police Agency (NPA) officials 
requested AIT assistance in arranging training by U.S. 
experts on how to effectively identify, treat, and house TIP 
victims.  TIP, they said, is a relatively new problem for 
Taiwan and the government needs the help of experts, 
especially social workers and counselors, because Taipei 
lacks the expertise to offer victims the best treatment 
available.  MOI and NPA Officials told AIT that they were 
meeting that afternoon with NGO experts to discuss how to 
make additional improvements at Hsinchu.  AIT told MOI that 
our G/TIP office wants to work with Taiwan to improve the 
situation for TIP victims and that AIT would pass the MOI 
request back to Washington. 
 
¶5. (U) Comment: While the TIP situation at Hsinchu still has 
room for improvement, the progress made since the November 
visit is very encouraging.  Authorities at the detention 
center told AIT that the improvements made thus far were only 
the beginning, since a comprehensive program for TIP victims 
is being developed.  MOI and NPA immigration officials and 
NGO experts are working to devise a comprehensive plan to 
care for TIP victims.  They fully recognize that a more 
suitable facility, one less resembling a detention center, is 
important and hope to eventually construct a new building. 
 
¶6. (U) AIT believes Taiwan is making substantial efforts to 
improve its treatment of TIP victims, and that under these 
circumstances Taiwan should not be downgraded to Tier 2.  The 
Tier 2 definition does not accurately characterize Taiwan's 
efforts, since the government has provided evidence that it 
has, in fact, worked to improve protection for TIP victims 
and is making continued efforts to improve protections and 
treatment further.  End comment. 
 
¶7. (U) Action Request.  Please provide a response to Taiwan's 
request for guidance and assistance. 
PAAL