05TAIPEI4
UNITED DAILY NEWS" COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT CHEN
Mon Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 000004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO TW
SUBJECT: "UNITED DAILY NEWS" COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT CHEN 
SHUI-BIAN'S NEW YEAR'S ADDRESS 
 
 
Summary: January 2, the Chinese-language "United Daily 
News" carried straight news coverage of President Chen 
Shui-bian's New Year's address, in which Chen called 
for the establishment of a Committee for Cross-Strait 
Peace and Development.  Full-text translation of the 
editorial follows. 
 
"Chen Says in the New Year's Address: Form a Committee 
for Cross-Strait Peace and Development.  [Chen Vows to] 
Push for an Interactive Framework for Peace, Urging 
Beijing Not to Neglect Taiwan People's Determination to 
Defend the Republic of China" 
 
Journalist Liu Pao-chieh said in the conservative, pro- 
unification "United Daily News" (1/2): 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian said Saturday in his New 
Year's address that [Taiwan] will adopt an unhurried 
attitude of being `steady and progressing, stable but 
not hasty' to steadily form a `Committee for Cross- 
Strait Peace and Development,' to consolidate Taiwan's 
internal consensus, and to actively push for as well as 
establish an interactive framework for cross-Strait 
peace and stability. 
 
"President Chen Saturday delivered his New Year's 
greetings entitled `Open a Stable New Era of 
Negotiations and Dialogue.'  He urged Beijing not to 
neglect the firm resolution of the Taiwan people to 
defend the sovereignty, security, and dignity of the 
Republic of China.  The long-term development of peace 
across the Taiwan Strait should be a common hope shared 
by both sides of the Taiwan Strait and is in accordance 
with the expectations of the international community. 
 
"President Chen said in the future, he will 
continuously stick to the policy route of `standing on 
a firm position and moving forward in a pragmatic 
manner' to deal with cross-Strait relations.  He will 
insist on `keeping the ambition, and not messing up 
with the sequence' even when facing China's unilateral 
and radical behaviors, Chen said. 
 
"President Chen pointed out that in the past four 
years, he has extended olive branches to China numerous 
times and has actively sought [to form] a new basis for 
both sides of the Taiwan Strait to resume negotiations 
and dialogue.  Even in his inaugural speech delivered 
May 20, 2004, his National Day speech, and a meeting 
with the high-ranking national security officials 
November 10, 2004, Chen has repeatedly expressed 
sincerity and good will gestures to push for the 
normalization of cross-Strait relations.  However, Chen 
said, it is very regrettable that China still does not 
abandon military threats, and it even persistently 
oppresses Taiwan using all means it can and speaks 
viciously toward Taiwan. 
 
"President Chen said China unilaterally attempted to 
play the role as an arbitrator and punisher regarding 
cross-Strait issues and to make up a so-called `legal 
basis' for its use of force against Taiwan.  Such moves 
will not only unilaterally change the peaceful status 
quo in the Taiwan Strait but will also impose the 
biggest threat to regional stability and world peace. 
 
"In his speech, President Chen showed his appreciation 
to several international allies, including the United 
States and Japan, for their long-standing support of 
Taiwan people and concern for peace in the Taiwan 
Strait.  Chen said the friendships that Taiwan has 
established in the international community are based on 
not only alliance of the values of freedom, democracy, 
and human rights, but also long-term cooperative 
relationships and mutual understanding. 
 
"President Chen pointed out that under strong pressure 
from China, Taiwan's diplomatic efforts are facing 
extreme difficulties. Some tasks can be done but are 
better kept quiet, and Taiwan sometimes even has to 
endure humiliation and bear the heavy load.  Other 
people can surely make criticisms and comments [about 
Taiwan], but they should not distort or even denigrate 
Taiwan's relationships with other allies using 
groundless speculations." 
 
PAAL