05TELAVIV4749
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 004749 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  U.S.-Israeli Relations 
 
¶3.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
¶4.  Global Struggle Against Violent Extremism 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz (Sunday) and Israel Radio reported that senior 
Israeli officials Dov Weisglass and Shalom Turgeman 
will meet with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and 
the heads of the National Security Council today to 
discuss issues related to disengagement.  Ha'aretz 
reported that Sharon and Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz 
are opposed to an Egyptian proposal to supply the 
Palestinian security forces with ammunition for light 
arms.  Ha'aretz quoted designated ambassador to Israel 
Richard Jones as saying during a Senate hearing last 
week that he "understands Israel's dilemma" with 
regards to the strengthening of the Palestinian forces. 
The radio quoted senior GOI officials as saying that 
Israel is tired of being the address for PA Chairman 
[President] Mahmoud Abbas's image problems, that the PA 
has enough ammunition, and that the only thing it has 
to do is to collect it and confiscate illegal weapons 
held by groups in the PA.  Israel Radio reported that 
Deputy National Security Advisor Elliott Abrams will 
arrive in Israel for talks today. 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that ambassador-designate 
Richard Jones will begin his tour of duty during the 
first half of September. 
 
During the weekend, all media led with various aspects 
of the disengagement move and the scheduled right-wing 
march towards Gush Katif. 
 
Leading media reported that the IDF expects Tuesday's 
anti-disengagement protest in Sderot to result in much 
fiercer clashes with demonstrators than did the one two 
weeks ago in Kfar Maimon.  Maariv and other media 
reported that the police have proposed that the rally 
take place in the Negev town of Ofakim, because of the 
risk of Qassam rockets falling on Sderot.  Yediot 
reported that PM Sharon has engaged in a secret 
dialogue with right-wing rabbis, in order to avoid 
bloodshed.  The media reported that, at Sunday's 
cabinet meeting, PM Sharon declined suggestions by 
Finance Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Education 
Minister Limor Livnat that the Yesha Council of Jewish 
Settlements in the Territories be allowed to hold its 
mass demonstration this week.  Leading media reported 
that on Sunday, President Moshe Katsav voiced criticism 
over the fact that the High Court of Justice did not 
prevent the blocking of buses to the protest two weeks 
ago. 
 
During the weekend, the media reported that the first 
settler families have started to move from Gush Katif 
to temporary quarters in Israel. 
 
Leading media reported that on Sunday, Iran announced 
it would resume its nuclear program, after the 
expiration of its ultimatum to the UK, France, and 
Germany, in which it had demanded that those countries 
finalize their offer of a package of economic and 
political incentives in return for Iran's indefinite 
suspension of its nuclear work.  Ha'aretz reported 
that, during last week's visit of Ukrainian Defense 
Minister Anatoliy Hrytsenko to Israel, Israel asked the 
government of Ukraine to demand that Iran return 12 
long-range cruise missiles purchased during the tenure 
of the previous Ukrainian government via arms dealers 
whom the current government claims were acting 
illegally.  However, the newspaper reported that 
Ukraine has not yet responded to Israel, and that it 
seems doubtful that Iran would agree to return the 
missiles in any case. 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz quoted Pentagon spokesman Lawrence 
Di Rita as saying on Friday that tough issues remain in 
a dispute between Israel and the U.S. over Israeli arms 
sales to China, but that talks to resolve them are not 
stalemated. 
 
Yediot quoted FM Silvan Shalom as saying, during his 
talks with British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw in 
London last week, that PA Civil Affairs Minister 
Muhammad Dahlan is not helping Abbas or his Interior 
Minister, because he aspires to replace Abbas. 
 
This morning, Israel Radio reported that the IDF lifted 
the closure it has imposed on the Gaza Strip following 
the Netanya bombing.  The closure of the northern West 
Bank remains in place.  On Sunday, Jerusalem Post 
reported that control over the Erez Crossing will pass 
from the IDF to the Interior Ministry after the 
disengagement. 
 
Leading media cited the French daily Le Figaro as 
writing during the weekend that France and Israel will 
jointly produce drones. 
 
Israel Radio and the major Israeli media web sites 
reported that King Fahd of Saudi Arabia passed away 
this morning. 
 
Leading media cited a story that appeared in Sunday's 
New York Times, according to which a lengthy analysis 
by Robert J. Haniock, a top historian at the NSA, which 
suggests that a combination of incompetence and anti- 
Semitism prevented the Allied intelligence services 
from identifying the unfolding Holocaust in Europe. 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Dankner wrote on page one of 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "The definition [of attitude 
to disengagement] already demarcates a clear boundary: 
Protest -- yes.  Resistance -- yes, to a certain 
degree.  An attempt to thwart [disengagement] -- no." 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar opined in left-leaning, 
independent Ha'aretz: "The really important question is 
not whether we should allow the Palestinians weapons to 
use to kill themselves for us, but whether we should 
enable them to live -- and to allow ourselves to live." 
 
Senior Likud member and former ambassador to the U.S. 
Zalman Shoval wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: "An analysis of Abbas's actions since 
he was elected does not indicate that he has any 
intention of poring over the curriculum that the 
American headmaster has prepared for him." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "We'll Get Through It Together" 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Dankner wrote on page one of 
popular, pluralist Maariv (August 1): "The real debate 
that is being waged today -- with anger that is no less 
noisy than the debate over disengagement itself -- 
pertains to the boundaries of protest and the 
resistance to disengagement and evacuation.  The 
definition itself already demarcates a clear boundary: 
Protest -- yes.  Resistance -- yes, to a certain 
degree.  An attempt to thwart [disengagement] -- no.... 
The successes [of Israel's state and society] could not 
have arrived and will not arrive without the strong 
bonds that have kept together all of society, with all 
its tribes and viewpoints, since the inception of the 
state.  These [bonds] consist mainly of recognition of 
the rule of law, recognition of the justification for 
the joint life of the Jewish people in its land (it is 
permissible to say -- Zionism), and the willingness to 
mobilize on behalf of society, contribute to it and 
sacrifice on its behalf.  This is shared by the Oranges 
and the Blues [i.e. disengagement opponents and 
supporters], and it must not shatter suddenly because 
of disengagement or because of anything else." 
II.  "'Area A' Status Won't Pay the Rent" 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar opined in left-leaning, 
independent Ha'aretz (August 1): "There is a chance 
that Israel's withdrawal from the Strip will sever 
Gaza's residents from the few 'fruits' of occupation: 
their sources of livelihood as well as their relatives 
in Hebron and Europe's export markets.  Should this be 
the case, then policemen armed to the hilt would not 
stop them on their way to Hamas's recruitment 
center.... This is the junction where, as always, 
welfare clashes with security.  The same Shin Bet 
security forces head who, according to Sunday's 
reports, does not object to supplying the Palestinian 
police with ammunition, refuses to facilitate the 
passage of humans and merchandise between Gaza and 
Israel on the morning after the disengagement.... It 
follows that the really important question is not 
whether we should allow the Palestinians weapons to use 
to kill themselves for us, but whether we should enable 
them to live -- and to allow ourselves to live." 
 
III.  "Visit of the Strong Lady" 
 
Senior Likud member and former ambassador to the U.S. 
Zalman Shoval wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (August 1): "Washington's attitude 
towards Abbas (Abu Mazen) can be compared to the 
attitude of a teacher towards a failing pupil, who 
still has to be encouraged -- so that he does not drop 
out of school altogether.  The trouble is that this 
American approach may be based more on heartfelt 
aspirations than on actual familiarity with the 
character of the 'pupil.'  After all, an analysis of 
Abbas's actions since he was elected does not indicate 
that he has any intention of poring over the curriculum 
that the American headmaster has prepared for him.... 
Here is the point of linkage between the different 
trends of U.S. diplomacy: to save not only the 'cease- 
fire' but also the Bush administration's foreign policy 
itself -- a policy that views bringing democracy and 
stability to Iraq and promoting an Israeli-Palestinian 
arrangement as a test of success or failure in the eyes 
of history.  Therefore, the more the picture in Iraq 
and the Arab Middle East refuses to clear up as 
Washington hoped and expected (even in Lebanon the 
situation is less favorable than they had hoped), Ms. 
Rice will continue her trips in order to ensure success 
at least in one place.  Mr. Abbas also understands that 
the Americans are eager to see progress, any progress - 
- and he is gambling that they will apply pressure not 
only on him, if at all -- but also to Israel.  Judging 
from the statements made by Washington on the 
construction in the settlement blocs, statements that 
completely contradict the understandings between the 
Prime Minister and President Bush, it is possible that 
Abbas's gamble is not unjustified." 
--------------------------- 
¶2.  U.S.-Israeli Relations: 
--------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Columnist Shlomo Papirblat wrote in mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "[American officials have 
adopted] a style of behavior that reminds one of that 
of a colonial governor whose local servant spilled a 
cup of tea on him." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"An Israeli-French Provocation" 
 
Columnist Shlomo Papirblat wrote in mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (July 31): "Unpleasant 
screeches have recently been heard from America's 
direction.... What should be worthy of attention is the 
attitude of American officials vis-a-vis their Israeli 
counterparts -- their strategic allies, the 
representatives of the only democratic state in the 
Middle East.  To put it politely: a style of behavior 
that reminds one of that of a colonial governor whose 
local servant spilled a cup of tea on him.... Is the 
coronation ceremony of Jacques Chirac by the Israeli 
Prime Minister as one of the most important world 
leaders moving any White House resident?  This is very 
doubtful.  However, it was nice to close one's eyes for 
a moment and to believe that, thanks to the evacuation 
of some of the settlements, Israel can increase the 
number of its options in the world." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The acceleration 
of the presentation of the ultimatum pertains more to 
the political calendar in Iran and less to pressure 
being applied on Europe." 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"An Ultimatum With Domestic Considerations" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (August 1): "It 
appears as though the acceleration of the presentation 
of the ultimatum pertains more to the political 
calendar in Iran and less to pressure being applied on 
Europe.  Next Saturday, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is supposed 
to be sworn in as president of Iran.... The European 
assumption was that, despite the fact that 
Ahmadinejad's views are considered extremist, he was 
likely to want to present a more moderate line at the 
beginning of his term, and that he was worthy of being 
granted an opportunity.  In order to remove that 
dilemma from the new president's path, Iran had to 
present the ultimatum as a decision of the outgoing 
regime, thus tossing the dilemma into the European 
Union's lap." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶4.  Global Struggle Against Violent Extremism: 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Even Muslim opinion is not immune to the sort of 
process that led the IRA to conclude that terrorism had 
begun to backfire." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The IRA Capitulation" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(July 31): "When terrorism doesn't pay, it stops.  This 
is the lesson behind the IRA's announcement last week 
that its 35-year-old campaign against British rule in 
Northern Ireland is over.... This is an invaluable 
lesson for the international community to learn at the 
time when the world is being shaken by an unprecedented 
spate of Islamist terrorist attacks.... Even Muslim 
opinion is not immune to the sort of process that led 
the IRA to conclude that terrorism had begun to 
backfire, both among potential sympathizers and the 
peoples and governments targeted for intimidation.  The 
paradox of terrorism is that, as much as it is meant to 
shock and horrify, it is at the most basic level 
designed to gain sympathy and support.  The IRA's 
capitulation shows that the sooner terror provokes only 
disgust and determination among its victims, without a 
chorus seeking to 'understand' its 'root causes,' the 
sooner it loses its utility." 
 
KURTZER