05TELAVIV4896
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091101Z Aug 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 004896 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Global War on Terror 
 
¶3.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
¶4.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media (banners in Ha'aretz and Yediot, and 
Hatzofe -- "Deportation Order") reported that, 
according to a letter distributed by IDF officers to 
residents of Gush Katif, six days ahead of the 
evacuation of the Gaza Strip, Gaza Strip settlers will 
be required to leave their homes by midnight on August 
14, at which time voluntary evacuation will end and the 
presence of Israeli civilians in the Strip will be 
considered illegal.  Israel Radio reported that most 
residents have not received the letters, because 
secretariats of settlements have refused to pass them 
 
SIPDIS 
on.  Leading media reported that former Ashkenazi chief 
rabbi Avraham Shapira has launched unprecedented 
attacks against the disengagement.  Leading media 
reported that the Yesha Council of Jewish Settlements 
in the Territories will hold a last anti-disengagement 
demonstration in Rabin Square in Tel Aviv this 
Thursday, instead of the protest that had been planned 
for Ashkelon at that time.  All media reported that on 
Monday, the police uncovered a smuggling ring that had 
been transporting opponents of the disengagement into 
Gush Katif. 
 
Jerusalem Post says that Israel and the PA have not yet 
reached an agreement about border crossings.  Ha'aretz 
reported that the security cabinet decided on Monday 
that Israel will cancel the customs union with the Gaza 
Strip if the PA and Egypt refuse to build a new border 
terminal near Kerem Shalom (south of the Strip) to 
replace the existing one in Rafah.  Recalling that the 
PA and the international community have been pressuring 
Israel in recent months not to exclude the Gaza Strip 
from the customs agreement, Ha'aretz writes that Israel 
wants to use this issue as a bargaining chip to 
maintain security supervision in the crossing between 
Sinai and the Strip after the disengagement.  Leading 
media reported that members of the Knesset's Foreign 
Affairs and Defense Committee from various factions 
were shocked to hear that the proposed agreement with 
Egypt to block Palestinian arms smuggling into the Gaza 
Strip does not bar Cairo from supplying weapons to the 
Palestinians.  Speaking on Israel Radio this morning, 
Yuval Steinitz, the committee's chairman, said that the 
committee will not transmit the pertinent bill proposal 
for approval by the Knesset plenum if the agreement is 
not amended.  The media reported that Israel will admit 
some 40 Palestinian Gaza Strip families (from the 
village of Dahaniyeh) who have assisted the defense 
establishment. 
Israel Radio quoted PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud 
Abbas as saying in his speech to the Palestinian people 
this morning that the disengagement is the first step 
to Palestinian statehood.  Abbas urged the Palestinians 
Tuesday to ensure calm for Israel's evacuation of its 
Gaza settlements.  Ha'aretz reported that Sheikh Jamal 
al-Bawatna, the mufti of the Ramallah district, who the 
newspaper says is a senior Palestinian religious 
leader, has issued an edict in the past few days, 
banning shooting attacks against Israeli security 
forces and settlements.  Israel Radio reported that 
Jerusalem Mufti Ikrima Sabri made similar comments. 
Jerusalem Post reported that Palestinian PM Ahmed Qurei 
met in Jenin on Monday with Zacharia Zubeidi, commander 
of Fatah's armed militia, the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, 
and discussed with him preparations for the Israeli 
withdrawal from the northern West Bank. 
 
All media reported that on Monday, the counterterrorism 
unit of Israel's National Security Council issued a 
travel warning to Israelis regarding a segment of 
Turkey's southern coast -- between Alanya and Kemer -- 
due to a "concrete terrorist threat."  The media say 
that Al-Qaida could hit in the area, but that Israelis 
continue to fly there.  Maariv reported that the Shin 
Bet is considering canceling those flights. 
 
Leading media (lead story in Jerusalem Post) reported 
that outgoing Finance Minister Binyamin Netanyahu 
unofficially kicked off his run for the Likud 
leadership on Monday.  Yediot reported that he will 
leave for the U.S. Wednesday night, among other things, 
in order to meet with American donors who might 
contribute to his campaign.  Leading media reported 
that PM Sharon and Netanyahu, both directly and by 
proxy, have been hard at work trying to shore up their 
support within the Likud, focusing their efforts mainly 
on the Knesset faction and the cabinet ministers. 
 
All media reported that Sharon went head to head with 
the treasury Monday when he rejected its request for a 
1.5 billion-shekel (around USD 332 million) budget cut 
in 2006, and approved only a cut of 650 million shekels 
in the defense budget.  Ha'aretz quoted annoyed 
treasury officials as saying that Sharon made 
concessions to Likud ministers that may amount to 1.5- 
1.7 billion shekels. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that IDF troops shot 
and killed a Palestinian youth in Tulkarm's refugee 
camp Monday. 
Leading media quoted Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz as 
saying Monday before the Knesset's Foreign Affairs and 
Defense Committee that the IDF is trying to trace nine 
armed deserters.  Their profiles are supposed to be 
similar to that of Eden Natan-Zada, who killed four 
Israeli Arabs on Thursday. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Monday, the International 
Committee of the Red Cross suspended all its field 
operations in the Gaza Strip in protest of the 
deterioration in security.  The media reported that a 
number of UN aid people have been abducted in the Gaza 
Strip in recent days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Neither Netanyahu 
nor the Shfaram murderer will budge Sharon from his 
plans.  This disengagement is going to happen." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz: 
"The occupation, then, looks like something unpleasant 
that has stuck to a shoe.  It is hard to get rid of it 
and the stink remains even after the sole is cleaned." 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global 
Research in International Affairs Center, columnist 
Barry Rubin, wrote in conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post: "Which side will be better off after 
the withdrawal?  To find out, watch the material 
realities, not the rhetoric." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Double Trouble" 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (August 9): "Israel 
was attacked twice within the space of 72 hours.  First 
by a Jewish terrorist who shot four passengers to death 
on a bus in Shfaram and then by Benjamin Netanyahu, who 
suddenly resigned as the cabinet met to put their John 
Hancock on the first stage of the pullout.  Both 
attacks had the same motivation -- to sabotage the 
disengagement.  But it is doubtful that either the 
military misfit who became a murderer or the smart, 
sharp-tongued politician will achieve their goal.... 
The double trouble that has come Israel's way has 
changed nothing.  Eight days from now, at midnight, the 
iron curtain will fall on Gush Katif.  Neither 
Netanyahu nor the Shfaram murderer will budge Sharon 
from his plans.  This disengagement is going to 
happen." 
 
II.  "Not Letup to the Occupation" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz 
(August 9): "The Palestinians will no doubt argue that 
the occupation has not ended in Gaza as long as Israel 
controls the sea and the air and is supervising the 
border crossing points.  They are already saying that 
the disengagement will turn the Gaza Strip into a big 
prison.  They will try to lever the principle of total 
withdrawal to demand much the same in the West Bank.... 
The occupation, then, looks like something unpleasant 
that has stuck to a shoe.  It is hard to get rid of it 
and the stink remains even after the sole is 
cleaned.... [According to another consideration], even 
today, the world does not hold Israel responsible for 
the poverty and other problems in the Gaza Strip, and 
after the disengagement the attribution of this 
responsibility will be even less." 
 
III.  "The Logic of the Middle East" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global 
Research in International Affairs Center, columnist 
Barry Rubin, wrote in conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (August 9): "There is every reason to 
believe that the Palestinian leadership and movements 
will throw away this opportunity [of a rapprochement 
with Israel following the disengagement].... Does this 
... mean Israel should not withdraw?  Actually, one 
should argue the exact opposite.  For if nothing is 
going to change anyway, why should Israel be bound to 
the status quo?  Take away the excuse of 'occupation' 
and let the world -- and, far more importantly, the 
Palestinians themselves -- see the real cause of their 
problems.... Of course, one should add that Israel 
largely withdrew from the territory 11 years ago, when 
it was turned over to the tender mercies of Yasser 
Arafat... The idea at the time was that Arafat would 
have to deal with schools and sewage, jobs, and 
housing.  The problem was that he and his colleagues 
had no interest in anything other than fighting Israel. 
Some of his top successors have better intentions but 
lack the power or determination to do better.  As a 
substitute, they will complain about inadequate 
international support, blame Israel for everything, and 
urge more militancy.  Which side will be better off 
after the withdrawal?  To find out, watch the material 
realities, not the rhetoric." 
 
------------------------- 
¶2.  Global War on Terror: 
------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Security and intelligence affairs commentator Amit 
Cohen wrote in popular, pluralist Maariv: "In recent 
days, the Turkish intelligence services have succeeded 
where their counterparts in many states failed." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Terror in Turkey Comes From Iraq" 
 
Security and intelligence affairs commentator Amit 
Cohen wrote in popular, pluralist Maariv (August 9): 
"Intensive efforts made by Turkish [intelligence] has 
exposed deep infiltration of Turkey by Al-Qaida.... 
Habib Akdas, an Afghanistan veteran, established Al- 
Qaida's infrastructure of terror in Turkey.... A few 
months ago, Akdas was eliminated in Baghdad.  Two of 
his aides were captured by American forces and moved to 
the Abu Ghraib prison.  Despite this achievement, some 
of Akdas's people are still free in northern Iraq, not 
far from the Turkish border.... In recent days, the 
Turkish intelligence services have succeeded where 
their counterparts in many states failed.... Contrary 
to Egypt or Britain, Turkish intelligence has proven 
that there is a way to deal with Islamic terror, even 
if total success isn't guaranteed.  Those Turkish 
achievements aren't a question of luck, but of hard 
work." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
Paris correspondent Sefi Hendler wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Berlin and 
Paris will soon have to decide whether they will adopt 
a tough line or a conciliatory policy whose price might 
be a Shi'ite bomb.  Europe's moment of truth is 
approaching." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Europe's Moment of Truth" 
 
Paris correspondent Sefi Hendler wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (August 9): "The 
Bush administration had placed the management of the 
Iranian nuclear crisis in the hands of European 
diplomats who were convinced of their ability to attain 
better results in peaceful ways.... The Europeans will 
now face a dilemma filled with irony: is there room for 
the use of force, even without UN approval, when 
diplomacy has failed?  On Monday, German Chancellor 
Gerhard Schroeder tried to calm the spirits: 'No one is 
currently dreaming of a military confrontation.'  But 
Berlin and Paris will soon have to decide whether they 
will adopt a tough line or a conciliatory policy whose 
price might be a Shi'ite bomb.  Europe's moment of 
truth is approaching." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶4.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "It was law 
professor Alan Dershowitz who said that Jews in America 
are not 'guests in someone else's house,' but their 
silence about the AIPAC affair sometimes seems like the 
silence of a guest." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The Silence of the Jewish Leaders" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (August 9): "Last 
week, an indictment was issued against Steve Rosen and 
Keith Weissman, two former AIPAC employees.... The 
investigation is ... bad news for the Jewish 
community.... The charges against Rosen include using 
classified information in order to warn the Israeli 
embassy about Iranian agents who might abduct Israeli 
soldiers in Iraq.  Is there any Jewish leader who would 
get information of this kind and keep silent?  It's a 
difficult question.  The answer cannot always be 
explained easily to the public.  Therefore it is 
possible that the decision to remain silent makes sense 
from a tactical point of view.... If I'm not mistaken, 
it was law professor Alan Dershowitz who said that Jews 
in America are not 'guests in someone else's house,' 
but their silence about the AIPAC affair sometimes 
seems like the silence of a guest.  Even if it is 
justified for reasons of caution or etiquette, even if 
it can be understood, it nevertheless makes one feel 
somewhat uneasy.  Some of the Jewish leaders admit to 
this.  But only in private." 
 
KURTZER