05TELAVIV4030
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 004030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  U.S.-Israel Security Exports Crisis 
 
¶2.  Iran: Presidential Election 
 
¶3.  Democracy in Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that during her visit to 
Jerusalem last week, Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice warned against continued construction in the 
territories.  Ha'aretz reported that she told a senior 
Israeli official: "We don't want it to be a problem but 
it will."  Ha'aretz quoted Rice as saying that 
alongside President Bush's April 14 letter to Sharon 
recognizing "existing Israeli settlement blocs" in the 
territories, the U.S. expected Israel not to create 
facts on the ground.  She was further quoted as saying: 
"We can't be forced to accept changes in the status 
quo."  Maariv reported that Rice told FM Silvan Shalom 
during her visit that she saw Israeli construction 
between Jerusalem and Ramallah, but that President Bush 
has determined that the final-status borders will only 
be determined through negotiations.  The newspaper 
reported that Secretary Rice stressed the importance of 
making no changes in and around Jerusalem.  Maariv 
reported that Rice refrained from expressing harsh 
criticism at her meetings with Sharon and Mofaz. 
 
All media highlighted confrontations between settlers 
and security forces in the Gaza Strip on Sunday.  Ten 
members of the security forces were wounded in the 
clashes.  The IDF demolished abandoned buildings to 
prevent anti-disengagement protesters from using them 
as an outpost.  An IDF soldier refused to participate 
in the demolition, defining himself as a "conscientious 
objector."  This morning, leading media reported that 
young anti-disengagement activists in Gush Katif set up 
a protest outpost early Monday at the site of the 
clashes.  Ha'aretz web site cited the IDF as saying 
that the settlers and media exaggerate in the 
description of the new illegal outpost. This morning, 
Israel Radio reported that the Yesha Council of Jewish 
Settlements has not obtained police approval for a 
demonstration during which drivers on major 
thoroughfares will be called to stop their vehicles and 
stand next to them for fifteen minutes.   The event 
aimed at blocking traffic at major junctions throughout 
the country is scheduled to take place on Wednesday. 
 
During the weekend, all media reported that two teenage 
settler boys were killed in a drive-by shooting 
incident next to the settlement of Beit Haggai, south 
of Hebron, on Friday. 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that PM Sharon and Defense 
Minister Shaul Mofaz agreed last week to comply with 
all American demands regarding the unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAV) deal with China and changes in 
supervision of Israel's arms exports.  Today, Ha'aretz 
quoted sources familiar with the draft agreement 
regulating the reporting of weapons sales that the U.S.- 
Israel accord will be worded in an equable manner.  The 
newspaper writes that the memorandum will state that 
the U.S. and Israel are "strategic partners" and that 
each country will be considerate of the other's 
concerns about military technology being transferred to 
other countries.  The countries "arousing concern" will 
be specified separately.  Under the agreement, to be 
termed "Declaration of Understanding on Technology 
Exports," both countries will undertake to maintain 
transparency regarding weapons sales to countries 
considered worrisome.  Ha'aretz reported that, in 
addition to the agreement, Israel will give the U.S. a 
written commitment to tighten oversight on defense 
exports and put in place new mechanisms and 
regulations.  Israel will introduce legislative 
amendments to increase enforcement and toughen 
punishment for selling arms in violation of 
regulations.  The U.S. will recognize the fact that the 
legislation will take time. 
 
On Sunday, leading media reported that the Palestinian 
Security Forces arrested 10 Fatah gunmen over the 
weekend on suspicion of participating in an armed 
attack on a PA police station in Jenin. 
 
On Sunday, all media reported on Tehran Mayor Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad's victory in Iran's presidential election. 
Referring to Ahmadinejad as a killer of the regime's 
political opponents, Yediot bannered: "Executioner 
Elected President."  The newspaper quoted opponents to 
Ahmadinejad as saying that Israel now has a real reason 
to fear Iran.  Today, Maariv quoted Ahmadinejad as 
saying following his win: "Israel's existence is 
illegal."  Israel Radio and other media quoted Mofaz as 
saying that Israel demands that Iran stop funding 
terror. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted Palestinian sources as saying 
that leaders of Hamas and other Palestinian radical 
groups in Lebanon and Syria are planning to move to the 
Gaza Strip after Israel evacuates the area.  The 
newspaper also quoted an IDF source as saying on Sunday 
that Hamas is using the lull in fighting to raise an 
"army" of several thousand fighters in the Gaza Strip 
to complement its developing arsenal of Qassam rockets 
and mortars. 
 
Leading media reported that on Friday, a council of the 
worldwide Anglican Communion unanimously urged its 
member churches to put pressure on companies linked to 
Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories, 
including possibly divesting their money from such 
businesses. 
All media reported that on Sunday, the Labor Party 
Central Committee voted to delay the party's leadership 
race indefinitely. 
Ha'aretz reported that Russia's state prosecutor has 
ordered an examination of Shulhan Arukh -- a code of 
Jewish religious law compiled in the 16th century -- to 
ascertain whether it constitutes racist incitement and 
anti-Russian material.  The newspaper quoted Jerusalem 
sources as saying this is the first time since Stalin's 
regime that Russian officials have described holy 
Jewish scriptures as incitement. 
 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
¶1.  U.S.-Israel Security Exports Crisis: 
---------------------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
foul-up regarding the Chinese-America issue is a 
serious one. It reflects mismanagement, at the director- 
general and ministerial level, of Israel's defense 
policy in the most sensitive and complex of fields." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The China Syndrome" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (June 
27): "Ever since the middle of the past decade, China, 
as a power, has become the biggest threat to America's 
universal supremacy.... This information was readily 
available to every newspaper reader. And it was well 
absorbed at the Israeli Embassy in Washington and the 
Foreign Ministry in Jerusalem. In only one place was it 
given very little thought, and if it was given any at 
all, its significance was belittled: at the Defense 
Ministry in Tel Aviv.... [Defense Minister Shaul] Mofaz 
has been in his post for almost three years, and has 
yet to realize a single lofty declaration concerning 
his plans to change the face of the ministry.  It 
appears that the director general of the Defense 
Ministry is also directing the minister above him.  The 
Pentagon hinted to Mofaz in no uncertain terms that as 
long as Yaron continues to serve in his post, a cool 
wind will blow between the two defense establishments 
and reflect also on other aspects of relations between 
the two countries.  There was no indication in the 
field that Mofaz got the message.  Yaron remained in 
his post and the cold wind continued to blow, until 
last week when Washington brought out the big guns, in 
the shape of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and 
spokesmen for Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. Only 
then did Mofaz wake up to hasten the lazy handling of 
the affair, to spur on his envoys outside the ministry 
to come to an agreement with the U.S. 
administration.... The foul-up regarding the Chinese- 
America issue is a serious one. It reflects 
mismanagement, at the director-general and ministerial 
level, of Israel's defense policy in the most sensitive 
and complex of fields." 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
¶2.  Iran: Presidential Election: 
-------------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "At least one 
positive thing will come out of these elections: the 
West will no longer be able to hold on to the illusion 
of a reformist regime in Iran." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Worrying Surprise" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (June 26): 
"Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's surprising ascent to Iran's 
presidency is a gloomy testimony to the fact that 
Israel isn't sufficiently familiar about what's going 
on in Iran.  That very surprise is a very worrying 
mishap, since Iran represents the key strategic threat 
to Israel, and that a situation in which a president is 
elected in Iran, and Israel and the West are surprised, 
is inconceivable.... The new Iranian regime will 
sharpen its view on the issue of the Israeli- 
Palestinian conflict.... Hizbullah's extremist conduct 
... will become more forceful.... The Iranians will 
again try to ... drag their feet [in the matter of 
their nuclear program.  Will the Americans continue [to 
grant Europe a negotiating role]?  Today, the Americans 
mainly chitchat about democratization in Iran.  Perhaps 
the results of the elections will shake them up.  At 
least one positive thing will come out of these 
elections: the West will no longer be able to hold on 
to the illusion of a reformist regime in Iran, which 
ought to be encouraged and brought closer.  Starting 
today, there is a clear division between the 'bad ones' 
and the 'good ones.'  The new regime in Iran won't 
renounce its nuclear program; it won't even have to 
pretend." 
 
------------------------- 
¶3.  Democracy in Mideast: 
------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The concern is 
that the more the U.S. exerts itself in spreading 
democracy, the greater the opposition will be to what 
it represents." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Interim Report Card For Condoleezza" 
 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (June 26): 
"[Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's] words about 
the charms of democracy in Iraq seem like the 
description of the successful makeup on a corpse in a 
coffin.  But Iraq is just an example of the way in 
which ideology dictates policy.  It is indisputable 
that democracy is a worthy goal, but this goal cannot 
be used to justify a war of this magnitude, with so 
many killed, with such destruction of infrastructure, 
and without any confidence that the Iraqi government, 
beyond the show of elections, will ultimately be 
democratic.... Herein lies the reason for concern: 
alongside the praise for democracy, a new American 
attitude is developing: countries like Egypt and Syria 
must be compelled to adopt American ideology, while 
other countries like Kuwait and China are allowed to 
pick and choose.... This is a sweeping conception very 
reminiscent of the Cold War, when the world was divided 
-- especially by the U.S. -- into the West versus 
Communism, liberty versus repression.... The problem is 
that because of the belligerent way in which it is 
being driven into the region, the vision of American 
democracy arouses fierce opposition among movements 
that are actually advocating for reform but do not want 
to appear to be acting according to an American 
diktat.... The concern is that the more the U.S. exerts 
itself in spreading democracy, the greater the 
opposition will be to what it represents, and the 
question before the public in Arab countries will not 
be democracy or repression, but between America and the 
local regime." 
 
KURTZER