05VANCOUVER1614
CSI VANCOUVER:  RUNNING SMOOTHLY WITH CANADA'S FULL SUPPORT
Thu Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vancouver
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS VANCOUVER 001614 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CAN; WHA/FO; INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA KCIP SNAR
SUBJECT: CSI VANCOUVER:  RUNNING SMOOTHLY WITH CANADA'S FULL SUPPORT 
 
 
¶1.  (U) The Port of Vancouver was one of the US Department of 
Homeland Security's original Container Security Initiative ports 
in 2002.  US Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) officials explained 
that out of 10,000 or so shipments that come into the port per 
month, only about 2 to 3 percent are stopped for additional 
security checks by CSI and Canadian officials.  The system is 
working smoothly with Canada's full cooperation.  Interestingly, 
most of the shipments coming to Vancouver's ports are from Asian 
ports where other CSI operations already exist. Therefore, these 
US bound shipments have already been checked at their origin and 
are essentially being checked twice by US Customs and Border 
officials.  CBP officials in Vancouver do not view this as 
duplicative, but rather, they see it as a valuable tool that 
keeps the supply chain to US destinations more secure in an 
international shipping environment mired in high volume and 
complex bureaucracy. 
 
¶2. (U) CSI is established at 40 ports worldwide and its original 
intent was to intercept potential weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD) from entering the US from foreign origins. So far, no 
known WMD have been detected through CSI but CBP officials 
believe that CSI is a deterrent for these weapons. 
Additionally, CBP has successfully interdicted IPR violators, 
chemical precursors, drugs, and illegal cigarettes from 
Vancouver's ports. 
 
¶3. (U) There are only two CBP officials managing CSI from 
Vancouver, both on long term TDY status.  They told us that they 
check containers based mostly on anomalies found in Bills of 
Lading or erroneous manifests received from freight forwarders. 
The paperwork for containers is complicated.  For example, one 
Bill of Lading could have 15 containers attached to it, whereas 
sometimes one container could have several Bills of Lading 
associated with it.  Therefore, working closely with CBP 
counterparts at other CSI ports as well as with Canadian 
officials becomes paramount for determining anomalies.  If they 
determine that a container warrants further inspection, they can 
decide to x-ray it or to "strip" the container entirely.  CSI 
shares a warehouse facility in Burnaby (a suburb of Vancouver) 
with Canadian officials for these purposes.  When US bound 
containers are shipped to Vancouver, they either: 1) remain on 
board and are moved to the US by ship, or 2) are loaded onto 
trucks or trains for US destinations. 
 
¶4. (U) Other useful security and time-saving tools available to 
US officials are the "24 hour rule" which requires that 
manifests arrive 24 hours before the containers, allowing 
inspection officials to review the content and amount beforehand 
and then match that information with the size and number of 
containers that follow 24 hours later.  CTPAT is a program where 
freight forwarding companies can apply to become "trusted 
travelers" similar to how NEXUS Land or Air work. 
 
LUKENS