05WELLINGTON675
TFUS01: NEW ZEALAND OFFERS ASSISTANCE
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000675 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON AEMR ASEC CASC MARR AMGT US NZ
SUBJECT: TFUS01: NEW ZEALAND OFFERS ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: STATE 162226 
 
¶1. The Government of New Zealand has made a general offer of 
assistance to the United States in the aftermath of Hurricane 
Katrina.  In addition, the government has approved specific 
areas of assistance, and the New Zealand Embassy has been 
instructed to convey those offers to USG officials on 
September 2 local time. 
 
¶2. The specific offers include: 
 
For now: 
-- Search and rescue team: It has trained with FEMA and can 
be deployed at short notice. 
-- Police disaster ID teams: These forensic teams were 
deployed to Thailand to help identify tsunami victims. 
 
For the recovery phase: 
-- NZ Disaster Management Team that has been involved in 
flood recovery in New Zealand.  The team would be pleased to 
go to the affected region to meet officials there, or to 
invite the officials to New Zealand if that would be 
preferable to the officials. 
 
¶3. Air New Zealand also has asked if it could provide 
assistance.  The airline suggests that it could help 
transport stranded people (victims and families) and deliver 
cargo and equipment, as examples of what it might be able to 
do.  It is open to addressing other transportation needs. 
The point of contact at Air New Zealand is: Rick Osborne, 
manager, government and international relations, public and 
government affairs, tel 011-64-9-336-2905; cell 
011-64-21-737-667; e-mail Rick.Osborne@airnz.co.nz.  (New 
Zealand is 16 hours ahead of Washington.) 
 
¶4. New Zealand Prime Minister Clark, who sent letters of 
sympathy to the President and the Secretary, stopped at 
Consulate Auckland on September 2 to sign a condolence book. 
The mission has received numerous calls from New Zealanders 
offering condolences and assistance.  (We are advising them 
to donate cash through non-governmental organizations.)  The 
local Red Cross and Salvation Army have launched drives and 
set up toll-free phone lines to raise funds for the 
hurricane's victims. 
 
¶5. Post welcomes any questions or instructions. 
Burnett