05WELLINGTON7
NEW ZEALAND SUPPORT TO TSUNAMI RELIEF VICTIMS
Thu Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID PGOV NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND SUPPORT TO TSUNAMI RELIEF VICTIMS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 959 
 
¶1.  (U) NZAid has confirmed to post the break down of the NZD 
10 million (about USD 7.2 million) that the New Zealand 
Government has committed so far to the relief effort: 
 
 -- Up to NZD 5 million will be given in dollar-for-dollar 
matching funds for private charitable donations (FYI: The Red 
Cross here has announced donations to their organization 
alone so far total $3.2 million; they expect the total to 
increase to $8 million.  So we can expect the government will 
likely pay out the full $5 million.) 
 
-- NZD 3 million (USD 2.16) will go to the UN Aceh appeal. 
 
-- NZD 2 million will be provided for general relief efforts. 
 This includes NZD 300,000 to provide funding for a New 
Zealand company operating helicopters in Borneo to conduct 
relief operations, including reconnaissance, liaison, and 
light transport.  It also includes a police forensic team 
helping to identify bodies in Phuket. 
 
¶2.  (U) Many New Zealand officials remain on leave this 
holiday break, and those whom post contacted were unable to 
tell us whether or not the NZD 10 million includes the funds 
used to support NZ Defense Force (NZDF) tsunami relief 
efforts.  As of now, there are two C-130 Hercules in the 
region, airlifting relief supplies and personnel to the 
affected areas and evacuating refugees out.  One C-130 
arrived in Sumatra on January 2 with a 30-member NZDF medical 
team that is working with Indonesian authorities and 
alongside an Australian Defence Force Health Support Company. 
The other was deployed on December 28, and as of December 31 
had delivered 25 tons of supplies before suffering a crack in 
its manifold. After repairs, it delivered a water 
purification plant into Aceh province.  A RNZAF Being 757 has 
been in the region since December 31, carrying Police and 
Defense personnel to help with victim identification. 
 
¶3.  (U) As of today, there have been two confirmed New 
Zealand deaths in the Phuket region and one in Sri Lanka. 
The government remains "gravely concerned" about 17 other New 
Zealanders, seven  whom were thought to have been in 
Thailand, four in Sri Lanka, four in India, and one in the 
Andaman Islands.  According to the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade, a total of 737 New Zealanders remain 
unaccounted for overall. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Although none of the confirmed or feared New 
Zealand casualties have been in Indonesia, that is where the 
bulk of NZ assistance has been directed.  This apparently 
reflects the government's assessment of where the need is 
greatest, as well as the fact that the military aircraft 
being used to deliver assistance can most easily reach 
Indonesia from New Zealand and Australia. 
Swindells