06ADANA9
OCALAN APPEAL STILL STRONG IN SE
Fri Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL TU ADANA PKK
SUBJECT: OCALAN APPEAL STILL STRONG IN SE 
 
 
SUBJECT:  Pro-Ocalan Sentiment Still Strong in Turkey's Southeast 
 
¶1. (SBU) On January 18  a Turkish court confined imprisoned PKK 
leader Abdullah Ocalan to his cell on Imrali Island for 20 days, 
and stipulated that his lawyers would not be able to see him 
during that period, according to our contacts and press reports. 
The government charged that, during December 12, 2005 meetings 
with his lawyers, Ocalan issued instructions for Kurds to engage 
in demonstrations. The lawyers made public the news of Ocalan's 
confinement. The PKK then publicly announced that Ocalan's 
confinement was unacceptable, and urged Kurds within and outside 
Turkey to stage pro-Ocalan demonstrations. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Local contacts told us that on January 17 in the 
Sakirpasa district of Adana, about 100 Kurds and members of the 
Liberal Citizens Movement (a small pro-Kurdish citizens action 
group in the Cukurova region) demonstrated against Ocalan's 
confinement as part of a series of similar demonstrations in 14 
provinces involving approximately 5000 protestors throughout 
Turkey's southeast, as reported in the press. 
 
Actions follow regional mayors' assertion that "Ocalan is a 
reality" 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  On Dececember 15, 2005, regional pro-Kurdish press 
announced that the 56 mayors in southeast Turkey aligned with 
DEHAP, including the mayors of larger regional cities, such as 
Diyarbakir, Batman, Tunceli, Hakkari and Sirnak, joined the 
ranks of the new Democratic Society Party (DSP) in a Diyarbakir 
ceremony.  In that ceremony the groups' remarks emphasized, 
among calls for greater Kurdish cultural rights, a call for the 
GoT to recognize the "reality of (former PKK Abdullah) Ocalan's" 
continuing strong influence on southeast Turkey's Kurdish 
population. 
 
4.(U)  On December 30, regional press reported that this 
southeast Turkey mayor's group also sent a letter to Danish 
Prime Minister Rasmussen to protest calls by the GoT for the 
cessation of ROJ-TV broadcasts from Denmark.  In response to 
their letter, Turkish deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister 
Gul reportedly criticized the group's protest of the GoT request 
and the Diyarbakir Prosecutor's office reportedly started an 
investigation into whether several mayors, including Diyarbakir 
mayor Osman Baydemir, Tunceli mayor Songul Erol Abdil, and 
Batman Mayor Huseyin Kalkan., violated Turkish law in making 
their protest. 
 
5.(U)  Regional press reports that the Diyarbakir Prosecutor's 
Office this week has opened similar investigations against 
regional DSP mayors regarding their calls for peaceful protests 
of Ocalan's reported solitary confinement. 
 
REID