06AITTAIPEI556
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S PROPOSAL TO
Thu Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0037
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0556/01 0540858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230858Z FEB 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8650
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 4709
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 5902UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000556 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S PROPOSAL TO 
ABOLISH THE NATIONAL UNIFICATION COUNCIL AND GUIDELINES 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Major Chinese-language Taiwan dailies continued 
to focus their coverage February 23 on the aftermath of 
President Chen Shui-bian's announced proposal to abolish the 
National Unification Council (NUC) and National Unification 
Guidelines (NUG).  In addition, U.S. arms procurements, a 
BBC interview with KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou in London, the 
February 28 Incident of 1947, and the "1992 Consensus" were 
also covered heavily in the newspapers.  The pro- 
independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, 
juxtaposed a Ma statement in the BBC interview and Chen's 
remark when meeting with U.S. House Representative Rob 
Simmons (R-CT) in a banner headline on its front page that 
said: "Ma Ying-jeou: Taiwan Independence Is One of the 
Possible Options for [the Taiwan] People; President Chen: If 
It Is so, NUC Should Be Abolished."  The pro-independence 
"Taiwan Daily" also ran a banner headline on its second page 
that quoted Taiwan Foreign Minister James Huang as saying: 
"Taiwan-U.S. Communication over the Abolition of NUC and 
NUG; [Both Sides] Have More in Common than Differences." 
 
¶2. The pro-unification "United Daily News," on the other 
hand, ran an article on its front page with the headline: 
"[Regarding] Bian's Proposal to Abolish the NUC and NUG, 
China Criticizes Upgraded Taiwan Independence, While the 
United States Urges Taiwan to Exercise Restraint."  The pro- 
status quo "China Times" ran a related news story in an 
inside page with the headline: "Bian Insisting on Abolishing 
the NUC and NUG, It Is Rare That the United States Singles 
out Taiwan to Exercise Restraint."  The "China Times," in 
addition, ran an exclusive story on its front page with the 
headline that quoted KMT Legislator Su Chi as saying "Bian 
Sent Secret Envoy to China Last Year." 
 
¶3. All Chinese-language papers carried reports about U.S. 
House Representative Rob Simmons's speech before the Taipei 
American Chamber of Commerce and his meeting with President 
Chen Wednesday.  Both the "Liberty Times" and "Taiwan Daily" 
devoted almost a whole inside page to a transcript of Ma 
Ying-jeou's interview on the BBC's "Hardtalk" television 
program, in which Ma talked about cross-Strait relations and 
U.S. arms procurements. 
 
¶4. Almost all Chinese-language papers editorialized on 
President Chen's proposal to abolish the NUC and NUG and on 
cross-Strait relations.  A "Liberty Times" editorial urged 
Chen to stay firm, and to resist all pressure while carrying 
out his mission to abolish the NUC and NUG.  A "Taiwan 
Daily" editorial called on Washington not to overlook the 
fact that China is the source of chaos in that it seeks to 
alter the cross-Strait status quo and sabotage peace.  A 
"United Daily News" editorial commented that "Chen wants to 
use the abolition of the NUC and NUG to prove that he is the 
flagman of Taiwan independence, and he also wants to 
highlight the fact that he dares to resist Washington and 
provoke Beijing."  Professor Yang Yung-ming of National 
Taiwan University opined in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
that "What Washington is going to do to prevent Taipei's 
next step to alter the status quo is testing U.S. President 
George W. Bush's patience and wisdom."  An editorial in the 
limited-circulated, conservative, pro-unification, English- 
language "China Post" urged Chen not to push Taiwan to "the 
precipice."  End summary. 
 
A) "Taiwan Must Stay Firm to Walk Its Own Road" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (2/23): 
 
"Despite heavy pressure from outside [of Taiwan] and the 
different voices of the pro-China groups inside Taiwan 
trying to pull his leg, President Chen Shui-bian evidently 
looks determined to abolish the NUC and NUG. . Chen's 
abolition of the NUC and NUG is simply a move to scrap the 
`last No' [in Chen's `Five No's' pledge], putting an end to 
a government body and papers that have remained dormant for 
the past six years.  The move to do so is just an 
administrative procedure.  How can it affect or cause 
deterioration of relations across the Taiwan Strait?  In 
addition, the real reason behind the cross-Strait impasse 
lies in the fact that China is unwilling to renounce the use 
of force against Taiwan or to treat Taiwan on an equal 
footing.  Taiwan has never gotten any positive response 
[from China] no matter how many olive branches it has 
extended. . Now, all the people of Taiwan and the world are 
watching how Chen is going to resist pressure from all sides 
and carry out his mission to abolish the NUC and NUG." 
 
B) "China Is Changing the Status quo Across the Taiwan 
Strait and Sabotaging Cross-Strait Peace as Planned, and the 
United States Must Never Overlook [This Fact]" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
said in an editorial (2/23): 
 
". This newspaper wants to remind the United States that 
China is the real source of chaos that alters the status quo 
across the Taiwan Strait, sabotages cross-Strait peace and 
causes the United States to lose its interests. . 
 
". Here are our questions: What did the United States do for 
Taiwan when China planned to pass the Anti-Secession Law? 
Given the fact that China totally disregarded Taiwan's 
goodwill gestures and used strategic united-front [measures] 
against Taiwan . the abolition of the NUC and NUG is nothing 
but a move for Taiwan to passively adjust its cross-Strait 
policy and to preserve the right of its people to make their 
own choices. 
 
With regard to U.S. interests, the United States' security 
layout plan in the Asia-Pacific region will be affected if 
Taiwan is controlled by pro-China forces. ." 
 
C) "What Pledge Does Chen Shui-bian Place on His Gambling 
Table?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (2/23): 
 
". Unless Chen Shui-bian really wants to carry out `de jure 
Taiwan independence and alter the status quo' this time, or 
his proposal to `abolish the NUC and NUG and hold a 
referendum on Taiwan's new constitution' will turn out to be 
something that begins with a roar and ends with a whimper, 
just like the proposed `referendum on Taiwan independence' 
[in 2004], which changed into a `preventive referendum.' 
Perhaps Chen will really scrap the `last No' in his pledge, 
but unless he has lost his reason, it is expected that he 
will put on the brake right before the red line drawn with 
the `Four No's' pledge.  But should it really happen, Taiwan 
will be harmed both internally and externally, just like 
when it held the [first-ever] referendum in 2004.  Chen, on 
the other hand, will gain the wounded political interests 
[he desires].  The move will put him on the position of a 
flagman of Taiwan independence. . 
 
"Chen wants to use the abolition of the NUC and NUG to prove 
that he is the flagman of Taiwan independence; he also wants 
to highlight the fact that he dares to resist Washington and 
provoke Beijing.  But in reality, chances for slim for him 
to hop out of the palm that controls the world.  Instead, 
what he gets is deteriorated mutual trust between Washington 
and Taipei, more hostile cross-Strait relations and a more 
unstable living condition for Taiwan. ." 
 
D) "The Race for the Right to Define the Cross-Strait Status 
Quo" 
 
Professor Yang Yung-ming of National Taiwan University 
opined in the pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] (2/23): 
 
". Judged from the interactions between Washington, Beijing 
and Taipei over the past few years, the `Five No's' pledge 
carried comprehensive and symbolic significance and is 
almost equivalent to a `red zone between the two sides of 
the Taiwan Strait.'  As a result, the presence of the `Five 
No's' pledge is significant in the way that it itself has 
major strategic interests in maintaining the status quo and 
peace across the Taiwan Strait.  Even though the abolition 
of the NUC and NUG, under careful manipulation, may not 
necessarily cross the red zone, the consequences of such a 
move will definitely invite a new wave of movements from 
Beijing and will expand Washington's distrust toward Taipei. 
Everyone knows that the abolition of the NUC and NUG is just 
the first step, and there are more steps to get rid of 
unification and shift toward unification to follow up.  What 
Washington is going to do to prevent Taipei's next step to 
alter the status quo is testing U.S. President George W. 
Bush's patience and wisdom. ." 
 
E) "Don't Push Taiwan to the Precipice" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" [circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (2/23): 
 
 
". Chen seems determined to carry out a plan he proposed in 
his New Year statement, in which he remarked that he was 
going to scrap the National Unification Council and National 
Unification Guidelines.  That announcement dropped a 
bombshell on the local political scene and has had a strong 
impact on relations between Taiwan, the United States and 
the Chinese mainland. 
 
"The U.S., Taiwan's staunchest ally over the years, has 
expressed deep concern about Chen's plan and has reportedly 
warned that Taiwan would have to bear the responsibility for 
the possible consequences. .  Taiwan's relations with the 
U.S. are suffering from Chen's readiness to pursue a highly 
hazardous course.  A decrease in U.S. support would make the 
island dangerously vulnerable to an attack from the 
mainland.  If President Chen continues to push for de-jure 
as well as de-facto independence, it will soon create a life- 
and-death situation for the 23 million residents of this 
island." 
 
KEEGAN