06AITTAIPEI1510
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S TRANSITS IN THE
Tue May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1510 1220852
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020852Z MAY 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9977
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5146
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6350UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S TRANSITS IN THE 
UNITED STATES 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage May 2 on the details of President Chen Shui-bian's transit 
in the U.S., legislators' proposed constitutional amendments, the 
corruption scandals involving First Lady Wu Shu-chen, and the 
year-end Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral race.  The pro-status quo 
"China Times" ran a banner headline on its front page that read: 
"[U.S. President George W.] Bush Will Personally Decide on the 
Cities for Bian to Transit [in the United States]."  The 
pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" also ran a news story on its page 
two with the headline: "Is the United States Making Things Difficult 
for the President's Transits? Taiwan's Foreign Ministry: Still 
Negotiating [with Washington over the Issue]." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, the "Free Talk" column 
in the pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, 
pointed out that Washington's way of handling President Chen's 
transits may be aimed at showing its displeasure with the DPP 
government, but it has also humiliated all the Taiwan people.  The 
column added that Taiwan remains an independent sovereign state no 
matter whether its president gets to transit in the United States. 
A "China Times" editorial, however, criticized Chen and Taiwan's 
high-ranking officials for using Taiwan's foreign relations as a 
tool for the island's infighting.  The editorial concluded by saying 
that "the President's transits are actually a small matter; what 
really matters is that Taiwan has now become something that 
Washington and Beijing will jointly 'manage.'"  End summary. 
 
A) "[Taiwan] Refuses to Be a Wealthy Fool" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] wrote (5/2): 
 
"[President] A-bian will depart for a visit to Central and South 
America Wednesday, but as of now, the cities that he is going to 
stop over in the United States are undecided yet.  Even a layman who 
knows nothing about foreign relations can tell that the U.S. 
government is deliberately making things difficult [for Chen]. 
Washington's approach may be aimed at expressing its displeasure 
with the DPP government, but it has humiliated all the Taiwan 
people.  Even if A-bian is willing to accept such humiliation, are 
the Taiwan people willing to do so, too? 
 
"The fact that our president, when visiting Taiwan's allies, tend to 
regard his transits in other countries as a diplomatic breakthrough 
or achievement, is indeed a move that has put the cart before the 
horse.  When the President makes stopovers in the United States, the 
most he can do is to shake hands and dine with some overseas Taiwan 
people.  What else can he do?  No matter whether the President is 
able to transit in the United States, Taiwan is still Taiwan and it 
remains to be an independent sovereign state. ..." 
 
B) "An Incompetent and Senseless Way to Handle Diplomacy" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (5/2): 
 
" It is an unprecedented situation that our President Chen Shui-bian 
has no clue at all as to which cities he will stop over even though 
he is about to take off.  But in fact there is more Taipei should 
worry about.  ... Chen is about to depart for a trip to Paraguay and 
Costa Rica tomorrow, yet [until now,] the United States is reluctant 
to formally announce the cities that Chen can transit in; it seems 
that Washington does not want Taiwan to play up this issue.  But 
despite the trouble that could cause to Chen's safety and the 
aviation operations, do we see any respect shown for a state leader 
who has no idea where he will stop over when he is about to take 
off? ... 
 
"... What's worse is that Chen and other high-ranking officials have 
used [Taiwan's] foreign relations as a tool for the island's 
infighting. ...  For example, the United States is Taiwan's most 
important ally, but the bilateral relations [between the two] have 
fallen from the peak to the lowest point just within a few years. 
The mutual trust between Taiwan and the United States built over the 
past years were severely damaged, and the United States' respect for 
the Taiwan government was significantly jeopardized;   Washington's 
doubts are evident in the way it handles Chen's transits this time. 
But the President's transits are actually a small matter; what 
really matters is that Taiwan has now become something that 
Washington and Beijing will jointly 'manage.'  What is it exactly 
that has made the United States feel that Taiwan is a more dangerous 
variable that Washington can hardly control than China? ..." 
 
YOUNG