06AITTAIPEI3754
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN, TAIWAN'S NEW
Fri Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3754/01 3070906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030906Z NOV 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2895
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5884
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7102UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN, TAIWAN'S NEW 
CONSTITUTION 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage November 3 on the kidnap of a local baseball pitching 
coach; on the investigation of the presidential allowance for state 
affairs case; and on President Chen Shui-bian's interview with the 
"Financial Times" Wednesday, in which he again proposed that Taiwan 
could "freeze" its current constitution and pass a new constitution. 
 The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran a banner headline on 
page six that read "Exclusive Interview with Britih Media; Bian 
Proposes Again to Freeze [Current] Constitution and Push New 
Constitution." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, continued to editorialize on U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.  The 
article defended AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young's recent remarks 
on Taiwan's arms procurements and criticized those who oppose the 
arms deal for their "anti-U.S. and pro-China" mentality.  An 
analysis in the pro-status quo "China Times," on the other hand, 
discussed President Chen's proposal to push a new constitution.  The 
article said Chen's real purpose is to use the constitutional reform 
to lure the hardcore Green supporters and restrain the new DPP 
heavyweights.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S. Arms Sales to Taiwan 
 
"To Put It Bluntly, Opposition to Arms Procurements Is [to Adopt] 
Anti-U.S. and Pro-China Position" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (11/3): 
 
"... Stephen Young reminded the Legislative Yuan to pass the arms 
procurement bill this fall and reminded Taiwan to quickly strengthen 
its self-defensive military capability.  His remarks have conveyed 
the United States' grave concern for Taiwan's security.  In our 
eyes, foreign friends such as Stephen Young are the real friends of 
Taiwan.  The national identity in Taiwan is quite confusing right 
now; some people mistake friends for foes, while others mistake foes 
for friends, and this is the real threat coming from within Taiwan. 
 
"Those who oppose the arms procurements tend to oppose everything 
that has to do with the United States, and thus they harbor 
resentment against Young.  To put it bluntly, [the resentment] was 
actually caused by their 'anti-U.S. and pro-China' mentality. If 
this is not the case, then why were these people so infuriated when 
the United States urged Taiwan to pass the defense military budget? 
Why is it that they have never felt that their country's dignity has 
been jeopardized and that their life and property are in danger when 
China has constantly threatened to use force against Taiwan, has 
enacted the 'Anti-Secession Law,' and has announced to the 
international community that Taiwan is part of China?" 
 
¶4. Taiwan's New Constitution 
 
"Bian Is Anxious to Protect Himself by Pushing a New Constitution 
before the Elections" 
 
Journalist Lin Shu-ling noted in an analysis in the pro-status quo 
"China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (11/3): 
 
"... The Bian administration is clearly aware that the United States 
will not support the DPP in dealing with the sensitive issue of a 
new constitution.  But the Presidential Office gave Washington two 
justifications [for its move]:  The first is that the threshold for 
constitutional reform is very high, and a draft constitution 
proposal cannot possibly be passed without a true consensus. 
Second, the 'Second Republic Constitution' will continue to use 
'Republic of China' as the national name, so it will not violate 
[Taiwan's] pledge to the United States. 
 
"Bian's justifications are akin to telling the United States that 
the constitutional reform is a 'bogus game' and that it hopes 
Washington will not exert too much pressure [on Taiwan].  Indeed, 
Bian's move of 'quasi-writing a new constitution' will by no means 
cross the super-high threshold of constitutional amendment.  But 
Bian's move is evident and widely known to everyone.  Whether or not 
there will be a new constitution remains to be seen, but using 
constitutional reform to pander to hardcore Green supporters and 
restrain the new DPP heavyweights is his real purpose. 
 
"For Bian, as long as he can secure the deep-Green stalwarts, he can 
continue to position himself on the high ground and attack others, 
regardless of whether the DPP can continue to take the helm.  But 
the topic of 'quasi-writing a new constitution' should be poisonous 
for soliciting votes in the Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral races.  As 
a result, it is truly intriguing to see whether Bian's move quickly 
to put this topic on the table prior to the elections indicates that 
he has sensed the pressure from the investigation of the 
CONSTITUTION 
 
Presidential allowance for state affairs case, so he needs to rally 
the pro-independence supporters and launch another campaign to 
protect himself." 
 
WANG