06AITTAIPEI4135
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Fri Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #4135 3490822
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150822Z DEC 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3460
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6101
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7330UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 004135 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage December 15 on First Lady Wu Shu-chen, who will stand trial 
today for her involvement in the Presidential Office Allowance for 
State Affairs case; on the Green camp's request for a constitutional 
interpretation on the legality of prosecutors' questioning of 
President Chen Shui-bian over the state affairs allowance case; and 
on alleged vote-buying in Kaohsiung.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, a column in the pro-status quo "China Times" discussed 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's statement made early this week 
 
SIPDIS 
on North Korea's nuclear program.  The article said Rice's remarks 
indicated that Washington is ready to compromise diplomatically on 
the North Korean nuclear issue.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times," on the other hand, discussed the cross-Strait issue.  The 
article said "what people in China, Washington, and elsewhere must 
understand about the nature of Taiwanese 'identity' is that, 
regardless of what people here call themselves, virtually everyone 
accepts that this society is different from China's."  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. North Korea 
 
"Rice's Latest Expression of Her Position Prior to the Six-Party 
Talks" 
 
The "International Outlook" column in the pro-status quo "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] noted (12/15): 
 
"... Two points are noteworthy:  First, [Secretary] Rice is 
determined to resolve the [North Korean nuclear] issue in two years, 
so as to make it a legacy for President Bush and for herself.  This 
would indicate that Washington will by no means use force to resolve 
the problem, but will be ready to compromise diplomatically, 
otherwise how can she be sure to achieve her goal?  Second, Rice has 
acknowledged that the chances are slim that Pyongyang will get rid 
of all its nuclear facilities in two years.  Since she claimed she 
will achieve her goal in two years, but then said she could not stop 
Pyongyang from getting rid of its nuclear facilities, the United 
States' bottom line for compromise will evidently be to allow North 
Korea to reserve some nuclear power.  If this interpretation is 
correct, the United States obviously intends to acknowledge tacitly 
that North Korea is a country that possesses nuclear weapons, and to 
use this in exchange for Pyongyang's [promise] not to export nuclear 
weapons and related technology. ..." 
 
¶3. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
"The Reality of the Taiwan Crisis" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (12/15): 
 
"... What people in China, Washington and elsewhere must understand 
about the nature of Taiwanese 'identity' is that, regardless of what 
people here call themselves, virtually everyone accepts that this 
society is different from China's.  More than 111 years of cultural 
and physical separation, combined with 61 years of autonomous 
political development, have created two different societies, 
regardless of how many traits they share. ...  Some well-intentioned 
people (as well as a few opportunists) here and abroad have said 
that what Taiwan needs is some kind of interim non-aggression pact 
with China.  Others say unification is 'inevitable' given economic 
interdependence with China. 
 
"But the first assumes that either (a) Taiwanese are willing to 
sacrifice their political autonomy, or (b) China is willing to 
compromise.  The second ignores the reality that economic 
interdependence is not an indicator of political dependence. 
Dealing with the 'Taiwan Issue' requires accepting reality.  The 
reality is that there are two distinct societies on either side of 
the Strait.  One is free and autonomous and doesn't want to be 
coerced out of its freedom or autonomy.  All other formulations are 
just window dressing." 
 
YOUNG