06ANKARA297
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3216
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0297/01 0261646
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261646Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2740
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 6899
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 9664
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0312
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5076
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4786
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1400
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/CDRUSAE IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 000297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 26, 2006 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Thursday, January 26, 2006 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
US Rejects Alpogan's Request to Hand Over PKK Ringleaders - 
Hurriyet 
Straw: Turkey's Cyprus Action Plan Important - Milliyet 
Straw the First Western Minister to Meet Talat in Turkish 
Cyprus - Hurriyet 
Greek Cypriots Protest Straw for Visiting North Cyprus - 
Milliyet 
Rehn: EU Accession Talks with Turkey May Start in Spring - 
Hurriyet 
UNSC to Convene to Discuss Iran - Sabah 
Iran to Safeguard Nuclear Facilities Underground - Milliyet 
HAMAS Won't Recognize Israel, Abandon Weapons - Sabah 
'Survival Map' for Illegal Mexican Immigrants - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
MacCormack: Turkey's Cyprus Action Plan a Welcome Step 
Forward - Cumhuriyet 
Straw: Turkey's Cyprus Plan Deserves to be Taken Seriously - 
Yeni Safak 
Congressmen Wexler, Whitfield Laud Turkey's Cyprus Action 
Plan - Radikal 
Alpogan Urges US to Support Turkey's Cyprus Plan - Radikal 
Tehran Open to Enriching Uranium in Russia - Cumhuriyet 
HAMAS Takes the Stage, Enters Palestine Parliament Strong - 
Radikal 
Olmert Signals Changes in Post-Sharon Era - Radikal 
2 Million Iraqi Families Survive on 1 USD a Day - Yeni Safak 
US Troops Kill 3 Civilians in Ramadi - Yeni Safak 
1.4 Million Cubans Protest against US in Havana - Radikal 
US Develops Nuclear Detector - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Turkey Announces Action Plan on Cyprus:  On Wednesday, 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul announced a Turkish Action 
Plan for Cyprus, which was submitted to UN Secretary General 
Kofi Annan on January 20, Turkish papers report.  The 
Turkish plan says that Greek Cypriot vessels will be given 
access to Turkish ports and airports within the framework of 
EU customs unions, and suggests that direct international 
flights will be allowed to and from the Ercan airport in 
Girne (Kyrenia) in the north.  It asks for removal of trade 
restrictions by both sides, and of international sanctions 
against the Turkish side.  The plan calls for special 
arrangements for inclusion of Turkish Cyprus, as an economic 
entity, into the EU customs union.  FM Gul offered to hold a 
meeting in May or June for Turkey, Greece, and both Cypriot 
sides in Cyprus under the auspices of UN Secretary General 
Annan.  The plan aims at introducing a perspective for a 
lasting settlement in Cyprus, and to pave the way for 
cooperation and mutual trust in Cyprus, Gul said.  'The UN 
Secretary-General is kindly invited to consider the plan and 
 
SIPDIS 
take the lead, and we call on the international community to 
examine and support this proposal,' he added.  Gul also 
stressed he was confident the plan presented an opportunity 
to help stabilize the eastern Mediterranean region, provide 
 
ANKARA 00000297  002 OF 005 
 
 
economic benefits for all, and integrate the Turkish 
Cypriots with the rest of the world, 'which has been a goal 
of the international community, including the EU, since mid- 
2004.'  Meanwhile, visiting British Foreign Secretary Jack 
Straw will be received by PM Erdogan and later hold a joint 
press conference with Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul in 
Ankara on Thursday.  Before traveling to Turkey, Straw paid 
a visit yesterday first to Nicosia and then to the Turkish 
part of the city, meeting with leaders on both sides.  In a 
news conference in the buffer zone after wrapping up talks, 
Straw stressed that his visit should be evaluated under the 
good-offices mission of Secretary General Annan.  Straw has 
stressed that his calling on the Turkish Cypriot leader 
Mehmet Ali Talat at his office in the north did not mean an 
'upgrade' the in political status of the 'TRNC.' 
 
Wexler, Whitfield Praise Turkey's Cyprus Action Plan:  US 
Congressmen Robert Wexler (D) and an Ed Whitfield (D) 
praised the new Cyprus initiative launched by the Turkish 
government, papers report.  Wexler and Whitfield, members of 
the US-Turkey Friendship Group, called for and end to the 
international isolation of Turkish Cypriots.  'The Cyprus 
action plan, made public by the Turkish government, is a 
constructive effort, aiming to make progress in the ongoing 
Cyprus problem,' the Congressmen said in a statement. 
Whitfield said the action plan was a 'good-will initiative,' 
and stated that it will contribute to economic development 
and stability of the island.  Wexler expressed hope that the 
Greek Cypriot administration would respond to this call 
immediately, and that talks would resume under the auspices 
of the UN.  Wexler also stressed that Turkey, Greece and the 
two communities in Cyprus had seized an extraordinary 
opportunity to work for regional peace, democracy and 
prosperity under the plan proposed by Turkey. 
 
Alpogan Seeks Support on PKK, Cyprus in Washington:  During 
his meetings in Washington earlier this week, Turkish 
National Security Council (NSC) Secretary-General Yigit 
Alpogan urged the Americans to hand over the leaders of the 
outlawed PKK organization in northern Iraq, papers report. 
Alpogan said in a speech he delivered on Tuesday at the 
Washington Institute that such forward steps would help in 
restoring the image of the US in the view of Turks.  A 
source told "Milliyet" that the US had declined to make any 
commitments regarding the fight against the PKK.  The Iraqi 
Kurds continue efforts to change the demographic structure 
of Kirkuk, Alpogan said, proposing a change in the 
constitution regarding the future of the city or else a four- 
year delay of the referendum due to be held in 2007.  He 
also warned that inclusion of Kirkuk in the region 
controlled by the Kurds will lead to big problems in Iraq. 
A high-ranking military officer told "Radikal" that the 
Turkish military views the PKK issue from a standpoint of 
separatism rather than of terrorism.  'Things in Iraq are 
not going the way the US wants, and we are worried about 
separatism in Iraq.  We need a political strategy to deal 
with the problem -- not just a military one,' the source 
said.  Alpogan said that Syria should not be completely 
isolated in the international arena.  Alpogan noted that 
Foreign Minister Gul has proposed to Syria that they try 
five Syrian suspects in Turkey in connection with the 
assassination of former Lebanese PM Hariri.  Alpogan also 
requested US support for Turkey's new action plan on Cyprus. 
An unidentified US official who attended the Alpogan's 
meeting with Secretary Rice is quoted by "Milliyet" as 
saying that Turkey and the US shared the same views with 
regard to the nuclear program of Iran.  "Cumhuriyet" reports 
that Alpogan submitted a report to the US which said that 
Iranian missiles posed a threat to Turkey, adding that 
 
ANKARA 00000297  003 OF 005 
 
 
Turkey urgently needed a missile defense system.  Alpogan 
outlined Turkish conditions for supporting a possible 
military operation against Iran, emphasizing that Turkey 
will extend only intelligence and logistic support to the US 
in a possible operation against Iran.  'There have been good 
relations between Turkey and Iran for a long time.  However, 
we do not want Iran to have nuclear weapons.  We support 
efforts to find a solution to the problem through diplomatic 
means,' Alpogan emphasized.  Alpogan's meetings in the US 
had been a response to the recent visits of CIA and FBI 
Directors to Turkey, says "Cumhuriyet." 
 
USTR Donnelly Visits Ankara:  Assistant US Trade 
Representative for Europe and the Mediterranean, Shaun 
Donnelly, said that the US wishes to increase trade with 
Turkey, which is currently 10 billion USD, Turkish papers 
reported on Wednesday. Donnelly, heading the US delegation 
in a meeting of the Turkey-US Trade and Investment Framework 
Agreement (TIFA) Council, stressed that, with the TIFA 
meeting, commercial obstacles have been removed and an 
important step made to promote investments in both 
countries.  'We plan to develop joint projects and make 
investments with Turkey in the Caucasus, Central Asia and 
Middle East,' said Donnelly.  Donnelly pointed out that 
General Electrics (GE) has purchased shares of Turkish 
Garanti Bank.  'Other major US corporations will also invest 
in Turkey soon,' Donnelly noted.  Turkish State Minister 
Kursad Tuzmen noted that there is no joint economic 
commission between Turkey and the US other than TIFA.  'This 
meeting convened after three years, and is important from 
the perspective of developing commercial ties,' Tuzmen said. 
Tuzmen said the issue of Qualified Industrial Zones was also 
raised at the meeting.  'We want to include textiles and 
ready made garments in such zones,' he added. 
 
US Bird Flu Team Tours Turkey's Eastern Provinces:  'We are 
impressed by the program carried out by Turkey to contain 
bird flu,' said Ann Derse, a senior official from the US 
State Department heading the US bird flu team to the eastern 
cities of Erzurum and Van over the weekend, Turkish papers 
reported earlier this week.  The US delegation, comprised of 
a senior infectious diseases adviser with USAID and other 
experts on animal and human health, toured affected areas in 
Turkey to assess what help the United States can provide, 
ended their meetings on Sunday and departed for Baku from 
Van.  Derse told the press before departure that they were 
briefed by the local officials in both provinces on the 
efforts to contain the disease.  Derse said that bird flu 
was a global problem and it needed a global solution. She 
praised Turkey's transparency and thanked Turkish officials 
for their cooperation.  Other team members said they were 
impressed by the professional steps and methods taken by 
Turkey when compared to other countries which have the 
disease.  On Sunday, the US team visited the university 
hospital in Van where four children had died of the deadly 
H5N1 strain of bird flu.  The chief physician of the 
hospital said they asked the US team to help to establish a 
modern laboratory in the region.  Meanwhile, "Zaman" reports 
Thursday that Turkey's efforts to combat bird flu are 
yielding results.  Tour operators said that if tourist 
reservations continue at the present pace, Turkey will 
achieve its 2006 targets. 
 
Military Source: AKP Government Slow in Fighting Separatism: 
An unidentified senior Turkish military source told 
"Radikal" that the military does not mind who becomes the 
next president, provided he respects the constitution.  The 
source said the ruling AK Party government is too slow in 
fighting separatism, and needs to formulate a clear policy. 
 
ANKARA 00000297  004 OF 005 
 
 
'Like many other circles in Turkey, the military is 
concerned about the favoritism shown for, for example, the 
graduates of theology high-schools.  We convey to the 
government our views through legal channels.  The 
possibility of a military takeover in Turkey is out of the 
question,' the source said. 
 
Erdogan to Attend World Economic Forum Meetings in Davos: 
Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan will travel to Davos, 
Switzerland on Thursday to attend the World Economic Forum 
meetings.  Erdogan will be received by the Swiss, Pakistani, 
Afghani, and Georgian presidents, meet with Kofi Annan and 
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, and also 
participate in a meeting on 'enlarging the borders of 
Europe' during his stay in Davos, papers report. 
 
Mixed Prayer Draws Islamic Reformation Comments in Turkey: 
Turkish papers reported earlier this week that the wife of 
Cuneyd Zapsu, a close advisor to PM Erdogan, has been 
attending a mosque where women do not cover their heads and 
pray side-by-side with men.  Left-leaning "Cumhuriyet," and 
mainstream dailies describe the reformist Islam group as a 
form of 'Islamic Calvinism.'  "Sabah" reports that the 
movement has its roots in the US.  The fundamentalist daily 
"Vakit" speculates that this could be an attempt by the US 
to 'degenerate' Islam in Turkey.  "Hurriyet" says under the 
headline 'Protestant Turks' that a group of people in 
central Turkey launched a reform movement in Islam like the 
16th century reformation movement in Christianity. 
"Cumhuriyet" and some other mainstream papers claim that 
'mixed prayer' is causing trouble in the ruling AK Party. 
The AKP is split over whether women should be allowed to 
pray alongside men in mosques without headscarves, say 
papers. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Palestine Elections; Iran 
 
"A Difficult Election" 
Sami Kohen commented in the mainstream "Milliyet"  (1/25): 
"This time the Palestinian elections have a potential to 
create an impact on both the fate of the Palestinian people 
and the future of Israel-Palestine peace.  The popular 
support evident in election results for Hamas, which is 
known for its attacks against Israel and radical Islamist 
tendencies, stemmed from its social programs to end 
unemployment and poverty.  This approach helped Hamas gain 
political support.  Some people who voted in favor of Hamas 
and against Al Fatah are not bothered with the radical 
religious rhetoric and are more concerned with the 
settlement of social and economic problems.  If Hamas finds 
itself as a coalition partner with Al Fatah, it will have to 
choose between politics and violence." 
 
"Iran and Beyond" 
Namik Kemal Zeybek argued in the conservative "Tercuman" 
(1/26): "The main reason Iran has become a target stems from 
its resistance against being a part of the global 
capitalistic system.  Iran continues to resist allowing its 
natural resources to fall into the hands of global markets. 
The ongoing nuclear power dispute is just a pretext for 
international players to manipulate Turkish opinion about 
the activities against Iran.  Unfortunately these players 
are backed by influential media and other figures in Turkey. 
On the issue of nuclear weapons, the rhetoric against Iran 
does not reflect the actual truth as there is no proof that 
Iran is going to produce nuclear weapons.  A State 
Department spokesman recently said that he believes Turkey 
is worried about Iran's nuclear weapons program.  This is 
 
ANKARA 00000297  005 OF 005 
 
 
not the first time we have read or heard similar rhetoric 
against Iran.  The question to ask is:  Why was there no 
objection when Israel possessed nuclear weapons?  Who 
actually used its nuclear power against Japan?  Who is 
actually becoming more dangerous?" 
 
"Iran's Position" 
Yilmaz Oztuna wrote in the conservative-nationalist 
"Turkiye" (1/26):  "Iran wants to be a leading country in 
the Middle East and believes that a leading country should 
have the atomic bomb.  The US insists on being the corrector 
of mistakes, as well as a leader, organizer, fighter against 
terrorism, and the distributor for the Middle Eastern oil 
resources.  The US supports its plan by establishing strong 
military bases.  With its new regime, Iran doesn't present a 
model for the Middle East.  Other than Turkey, achieving 
democracy in this region may not be impossible, but it is 
definitely a slowly developing process.  Moreover, neither 
Turkey which controlled this region for centuries, nor Egypt 
which stands for the Arab leadership position, would agree 
with Iran's superiority.  Iran, in order to eliminate 
isolation, may try to spread its ideology to Turkey, 
Lebanon, Palestine, Southern Iraq, the Caucasus, the Turkic 
Republics and to the Balkans.  An Iranian Foreign Ministry 
spokesman announced a few days ago that Iran is ready to 
share its nuclear power with all Islamic countries and with 
the Middle East.  However, there isn't a single Muslim 
country ready to accept such an offer from Iran.  They will 
all kindly say "no" to this." 
 
WILSON