06ANKARA5940
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Oct 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0378
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #5940/01 2891408
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161408Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9399
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7521
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1465
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1228
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5510
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5227
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1889
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005940 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2006 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Parliament to Discuss France's Adoption of Armenian 
'Genocide' Bill 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others reported over the weekend and today that French President 
Jacques Chirac had called him to 'apologize' for the Armenian 
genocide voting, pledging help in heading off the bill. 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul told the press before flying to 
Luxembourg on Sunday to participate in the Turkey-EU Troika meeting 
that the whole international community and the EU circles criticized 
the bill.  'France is discredited; I hope French politicians will 
become aware of this fact,' said Gul.  He said the Turkish 
parliament would discuss in a special meeting Tuesday the measures 
to be taken following the adoption of the bill.  Gul said Turkey 
would carry the issue to the European Court of Human Rights when the 
French bill enters into effect. 
 
Papers expect the parliament's tomorrow meeting to publish a 
statement accusing France of double standards by defending freedom 
of expression while outlawing free speech on the Armenian issue. 
The main opposition CHP deputy chairman Onur Oymen said Turkey had 
given a weak response to the adoption of the bill in France. 
Turkish Nobel laureate Orhan Pamuk said over the weekend after 
receiving the prestigious literary prize that France's adoption of a 
draft prohibiting the denial of the Armenian genocide went against 
free speech.  'Freedom of expression is a French discovery and this 
law is contrary to the culture of freedom of expression,' Pamuk said 
from New York.  Most of the newspapers over the weekend praised 
Pamuk for winning Nobel but several others questioned whether the 
decision by the Swedish academy was politically motivated. 
 
Semih Idiz observed in the mainstream Milliyet (10/16):  "There is a 
general consensus about French Parliament's bill on Armenian 
genocide is a stupid move which casts a serious blow against the 
freedom of expression.  There is even a sheer double standard on the 
genocide stance because the very same France, last year was 
suggesting to let the historians discuss 'the French genocide 
against Algeria' when Algerian government claimed the existence of a 
genocide.   In any case, this issue does not seem to disappear 
regardless of assurances from French President Chirac.  Let's not 
forget that the two candidates for presidential elections in France 
next year, Sarkozy and Royal, are supportive of the genocide bill. 
Given the circumstances, there is only one rational way for Turkey 
to give a proper response to France which is expansion of freedom of 
expression.  We should be able to demonstrate that while criticizing 
the wrong thing in France, we have the right thing here in Turkey. 
That will be best way of reprising France. " 
 
Gul to Join Turkey-EU Troika Talks in Luxembourg 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul will take part in the EU Troika 
foreign ministers' gathering in Luxembourg on Monday to discuss 
EU-Turkey issues prior to the November 8 release of the progress 
report on Turkey.  On a question concerning Article 301 of the 
Turkish Penal Code, Gul said it would be wrong to say that people 
can not express their views in Turkey.  'Turkey is aware of its 
deficiencies of which we are trying to eliminate because our people 
deserve it,' Gul emphasized.  Responding to a question about EU term 
president Finland's Cyprus proposal, Gul said Turkey welcomed all 
goodwill efforts, and would cooperate in all constructive 
initiatives.  'It should not be forgotten that the island has two 
sides, and Turkey is not a direct party of the problem.  For 
progress, everybody should talk to Turkish Cypriots,' Gul stressed. 
Meanwhile, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said 
the EU was worried over the slow pace of reforms in Turkey, noting 
that Turkey's EU accession would take 15 to 20 years. 
 
On the other hand, Radikal and Zaman cite the Greek Cypriot daily 
Fileleftheros as claiming the US was working on plans for a 
 
ANKARA 00005940  002 OF 003 
 
 
'gradual' transfer of the ghost city of Maras (Varosha) to the Greek 
Cypriots, quoting unidentified sources.  Fileleftheros says DAS Matt 
Bryza explained the plan to the attendants to a dinner held the 
Greek Ambassador in Washington, Aleksandros Mallias. 
 
Al-Maliki's Turkey Visit Postponed 
Turkish televisions reported early Monday that the Iraqi Prime 
Minister Nuri Al-Maliki's visit to Ankara scheduled for today has 
been cancelled due to a sandstorm.  The visit will be held in 
November.  If the visit had not been put off, papers were expecting 
the Turks to urge al-Maliki to crack down on the PKK camps in Mount 
Kandil as well as arrest and handover some 150 PKK militants moving 
freely in northern Iraq.  Cumhuriyet claims al-Maliki had caused 
strain before his Turkey visit by saying that Kirkuk was Iraq's own 
problem, warning other countries against meddling in the issue. 
Dailies expect Ankara to continue pressing for a suspension of the 
upcoming census and referendum on Kirkuk next year. 
 
Kamuran Ozbir commented in the nationalist Ortadogu (10/16): 
"According to credible Western press sources, such as British The 
Times, Iraq is heading toward a division.  And this is going to be 
the primary suggestion to the US administration for the future of 
Iraq in an upcoming report by US Congressional Commission on Iraq. 
The issuanceof the report coincides with the period where atacks 
against American soldiers in Iraq reachd to a peak level.  The US 
Congressional Commission, chaired by former Secretary of State James 
Baker, is likely to suggest a new model for Iraq under three 
autonomous regions -Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds- and lay out this plan 
as the most reasonable option for the country's future.  This does 
not necessarily end up with an actual division of Iraq under three 
different entities, but it implies more governing role to the 
autonomous regions and limits Baghdad's authority only with foreign 
policy, border control and control of oil reserves.  Considering the 
closeness of James Baker to President Bush, the upcoming report on 
Iraq looks like to have a serious impact on Washington." 
 
 
TGS Chief Buyukanit's Reaction to DYP Leader Agar's Comments on the 
PKK 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Vatan and weekend papers:  The Chief of General 
Staff over the weekend harshly criticized the leader of the True 
Path Party (DYP) for his remarks on the PKK.  General Buyukanit 
characterized Agar's call for 'politics on the plains rather than 
weapons in the mountains', as a call for general amnesty and said "I 
strongly condemn it, how would it be possible for terrorists to get 
involved in politics?" Agar, in return, stressed that his call for 
"politics on the plain" was an approach aimed at preventing young 
people from going up into the mountains any more.   Sabah reports 
that, on his way to Luxembourg, FM Gul extended support to Agar by 
saying "Agar is an experienced politician on the security issues, 
therefore, his comments should be evaluated carefully."  Vatan 
reports that ANAP (Motherland Party) Leader Erkan Mumcu said 
"Politicians should be criticized by the politicians only, not by 
the military.  It is not right for the military and politicians to 
enter into polemics.  I don't agree with Agar on his comments but I 
support him for commenting on the issue." 
 
 
TV News: 
(NTV, 7.00 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish frigate Gaziantep with 19 officers and 203 
non-commissioned officers and privates on board, has joined the 
international naval force patrolling the coast off Lebanon.  Turkish 
ground troops will leave the Mersin port on the Mediterranean for 
Lebanon on October 19. 
 
- Armenian Foreign Minister Vartan Oskanyan said he will look to the 
 
ANKARA 00005940  003 OF 003 
 
 
future and seek a normalization of ties with Turkey. 
 
International News 
 
- According to the British Times, Iraq's fledgling democracy is 
being challenged by calls for the replacement of the existing 
government with a group of five strongmen who would impose martial 
law and dissolve the parliament. 
 
- The UN Security Council voted over the weekend unanimously on 
sanctions against North Korea in response to its claimed nuclear 
tests. 
 
- A suicide attacker exploded a powerful car bomb in the capital 
Kabul, wounding at least three people. 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON