06ANKARA2310
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5360
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2310/01 1161356
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261356Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5125
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7132
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0383
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0677
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5230
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4944
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1558
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002310 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 26, 2006 
 
 
Secretary Rice Visit Special Edition 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HEADLINES 
 
Milliyet (mainstream): "Rice Renewed Trust" 
During Secretary Rice's critical visit, a decision was made 
to prepare a document on strategic vision and to further 
strengthen relations between the US and Turkey.  Rice said 
the document envisions more frequent consultations and 
intensification of effort in areas of common interest.  The 
Turkish side gave a clear message to Secretary Rice about 
the need for concrete action on the PKK.  Rice emphasized 
the need for Iraqis to make an effort, hinting that the US 
does not look favorably on a possible cross-border operation 
by Turkey.  Rice also said that the US has no better ally or 
stronger supporter in efforts to bring about a democratic 
Middle East and that Turkey serves as an example that Islam 
and democracy can co-exist.  On Cyprus, the Secretary said 
that the US will continue to do what it can to break the 
isolation of te Turkish Cypriots and that Greek Cypriots 
shuld also be helpful on this and on Turkey's E 
membership. She expressed strong support forTurkey's EU 
process. 
 
Hurriyet (mainstream): "A Promise to Redouble the Effort" 
Turkish counterparts gave Secretary Rice a tough message on 
the PKK: intelligence sharing is not enough -- PKK terrorism 
must end.  Rice promised to redouble efforts and reactivate 
the trilateral process with Iraq, the coalition and Turkey. 
On the PKK presence in northern Iraq, Rice said that borders 
need to be as secure as possible, that Iraqi territory 
should not be used as a place to launch terrorism, and that 
US assistance on PKK issue will continue, but care must be 
taken not to harm stability in Iraq. 
 
Vatan (mainstream): "After 3 Years, We are Once Again 
Strategic Partners," "Redoubling of Efforts on the PKK" 
The US and Turkey will prepare a document on their strategic 
vision as a way to overcome the March 1, 2003, Turkish 
parliament vote against cooperation in the war in Iraq and 
the July 4, 2003, Suleymaniye incident, in which Turkish 
special forces in northern Iraq were detained by US troops. 
During talks, FM Gul stressed that the PKK presence in Iraq 
is harming Turkey, but was clear that Turkey would not carry 
out a cross-border operation. 
 
Yeni Safak (Islamist-oriented):  "A New Vision for 
Partnership" 
The future of Turkish-American relations is being redrawn as 
the two countries prepare a new strategic vision document. 
During talks, Secretary Rice promised to rejuvenate the 
three-way talks, stressing that the US was the first country 
to call PKK terrorists.  FM Gul said Iran needs to respond 
to concerns of the international community and be more 
transparent, but urged that Iran not become another Iraq. 
On aid to Palestine, PM Erdogan urged that the US not 
penalize the Palestinians for their democratic choice.  Rice 
said that the US is continuing humanitarian assistance.  On 
Cyprus, PM Erdogan stressed the need for positive movement 
and Rice agreed that Turkish Cypriots had done the right 
thing. 
 
Sabah (mainstream): "A New Vision with the US" 
The "Strategic Vision" to be prepared by the two countries 
will include economic cooperation, a calendar for political- 
military consultations, a coordination mechanism on Iraq, 
and specific targets for the partnership.  On Iran, 
Secretary Rice raised the possibility of trade sanctions 
 
SIPDIS 
against Iran with FM Gul, and said she expected Turkey's 
support if sanctions are imposed.  FM Gul said Turkey was 
 
ANKARA 00002310  002 OF 004 
 
 
not very favorable toward sanctions, and that he hoped the 
situation could be resolved through diplomacy. He assured 
the Secretary that the Turks would give the right messages 
to Larijani during an expected meeting in Ankara next week. 
Rice also asked that Erdogan give the right message to 
Ahmedinejad if he meets with him in Baku. 
 
Radikal (liberal):  "New Page in US-Turkey Relations," "No 
Promise to Rice" 
Among the many issues on the table, the PKK & Iran rose to 
the top. Secretary Rice requested Turkey support the 
collation against Iran and Turkey replied that without a UN 
decision they would not participate. 
 
Other Headlines: 
NTV (all-news TV): "US-Turkey Strategic Vision Document to 
be Prepared" 
Zaman (Islamist-oriented): "US-Turkey Strategic Vision Era" 
Cumhuriyet (left-leaning): "AK Party Gives in to Rice; 
Strategic Vision Document will Restrict Turkey" 
Turkiye (nationalist, mainstream): "US Should Take Concrete 
Steps" 
Aksam (tabloid): "A Vision to Repair Damaged Relations" 
 
COMMENTARY 
 
Abdulhamit Bilici, Zaman:  "Has America Turned its Back on 
the AK Party?" 
"The people in this country who are bothered by democracy 
and economic stability are very skilled.  One of their 
favorite refrains is that the government has lost the 
confidence of the West.  They think 'if only their ties with 
the US could be broken, then we could get rid of them.'  But 
fortunately, every time these dark circles are about to 
celebrate, developments seem to move in the other direction. 
US Secretary of State Rice came to Ankara yesterday.  It is 
true that the Hamas issue has created some turbulence in the 
relationship, in the same way that the PKK haven in Iraq has 
become a serious problem.  But relations are not at a point 
that would make those who are looking for partners in the 
West for their illegitimate plans rub their hands together 
with glee.  Just as there is not only one Turkey, there is 
not one, single America.  There are those in Washington who 
from the very beginning have not been able to make their 
peace with the AKP.  There may be others who joined that 
group following the disappointment of the March 1 vote.  But 
Rice's messages in Ankara show that this approach does not 
reflect the views of the Administration.  Rice talked about 
the importance of Turkey's EU process and praised the 
democratic evolution that has been carried out here.  These 
statements show that the US Administration has not turned 
its back on Turkey or the AKP.  If ties are to be broken, it 
would mean the AKP would have to turn its back on the United 
States.  According to AKP foreign policy leaders, such a 
thing is unthinkable.  Even though they may disagree with 
some policies of the Bush Administration, they are realistic 
enough to see the US as a kind of insurance against threats 
that may arise in Eurasia." 
 
Fikret Bila, Milliyet:  "Turkish-American Relations from 
Ankara's Perspective" 
"According to Foreign Ministry sources, the message to 
Secretary Rice from Gul and Erdogan was essentially the 
 
SIPDIS 
same: the need to strengthen mutual trust, which is 
perceived to have been damaged, and to concentrate on common 
goals.  The Turkish side stressed that the US-Turkish 
relationship should not be reduced to just one or two 
issues, but must be comprehensive and include energy, 
regional cooperation, Central Asia, the Caucasus, and the 
Balkans.  The Turks told Rice that the relationship should 
 
ANKARA 00002310  003 OF 004 
 
 
not be defined by differences over Hamas or the PKK.  This 
approach was shared by Secretary Rice, and the two sides 
announced their intention to draft a document outlining 
their strategic vision.  Ankara expressed to Rice once again 
Turkey's expectations on the PKK, repeating that the 
establishment of a blatant PKK presence in northern Iraq and 
the infiltration of PKK militants into Turkey must be 
prevented, and that operational cooperation against the PKK 
must remain an option.  On Iraq, the Turks made clear their 
desire for a broad-based government of national unity, and 
cautioned that the Kurdish regional authority should not be 
allowed to protect the PKK.  They drew attention to efforts 
to create a fait accompli in Kirkuk, and emphazised that 
Iraq's natural resources must be shared by all Iraqis.  On 
Iran, the Turks made clear to Rice that Turkey would not 
fall out of step with the international community, but said 
that every last effort should be made to resolve the issue 
diplomatically.  What is important for Turkey is that the 
international community act together on the Iran issue.  If 
that happens, Ankara will comply with international 
decisions.  Turkey does not seek to mediate with Iran, but 
is trying to ensure that Iran gets the right message from a 
country it trusts.  On Cyprus, the Turkish side expressed 
its hope that the US will do more to lift the isolation of 
the Turkish Cypriots.  The Turks said they recognize the 
importance of US support in the EU process, and in that 
context expect that the United States will be supportive of 
Ankara's legitimate expectations on Cyprus." 
 
Yalcin Dogan, Hurriyet: "Ice Skating with Rice" 
"The US Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice, is known to 
get up at 4 am and go to the gym.  She also ice skates and 
plays the piano.  She showed Ankara how good an ice skater 
she is despite the warm messages given outside.  Turkish- 
U.S. relations are not going well.  The US was very 
disturbed with the Valley of the Wolves, Iraq film and 
Hamas' Ankara visit.  The impression that Rice left in 
Ankara is that the US is determined to hit Iran but the time 
of this is still uncertain.  The Secretary did not request 
anything from Turkey on Iran yesterday and our side was 
relieved.  There are other options like northern Iraq, 
Afghanistan and the Diego Garcia Base for a possible attack 
on Iran but Turkey will eventually be affected by such an 
attack.  When Turkey mentioned the PKK to Rice, she launched 
into a long fairy tale.  She said that there is stability in 
northern Iraq now and it would be a mistake to damage that 
stability through a military intervention.  This means that 
the PKK will continue its presence there." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul, Yeni Safak: "Iran, Turkey and United 
Kurdistan" 
"The visit of US Secretary of State will not provide 
anything new for Turkey's expectations regarding the PKK. 
We will end up being asked to believe the 'intelligence- 
sharing' rhetoric accompanied by the usual propaganda about 
the strength of Turkish-American ties.  The US undoubtedly 
will promise Ankara to take action against the PKK as soon 
as Iraq becomes a stable country.  The truth is that Iraq 
will never be stable again, nor will a 'State of Iraq' exist 
in the future.  Iraq is going through a process of division 
and it is at a point of no return.  Turkey should act 
together with Iran and Syria on the Iraq issue.  Civil war 
in Iraq will continue until the US/UK intervention reaches 
its goals.  We will have to deal with an Iraq dragged into a 
series of ethnic or religious sectarian fights.  This is the 
way the US wants to see it.  Iran is the real agenda for 
Rice's visit.  The war plan against Iran is underway and the 
US is in the search of support from regional powers." 
 
Cengiz Candar, Bugun: "The Rice Visit" 
 
ANKARA 00002310  004 OF 004 
 
 
"Secretary Rice made some important comments addressing 
Turkey's concern regarding the PKK's existence in northern 
Iraq even before she arrived in Ankara.  Underscoring the 
ongoing efforts to prevent Iraq from turning to a shelter 
for any terrorist groups, she was mentioning the importance 
of the issue for Turkey.  With Turkish troops positioned in 
the border area, Rice has given two messages through her 
comments about the PKK and the future of Iraq.  The first 
message was a green light provided for Ankara to take any 
necessary action against the PKK within Turkish borders, 
while she gave another message to Baghdad when she asked the 
new Iraqi government to move forward on the PKK issue.  Why 
is the US providing such clear support?  The US wants to get 
Turkey on its side on the Iran issue and simply does not 
want to see Turkey become like Finland during the cold war 
era." 
 
Hasan Cemal, Milliyet: "Rice's Visit" 
"By coming to Ankara, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
showed that our countries' relations are pretty good.  Since 
the end of the Second World War or the Cold War, the Turkish- 
US alliance has never lost its strategic importance.  There 
have been ups and downs in the relations, or even crises. 
Yet, a balance was found every time and the two countries 
continued on their common path.  The two countries cannot 
ignore one another but this does not mean that there are no 
differences of interest between Turkey and the US.  It would 
be impossible for them to view every issue through the same 
lens.  It is without doubt that both sides, particularly the 
US as the only superpower, will want to attract each other 
into their own area of play." 
 
Sami Kohen, Milliyet: "While Waiting for a New Government in 
Iraq." 
"Four months after the elections in Iraq, there is finally a 
chance for a new government.  The chances of Jawad al-Maliki 
to form a wide-based coalition seem much higher than that of 
the temporary Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaferi.  The fact 
that the Iraqi Parliament and the President assigned al- 
Maliki to the prime ministry proves that the rather 
disparate Iraqi society trusts him.  Al-Maliki now has one 
month to form a broad-based government.  The U.S. Secretary 
of State, Condoleezza Rice, who came to Turkey yesterday, 
told the traveling US press that the certain militia groups 
in Iraq can only be de-activated after the forming of a new 
government and she included the PKK in that group as well. 
In other words, Rice left the responsibility of erasing the 
PKK presence from northern Iraq to the Iraqis and the new 
government there.  A number of questions come to mind.  How 
long will it take for the al-Maliki government to be formed? 
How much importance will they give to the fight against the 
PKK when they have their own priorities?  Will a broad-based 
government that will also include Kurdish elements be able 
to make such a decision?  When Rice passed the ball to al- 
Maliki, did she seek answers to these questions?" 
 
 Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
  http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON