06ANKARA1434
TURKEY 2005 END USE MONITORING REPORT
Mon Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

200934Z Mar 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AFIN SNAR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY 2005 END USE MONITORING REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 222564 
 
-------- 
Overview 
-------- 
 
¶1.  Since 1986, the International Narcotics Crime and 
Control (INCC) program has provided approximately 5,500 
units of equipment and training, valued at over USD 5.7 
million, to five Turkish agencies with responsibility 
for Turkey's anti-narcotics programs: the Turkish Grain 
Board (TMO), Turkish National Police (TNP), Jandarma, 
Customs, and the Amatem drug addiction treatment 
facility.  During calendar year 2005, training and 
equipment valued at USD 60,384 was provided. 
Generally, the equipment provided since 1986 can be 
assigned to the following categories: training, 
communication, surveillance, and poppy processing. 
However, because of the number and types of equipment 
provided, to report by type of resource rather than by 
project, as requested in reftel, is not practicable. 
(For example, while computers have been provided to all 
five agencies, they serve completely different 
functions in each agency.) 
 
¶2.  Similarly, because equipment has been assigned to 
scores of locations throughout the country, physical 
inspection of any but a very small portion is a 
practical impossibility.  Thus, Post relies upon 
periodic meetings with supervisory personnel in each 
recipient agency to monitor use.  (It appears that all 
agencies maintain up-to-date physical inventories.) 
Where feasible, Post does, in connection with such 
meetings, also physically inspect some equipment. 
Physical inspections were carried out at TNP Istanbul 
and at Amatem in calendar year 2005.  In 2006, Post 
plans to inspect some equipment provided to the TMO. 
 
¶3.  Because of Turkey's refusal to accept Leahy 
Amendment language contained in the year 2000 Letter of 
Agreement, the INCC program has been winding down. 
After funding a DEA-led Jetway Drug Interdiction School 
seminar in Istanbul in 2005, Post is left with a total 
of USD 57,719 remaining INL funds.  Our local partners 
have made many requests for additional training and 
equipment and believe resumption of the program will be 
of great value to Turkey's anti-narcotics efforts. 
 
------------------- 
Turkish Grain Board 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  Starting in 1992 and continuing through 2001, the 
INCC program provided TMO with equipment and training 
valued at over USD 900,000.  All of this equipment is 
still being used.  No new items were delivered in 2005. 
We plan to conduct a physical inspection of donated 
items in spring 2006.  The items are located in the 
town of Afyon, a three-hour drive from Ankara. 
 
----------------------- 
Turkish National Police 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  Starting in 1986 and continuing through 2004, the 
INCC program provided TNP with equipment and training 
valued at over USD 1.2 million.  In March 2005, INCC 
funded the Jetway Airport Interdiction Seminar at 
Istanbul's Ataturk International Airport for TNP and 
Customs officials.  The 30 participants received 
training in identifying drug couriers and initiating 
and developing airport investigations.  This program, 
which cost approximately USD 60,400, strengthened DEA 
Turkey's already excellent relationship with the TNP. 
 
¶6.  We met with Erol Keskinkilic, chief of the 
Technical Unit at TNP Ankara.  He began the meeting by 
mentioning that the INCC program was no longer active 
because of the addition of Leahy Amendment language to 
the Letter of Agreement.  Keskinkilic reported that the 
vast majority of the items donated under the INCC 
program are outdated and no longer used.  He told us 
that TNP Ankara still uses the donated GPS equipment, 
camera lenses, siren systems, and hand-held radios in 
its operations. 
 
¶7.  We also met with Ramazan Emekli, deputy chief of 
the Narcotics Division at TNP Istanbul.  According to 
Emekli, the fiberscopes provided under the INCC program 
in 2003 have been the most useful.  The vast majority 
of the technical equipment provided to the TNP in the 
last ten years has reached the end of its useful life. 
Emekli reported that aside from the fiberscopes, the 
INCC-donated equipment is no longer in use and is in 
the TNP's storage warehouse.  He told us that digital 
recording devices, microphones, wire transmitters, and 
headphones would be very useful for their search and 
surveillance operations. 
 
-------- 
Jandarma 
-------- 
 
¶8.  Starting in 1988 (when the INCC program was revived 
for the Jandarma) and continuing through 2004, the INCC 
program delivered to Jandarma training and equipment 
valued at over USD 81,390.  We met with Cengiz 
Yildirim, head of the Smuggling and Organized Crimes 
division, who told us that the Jandarma still use the 
digital video cameras and night vision goggles that the 
INCC program provided.  He reiterated that, if in the 
future the program were revived, the Jandarma would 
benefit from training rather than equipment, as the 
INCC-funded equipment often must be purchased in the 
U.S. and does not resemble local equipment, making 
covert operations difficult. 
 
------- 
Customs 
------- 
 
¶9.  Starting in 1994 and continuing through 2002, the 
INCC program delivered to Customs equipment valued at 
USD 562,000.  We met with Ender Gurleyik, Head of 
Department, Undersecretariat of Customs.  From 1999 
through 2004, the INCC program provided English 
language instruction to customs officials to enable law 
enforcement officers to follow international 
developments more closely and cooperate better with 
international counterparts if they spoke English. 
These courses were terminated in January 2005 due to 
lack of funding.  Gurleyik stressed that if the INCC 
program were to be revitalized in the future, Customs 
would greatly benefit from the resumption of English 
language courses. 
 
------ 
Amatem 
------ 
 
¶10.  Amatem is a state-sponsored drug rehabilitation 
center with six branches throughout Turkey.  Starting 
in 1994 and continuing through 2003, the INCC program 
delivered to Amatem computer and communications 
equipment valued at USD 86,000.  We met with Dr. Duran 
Cakmak, the Istanbul clinic chief, to discuss the 
program and tour the facility.  Cakmak said that all of 
the donated equipment is still being used for patient 
registration and rehabilitation and to manage a 24-hour 
hotline.  He noted that future funding could be used 
for research projects and to replace the donated 
equipment, as much of it is reaching the end of its 
useful life. 
 
Wilson