06ANKARA3544
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0160
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #3544/01 1661252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151252Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6605
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7275
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0807
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0876
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5338
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5036
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1654
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JUNE 15, 2006 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
MFA Denies Turkey Helped CIA Rendition Flights 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman and others:  Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Namik Tan said yesterday at a 
weekly press briefing that "Turkey has never played a role" in the 
covert transfer of terrorism suspects to third countries or US-run 
detention centers, in response to a Council of Europe report listing 
Turkey among the European countries that helped the US in rendition 
flights.  Last week's report by Swiss parliamentarian Dick Marty 
finding a "spider's web" of bases around the world used by the US 
for "extraordinary rendition," held Turkey responsible along with14 
European countries for violations of the rights of specific persons. 
 London-based Amnesty International (AI) also said Turkey, along 
with Britain, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Macedonia and Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, was implicated in six rendition cases.  Tan recalled 
that in an interview with Turkey's semi-official Anatolian News 
Agency in December, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul had strongly 
denied reports that terror suspects were brought to Istanbul's 
Sabiha Gokcen airport and interrogated by foreign officials.  Tan 
also said it was out of the question that CIA planes might have used 
Incirlik Airbase in south Turkey during the transfer of suspects, 
without notifying the Turkish government. 
 
Ambiguity over a Possible Gul Visit to Iran 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman and others:  At a weekly 
press conference on Wednesday, Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) 
Spokesman Namik Tan denied work was underway to schedule a visit by 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul to Tehran.  "However," Tan added, "in 
the coming days, if it is considered necessary, then such a visit 
would be very natural."  Tan reminded the press that Turkey was in 
close contact with the relevant parties, but underlined that 
Ankara's efforts should be considered as something "less than 
intermediation."  On Tuesday, Hurriyet had claimed that Gul could 
stop over in Tehran on his way back from trips to Azerbaijan and 
Kazakhstan that will kick off over the weekend.  The paper said when 
in Iran, Gul would meet with Iran's spiritual leader Ayatollah Ali 
Khamenei.  "If it will serve to achieve a result, needless to say I 
will go, but we haven't made a decision yet," Gul was quoted as 
saying. 
 
Erdogan to Visit Cyprus in July 
Bugun, Yeni Safak:  Prime Minister Erdogan is planning to pay a 
visit to Cyprus on July 20 (32nd anniversary of Turkish Military 
invasion of the island) for Peace and Freedom celebrations.  While 
he is on the Island, Erdogan will urge the world for a concrete 
solution. 
 
Turkey, US Stress Cooperation in Central Asia, Afghanistan 
Cumhuriyet reports at a meeting in Ankara yesterday, Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul and US Assistant Secretary of State Richard 
Boucher underlined ongoing cooperation and common interests in 
Central Asia and Afghanistan.  Boucher praised Turkey's contribution 
to the reconstruction of Afghanistan and stressed that the 
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline to carry Caspian oil to western 
markets was an opportunity for the Central Asian countries.  Boucher 
said the BTC route should also carry natural gas, and that they were 
working for more oil to be pumped into the BTC to Turkey. 
 
Pew Survey: Only 12 Percent of Turks Support Global War on Terror 
All papers carry a PEW poll carried out in 14 countries including 
Turkey, which shows America's global image has again slipped with 
support for the war on terror declining even among US allies.  The 
survey shows that Turkey has the most negative attitudes toward the 
US with only 12 percent of Turks favorable.  It says that Europeans 
and Turks view the situation in Iraq as a bigger threat to world 
peace than Iran's nuclear activities.  Only three percent of Turks 
hold a favorable view of President Bush, the lowest among all the 
countries surveyed.  Iranian President Ahmedinejad has the support 
of 25 percent.  More than three-quarters of Turks, 77 percent, 
 
ANKARA 00003544  002 OF 003 
 
 
oppose the US-led war on terror, up from 56 percent in 2004.  The 
Pew survey finds that the US-led war on terror draws majority 
support in just two countries, India and Russia. 
 
US Marine Video Clip Scandal 
Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal say that following the Haditha killings, 
another scandal broke out when a video clip posted on the Internet 
showing a US Marine singing a song called "Hadji Girl," to a 
cheering crowd. The song is about massacring a Muslim family when 
their daughter resisted him with a gun.  The alleged singer, 
Corporal Joshua Belile, said in the face of reactions that the song 
was a joke, and apologized to the Muslims in the US.  The American 
Islamic Relations Council demanded an investigation. 
 
FM Gul Praises Turkish Military Support in EU Process 
Radikal:  Columnist Murat Yetkin reports that Foreign Minister Gul 
has said that the government received immense support from the 
Turkish military in the EU process.  Gul was quoted as saying that 
"implementing EU harmonization reforms would be impossible without 
the military's support.  The Military's strategic vision played an 
important role in this process."  Gul noted that the change in 
Turkey's Cyprus policy would not be possible without the support of 
the military.   Turkish diplomats coordinated with the military at 
every point to determine Turkey's Cyprus policy.  Gul stressed that 
it would be wrong to attribute the military's support only to Chief 
of General Staff Hilmi Ozkok, because the support had come from the 
military as an institution.  Gul added that the support extended by 
the military to the government in the EU membership process was much 
stronger than the support extended by some civilian organizations. 
 
 
Editorial Comment on Palestine 
Ertugrul Ozkok commented in mass appeal Hurriyet: "We kept hearing 
the same rhetoric following the election results in Palestine: Hamas 
is the elected representative of the Palestinian people.  Recent 
developments in Palestine have proved just the opposite.  By making 
a decision to ask the people about recognition of Israel, 
Palestinian President Abbas took a very realistic and important step 
toward ending the chaos and economic strife of his people.  And at 
this point the so-called elected representatives - Hamas - are now 
standing against the idea of getting the people's opinion.  Abbas 
made a historic decision which may change the entire course of the 
Middle East.  We should wish him every success in this mission which 
will transfer the fate of peace from a terrorist organization 
directly into the hands of the people." 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 8.00 a.m. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan told the press aboard the plane returning 
home from Macedonia that the current parliament has the 
representational capability to elect the next president of Turkey, 
and that his party will nominate someone with "leadership 
characteristics" for the office. 
 
- The trial of the suspected killer of Andrea Santoro, the Italian 
priest murdered at the Santa Maria Church in the Black Sea city of 
Trabzon in February, was adjourned until 13 July.  The 16-year-old 
suspect faces life in prison. 
 
- Turkey said it was likely to seek financial compensation from 
Greece following a mid-air collision between two F-16 jetfighters on 
May 23.  Turkish Foreign Ministry said a 
report is being prepared by the authorities, and if it is in favor 
of Turkey, compensation will be demanded. 
 
- Turkish troops killed two PKK members during an operation in the 
 
ANKARA 00003544  003 OF 003 
 
 
eastern Tunceli province. 
 
- In May, Turkey's budget showed a surplus for the first time since 
1984, said Finance Minister Kemal Unakitan, stressing that the 
government is determined to maintain financial discipline, and that 
no dramatic fluctuations were expected in exchange rate. 
 
- Fitch Ratings said it may revise Turkey's credit rating downward 
if the country's economic and fiscal position deteriorates further. 
"If there are further policy slippages or negative shocks then Fitch 
may revise the outlook on Turkey's 'BB-' foreign currency and local 
currency Issuer Default ratings to stable from positive," Fitch said 
in a statement. 
 
International News 
 
- Prime Minister al-Maliki has launched a security crackdown against 
insurgents in Baghdad, but also extended an olive branch to Sunni 
rebels who want to join the political process in an effort to end 
violence. 
 
- Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki said a new international offer 
of incentives to encourage Tehran to stop uranium enrichment was 
"very positive" and would be examined seriously. 
 
- Palestinian Prime Minister Ismail Haniyah's advisor told Haaretz 
Hamas is prepared to offer a 50 or 60-year cease-fire if Israel 
withdraws to the 1967 borders. 
 
- UNSYG Annan said he was "shocked and saddened" by the latest 
Israeli missile attack into Gaza, which killed nine people and 
wounded 40. 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON