06BAGHDAD3485
AGRICULTURE PROJECT AND KOREAN VOCATIONAL TRAINING
Mon Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO5395
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3485/01 2610217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180217Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6948
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID ECON ELAB IZ
SUBJECT: AGRICULTURE PROJECT AND KOREAN VOCATIONAL TRAINING 
SITE IN ERBIL 
 
 ¶1. (U)  Summary.   MNF-I's Civil-Military Directorate and 
Econoff traveled to Erbil August 29 - 30, to visit a 
vocational instruction site operated by Korean coalition 
forces, and a honey production project supported by USAID. 
The Korean project conducted training in a wide range of 
skills.  Classes were well attended, and the training was 
thorough.  Honey production is the number one source of 
revenue for the village visited.  The USG group also received 
a briefing from the country director for the USAID contractor 
Development Alternatives, Inc. on the status of current 
projects.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U)  Staff from MNF-I's Civil-Military Operations (CMO) 
Directorate and EconOff traveled to Erbil August 29-30 to 
visit a vocational training center operated by Korean 
Coalition Forces, and a honey production agricultural 
project.  The group also met with the country director of 
USAID's contractor Development Alternatives, Inc. (DAI). 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Korean-run Training Center 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶3. (U) The vocational training center is located in the 
Korean military facility, Zaytun, and conducts classes in 
basic computer operation skills, repair and maintenance of 
automobiles, diesel motors, and air conditioners, as well as 
commercial baking and heavy machine operation.  The classes 
are eight weeks in length, and classes observed by the group 
were well attended.  The Korean military officers stated that 
the amount paid out of the Korean defense budget was 
approximately 2M USD.  (Comment:  The amount does not include 
the donated equipment such as cars, repair equipment, air 
conditioners, and excavators from well-known Korean companies 
such as Hyundai, Daewoo, and Samsung.  End Comment.)  The 
Zaytun vocational education center is the model that MNF-I is 
using to create the National Vocational Training and 
Employment program.  This program will build 11 facilities 
across Iraq and is currently in the funding stage. 
 
- - - - 
DAI 
- - - - 
¶4. (U)   The group later in the day met with the country 
director for DAI at its offices in Erbil for an update on 
various USG supported projects.  DAI's current contract is at 
its end, so its operations in Iraq are winding down.  CMO 
asked if it was possible to obtain wheat designed to grow in 
the saline soil found in Iraq.  DAI said that there are 
varieties from Syria that would work very well in Iraq's 
soil.  Econoff asked about GOI price supports for wheat and 
their effect on local production and the Iraqi market.  DAI 
said that although GOI guaranteed prices per metric ton for 
wheat are higher than world prices, the difference is almost 
entirely negated by the costs of importing the world-priced 
wheat such as high transportation and demurrage costs that, 
when added to world price for imported wheat, brought it more 
or less in line with GOI's guaranteed price. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Show Me the Honey 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶5. (U) On August 30, the group traveled to the village of 
Shaqlawa, about an hour's drive north of Erbil, to meet with 
local honey producers.  The farmers gave a tour of their 
small facility including an inspection of the hives, and a 
sample of the raw product.  The DAI staff brought along 
equipment that allows farmers to spin honey out of the 
collection boards.  The machine significantly reduces the 
labor and time needed to harvest the honey.  The farmers and 
the DAI's staff pointed out that about 300 metric tons of 
honey is produced per year in Iraq, and another 300 to 400 
metric tons is imported, so there is significant room for 
expanded development of honey production in Iraq.  The 
farmers indicated that they would benefit from more training 
centers on bee keeping and additional equipment.  Since it 
does not take much effort to keep the bees according to DAI's 
staff, bee-keeping is a good part-time job for many in the 
area.  One hive provides about 250 USD per year in income, a 
significant sum in Iraq where average yearly farm income is 
estimated to be 1500 USD.  The farm visited by the USG group 
had approximately 100 hives, so its yearly income, according 
to this estimate, is about 25,000 USD.  Honey is the number 
one income producer for the village, followed by pomegranate 
production in which the bees are used as pollinators. 
 
- - - - - - - 
Comment 
- - - - - - - 
¶6. (SBU) Comment.  The projects visited by the USG group 
presented a very good image of what can be achieved through 
 
BAGHDAD 00003485  002 OF 002 
 
 
international engagement and the hard work of Iraqi partners; 
although this region of Iraq is quite secure compared to 
other regions.  During an informal visit to Erbil, the city 
appeared to be bustling with plenty of goods in the local 
market.  Large construction projects were much in evidence 
with numerous large cranes at work in the city.  This 
admittedly anecdotal evidence does demonstrate the 
significant economic potential in Iraq, once a reasonable 
level of security is established.   End Comment. 
SPECKHARD