06BEIRUT2882
MARONITE BISHOPS CRITICIZE HIZBALLAH; HINT THAT
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO2674
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ
DE RUEHLB #2882/01 2491627
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061627Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5454
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0248
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIRUT 002882 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ELA AND L 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DORAN/SINGH/HARDING 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV LE
SUBJECT:  MARONITE BISHOPS CRITICIZE HIZBALLAH; HINT THAT 
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS WILL BE CONTESTED 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Under the leadership of Patriarch Sfeir, the Maronite Bishops' 
League convened their monthly meeting September 6 and issued a 
subtly-worded statement addressing the current socio-political 
situation.  Without mentioning him by name, the Bishops criticized 
President Lahoud, claiming that the Christians have been 
marginalized because of the "absence" of the Presidency.  They 
hinted that the next Presidential Elections should be earlier than 
the November 2007 schedule and contested, indirectly implying that 
presumed candidate Michel Aoun would not get an automatic pass from 
his religious constituency.  The statement further alleges that 
Hizballah broke the Taif Agreement when it kept its weapons 
following the 2000 liberation of South Lebanon, and stresses 
building a strong state that is the only guarantor for all citizens. 
 End Summary. 
 
National Problems 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  The statement addressed four national problems Lebanon is 
witnessing currently: absence of national involvement, individual 
selfishness, partisan selfishness, and decision making exclusivity. 
The absence of national involvement is demonstrated in the division 
among the different parties in Lebanon, each claiming that it is 
looking after the interest of Lebanon, while in reality it is 
looking after its own interest.  "This is a disease that must be 
eliminated."  Symptoms of this disease are apparent in the highest 
levels of authority.  Because of the absence of the President, the 
Presidency -- a Maronite preserve -- will eventually lose its 
effectiveness and prestige. 
 
¶3.  In addition to individual selfishness, the statement addresses 
partisan selfishness too.  Instead of cooperating with each other to 
build and reinforce the state, heads of various parties fight to 
employ their partisans in different government institutions, 
regardless of their qualifications, in order to gain loyalty and 
allegiance. 
 
Presidential Politics and Elections 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The Bishops hinted for an early, and contested, presidential 
election when they called for democratic competition between 
aspiring presidential candidates.  (Note: Normally, competition 
starts two months before the end of the presidential mandate.  The 
current, extended presidential tenure is due to end in November 
¶2007.  End Note.)  National interest is best achieved through 
democratic competition between the most credible and qualified 
individuals.  Therefore, those Maronites aspiring for the presidency 
must be committed to the rules of competition and must represent the 
national interest and not their personal interest. 
 
¶5.  The Bishops condemned Hizballah (though, again, without 
mentioning any names) for unilateral action that brought harm down 
on Lebanon.  Such actions have occurred four times in the past half 
century; the most recent occurrence was when "a Lebanese group kept 
their weapons following the liberation of South Lebanon in 2000, in 
violation of the Taef Agreement.  Then this group transformed into a 
religious, political, and military organization.  Consequently, 
there was the July 12, 2006 war."  Foreign policy decision-making 
belongs solely to the state, which represents all Lebanese. 
 
Repercussions of the War 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Regardless of the extensive damage and destruction the war has 
caused, the Lebanese faced the tragedy and aggression with 
solidarity and unity.  However, this war caused a large number of 
Lebanese to lose confidence in their country and emigrate. 
 
A Strong State in a Sovereign Territory 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  The Maronite Bishops' Council called on all Lebanese to renew 
their trust and confidence in their small country that has been 
described as the "example of democracy and co-existence." 
Furthermore, the statement supported the existence of one strong 
state and not "many states in one state," a state that should treat 
everyone equally and not differentiate between its various 
confessions.  Therefore, "we urge the state to take its full 
responsibility towards its affected citizens of South Lebanon." 
They expressed hope the GOL would fairly distribute all assistance 
and donations they receive from the numerous humanitarian 
 
BEIRUT 00002882  002 OF 002 
 
 
associations.  They added that any assistance administered by a 
political organization or party may raise suspicion. 
 
¶8.  Notably, the statement implies that the bishops do not support 
recent calls by Michel Aoun, Suleyman Frangieh, Hizballah and others 
for a government of national unity to replace the Siniora 
government.  According to the statement: "People should alternate in 
authority in accordance what free voters want.  The Lebanese should 
understand that the only savior is a strong and just state, where 
people alternate in authority." 
 
¶9.  Finally, the statement urged Lebanon to take advantage of the 
international support and to commit to the implementation of 
international resolutions which will consequently lead to the 
liberation of all its territories.  In addition, the GOL is capable 
of exercising its sovereignty over all its land through its legal 
security forces. 
 
FELTMAN