06BEIJING16514
CODEL STEVENS AND LIU QI DISCUSS BEIJING OLYMPIC
Sat Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8911
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #6514/01 2241013
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121013Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3611
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 016514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/CM, DS/P/PL-MIKE VANBUSKIRK, S/CT-TIM 
WALSH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KOLY ASEC CH
SUBJECT: CODEL STEVENS AND LIU QI DISCUSS BEIJING OLYMPIC 
PREPARATIONS 
 
 
THIS CABLE IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. PLEASE 
HANDLE ACCORDINGLY. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Codel Stevens, accompanied by the Ambassador, 
met with Beijing Party Secretary and President of the 
Beijing Organizing Committee for the 29th Olympiad 
Games (BOCOG) Liu Qi to discuss Olympic preparations, 
including security, venue construction, traffic 
management, air quality, media, youth education and 
ticket sales.  End Summary. 
 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Codel Stevens, accompanied by the Ambassador, 
visited the Olympic National Stadium (also known as 
the Bird's Nest) and met with Beijing Party Secretary 
Liu Qi on August 10.  Senator Ted Stevens noted, given 
his long relationship with the Olympic movement, that 
he is anxious to help in any way to ensure that the 
Beijing Olympic Games will be the best the world has 
ever seen.  Senator Stevens pointed to the increased 
terrorism threat during the Salt Lake City Games as a 
reason for China to remember the commitment by 
terrorists to do harm during such a high-profile 
event.  He noted security measures the U.S. Government 
had taken during the Salt Lake City Games.  Observing 
that a possible one-third of all visitors to the 
Beijing Olympics could be American, Senator Stevens 
encouraged the Chinese Government to call on the U.S. 
Government if there is anything the United States can 
do to assist China in protecting American and Chinese 
citizens and others from terrorism. 
 
Venue Construction and Usage 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Senator Patty Murray recalled the excitement 
that had surrounded China's selection as host country 
for the 2008 Summer Games and said 2008 will be a 
tremendous opportunity to show the world what China 
has to offer.  She noted that many of her constituents 
are interested in hearing about the venue sites and 
transportation plans. 
 
¶4. (U) Liu responded that this will be the first time 
for China to host an Olympic Games.  Organizers have 
visited Athens, Sydney and Salt Lake City to learn 
from previous host cities.  China has done a thorough 
study of previous games to learn from their 
accomplishments as well as avoid their mistakes.  One 
of the lessons learned was the importance of planning 
for venue utilization after the Olympiad.  Liu 
reported that there would be 37 venues constructed for 
the Games, 31 in Beijing and six in the other cities 
(Qingdao, Qinghuangdao, Shanghai, Shenyang, Tianjin 
and Hong Kong).  Of the Beijing venues, 11 are new 
constructions, including four built on university 
campuses to be used for collegiate sports after the 
Games.  The rest of the venues are temporary 
structures or refurbished sports sites.  Some of the 
venues, including the National Aquatic Center (also 
known as the Water Cube), will become public 
recreational spaces after the games, he said. 
 
Traffic Management 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) Liu said traffic jams are prevalent in Beijing, 
but the Chinese Government is preparing a traffic 
management plan to improve traffic flow during the 
Games.  Beijing's traffic problems originated with its 
initial public transportation plan and the city's 
municipal traffic system.  However, by 2008, the 
Beijing Government plans to operate 280 kilometers of 
metro lines and to implement a strategy to encourage 
public transportation.  The plan will encourage 
citizens to leave private vehicles at home during the 
work week and take public transportation during rush 
hour.  The Chinese Government has invested heavily in 
 
BEIJING 00016514  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
a master plan for Beijing transportation, including 
improvements and additional construction of highways, 
expressways and inter-city roadways.  The Beijing 
Government plans on using modern technology to improve 
use of traffic lights and other components of the 
traffic system. 
 
¶6. (U) Liu said that an additional 1,000 small 
personal vehicles are sold every day and the Beijing 
Government needs to improve car sales management, but 
Beijing already has a plan to monitor and lessen auto 
emissions.  Liu added that the International Olympic 
Committee (IOC) has confirmed his assessment that 
there will be no traffic problems during the 2008 
Games.  During the Games, there will be lanes 
restricted for Olympic use, restrictions on personal 
vehicle usage and a push to use public transportation. 
Athletes, sports officials, and tourists will have no 
transportation problems, Liu stated. 
 
Air Quality 
----------- 
 
¶7. (U) Senator Norm Coleman remarked that it would be 
a pity for Beijing's beautiful scenery to be obscured 
by air pollution and inquired what the city is doing 
to improve the environment.  Liu agreed that air 
quality and environmental protection will be critical 
to a successful Olympics.  The Beijing Government has 
prepared 12 environmental plans since 1998 to promote 
air quality improvement.  Liu suggested that 65 
percent of the days in 2006 would have good air 
quality, up one percent from 2005.  A drought in 
Mongolia and Inner Mongolia that caused more frequent 
sandstorms to blow into Beijing had prevented more 
dramatic improvement. 
 
¶8. (U) There are three parts to Beijing's air quality 
improvement plan.  The first is to increase internal 
controls over the 9000-plus construction sites in and 
around Beijing, ensuring there will be less dust 
pollution by 2008.  Second, industrial and coal 
burning enterprises are being moved outside the city, 
making room for high-tech companies, which will help 
lessen pollution.  Liu used the example of the Capital 
Iron and Steel Factory, which has an annual production 
capacity of eight million tons of steel, being moved 
from Beijing to Bohai to illustrate his point.  Third, 
Beijing is encouraging energy conservation.  In 2006, 
Beijing is expected to use 4.2 billion cubic meters of 
natural gas instead of coal, which will help reduce 
sulfur dioxide emissions.  He noted that this is ten 
times less coal than was used last year.  Beijing 
currently adheres to Europe 3 car emission standards 
and may move to Europe 4 standards by 2008. 
 
Media Participation 
------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Senator Lamar Alexander commented that the 
Olympics will be a wonderful time to show the rest of 
the world not just Beijing but all of China.  He added 
that China may be surprised by the large number of 
media-affiliated individuals who come to China to 
cover the Games.  He urged that they be allowed to 
operate freely. 
 
Public Education 
---------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Liu responded that with an estimated 500,000 
foreign spectators expected in 2008, the Olympics are 
indeed China's opportunity to showcase its long 
history, dynamic civilization and beautiful scenery. 
The Games will also be a chance to combine Eastern and 
Western culture.  While the Olympics originated in 
Greece, the Games arenow being held in Asia. 
 
¶11. (U) BOCOG has developed a youth Olympic education 
program that will involve 400 million children, 
according to Liu.  The goal of the campaign is to 
spread knowledge of the Olympic movement.  This will 
be the best popularization campaign the Olympic Games 
 
BEIJING 00016514  003 OF 003 
 
 
have ever seen, Liu predicted.  Educational materials 
have been distributed among elementary and middle 
schools.  Textbooks have also been developed for 
students from the elementary through university 
levels, he said. 
 
Ticket Distribution 
------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Liu answered Senator Mark Dayton's question 
regarding ticket distribution by stating that there 
will be 900 million tickets available, of which 700 
million will be sold and distributed through various 
countries, National Olympic Committees.  After IOC's 
approval of BOCOG's ticket distribution plan in the 
latter half of 2006, BOCOG expects to make tickets 
available to its purchase priority clients (i.e. 
Olympic sponsors and other Olympic-related 
organizations).  Ticket sales to the public will begin 
in 2007. 
 
Looking to 2008 
--------------- 
 
¶13. (U) Senator Stevens stated that the United States 
is prepared to coordinate with China on lessons 
learned from the Olympics in Atlanta and Salt Lake 
City.  He complimented Liu on China's progress on 
Olympic preparations, remarking that China's 
preparations are advanced compared to other host 
countries during the same period.  He added that 
during his discussions with the Vice Chairman and 
Secretary General of the 10th National People's 
 
SIPDIS 
Congress (NPC) Sheng Huaren, they had discussed 
lessons learned from the Athens Olympics.  During his 
discussion with NPC leadership, both sides had agreed 
to return for meetings the week before opening 
ceremonies in August 2008.  He expressed the hope that 
members of the Inter-Parliamentary Exchange would be 
in China for part of the Games. 
 
¶14. (U) Senator Thad Cochran congratulated Liu on 
China's investment to make the Olympics a success.  He 
added that the fact that China had been selected to 
host the 2008 Summer Games was a great compliment.  It 
is now up to the Chinese leadership to exercise 
responsibility in making the Olympics a great success. 
Senator Richard Burr concurred, noting that the 
American people look forward to seeing the Beijing 
2008 games, an opportunity for China to present itself 
to the world and for the world's greatest athletes to 
compete. 
 
Participants 
------------ 
 
¶15. (U) U.S. Participants: 
 
Senator Ted Stevens 
Ambassador Clark T. Randt, Jr. 
Senator Patty Murray 
Senator Thad Cochran 
Senator Arlen Specter 
Senator Mark Dayton 
Senator Lamar Alexander 
Senator Norm Coleman 
Senator Richard Burr 
Embassy Olympics Coordinator 
Embassy Notetaker 
Interpreter 
 
Chinese participants: 
 
BOCOG Chairman Liu Qi 
NPC Foreign Affairs Committee Vice Chairman Lu Congmin 
BOCOG Vice Chairman Wang Wei 
Chinese Embassy in Washington Counselor Chen Guomin 
NPC Foreign Affairs Committee DDG Hong Yingchun 
Notetakers 
Interpreter 
 
¶16. (U) This cable was cleared by CODEL Stevens. 
RANDT