06BEIJING11755
PRC PREMIER TO VISIT 7 AFRICAN NATIONS
Fri Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3631
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #1755/01 1601255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091255Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8313
INFO ALAFD/ALL AF DIPLOMATIC POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 011755 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AGOA ECON EAID CH
SUBJECT: PRC PREMIER TO VISIT 7 AFRICAN NATIONS 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  MFA Assistant Minister He Yafei previewed Premier Wen 
Jiabao's June 17-24 tour of Egypt, Ghana, the Republic of the 
Congo, Angola, South Africa, Tanzania and Uganda to 
reporters.  Besides meeting the leaders of each nation, 
Premier Wen will meet Chinese medical workers, tour an 
HIV/AIDS prevention center that China will support, pay 
tribute to Chinese workers killed during the construction of 
the Tanzania-Zambia Railway and attend events in 
commemoration of 50 years of China-Egypt relations.  China 
will sign agreements covering political, economic, 
educational, health and technological issues with each 
country that Premier Wen will visit.  AFM He declined to 
provide details of the agreements and ducked repeated 
questions about possible energy deals.  Dismissing the notion 
that China is only after oil and ignores human rights abuses 
in Africa, AFM He said China is due partial credit for the 
reconciliation between groups in northern and southern Sudan. 
End Summary. 
 
Overall Sino-Africa Relations 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On June 9 MFA Assistant Minister He Yafei briefed the 
press on Premier Wen Jiabao's June 17-24 seven nation African 
tour to Egypt, Ghana, Uganda, the Congo, Angola, Tanzania, 
and South Africa.  Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and senior 
officials from the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of 
Commerce and National Development and Reform Commission will 
accompany the PRC Premier. 
 
¶3.  AFM He broadly described China-Africa relations, pointing 
to the long shared history from Ming Dynasty explorer Zheng 
He's landings on the Africa's eastern coast to the Egypt's 
1956 recognition of the PRC.  The African continent is 
increasingly unified, working to resolve regional conflicts 
and making progress in political stability.  Since 2000, the 
China-Africa Cooperation Forum has been an important 
mechanism for bilateral and multilateral cooperation. 
Beijing appreciates the continually strong support the 
African nations have shown China in the international 
community.  "This is Africa's year," AFM He said, noting 
China's Africa Policy Report, President Hu Jintao's April 
2006 visit to the three African nations and Premier Wen's 
upcoming seven nation tour. 
 
¶4.  AFM He said Sino-Africa economic ties have progressed 
steadily, with two-way trade growing from USD 12 million in 
1956 to USD 37.9 billion in 2005.  Total direct Chinese 
investment in Africa reached USD 1.18 billion in 2005 and 800 
companies have a presence on the African continent.  China 
has engaged in more than 900 assistance projects in Africa, 
such as the Tanzania-Zambia Railway.  There is robust 
cooperation in health, culture and education, with China 
already providing over 18,000 scholarships to African 
students. 
 
Egypt 
----- 
 
¶5.  Calling Egypt a major developing country, AFM He said 
Beijing enjoys "very friendly relations" with Cairo, with 
numerous high level visits since the establishment of a 
strategic and cooperative relationship in 1999.  Premier Wen 
will meet with President Hosni Mubarak, Prime Minister Ahmed 
Nasiz, People's Assembly Speaker Ahmed Fathi Sorour and Shura 
Council Chairman Safwat Al-Sharif.  During the meetings with 
his counterparts, Premier Wen will review their bilateral 
relationships and discuss ways to strengthen ties.  China and 
Egypt will sign political, economic, cultural and educational 
agreements.  Premier Wen will attend a gala at the foot of 
the pyramids in commemoration of 50 years of Sino-Egyptian 
relations.  The Chinese Premier will also meet the media to 
discuss China's relations with Egypt, other African nations, 
the Middle East and the developing world, according to AFM He. 
 
Ghana 
----- 
 
¶6.  AFM He said Premier Wen will meet President John Agyekum 
Kufuor and exchange views on expansion of mutual beneficial 
and cooperative ties with the first sub-Saharan African 
nation to diplomatically recognize China 46 years ago.  The 
two sides will sign agreements on trade, public health, 
education and human resources.  AFM He said Premier Wen will 
attend a completion ceremony of a China-funded road 
renovation project. 
 
BEIJING 00011755  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
The Republic of the Congo 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  AFM He said the PRC and the Congo have enjoyed 
"traditional friendly relations" since the establishment of 
diplomatic ties in 1964.  Premier Wen will meet with 
President Denis Sassuo-Nguesso, who also holds the rotating 
presidency of the African Union, to discuss the state of 
bilateral relations, as well as regional and international 
issues of common interests.  They will sign agreements to 
strengthen economic, trade, agricultural and education ties. 
AFM He said Premier Wen will also visit a hospital to meet 
Chinese medical workers and a middle school with a large 
offering of China-related courses. 
 
Angola 
------ 
 
¶8.  The PRC and Angola established diplomatic relations in 
1983 and have enjoyed fruitful cooperation in various fields 
since, AFM He reported.  Premier Wen will hold talks with 
President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos and Prime Minister Fernando 
de Piedade Dias Dos Santos.  The two sides will sign 
agreements covering economics, trade, agriculture, education 
and health.  AFM He said Angola is an important supplier of 
oil, but would not go into further detail.  AFM He also would 
not confirm the amount of the line of credit China is 
providing to Angola. 
 
South Africa 
------------ 
 
¶9.  The PRC Government supported the South African people's 
fight against apartheid and efforts to develop their nation, 
AFM He underscored.  China and South Africa have enjoyed 
frequent high level bilateral visits and a strategic 
partnership based on equality, mutual benefit and trust. 
Cooperation in tourism, public health and trade has produced 
practical results.  Premier Wen will focus on how to deepen 
the bilateral relationship during his meetings with President 
Thabo Mbeki, Vice President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuku and the 
National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete.  Cooperative 
agreements will be signed in the areas of economics, trade, 
science and technology, animal and plant quarantine, 
education and cultural exchanges.  Premier Wen will also meet 
with the head of the New Partnership of Africa Development 
(NEPAD) secretariat.  AFM He said Premier Wen will attend the 
China-South Africa Business Forum where he will give an 
important speech on China's relationship with Africa. 
 
¶10.  Asked about anti-Chinese riots in South Africa a few 
months ago and perceived growing resentment of China's 
economic intrusions in Africa, AFM He said China's 
cooperation with African nations brings mutual benefit to 
both sides.  It is normal to have problems from time to time 
in bilateral relations, AFM He said.  The key is to treat 
each other as equals and take dynamic and respectful action 
to directly address problems.  This is what China is doing, 
according to AFM He.  As for the South African complaints, 
these are due to complex reasons and misunderstandings.  For 
instance, sometimes the quality of Chinese products does not 
meet local standards due to problems associated with 
globalization.  AFM He said South Africa has raised this in a 
somber way with China and the two sides are working on this 
and other issues. 
 
Tanzania 
-------- 
 
¶11.  The PRC and Tanzania have had a "profound friendship" 
over the last 42 years, according to AFM He.  Premier Wen 
will review these relations during his meetings with 
President Jakaya Kikwete and Prime Minister Edward Lowassa. 
He will visit a cemetery to pay tribute to the Chinese 
experts who died during the building of the PRC-supported 
Tanzam Railway.  AFM He said Premier Wen will also visit the 
construction site of the national stadium that Beijing is 
funding. 
 
Uganda 
------ 
 
¶12.  AFM He said there has been a steady development in 
relations between the PRC and Uganda since the establishment 
of diplomatic relations in 1962.  Premier Wen will meet with 
President Lt. General Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and Prime 
Minister Apollo Nsibambi to share views on the progress of 
bilateral relations and to discuss ways to upgrade the 
 
BEIJING 00011755  003 OF 003 
 
 
political and economic relations.  China and Uganda will sign 
political economic, trade, public health, educational and 
cultural agreements during Premier Wen's visit.  AFM He said 
the Premier will also visit an HIV/AIDS prevention center 
that China will be supporting. 
 
Ducking the Details and Challenging the Media 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  AFM He declined to provide specifics on the agreements 
that will be signed during Premier Wen's visit and deflected 
reporters' repeated attempts to get specific information on 
which countries would sign energy deals with China.  He also 
did not provide details about the amount or types of Chinese 
aid to Africa, simply saying China is a developing country 
that is doing its best to help raise the living standards of 
the African people.  AFM He urged understanding that China 
has a comprehensive relationship with Angola and it is wrong 
to believe that China looks to Africa solely as a source of 
oil.  AFM He called on reporters to go to Africa to see the 
actual situation and report their own objective stories, 
instead of following the leading stories of one or two large 
media organizations. 
 
Sudan 
----- 
 
¶14.  AFM He disagreed with a reporter's suggestion that China 
ignores human rights abuses in Sudan because of its thirst 
for oil.  AFM He averred China and Sudan have a normal, 
cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship that 
delivers tangible economic benefits to the Sudanese people. 
The resulting economic development promotes human rights in 
Sudan, claimed AFM He.  China has assisted in peacekeeping 
operations and supported the international efforts to resolve 
the situation in Darfur.  The recent reconcilation between 
rival groups in northern and souhern Sudan was partially due 
to Chinese efforts, according to AFM He. 
RANDT