06BRASILIA800
BRASILIA HUB PROPOSAL FOR FY 06 AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH
Tue Apr 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO4381
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0800/01 1151850
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251850Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5209
INFO RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4658
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 6819
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 1942UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000800 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB - T.LERSTEN AND M.KOCH 
STATE FOR OES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR SENV ECON TBIO BR
SUBJECT: BRASILIA HUB PROPOSAL FOR FY 06 AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH 
PROJECT 
 
----------------- 
Sector Assessment 
----------------- 
 
¶1. Despite the approval of Brazil's Biosafety Law (#11,105 in March 
24, 2005), followed by the signing of Presidential Decree (#5,591 on 
November 22, 2005), which implemented the new law, agricultural 
biotechnology continues to be a difficult issue in Brazil. 
Government agencies and consumer groups are divided on how to 
approach, conduct research, and approve commercial applications for 
biotech products. 
 
¶2. Meanwhile, Brazil had significant growth in biotech soybean 
acreage in 2005, estimated at 10 million hectares, or an increase of 
nearly 90 percent over 2004.  Brazil is now considered the third 
largest country in biotech crop area, after the United States and 
Argentina.  The next major step regarding the development of biotech 
crops in Brazil will be the approval for commercial applications of 
biotech cotton and corn.  The Brazilian press carries frequent 
reports that illegal planting of these two-biotech crops is 
increasing. 
 
¶3. The recent nomination and selection of the representatives of the 
National Technical Commission on Bio-safety (CTNBio, the Brazilian 
government commission charged with approving applications for 
biotech products) offers the USG an opportunity to encourage 
adoption of fair and science based policies and practices for 
biotechnology. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Past Performance and Long -Term Strategy 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Three years ago, the U.S. Embassy, Brasilia supported a program 
that sent several Congressional representatives from the 
Agricultural Committee of Brazil's House of Representatives, 
accompanied by other government officials and consumer and NGO 
groups.  The Monsanto Company provided logistical support in the 
United States.  The group came back motivated and supportive of U.S. 
policy during the period when the Brazilian Congress was debating 
the draft bill of Brazil's new biosafety law. Unfortunately, a good 
deal of negative press attention followed, mostly from groups 
opposed to agricultural biotech, such as Brazil's Greenpeace office. 
 
 
¶5. To improve the prospects for a successful follow-up project, the 
U.S. Embassy, Brasilia supports a study tour program in the United 
States made up of Brazilians both supportive and critical of 
agricultural biotechnology and food labeling that would be received 
by organizations similarly diverse in the United States.  These 
individuals would be chosen from organizations that have an impact 
on national policy and decision-making and public opinion.  The 
long-term goal is to move these groups towards acceptance of the 
U.S. Government regulatory system. 
 
------------------- 
Proposed Activities 
------------------- 
 
¶6. U. S. Embassy, Brasilia proposes the organization of the 
following activities for two different groups of individuals to 
visit the United States at different times.  The first group would 
consist of individuals from the Brazilian Farm Bureau (CNA), 
representing Brazilian farmers, industry and consumer groups, 
Congressional staffers, selected Brazilian based NGOs, and media. 
The second group would include government representatives from major 
regulatory agencies related to agricultural biotech, including 
CTNBio, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Environment, 
the Ministry of Health, and Brazil CODEX office. 
 
¶7. Point of Contact (POC):   James Story (Storyjb@state.gov) 
 
----------- 
Activity #1 
----------- 
 
A) Estimated Cost: US $ 40,000 
 
B) Target Audience:  This activity would involve collaboration with 
the Brazilian Farm Bureau (CAN), the Brazilian Food Industry 
Association (ABIA), the Brazilian Consumer Group (IDEC), two 
Congressional Staff Offices in Brasilia, and three media groups to 
identify a total of 10 individuals. 
 
C) Agricultural Biotech Issues:  This activity is designed primarily 
to introduce participants to the US regulatory system related to 
agricultural biotechnology.  It would present the U.S. Government 
 
BRASILIA 00000800  002 OF 002 
 
 
process for biotech and how its different agencies (USDA, FDA, EPA) 
ensure that biotech products are safe for agriculture, the 
environment, and consumers.  It should also include issues related 
to labeling of agricultural products.  This activity would also 
include a two-day visit to Chicago to participate in the Annual Bio 
2006, April 10-11, 2006. 
 
D) US Government Objectives:  The purpose of this activity is to 
counter anti-biotechnology rhetoric in the local media and among 
consumer/industry groups, as well as to build consumer confidence in 
new technologies by improving public dialogue in Brazil.  This 
activity would also meet USG policy objectives for fostering more 
balanced media statements, and bringing interest groups into 
technical discussions based on sound science, rather than ideology 
or emotional appeals, and by improving the business environment for 
agricultural biotech trade. 
 
E) Proposed Length of Activity:  This activity will be developed for 
a total duration of 8 days, including visits to Washington, D.C.; 
(to cover all major USG agencies, consumer and industry groups); one 
major biotech company, and two days in Chicago to participate in the 
Bio 2006 (April 10-11, 2006), which will have agriculture biotech as 
the spotlight of the this important trade show. 
 
------------ 
Activity # 2 
------------ 
 
¶A.  Estimated Cost: US  $ 24,000 
 
¶B. Target Audience:  This activity is designed for government 
officials from different Brazilian government agencies, such as 
EMBRAPA (Ministry of Agriculture), ANVISA (Ministry of Health), 
IBAMA (Ministry of the Environment), CTNBio, and other government 
representatives involved with CODEX and the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety.  A total of 6 individuals are envisaged for this 
activity. 
 
¶C. Agricultural Biotechnology Issues:  This activity is designed 
primarily to introduce government officials to the US regulatory 
system related to agricultural biotechnology, but specifically to 
those agenda items involving USG discussions in international 
forums, such as the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and Codex 
Alimentarius, including the Committee on Food Labeling and the 
Biotech Task Force. This activity should include research and 
development (R&D) discussions, both with private and government 
officials, and academia related to the overall advantages of 
biotechnology to consumers and the environment.  Visits to one or 
two producers and/or agricultural cooperatives would expose 
Brazilian officials to the economic advantages of the use of biotech 
products.  This team should also learn about the advantages and 
challenges of animal biotechnology. 
 
¶D. US Government Objectives:  This activity would build on the 
objective of bringing support to USG positions in international 
fora, mostly related to the World Trade Organization.  This activity 
would reinforce adoption of science based trade and regulatory 
policies in Brazil and would present the US Government regulatory 
system as transparent, predictable, open to public comment, and 
based on sound science. 
 
¶E. Proposed Length of Activity:  This activity will be developed for 
a total duration of 7 days, including activities mostly in/or around 
Washington, D.C.  The appropriate time for this activity would be 
around May/June 2006. 
 
¶F. Post Responsible Office (POC):   James Story 
 
----------- 
Activity #3 
----------- 
 
Informal follow-up activities for both groups to debrief 
participants and generate further support for the USG position. 
These activities would also serve to further strengthen 
relationships between the USG and the participants in this program. 
The estimated cost for two follow-up activities is US $ 2000 total. 
POC is James Story. 
 
CHICOLA 
 
 
 
 
 
1