06BRASILIA527
COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR NASA (GSFC) OFFICIAL WILLAMS
Thu Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO0749
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0527/01 0751059
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161059Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4819
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 1709
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 6565
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4475
RUEANAT/NASA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLS PASS TO NASA/GSFC FOR TPOSEY 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC 
STATE FOR OES/SAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPA KSCA OTRA US BR
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR NASA (GSFC) OFFICIAL WILLAMS 

REF: STATE 38515 

¶1. Mission welcomes and grants country clearance for Mr. Darrell Williams, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) to Manaus and Santarem, Brazil, April 2-7, 2006 to address various NASA-Supported Large-Scale Biosphere-Atmosphere Experiment in Amazonia (LBA-ECO) Project office management issues. 

¶2. Mission understands that no Embassy or Consulate assistance is required. Embassy point of contact for this visit is Science Counselor Patricia D. Norman, Tel XXXXXXXXXXXX, Fax XXXXXXXXXXXX, cellular phone XXXXXXXXXXXX, email: XXXXXXXXXXXX

¶3. Visitors should be current with all immunizations required for Brazil. Those arriving from flights that do not originate in the United States are advised to ensure that their yellow fever vaccination is up to date, and that they have their WHO yellow cards with them to prove it. If you require a yellow fever vaccination and it is for the first time, not a booster, it should be given at least 10 days before travel to be effective. Please consult with appropriate medical authorities before traveling. 

¶4. Please find below information needed for the cities to be visited: - Brasilia - The United States Embassy in Brasilia is located at Avenida das Nacoes, Quadra 801, Lote 3, telephone number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX, fax number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX. Emergencies and calls after normal business hours may be directed to Post One at XXXXXXXXXXXX. - Rio de Janeiro - The United States Consulate General in Rio de Janeiro is located at Avenida Presidente Wilson 147 B. Castelo, telephone number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX, fax number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX. Emergencies and calls after normal business hours may be directed to Post One at XXXXXXXXXXXX. - Sao Paulo - The United States Consulate General in Sao Paulo is located at Rua Thomas Deloney, 381 - Chacara Santo Antonio, telephone number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX, fax number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX. Emergencies and calls after normal business hours may be directed to Post One at XXXXXXXXXXXX. - Recife - The United States Consulate in Recife is located at Rua Goncalves Maia 163, Bairro Boa Vista, telephone number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX, fax number (from U.S.) XXXXXXXXXXXX. Emergencies and calls after normal business hours may be directed to Post One at XXXXXXXXXXXX. 

¶5. Persons entering Brazil under the USG auspices have an important role to play in strengthening U.S. - Brazil cooperation. Please keep this priority in mind during your visit and inform the embassy or nearest consulate promptly of any opportunities or problems that arise. As a result of the imposition of biometric enrolment of the US-VISIT program, the Government of Brazil started fingerprinting and photographing arriving U.S. citizens in January 2004. Present GOB policy is not to fingerprint U.S. travelers arriving on official or diplomatic visas. It is possible, however, that official visitors could be asked to submit to a fingerprinting through administrative error. The Embassy hopes that visitors will comply with reasonable requests from the Brazilian immigration authorities. Any unusual delays or unreasonable treatment should be brought to the attention of the Management Officer so they can be relayed to the GOB. Full cooperation with the identification procedures is advisable. 

¶6. Please find below some information on Administrative procedures and requirements: 

¶A. Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit. Each agency, organization or visiting delegation will be charged for the actual costs attributed to its visit. Direct charge costs include, but are not limited to: 

-- American and LES overtime (for such services as airport expediting, cashier accommodation exchange, control room staffing, representational event support); Travel and per diem costs incurred by post personnel in support of visitor's field travel; 

BRASILIA 00000527 002 OF 002 

-- Rental of vehicles and other equipment; 
-- Long distance telephone calls; 
-- Office supplies; 
-- Gasoline and other vehicle maintenance costs; 
-- Departure tax and other airport fees. Post will not provide service if fiscal data is not provided for the direct charges. 

¶B. For TDYers remaining at post over 30 days, there is a charge for ICASS support services. This charge is for the following ICASS services and will be billed thru the ICASS TDY module, based on a per-capita-basis, prorated for the length of stay. For example, a TDY visit by one USG employee of 06 months' duration would be counted as 0.5: -- Basic Package; 

-- Community Liaison 
- CLO; 
-- Health Services. 

¶C. If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS services at post, please be prepared to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) document for ICASS support services upon arrival. The agency should provide post with a written communication generated by the traveler's headquarters that confirms the agency will pay ICASS charges for the TDYer. The communication should include the agency ICASS billing code to which the TDY support should be charged and authorize the traveler to sign the ICASS invoice generated by the TDY module. Agencies will not be billed until the accumulated invoice cost for TDY support exceeds Dols 2,500 for the fiscal year. Where travel is urgent, the TDYers should bring this documentation with him/her to ensure there are no interruptions in the provision of service. Post will not provide any service to a TDYer staying in excess of thirty days without provision of this documentation before day 31 of the TDY. 

¶7. Crime is the principal and real threat to visitors to Brazil. The crime threat level in Brasilia, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo and Recife is critical. Armed street robberies are common in these cities. The area in and around the hotel sector in Brasilia is extremely dangerous, especially at night. Embassy visitors have been robbed under gunpoint while walking on the street. Taxis and private vehicles should be used to move about. 

¶8. In addition, individuals and organizations with ties to extremist groups operate in the tri-border area between Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina - this includes the Iguacu falls area. Official visitors contemplating travel to this area should contact the Embassy before doing so, as well as Embassy Asuncion and/or Embassy Buenos Aires if they plan to cross into Paraguay and/or Argentina. 

¶9. Visitors should practice common sense preventative security techniques, just as they would in any large city in the world. Some of the more important tips that you should follow to avoid becoming a crime victim are: 

-- Do not carry or wear valuable items that will attract the attention of thieves. If you need to wear expensive jewelry or carry a camera; conceal it until you arrive at your destination. 

-- Be aware of the street environment and avoid contact with those who may be looking for robbery targets. Seek a safer location. Go into a store, bank or simply cross the street. 

-- Do not physically resist any robbery attempt. While this is a personal decision, statistics show that resistance leads to injury. 

-- Do not answer your hotel room door until you positively confirm who is on the other side. Look out the peephole, or call the front desk to confirm the visitor. 

-- Do not walk on the beaches after dark. Assaults are common. 

-- Avoid city buses. Many pass through high crime areas and are susceptible to robberies. 

¶10. Visitors who intend to bring U.S. Government portable microcomputers into the embassy or consulate must obtain prior approval from the systems manager and the RSO/PSO. The use of privately owned computers is discouraged in any government facility. 

CHICOLA