06CAIRO4840
EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:  AUGUST 6, 2006
Mon Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4840 2191141
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071141Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0383
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ALBERTO FERNANDEZ, ROBIN SMITH AND 
DAVID BENZE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:  AUGUST 6, 2006 
 
 
¶1.  Summary. Continuation of fighting in Lebanon 
amid reports of a draft resolution sponsored by 
the US and France were the main stories in all 
papers on Sunday.  Pro-government papers 
continued what we perceive as efforts to downplay 
support for Hezbollah in commentaries, while many 
papers continued unfettered criticism of 
President Bush and his ""rightists.""  Hugo Chavez 
joined Hassan Nasrallah as the hero of the day in 
opposition media. End summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines. While no singular theme 
emerged in the headlines, the following evidenced 
the public fatigue over the rising death toll, 
and the focus on achieving a ceasefire. Of note, 
leading opposition daily, Al-Wafd's banner 
headlines were similar to leading pro-government 
daily, Al-Ahram's, in the focus on the killing of 
Israeli soldiers and the US-France ceasefire 
agreement.  Centrist, pro-government daily, Al- 
Akhbar, bannered Egypt's statement to Washington 
regarding ""the urgency to stop the aggression 
against Lebanon.""  The accompanying photo of a 
Lebanese woman standing amidst ruins looking up, 
read, ""She is praying to God to exact revenge 
against the Zionists."" Pro-government daily, Rose 
Al-Youssef's banner headline examined Iran's role 
by asking the question, ""Hassan Nasrallah or the 
Party to Bring Victory to Iran?""  The two front- 
page photos showed a Lebanese woman with a look 
of horror and a Lebanese man fleeing the bombing. 
Popular daily, Al-Gomhouriya's banner headline 
announced the ""new Israeli massacre"" that killed 
40 civilians. 
 
The independent press's headlines focused more on 
the US role and its ""greater Middle East"" 
ambitions than did the pro-government papers. 
Liberal independent daily, Nahdit Misr's banner 
headline decried Washington for ""hindering the 
ceasefire by insisting that Israel remain in 
southern Lebanon.""  The accompanying photo 
portrayed a Lebanese corpse surrounded by people. 
Independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Yom, announced its 
special report on ""An Islamic Middle East Versus 
an American One"" and, separately, looked at the 
""resistance still standing"" amidst strong clashes 
and Israel's ""killing of 35 Palestinians in 48 
hours."" 
 
¶3.  In the commentaries. In what appears to be an 
effort to reflect public opinion while 
simultaneously influencing it, the opinion pages 
in pro-government papers showed that condemnation 
of the US does not exclude condemnation of 
Hezbollah on the same day in the same paper. For 
example, Al-Gomhouriya's editor-in-chief attacked 
Hassan Nasrallah for ""criticizing Arab rulers 
and his illusions that he will become a hero"" and 
spoke against the Iranian foreign minister as 
""the godfather of Hezbollah aimed at prolonging 
the war,"" while publishing an unsigned editorial 
asking the US how it will ""deal with the Arab 
nation when the mask has fallen off its ugly 
face.""  Similarly, Al-Ahram published an unsigned 
editorial criticizing the US for ""preventing the 
Security Council from issuing an immediate 
ceasefire,"" while publishing the views of a well- 
known, young columnist criticizing Nasrallah for 
""trying to appear as the Arab hero, but bringing 
destruction to his own people.""  A columnist in 
opposition daily, Al-Wafd, used the example of 
Venezuela's Hugo Chavez ""bringing back the 
Venezuelan ambassador in Israel in opposition to 
the war"" to shame Egypt into ""standing up to its 
responsibilities."" 
 
¶4.  Public sentiment.  Over the weekend, 
independent and opposition papers carried news of 
demonstrations after Friday's noon prayers 
""condemning Israeli aggression against Lebanon."" 
The sermon called upon God to ""help Hezbollah 
triumph over the Jews."" Demonstrators carried 
photos of Hassan Nasrallah and chanted slogans 
against the Arab governments.  The papers 
highlighted that similar demonstrations would 
take place in a number of provinces. 
RICCIARDONE