06DAMASCUS168
Damascus Media Reaction: Lebanon, Palestinian Elections,
Mon Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0168/01 0161500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (508)
O 161500Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6577
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5719
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4207
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0439
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6590UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Lebanon, Palestinian Elections, 
Iraq, Iran (1/11-16) 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported a demonstration by Lebanese 
students and youth outside a government office in Beirut to 
protest the visit of US Assistant Secretary of State David Welch. 
 
Papers also quoted an official media source in Damascus strongly 
criticizing the statement made by Welch in Beirut. The source 
said the statement aimed to escalate pressure on Syria because of 
its policies, which advocate stability and comprehensive peace 
and oppose aggression and occupation. The source added that 
Welch's statement constitutes a new, desperate attempt to raise 
the morale of the forces and figures that oppose stability in 
Lebanon and are hostile to Syria at a time when efforts are being 
made to restore stability to this Arab country. 
Papers also cited statements by Lebanese figures emphasizing 
support for the Lebanese resistance and for Syria. One statement 
is by Lebanese ex-Premier Salim al-Hoss, who criticized the 
Lebanese voices that describe the Lebanese resistance as "weapons 
of treachery" and acquit the Israeli enemy of the crime that 
claimed the life of Rafik al-Hariri. Another statement, by 
Lebanese ex-Parliamentarian Najah Wakim, totally rejects all 
foreign intervention in Syrian and Lebanese internal affairs. 
 
Papers also reported that Saudi Arabia and the UAE have declined 
an official French request to grant political asylum to former 
Syrian Vice President Abdul Halim Khaddam. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"Syrian official source strongly criticizes statements in Beirut 
by David Welch, US Assistant Secretary of State for Middle East 
Affairs. The source stresses that these statements are a 
desperate attempt to boost the morale of anti-Syrian figures in 
Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/15) 
"Lebanese security forces violently curb a Lebanese demonstration 
denouncing US intervention in Lebanon. Over 16 persons injured 
and 3 others arrested during the demonstration" 
"Office of Lebanese Presidency: Khaddam's statements are 
unacceptable fabrications" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/15) 
"John Bolton, US envoy to the UN, attacks UN Chief Kofi Annan for 
attending solidarity event with Palestinians" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/15) 
"France looks for another asylum for Khaddam" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/14) 
"Lebanese ex-Premier Salim al-Hoss: US pressure aims to impose 
the Greater Middle East Project to destroy Arabism and tear the 
region apart to serve Israel. Former Lebanese Minister Suleiman 
Franjia: Syria has brought peace back to Lebanon; Jumblatt dreams 
of fragmenting Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/14) 
"Iranian President Ahmadi Najad: No concession regarding the 
nuclear issue. Bush: We seek a diplomatic settlement" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 1/14) 
"Mubarak discusses developments in Lebanon with Lebanese FM Al- 
Saniora. Lebanese emphasis on maintaining relations with Syria 
and rejecting foreign intervention" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
1/13) 
"Turkish FM Gul: No Cooperation with US and Israel against Syria" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/13) 
"Disagreements once again over the Iraqi constitution. A US 
General expects increase in attacks in Iraq" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 1/13) 
"Amal and Hizbollah support healing rift with Syria on the basis 
of the Taif Accord" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/12) 
"Palestinian resentment over Jerusalem siege. Ashrawi calls on 
Washington to deter Israel. Hamas confirms its participation in 
elections" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/12) 
"Iran calls on Europeans to understand the aim of its nuclear 
activities. Iranian President: Iran's nuclear activities are for 
peaceful purposes. 
"Congress threatens to stop loans for reconstruction in Iraq. 
Democrats answer Bush: Our loyalty is to our country not to you" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/12) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
"Exhausted Excuses" 
Muhammad Ali Buzah, an editorialist in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (1/14): "Merchants of blood and politics in Lebanon 
are escalating the situation and maintaining the climate of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and oppose aggression and occupation. The source added that 
Welch's statement constitutes a new, desperate attempt to raise 
the morale of the forces and figures that oppose stability in 
Lebanon and are hostile to Syria at a time when efforts are being 
made to restore stability to this Arab country. 
Papers also cited statements by Lebanese figures emphasizing 
support for the Lebanese resistance and for Syria. One statement 
is by Lebanese ex-Premier Salim al-Hoss, who criticized the 
Lebanese voices that describe the Lebanese resistance as "weapons 
of treachery" and acquit the Israeli enemy of the crime that 
claimed the life of Rafik al-Hariri. Another statement, by 
Lebanese ex-Parliamentarian Najah Wakim, totally rejects all 
foreign intervention in Syrian and Lebanese internal affairs. 
 
tension whenever an attempt is made to heal the rift and 
safeguard Lebanon's unity and Arabism and fraternal relations 
with Syria.... These Lebanese, whose names were associated with 
Lebanon's crisis and civil war and with collaboration with 
Lebanon's enemies, have attacked the Arab endeavor, embodied by 
the Saudi-Egyptian initiative, to contain the Syrian-Lebanese 
crisis. This group has installed itself as the advocate of the 
devil and the defender of Israel out of spite for Syria, Arabism, 
and the valiant national resistance and its weapons and 
sacrifices." 
"This group risks dragging Lebanon, and with it the region, into 
the fire and to partition. 
"Maniac Walid Jumblatt, with the logic of collaboration and 
humiliating mercenary subservience to the United States and 
Israel, is repeating lies and falsehoods and spreading the poison 
of hatred against Syria and its positions.... Jumblatt is 
creating sedition in Lebanon and inciting against the resistance 
as part of the conspiracy of Zionization, internationalization, 
and the imposition of the so-called Greater Middle East plan.... 
This hysteria shows that these Lebanese figures are experiencing 
a real crisis, as they know that they are mere pawns and cheap 
tools who have sold themselves and their countries, and exhausted 
their excuses that will soon be rejected and sent to their 
natural place in the dustbin of history." 
-------------------------------- 
"The Maestro and the Orchestra" 
-------------------------------- 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (1/12): "Some Lebanese are not happy to see 
Syrian-Lebanese relations return to their normal state of 
brotherly relations based on neighborliness and mutual interests. 
This repulsive and very small minority, which has links with 
foreigners and which is loyal to them at the expense of the 
homeland, publicly places itself on the other side and hinders 
every effort to solve the problems in Syrian-Lebanese relations 
and every attempt to heal the rift among the Lebanese themselves. 
This Lebanese group appeared nervous during the Syrian-Saudi and 
Syrian-Egyptian summits on Syrian-Lebanese relations.... They 
directed abuse and accusations at and spread poison among the 
Lebanese, heedless of the consequences. They have accused 
everyone, including some Arabs, of treason. They have encroached 
upon the nationalist leaders in Lebanon. And they have made 
utterances that, to say the least, reflected blind hatred toward 
Lebanon, Syria, and Arabs in general." 
"The maestro [a reference to Progressive Socialist Party leader 
Walid Jumblatt] and his orchestra are certain that the return of 
Lebanese-Syrian relations to their normal state would mean, among 
other things, the failure of their plans and, consequently, the 
decline of their leadership. They are certain that the revelation 
of the truth about the Al-Hariri assassination would take from 
their hands the most important cards they use to tamper with 
Lebanon and its relations with Syria. This is why they launch 
media and political attacks, fabricate lies, level accusations, 
draw strength from foreigners, and call for direct international 
trusteeship. When one of them saw that relations with Syria and 
the investigations of the Al-Hariri assassination were heading in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and oppose aggression and occupation. The source added that 
Welch's statement constitutes a new, desperate attempt to raise 
the morale of the forces and figures that oppose stability in 
Lebanon and are hostile to Syria at a time when efforts are being 
made to restore stability to this Arab country. 
Papers also cited statements by Lebanese figures emphasizing 
support for the Lebanese resistance and for Syria. One statement 
is by Lebanese ex-Premier Salim al-Hoss, who criticized the 
Lebanese voices that describe the Lebanese resistance as "weapons 
of treachery" and acquit the Israeli enemy of the crime that 
claimed the life of Rafik al-Hariri. Another statement, by 
Lebanese ex-Parliamentarian Najah Wakim, totally rejects all 
foreign intervention in Syrian and Lebanese internal affairs. 
 
the right direction, he went so far as to call on the US 
Administration to occupy Syria. He also urged foreign support to 
crush the nationalist political regime in Syria! These people 
know their real size in Lebanon and the Arab world." 
----------------------------------------- 
"A Position that Gives No Cause for Joy" 
----------------------------------------- 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(1/15): "Palestinians should not be happy that the US has asked 
Israel to allow the residents of Jerusalem to participate in the 
legislative elections, because the American and Israeli 
statements regarding HAMAS' participation in the polls give no 
reason for joy. The remarks of US Assistant Secretary of State 
David Welch on the need to exclude groups and individuals who 
refuse to condemn terrorism and violence, who do not acknowledge 
Israel's right to exist, and who refuse to disarm, do not 
encourage optimism.... 
"Palestinians should be worried because Israel and the US are 
bargaining with the Palestinian Authority over a purely domestic 
issue and a legitimate Palestinian right. Any commitments made by 
the Palestinian Authority as a result of such bargaining, such as 
a pledge to disarm the resistance, would be unjustified and would 
place more obstacles in the way of the Palestinian people as they 
seek to end the occupation and establish their independent 
state.... 
"The next few days will perhaps disclose details about the 
American talks with the Israelis and the Palestinian Authority. 
But these parties will be wrong if they believe that the 
Palestinian people will agree to bargain over any of their rights 
or to abandon any aspect of their steadfastness in the face of 
the continuous Israeli aggression against them." 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
"A Step Serving the Umma and its Solidarity" 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(1/11): "The Arab nation will ultimately be able to overcome all 
ordeals, no matter how intense and regardless of the power of the 
foreign forces that cause them. Perhaps what we saw in Jeddah and 
Sharm al-Sheikh three days ago [President Al-Asad's visits] and 
the preceding activities, contacts, and consultations on the 
highest levels provide the best proof that Arab leaders, at times 
of hardship, adopt one position and one objective, namely, 
protecting the nation and safeguarding its borders and existence. 
 
"The entire Arab nation is facing major dangers, although the 
accusations and threats are directed at Syria at this stage. All 
Arabs are being burned by the fire of the US theory of 
'constructive instability....' The war on Iraq and developments 
in Lebanon and the Palestinian territories are part of the 
American Greater Middle East plan.... 
 
"All weapons are being used today to subdue the Arab will, of 
which Syria is the spearhead. The Jeddah and Sharm al-Sheikh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and oppose aggression and occupation. The source added that 
Welch's statement constitutes a new, desperate attempt to raise 
the morale of the forces and figures that oppose stability in 
Lebanon and are hostile to Syria at a time when efforts are being 
made to restore stability to this Arab country. 
Papers also cited statements by Lebanese figures emphasizing 
support for the Lebanese resistance and for Syria. One statement 
is by Lebanese ex-Premier Salim al-Hoss, who criticized the 
Lebanese voices that describe the Lebanese resistance as "weapons 
of treachery" and acquit the Israeli enemy of the crime that 
claimed the life of Rafik al-Hariri. Another statement, by 
Lebanese ex-Parliamentarian Najah Wakim, totally rejects all 
foreign intervention in Syrian and Lebanese internal affairs. 
 
summits call for optimism and restore hope to our troubled souls. 
They are a constructive step on a long road that we hope will 
continue in order to serve the nation and its interests and 
protect its threatened existence." 
 
 
Seche