06DAMASCUS512
Damascus Media Reaction: Beirut Riots/Accusations
Wed Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0512/01 0391415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081415Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6996
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5778
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3674
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2139
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6902
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0775
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4259
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0491
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6638UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000512 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Beirut Riots/Accusations 
against Syria, Cartoons on Prophet Muhammad, Iraq, Iran's 
Nuclear Program, Palestinian Territories (2/8) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that Muqtada al-Sadr, Leader 
of the al-Sadr Movement in Iraq, has rejected accusations that 
infiltrators enter Iraq through Syria, stressing that there is 
not any evidence of this. 
 
Al-Sadr, during a visit to the Syrian northeastern city of Raqqa 
described Syrian-Iraqi relations as intertwined, saying that he 
was visiting Syria to boost those relations in all fields. 
 
"The visit aims to enhance relations between Syria and Iraq on 
the popular and governmental levels. In addition, we express 
support to Syria in the face of pressure the country is 
encountering," Sadr added. 
 
He underlined that the neighboring countries are cooperating 
with Iraq to cement security and stability, and stressed the 
importance of putting a timetable for occupation withdrawal. 
 
Syrian papers also featured a statement by US Brigadier General 
Mark Kimmitt to "The Guardian" admitting that the presence of 
more than 300,000 troops in the Middle East, most of them 
American, was a "contributory factor" to instability in the 
region. 
 
"Our position is, when we leave we will not have any bases 
there," General Kimmitt said, without speculating when the 
withdrawal might be. 
 
End summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Denmark faces economic losses and complains about the 'lack of 
European solidarity.' Demonstrations of Islamic anger 
continue... Syrian lawyers halt trials in protest of cartoons 
that insult Prophet Mohammad" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/8) 
 
"Minister of Awkaf Al-Ayoubi confers with the French Ambassador 
to Damascus: No one has the right to insult religious symbols. 
Syrian Mufti Hassoun receives Ambassadors of India and Norway 
and emphasizes the importance of dialogue" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 2/8) 
 
"Muqtada al-Sadr in Raqqa: Syria strives to cement stability in 
Iraq; no evidence of infiltrations through Syrian borders" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/8) 
 
"Iraqi protest closure of the Basra airport by British forces. 
Four US marines killed in two explosions near Al-Anbar" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/8) 
 
"US General [Kimmit]: Foreign troops in the region are 
responsible for the state of instability in the region" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/8) 
 
"Four Palestinians martyred by Israeli shooting. Khaled Mashaal 
in Cairo: We will acknowledge Israel if it acknowledges our 
rights. Amer Mousa, SecGen of Arab League, calls for 
comprehending Israeli intentions" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
2/8) 
 
"Putin expresses worry over the situation in the region: 
Severing aid to the Palestinian people is a big mistake" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/8) 
 
 ¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Their Bet, and Ours" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(2/8): "The riots in Beirut against the background of cartoons 
about the Prophet Muhammad were painful and shameful, just like 
the violent protests that took place in Damascus.... 
"We reject the use of violence and the chanting of racist 
slogans to express anger and protest.... Demonstrations should 
be staged in a civilized manner as violence sends wrong messages 
and makes things worse.... In this tense atmosphere, those who 
hold grudges against Syria find an appropriate climate to 
continue to perform their set role in a play that has become 
boring, a play conducted by Americans, far and near, through the 
exposed interference in domestic Lebanese affairs.... 
 
"We are not surprised that anti-Syria forces in Lebanon blamed 
Damascus for the riots.... A full year has passed and the same 
people continue to repeat the same sentences and hold daily news 
conferences only to harm Syria, its people and pan-Arab role. 
They are involved in cheap incitement, the ugly and bloody 
consequences of which are known to everyone." 
 
"The band of hatred in Lebanon continues to spread venom, plant 
mines, build barriers between Syria and Lebanon, and join the 
game of American pressure on Damascus.... The Lebanese will one 
day discover and hold to account those who promoted lies and 
tried to mislead them for so long...." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
"Is it Really a Freedom of Expression?" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (2/8): "Does free speech mean ridiculing the faith of 
other nations.... There are red lines in Europe when it comes to 
the holocaust and anti-Semitism.... Cartoons on the Prophet 
Muhammad were meant as a deliberate insult to all Muslims. Such 
acts spread chaos and the culture of extremism and antagonism, 
which Arabs and Muslims renounce, and which has never been in 
the teaching of their religion, which is based on the principles 
of respect and tolerance.... 
 
"What happened was not innocent, nor was it part of the freedom 
of expression. This is a lesson to Arabs and Muslims. They 
should know how to deal with it. They should not underestimate 
their power, on all levels, in the face of the ideas that 
distort their religion, creed, and deep-rooted history...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
"What Is after Referral of Iran's Nuclear Program?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Dr. Turki Saqr, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(2/8): "Why did the US insist on referring Iran's file to the 
Security Council? What are the possible scenarios after this 
referral? 
 
"The neoconservatives in Washington insisted on this referral 
after the Iranian president's statements on Israel's existence 
and the lies about the holocaust and his call on those who 
believe this lie to receive the Jews from Israel and leave 
Palestine to the Palestinians.... 
 
"As for the scenarios, the Security Council might impose 
sanctions on Iran and the US might use military action against 
Iran either directly or through Israel.... But Iran is not a 
soft morsel as Bush's administration imagines. It is not a weak 
or hated regime, as Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq and Taliban 
regime in Afghanistan were.... 
 
"Arabs, Muslims, and the rest of the world will not accept 
Washington's logic and flagrant bias toward Israel over the 
nuclear issue.... Iran is influential in the arenas of Iraq and 
Afghanistan and is capable of raising oil prices in the 
international market. All this proves that the Bush 
administration is in a major predicament now that the Iranian 
nuclear file has reached the Security Council." 
 
Seche