06DAMASCUS3552
Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operations in Lebanon
Thu Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3552/01 2010829
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200829Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0447
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6116
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3960
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2496
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7157
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1147
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4533
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0753
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6892UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003552 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operations in Lebanon 
(7/19) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers today reported a meeting by the Syrian 
Cabinet emphasizing readiness in all fields to face all future 
scenarios. PM Mohammed Naji Ottri underlined "the importance of 
coordination and integration of government performance, 
escalating readiness in all sectors, and taking the needed 
procedures to face all prospects in the future." The Cabinet 
reviewed developments in the Lebanese and Palestinian arenas as 
well as all forms of support needed by the Lebanese and 
Palestinian peoples, in addition to what Syria is already giving 
in the form of medical, food and other basic needs. The PM 
confirmed "Syria's support of the Palestinian and Lebanese 
peoples in their heroic confrontation of the Israeli enemy 
machine that targets with its cold-blooded crimes innocent 
people, facilities and services." The Cabinet denounced the "Arab 
and international silence" against the brutal Israeli offensive, 
stressing the need to adopt decisive and quick stances that deter 
Israel and stop its hostilities and attacks on Lebanon and Gaza 
Strip." 
 
Papers also featured a statement by a Syrian information source 
strongly denying, as totally baseless and unfounded, a statement 
by an Israeli army spokesman that Israeli warplanes shelled 
trucks traveling from Syria towards Lebanon carrying weapons and 
ammunitions. The source pointed out that the missile which was 
fired by Israeli warplanes targeted a UAE aid convoy, which was 
carrying medicines and ambulances, in Lebanon near the Syrian 
border, in addition to a truck coming from Lebanon to Damascus 
that happened to be in the same place at the time of attack. The 
source stressed that such repeated Israeli statements aim to 
create pretexts to justify its brutal crimes perpetrated against 
innocent civilians in Lebanon and to prevent humanitarian aid 
from reaching the Lebanese people. 
 
All Syrian papers reported that a delegation of Syrian children 
handed the Resident Representative of the UN Program a message 
addressed to UN Secretary General Kofi Annan expressing deep 
concern over the Israeli aggression on the Palestinian and 
Lebanese people and their courageous resistance. The message 
called upon the UN to bring an end to the barbarian Zionist 
killing machine which has targeted the children of the region for 
more than half a century. It said that the "Marwahin massacre in 
South Lebanon reflects the inhuman situation which our people are 
being exposed to under the Israeli aggression and the full 
indifference of the UN forces about maintaining security and 
peace in the area". 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
"The massacre continues. Israel expands its aggression with 
international collaboration. The US rejects cease-fire. Scores of 
martyrs reported. The assaults reach everywhere. The resistance 
responds by shelling Haifa and Israeli settlements" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 7/19) 
 
"The Prime Ministry listens to a review of political developments 
by the Foreign Minister, praises the Lebanese resistance's 
steadfastness and denounces Arab and international silence 
towards the Israeli aggression" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/19) 
 
"An official media source: The Israeli shelling targets medical 
aid convoy, not weapons" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/19) 
 
"Syrian children address a message to UN SecGen Kofi Annan: UN 
forces have refrained from protecting children in Marwahim" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/19) 
 
"Syria intensifies campaigns of aid. Syrian organizations place 
their installations at the disposal of Lebanese brothers" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/19) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Days of Rage" 
 
--------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/19): "It seems that Arab popular anger will not be focused on 
the absence of Arab positions, but rather on harmful Arab 
positions.... 
 
"The international position has colluded to an unprecedented 
degree with the Israeli aggression, to the extent that 
international positions have turned from dealing with the 
executioner and the victim on an equal footing, to political 
support for the executioner.... 
 
"The UN Security Council has failed to take a position that 
compels Israel to stop its aggression.... Maybe Arab popular 
anger has not reached a level enabling it to express its 
existence and role in the required manner. However, no one can 
deny that this anger has reached levels it has not reached 
before.  This is the truth which has to crystallize in the coming 
days." 
 
---------------------- 
 
"Lessons and Examples" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (7/18): "What is happening in Lebanon is reminiscent of 
what happened 60 years ago when the occupation forces abandoned 
our Palestinian people following mass slaughter, turning them 
into homeless refugees everywhere in the world.  Israel is doing 
the same now to the residents of southern Lebanon threatening 
them with the same fate if they continue to hold on to their 
land, villages, national rights, and sovereignty in their 
homeland. Why? Because Israel simply wants to turn all of 
southern Lebanon into a security zone with guaranteed US approval 
supported by the civilized west and, regretfully, some Arabs.... 
 
"Only the resistance had the courage to take the decision of 
confrontation.  It is now offering lessons and examples to the 
nation, stating that whoever seeks peace will eventually be 
stripped of everything in view of the endless US -Israeli 
conditions...." 
 
---------------------- 
 
"Imbalanced Statement" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Bassam Radwan, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
"The statement issued by the G-8 Summit constitutes a letter of 
support for the Israeli occupation government to continue its 
sinful aggression against Lebanon.... 
 
"Leaders of the G-8 summit could have adopted responsible 
positions to stop the Israeli aggression, but instead adopted the 
conditions of the Israeli murders to a ceasefire.... 
 
"It is time to realize that there will be no peace in this region 
as long as there is an enemy that recognizes only the language of 
killing and destruction, with or without a pretext, and that 
there is no way to curb and break this enemy but through 
confronting and resisting it through all possible means...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"A Call to Confront the Terrorism of Occupation" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Ghassan Abdul-Aziz Othman, member of the Central Command of the 
National Progressive Front, wrote an op-ed in government-owned Al- 
Ba'th on (7/19): "The only description for the recent Israeli 
aggression against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples is 
 
 
'official terrorism'.... 
 
"The same description applies to the US occupation of Iraq and 
the military operations there....  There are several examples of 
'official terrorism' practiced by Israel against Palestinians and 
practiced by the Anglo-American occupation in Iraq.  Among these 
examples are the Gaza shore massacre, the Hadithah massacre, and 
the current barbaric massacres in Lebanon.... 
Those who claim to fight terrorism and wage war against it are 
the very ones who practice official terrorism.... 
 
"What is required now is to announce an international campaign, 
in which Arabs and the countries that reject the policy of 
hegemony take part, with the purpose of resisting the forces of 
terrorism in defense of the security of the world and the 
people's right to freedom and independence. What is also required 
is an angry popular reaction, including all Arab arenas, with 
continuing demonstrations, sit-ins and protests until Arab and 
international action is taken to contribute to ending the 
barbaric aggression against Lebanon, and the siege and massacres 
against the Palestinian people...." 
 
Seche