06DAMASCUS674
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR BAGHDAD REFUGEE COORDINATOR
Thu Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0674/01 0471440
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161440Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0648
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5804
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2164
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7191UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AMMAN FOR KANESHIRO, BAGHDAD FOR HILL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC OTRA PREF SMIG SY IZ
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR BAGHDAD REFUGEE COORDINATOR 
CAMILLE HILL 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 411 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Damascus welcomes and grants country clearance 
to Baghdad Refugee Coordinator Camille Hill for travel to 
Damascus from February 28 through March 4, 2006.  After 
clearing customs, traveler will be met and assisted at the 
airport by an Embassy driver who will display a sign with the 
traveler's name. 
 
¶2. (U) POC for this visit is Maria d.G. Olson, POL; Embassy 
phone (963)(11) 333-1342, Ext. 272; home phone (963)(11) 
612-3845; mobile phone 094-405-166. 
 
¶3. (U) Action Request:  Each visitor must bring a copy of 
his/her travel orders or provide fiscal data for the costs of 
the visit.  Costs include American and FSN overtime, 
transportation costs for official vehicles or commercial 
transportation long distance telephone calls, and other costs 
that are directly attributable to the visit. 
 
¶4. (U) Visa Requirement:  Each traveler must have a valid 
Syrian visa prior to departure for Damascus.  The Syrian 
government will not/not normally grant airport or border 
visas.  Persons traveling on passports bearing an Israeli 
visa or entry/exit stamp, or persons born in the Gaza region 
or of Gazan descent, will be refused entry to Syria.  Persons 
arriving in Syria on a single entry visa and who will be 
staying in Syria in excess of 10 days are required to obtain 
a "verification stamp" in their passports after arrival. 
American citizens are cautioned that the Syrian government 
rigidly enforces restrictions on prior travel to Israel. 
Travelers with Israeli stamps in their passports, Jordanian 
entry cachets, or cachets from Egypt or other countries that 
suggest prior travel to Israel will cause Syrian immigration 
authorities to refuse the traveler admission into Syria. 
Likewise, the absence of entry stamps from a country adjacent 
to Israel, which the traveler has just visited, will cause 
Syrian immigration officials to refuse admittance.  American 
citizen travelers suspected of having traveled to Israel have 
been detained for questioning. 
 
¶5. (U) Security Requirements:  All visitors must receive a 
briefing from the Regional Security office upon arrival. 
 
¶6. (U) Lodging:  Per an e-mail request from Amman-based 
RefCoord Claire Kaneshiro, a single room has been reserved at 
the Four Seasons Hotel Damascus (telephone 963-11-339-1010) 
for the nights of Tuesday, February 28 - Thursday, March 2, 
departing the morning of March 3.  The room rate of USD 110 
is within per diem but does not include breakfast, a 10 
percent service charge or 11 percent tax.  The Four Seasons 
accepts major credit cards. 
 
¶7.  (U) Departure Tax and Flight Reconfirmation:  Syria 
charges a departure tax of SP200 (approximately $4), payable 
in SP cash only.  Those travelers on diplomatic passports are 
exempt, but those with official passports are required to pay 
the tax.  Visitors also should confirm onward flight 
reservations 72 hours prior to departure. 
 
¶8. (U) Health:  Health facilities in Damascus are not up to 
U.S. or European standards and facilities outside Damascus 
are extremely limited.  Only personnel covered under the 
State Department's medical program, and with a valid medical 
clearance for Syria are eligible for medevac at USG cost. 
All other visitors are recommended to have medical evacuation 
insurance sufficient to cover evacuation by chartered air 
ambulance or ensure their agency will voucher the cost. 
 
¶9. (U) Communications:  Long distance telephone calls (for 
official business only) can be placed from the Embassy if the 
traveler provides a fund cite or has authorization from the 
appropriate agency/section head at post.  IVG lines are 
available at post.  The Internet can be accessed through a 
stand-alone PC in the Embassy on a first-come, first-serve 
basis.  There is no charge for this service.  Alternatively, 
the Internet may be accessed from hotels in Damascus using 
either of two Syrian ISPs or through the Embassy's Internet 
connection.  (Check with the ISC for accounts and 
configuration settings.)  There are also several Internet 
"cafes" available.  Cell phone roaming is available in Syria 
for GSM systems only.  Please contact the Embassy in advance 
to make arrangements for cell phone access if you do not have 
a GSM system phone. 
 
¶10. (U) Currency Exchange:  The Embassy Class B cashier 
provides accommodation exchange from dollars to Syrian pounds 
at the current rate for institutions (SP 53 to $1) against 
 
cash, travelers checks, or, with the authorization of the 
financial management officer, personal checks.  Reverse 
accommodation exchange is not authorized in accordance with 
Syrian government regulations.  Alternatively, travelers can 
purchase pounds at branches of the Commercial Bank of Syria. 
(A branch office is located in the Sheraton Hotel.)  It is 
illegal to exchange money except at authorized exchange 
points (i.e., the Embassy or branches of the Commercial 
Bank).  Post recommends against using any type of credit or 
debit cards for purchases or currency exchange while in Syria. 
 
¶11. (U) Photos: Photography of individuals in uniform 
(including police), government buildings, and military 
installations is strictly forbidden. 
 
¶12. (U) Threat Assessment: Presently in Syria there are no 
specific threats against official or unofficial American 
travelers.  Political developments in the Middle East are 
fluid and can quickly affect the security environment in 
Syria.  Violent mob attacks against U.S. mission facilities 
in Syria occurred in 1998 and 2000 in response to regional 
events.  In February 2005 the former Prime Minister of 
Lebanon was assassinated in Beirut, precipitating the 
withdrawal from Lebanon of Syrian military forces.  The 
entire political, economic, and security implications of this 
change remain unknown.  All Americans traveling to Syria 
should try to be unpredictable in their activities. They 
should avoid large crowds and gatherings and should report 
suspicious incidents to the Regional Security Officer. 
Further, they should avoid electronic financial transactions 
and should not carry valuables or large amounts of cash in 
crowded shopping districts.  Visitors should read and follow 
the guidance contained in the latest Public Announcements and 
State Department Travel Advisory for Syria. 
SECHE