06DAMASCUS2211
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Palestinians,
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2211/01 1311314
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (508)
O 111314Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8926
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5942
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3808
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2319
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7014
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0974
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4389
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0609
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6753UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Palestinians, 
Syria/Sudan, Meqdad/Anan, Syria/Lebanon (5/11) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Papers reported that the Palestinian government 
thanked President Asad for the Syrian fund-raising campaign for 
the Palestinian people and for receiving 244 Palestinian refugees 
coming from Iraq. That came in a phone call President Asad 
received from Palestinian Prime Minister Ismail Hanieh and a 
cable of appreciation from Ali Mustafa, General Director of the 
General Board of Palestinian Refugees in Syria. Farouk al- 
Qaddoumi, Head of the PLO Political Bureau, also expressed 
appreciation of Syria's support during his meeting with Ahmad 
Abdul Karim, Chairman of the Syrian Arab Popular Committee for 
Support of Palestinians. 
 
Syrian papers also reported that Mustafa Otham Ismail, the 
visiting Sudanese Presidential Advisor, held talks with Foreign 
Minister Walid Al-Mouallem that focused on Syrian-Lebanese 
relations, developments in the occupied territories, and the 
situation in Iraq. FM Mouallem thanked Sudan for its efforts, as 
a chairman of the Arab summit, to boost inter-Arab relations and 
Arab solidarity.  Dr. Ismail announced in a press statement that 
preparations are underway to hold a Joint Syrian-Sudanese 
ministerial committee meeting, noting that investment projects 
have been proposed by both sides to cement cooperation. Ismail 
also held talks with President Asad and Vice President Shara to 
update them on events in the Arab arena, mainly in Iraq and 
Lebanon. Talks also touched upon the latest developments in 
Darfur. 
 
Papers reported that UN SecGen Kofi Anan had a meeting with 
Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Meqdad during which Anan 
underlined Syria's vital role in the region. Anan also reiterated 
the importance of implementing all UN resolutions related to the 
Palestinian issue and the Middle East, stressing the necessity of 
not exposing the Palestinian people to more problems, 
particularly after the latest democratic elections. Dr. Meqdad 
underscored the main role of the international organization in 
easing tension in the region. "It is important to exert more 
pressure to make Israel implement UN resolutions and withdraw 
from the occupied Arab land in order to realize a just and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East," Dr. Meqdad said. Both 
sides underlined the importance of the UN role in Iraq and 
expressed full support for the Lebanese national dialogue, noting 
the need to provide appropriate conditions to make the dialogue a 
succeed. 
 
Syrian papers also featured Information Minister Mohsen Bilal's 
interview with Al-Manar satellite channel, in which he said that 
"Syrian media will always be an honest conveyor of information to 
Syrian, Arab and International societies and public opinion.... 
The Minister said that Syria looks positively at the Lebanese 
national dialogue and wishes to have a unified and healthy 
Lebanon. "Damascus's doors are always open to all honest and 
national Lebanese who want to work hard to establish brotherly 
and distinguished relations between Syria and Lebanon," he 
clarified, stressing that those who work against this are working 
against history and geography. The minister warned against 
turning Lebanon into a conduit and base for conspiracies against 
Syria. "We hope that Lebanon will not turn into an executive of 
its foreign embassies' orders," he added, recalling all the 
sacrifices Syria has made to protect Lebanon's security and 
stability. "Supporting the Lebanese resistance is our choice 
until a just and comprehensive peace is achieved in the region," 
he said. Dr. Bilal stressed Syria's commitment to UN resolutions 
and Iraq's unity, stability and sovereignty. He criticized the US 
double-standards policy regarding Israel, a policy that rejects 
UN resolutions, particularly resolutions 242, 338, 425 and 104, 
which stipulates the Palestinians' right of return. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a phone call from Palestinian Prime 
Minister Ismail Hanieh, who thanks Syria for standing by the 
Palestinian people. President Asad also receives a cable of amity 
and loyalty from Ali Mustafa, General Director of the General 
Board of Palestinian Refugees in Syria, thanking him for 
 
receiving Palestinian children, women and men after a tough and 
bitter siege at the Iraqi and Jordanian borders" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 5/11) 
"Vice-President Farouk al-Shara and Foreign Minister Walid al- 
Mouallem discuss with Mustafa Otham Ismail, Sudanese Presidential 
Advisor, the latest developments in the region, and welcome 
agreement on Darfur" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/11) 
 
"Information Minister Dr. Mohsen Bilal says in a meeting with 
Lebanese Satellite TV Channel al-Manar: We welcome everyone who 
works to establish distinguished relations between Syria and 
Lebanon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/11) 
 
"UN SecGen Kofi Annan meets Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Faisal 
Miqdad in New York and stresses Syria's pivotal role in the 
Middle East" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/11) 
 
"A huge demonstration sweeps Beirut protesting the economic 
policy of the Lebanese government. Lahoud: The Lebanese are fed 
up with promises. Aoun: The cabinet is impassive towards Lebanese 
citizens' sufferings. Israeli warplanes violate Lebanese air 
space. Israeli forces shell South Lebanon" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 5/11) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
"A Compass for those Who Have Lost Direction" 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
Khalid al-Ashhab, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (5/11): "Syria, in the past 30 years, stopped the 
bloodshed in Lebanon and protected the Lebanese from one 
another.... 
 
"There is no crisis of confidence between Lebanon and Syria. The 
crisis of confidence is between Lebanon and Lebanon, between the 
genuine Arab Lebanon of resistance, which has not disavowed 
itself or its blood, which is mixed with the blood of its 
sisterly Syria, and the Lebanon of embassies, slogans, and 
bombs.... 
 
"Lebanon needs to rise against those who have misled, sold, and 
bought it, and who are today bargaining over its resistance and 
destiny...." 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
"Political Diversity and Multiple Powers" 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
Adnan Ali, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(5/11): "The Gaza clashes between HAMAS and Fatah militants once 
again underline the need to order the Palestinian home on a 
sound basis and to direct the guns only toward the Israeli 
enemy. 
 
"The various Palestinian parties need to shoulder their 
responsibilities and address their differences frankly, giving 
the higher interest of the Palestinian people precedence over 
all personal and party interests.... 
 
"Both HAMAS and Fatah are in power.... The two factions must 
quickly find a formula not only to live together peacefully, but 
also to achieve understanding and work jointly to serve the 
interests of the Palestinian people...." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"Before the Collapse of Basra" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (5/11): "There must be effective Arab solidarity to 
confront the dangers that are coming from the West and from 
Israel.... 
"These dangers threaten all Arabs without exception.... The 
Greater Middle East is meant to be built on the rubble of Arab 
countries and under an Israeli leadership.... 
 
"What makes things worse is that Arabs themselves help these 
plans, sometimes willingly and sometimes by complying with 
foreign dictates. 
 
"Arabs still have a chance to end this bizarre situation and 
confront the threats.... All they need is resolve, 
determination, and unity around one courageous position capable 
of facing the storms.... 
 
"The United States can break every Arab country separately, but 
it cannot break the will of the nation if it is united." 
 
---------------- 
 
"Lack of Vision" 
 
---------------- 
 
Hikmat Fakah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(5/11): "Donald Rumsfeld stated recently that no one was able to 
predict how long the Iraq war would last.... The only meaning of 
this is that the United States uses its power haphazardly and 
undertakes war whose objectives and results it does not know.... 
 
"This endangers American interests and causes damage to 
others.... The presence of people like Rumsfeld in power is a 
looming danger...." 
 
Seche