06DAMASCUS3969
Damascus Media Reaction: Israel/Lebanon, Syria/Lebanon,
Mon Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0037
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3969/01 2261242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141242Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0933
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6180
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4022
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2577
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4593
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0810
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6949UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003969 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israel/Lebanon, Syria/Lebanon, 
Syria/Germany, Iraq (8/14) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers reported that President Asad received a 
telephone call from UN SecGen Kofi Annan. Their talks dealt with 
the situation in Lebanon following the UNSC resolution and with 
implementation of the ceasefire. 
Papers also quoted an official Syrian source as saying that Syria 
supports the Lebanese national consensus and reservations 
expressed by Lebanese officials about UN Resolution 1701. The 
source said Syria urges the international community to help 
Lebanon rebuild what the Israeli military has destroyed, to 
enhance UNIFIL's role and to support a comprehensive peace based 
on UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 388. The official 
confirmed that the "April Understanding" is the framework that 
will control the fight in the interval between the cessation of 
aggressive acts and Israeli withdrawal from South Lebanon, which 
gives the resistance the right to continue fighting occupation 
forces. 
 
Papers also reported a joint Syrian-Lebanese media dialogue held 
at the Ministry of Information during which Information Minister 
Bilal underscored the correctness of the Lebanese resistance's 
course and praised its steadfastness. He pointed out that the 
resistance has foiled all the enemy schemes and humiliated its 
allegedly undefeated military machine. Former Lebanese Minister 
Weam Wahab said that "the Syrian role, which has long succeeded 
in maintaining Lebanese unity and building its institutions, is 
today even more important for preservation of the Arabism of the 
region and for foiling the US-backed Israeli attempts to destroy 
resistance." Wahab added: "The whole region faces a new era after 
the resistance emerged victorious in the battle against Zionist 
aggression and its war machine." He referred to the Syrian 
rejection of bargaining against the resistance, saying, "Syria 
has chosen adherence to its national and pan-Arab stances as well 
as the aspirations of its people, who have rejected surrender to 
hegemonic superpowers." Charles Ayyob, Editor-in-chief of 
Lebanese daily Al-Dyyar, maintained that "the importance of 
victory lies in the fact that it came at a critical stage of Arab 
history, when solidarity was at its lowest and Israel and the US 
thought they could impose their conditions on Arabs and the whole 
region. Syria will remain the basic guarantor of Lebanese unity 
through its positive role, which supports Lebanese reconciliation 
and rejects participation in any suspicious project that could 
target national unity in Lebanon."  He called on the Arab media 
to exert greater efforts to convey the real voice that echoes 
victory and confronts Zionist propaganda. 
 
Papers also reported that Information Minister Bilal received 
Volkhard Windfuhr, head of the Cairo Office of the German 
Magazine DER SPIEGEL and chairman of the Cairo-based Foreign 
Correspondents Association. Talk focused on the Israeli war 
against Lebanon. During the meeting, the minister underlined the 
importance of the international media, in general, and, in 
particular, its role in revealing the truth about the crimes 
committed by Israel against civilians and the infrastructure of 
Lebanon and Palestine. For his part, Windfuhr condemned the 
continuous Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people, 
pointing out that Israel is carrying on a losing battle in 
Lebanon and Palestine. "The results of war will negatively impact 
Israel," he added. "Israel has not learned the lessons of its 
first experience in Lebanon, or of the experiences of other 
colonial countries that were forced out of the Arab lands by Arab 
resistance," the journalist said. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a phone call from UN SecGen Annan on the 
situation in Lebanon following the UNSC resolution" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 8/14) 
 
"A Syrian official source expresses sorrow over the UNSC 
disregard for Lebanon's demands and its failure to hold Israel 
responsible for the aggression;  Syria supports the national 
Lebanese consensus and Lebanese reservations about UNSC 
Resolution No. 1701" (Government-owned Tishree, 8/14) 
 
 
 
"Israeli madness on the eve of carrying out the UNSC resolution: 
Tons of bombs fall on Beirut suburb, Tyre and southern villages. 
Tel Aviv admits: No army in the world is able to disarm 
Hizbollah" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/14) 
"Austrian figures call for prosecuting Israel for war crimes in 
Lebanon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/14) 
 
"'The New Yorker': Bush and Cheney are involved in the war 
against Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/14) 
 
"A joint Syrian-Lebanese media dialogue held at the Information 
Ministry to discuss dimensions of the resistance victory" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/14) 
 
"Information Minister Bilal receives Volkhard Windfuhr, head of 
the Cairo Office of German Magazine DER SPIEGEL and chairman of 
the Cairo-based Foreign Correspondents Association. Bilal: The 
media has an important role in uncovering Israeli crimes" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/14) 
 
"Over 100 Iraqis killed or injured in explosions in Baghdad and 
over 195 Iraqis killed or injured in terrorist explosion south of 
Baghdad"  (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/14) 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"So as Not to Steal the Resistance's Victory" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawrah, wrote (8/14): "There are attempts at the United Nations 
and in world capitals to steal the victory of the resistance.... 
No one can steal the fruits of this victory.... This victory 
buried the new Middle East plan, the birth pangs of which were 
announced by Condoleezza Rice at the beginning of the aggression 
on Lebanon.... 
 
"The resistance victory also irrevocably abolished the notion of 
'the invincible army' and constituted an American defeat to be 
added to the resounding US defeat in Iraq. 
 
"There must be an international investigation into Israel's 
crimes in Lebanon.... The international community must force 
Israel to implement all UN resolutions.... The Syrian vision, 
which supported the line of resistance in Palestine and Lebanon, 
produced effective fruits.... It proved to be a sound 
vision...." 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
         "The Accounts Do not Tally" 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
maintained (8/14): "Israel and the United States miscalculated 
and thus failed to achieve their objectives in Lebanon.... Arabs 
need to learn the lesson, reconsider their positions, and 
correct their mistakes. Now that Lebanon has foiled the Israeli- 
American plan, Arabs need to reassess their position, the 
sources of their power, and the size of their capabilities, 
which can do a great deal to protect their rights and interests. 
What foiled the plan and dream of Rice and Olmert was Lebanon in 
its valiant resistance, the steadfastness of its people, and the 
solidarity of the Arab and Islamic peoples with it." 
 
"A new resisting Middle East rejecting hegemony, aggression, and 
occupation is being born now...." 
 
--------------------------- 
 
 
"Be Ashamed, Mr. President" 
--------------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Hamid Sallum, an op-ed writer in government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, said (8/14): "President Bush should be ashamed of himself 
for calling Muslims fascists.... 
 
"After all this treacherous aggression and the positions that the 
United States has been adopting to prolong the aggression and the 
killings, destruction, and displacement associated with it, and 
after the statements we heard from this rancorous American 
president, do we still need more analyses, theorizing, and debate 
to realize that the aggression on Lebanon, Palestine, and Iraq 
shows hidden hatred targeting the entire [Arab] nation in all its 
groups and colors without exception...?" 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
"Additional US Forces To Iraq... Why?" 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Hasan Salha, a commentator in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (8/14): "Bush said that containing the situation 
in Iraq, in light of the qualitative and quantitative 
development of the national resistance, warrants the dispatch of 
more US forces to Iraq to face what he called terrorism and its 
growing strength, and to contain its operations and its ability 
to attract Iraqi public opinion and mobilize it to join the 
resistance against the occupation represented by the United 
States and against the occupation's command represented by the 
US forces.... 
 
"Why did President Bush declare at this time in particular that 
Iraq needs more US forces to confront the alleged terrorism 
inside Iraq?  And why has he declared that additional forces 
will be sent to Iraq, and has perhaps already begun to dispatch 
such forces...? 
 
"Is it true that the additional Marines will serve the US 
democracy in Iraq?  There is no doubt that US occupation forces 
are taking painful blows in Iraq, and their size, equipment, and 
technology are totally unable to undermine the will and actions 
of the resistance in Iraq. Increasing [the size of US forces] 
and conducting visits will not subjugate the will of the 
resistance, for it defies all weapons.  The resistance is not a 
body that can be torn apart by a missile fired from an aircraft, 
nor is it a wall that can be destroyed by a tank shell. It is a 
spirit that moves to create life.  It is against death, because 
it is something that comes out of death and means life. 
 
"If the will and actions of the resistance in Iraq defy US and 
all other weapons, what is the purpose of sending additional US 
forces and US weapons to Iraq?  Simply, they are there to 
support Israel's aggression against Lebanon and to expand the 
aggression toward Syria, or at least send a message of military 
threat to Syria to stop supporting the legitimate Arab 
resistance against the US-Israeli plan in the region.... 
 
"By dispatching more US soldiers to the region, the United 
States will have announced in a more provocative manner its bias 
toward Israel in its aggression against Lebanon to ensure the 
implementation of Resolution 1559 at a later stage.... 
 
"Hence, the dispatch of additional US forces to the region, 
about three military divisions, is not to work in Iraq, but 
rather to threaten Lebanon and Syria and to threaten Iran, which 
stands firmly in favor of just Arab and Muslim causes.... 
 
"The US is employing all its capabilities to achieve its goals 
and attain its objectives by using all available means and by 
using the United Nations and the Security Council as tools of 
diplomatic pressure that pave the way for launching aggressive 
military operations in the region. 
 
 
"Within a few days only, Israel will launch an enormous 
aggressive operation, one that will be commensurate with the 
size of the forces that are being mobilized for this purpose, in 
addition to the US forces that will be dispatched to Iraq. 
Moreover, such an operation will initially be commensurate with 
the size of the US objective, namely, eliminating Hizbollah and 
the Islamic resistance and establishing the new Middle East that 
the United States wants to establish and that is going through a 
difficult birth.  We say to the United States and Israel that 
because this birth is against the laws of nature it will be a 
stillbirth." 
 
Corbin