06DAMASCUS4184
Damascus Media Reaction:  Asad Interview,
Thu Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4184/01 2361128
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241128Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1199
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6223
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4059
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2619
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7250
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1249
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4632
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0845
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6984UNCLAS DAMASCUS 004184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Damascus Media Reaction:  Asad Interview, 
Syria/Finland, Syria/Iran, Lebanon/Israel/US (8/24) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  President Asad's interview with Dubai TV was the 
major topic in papers today.  President Asad said he would view 
deployment of international troops along the Lebanon-Syria border 
as a hostile move toward his country.  "It robs Lebanon of its 
sovereignty.  No single state in the entire world would tolerate 
deploying foreign troops on its border posts unless there is a 
state of war with the other state, as is the case in the Golan or 
in southern Lebanon.  This is normal.  It is, first, handing over 
sovereignty to other parties;  and, secondly, it signals a 
hostile stand against Syria.  Naturally, it will create problems 
between Syria and Lebanon," Asad said. 
 
Asked whether he will call upon the Lebanese government to refuse 
the deployment of international forces along the borders with 
Syria, President Asad said, "We call on the Lebanese government 
to shoulder its responsibilities just like any other state.  It 
will be held responsible.  If it wants to ruin the relationship 
between Syria and Lebanon, then it is free to do so.  It can bear 
the responsibility for that.  There is a trend in the Lebanese 
Government and a trend among the majority of the Lebanese seeking 
to accomplish this objective." 
 
On the issue of the Shebaa Farms, Asad said, "There can be no 
drawing of (borders) at the Shebaa Farms before the departure of 
Israeli forces," and that the issue "will only be solved in a 
comprehensive solution that includes the Golan." 
 
On the contradiction in Syrian statements regarding the Shebaa 
Farms, President Asad said that "there is no contradiction;  on 
the contrary, each position completes the other.  In my last 
speech, I said that Shebaa Farms is Lebanese territory, but what 
are the borders of Shebaa Farms?  Is there no demarcation?  How 
is demarcation done?  They now propose to conduct demarcation on 
the map in order to serve Israel.  This falls within that same 
context.  It is a fact.  Some international forces pressured 
Syria in the past to implement this.  Demarcation between two 
states cannot be conducted on a map.  The map reflects the 
situation on the ground and not vice versa.  Demarcation is done 
on the ground through certain coordinates;  there is a technical 
aspect to it.  You first determine these coordinates, then you 
put them on the map, and then you register the final agreement on 
these coordinates with the United Nations." 
Syrian papers also reported the visit to Finland by Syrian 
Foreign Minister Walid al-Mouallem, who held official talks with 
his Finnish counterpart Erkki Tuomioja on the situation in the 
region, particularly in Lebanon and Palestine.  Both sides 
reviewed repercussions of the Israeli aggression against Lebanon, 
particularly after the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 
1701, and the role of the UNIFIL troops in South Lebanon.  They 
reiterated the importance of an Israeli withdrawal to behind the 
blue line, consolidating the cease-fire, returning the displaced 
back home, and rebuilding Lebanon.  The two sides discussed 
Syrian-European relations and the importance of involving Europe, 
the closest neighbor to the region, in solving the problems it 
faces, foremost of which is the achievement of a just and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.  In this context, 
viewpoints were identical on the significance of boosting 
dialogue between the two sides after developments have proven the 
pivotal role Syria plays in the regional arena in the service of 
peace and security in the region. 
Papers also reported that Syrian Grand Mufti Ahmad Bader al-Din 
Hasoun, in a discussion after reading the communique of the 19th 
International Conference of Islamic Unity in Tehran, stressed the 
legitimacy of resistance as long as there are occupied Arab 
territories, emphasizing the necessity of restoring the occupied 
Arab territories in Lebanon, Palestine, and Syrian Golan.  Sheikh 
Hasoun called on the Conference to include the legitimacy of 
resisting occupation in its final statement. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"A vision about what happened and what will happen.  President 
Asad, in an interview with Dubai satellite channel:  Syria has 
always been in the hurricane's eye.... Those who have protected 
 
her are the Syrian people.... Coming weeks will determine the 
final vision of peace.... Everyone who thinks of isolating Syria 
will isolate himself from the basic issues.... We are highly 
sensitive towards foreign interventions.... Deploying UNIFIL on 
the Syrian-Lebane 
se boarder will create a state of enmity between 
the two countries.... If peace does not lead to the restoration 
of the Golan, a Syrian resistance will emerge, whether we like it 
or not" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/24) 
 
"FM Mouallem in Helsinki holding talks with Foreign Minister of 
Finland on the UNIFIL mission in Lebanon and Syrian-European 
relations" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/24) 
 
"British MP George Galloway:  The victory of Lebanese Resistance 
impressed British public opinion" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
8/24) 
 
"Israel escalates its violations of UNSC Resolution 1701. Germany 
responds to Washington:  There is no need for a second 
resolution.  Amnesty International:  Israel committed war crimes; 
we call for an independent investigation" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/24) 
 
"Israel purchases two nuclear submarines from Germany" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/24) 
 
"The Lebanese Resistance thanks Syria for its support and the 
great hospitality it offered displaced Lebanese" (Government- 
owned Al-Ba'th, 8/24) 
 
"Republicans cast doubts on Bush's capabilities:  Is he stupid? 
... Will the Vietnam defeat be repeated in Iraq?" (Government- 
owned Al-Ba'th, 8/24) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------- 
 
"War on Peace?" 
 
---------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (8/24):  "The aggressive war that Israel launched 
against Lebanon had a grave impact on the Israeli military and 
political establishments, which witnessed splits, differences, 
and mutual recriminations.  Moreover, contradictory and largely 
conflicting statements and positions appeared:  Some talked 
about peaceful negotiations with Syria and others rejected such 
negotiations.  Yet others spoke about a new round of fighting to 
annihilate Hizbollah. 
 
"Does Israel still want war to rehabilitate the defeated army 
and the tense Israeli public, or is it inclined toward peace 
after the loss of all peace opportunities over the past 15 
years? 
 
"Irrespective of what Israelis are thinking after the defeat of 
their army, and regardless of what the Americans want to do 
later -- either to turn the Resistance' victory into a defeat 
through local tools that volunteered to perform this mission or 
to exploit what happened to save the new Middle East from the 
crisis it finds itself in -- the Arab region is witnessing the 
birth pangs of a new Middle East different from the one that the 
neoconservatives planned.  Those neoconservatives wanted the 
occupation of Iraq, the aggression on Lebanon, and the events in 
the occupied Palestinian territories to serve as connected links 
in their new Middle East.  But the new Middle East that is being 
born now had its first blocks laid by the Resistance on the 
rubble of the American-Israeli new Middle East. 
 
"This new equation in the region had not crossed the minds of 
the planners and theorists in Washington and Tel Aviv.  The 
implementation of their plan turned things upside down. The 
chaos that now prevails on the Israeli political scene and the 
frustration and disappointment in Washington provide ample 
 
proof...." 
 
------------------------------ 
"Israel and the Talk of Peace" 
------------------------------ 
 
Adnan Ali, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(8/24):  "Much of the controversy that has arisen in Israel 
following Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni's decision to 
form a committee to consider the possibility of resuming 
negotiations with Syria indicates that Israel is still not ready 
for a return to political action as a new option to deal with 
pending issues in the region.... 
 
"In the aftermath of the Israeli failure in Lebanon, the Israeli 
press is reflecting a major controversy over the grave 
consequences for Israel itself of neglecting the political 
process.  This is because Israel, with the encouragement of 
Washington, has blocked all avenues before the Arab people to 
attain their rights, leaving them nothing other than a choice 
between armed resistance or total submission to the will of 
Israel and the United States. 
 
"Arabs have vehemently expressed their rejection of the option 
of capitulation, through resistance in Palestine, Lebanon, and 
Iraq, making up for the official Arab weakness in confronting 
the US-Israeli arrogance. 
 
"Despite the harsh lesson the Israeli government has received in 
Lebanon, it has, to date, failed to learn a sound lesson, and it 
may not do so at all.  The current talk of peace in Israel is 
more likely intended to distract attention from the Israeli 
government's failure in Lebanon and, perhaps, to cover up 
another imminent aggression." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"We Wish He Hadn't Caused Destruction and Weren't Generous" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
As'ad Abbud, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (8/24):  "With unique generosity President Bush announced 
an offer of $230 million for the Lebanese reconstruction 
effort.... 
 
"Despite the sweetness of the victory, offering such gifts 
appears like sprinkling dirty sugar on virtuous wounds.... Bush 
could have accepted a ceasefire in the first week of the war. 
If he had, he would have spared Lebanon the loss of thousands of 
people and millions of dollars and have saved his valuable gift 
for himself.  He could have stopped the shipment of weapons, 
particularly the stupid bombs -- stupid as their dispatcher.  If 
he had, he would have spared Lebanon all those losses, have 
saved the price of his stupid bombs, and have spared Britain the 
fabricated embarrassment of allowing the shipment of those bombs 
via its territory.... 
 
"Bush's gift to Lebanon really deserves to be rejected.  And I 
honestly say that it is shameful for every Arab to accept such a 
ridiculous and dirty gift.... All Arabs, including Syria, must 
contribute to the reconstruction of Lebanon...." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"A Dangerous Curve" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (8/24):  "The United States is continuing its efforts 
to disarm Hizbollah and consequently turn Lebanon into a base 
for attacks against other countries in the region.... 
 
"US Ambassador John Bolton stated that Washington is working for 
 
a new Security Council resolution calling for disarming 
Hizbollah.... It is obvious that Resolution 1701 complements 
Resolution 1559, and that the new resolution that Bolton is 
talking about complements the conditions that the United States 
and Israel, in collusion with other countries, specifically at 
the United Nations, set for Lebanon to meet.  This proves that 
the US Administration's only concern is to please Israel, even 
at the expense of American interests in the region. 
 
"The US talk about Hizbollah's weapons is intimidation to 
destabilize Lebanon and facilitate the achievement of what the 
terrorist aggression was unable to achieve...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"On Whom Do Arabs Rely at the Security Council?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Salim Abbud, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(8/24):  "The Arab regimes must wake up and confront the 
challenges that the entire Arab nation is facing.... 
 
"Arabs' silence on what is happening in Palestine, Iraq, and 
Lebanon, and on the threats against Syria, prevented the world 
from supporting Arabs or showing sympathy for them.  It made the 
United States and other countries ignore and disdain Arab 
sentiments and bypass Arabs, to do whatever they want in the 
Arab region and to defend Israel and use their veto in its favor 
and their influence to support it.  These Arab forces and 
regimes, which saw the action of the Resistance as an 
uncalculated adventure, possess many pressure and power cards, 
but they are not being used.... 
 
"Although the Israeli-American war is still going on in Lebanon, 
threatening the entire region, the official Arab order still 
adopts a cold position, relying on an American-French-British 
role even though all these countries play one role for one 
objective:  supporting Israel with no limits and undermining the 
Lebanese, Palestinian, and Iraqi resistance to kill the spirit 
of resistance among the Arabs...." 
 
Corbin