06DAMASCUS4365
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Palestinian
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4365/01 2491329
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061329Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1405
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6252
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4087
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2650
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7274
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1278
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4656
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0871
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7008UNCLAS DAMASCUS 04365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Palestinian 
Territories, Iraq (9/6) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers today reported President Asad's 
phone call to UN Secretary General Kofi Annan following up on 
the situation in Lebanon, and Annan's interview with the daily 
newspaper Al-Hayat (Sept. 6 edition) describing Syria's 
cooperation with the UN regarding regional issues as "positive," 
and saying that there was tangible Syrian cooperation in this 
regard.  Annan confirmed that the issue of exchanging embassies 
between Syria and Lebanon is a sovereign issue to be determined 
by the two countries.  He underlined the importance of moving to 
achieve a comprehensive peace in the Middle East on all tracks, 
saying "it is the only way through which we can enjoy peace." 
 
Papers also reported that Minister of Information Bilal 
participated in a symposium held by the Anglo-American 
Organization at the British House of Commons.  Dr. Bilal 
stressed that Syria is working to realize a just and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and to eliminate Israeli 
occupation from her territories through full Israeli withdrawal 
from all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan, 
to the Jun 4th 1967 borders.  On UNSC Resolution 1701, Dr. Bilal 
said that it does not call for a cease-fire, which is a matter 
that raises astonishment and condemnation.  He criticized the 
British Government's position that allowed Israel to continue 
its aggression against Lebanon for 33 days. 
 
Papers also reported that Members of the Syrian Parliament 
staged a sit-in on Tuesday in solidarity with their Lebanese 
counterparts to protest the Israeli blockade of Lebanon.  They 
sent a cable of solidarity to Lebanese parliament speaker Nabih 
Berri. 
 
Papers also reported that MP Muhamad Habash, Chairman of the 
Islamic Studies Center in Damascus, announced on Tuesday that a 
popular delegation, including 50 parliamentarians, Islamic 
scholars and Christian clergymen, will head to Lebanon to 
demonstrate full solidarity with the Lebanese people.  "The 
visit comes within the framework of the activities of the 
Islamic and Christian Joint Committee, which works in the field 
of religious brotherhood and enhances cohesion between the two 
brotherly countries," Dr. Habash told a SANA reporter.  Dr. 
Habash said that the delegation will visit areas destroyed by 
the brutal Israeli aggression and meet with a number of 
political leaders and religious and spiritual personalities. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad discusses the situation in Lebanon by telephone 
with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
9/6) 
 
"President Asad honors families and civil associations who hosted 
the brotherly Lebanese during recent aggression against Lebanon: 
What you offered was great and unparalleled" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 9/6) 
 
"Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal maintains at the British 
House of Commons:  Syria is working to realize a just and 
comprehensive peace;  Tony Blair's government allowed Israel to 
destroy Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/6) 
 
"The People's Assembly stages a sit-in in solidarity with 
Lebanese MPs.  Speaker al-Abrash tells Lebanese counterpart:  We 
support you in order to complete reaping the fruits of victory" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/6) 
 
"Hassan Nasrallah, Secretary General of Hizbollah:  Israel takes 
Syria's power into consideration;  it stayed away from the Syrian 
border during the latest war" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/6) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"Reconstruction Is a More Sublime Goal" 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(9/6):  "President Asad's decision to rebuild three towns in 
south Lebanon is yet another indication that Syria and Lebanon 
share everything, even the loaf of bread, despite modest 
material resources in relation to the magnitude of the tragedy 
and the destruction that the Zionist enemy caused in Lebanon.... 
 
"Syria always seeks to serve the interests of Lebanon and the 
Lebanese people, regardless of the campaigns by some tendentious 
Lebanese who are connected with suspicious schemes.... 
 
"It is true that some people continue to bombard every Syrian 
initiative to help Lebanon and to interpret it based on their 
deviant positions, but it is also true that the majority of 
Lebanese know the true Syrian intentions and what sacrifices 
Syria has made, with its blood and money, for their sake.... 
 
"What counts now is the reconstruction of Lebanon through the 
concerted efforts of sincere Lebanese and the sons of the Arab 
nation...." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"Inside Siege and Outside Siege" 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(9/6):  "Those Lebanese who plotted against the Resistance and 
relied on its collapse during the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon are now trying to portray the Resistance's victory as a 
defeat.... 
 
"Those who trade in the blood of the Lebanese cannot discuss 
patriotism or claim they care about Lebanon and its people.... 
Now that the American plan has received a fatal blow at the 
hands of the Resistance, we today see those who are involved in 
this plan pulling out their knives to stab and assassinate the 
Resistance, either through the call to disarm Hizbollah or 
through a vicious attack on the Resistance and all those who 
support it from other factions.  They are doing this to defend 
the new Middle East plan because their existence is linked to 
the existence and implementation of this plan.... 
 
"It is surprising that while this Lebanese team is doing this, 
it is doing nothing to break the Israeli blockade on Lebanon.... 
Those who depart from the principles of the homeland and the 
Resistance will ultimately fail and their policy will 
collapse...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
"Moves That Are Insufficient to Avert Dangers" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, said 
(9/6):  "Although the region and the world in general 
acknowledge that the achievement of peace and the removal of 
occupation is the way to solve the problems of the Middle East, 
Israel and the Bush Administration are more interested in using 
the absence of peace and the continuation of the occupation to 
implement their chaos-based plans at the expense of the peoples 
of the region and the security and stability of the world.... 
 
"The United States is hindering the establishment of the Iraqi 
General Staff because this Iraqi body wants to determine the 
responsibilities for the occupation.... 
 
"Israel, for its part, uses every possible means to kill any 
peace opportunity.  Its incursions into the Gaza Strip and its 
raids into the West Bank result in additional martyrs and 
wounded every day.  Not only that:  Israel's threats against 
 
Iran are escalating, which means that it is almost impossible to 
translate the talk about peace into action.... 
 
"Arabs are to blame for this American and Israeli disdain for 
Arab existence, positions, and interests.... Arabs must adopt 
positions that can prevent Israel from exporting its domestic 
crisis, which the Lebanese Resistance's victory created, 
especially since the danger of the Israeli threats against Iran, 
if implemented, will affect the entire region, and their 
disastrous results will not spare the Arabs...." 
 
------------------ 
 
"Stupid Sanctions" 
 
------------------ 
 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, an op-ed writer in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (9/6):  "The policy of sanctions, which the US 
Administration used in Iraq, Afghanistan, and other parts of the 
world, and which it is now threatening to use against Iran, 
caused destruction, starvation, and chaos in those regions and 
increased the wealth and investments of the multinational 
companies that are led by Bush, Cheney, and Rumsfeld.... 
 
"We wonder how the United States is going to deal with Moscow 
and Beijing, which are now investing more than $40 billion in 
Iran's oil, energy, and nuclear technology sectors.... 
 
"Regardless of how the Iranian nuclear crisis develops, the fact 
is that Iran is not concerned about the stupid sanctions and 
will not give up its sovereign rights...." 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Who Is Lying to Whom?" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Ghazi al-Dada, an op-ed writer in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (9/6):  "It is surprising that President Bush continues to 
insist that the situation in Iraq is fine, even though the 
security situation is worsening day after day and the Pentagon 
is warning that the country is heading toward civil war.... 
 
"If the security situation in Iraq is improving, as President 
Bush and other administration 'optimists' say, what is the need 
for sending more troops to Iraq...? 
 
"Who is lying to whom?  Do Bush and his administration officials 
live in a fictitious dreamer's world that exists only in their 
minds and has no connection whatsoever with reality....?" 
 
Corbin