06DAKAR1761
HUMAN RIGHTS IN SENEGAL: MID-YEAR REVIEW
Fri Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO8010
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1761/01 2021724
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211724Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5826
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 001761 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL, G/TIP, AF/RSA, AF/W AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SOCI SG
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS IN SENEGAL: MID-YEAR REVIEW 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  We recently invited key human rights activists to a 
luncheon seminar to review rights violations and concerns 
in the past year.  About 40 people attended, representing 
key Senegalese NGOs specializing in freedom of speech, 
children and women's rights, TIP (trafficking in persons), 
transparency and anticorruption.  Several international 
organizations, including UNHCR, UNICEF, and the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM), also 
attended.  The main issues raised were lack of adequate 
legal protection for journalists, increasing cases of 
violence against women, lack of enforcement of child 
begging laws and increasing cases of corruption, 
particularly in the judiciary.  END SUMMARY. 
 
CORRUPTION THRIVES 
------------------ 
¶2.  The representative of the Forum Civil, Transparency 
International's Senegalese partner, called corruption 
"Senegal's main problem" and stressed that "GOS responses 
are unsatisfactory."  He noted that ministers and senior 
civil servants are not required by law to make financial 
disclosure statements and that the National Assembly never 
passes the end-of-fiscal year law certifying that the 
national budget has been executed properly, as required by 
current legislation.  The country's National Commission on 
Corruption, he added, has no power to initiate hearings 
even when cases of corruption are reported in the media, 
but can only act upon mandates given by the GOS. 
Participants bemoaned widely perceived high levels of 
corruption in the judicial branch.  Other participants 
pointed to early July press revelations that Aminata 
Mbaye, a senior judge at the Supreme Court (Cour de 
Cassation), had received 15 million CFA francs (CFAF) (USD 
30,000) to "purchase" a case involving fraud in which the 
defendant was likely to receive a prison sentence.  (NOTE: 
Judge Mbaye and the judges who were helping her in the 
prosecution are under administrative investigation and 
have been suspended by the GOS.  END NOTE.) 
 
FREEDOM OF SPEECH 
----------------- 
¶3.  A journalists' union representative noted that freedom 
of speech is protected by the Constitution by a law passed 
in 1996.  In general, he said, there was progress during 
the year.  No journalists were prosecuted or imprisoned 
for propagating false news:  unlike in the past the GOS 
tended to prosecute and imprison political leaders who 
made allegations against the Government rather than the 
media relaying them.  He noted, however, that article 139 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure still allows the GOS to 
put in pretrial detention any journalist "propagating or 
helping propagate" false news.  He also said the increase 
in media enterprises (mainly radio and newspapers) has led 
to hiring of untrained journalists who receive low pay and 
almost no social protection.  Another participant brought 
up the case of a young female journalist involved in a car 
accident while on duty who now may lose use of one leg for 
lack of insurance.  In addition, several media companies 
violate collective bargaining agreements, and participants 
charged that resultant low or unpaid salaries have led to 
journalists blackmailing political leaders to supplement 
their income. 
 
MORE CASES OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN 
------------------------------------ 
¶4.  CLVF, an organization fighting violence against women, 
noted that between October 2005 and July 2006, it has 
dealt with 59 cases of violence involving females.  Five 
cases were rapes of female minors.  In another case, one 
women's husband murdered her.  The CLVF representatives 
deplored the lack of national statistics.  In their view, 
while there is an increase in infanticides reported, many 
cases are still hidden by families or charges are simply 
"abandoned" by prosecutors.  Participants deplored the 
lack of shelters for women victims of domestic violence. 
They also questioned the current criminal system's 
expectations that minors, especially girls of just 5 or 6, 
can bring evidence of rape into court.  They indicated 
that many people accused of rape have been freed by judges 
for lack of sufficient evidence, and called for legal 
reform to reverse the burden of proof.  Another human 
rights organization, RADDHO, noted that just during the 
month of May, 16 cases of child abuse were reported, 
involving children between 6 and 16 years of age. 
 
GOS STILL HESITANT TO BAN CHILD BEGGING 
--------------------------------------- 
¶5.  All participants deplored that despite laws banning 
begging, exploitation of child begging by unscrupulous 
 
DAKAR 00001761  002 OF 002 
 
 
religious teachers and other adults still prevails in the 
streets of Dakar.  One participant said "the law is here, 
it is clear, but nobody is enforcing it." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶6.  The human rights situation in Senegal is generally 
good, but as demonstrated by cases and concerns reported 
at this seminar, there are areas that need to be addressed 
promptly.  There is widespread NGO concern over freedom of 
speech and right of assembly, which the NGOs believe the 
GOS has tended to restrict over the past year.  Above all, 
though, and this may well be driven by current heavy press 
coverage of a particularly egregious case, there is 
concern over alleged corruption in the judiciary.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
Jacobs