06DAMASCUS2975
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Palestinians, OIC
Tue Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0027
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2975/01 1711311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201311Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9821
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6042
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3901
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2428
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7099
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1088
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4474
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0697
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6836UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Palestinians, OIC 
Ministerial, Syria/Italy, Lebanon, Iraq (6/19-20) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that Vice President Farouk 
al-Shara discussed the latest developments in the occupied 
Palestinian territories and the ongoing national dialogue 
between Palestine factions with a Palestinian delegation headed 
by Khaled Meshal, Head of the Hamas Politburo. Mr. Shara 
stressed the importance of making the nat 
ional dialogue a 
success and reaching common ground based on national principles 
that ensure the Palestinian right of return and the 
establishment of an independent state. He also reiterated 
Syria's full support of any offer that may contribute to 
enhancing Palestinian unity. Both sides stressed the importance 
of moving on the bilateral and Arab levels to break the unjust 
siege imposed on the Palestine people. Meshal expressed hope 
that the Palestinian national dialogue will produce positive 
steps. 
 
Papers also reported the 33rd ministerial meeting of the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in Baku, Azerbaijan, 
with the participation of Syria. Foreign Minister Walid al- 
Mouallem, heading an official delegation, represents Syria at the 
meetings. In an opening speech, the President of Azerbaijan, 
Ilham Aliyev, stressed the necessity of enhancing cooperation and 
coordination among the OIC member states in facing present 
challenges. He pointed out the importance of clearing up the true 
image of Islam, based on justice, tolerance and coexistence among 
different peoples.  A number of Arab and Islamic Foreign 
Ministers are participating in the meetings. 
Papers also reported a statement to SANA by Massimo Dalima, 
Italian Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister, stressing the 
importance of Syria's role in establishing peace and security in 
the Middle East, saying that the new Italian government is 
willing to boost and enhance existing cooperation with Syria in 
all fields. Mr. Dalima described bilateral relations between 
Syria and Italy as excellent, saying that Italy is linked to 
Syria by very excellent ties in the economic and culture fields. 
Mr. Dalima added that Italy is committed to working side by side 
with the Syrian government and is very interested in developing 
and boosting existing relations with Syria. He also expressed his 
country's willingness to become directly involved in the process 
of establishing peace in the region. Answering a question about 
his forthcoming tour of the Middle East, Mr. Dalima said 
preparations are underway to outline the special agenda of the 
tour in the framework of Italy's willingness to play its role in 
establishing peace in the Middle East. He expressed hope that the 
peace process could be resumed on all tracks, saying that Syria 
is a central player in establishing the sought-for peace in the 
region, which is an important issue for which both Italy and 
Syria have worked for years. 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Shara confers with Meshal, Head of Hamas Politburo. Talks focus 
on the importance of making the Palestinian National dialogue a 
success" (Government-owned TIshreen, 6/20) 
 
"Italian Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister Massimo Dalima: We 
are determined to develop relations with Syria and committed to 
work to cement peace in the region" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
6/20) 
 
"Israeli Prime Minister Olmert rejects international 
investigation of the Gaza beach massacre. Palestinians are 
optimistic about a national unity government. The Quartet 
endorses European mechanisms for aid to Palestinians" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 6/19) 
 
"Foreign Minister of the OIC calls on the Red Cross and Red 
Crescent to shoulder responsibility in the Palestinian 
territories" (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/20) 
 
"The EU Commissioner Valdner casts doubts on Israel's unilateral 
plans. Progress in the Palestinian National Dialogue. Fatah and 
Hamas representatives call upon participants in the dialogue to 
shoulder their responsibility" (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/20) 
 
"Lebanon awaits the end of the investigation on the Mossad 
 
network in Lebanon to refer the file to the Security Council" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/20) 
 
"The Free Patriotic Movement in Lebanon calls for toppling the 
government. The Amal Movement: Uncovering the Israeli spying 
network is a blow against sedition" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
6/19) 
 
"President Asad reviews Syria's policy and bilateral relations 
with a Romanian Parliamentary delegation" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 6/19) 
 
"At the Conference of Arab-American Committee for Combating 
Discrimination, Minister of Expatriates Shabaan: Coexistence and 
religious tolerance are characteristic of peoples of the 
region.... Violence and extremism are the result of double 
standards" (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/19) 
 
"A massive US military operation in al-Ramadi. Violence continues 
in Baghdad" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 6/19) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"The Source of Syria's Power" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawrah, commented (6/19): "In its contemporary history, 
Syria has experienced extremely delicate and dangerous 
circumstances, dealt with extremely difficult and complicated 
regional and international crises, and addressed many issues. In 
its approach to those circumstances, crises, and issues, it did 
not make mistakes in determining their backgrounds and serious 
repercussions on the stability of the region and international 
peace. It was the others who wrongly read events and crises.... 
Others always realized, later, that Syria was right in its 
positions. This happened in Syria's approach to the issue of 
terrorism and its positions on the Iraq-Iran war, the war on 
Iraq, and developments in the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
 
"Thanks to this clear vision and position and adherence to 
principles, and to national cohesion and the people's support 
for President Asad and his development policy, Syria will remain 
strong, not shaken by the winds of treachery and plotting and 
not affected by the storms of pressure, no matter how strong 
they may be...." 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Volume of Penetration" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (6/19): "The exposure of the Mossad network in Lebanon 
was a clear message to those who are being unfair to the weapons 
of the national resistance. The message says that Israel is 
still enemy number one of Lebanon and the Lebanese.... 
 
"The Israeli infiltration into Lebanon was apparently not small. 
It shows that Lebanon is still a target for Israel and that 
Resolution 425 is still not fully implemented, in light of the 
occupation and the failure of the United Nations to stop the 
continuous harassment and aggression on Lebanese 
sovereignty...." 
 
 
--------- 
 
"Reviews" 
 
--------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (6/19): "Israel has been, is and will be 
Lebanon's only enemy, in the past, present and future. As such, 
it harbors nothing but evil and treachery for the Lebanese.... 
It is surprising that while members of the Mossad network that 
was uncovered in Lebanon confess to involvement in 
assassinations and bombings, some [Lebanese] are defending 
Israel and promoting the possibility of peace with it on the 
basis of American promises to a Lebanon of the future.... 
 
"Developments in Lebanon since the assassination of former Prime 
Minister Rafiq al-Hariri are part of a carefully worked out plan 
seeking to create a rift between Lebanon and Syria and disarm 
the Lebanese resistance.... 
 
"The crime of the Al-Hariri assassination was certainly part of 
that plan.... Israel wants not only to keep Lebanon away from 
Syria but also to take revenge against the Lebanese national 
resistance and prepare the Lebanese arena for sedition and for 
security and political havoc. In this, it benefits from the UN 
Security Council resolutions on Syrian-Lebanese relations, 
resolutions that are, in fact, American-Israeli resolutions.... 
The discovery of the Mossad-affiliated network highlights the 
role and importance of the resistance as Lebanon's strongest 
weapon against Israeli aggression." 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"Palestinian National Dialogue" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad al-Khadir, a commentator in government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
wrote (6/19): "Any Palestinian civil strife helps Israel to free 
itself from the resistance and continue its hostile plan of 
killing field leaders of the resistance, swallowing up the land, 
and convincing the world of the 'soundness' of its unilateral 
withdrawal plan amid the Palestinians' preoccupation with their 
differences.... 
 
"The Palestinian national dialogue must continue until results 
are achieved because the current splits serve only Israel and 
its plans...." 
 
Seche