06DAMASCUS5403
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Syria/Senegal,
Thu Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0013
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #5403/01 3481141
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141141Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2629
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6444
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4234
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2831
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7411
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1454
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4793
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1015
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7143UNCLAS DAMASCUS 005403 
 
SIPDIS 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Syria/Senegal, 
Syria/Russia, Syria/UK, Syria/Iraq, Lebanon (12/14) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Dec. 14 reported that President Asad 
met on Dec. 13 with US Democratic Senator Bill Nelson.  Talks 
focused on the latest developments in Lebanon, Iraq and the 
Palestinian territories.  President Asad called for non-interference 
in Lebanese affairs, since the Lebanese people are capable of 
understanding each other and national issues.  Asad noted that there 
is interest on the Syrian and American sides to activate dialogue 
and put in place mechanisms for bilateral cooperation.  President 
Asad underscored the firmness of Syria's positions, calling on the 
international community to exert efforts with the countries of the 
region to achieve security and stability.  President Asad also 
reiterated Syria's call to make the Middle East a WMD-free zone, and 
supported the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
 
All papers reported President Asad's meeting with Senegalese Foreign 
Minister Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, who conveyed a message from Senegal's 
President Abdoulaye Wade on means of bolstering bilateral relations. 
President Asad called on Senegal to play a more effective role in 
the region.  Gadio confirmed Syria's important role in the region. 
Talks during the meeting dealt with activating the role of the 
Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC).  Views of the two sides 
were identical regarding regional issues, particularly on Iraq. 
 
On Syrian-Russian relations, papers reported VP Shara's meeting with 
a Russian media delegation on Dec. 13, during which Shara reiterated 
the importance of Russia's role in the regional and international 
arenas.  Shara emphasized the significance of the upcoming visit by 
President Asad to Moscow for talks with Russian President Vladimir 
Putin.  Papers also cited a statement to SANA by Vitaly Naumkin, 
Chairman of the Russia International Center for Strategic and 
Political Studies, depicting Syrian-Russian relations as "good," 
"historical," and high-level. 
 
On Syrian-UK relations, papers reported VP Shara's meeting with 
Michael Ancram, British MP and Former Shadow Foreign Secretary, on 
Dec. 13.  Talks focused on the critical situations in Lebanon, Iraq 
and Palestine.  In a press conference following the meeting, Ancram 
confirmed that Syria can play a very important role in solving every 
problem in the region. 
 
Papers also reported that VP Shara held talks on Dec. 13 with former 
Iraqi PM Ibrahim Jafari.  Both sides expressed satisfaction over 
resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries.  In a 
statement to journalists, Jafari said talks dealt with developments 
in Syrian/Iraqi relations and the political situation in Iraq, as 
well the conference for Iraqi reconciliation to be held Dec. 16. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
"President Asad receives a message from Senegalese President 
Abdoulaye Wade concerning means of bolstering bilateral relations. 
President Asad reviews the latest developments in Iraq, Lebanon and 
the Palestinian territories with Senator Bill Nelson.  President 
Asad underscores firmness of Syria's positions, calling for 
non-interference in Lebanese affairs" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
12/14) 
"The Joint Syrian-Egyptian Higher Committee commences deliberations 
in Cairo.  PM Ottri:  Syria and Egypt are cores of joint Arab 
action.  Egyptian PM Nazeef: Syrian-Egyptian fraternal relations are 
special and distinguished" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/14) 
"VP Shara confers with former Iraqi PM Ibrahim Jafari, confirming 
Syria's support of stability in Iraq.  Shara meets Michael Ancram, 
British MP and Former Shadow Foreign Secretary.  Ancram:  Syria has 
a decisive role in solving problems in the region" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 12/14) 
"Hizbollah unveils a document from Lebanese MP Sa'ad al-Hariri 
demanding that Hizbollah surrender the resistance's arms in exchange 
for stopping the Israeli aggression against Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/14) 
"Americans reach unprecedented pessimism on Iraq.  'Bush's strategy' 
is not ready" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/14) 
 
"The EU demands clarifications from Israel concerning its possession 
of nuclear weapons.  Washington keeps silent" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 12/14) 
 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
------------------- 
"Medals under Feet" 
------------------- 
Khalid al-Ashhab, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(12/14):  "Now that John Bolton has gone, there is a long list of 
candidates to whom the March 14 group leaders in Lebanon will grant 
the Cedar Medal.  This list include US Ambassador in Beirut Feltman 
and Israeli Prime Minister Olmert, the first because he manages the 
group from inside Lebanon and the latter because he manages it from 
abroad. 
"Bolton was managing the group from the international 
organization....  The March 14 team's eagerness to stay in power, 
naturally, is not weaker than the eagerness of the Bush 
administration and its leaders to remain in the White House.  But 
the difference between the two is that while the Bush team betrayed 
the world for the sake of its country's interests - oil and 
domination - , the March 14 team betrayed its country for the sake 
of the interests of others in it...." 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
"Repercussions of the Baker-Hamilton Report on US Policy in the 
Region" 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(12/14):  "Israel rushed to reject the positive points in the Iraq 
Study Group's Report, particularly the call for the withdrawal of 
American troops from Iraq and the call for a comprehensive 
settlement in the Middle East and the return of the occupied Golan 
to Syria.  This shows that Israel does not hesitate to abandon its 
allies when the results are not fully in its favor.... 
"British Prime Minister Tony Blair was designated to discuss the 
Middle East file and the calls for dialogue with Iran and Syria and 
find a face-saving formula, because President Bush finds it 
embarrassing to make concessions and talk to those whom he has 
described as rogue or evil people.... 
"The region awaits the solutions or mechanisms that British Prime 
Minister Blair will offer to activate the Baker-Hamilton 
recommendations, and the proposals that he will carry from Bush, 
especially with regard to the engagement of Syria and Iran.... 
"The more important question, however, is:  What files have the US 
Administration and its allies prepared in order to get Syria and 
Iran involved in this solution? Do they believe either of the two 
countries will offer ready meals on a silver or golden platter, when 
the two countries faced, and are still facing, harsh pressure 
applied by the foolish US policy? 
"There are no free gifts to please Bush.... The American failure 
must be exploited in favor of the national plan, whether by Iran, 
Iraq, Palestine, or Lebanon...." 
------------------------------------ 
"Annan's Speech and Rice's Reaction" 
------------------------------------ 
Isam Darin an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(12/14):  "In his farewell speech at the UNSC, Kofi Annan 
objectively criticized the US policy in a polite diplomatic tone.... 
 
"What was the thing that angered Miss Rice?  Does a simple word of 
truth trouble the American decision-makers?  Can Rice or the Bush 
administration deny the role of the United States in pushing off 
peace and unleashing the monster of terror?  Can this administration 
deny its role in marginalizing the role of the United Nations in 
international issues and in preventing this international 
organization from performing its mission of protecting world 
security and peace as the UN Charter stipulates?  Can the 
administration of the neoconservatives ignore the unlimited American 
support for and legitimization of Israeli terror and the use of the 
veto against every draft resolution condemning Israeli 
aggression...? 
"The Bush administration should have responded positively to Annan's 
message, especially after the successive setbacks that US policy has 
suffered domestically and internationally.  But instead, Rice turned 
to the same offensive style, proving once again that the Bush 
administration cannot learn from lessons and experiences." 
Roebuck