06DAKAR3007
SENEGAL: ANNUAL OVERSES SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC)
Tue Dec 26 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDK #3007/01 3601416
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261416Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7157UNCLAS DAKAR 003007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/DSS, DS/IP/AF, DS/IP/ITA AND DS/DS/ICI 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR DS/SPC/MSG, DS/PSP/PSDAND DS/ICI/PII 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CAS AMGT APER SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: ANNUAL OVERSES SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC) 
CRIME AND SAFTY REPORTS 
 
REF: STATE 199547 
 
¶I.  OVERALL CRIE AND SAFETY SITUATION 
------------------------------------- 
¶1.  Dakar is a high-crime post according to the number and frequency 
of crimes committed.  Like most large cities, the full spectrum of 
criminal activity can be found.  Official Americans, 
businesspersons, and visitors are victimized primarily by crimes of 
opportunity, e.g., pick-pocketing, purse-snatching, thefts from 
vehicles, minor assaults, and burglaries taking advantage of 
unlocked doors and windows.  The level of crime has made walking 
outside at night not recommended.  Americans walking in downtown 
Dakar are often approached by aggressive vendors and street 
criminals looking to sell something for an inflated price or a 
potential victim. 
 
¶2.  After several years of relative quiet in the Casamance, there 
has been an increase in armed banditry and fighting between rebel 
separatists and the Senegalese military.  The U.S. Embassy sent a 
warden notice on December 6 advising against all non-essential 
travel to the Ziguinchor region, including Cap Skirring.  Throughout 
the history of the insurgency, there have been few incidents of 
fighting within the city of Ziguinchor and the resort area of Cap 
Skirring.  Rural areas have been the sites of sporadic violent 
attacks on Senegalese military and civilian personnel and, on rare 
occasions, tourists. 
 
II.  POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
----------------------- 
¶3.  Senegal is considered one of the most stable democracies in West 
Africa.  There has been no known terrorist targeting of private 
American citizens to date.  Public protests, demonstrations, and 
strikes occur regularly and often become violent.  Special 
consideration should be taken in early 2007 as this is an election 
year and an increase in demonstrations is expected.  Americans 
should avoid large political gatherings as riot police may quickly 
resort to batons and tear gas as a means of crowd control. 
 
III.  POST-SPECIFIC CONCERNS 
---------------------------- 
¶4.  The single greatest danger posed to Americans in Dakar is 
vehicle accidents, especially at night.  Drivers in Dakar are 
aggressive, unpredictable and untrained.  Poor traffic markers, 
changing traffic patterns, and road construction throughout the city 
confuse even the savviest of drivers.  Taxis and buses are often in 
poor working condition. 
 
IV.  POLICE RESPONSE 
-------------------- 
¶5.  The police, like many police forces in Africa, are under-funded, 
-staffed, and -equipped.  Police often request money for what 
Americans consider routine police duties.  Dakar is patrolled 
predominantly by the police, who typically wear green/khaki uniforms 
and either a red or black beret.  The Gendarmes, a military unit of 
police, wear blue uniforms or green fatigues and blue berets.  The 
downtown area of Dakar is primarily under police jurisdiction. 
Outside of Dakar, one finds Gendarmes.  Normally both law 
enforcement bodies will only be able to provide rudimentary 
assistance.  In the event of any emergency, call the embassy at 
823-4296 (Monday - Friday, (0800-1700) or 823-6520 after hours. 
 
¶6.  If arrested, ask to contact the American Embassy.  This request 
is not always honored expeditiously and may need to be repeated.  Do 
not ignore a policeman's lawful/reasonable orders.  Becoming 
belligerent will only exacerbate the situation and prolong your 
detention. 
 
¶V.  MEDICAL EMERGENCIES 
----------------------- 
¶7.  Several hospitals and clinics in Dakar can treat a wide variety 
of injuries and illnesses.  There is inadequate in-patient 
psychiatric care, though there is very good office-based psychiatry. 
 Public hospitals do not meet U.S. standards, but several private 
clinics are at the level of small European hospitals, and even 
approach U.S. community hospital standards.  The Embassy maintains a 
list of physicians and other health care professionals who will see 
U.S.-citizen patients.  The Embassy does not guarantee their 
services or recommend any of the physicians.  Medical facilities 
outside Dakar are limited. 
 
¶8.  French medications are more readily available than American 
drugs, and the limited selection of American drugs in stock is often 
listed under the French trade names.  Medications may be obtained at 
pharmacies throughout Dakar and in other areas frequented by 
tourists, and are sometimes less expensive than those in the U.S. 
Travelers should carry a supply of any needed prescription 
medicines, along with copies of the prescriptions, including the 
generic name for the drugs, and a supply of preferred 
over-the-counter medications. 
 
VI.  TIPS ON HOW TO AVOID BECOMING A VICTIM 
------------------------------------------- 
¶9.  Avoid carrying large amounts of cash.  If one must carry cash, 
break it up and place it in different areas on one's person.  Do not 
carry credit cards unless one plans to use them on a specific 
outing. 
 
¶10.  Senegalese law requires that one have valid identifying 
documents at all times.  Make photocopies of one's passport, 
driver's license, and other ID and carry copies while on the street. 
 As a rule, the police do not distinguish between original documents 
and photocopies.  Place original documents, including passports, 
into secure storage at your hotel or place of business. 
 
¶11.  Do not wear expensive jewelry, or necklaces of any value, as 
these are targeted for snatch and grab type crimes.  Do not carry 
backpacks or fanny packs, as they brand an individual as a tourist. 
Carry bags with short straps that can easily be placed under one's 
arm. 
 
¶12.  Never accept anything from anyone on the street unless you are 
planning to buy the item.  This is also true for anyone presenting 
you with a "gift."  This is a favorite ploy of street criminals, who 
will then request money in return.  Minimize your verbal contact 
with anyone other than legitimate contacts you may have.  Just say 
"no" and be persistent and forceful. 
 
¶13.  Never walk alone at night or drive into unfamiliar areas.  If 
one does drive and park, it is common practice for a street person 
to offer to watch the car while one shops or eats in a restaurant. 
Paying the 100 CFA ($.20) after you return can deter mischief 
directed at the vehicle.  Park in well-lit and well-traveled areas, 
if possible. 
 
¶14.  Always negotiate a price before getting into a taxi.  Although 
difficult given the current construction situation, have the driver 
use only the main roads into town, no shortcuts, and never get into 
a taxi that is already occupied.  If the cab stops to pick up 
someone else, tell the driver that you will not pay him.  The driver 
may be trying to set up a pick-pocketing. 
 
¶15.  At the airport:  If one's job does not call for extensive use 
of a laptop computer, then do not carry one.  Customs can hold any 
expensive electronic device for an exoneration period to ensure that 
one is not attempting to resell the item and avoid customs duties. 
Upon clearing customs, one will be bombarded by "expediters" and 
"taxi handlers" who want money.  Avoid these individuals.  The taxi 
fare is between 3,000-4,000 CFA francs for trips between downtown 
and the airport.  (Fares are slightly higher at night.) 
 
VII.  FURTHER INFORMATION 
------------------------- 
¶16.  All Embassy offices can be reached by calling 823-4296 Monday - 
Friday (0800-1700) or 823-6520 after hours.  The Regional Security 
Officer John Bray can also be reached using the numbers above. 
 
VII.  OSAC COUNTRY COUNCIL 
-------------------------- 
¶17.  Dakar's OSAC Country Council meets quarterly.  Points of 
contact for the council are RSO John Bray brayfj2@state.gov and ARSO 
Barrett Bishop bishopb@state.gov.  They both can be reached by 
calling 823-4296 Monday - Friday, (0800-1700) or 823-6520 after 
hours. 
 
JACKSON