06HILLAH74
MUQTADA AL-SADR  STATEMENTS: ZARQAWI,  COLLABORATING WITH
Mon May 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO9551
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHIHL #0074/01 1211052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011052Z MAY 06
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0611
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0597
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 0662UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER KISL IZ
SUBJECT: MUQTADA AL-SADR  STATEMENTS: ZARQAWI,  COLLABORATING WITH 
THE AMERICANS 
 
HILLAH 00000074  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: On April 28 and 29, Cleric Muqtada al-Sadr issued 
two "Istifa" or policy statements.  The first statement 
suggested that Al Qaeda leader Zarqawi had entered into a 
"truce" with Coalition Forces that created a pretext for 
continued U.S. occupation of Iraq.  Muqtada al-Sadr told his 
followers that Zarqawi's recent video appearance was timed to 
put pressure on the new national government to accept the 
presence of Coalition Forces in Iraq.  In the second statement, 
al-Sadr stated that a Sadrist cleric who had met with US forces 
in a Kirkuk police station was an "infidel" who did not realize 
that the Hawza (Shi'a religious leaders in Najaf) "could never 
be allies" with the United States.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  Muqtada al-Sadr's two statements or "Istifa" were phrased as 
responses to questions from followers.  They are meant to 
provide religious guidance for actions in a manner similar to a 
fatwa, but with less formal standing.  The first statement 
concerned the recent release of a videotaped appearance by Al 
Qaeda terrorist Abu Musab Zarqawi.  REO Al-Hillah informal 
translation follows: 
 
Begin translation of the first statement 
 
The Iraqis have watched the latest Zarqawi statement on 
television in which he called all Iraqis; Shi'a, Sunni, or Kurd, 
traitors, except for those who work with him.  How does Muqtada 
al-Sadr view these statements and their purpose?  We appreciate 
your position that rejects classifying people by their religious 
beliefs, thus assuring unity for the supreme goal of 
(liberating) this country and Islam. 
 
Sayyed Muqtada: 
 
From the statements of Zarqawi, I draw the following conclusions: 
 
¶1.  The discourteous appearance of Zarqawi on television 
occurred after the United States reached a truce and negotiation 
with Al Qaeda that extends the U.S. influence and strength in 
Iraq. 
 
¶2.  His appearance came after national pressure was placed on 
the United States to withdraw from Iraq.  The United States will 
not withdraw from Iraq while Zarqawi and his followers are here, 
so I say that this statement provides an excuse to extend the 
occupation. 
 
¶3.  Zarqawi and his followers accuse all Iraqis who do not work 
with him to be traitors.  He ignores Iraq as a State of Islam 
and protector of our Islamic heritage.  He ignores those who 
fought against the armies of invasion in Najaf, Karbala, 
Al-Anbar, Basrah, and Mosul.  He ignores the 130 members of the 
Council of Representatives who declared themselves for freedom 
and the million Iraqis who have signed petitions demanding the 
expulsion of the invaders. 
 
¶4.  Zarqawi and his followers are collaborators with Saddam 
Hussein and the Saddamists because in the video, he did not 
condemn Saddam or his infidel Baathists who committed crimes 
against innocent Iraqis. 
 
¶5.  The appearance of Zarqawi ensures that the Iraqi people face 
three enemies: the invaders of all nationalities, the 
extremists, and the Baathists. 
 
¶6.  If, according to Zarqawi's words, Shi'a are traitors then I, 
too, am a traitor and am honored to be one as Muqtada al-Sadr. 
 
¶7.  His appearance should be compared to the displacement by 
force of Iraqis and the killing of innocent people by his 
followers. 
 
¶8.  We remind you: 
 
America is the enemy of all nations. 
 
Zarqawi's appearance is meant to weaken the national government 
by supplying a pretext of terrorism in order to force the 
government to accept the occupation. 
 
Zarqawi meant to apply pressure on the Council of 
Representatives to drop demands for withdrawal of the invaders. 
 
Therefore, I am ready to help all my Sunni, Kurd, and Shi'a 
brothers and the voices in the Parliament to push for the 
invasion's withdrawal and to stop cooperation between Zarqawi 
and his followers and the U.S. Ambassador. 
 
End informal translation of the first statement. 
 
¶2.  Begin informal translation of the second statement: 
 
 
HILLAH 00000074  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
A group of Sadrists in Kirkuk Province claims that a cleric in 
the Kirkuk Sadrist office (Dr. Abdul Kareem Khalaf Al-Souadi) 
met with U.S. officers in a police station.  We want to ask if 
this is acceptable behavior and if communication with U.S. 
forces is allowable. 
 
A Sadr cleric answers: 
 
This is unacceptable behavior.  It is an outrageous action to 
talk with Americans.  Muqtada warns everyone who is as 
irresponsible that they will be considered to be an infidel and 
must be boycotted.  All Sadrists must follow the teachings of 
the Hawza to avoid disgrace.  The Hawza and the invaders will 
never be allies and Iraqis must work for their independence and 
liberation from the invasion. 
 
End informal translation of the second statement. 
FONTENEAU