06KHARTOUM192
USCIRF meetings in Khartoum: The Status of Sharia
Wed Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
P 250838Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1179
AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ASMARA PRIORITYUNCLAS  KHARTOUM 000192 
 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KISL PGOV SOCI SU
 
SUBJECT: USCIRF meetings in Khartoum: The Status of Sharia 
Law 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  The US Commission on International 
Religious Freedom (USCIRF) arrived in Khartoum on January 10 
and departed on January 21.  The delegation met with various 
interlocutors about the status of religious freedom, 
especially for Christians living in Khartoum. Overall, there 
was much debate about how sharia law would apply to non- 
Muslims living in Khartoum.  On January 4, the Presidency 
decided that sharia law would apply to all people in the 
North, including non-Muslims; however, there would be a 
Commission for the Protection of Non-Muslims that would 
ensure that non-Muslims would not be adversely affected by 
the law.  The Commission has been created but no one has 
been named to it.  End Summary. 
-------------------------- 
Application of Sharia Law 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) In a January 16, meeting with the Assistant Secretary 
of the Bar Association, Abdel Rahman Ibrahim, the Commission 
inquired about the status of sharia law in the North, 
particularly how it was applied to non-Muslims. Ibrahim said 
that sharia law was part of the political, social, and 
cultural development of Sudan before the British entered the 
country.  Although there were differences within Islam on 
the application of sharia law, he added, the basic 
principles of sharia law remain and are implemented in 
Sudan.  According to Ibrahim, sharia law should be applied 
to all people in the North; however, non-Muslims in Khartoum 
were exempted.  Ibrahim added that Southern women who brew 
alcohol in the squatter areas were arrested according to 
statutes deriving from old British law, not sharia law, in 
which brewing alcohol was also illegal. 
 
¶3. (U) The Commission spoke with the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Lam Akol, who stated that Christians in Khartoum 
were not exempted from certain punishments under sharia law, 
such as lashings.  However, there were discretionary ways of 
applying sharia to Christians.  The Minister added that the 
Commission for Human Rights had not yet been established and 
required the National Assembly to pass an Act to provide it 
a legal basis. 
 
----------------------------------- 
No History of Religious Intolerance 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) On January 18, the Commission spoke with Said El 
Khatib, Director of the government supported Sudan Strategic 
Studies Institute and also a member of the Assessment and 
Evaluation Commission (AEC).  He said that the Sudanese 
people have always been tolerant of other religions, and 
there was no history of religious persecution.  However, as 
the war with the South continued, religion became a factor. 
El Khatib added that the Commission for the Protection of 
Non-Muslims was not expected to deal with daily claims, but 
instead with the larger issues of protecting non-Muslims. 
 
¶5. (U) On January 17, the Commission spoke with the Minister 
of Investment, Malik Agar, who said that the administration 
of the capital demonstrated the ruling parties' intolerance 
of religious freedom.  According to Agar, applying sharia 
law to Christians in the capital makes "Christians behave 
like Muslims." 
 
 
------------------ 
Intra-Islam Debate 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) In a January 17 meeting with Saadig al Mahdi, the 
leader of Umma Party and former Prime Minister of Sudan from 
1985-1988, al Mahdi commented that the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement was not comprehensive, and should be called the 
Navaisha Peace Agreement.  For the agreement to be 
comprehensive, he added, it should have been ratified 
nationally.  Furthermore, he said, the agreement left 
several issues unresolved, such as religious freedom, 
particularly for Muslims that disagree with the current 
regime.  According to al Mahdi, the SPLM sold out the 
"silent majority" (Muslims in the North that oppose the 
current regime) by agreeing with the government to implement 
sharia law in the North.  The question remained, Mahdi 
added, as to which interpretation of Islam would be 
implemented in the North.  Mahdi said that the CPA-mandated 
Commission for the Protection of Non-Muslims should not be 
government-run, but instead an independent commission to 
prevent government control. 
 
¶7. (U) Comment:  The various meetings demonstrated a lack of 
consensus on applying sharia law to non-Muslims in the 
North. This issue needs to be resolved in order to stipulate 
how sharia law will apply to non-Muslims in the capital, or 
non-Muslims may be subjected to differing punishments based 
on varying interpretations of sharia law. 
 
HUME