06KIGALI848
GOR RENEWS VOA BROADCAST AGREEMENTS, AIRS ITS
Thu Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0037
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0848/01 2431445
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 311445Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3185
INFO RUEHJB/AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA 1536
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM 0732
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 1436
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 0105
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0583
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0122UNCLAS KIGALI 000848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/C PLEASE PASS TO VOA DIRECTOR DAVID JACKSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KPAO PREL RW
SUBJECT: GOR RENEWS VOA BROADCAST AGREEMENTS, AIRS ITS 
FRUSTRATION WITH VOA'S KINYARWANDA PROGRAMS 
 
 
¶1. On Thursday, August 31, Voice of America Director David 
Jackson renewed VOA's transmission agreement with Rwanda's 
public broadcaster, ORINFOR, and signed a licensing agreement 
with the Ministry of Information.  The GOR took the 
opportunity of the signings to voice strong concerns about 
what it regards as the purposeful effort by the staff of the 
VOA's Kinyarwanda programs (and to some degree local content 
French-language reports) to paint the present government in 
as negative a light as possible, to counter GOR efforts to 
foster reconciliation, and to provide a platform to 
individuals or organizations who advocate violence and/or are 
genocide deniers. 
 
GOR representatives at the meeting included: 
--Minister of Foreign Affairs Charles Murigande 
--Minister of Information in the Office of the Prime Minister 
Laurent Nkusi 
--Secretary General in the Ministry of Internal Security 
Ambassador Joseph Mutaboba 
--Director of Communications in the Office of the President 
Alfred Ndahiro 
--ORINFOR Director Joseph Bideri 
--National Unity and Reconciliation Commission Executive 
Secretary Fatuma Ndangiza 
 
SIPDIS 
--High Council of the Press Executive Secretary Patrice Maluma 
 
USG representatives were VOA Director David Jackson, VOA 
Regional Marketing Representative Paula Caffey, Ambassador, 
and PAO. 
 
¶2. Minister Nkusi opened the discussion by expressing the 
GOR's appreciation of the positive role the VOA Central 
Africa service played when established 10 years ago.  Among 
other things, Nkusi credited the VOA with contributing to the 
positive atmosphere that permitted the fairly speedy return 
of most of the two million Rwandans who fled the country in 
¶1994.  Nkusi commented, however, that VOA's 
Kinyarwanda/Kirundi programs now seem to have as their 
objective to give air time to the most virulent critics of 
the GOR and to undermine the government's reconciliation 
efforts.  Nkusi proceeded to site examples of what the GOR 
considered to be biased and inflammatory programs, including: 
--A November 11, 2004 debate that included the spokesperson 
for the FDLR, which has been identified as a terrorist group 
by the USG and is under international sanctions that, among 
other things, are supposed to deny the group access to the 
media to promote its agenda; 
--June 5 and 6, 2005 programs on Rwanda's use of traditional 
'gacaca' courts that gave more time to critics of 'gacaca' 
than supporters; and 
--A May 2, 2006 program on the theme of a "double genocide" 
in Rwanda that was biased against the government. 
 
¶3. Minister Murigande and Ambassador Mutaboba corroborated 
and elaborated on Nkusi's remarks, with both noting that they 
had a long history of cooperation with the VOA and great 
respect for the organization and his mission.  Murigande, who 
spent time in the U.S. during Rwanda's civil war, said that 
he always appreciated the VOA's willingness during this 
period to air the views of both the Rwandan Patriotic Front 
and the then government.  Mutaboba, noting that the first 
interview he granted upon arrival in the U.S. to take up his 
post as Ambassador was with VOA, said that there are major 
differences between the way the news on VOA is presented in 
its Kinyarwanda, French, and English broadcasts, which is a 
clear sign that there is something fishy going on.  Murigande 
half-jokingly said the biased programs on Rwanda give the 
impression that somebody at VOA has decided that there is a 
need for a "Radio Free Rwanda" charged with a mission to 
change the present regime. 
 
¶4. Director Jackson responded by assuring the group that VOA 
continues to be motivated by the same goals and concerns that 
it had when it started its Central Africa service: namely, to 
promote the peaceful resolution of conflicts in the region 
and to foster reconciliation.  It is, he said, against VOA 
policy to serve as a platform for any individual or 
organization or to give a platform to anybody who advocates 
violence.  Jackson confirmed that any allegations of bias 
would be investigated and that any reporters found to be 
biased would be changed.  Jackson expressed his appreciation 
for the GOR's stated commitment to the promotion of freedom 
of speech and its willingness to proceed with signing of the 
VOA agreements despite the concerns that had been raised.  He 
 
also encouraged the GOR to voice any complaints in a timely 
manner rather than several months or even years after the 
fact. 
 
¶5. Regarding recent alledeged threats against VOA stringer in 
Kigali, GOR reps confirmed that there is an ongoing 
investigation into these reports and reiterated that, if 
true, any such actions are inconsistent with GOR's commitment 
to press freedom.  Ambassador said Embassy anticipates 
receiving promptly the results of this investigation. 
 
¶6. Comment.  The rank, size, and well coordinated remarks of 
the GOR delegation reflect the degree of the government's 
frustration with the VOA's Kinyarwanda/Kirundi programming. 
Director Jackson's decision to travel to Rwanda for the 
signings was well received by the GOR attendees, who seemed 
pleased to have had the opportunity to air their grievances 
at such a senior level.  They also appeared reassured by 
Jackson's commitment to look into any allegations of bias and 
to take remedial action where appropriate.  Post believes the 
meeting opened an avenue of communication that could prove 
important in reducing the frustration, if not outright anger, 
that has been growing within the GOR toward the VOA's Central 
Africa service. End Comment. 
ARIETTI