06KIEV1015
UKRAINE: YUSHCHENKO'S MARCH 14 remarks ON FREE AND
Wed Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kyiv
VZCZCXRO9752
PP RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHKV #1015 0741443
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151443Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIEV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8146
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KIEV 001015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM UP
SUBJECT: UKRAINE: YUSHCHENKO'S MARCH 14 remarks ON FREE AND 
FAIR ELECTIONS 
 
REF: KIEV 978 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  On March 14, shortly after the Rada 
(parliament) had passed a series of amendments designed to 
address technical problems regarding the administration of 
the March 26 elections (reftel), President Yushchenko held a 
press-conference devoted to the election campaign and the 
domestic situation in Ukraine.  He opened with a statement 
on free and fair elections that stressed that the 2006 
election cycle was the freest and fairest in Ukraine's 
history and vowed that problems with the functioning of 
polling station commissions would be addressed.  He also 
highlighted the positive contributions civic organizations 
like the Committee of Voters of Ukraine (CVU) made to the 
democratic process.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) In his opening remarks, Yushchenko said that Ukraine 
as a nation was focused on implementation of a task that it 
had not successfully tackled for the last 15 years: 
guaranteeing free and fair elections.  Although society had 
not yet developed coherent criteria to evaluate the fairness 
of the process, it was clear that transparent public policy, 
freedom of speech, rule of law, and democracy would attest 
to Ukraine's progress. 
 
¶3. (U) Yushchenko reminded listeners that in past elections, 
Ukrainian authorities had resorted to voting process 
manipulations and voter lists had been inaccurate.  He 
maintained that the new government had checked the lists 
used in 2004 and identified 1.4 million people whose names 
were listed on voter lists but did not exist.  Currently, 
the number of these so-called "dead souls" had been reduced 
to 840 thousand.  Yushchenko acknowledged that 10,000 (of 
the approximately 33,000) polling station commissions (PSCs) 
were not yet fully staffed and that across the country there 
was a shortage of 20,000 ballot boxes, but he vowed these 
problems would be resolved. 
 
¶4. (U) Yushchenko said that he as President would personally 
ensure that the Cabinet of Ministers fully financed the 
election campaign.  In some areas, only 70 percent of 
designated funds had been received; in others, only 50 
percent.  Yushchenko added that some local authorities had 
used authorized election funds for other purposes. 
Yushchenko expressed hope that the necessary amendments to 
the 2006 Budget would be adopted to guarantee adequate 
funding of the election campaign.  (Note:  The Rada had 
already passed such amendments by time Yushchenko spoke; the 
bill awaits Yushchenko's signature.) 
 
¶5. (U) Yushchenko noted that in the past, political parties 
had not been able to freely conduct their election 
campaigns; only pro-presidential forces had been able to 
place their advertising materials with the media.  In 
contrast, at present, all parties could campaign freely; the 
streets in Keiv and other cities were covered with various 
campaign colors.  The opposition enjoyed free access to the 
media.  Yushchenko stressed that his goal as President was 
to guarantee equal access to the mass media to all political 
parties. 
 
¶6. (U) Highlighting the role of non-governmental actors, 
Yushchenko pledged to carefully study the reports of the 
[non-partisan, pro-democracy NGO] Committee of Voters of 
Ukraine and the President's Public Committee.  Until now, he 
added, their reports had not provided evidence of serious 
violations of electoral legislation. 
 
¶7. (U) Yushchenko concluded his introductory statement 
saying he was optimistic about Ukraine's level of readiness 
for the March 26 elections.  (Note:  Yushchenko's statement 
in Ukrainian is on the web at: 
. 
 
Gwaltney