06MANAGUA2484
IRREGULARITIES MAY INFLUENCE DISTRIBUTION OF
Thu Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO5096
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #2484/01 3131938
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 091938Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8173
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 002484 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: IRREGULARITIES MAY INFLUENCE DISTRIBUTION OF 
ASSEMBLY SEATS 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2466 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2459 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Although the November 5 national elections 
occurred without significant outbreaks of violence or major 
systemic irregularities, mission observers nevertheless noted 
anomalies that may have been of a magnitude sufficient to 
affect the outcome of the distribution of deputy positions in 
the National Assembly.  The limited training of poll watchers 
for the new parties and the Electoral Police corps, as well 
as the sporadic absences and inattentiveness of national 
observers, also contributed to an environment that PLC and 
FSLN officials were able to exploit to the advantage of their 
parties.  The deputy races in several departments are very 
close, and the loss or gain of one seat in the Assembly can 
strongly influence the balance of power between parties in 
this emerging multi-party scenario.  End Summary. 
 
Additional Anomalies Noted 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ref B detailed several irregularities reported by 
Embassy observers on election day.  On November 7, our 
electoral volunteers gathered to discuss their experiences. 
The following points summarize additional observations 
regarding anomalies and the preparation of party poll 
watchers, Electoral Police, and national observers: 
 
- Voter Lists Difficult to Read: Observers noted that the 
voter lists posted outside of polling stations (JRVs) were 
not numbered and were often posted on doors (constantly 
opening and shutting) or high on walls, making the lists 
difficult to read.  The CSE trained several officials to help 
voters identify the correct JRVs, but not enough to cover all 
voting centers. 
 
- Selective Voiding of Ballots: Several observers noticed an 
apparently selective voiding of ballots by JRV officials that 
appeared to be biased against the ALN and MRS.  In some 
instances, officials "signed" ballots with initials instead 
of a full signature and then disqualified these ballots (all 
ALN and MRS) based on this "error." 
 
- Open FSLN Influence: In at least one instance, an observer 
road from her JRV with the ballots to the Municipal Electoral 
Council (CEM) headquarters in a Sandinista vehicle.  When she 
reached the CEM, she noticed a large gathering of Sandinistas 
with FSLN propaganda throwing a party at the CEM to celebrate 
their victory.  We received other reports of citizens 
soliciting (and receiving) voting documents at local FSLN 
campaign houses instead of the CEMs. 
 
- FSLN collusion with AC: Many contacts expressed concern 
that the "Alternative for Change" (AC) was just a fabrication 
to provide more FSLN supporters in the JRVs under a different 
party name.  Observers noted in some instances that the AC 
failed to register any votes, even with a fiscal from that 
party present in the JRV.  One AC fiscal told an observer 
that the name of the party is "Accion Cristiana." 
 
- ALN Fiscales Inexperienced: Ref B reported how experienced 
FSLN poll watchers (fiscales) were able to dominate decision 
making in their JRVs.  Conversely, observers commented that, 
while the ALN did have widespread coverage of the JRVs, ALN 
fiscales appeared young and inexperienced and often did not 
challenge clear cases of bias against their voters (such as 
those mentioned above). 
 
- Inconsistencies With ET Observation: Before the election, 
national observers Etica y Transparencia (ET) planned to 
cover 100 percent of the JRVs.  Our volunteers noticed that 
ET observers were absent in 25 to 30 percent of JRVs in some 
areas (though ET claims that most were in place before the 
JRV closings to record the vote totals).  Additionally, the 
quality of ET observers appeared to vary considerably -- some 
were watching every step of the process while others were 
absent, ignorant of electoral laws and regulations, or 
otherwise inattentive. 
 
- Electoral Police: The Ministry of Government typically 
organizes a corps of special Electoral Police to assist 
during national elections.  Observers reported that the 
Electoral Police were not present at all voting centers, and 
many were very young or elderly and did not seem to know what 
their role was during the elections.  In Leon, the 
FSLN-affiliated Municipal Electoral Council president decided 
 
MANAGUA 00002484  002 OF 002 
 
 
to substitute up to 100 (out of 400) Electoral Police, a 
function clearly beyond his jurisdiction.  PLC and ALN 
fiscales complained that many of these substitutes had police 
records and favored the FSLN. 
 
FSN Misinformed and Harassed 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (SBU) The story of a mission FSN and her struggle to vote 
is particularly telling.  Before election day, this FSN 
reported that teams of "pollsters" went around her 
neighborhood to identify FSLN supporters.  Residents who 
indicated that they did not support Ortega were later 
informed that their JRV had been changed.  The FSN later 
confirmed from the CSE web site that she had not been moved 
from her original JRV. 
 
¶4. (SBU) On election day, after first tacitly confirming with 
the FSLN fiscal that she was not an Ortega supporter, the JRV 
president told the FSN that her name was not on the voter 
list by claiming that her first name was listed as her family 
name.  Although the FSN did not receive support from the 
other fiscales, she insisted that everything was in order and 
was finally allowed to vote.  After casting her ballots, the 
JRV second member glared at her and covered half her hand 
with smelly indelible ink.  This FSN encountered major 
difficulties even though she was wearing a t-shirt and badge 
that identified her as an ET observer. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶5. (SBU) None of these factors appeared to be widespread 
enough to influence the outcome of the presidential race. 
The allocations of deputy seats in the National Assembly, 
however, are decided by much smaller margins and could be 
influenced by the voiding of results from one JRV, or even 
the strategic nullification of individual votes from several 
JRVs.  ET is conducting a comprehensive review of the deputy 
votes (Ref A), though the absence of observers during the 
closing acts in some departments may affect ET's accuracy in 
some races.  We will continue to closely monitor the process 
of challenges with other national and international observer 
groups to attempt to prevent a biased outcome. 
TRIVELLI