06MONTREAL518
Montreal Outreach on WHTI
Wed May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Montreal
VZCZCXRO3209
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHMT #0518/01 1232000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 032000Z MAY 06
FM AMCONSUL MONTREAL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9666
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MONTREAL 000518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT CPAS CASC KTRD KPAO PREL CA
SUBJECT: Montreal Outreach on WHTI 
 
¶1.  Summary. The visit of DHS US-Visit Director Jim Williams and 
Department of States Ann Barrett, Managing Director of U.S. 
Passport Services, gave post an opportunity to get our message 
about WHTI out to a number of influential audiences and 
journalists in Montreal.  Exports to the U.S. are extremely 
important for Quebecs economy.  In 2004, exports to the U.S. 
accounted for $57 billion, or 27% of the provinces GDP and 82% 
of its international exports.  A recent study by Quebecs 
Ministry of Development found that one fifth of all jobs in 
Quebec are tied to international exports, of which an 
overwhelming majority are destined for the U.S.  Given the 
the 
immensity of this economic relationship, Quebeckers have been 
anxious about the impact of WHTI regulations on their exports to 
the U.S., on their tourism industry, and on their close social 
and cultural ties.  Mr. Williams and Ms. Barrett heard a broad 
range of concerns and queries from Canadian and American 
stakeholders in Montreal, dispelled misconceptions about WHTI, 
and underscored the U.S. aim to increase security and prosperity 
in North America.  End summary. 
 
------------------------ 
What Quebec has at stake 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Quebecs exports to the U.S. ($57 billion in 2004) far 
outstrip its exports to the rest of Canada (valued at $40 
billion).  A recent study by Quebecs Ministry of Development 
found that one fifth of all jobs in Quebec are tied to 
international exports, of which an overwhelming majority are 
destined for the U.S.  An average of three million Quebeckers 
visit the U.S. each year.  At the Champlain-Lacolle Port of Entry 
try 
alone, some 365,000 tourists cross into Quebec from New York 
State.  Montreal alone had 1.28 million visitors from the U.S. in 
¶2003.  In 2004, more than 1.8 million trucks crossed the border 
between the U.S. and Quebec; some 64% of all the trade in goods 
between the U.S. and Quebec were shipped by truck.  Given the 
immensity of this economic relationship and the substantial 
portion of the Quebec economy that hinges on its U.S. ties, 
Quebeckers have expressed concern over the potential economic 
impact of WHTI.  In an October 2005 letter, Quebecs contribution 
to the public comment period of the proposed rulemaking of 
WHTI, Premier Jean Charest noted that although the Government of 
Quebec fully supports the underlying objectives of the WHTI, it 
remains very concerned about the negative impact that the WHTI, 
in its current form, will have on trade, tourism, and the daily 
lifestyles of thousands of citizens in border communities in both 
the United States and Canada. 
 
ada. 
 
¶3.  An oft-quoted study by the Conference Board of Canada, 
released in July 2005, forecasts that the WHTI will result in a 
loss of 7.7 million trips from the U.S. to Canada between 2005 
and 2008, but does not account for the impact that the 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar and higher gas prices have 
had on peoples decisions to travel.  The Conference Board study 
forecasts that the WHTI requirements will significantly hurt the 
profitability of the tourism industry, with U.S. citizens 
currently accounting for 2/3 of foreign tourism spending in 
Canada.  Press reports in the Montreal Gazette noted that 
political leaders in many U.S. states that border Canada are also 
worried about the impact of the new documentation requirements, 
and will form "important allies" in Canada's fight to "restore 
sanity to border security."  Even though new land border 
documentation requirements won't start to be phased in until the 
end of 2007, the Conference Board study claims that many people 
assume that new documentation requirements are already in place 
and, since "they can't be expected to consult a lawyer before 
making a day trip to Montreal or Vancouver, some now figure that 
a trip to Canada isn't worth the hassle."  In addition, Quebec 
Ministry of International Relations' personnel have also 
indicated to Consulate officials their concern for a lack of 
information from the Canadian Federal government regarding 
Canadian plans. Since the provinces have responsibility for civil 
and identity documents (other than passports), provincial 
officials said they would welcome any collaboration to be able to 
better anticipate what will be required, if anything, on their 
part, and to ensure its compatibility with U.S. requirements. 
 
---------------------------- 
ENGAGING QUEBEC STAKEHOLDERS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Jim Williams and Ann Barrett came to Montreal to address an 
April 27 event of the Border Trade Alliance, a non-profit 
organization that advocates policies and initiatives to improve 
border affairs and trade relations in North America.  The Border 
Trade Alliances board of directors recently approved a 
resolution on the implementation of WHTI that calls for the 
consideration of alternatives to the U.S. Passport and the PASS 
card for border crossers, such as the BCC; FAST, NEXUS, and 
 
MONTREAL 00000518  002 OF 003 
 
 
SENTRI cards as well as the possibility of deadline extensions 
in order not to hinder efficient travel.  At the Border Trade 
Alliance event, Mr. Williams and Ms. Barrett discussed WHTI 
implementation, stressed the USGs commitment to strengthen 
security without compromising trade and legitimate travel, and 
fielded questions about the likelihood that FAST and NEXUS cards 
would be accepted at land borders after December 31, 2007. 
Participants inquired whether and how DHS and STATE planned to 
get the word out to potential travelers about the PASS card or 
other acceptable travel documents. Williams and Barrett called on 
ed on 
the business leaders to help provide accurate information and to 
be involved with finding the solution to make cross border 
movement more efficient and secure through WHTI. 
 
¶5.  During a lunch at the Consul Generals Residence with Quebec 
government and tourism industry officials, there was vigorous 
discussion of how WHTI would be implemented and what stakeholders 
needed to be involved in ensuring both Americans and Canadians 
were kept informed. A Canadian Department of Transportation 
official mentioned renovations at the Champlain-Lacolle Port of 
entry, scheduled for completion in 2008, which will increase the 
number of truck lanes to nine and ten passenger lanes, including 
a bus lane and a NEXUS lane (there are currently four truck lanes 
and six passenger lanes.)  These renovations, he said, combined 
with more streamlined procedures at the border under WHTI, stand 
to actually improve the flow of traffic at the border and reduce 
chokepoints that hinder trade and stall tourists.  Tourist 
industry representatives were interested in outreach initiatives 
to ensure that the public was aware of the new requirements and 
how to meet them.  Steps taken by the State Departments Passport 
Office were of particular interest.  At the end of the day, the 
tourist industry itself will have to take a leading role in 
informing its clientele, even if they be across the border. 
 
¶6.  At a meeting with 17 economic stakeholders, Mr. Williams and 
Ms. Barrett dispelled misconceptions about WHTI and affirmed 
their commitment to increase security and prosperity in North 
America.  From a Quebec municipal government official from the 
Champlain-Lacolle border area concerned about the impact of WHTI 
on cross-border fire fighting, to a representative from Duty Free 
stores at the border who has taken to handing out passport 
applications to her customers, the WHTI spokespersons heard from 
a broad range of the concerns and queries from Canadian and 
American stakeholders in Montreal.  The mayor of Stanstead, a 
 a 
small border community in Quebec, asked if DHS and State had 
considered the possibility of offering exemptions for senior 
citizens crossing the border.  Many of my constituents are over 
65, and they are worried about these new border regulations. 
 
¶7.  Three media events were organized to reach general Quebec 
audiences  a roundtable with print journalists, a TV interview 
with Radio-Canada/CBC, and a radio interview with the Montreal 
all-news station 940AM. Media play from the visit, although 
buried beneath the softwood lumber deal, offered factual, 
positive coverage of WHTI.  The press roundtable included 
journalists from three leading Montreal newspapers and as well as 
news service Canadian Press/Broadcast News. The two leading 
Montreal French language dailies, La Presse and Le Devoir, 
published articles clarifying the timeline and the goals of WHTI. 
Under the headline American officials on Operation Charm, La 
Presse quoted Mr. Williams as saying the USG goal is to catch 
tch 
terrorists, illegal immigrants and criminals, and to make 
crossing the border faster and easier for legitimate travelers, 
and as recognizing the unique border relationship The last thing 
we want to have happen is for someone to cancel his/her trip 
because he/she does not have a passport.  Le Devoir emphasized 
the PASScard, its potential features, its advantage over drivers 
licenses/birth certificates for establishing citizenship and 
identity, and its potential to facilitate, not hinder, crossing 
the border. 
 
¶8.  The Canadian Press posted article, picked up by the Winnipeg 
Free Press, focused on Mr. Williamss acknowledgement that the 
USG was aware of confusion over the regulations and had 
concerns about the economic impact of the initiative, but the 
article did not capture the larger context that DHS and State are 
striving to protect our borders without compromising economic 
prosperity or tourism. The English daily The Gazette chose not to 
not to 
publish this time but the journalist commented he found the 
meeting very useful and will use the contents in future articles. 
Radio-Canada/CBC Ottawa political correspondents interview of 
Mr. Williams played positively to French speaking audiences on 
its newscast and its prestigious current affairs program, Le 
Point. In addition to the same themes covered by the print media, 
Radio Canada/CBC honed-in on the issue of privacy concerns. We 
understand Radio-Canada/CBC plans to use the taped interview for 
a more in-depth program. Finally, Montreals all-news radio 
station asked for comment on the fears of businessmen/tourism 
industry to which Mr. Williams again clarified the timeline and 
 
MONTREAL 00000518  003 OF 003 
 
 
emphasized the facilitation factor of the potential PASScard. 
940AM aired interview segments throughout the day. 
 
¶9.  The April 26 efforts in Montreal built on outreach already 
conducted by Consulate Quebec City. Quebec Citys Consul 
Strudwick and Consular Assistant Maciagowski discussed WHTI with 
with 
eleven representatives of Quebec travel agencies and tourist 
boards.  Individuals from the Quebec Ministry of International 
Relations (MRI) and large international tourist operators, such 
as cruise ships, were aware of the changes; the others had only 
incomplete information and had paid only occasional attention to 
the issue. Operators of US-bound tour buses reckoned they would 
be badly hurt by the new rules, since many of their customers 
make last minute travel plans.  Post underlined the objectives of 
the WHTI, and pointed out the advantages to many Canadian 
travelers of securing a passport now, rather than wishing for a 
reversal of the new requirements.  Quebec City is planning 
additional meetings with local stakeholders to raise awareness of 
WHTI and to get feedback on what is happening on the ground. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  Prime Minister Harper had initially pledged to work with the 
U.S. to find a mutually agreeable solution to border crossing 
documents.  However, more recent statements in late April by 
Canadian Public Security Minister Stockwell Day maintaining that 
Canada would not consider a new border crossing card in lieu of a 
passport have left many Canadians confused about the ultimate 
impact of WHTI and Canadas approach to the issue. Although the 
GOC appears to have accepted the reality of WHTI, many 
stakeholders in Montreal continue to oppose it.  In both press 
events, the issue of privacy and what type of information would 
be kept surfaced though it was not included in print or radio 
reports.  We expect this to remain a central concern for 
Canadians with regard to WHTI.  Mr. Williams and Ms. Barretts 
Montreal speaking engagements left audiences with the message 
that by reducing the number of acceptable documents and making 
use of RDIF and other smart-card technology the WHTI offers an 
opportunity to improve border security while speeding up border 
crossing and increasing trade.  Reductions in tourism could be 
e 
minimized by keeping the public on both sides of the border aware 
of documentary requirements. Quebec Consulates outreach efforts, 
combined with more similar future visits by DHS/State teams will 
help to improve understanding of WHTI and minimize any 
disruptions to travel and trade. 
 
CA/PPT Ann Barrett did not have the opportunity to clear this 
cable. 
 
SHEAFFER