06OTTAWA3205
MAPPING THE BORDER:NEW BRUNSWICK CAMPOBELLO/LUBEC
Tue Oct 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO8866
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #3205/01 2971503
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241503Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4214
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 003205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY ///ENTRY IN PARA 1 ADDED Point Roberts//// 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, CA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA PTER PGOV CVIS PHUM
SUBJECT: MAPPING THE BORDER:NEW BRUNSWICK CAMPOBELLO/LUBEC 
CROSSING 
 
 
OTTAWA 00003205  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
 ¶1.  The Lubec Maine/Campobello Island, New Brunswick 
crossing is the easternmost land border port of entry on our 
northern border.  The island -- in Canada is only accessible 
to the rest of Canada by road through the U.S., mirroring our 
westernmost port of entry in Point Roberts, Washington, a piece 
of U.S. territory only accessible through Canada.  The only 
way off the island is a short, two-lane bridge over the Lubec 
Strait/Passamaquody Bay waters into Lubec, Maine which is an 
hour,s drive from the next port of entry back into Canada at 
Calais, Maine/St. Stephen New Brunswick.   In the summer, a 
ferry connects the island directly to the Canadian mainland. 
 
¶2.  How does this geographic anomaly play out for the roughly 
1500 full-time residents of this 9-mile long island, which 
relies extensively on summer tourism?   Some residents cross 
3-4 times a day for work or personal business and or 
pleasure.  The same Canadian import restrictions apply for 
groceries and shopping done in the U.S. so duties on 
purchases over $50 apply if travel is less than 24 hours. 
There is no gasoline on the island so all car fill-ups are 
done in the U.S.  We have well-oiled agreements at the border 
to facilitate movement of emergency vehicles back and forth, 
with inspectors getting advance notice of travel and then 
waving through ambulances.  We have also been able to resolve 
to everyone,s satisfaction the affect of complying with the 
advance notice of the Bioterrorism Act for imported food 
products which are purchased in Canada, but routed through 
the U.S. to get to Campobello Island.  Our inspectors at 
Calais seal or bond the truck transporting these goods, and 
then inspectors at Campobello Island confirm the seal has not 
been broken before the truck enters back into Canada. 
 
¶3.  According to CBP port director, the port of entry has 
changed since 9/11, describing that the function has moved 
beyond pre-9/11 routine inspections to greater emphasis on 
security and increased inspections.  In fact, while we were 
speaking, his office was carrying out an &enforcement 
action8 returning a third country national (through the U.S. 
to mainland Canada at St. Stephen) who had fallen out of 
approved student status in the U.S.   He said crossings have 
fallen from 1100-1300 to 800-900 per day, reflecting drops 
due to exchange rates and higher gas prices this past summer, 
as well as reports of more difficulty at the border.  He 
insisted that the longest delays have been only 30 minutes, 
but Campobello contacts told us they approached two hours 
this summer. 
 
¶4.  Staffing at the port of entry remains a challenge, 
despite increases in the numbers from 7-13 full-time 
inspectors in the last five years.  Turnover and filling 24 
hour shifts create logistical issues.  CBP also has an 
inspector assigned to the Eastport harbor which falls under 
the Lubec port of entry.  The other major inspection 
challenge has been increased flow of illegal opiates, 
re-packaged from pharmaceuticals. 
 
¶5.  The new passport requirement is one of two main issues on 
the island, especially given the local residents, dependence 
on the U.S.  The port director estimated that 80 per cent of 
non-locals already have passports.  &No doubt about it, a 
passport makes our job easier,8 he said.  A much lower 
estimate was true though for the local population. 
 
¶6.  The other major issue on the island is the proposed 
Liquified Natural Gas terminals in Passamaquody Bay which 
QLiquified Natural Gas terminals in Passamaquody Bay which 
would see 2 tankers a week coming through the bay waters to 
unload the LNG.  Tourism and fishing are the major industries 
in this region, and on the island there is a palpable 
sentiment that the LNG terminals and tankers would harm both. 
 Signs in opposition to the terminal were seen across the 
island.  In Maine, on the other hand, views that the new 
terminal would create jobs, both in the construction of the 
terminal and in any industry re-locating to this poorest 
county in Maine would be beneficial. 
 
¶7.  Campobello is home to the binational historic site and 
park preserving the Roosevelt summer cottage.  In the 42 
years since the binational park was established, it has 
expanded from 10 acres of the resident area to include over 
2200 acres of natural wilderness.  The independent commission 
running the park will meet in November to decide on a new 
proposal to create a joint memorial to human rights, 
reflecting on Eleanor Roosevelt and Canadian John Peters 
Humphrey, author of the UN Declaration of Human rights. 
 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
 
OTTAWA 00003205  002 OF 002 
 
 
WILKINS