06OTTAWA119
CANADA:  2006 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT
Fri Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 OTTAWA 000119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND WHA/CAN 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EFIN ETRD ELAB CA KTDB PGOV NAFTA
SUBJECT: CANADA:  2006 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
REF: 05 STATE 201904 
 
INVESTMENT CLIMATE 
 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
 
General Attitude 
 
Strong economic fundamentals, proximity to the US market, 
highly skilled employees and abundant resources are key 
attractions for American investors in Canada.  With few 
exceptions, Canada offers foreign investors full national 
treatment within the context of a developed open market 
economy operating with democratic principles and 
institutions.  Canada is, however, one of the few OECD 
countries that still has a formal investment review process. 
Foreign investment is also prohibited or restricted in 
several sectors of the economy. 
 
Canada's economic development is, to a significant extent, 
reliant on foreign investment inflows. The Canadian 
government estimates that foreign investors control about 
one-quarter of total Canadian non-financial corporate 
assets.  The stock of global foreign direct investment in 
Canada in 2004 was US$304 billion, with US investment 
accounting for about 65% of total FDI in Canada. 
 
The United States and Canada agree on important foreign 
investment principles, including right of establishment and 
national treatment.  The 1989 Free Trade Agreement (FTA) 
recognized that a hospitable and secure investment climate 
would be necessary to achieve the full benefits of reducing 
barriers to trade in goods and services. The agreement 
established a mutually beneficial framework of investment 
principles sensitive to the national interests of both 
countries, with the objective of assuring that investment 
flowed freely between the two countries and that investors 
were treated in a fair and equitable manner.  The FTA 
provided higher review thresholds for US investment in 
Canada than for other foreign investors, but it did not 
exempt all American investment from review nor did it 
override specific foreign investment prohibitions, notably 
in the cultural area. 
 
The 1994 NAFTA incorporated the gains made in the FTA, 
expanded the coverage of the Investment chapter to several 
new areas, and broadened the definition of investors' 
rights.  It also created the right to binding investor-state 
dispute settlement arbitration in specific situations. 
 
Legal Framework:  The Investment Canada Act 
 
Since 1985, foreign investment policy in Canada has been 
guided by the Investment Canada Act (ICA, 
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/internet/inica - 
lic.nsf/en/Home ), which replaced the more restrictive 
Foreign Investment Review Act.  The ICA liberalized policy 
on foreign investment by recognizing that investment is 
central to economic growth and is the key to technological 
advancement.  At the same time, it provided for review of 
large acquisitions by non-Canadians and imposed a 
requirement that these investments be of "net benefit" to 
Canada.  For the vast majority of small acquisitions, as 
well as the establishment of new businesses, foreign 
investors need only notify the Canadian government of their 
investment. 
 
Industry Canada must be notified of any investment by a non- 
Canadian to establish a new business, regardless of size; to 
acquire direct control of an existing business that has 
assets of at least C$5 million; or to acquire the indirect 
control of an existing Canadian business with assets 
exceeding C$50 million in value.  However, the review 
threshold is higher for firms from member countries of the 
World Trade Organization (WTO), including the US.  In 2006, 
the review threshold for WTO members is expected to be C$265 
million, rather than the C$5 million level applicable to non- 
WTO investors.  The Canadian government must be notified of 
an indirect acquisition of a Canadian business by firms from 
WTO-member countries, but, with the exception of foreign 
acquisitions of any size in "cultural industries" such as 
publishing, film, and music, there is no review of indirect 
acquisitions. 
 
Investment in specific sectors is covered by special 
legislation.  For example, foreign investment in the 
financial sector is administered by the federal Department 
of Finance Investment in an activity that is related to 
Canada's cultural heritage or national identity is 
administered by Heritage Canada.  Under provisions of 
Canada's Telecommunications Act, foreign ownership of 
transmission facilities is limited to 20 percent direct 
ownership and 33 percent through a holding company, for an 
effective limit of 46.7 percent total foreign ownership. 
The Broadcast Act governs foreign investment in radio and 
television broadcasting.  (See below for more detail on 
these restrictions.) 
 
 
Canada's federal system of government subjects investment to 
provincial as well as national jurisdiction.  Restrictions 
on foreign investment differ by province, but are largely 
confined to the purchase of land and to provincially- 
regulated financial services.  Provincial government 
policies, either cultural, such as French-language 
requirements in Quebec, or in the areas of labor relations 
and environmental protection, can be a factor for foreign 
investors. 
 
US foreign direct investment in Canada is subject to 
provisions of the Investment Canada Act, the WTO, and the 
NAFTA.  The basic obligation assumed by the two countries in 
Chapter 11 of the NAFTA is to ensure that future regulation 
of Canadian investors in the United States, and of US 
investors in Canada, results in treatment no different than 
that extended to domestic investors within each country -- 
"national treatment." Both governments are completely free 
to regulate the ongoing operation of business enterprises in 
their respective jurisdictions under, for example, antitrust 
law, provided they accord national treatment. 
 
Existing laws, policies and practices were "grandfathered," 
except where specific changes were required.  The practical 
effect of this was to freeze the various exceptions to 
national treatment provided in Canadian and US law, such as 
restrictions on foreign ownership in the communications and 
transportation industries.  The Canadian government retains 
the right to review the acquisition of firms in Canada by US 
investors at the levels applicable to other WTO members and 
has required changes before approving some investments. 
 
Both governments are free to tax foreign-owned companies on 
a different basis from domestic firms, provided this does 
not result in arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, and 
to exempt the sale of Crown (government-owned) corporations 
from any national treatment obligations.  Finally, the two 
governments retain some flexibility in the application of 
national treatment obligations.  They need not extend 
identical treatment, as long as the treatment is 
"equivalent." 
 
Services Trade 
 
Bilateral services trade is largely free of restrictions and 
the NAFTA ensures that restrictions will not be applied in 
the future.  However, pre-existing restrictions, such as 
those in the financial sector, were not eliminated by the 
NAFTA.  The NAFTA services agreement is primarily a code of 
principles that establishes national treatment, right of 
establishment, right of commercial presence, and 
transparency for a number of service sectors specifically 
enumerated in annexes to the NAFTA.  The NAFTA also commits 
both governments to expand the list of covered service 
sectors (except for the financial services covered by NAFTA 
Chapter 14). 
 
Federal Procurement 
 
The NAFTA grants US firms that operate from the United 
States national treatment for most Canadian federal 
procurement opportunities.  However, inter-provincial trade 
barriers exist that often exclude US firms established in 
one Canadian province from bidding on another province's 
procurement opportunities.  As a first step in the ongoing 
and difficult process of reducing trade barriers within 
Canada, the Canadian federal, provincial and territorial 
governments negotiated an Internal Trade Agreement that came 
into effect on July 1, 1995.  The Agreement provides a 
framework for dealing with intra-Canada trade in ten 
specific sectors and establishes a formal process for 
resolving trade disputes. 
 
Besides the areas described above, the NAFTA includes 
provisions that enhance the ability of US investors to 
enforce their rights through international arbitration; 
prohibit a broad range of performance requirements, 
including forced technology transfer; and expand coverage of 
the NAFTA investment chapter to include portfolio and 
intangible investments as well as direct investment. 
Investments In "Cultural Industries" 
Canada defines "cultural industries" to include: 
 
*the publication, distribution or sale of books, magazines, 
periodicals or newspapers, other than the sole activity of 
printing or typesetting; 
 
*the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of film or 
video recordings, or audio or video music recordings; 
 
*the publication, distribution or sale of music in print or 
machine-readable form; 
*any radio, television and cable television broadcasting 
undertakings and any satellite programming and broadcast 
network services. 
 
The ICA requires that foreign investment in the book 
publishing and distribution sector be compatible with 
Canadian national cultural policies and be of "net benefit" 
to Canada.  Takeovers of Canadian-owned and controlled 
distribution businesses are not allowed.  The establishment 
of new film distribution companies in Canada is permitted 
only for importation and distribution of proprietary 
products.  (In other words, the importer would have to own 
world rights or be a major investor).  Direct and indirect 
takeovers of foreign distribution businesses operating in 
Canada are permitted only if the investor undertakes to 
reinvest a portion of its Canadian earnings in Canada. 
 
The Broadcasting Act sets out the policy objectives of 
enriching and strengthening the cultural, political, social 
and economic fabric of Canada.  The Canadian Radio- 
television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) 
administers broadcasting policy.  Under current CRTC policy, 
in cases where a Canadian service is licensed in a format 
competitive with that of an authorized non-Canadian service, 
the commission can drop the non-Canadian service if a new 
Canadian applicant requests it to do so.  Licenses will not 
be granted or renewed to firms that do not have at least 80 
percent Canadian control, represented both by shareholding 
and by representation on the firms' board of directors. 
 
All investments in newspapers and periodicals require review 
by the Minister for Canadian Heritage.  Under terms of an 
agreement with the US signed in June 1999, Canada committed 
to significantly lower its barriers to foreign magazines. 
Canada has complied with its agreement to permit up to 51 
percent foreign equity in a magazine enterprise, up from the 
previous 25 percent, and to increase this level to 100 
percent by June 2000.  As of June 2002, US magazines 
exported to Canada are permitted to carry 18 percent of 
total ad space with advertising aimed primarily at the 
Canadian market.  Canada also committed to provide non- 
discriminatory tax treatment under Section 19 of the Income 
Tax Act.  In this context, Canada eliminated the nationality 
requirement in June 2000, and Canadian advertisers may now 
place ads in any magazine regardless of the nationality of 
the publisher or place of production.  Canadian advertisers, 
merchants and service providers may now claim a tax 
deduction for one-half of their advertising costs if they 
place ads in foreign magazines with zero to 79 percent 
Canadian editorial content.  They may deduct full 
advertising costs if the magazine contains 80 percent or 
more original (specifically for the Canadian market) 
editorial content. 
 
Investments in the Financial Sector 
 
Canada is open to foreign investment in the banking, 
insurance, and securities brokerage sectors, although, 
unlike the United States, Canada still has barriers to 
foreign access to retail banking.  Foreign financial firms 
interested in investing submit their application to the 
Office of the Supervisor of Financial Institutions (OSFI) 
for approval by the Minister of Finance.  US firms are 
present in all three sectors, but play secondary roles. 
Canadian banks have been much more aggressive in entering 
the US retail banking market because there are no barriers 
that limit access.  Although American and other foreign 
banks have long been able to establish banking subsidiaries 
in Canada, no US banks have attempted to undertake retail 
banking operations in Canada, which is regarded as a fairly 
"saturated" market.  Several US financial institutions have 
established branches in Canada, chiefly targeting commercial 
lending, investment banking, and niche markets such as 
credit card issuance. 
The NAFTA deals specifically with the financial services 
sector.  Chapter 14 on financial services eliminates 
discriminatory asset and capital restrictions on US bank 
subsidiaries in Canada.  It also exempts US firms and 
investors from the federal "10/25" rule so that they will be 
treated the same as Canadian firms.  The "10/25" rule 
prevents any single non-NAFTA, non-resident from acquiring 
more than ten percent of the shares, and all such non- 
residents in the aggregate from acquiring more than 25 
percent of the shares of a federally regulated, Canadian- 
controlled financial institution.  In 2001, the Canadian 
government raised the 10 percent rule to 20 percent for 
single shareholders. 
 
 
Both the ten percent and the 25 percent limitations were 
eliminated for American investors in federally chartered, 
non-bank financial institutions.  Several provinces, 
however, including Ontario and Quebec, have similar "10/25" 
rules for provincially chartered trust and insurance 
companies that were not waived under the FTA. 
 
Investments In Other Sectors 
 
Commercial Aviation: Foreigners are limited to 25 percent 
ownership of Canadian air carriers. 
 
Energy and Mining: Foreigners cannot be majority owners of 
uranium mines. 
 
Telecommunications: Under provisions of Canada's 
Telecommunications Act, direct foreign ownership of Type I 
carriers (owners/operators of transmission facilities) are 
limited to 20 percent.  Ownership and control rules are more 
flexible for holding companies that wish to invest in 
Canadian carriers.  Under these rules, two-thirds of the 
holding company's equity must be owned and controlled by 
Canadians. 
 
Fishing: Foreigners can own up to 49 percent of companies 
that hold Canadian commercial fishing licenses. 
 
Electric Power Generation and Distribution:  Regulatory 
reform in electricity continues in Canada, motivated by the 
expectation that increased competition will lower costs of 
electricity supply.  The provincially-owned power firms are 
also interested in gaining greater access to the US power 
market.  Since power markets fall under the competency of 
the Canadian provinces, they are at the forefront of the 
reform effort.  The reforms will also help to integrate the 
US and Canadian electricity markets more closely. 
 
Real estate:  Primary responsibility for property law rests 
with the provinces.  Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, and 
Nova Scotia all limit real estate sales to out-of-province 
parties.  There is no constitutional protection for property 
rights in Canada. Consequently, government authorities can 
expropriate property after paying appropriate compensation. 
 
Privatization:  Each privatization (federal or provincial) 
is considered on a case-by-case basis, and there are no 
overall limitations with regard to foreign ownership.  As an 
example, the federal Department of Transport did not impose 
any limitations in the 1995 privatization of Canadian 
National Railway, whose majority shareholders are now US 
citizens. 
 
Investment Incentives 
 
Federal and provincial governments in Canada offer a wide 
array of investment incentives, which municipalities are, on 
the whole, prohibited from doing.  None of the federal 
incentives are specifically aimed at promoting or 
discouraging foreign investment in Canada; rather, they are 
designed to accomplish broader policy goals, such as 
investment in research and development, or promotion of 
regional economies and are available to any qualified 
investor, Canadian or foreign, who agrees to use the funds 
for the stated purpose.   For example, Export Development 
Canada can support inbound investment under certain specific 
conditions (e.g. investment must be export-focused; export 
contracts must be in-hand or have a track record or there is 
a world or regional product mandate for the product to be 
produced). 
 
Provincial incentives tend to be more investor-specific and 
are conditioned on applying the funds to an investment in 
the granting province.  Provincial incentives may also be 
restricted to firms established in the province or that 
agree to establish a facility in the province.  Government 
officials at both the federal and provincial levels expect 
investors who receive investment incentives to use them for 
the agreed purpose, but no enforcement mechanism exists. 
 
Incentives for investment in cultural industries, at both 
the federal and provincial level, are generally available 
only to Canadian-controlled firms.  Incentives may take the 
form of grants, loans, loan guarantees, venture capital, or 
tax credits.  Incentive programs in Canada generally are not 
oriented toward the promotion of exports.  Provincial 
incentive programs for film production in Canada are 
available to foreign filmmakers. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
 
Foreigner investors have full and fair access to Canada's 
legal system, with private property rights limited only the 
rights of governments to establish monopolies and to 
expropriate for public purposes. Investors from NAFTA 
countries have mechanisms available to them for dispute 
resolution regarding property expropriation by the 
Government of Canada. 
 
Canada has yet to ratify key treaties that protect copyright 
works on the Internet (the WIPO "Internet treaties") that 
the government signed in 1997.  U.S. (and many Canadian) 
companies have also complained that Canada's enforcement 
regime against counterfeiting and piracy, both at the border 
and internally, is cumbersome and ineffective, requiring 
civil court orders before goods can be formally seized. 
 
Performance Requirements 
 
The NAFTA prohibits the United States or Canada from 
imposing export or domestic content performance requirements 
and Canada does not explicitly negotiate performance 
requirements with foreign investors.  For investments 
subject to review, however, the investor's intentions 
regarding employment, resource processing, domestic content, 
exports, and technology development or transfer can be 
examined by the Canadian government.  Investment reviews 
often lead to negotiation of a package of specific 
"undertakings" such as agreement to promote Canadian 
products. 
 
Regulatory System: Laws and Procedures 
 
The transparency of Canada's regulatory system is similar to 
that of the United States. Proposed legislation is subject 
to parliamentary debate and public hearings, and regulations 
are issued in draft form for public comment prior to 
implementation.  While federal and/or provincial licenses or 
permits may be needed to engage in economic activities, 
regulation is generally for statistical or tax compliance 
reasons.  The Bureau of Competition Policy and the 
Competition Tribunal, a quasi-judicial body, enforce 
Canada's antitrust legislation. 
 
Labor 
 
The Federal government and Provincial/territorial 
governments share jurisdiction for labor regulation and 
standards.  Federal employees and those employed in the 
railroad, airline and banking sectors are covered under the 
federally administered the Canada Labor Code 
(http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/L-2/ ), while employees in 
most other sectors come under provincial labor codes.  As 
the laws vary somewhat from one jurisdiction to another, it 
is advisable to contact a federal or provincial labor office 
for specifics such as minimum wage and benefit requirements. 
In 2005, unemployment dropped to the lowest level in 30 
years and 233,000 new jobs were created.  Labor at all skill 
levels is generally available, with variation among 
provinces. 
 
Due in part to the value of the Canadian dollar relative to 
the US dollar, Canadian wage and benefit levels for most non- 
executive job categories are somewhat lower than levels paid 
in the United States.  In 2004, the proportion of union 
membership among those in paid employment was 32 percent, 
which reflects a 19 percent union membership rate in the 
private sector and a 76 percent union membership rate in the 
public sector. 
Expropriation and Compensation 
Canadian federal and provincial laws recognize both the 
right of the government to expropriate private property for 
a public purpose, and the obligation to pay compensation. 
The federal government has not nationalized any foreign firm 
since the nationalization of Axis property during World War 
II.  Both the federal and provincial governments have 
assumed control of private firms -- usually financially 
distressed ones -- after reaching agreement with the former 
owners. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
 
Canada is a member of the New York Convention of 1958 on the 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.  The 
Canadian government has made a decision in principle to 
become a member of the International Center for the 
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).  However, since 
the legal enforcement mechanism for ICSID requires 
provincial legislation, the federal government must also 
obtain agreement from the provinces that they will enforce 
ICSID decisions.  Although most provinces have endorsed the 
agreement, full agreement is unlikely in the foreseeable 
future. 
 
Canada accepts binding arbitration of investment disputes to 
which it is a party only when it has specifically agreed to 
do so through a bilateral or multilateral agreement, such as 
a Foreign Investment Protection Agreement (see below).  The 
provisions of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA guide the resolution 
of investment disputes between the United States and Canada. 
The NAFTA encourages parties to settle disputes through 
consultation or negotiation.  It also establishes special 
arbitration procedures for investment disputes separate from 
the NAFTA's general dispute settlement provisions.  Under 
the NAFTA, a narrow range of disputes (those dealing with 
government monopolies and expropriation) between an investor 
from a NAFTA country and a NAFTA government may be settled, 
at the investor's option, by binding international 
arbitration.  An investor who seeks binding arbitration in a 
dispute with a NAFTA party gives up his right to seek 
redress through the court system of the NAFTA party, except 
for proceedings seeking non-monetary damages. 
 
Political Violence 
 
Political violence occurs in Canada to about the same extent 
as in the US.  For example, protests at the April, 2001 
Summit of the Americas in Quebec City sparked violent 
confrontations that resulted in some property damage. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements and Tax Treaties 
 
While the terms of the FTA and the NAFTA guide investment 
relations between Canada and the United States, Canada has 
also negotiated international investment agreements with non- 
NAFTA parties.  These agreements, known as Foreign 
Investment Protection Agreements (FIPAs), are bilateral 
treaties that promote and protect foreign investment through 
a system of legally binding rights and obligations based on 
the same principles found in the NAFTA.  Within Canada's 
overall foreign investment strategy, FIPAs complement the 
NAFTA.  Canada has negotiated FIPAs with countries in 
Central Europe, Latin America, Africa and Asia, and has over 
100 international tax treaties in force.  Please refer to 
the following Internet web site for more information: 
http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/tna-nac/reg-en.a sp . 
 
Capital Outflow Policy 
 
The Canadian dollar is fully convertible.  The Canadian 
government provides some incentives for Canadian investment 
in developing countries through Canadian International 
Development Agency (CIDA) programs.  Like OPIC, Canada's 
official export credit agency, the Export Development 
Corporation (EDC) provides political risk insurance to 
support Canadian companies with investments in foreign 
countries and to support lenders who finance transactions 
pursued by Canadian companies abroad. 
 
 
Average annual exchange rates: 
 
2004 .7683 
2005 .8250 
 
WILKINS