06PARIS7477
FRENCH GDP STAGNATES IN THIRD QUARTER
Tue Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO5148
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHFR #7477/01 3251317
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211317Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3248
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS FEDERAL RESERVE 
PASS CEA 
STATE FOR EB and EUR/WE 
TREASURY FOR DO/IM 
TREASURY ALSO FOR DO/IMB AND DO/E WDINKELACKER 
USDOC FOR 4212/MAC/EUR/OEURA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV FR
SUBJECT: FRENCH GDP STAGNATES IN THIRD QUARTER 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  Based on a French National Statistical Agency 
preliminary estimate (which may be subject to revisions), GDP growth 
stagnated in Q-3.  The results disappointed the government, which 
was counting on growth to reduce unemployment ahead of the April 
2007 presidential elections.  However, the government is sticking to 
its 2.0-2.5 percent range forecast for GDP in 2006.  Weak export 
growth, affecting output and employment, is a growing concern, 
prompting the GoF to call for an EU strategy on the euro.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
GDP Stagnates in Q-3 after a Spurt in Growth in Q-2 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶2.  Based on the National Statistical Agency's (INSEE) preliminary 
estimate, GDP (seasonally and workday adjusted) was unchanged in Q-3 
compared to Q-2 (when it increased at a 4.8 percent annualized rate, 
its fastest pace in five years).  The zero Q-3 GDP growth rate, the 
worst performance since Q-2 of 2005, was much worse than expected by 
INSEE and the Bank of France, which had forecast growth of 2.4 
percent (annualized) and 2.0 percent respectively for Q-3. The 
consensus forecast of private-sector economists is for 2.0 percent 
GDP growth in 2006.  Emmanuel Ferry, Chief Economist at broker 
Exane, ascribed the sharp Q-3 slowing to "a normalization" after a 
second quarter that was "disconnected from reality," also noting 
that quarterly results were not good indicators of future 
performance.  Chief Economist Marc Touati at Banques Populaires 
Natexis similarly stated the Q-2 was "an anomaly."  Both underscored 
that preliminary GDP growth estimates might be subject to change as 
more economic data becomes available. 
 
¶3.   Household consumption (not trade or industrial output) was 
still the driving force for economic growth in Q-3, increasing 2.4 
percent (annualized) compared with 3.6 percent in Q-1 and 2.8 
percent in Q-2.  There are indications that a portion of household 
consumption, fueled by buoyant sales of electronic and IT goods, was 
supplied by increased imports rather than domestic output. 
Industrial production fell 2.0 percent (annualized) in Q-3 compared 
with Q-2, led by a decline in the automobile and consumer good 
sectors, while imports increased to 104.7 billion euros (134 billion 
dollars) in Q-3 from 103.8 billion in Q-2.  The trade deficit 
deteriorated due to the increase in imports and a decrease in 
exports to 97.4 billion euros from 97.6 billion euros in Q-2. 
Interestingly, exports to the EU increased 4.0 percent (annualized) 
compared with Q-2, but exports to the U.S. and the Middle East 
decreased.  Corporate investment growth was weaker in Q-3 (3.2 
percent annualized compared with 9.0 percent in Q-2), and a strong 
positive inventory contribution reported in Q-2 was reversed in Q-3. 
 
 
GDP would increase at least 1.9 percent in 2006 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶4.  INSEE calculated that GDP would grow at least 1.9 percent in 
2006 based on the first three quarters.  Finance Minister Thierry 
Breton said "Q-3 GDP growth data was not good," but reaffirmed the 
government's forecast for 2006 to be 2.0-2.5 percent.  He said he 
saw a "very good fourth quarter" with GDP increasing 2.4-3.2 percent 
(annualized). French private-sector economists forecast 2006 GDP 
growth to be nearer the bottom of the range predicted by the 
government.  In early November, the IMF revised upward 2006 French 
GDP growth to 2.5 percent from 2.4 percent, but recommended the 
French government pursue reforms, notably to reduce the overall 
budget deficit and make the labor market more flexible by reducing 
the gap between permanent labor contracts and limited-duration 
contracts.  In a recent analysis, the EU Commission projected that 
the French budget deficit would decrease to 2.6 percent of GDP in 
¶2006.  However, the Commission stressed that France was on the road 
to register long-lasting durable current account deficits.  The 
Commission revised downward 2006 French GDP growth to 2.2 percent 
from 2.3 percent. 
 
Fears about U.S. Slowdown Spreads to Europe 
------------------------------------------- 
¶5.  The lack of French economic growth in Q-3 cast doubt on the 
strength of growth in the rest of Europe, prompting Citigroup Inc., 
JPMorgan Chase & Co., Royal Bank of Scotland Group Plc, as well as 
Commerzbank economists to immediately cut their estimates of 
European growth.  Other analysts waited for the November 13 
economic-growth estimates for Germany and Italy to see if the U.S. 
economic slowdown in Q-3 had spread to Europe.  Economists worry 
whether a hard landing of the U.S. real estate sector could impact 
France and Europe, since U.S. consumption is essential in global 
economic growth.  Nonetheless, solid economic growth in Germany in 
Q-3 reassured many economists about the solidity of EU economic 
growth.  Bank of France's economists said Q-3 zero GDP growth was "a 
pure accident," forecasting 2006 GDP to increase 2.0 percent, 
 
PARIS 00007477  002 OF 002 
 
 
including a 2.4 percent annualized GDP growth in Q-4. 
 
GDP Data Mask Positive Aspects of the French Economy 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶6.  Disappointing Q-3 economic growth did not affect the CAC 40 
blue-chip index.  Instead, the CAC 40 continued increasing, hitting 
new highs of 5,502 on November 13, and of 5,511 on November 15. 
Investors felt healthy French company profits, decreasing oil prices 
and increases in U.S. stock prices were good signs for the French 
economy. 
 
¶7.  The inflation rate decreased in September and October to 1.2 
percent and 1.1 percent, respectively, mainly due to a sharp decline 
in oil prices, which was beneficial for the purchasing power of 
households. 
 
¶8.  The unemployment rate decreased to 8.8 percent in September. 
Labor Minister Jean-Louis Borloo attributed the improvement to his 
Social Cohesion Plan. Job creation in the non-farm private sector 
only edged up 0.4 percent annualized, the lowest increase since Q-3 
2005, prompting economists to say that disappointing economic growth 
has dragged down hiring.  Borloo said he would unveil a package of 
new measures "to go quickly toward full employment" in January. 
However, despite the improvement, the unemployment rate of the youth 
remains above 20 percent, and the labor situation in disadvantaged 
suburbs remains problematic.  Quizzed about the introduction of new 
"flexisecurity" measures inspired from the successful Danish 
experience, Borloo said that the new hire contract ("Contrats 
Nouvelles Embauches - CNE) was "already" an example of 
flexisecurity. 
 
Government Calls for an EU strategy on the Euro 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶9.  A few days after the release of Q-3 GDP data, De Villepin 
asserted "we cannot allow the European Central Bank (ECB) to act 
alone on rates," urging Europe to acquire "a currency policy taking 
account the objectives of growth strategy, protection of industry, 
and of course employment."  He acknowledged that the euro allowed 
the creation of a stable environment between all European partners, 
but "its current level hurts some of French exports."  In September, 
Finance Minister Breton suggested he did not want the euro exchange 
rate to rise further against other currencies such as the U.S. 
dollar or the yen, saying "the euro was fully valued." 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶9.  The unexpected lack of growth in Q-3 is bad news for Prime 
Minister De Villepin's government, which was betting on a 
consolidation of economic growth in 2006 to reduce further 
unemployment and bolster its position ahead of the May 2007 
presidential elections.  The new package of measures in favor of 
employment is likely to include further measures in favor of the 
youth (living in or out of disadvantaged suburbs), but unlikely to 
include "flexisecurity" measures, except if the political situation 
permits.  Lower inflation coupled with GDP stagnation in Q-3 has 
prompted the government to speak out even more forcefully against 
ECB plans to hike interest rates in December, suggesting France's 
primary fear is weak export growth, but the ECB has given no sign of 
changing course. 
 
STAPLETON#