06PARIS121
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq: Liberation of French
Mon Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 000121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq: Liberation of French 
Hostage Bernard Planche Conjecture About Post-Sharon Israel 
Bush - Eavesdropping Controversy - Economic Boom 
PARIS - PARIS - Monday, January 09, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraq: Liberation of French Hostage Bernard Planche 
Conjecture About Post-Sharon Israel 
Bush - Eavesdropping Controversy - Economic Boom 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The liberation in Iraq of the French hostage Bernard Planche 
is reported on most front pages. Le Figaro headlines: "Paris's 
Thanks to Washington Illustrate a Close Collaboration." 
Inside, Alain Barluet entitles his report: "Paris and 
Washington on the same wavelength." But popular France Soir is 
still convinced that "the Mystery Surrounding Planche" has not 
been cleared up and headlines: "Questions on a Liberation." 
Jean-Marc Tanguy writes: "The circumstances of Planche's 
liberation remain confusing. While French intelligence does 
not appear to have been involved, it has begun to debrief the 
former hostage. Planche's personality remains somewhat of a 
mystery, and it may be that this time the press will not be 
invited to greet him when he arrives in France." For La Croix, 
"each hostage situation is unique." "Discretion or publicity?" 
asks Dominique Gerbaud. "We must respect the family's 
preference." Liberation agrees in an editorial entitled: 
"Silence" but it also emphasizes "the mysterious conditions 
surrounding Planche's liberation." (See Part C) 
 
The second most widely reported story revolves around Sharon's 
legacy and how Israel is preparing for the post-Sharon era, 
now that everyone appears convinced he will not be able to 
return to politics. Le Figaro's editorial explains: "Emotions 
are running too high to be able to predict anything or give 
much credence to polls." but praises Olmert "for taking over 
Sharon's legacy." (See Part C) 
 
Le Journal du Dimanche devotes its foreign column to President 
Bush's precarious situation in the eavesdropping controversy. 
Gille Delafon predicts 2006 "may be fatal" for Bush in terms 
of scandals, (See Part C) while Le Figaro devotes a major 
report to the nomination of Samuel Alito to the Supreme Court: 
"For Bush, this is an opportunity to make people forget his 
recent missteps, and to leave his imprint on American society 
for a long time." Financial La Tribune devotes its editorial 
to "The Alan and George Show" or "Greenspan's economic success 
versus Bush's political failures." (See Part C) 
 
The latest cases of Avian flu in Turkey are also prominently 
reported in the electronic media, while Le Figaro headlines: 
"Avian Flu Progresses Towards Europe." 
 
Domestic reports concentrate on the 10th anniversary of 
President Mitterand's death, and his political legacy, 
symbolized for Liberation by Segolene Royal who appears to be 
heading many polls as the lead figure for the next 
presidential elections. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraq: Liberation of French Hostage Bernard Planche 
 
"Paris and Washington on the Same Wavelength" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (01/09): "France, 
which now approves of the American role in Iraq, has thanked 
them for the part they played in Planche's liberation. This 
illustrates the rapprochement of the two countries over Iraq, 
but also on other dossiers on the Middle East. Chirac, PM De 
Villepin and FM Douste-Blazy expressed their thanks. These 
expressions of gratitude, rather rare in the recent past when 
it comes to Iraq, are a logical consequence Planche's release. 
Since American soldiers were the first ones to get hold of 
him, it would have been difficult to avoid saluting them. But 
the incident proves that even if France is not part of the 
coalition, France still needs the coalition's help. There may 
be other motivations behind France's diplomatic courtesy: a 
source intimates that the American surveillance system can 
obtain information, which could turn out to be embarrassing. 
Nevertheless France's gratitude fits with a new convergence of 
views between Paris and Washington on Iraq and the region. 
Paris is eager not to `upset' the Americans in their 
stabilization efforts. France's caution is also encouraged by 
the results of the December elections in Iraq. Paris has no 
alternative but to approve America's efforts to integrate the 
Sunnis in Iraq's political process. Both Paris and Washington 
are concerned about the region's stability: Paris wants to 
work with Washington on Syria and Iran, two crises which the 
French, and the Europeans in general, know they cannot hope to 
resolve without the Americans." 
 
"Publicity or Discretion for the Hostages?" 
Dominique Gerbaud in Catholic La Croix (01/09): "This time it 
was neither excessive publicity nor the payment of a ransom 
that led to the liberation of a hostage. It was coincidence, 
and the amateurism of the hostage takers. But mostly it was 
the result of the perfect perimeter of security set up by the 
American and Iraqi forces. Chirac congratulated the coalition 
forces for the release. A release that is going to launch once 
more the controversy about the attitude one must adopt in a 
hostage situation: over-publicize or remain discrete? In the 
case of Planche it seems that discretion, as requested by his 
family, led to success. The same attitude has been adopted by 
the Christian Science Monitor with regard to its kidnapped 
journalist in Baghdad. This is the first time a hostage's 
family and her newspaper have opted for discretion, just when 
Florence Aubenas has been campaigning for the opposite. Proof 
that each situation is unique and that the media must go along 
with the family's wishes. All the while recalling that some 
forty foreigners are still being held hostage in Iraq." 
 
"Silence" 
Antoine de Gaudemar in left-of-center Liberation (01/09): "We 
must rejoice in the liberation of Planche, just as an American 
journalist is reported kidnapped in Baghdad: both families 
have asked for discretion, in fact they have asked for total 
silence. We must respect their wishes. at the risk of 
appearing unfeeling. But we will respect the wishes of the 
American journalist's family: the rule indeed is to follow 
each hostage family's individual preference." 
 
Conjecture About Post-Sharon Israel 
 
"A Fateful Time for Olmert" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (01/09): "For 
Israel and the world, the post-Sharon era is a fateful time. 
Ehud Olmert has taken over the reins and will hold on to them 
until after the March elections. These elections, which were a 
simple formality for Sharon, will be a battle for his 
successor. Olmert has a little under two months to prove he 
can take over Sharon's complex legacy. A legacy that needs to 
be defined, because Sharon did reveal all his plans. His 
unpredictability was part of his strength. Olmert was Sharon's 
closest advisor: he shared Sharon's ideas on the pullout and 
on Jerusalem. But without Sharon's military glamour, he does 
not elicit the same trust. He will need to make his intentions 
more explicit. The first test will be the Palestinian 
elections: Olmert will need to define his relationship with 
the Palestinian Authority, remain firm on terrorism and 
inspire confidence in the West Bank settlers, all the while 
being criticized by his former Likud associates. Peres's 
support is good for Olmert and the new Kadima party. This may 
lead to the peaceful coexistence of two people and two 
nations." 
 
"Reinventing Peace After Sharon" 
Francoise Crouigneau in right-of-center Les Echos (01/09): 
"Geo-strategic tension in Iraq, Syria, Iran and now Israel 
undeniably put added pressure on today's markets. But 
paradoxically, critical periods such as the one Israel is 
facing, can also open new vistas, as long as all players avoid 
a policy of the worse. And as long as the international 
sponsors of the peace process are committed to a common 
initiative, beginning with the Bush administration." 
Bush - Eavesdropping Controversy - Economic Boom 
 
"Bush's Eavesdropping" 
Gilles Delafon in right-of-center Le Journal du Dimanche 
(01/09): "President Bush is facing one more scandal: on 
Saturday, Congress rejected the White House defense counsel's 
arguments regarding eavesdropping on Americans without a legal 
mandate. The White House stance that the country is at war and 
that the President has extended powers was not accepted. For 
Bush this last controversy is developing in an atmosphere 
already marked by mistrust. Watergate and the Clinton scandal 
are not far in people's minds; the word impeachment is already 
making the rounds in Washington . An impeachment procedure 
against Bush is highly unlikely at this time. But the way 
things are going in terms of scandal, 2006 may well turn out 
to be fatal for Bush." 
 
"The Alan and George Show" 
Pascal Aubert in centrist La Tribune (01/09): "Once upon a 
time there were two leaders with infinite power. The first 
managed to be successful in almost everything he did but 
remained modest. The second has practically failed at 
everything, but has a keen talent for claiming other people's 
successes as his own. The former, Alan Greenspan, already has 
his place in history reserved for his role in America's 
economy. No mean feat when one knows he lived through four 
Presidents. Conversely, the current President of the U.S. has 
no real successes to his name, except for a war that has 
brought America's unpopularity to a peak. His tendency to 
abuse his power is beginning to worry Americans. With so many 
failures to his name, maybe it is best that President Bush not 
get involved in America's economy and continue to claim other 
people's successes as his own." HOFMANN