06PARIS645
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Hamas
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000645 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Hamas 
PARIS - Wednesday, February 01, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
Hamas 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
With the exception of Le Figaro, domestic stories dominate 
today's front pages and commentaries focus on PM Villepin's 
stance towards unemployment. His contracts for employing young 
workers are widely criticized by left-leaning media, while on 
the right, the opinion is that the Prime Minister's resolution 
of this issues could "make or break him" as far as his 
Presidential aspirations. The tug-of-war between Mittal and 
Arcelor continues to elicit commentaries, including about 
France's economic protectionism. But as reported in La 
Tribune, workers unions and political circles in France and 
Europe "are united against the hostile takeover." Still, the 
editorial comments: "Mittal the man is neither an amateur nor 
a bandit. He is a knowledgeable entrepreneur. Before 
condemning him outright, why not give him a chance?" 
 
In international news Iran and the "shared position of the EU 
and Washington" is front page news in Le Figaro, while Le 
Monde carries an op-ed entitled: "India, Between Iran and the 
West." (See Part C) The Quartet's position on Hamas is noted 
in Le Monde, while Le Figaro reports how "Mahmoud Abbas is 
trying to influence Hamas." (See Part C) 
 
Le Parisien interviews FM Douste Blazy on the Middle East: 
"Hamas must publicly renounce all forms of violence and 
recognize the existence of the state of Israel."  He also says 
he will meet soon with Mahmoud Abbas, but "for the rest, our 
conditions are clear. We are intransigent on the principles." 
When asked about Iran, he replied "We (members of the Security 
Council) have agreed to present a very firm resolution on 
February 2. In March, if necessary, the Security Council could 
act." 
 
The State of the Union was scheduled too late for the written 
press to report on the President's message. But Pascal Riche 
in Liberation anticipates in an article entitled: "Bush 
Condemned to Being Pugnacious," "the President, for whom 
everything is going poorly, will choose a deliberately 
aggressive tone. He will remain firm on Iraq, despite the fact 
that a majority of Americans regrets the war. A year ago, 
President Bush began his second term victoriously, a year 
later the lack of reforms, Katrina and the fiasco that ensued 
have shattered the image of the leader to smithereens." Le 
Figaro, reporting on the Senate's confirmation of Samuel 
Alito, comments: "President Bush has already scored before 
giving his State of the Union address."  La Croix drafts a 
portrait of Samuel Alito who "was supposed to be confirmed 
last evening despite last minute obstruction tactics from the 
Democrats." "The confirmation," notes La Croix, "should, in a 
very timely manner, come only hours before the State of the 
Union." 
 
The satirical weekly, Le Canard Enchaine, carries a half-page 
story entitled: "Travelers to the U.S. Victims of a Typically 
French Can-of-Worms." The take on the article is that it is 
all "Sarkozy's fault" for having bungled the Imprimerie 
Nationale passport issue. "Sarko, America's best friend is 
unable to deliver the necessary passports to French citizens 
wanting to travel to the U.S." The only reference to the 
Embassy's difficulties in delivering visas is made in the 
second paragraph, the rest of the long article is devoted to 
the French catch 22 situation. The article notes: "Matignon is 
pressuring the Interior" and adds: "All we need now is for 
Chirac to get involved." A footnote explains the dilemma of 
French citizens in the West Indies, the Reunion Island and 
Polynesia. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"Europe in Synch With the U.S." 
Alexandrine Bouilhet in right-of-center Le Figaro (02/01): 
"Rarely has Europe been so much in sync with U.S. diplomacy. 
Vis--vis Hamas, the EU has adopted a defensive stance, and as 
Washington asked, it has been brandishing the threat of 
financial sanctions. Intransigence on the part of the EU seems 
to have won, including from Paris. where some in Brussels 
believe they are seeing a softening of France's policy. 
Regarding Iran, the `six' also agreed to put the crisis in the 
hands of the UNSC, as requested by Washington. Events such as 
the end of the Sharon era, the advent of Hamas and Iran's 
nuclear ambitions are all playing in favor of the 
transatlantic relationship. Yet disagreement remains over 
Iraq, even if Europe and Washington have decided to keep their 
disagreements quiet. Merkel's presence on the political scene 
has also helped to shift the balance towards Washington." 
 
"India Caught Between Iran and the West" 
Daniel Vernet in left-of-center Le Monde (02/01): "The next 
step in dealing with the Iran nuclear crisis will depend on 
the determination of the Europeans, which is not unfailing, 
and on the attitude adopted by Russia and China, which Teheran 
is trying, with unequal success, to disassociate form the 
West. But it will also depend on the position of countries 
that were once called `third world' and that today possess 
nuclear capabilities of their own, namely India. These 
countries are not insensitive to Teheran's position. India for 
its part did not sign the NPT or the NTBT and has therefore 
not broken any of its commitments. But India, in an effort to 
improve relations with the U.S. did agree to let IAEA 
inspectors visit its facilities. India's attitude demonstrates 
the difficult position of a country that would like to respect 
the rules of the rich and powerful in order to be admitted to 
the club, but that feels a sense of solidarity with countries 
that aspire to become nuclear powers." 
 
Hamas 
 
"The Quartet Gives Hamas Time to Recognize Israel" 
Marc Roche in left-of-center Le Monde (02/01): "Secretary Rice 
insisted on the fact that the members of the Quartet were on 
the same wavelength when it sent its warning to Hamas. The 
final declaration means that there is a wide consensus among 
the Quartet's members. Washington appears ready to follow the 
European lead on financial aid to the Palestinians, giving 
Hamas time to change its stance on the right for Israel to 
exist, give up violence and engage in a move to disarm. The 
goal for the Quartet is also to help Mahmoud Abbas." 
 
"Abbas Tries to Influence Hamas" 
Patrick Saint-Paul in right-of-center Le Figaro (02/01): 
"Mahmoud Abbas is threatening to resign unless Hamas changes 
its ways. This has been a consistent attitude on Abbas's part 
whenever he feels threatened. But today Abbas has become an 
indispensable interlocutor for Hamas, Israel and the 
international community and he is using the same threat with 
more effectiveness in order to impose himself in the crisis 
opened by Hamas's electoral victory. Mahmoud Abbas the 
moderate should be able to operate relatively freely in 
matters of foreign policy, while Hamas will be handling 
domestic issues."  STAPLETON