06PARIS3049
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran America's Darfur
Wed May 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 003049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC 
FOR ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; 
MOSCOW/PA; ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran America's Darfur 
Policy Russia's Energy Strategy 
PARIS - Tuesday, May 09, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
America's Darfur Policy 
Russia's Energy Strategy 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Iran and the "unprecedented Iranian initiative" (Le Figaro) 
calling on President Bush to a dialogue is today's lead 
international story, which Liberation interprets as "An 
Atom of Contact Between Iran and the U.S." Both Le Figaro 
and Liberation devote their editorials to the story: 
"America Must Talk to Iran" says Pierre Rousselin in Le 
Figaro, who, compares this opportunity to the U.S. opening 
with China or with the former Soviet Union, adds: "the 
existence of the letter is as important as its content. 
Iran's request mirrors past gestures to divide the West., 
making it very hard for the U.S. President to say yes to a 
dialogue." The Liberation editorial suggests: 
"International impotence is at its maximum. Collaborative 
cooperation is close to zero. The only trump card remaining 
may be that of a dialogue. Yesterday, the Iranian President 
took that road. A daring suggestion that merits attention." 
Les Echos's analysis sees Europe as being 'caught in the 
trap of Iran's nuclear crisis." (See Part C) 
 
The domestic lead story continues to be the Clearstream 
scandal as Le Figaro comments on its front page: "A 
Decisive Week for Villepin." Le Figaro notes that the 
weekend was rich in rumors of the PM's resignation, despite 
efforts to quell "the campaign of rumors." Le Figaro also 
reports that "Sarkozy's friends continue to fuel the 
hypothesis of his taking over as PM." But in an editorial, 
Liberation asks: "What would be the advantage for Sarkozy 
to go to Matignon (the Prime Minister's Office) if it means 
losing the Elysee Palace?" Meanwhile an analysis in 
Liberation emphasizes that "support for PM Villepin among 
his own people, both in the government and the National 
Assembly, is waning." 
 
The nomination of General Michael Hayden to head the CIA is 
widely reported. For Le Figaro, his nomination is "but the 
second part of a two-prong strategy by President Bush. who 
is naming a master spy to the job." For Philippe Gelie 
"this latest revolution at Langley is but a sign of other 
deeper changes to come for an agency in crisis. and held 
responsible for a long series of failures, starting with 
9/11 and the Iraqi WMD." According to Liberation's report, 
"no official explanation was given for Porter Goss's 
surprise resignation." 
 
Several media outlets report on Moussaoui's request for a 
second trial, "now that he knows he can be tied fairly," 
and in which he would "plead not guilty because he 'knew 
nothing.'" 
 
Le Monde devotes its editorial to Darfur and this weekend's 
agreement in Abuja, "a witness to America's determination." 
(See Pat C) 
 
Liberation comments on an op-ed penned by the Russian 
Minister for Energy, Viktor Khristenko, published in the 
Financial Times over the weekend: "The Russian Minister 
says he is 'perplexed over the persisting western criticism 
which gives a negative image of Russia's energy policy.' 
Without ever naming him, Khristenko is answering the 
criticism made last Thursday by the U.S. Vice-President in 
Vilnius. But the tension is far from falling: the U.S. 
President's interview in Bild stressed his concern over the 
'economic nationalism' at work in Russia." Les Echos also 
comments on the President's interview in the German daily 
Bild: "Washington accuses Moscow of using its energy for 
'political purposes." (See Part C) 
Le Figaro reports on the World Bank's warnings to the 
Quartet that "the suspension of financial aid could lead to 
the Palestinian Authority's demise." An accompanying report 
tells the story of "hounded Palestinians forced to sell 
their jewelry to survive." La Croix carries a report noting 
that the EU Commissioner Benita Ferreo-Waldner has said 
that the EU is seeking a way to send money to help the 
Palestinian people "which points to the difficult situation 
that the EU is in since it decided to suspend financial aid 
to the Palestinian Authority." One French diplomat is 
quoted saying that the EU has "fallen into the trap" laid 
out by the U.S. and now finds itself in a "grotesque 
situation" 
 
Liberation carries a two-page report entitled "America's 
Best Friends." "Since the protest against America's 
intervention in Iraq, French intellectuals, including 
journalists, appalled by the ambient anti-Americanism, have 
founded an association, 'The Circle of the Oratory,' which 
gets its inspiration from the neo-cons and those who flog 
radical Islamism. They meet regularly in a Parisian 
Protestant Temple. All of its members would like to see the 
French become friendlier towards their American cousins. 
Says one member, Michel Taubman: 'The Americans are not our 
enemies, even if we can criticize them. But I am worried 
about living in a world where America would be weakened.'" 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"America Must Speak to Iran" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/09): "In 
its tug of war with the international community, Tehran has 
always tried to divide the adversary. Pitting the 
Americans, Europeans Chinese and Russians against each 
other is the best way to protect Iran against international 
sanctions. On the eve of the UN talks, the letter sent to 
President Bush has the same goal. While the terms of the 
letter are probably not all kind for the U.S. President, 
the letter marks a beginning. Its existence is as important 
as its content. On a tactical level, the letter shows that 
Iran is ready to open a direct dialogue with the U.S. 
Strategically speaking, the letter shows that Iran wants 
Washington to grant it recognition, despite having listed 
it in the 'axis of evil.' Because of his past messages of 
destruction, Ahmadinejad is making it very difficult for 
President Bush to respond to the call for talks. Yet, 
despite Iran's unacceptable declarations, America must 
speak to Iran. For many reasons, including the fact that a 
military option against Iran would be even more hazardous 
than the intervention in Iraq. Direct contact between 
Washington and Tehran would help to reinforce the fragile 
international consensus. Past examples, although very 
different - China, the Soviet Union - prove that daring can 
serve peace. The time has come to test Iran's capacity for 
dialogue." 
 
"A New World" 
Pierre Haski in left-of-center Liberation (05/09): 
"International impotence is at its maximum. The Iranian 
nuclear crisis has crystallized the fact that what is 
commonly called the 'international community' is incapable 
of collective action. An agreement between the Americans, 
the Europeans, the Chinese and the Russians is practically 
impossible: each defends different positions for political 
or economic reasons. While everyone agrees on the goal, 
everyone disagrees on the means. There is no single good 
solution on the table: a diplomatic impasse, inoperative 
sanctions, a hazardous military operation. The only trump 
card that remains and which has yet to be tested is that of 
a direct dialogue between Washington and Tehran... The idea 
that an out to the crisis may reside in an approach similar 
to Nixon's trip to China is beginning to take hold: 
although daring, the option merits thought." 
 
"Europe in the Nuclear Trap" 
Jacques Hubert-Rodier in right-of-center Les Echos (05/09): 
"Side by side with the Iranian nuclear crisis what is being 
played out is the re-positioning of the U.S., China and 
Russia on the international scene, which could leave Europe 
behind. Against Iran, Europe does not hold the right cards, 
which are held by Washington. A high French official 
recently suggested that 'the time for dialogue between 
Washington and Tehran may have come.' This suggestion is 
unacceptable for Washington because, according to Nick 
Burns, dialogue with a country that threatens everyone is 
impossible. In this Iranian trap, the European Troika may 
well carry less weight than the U.S., Russia or China." 
 
America's Darfur Policy 
 
"Hope in Darfur" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its editorial (05/09): "No one 
can say whether the partial agreement reached in Darfur 
will succeed. But its signing, after a five-day Marathon 
led by Assistant Secretary Robert Zoellick stands witness 
to America's determination in Darfur. The Americans, who 
are mired in Iraq and who have characterized the situation 
in Darfur as a 'genocide,' cannot afford to be held 
responsible for a new humanitarian scandal. After months of 
dilly-dallying, probably because of Washington's desire to 
preserve its relationship with Sudan, a major partner in 
its war against terrorism, America has proven it can weigh 
in concretely for peace. The fear of instability, fueled by 
Chad, where the U.S. has oil interests may have played a 
role. Still, the agreement has already had a positive 
effect: Khartoum does not exclude the deployment of UN 
peacekeeping troops. But this dynamic could be short-lived 
if the international community sees the agreement as an end 
in itself. Long-term mobilization is required if the 
glimmer of hope born in Abuja is to lead to a concrete 
prospect for peace in Darfur." 
 
Russia's Energy Strategy 
 
"Washington Accuses Moscow of Using its Energy for 
'Political Ends'" 
Stephane Dupont in right-of-center Les Echos (05/09): "The 
Americans are accusing the Russians of wanting to keep 
their hold on former Soviet block nations through their 
energy policy and point to Putin's authoritarian excesses. 
America's accusations have triggered Moscow's anger. The 
first to the draw was Vice President Cheney while in 
Vilnius. But President Bush added a layer in an interview 
with the German daily, Bild. Tomorrow, in a very much- 
awaited speech, Putin will probably answer his accusers in 
the hopes of quelling the controversy, in the interest of 
Moscow, but also of other western capitals two months 
before the G-8 hosted by. the Russian President." STAPLETON