06PARIS2060
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Secretary Rice To Europe -
Thu Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301103Z Mar 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 002060 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Secretary Rice To Europe - 
Middle East Issues Israeli Elections 
PARIS - Thursday, March 30, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Secretary Rice To Europe - Middle East Issues 
 
SIPDIS 
Israeli Elections 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Once again all front pages and most editorials are devoted to 
PM Villepin and the CPE crisis, with Chirac thrown in for good 
measure: the President is urged to take a stand, and he could 
speak at some point this evening after the Council of State 
makes its decision known about the constitutionality of the 
legislation. Liberation headlines: "The Sinking of the Chirac- 
State" while France Soir carries a photo of Chirac and the 
headline: "What to Say? What to Do?" Le Figaro leads with 
"Scenarios for an Out." Experts contend that the CPE 
legislation will be found to be constitutional, but some add 
that the Council of State may express "reservations" about the 
"interpretation" of the legislation. Popular right-of-center 
Le Parisien carries a poll indicating that 83% of the French 
favor a withdrawal of the CPE legislation. Meanwhile a new day 
of protest and strikes has been called for next Tuesday. 
 
The lead international story is the "narrow" victory of Olmert 
and Kadima. For Liberation, Israel "is forced into a coalition 
government," and titles its editorial "Goodbye Dream" in 
reference to Greater Israel, while La Croix calls Olmert's 
victory "bittersweet." For France Soir it is clearly "A 
Victory for Sharon's Party," while Le Figaro's editorialist 
Pierre Rousselin suggests that to succeed, "Olmert will need 
to show as much determination as Sharon." (See Part C) 
 
Liberation carries a full-page article on the Pentagon's study 
on Saddam's leadership perspectives and Operation Iraqi 
Freedom. Christophe Boltanski starts his report by saying 
"this could be the story of Saddam in Wonderland." and goes on 
to explain why Saddam, "who believed in his own illusions of 
victory. was counting on Paris and Moscow to block the UN's 
decision on a military intervention." 
 
Le Monde carries on its front page a report on the "Hamdan 
versus Rumsfeld" case entitled "Failings of the Bush 
Administration at Guantanamo Before the Judges of the Supreme 
Court." "Given the historic nature of the issue, the Supreme 
Court granted a rare 90-minute session," writes Corine Lesnes. 
She quotes the National Journal as saying "it's about the 
separation of powers between the President, Congress and the 
federal justice system for issues concerning the war on 
terrorism. The lawyers for Hamdan are questioning the legality 
of military tribunals, and more generally, the 
constitutionality of the powers taken on by the President 
since 9/11. The trial appears to be the most important since 
the Rasul v. Bush case, which, in June 2004, allowed prisoners 
to question their detention. Justices Scalia and Breyer, his 
leftist-alter ego and `a distinguished Francophone,' exchange 
questions. Justice Thomas tips back his black leather chair 
and, as is his habit, says nothing." The article ends with the 
note that no decision is expected before July. 
 
France Soir interviews former French Guantanamo detainee Nizar 
Sassi who is awaiting his trial in a French prison and who has 
written a book entitled "Prisoner 325, Camp Delta." France 
Soir makes this commentary: "While the book gives a clear 
reading of the Guantanamo prison system, it is essentially a 
plea of innocence. The reader is at times seized by doubt: is 
Sassi really as nave and candid as he claims to be, motivated 
only by a dream of adventure, or a Jihaddist recruit?" 
 
In Le Figaro Alain Barluet reports on the Lebanon "impasse," 
which is a source of concern for the West. The report leads 
with the news that Secretary Rice will be speaking to 
President Chirac this afternoon on the Middle East. (See Part 
C) Catholic La Croix also notes Secretary Rice's visit to 
Paris and her meeting with President Chirac. La Croix 
comments: "French sources indicate that the situation in 
Ukraine and Belarus will also be discussed." 
 
La Croix also reports on President Bush's cabinet reshuffle 
and his replacement "on the sly" of Chief of Staff Andy Card 
with Joshua Bolten, and comments: "Could this be a sign that 
other changes will follow? For several months now his advisors 
have suggested changes in order to give his presidency a 
second wind." 
 
Columnist Alexandre Adler in his weekly column writes about 
the "Iranian Mystery and the Iraqi Key." (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Secretary Rice To Europe - Middle East Issues 
 
SIPDIS 
 
"Lebanon Impasse Worries the West" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/30): "Two 
important questions will be on the menu of the meetings this 
afternoon between Secretary Rice and President Chirac. First, 
they will talk about the Iranian nuclear crisis. They will 
also speak about the situation in Lebanon where the hold Syria 
has is making it difficult to put an end to the political 
crisis opened by Hariri's assassination. Paris and Washington 
have consultations practically very day, with the Elysee 
Palace clearly setting the tone for the French side. But 
despite these concerted efforts, diplomats here say the 
prospects are grim." 
 
"Iranian Mystery and Iraqi Key" 
Alexandre Adler in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/30): "The 
Israeli elections are not this week's key event. The increase 
in tension between the White House and Prime Minister 
candidate Jaafari is either the most destabilizing or the most 
promising incident in the crisis with Tehran. The brutal and 
courageous decision taken by the U.S. President with Hakim, 
who is none other than the Iraqi associate of Rafsandjani, 
sheds new light on the course of events. Thanks to Hakim, the 
government of Teheran is now renewing negotiations with the 
American Ambassador Khalilzad. This time around, Washington is 
putting all its weight in favor of a quick victory of 
Rafsandjani and a reconciliation. of the principal Shiite 
moderate parties with the Sunnis who want to join them. What 
is at stake here is no more and no less than the end of the 
anti-terrorist war which began September 11, 2001." 
 
Israeli Elections 
 
"Towards a Pullout from the West Bank" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/30): 
"Although narrower than predicted, Olmert's victory will allow 
him to form a government able to implement his unilateral 
withdrawal program from the West Bank. But Israel's political 
landscape has changed, in part due to the Likud's rout. Today, 
only a few are still attached to the idea of Greater Israel. 
Olmert's frank campaign based on Israel's borders may have 
cost him some votes. But it has the advantage of clarity and 
makes his future tasks much easier. The Israelis know what to 
expect. Rather than look for a joint peace with the 
Palestinians, they have rallied to the idea of a clean break 
and clear boundaries. Despite the recent victory of Hamas, 
this plan can succeed . because it is not dependent on 
negotiations with Hamas or the international community. 
Olmert's task will not be easy, and he will need to be as 
determined as Sharon was. Meanwhile the international 
community will have to make every effort to keep this historic 
opportunity from being spoiled." 
 
"Goodbye Dream" 
Pierre Haski in left-of-center Liberation (03/30): "Israeli 
voters are sending out two messages. The first, which was 
expected, is a goodbye message to Greater Israel as 
illustrated by the rout of the Likud party and its `loser,' 
Netanyahu. The Israelis are slowly moving towards an 
evacuation of the West Bank. While we are very far from a 
peace agreement with the Palestinians, this is far better than 
what might have happened if the Likud's hawks had won. The 
second message is more of a surprise and concerns Israel's 
social demands. This is an important phenomenon for Israel, 
which is taking its first step towards being a `normal' 
nation, with, as Ben Gurion said, `its prostitutes and its 
thieves' but also its new poor." 
 
"A New Chapter" 
Dominique Quinio in Catholic La Croix (03/30): "Should we 
believe in Olmert's first gesture towards Mahmoud Abbas? The 
end of the Likud and the good score obtained by the Labor 
party leads us to hope that a coalition government will opt 
for seeking solutions. Despite a tendency towards skepticism 
when it comes to this part of the world, let us all believe 
that a new page has been turned. With a dose of auto- 
persuasion, the international community has welcomed the 
results with satisfaction. It wants to believe in the 
Israelis' desire for peace. Hence everyone's promise for help, 
so as not to waste another opportunity." STAPLETON