06PARIS1711
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - U.S. National Security
Fri Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 001711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - U.S. National Security 
Strategy - Iran Iraq Human Rights Council 
PARIS -Friday, March 17, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
U.S. National Security Strategy - Iran 
Iraq 
Human Rights Council 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Domestic social protest is today's single story in front pages 
and editorials as the media ponders about yesterday's 
demonstrations against the government's youth employment 
legislation and what the next step might be. In Le Figaro, the 
editorial warns against "A dangerous escalation;" political 
analyst Nicolas Barotte claims that "student protest could 
lead to an unpredictable chain reaction of political events," 
while Ivan Rioufol in his weekly wrap-up column believes this 
is "a rebellion without an out."  Liberation titles its 
editorial "A Trial of Strength" and suggests that the 
demonstrators were successful in their opposition to the 
government, "while waiting for tomorrow's demonstration," to 
be joined by political parties and employee unions. Le 
Parisien reports on its front page that two out of three 
French are in favor of the government withdrawing the 
controversial youth employment contract (CPE). Azouz Begag, 
Minister for the Promotion of Equality, pens an op-ed in 
Liberation entitled: "Employment, It's Urgent." "France's 
cities had better not, this time, forget the forgotten of 
equality, who are rusting away on the other side of the 
tracks. What they see is France's students demonstrating 
against precariousness in employment, while they consider the 
CPE as a way to resolve their high unemployment rate." 
 
Afternoon paper Le Monde leads with President Bush designating 
Iran "as the most threatening country." The National Security 
Strategy report for 2006 is analyzed. Le Figaro titles on its 
front page: "Iran: George Bush Does Not Exclude Preemptive 
Strikes." Inside, the report begins: "All the lessons have not 
been drawn from Iraq." A separate article reports that "Iran 
is ready to negotiate with the U.S., but only on Iraq." A 
theme echoed in two successive articles in Liberation: "Iran 
Extends a Hand to the U.S." . "Which Declares Iran the Most 
Threatening Nation." (See Part C) 
 
France Soir entitles its report: "Iran in the Line of Fire" 
and adds that "the National Security Strategy is clear." "It's 
no surprise that Iran is in the sights of the Bush 
Administration, which considers the Mullahs' regime as its 
greatest challenge." La Croix reports briefly: "The U.S. 
believes Iran `supports terrorism, threatens Israel and is 
trying to block peace in the Middle East.' Meanwhile, 
Washington seems ready to engage in `limited' negotiations 
with Teheran on Iraq." 
 
Le Monde devotes its editorial to the new UN Council for Human 
Rights, "to replace the much discredited Human Rights 
Commission."  (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
U.S. National Security Strategy - Iran - Iraq 
 
"Washington Reiterates Preemptive War Doctrine as it Warns 
Iran" 
Eric Leser in left-of-center Le Monde (03/17): "Without 
admitting to it openly, President George W. Bush is beginning 
to draw the lessons of the Iraqi adventure into which he 
dragged his country and some of its allies in March 2003. The 
2006 version of the National Security Strategy confirms 
certain points of the 2002 version, while it introduces a few 
new highlights. Today, the focus is on Teheran. The new 
document avoids the phrase `coalition of the willing' used 
about Iraq. While the U.S. reiterates it is `prepared to act 
alone,' it also acknowledges `that there is little of lasting 
consequence that we can accomplish in the world without the 
sustained cooperation of our allies and partners.' The new 
doctrine takes into account the pitfalls and difficulties of 
implementing the administration's promotion of democracy 
throughout the world. and recognizes that elections can 
sometimes have `undesirable outcomes.' The publication of the 
report, just when Iran's nuclear crisis is being brought 
before the UNSC is no coincidence. All in all, the new U.S. 
strategy is based on the Administration's proclaimed ambition 
of making the spread of democracy the main axis of its foreign 
policy." 
 
"The U.S. Does Not Exclude Preemptive Strikes Against Iran" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/17): "The 
lessons of Iraq have not all been drawn. The U.S. still 
maintains preemptive military action as a pivotal means of 
protecting the U.S. . America's accusations, just when the 
Iranian nuclear crisis is being brought before the UN, sound 
like an echo to past accusations against Iraq. The National 
Security Strategy, presented under the light of this new 
threat and how to deal with it, is simply an up-date of the 
2002 version. The global approach adopted in the report puts 
more emphasis than before on international alliances. This 
does not keep Washington from criticizing crucial diplomatic 
partners such as Russia and China. As a counterweight to the 
syllogism brandished against Iran, `No other country poses as 
big a challenge as Iran. Diplomatic efforts must succeed if we 
want to avoid a confrontation,' the White House offers a cycle 
of virtue: freedom leads to democracy, which leads to peace. 
And it is up to the rest of the world to pick which side to be 
on." 
 
"Iran Extends a Hand to the U.S." 
Jean-Pierre Perrin in left-of-center Liberation (03/17): 
"Officially, the reason why Tehran says it is ready to talk 
with the U.S. is that Iraq is in chaos. The Iranian initiative 
has stunned the international community just when the U.S. is 
flexing its muscles against Iran. The Iranians claim they are 
answering an appeal from the Iraqi Shiites. But in reality it 
is the U.S. who made the offer through their Ambassador to 
Iraq, Khalizad, who, it is said, wrote a letter to the 
Iranians. He denies having taken this initiative. In reality, 
it would seem that Iran is trying to find a pretext for a 
rapprochement with the U.S. and the Europeans, at any cost. 
Iran is discovering its isolation, something it did not count 
on. It can turn neither to Moscow nor Beijing, which despite 
their differences with the other UNSC members, share the same 
strategic goal: avoid nuclear proliferation and bring Tehran 
to conform with IAEA regulations. Iran may be discovering that 
using the nuclear issue to build national cohesion in its 
disenchanted society may have taken them too far, and that the 
confrontation with the West is not so easy to manage. This is 
clear from the diverging declarations made by Iranian 
officials. The threat of a civil war in Iraq gives Tehran an 
excuse to renew its ties with Washington. But will the U.S., 
which has called Iran its greatest challenge, want to hear the 
appeal?" 
 
Iraq 
 
"A Major U.S. Offensive Against Iraqi Rebellion" 
Thierry Oberle in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/17): "Three 
years into the war in Iraq, American forces are once again 
trying to clean up a stronghold of Sunni rebellion. But the 
operation, code named `Swarmer', is also intended for domestic 
policy purposes to control the growing skepticism in American 
opinion. Polls indicate that Americans fear the Iraqi quagmire 
might turn into a wider conflict. President Bush's popularity 
ratings have never been so low: 57% believes that sending 
troops to Iraq was a mistake, and 67% thinks Bush has no exit 
strategy." 
 
Human Rights Council 
 
"Human Rights" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its unsigned editorial (03/17): 
"The UN General Assembly voted for the creation of the new 
Human Rights Council despite Washington's opposition. This is 
more than just a change in name. But for the U.S., this reform 
is not enough and marks a missed opportunity. The Bush 
Administration does not trust the UN and would have preferred 
keeping an imperfect Commission rather than having a new 
Council that could become an anti-western forum all the while 
maintaining an air of credibility.. NGOs and Human Rights 
defense organizations approve this compromise which, despite 
what the Americans say, offers a possibility of moving forward 
with regard to the former Commission. The EU, for its part, 
provided a lackluster defense of the realist stance. The Human 
Rights Council. reflects the ambiguities of the UN. In order 
to be universal it must be willing to take into its fold 
countries of every kind." STAPLETON