06PHNOMPENH1965
CAMBODIA INCSR PART I SUBMISSION
Wed Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6038
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #1965/01 3050921
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 010921Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7542
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC 0038UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PHNOM PENH 001965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR CB
SUBJECT:  CAMBODIA INCSR PART I SUBMISSION 
 
REF:  STATE 154928 
 
¶1.  The following is Embassy Phnom Penh's submission for the 
narcotics section of the 2007 International Narcotics Control 
Strategy Report as requested reftel. 
 
¶2.  Begin text: 
 
Cambodia 
 
¶I. Summary 
 
The number of drug-related investigations, arrests and seizures in 
Cambodia continued to increase in 2006.  This reflects a significant 
escalation in drug activity and perhaps some increase in law 
enforcement capacity.  The government is concerned at the increasing 
use of amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS) such as methamphetamines 
and ecstasy (MDMA) among all socio-economic levels.  The 
government's principal counternarcotics policymaking and law 
enforcement bodies, the National Authority for Combating Drugs 
(NACD) and the Anti-Drug Department of the National Police, 
respectively, cooperate closely with DEA, regional counterparts, and 
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).  Cambodia is a 
party to the 1961, 1971, and 1988 UN Drug Conventions. 
 
II. Status of Country 
 
Cambodia has experienced a significant increase in recent years in 
the amount of ATS transiting from the Golden Triangle.  The World 
Health Organization (WHO) estimates that as many as 150,000 
methamphetamine tablets enter Cambodia each day.  Many of these are 
consumed domestically (as many as 50,000 per day in Phnom Penh 
alone), though some are also thought to be re-exported to Thailand 
and Vietnam.  In addition, Cambodian drug control authorities and 
foreign experts have reported the existence of ATS laboratories in 
northwestern and southeastern Cambodia.  There have also been 
reports of mobile groups harvesting yellow vine and cinnamomum trees 
in Cambodia's Cardamom mountains and extracting chemicals which can 
be used as precursors for ATS production. 
 
Cocaine use by wealthy Cambodians and foreigners in Cambodia is a 
relatively small, but worrisome new phenomenon.  Most cocaine 
consumed in Southeast Asia originates in South America, particularly 
Peru and Colombia, and transits via internal body couriers on 
commercial air flights to regional narcotics distribution hubs in 
Bangkok, Hong Kong, Beijing, and Guangzhou.  Historically, a small 
portion of the cocaine arriving in Bangkok has been sent on to 
Cambodia for local use.  Recently, there have been reports that 
Cambodia has taken on a small but increasing role as a new 
trafficking route, with cocaine coming by air from Kuala Lumpur or 
Singapore, transiting via Phnom Penh, and arriving in Bangkok. 
 
Cambodia is not a producer of opiates; however, it serves as a 
transit route for heroin from Burma and Laos to international drug 
markets such as Vietnam, mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and 
Australia.  Heroin and methamphetamine enter Cambodia primarily 
through the northern provinces of Stung Treng and Preah Vihear, an 
area bordering Laos and Thailand.  Larger shipments of heroin, 
methamphetamine and marijuana exit Cambodia concealed in shipping 
containers, speedboats and ocean-going vessels. Smaller quantities 
are also smuggled through Phnom Penh International Airport concealed 
in small briefcases, shoes, and on the bodies of individual 
travelers.  Cannabis cultivation continues despite a government 
campaign to eradicate it.  There have been reports of continued 
military and/or police involvement in large-scale cultivations in 
remote areas.  However, only small amounts of Cambodian cannabis 
reach the United States. 
 
III. Country Actions Against Drugs in 2006 
 
Policy Initiatives.  Cambodian law enforcement agencies suffer from 
limited resources, lack of training, and poor coordination.  The 
NACD, which was reorganized in 1999 and again in June 2006, has the 
potential to become an effective policy and coordination unit.  With 
the backing of the Cambodian government, the UNODC launched in April 
2001 a four-year project entitled "Strengthening the Secretariat of 
the National Authority for Combating Drugs (NACD) and the National 
Drug Control Program for Cambodia".  This project seeks, inter alia, 
to establish the NACD as a functional government body able to 
undertake drug control planning, coordination, and operations.  The 
project is currently slated to expire at the end of 2006 to be 
replaced by a similar, but less ambitious, capacity building project 
of one year duration in 2007. 
 
Accomplishments.  The NACD is implementing Cambodia's first 5-year 
national plan on narcotics control (2005-2010), which focuses on 
demand reduction, supply reduction, drug law enforcement, and 
expansion of international cooperation.  In 2006, the NACD trained 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001965  002 OF 004 
 
 
205 police officers, gendarmes, customs officials, seaport 
officials, and border liaison officials in drug identification and 
law enforcement.  This training complements donor-provided training 
to increase local law enforcement capacity to test seized substances 
for use as evidence in criminal trials.  In February 2005, the 
National Assembly ratified the 1961, 1971 and 1988 UN Drug 
Conventions.  In 2005, the Cambodian government took decisive action 
to strengthen previously weak legal penalties for drug-related 
offenses.  The new law drafted with help from the Anti-Drug 
Department of the National Police provides for a maximum penalty of 
$1 million fine and life imprisonment for drug traffickers, and 
would allow proceeds from the sale of seized assets to be used 
towards law enforcement and drug awareness and prevention efforts. 
However, some observers worry that the law is too complex for the 
relatively weak Cambodian judiciary to use effectively. 
 
Law Enforcement Efforts.  According to NACD reports, 439 people 
(mostly Cambodians) were arrested for various drug-related offenses 
in the first nine months of 2006.  Total seizures of heroin for 
January to September 2006 were 13.4 kilograms.  Police arrested 18 
people in heroin-related cases in January to September 2006, 
including six Taiwanese individuals with more than 10 kilograms of 
heroin hidden in their bodies and bags at Phnom Penh International 
Airport.  The number of arrests and amount of heroin seized during 
the first nine months of 2006 exceed the total number of arrests and 
quantity seized during all of 2005.  While methamphetamine 
trafficking is believed to be on the rise, the number of 
methamphetamine pills confiscated in 2005 and the first nine months 
of 2006 remain far below 2004 levels.  Police arrested 465 people in 
methamphetamine-related cases in January to September 2006 and 
seized 322,761 methamphetamine pills and 3,722 grams of 
methamphetamine and 485 small dose packets. 
 
Corruption.  The Cambodian government does not, as a matter of 
government policy, encourage or facilitate illicit production or 
distribution of drugs or controlled substances or launder proceeds 
from their transactions.  Nonetheless, corruption remains pervasive 
in Cambodia, making Cambodia highly vulnerable to penetration by 
drug traffickers and foreign crime syndicates.  Senior Cambodian 
government officials assert that they want to combat trafficking and 
production; however, corruption, abysmally low salaries for civil 
servants, and an acute shortage of trained personnel severely limit 
sustained advances in effective law enforcement.  The judicial 
system is weak, and there have been numerous cases of defendants in 
important criminal cases having charges against them dropped after 
paying relatively small fines. 
 
In July 2006, Heng Pov, the former chief of the Anti-Drug Police, 
fled Cambodia and alleged that high-ranking government officials and 
well-connected businessmen were involved in drug trafficking, but 
were not prosecuted due to government pressure.  It is difficult to 
assess the credibility of these claims.  At the Consultative Group 
(CG) meeting in December 2004, a group of donor countries jointly 
proposed a new benchmark for Cambodian government reform: 
forwarding an anti-corruption law which meets international best 
practices to the National Assembly.  The government agreed to meet 
this benchmark by the next CG meeting, which was held in March 2006. 
 Unfortunately, the government failed to meet this deadline and, as 
of October 2006, has still not completed the law.  An informal donor 
working group, including the US, has worked closely with the 
government to produce a draft that meets international best 
practices.  In addition, at each quarterly meeting of the 
Government-Donor Coordinating Committee, the international community 
has highlighted the government's still un-met commitment and 
outlined the international best practices to be included.  Cambodia 
is not a party to the UN Convention Against Corruption. 
 
Agreements and Treaties.  Cambodia is a party to the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention, the 1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances, and 
the 1961 UN Single Convention.  Cambodia is a party to the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols 
against migrant smuggling 
and illegal manufacturing and trafficking in firearms. 
 
Cultivation/Production.  During the first nine months of 2006, 144 
square meters of cannabis plantations were destroyed and eight 
people were arrested. 
 
Drug Flow/Transit.  Cambodia shares porous borders with Thailand, 
Laos, and Vietnam and lies near the major trafficking routes for 
Southeast Asian heroin.  Drugs enter Cambodia by both primary and 
secondary roads and rivers across the northern border.  Many 
narcotics transit through Cambodia via road or river networks and 
enter Thailand and Vietnam.  Enforcement of the border region with 
Laos on the Mekong River, which is permeated with islands and 
mangroves, is nearly impossible due to lack of boats and fuel among 
law enforcement forces.  At the same time, recent improvement in 
National Road 7 and other roads is increasing the ease with which 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001965  003 OF 004 
 
 
traffickers can use Cambodia's rapidly developing road network--a 
trend likely to continue as further road and bridge projects are 
implemented. 
 
Large quantities of heroin and cannabis, and small amounts of ATS, 
are believed to exit Cambodia via locations along the 
Gulf--including the deep water port of Sihanoukville--as well as the 
river port of Phnom Penh. 
 
Airports in Phnom Penh and Siem Reap suffer from lax customs and 
immigration controls.  Some illegal narcotics transit these airports 
en route to foreign destinations.  In May 2006, police and customs 
officials arrested three Taiwanese nationals, two of whom were 
carrying a total of more than 7 kg of heroin which they intended to 
smuggle to Taiwan on commercial flights.  In September 2006, the 
Anti-Drug Police arrested four South Americans who had swallowed a 
total of more than 4 kg of cocaine and smuggled it into Cambodia on 
commercial flights. 
 
Domestic Programs (Demand Reduction).  A nine-month report of the 
NACD, from January to September 2006, states the total number of 
drug users and addicts was 6,500, a figure provided by the Royal 
Government of Cambodia's (RGC) Anti-Drug Department.  NGOs and other 
specialists working on this issue argue that the number of drug 
users in Cambodia is probably far higher and is growing each year. 
A study conducted by UNAIDS in 2005 estimated that at the end of 
2004, there were 20,000 amphetamine users, 2,500 heroin users, and 
1,750 intravenous drug users in Cambodia. 
 
With the assistance of the UNODC, UNICEF, WHO, CDC, the Japanese 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and NGOs, the NACD is 
attempting to boost awareness about drug abuse among 
Cambodians--especially Cambodian youth--through the use of 
pamphlets, posters, and public service announcements.  A UNODC 
treatment and rehabilitation project, funded by the Japanese and 
started in October 2006, provides services to addicts and works to 
increase the capacity of health and human services to deal 
effectively with drug treatment issues.  This project will work at 
four sites in three provinces, most likely in Phnom Penh, 
Battambang, and Banteay Meanchey.  Several local NGOs, including 
Mith Samlanh, Punloeu Komar Kampuchea, Cambodian Children and 
Handicap Development (CCHDO), Goutte d' Eau, Cambodian Children 
Against Starvation Association (CCASVA) and Street Children 
Assistance for Development Program (SCADP), have taken active roles 
in helping to rehabilitate drug victims across the country. 
 
IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
 
Policy Initiatives.  For the first time in over three decades, there 
is relative political stability in Cambodia.  However, Cambodia is 
plagued by many of the institutional weaknesses common to the 
world's most vulnerable developing countries.  The challenges for 
Cambodia include: nurturing the growth of democratic institutions 
and the protection of human rights; providing humanitarian 
assistance and promoting sound economic growth policies to alleviate 
the debilitating poverty that engenders corruption; and building 
human and institutional capacity in law enforcement sectors to 
enable the government to deal more effectively with narcotics 
traffickers.  One unique challenge which Cambodia faces is the loss 
of many of its best trained professionals in the Khmer Rouge period 
(1975-1979), as well as during the subsequent Vietnamese occupation. 
 Performance in the area of law enforcement and administration of 
justice must be viewed in the context of Cambodia's profound 
underdevelopment. Even with the active support of the international 
community, there will be continuing gaps in performance for the 
foreseeable future. 
 
Bilateral Cooperation.  US restrictions on assistance to the central 
government of Cambodia, in place from the political disturbances of 
1997 until the present reporting period, hampered US-Cambodia 
bilateral counternarcotics cooperation.  Cambodia regularly hosts 
visits from Bangkok-based DEA personnel, and Cambodian authorities 
cooperate actively with DEA, including in the areas of joint 
operations and operational intelligence sharing.  In January and 
March 2006, immigration, customs, and police officials attended 
Basic Counternarcotics and Airport Interdiction courses funded by 
the State Department and taught by DEA Special Agents. 
 
DOD conducted Joint Interagency Task Force-West (JIATF-West) 
training missions in Battambang in November 2005, Koh Kong in 
February 2006, and in Stung Treng province in June 2006.  The 
three-week programs increased the ability of Cambodian police, 
military, and immigration officials to interdict transnational 
threats, including narcotics.  In 2006, JIATF-West and DEA partnered 
to incorporate DEA trainers into the JIATF-West training missions, 
bringing together military interdiction and law enforcement skills 
into a coherent package. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001965  004 OF 004 
 
 
Through a USAID cooperative agreement, Khmer HIV/AIDS NGO Alliance 
(KHANA) is supporting more than 80 local organizations engaged in 
HIV/AIDS prevention throughout the country.  In 2006, some of these 
organizations included drug-related HIV/AIDS transmission issues in 
their programs.  Outreach efforts targeted at intravenous drug users 
will continue, as such drug use is the quickest and most efficient 
means of HIV transmission. 
 
The Road Ahead.  Cambodia is making progress toward more effective 
institutional law enforcement against illegal narcotics trafficking; 
however, its capacity to implement an effective, systematic approach 
to counternarcotics operations remains low.  Instruction for 
mid-level Cambodia law enforcement officers at the International Law 
Enforcement Academy in Bangkok (ILEA) and for military, police, and 
immigration officers by JIATF-West has partially addressed 
Cambodia's dire training needs. However, after training, these 
officers return to an environment of scarce resources and pervasive 
corruption.  As part of the JIATF-West program, Cambodian officials 
can be trained in land and maritime navigation and boat maintenance, 
but equipment to perform these tasks is often shoddy or completely 
lacking. 
 
US-Cambodia bilateral counternarcotics cooperation should improve in 
FY07 as a result of the lifting of sanctions on military assistance 
to Cambodia.  The RGC is establishing a foreign military sales case 
for $670,000 of excess defense articles.  The acquisition of basic 
soldier and unit equipment (such as uniforms, boots, first aid 
pouches, compasses, cots, and tents) for the Army border battalions 
will facilitate an increased ability to conduct patrols along the 
borders. 
 
The JIATF-West training events in FY07 will consist of two events in 
Stung Treng province and one event in the Battambang/Banteay 
Meanchey area, and will again include DEA trainers in addition to 
military personnel.  JIATF-West has also embarked on a training 
infrastructure renovation project, which will renovate several law 
enforcement and military facilities in Sisophon town and the 
provinces of Preah Vihear and Stung Treng.  Renovation will serve 
both to facilitate future JIATF-West training and also to build the 
capacity of Cambodian law enforcement and military authorities. 
 
In addition, the US-based drug treatment organization Daytop 
International will conduct three training sessions for Cambodian 
government, non-government, and private sector drug prevention and 
treatment professionals.  These training sessions, which will be 
funded by the State Department and will last approximately two weeks 
each, are scheduled to start in December 2006.  USAID is 
collaborating with WHO and NGO partners to collect data on numbers 
and behaviors of intravenous drug users and is supporting 
intravenous drug use and HIV outreach services in Phnom Penh and 
Siem Reap as a first step in addressing the growing problem of 
illicit drug use. 
 
End Text 
CAMPBELL