06QUITO1869
ECUADORIAN PRISONS IN CRISIS - UNDERFUNDED AND
Mon Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #1869/01 2122155
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 312155Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4955
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 5831
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 1897
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ JUL 9976
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 0810
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 0910
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 001869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: ECUADORIAN PRISONS IN CRISIS - UNDERFUNDED AND 
MISMANAGED 
 
¶1.  Summary: President Palacio on June 7 declared a state of 
emergency in Ecuador's prisons to address faulty 
infrastructure, overpopulation, violence and meager resources 
that had led to ongoing prisoner and worker strikes.  Despite 
an $8 million budget increase in April, the majority of the 
funds have yet to be delivered.  The government is exploring 
public-private partnerships as a way to increase investment, 
but 2007 funds remain uncertain.  This cable summarizes the 
budget and management challenges faced by the prison system; 
a separate cable will explore prison conditions.  End 
Summary. 
 
State of Emergency Declared in June 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On June 7, President Palacio, pressured by worker and 
prisoner strikes, initiated a 70 day state of emergency for 
Ecuador's 35 detention centers that drew attention to a 
paltry budget.  Ecuador's prison authority, the National 
Social Rehabilitation Board (DNRS), reported that a state of 
emergency would speed up investment, private contracts, and 
the rebuilding of Quito's Second Prison (destroyed by a fire 
in March). 
 
¶3.  In April, 1,526 prison workers initiated a national 
strike.  Employees demanded budget increases of $20 million 
per year for overtime pay of prison guards, additional pay 
for 262 contracted workers paid below standard rates, food 
for prisoners, and infrastructure improvement.  On June 16, 
prisoners and DNRS's 1,500 employee board asked for the 
resignation of National Prison Director Marco Gonzalez, 
accusing him of negligence and mismanagement.  Prisoner Bryon 
Briones said that Gonzalez has not made progress towards the 
budget crisis, overcrowding, or reinserting prisoners into 
society.  He added that "as long as these people continue to 
manage this institution, things will not change.  They are 
asking for money for themselves." 
 
Prison Strikes and Riots Frequent 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Prisoners have frequently gone on strike to protest 
prison conditions.  According to a January 2006 study headed 
by Fernando Carrion of the Latin American Faculty of Social 
Sciences (FLACSO) University (brother of Ecuador's Foreign 
Minister Francisco Carrion), strikes are necessary to ensure 
resources.  In January, prisons #1 and #3 in Quito declared a 
strike and held visitors hostage in order to reinstate the 
reduction of sentences based on good behavior, formerly 
allowed under Article 33 of the penal code.  The two day 
strike ended with negotiations between the National Committee 
of Prisoners and the presidency. 
 
¶5.  On February 9, newspapers reported a riot at an Ambato 
prison after a guard was arrested for possession of 
marijuana.  Antiriot forces confronted the prisoners, who 
demanded to talk to journalists and voiced grievances of 
mistreatment.  The director of the prison said the $1.00 a 
day provided for food was inadequate and that the prison was 
100 prisoners above capacity. 
 
Budget Reform Needed 
-------------------- 
 
¶6.  Despite President Palacio's announcement of a budget 
increase of $8 million in April, funds are still drastically 
insufficient and expenses have grown at an annual rate of 
58%.  In the last five years, the prison budget has increased 
4 times, by $6.73 million in 2001 and $21.15 million in 2004. 
 This year, however, DNRS received $98,000 less than in 2005 
despite an increase in the prison population.  According to 
Gonzalez, DNRS's current budget of $31 million does not cover 
the needs of employees or prisoners.  Cecelia Armas, the 
national attorney general, said that she will work with the 
Ministry of Economy to pursue an emergency budget for 2007. 
Gonzalez said additional funds would be used to pay guard 
salaries and bolster infrastructure projects including the 
construction of additional wings.  On April 9, DNRS received 
the first million that would go towards paying back salaries. 
 
¶7.  Ecuador has been looking towards U.S. and Chilean models 
of privatization and public-private partnerships as a 
solution that could reduce state costs and overcrowding and 
improve rehabilitation programs for inmates.  Private 
entities would design, finance, construct and maintain 
 
facilities and provide services.  The mayor of Quito signed 
an agreement with business associations that will invest $1 
million in the construction of a maximum security prison, 
reported papers on June 28.  The project would also fund the 
development of rehabilitation centers and income generating 
projects within the prison. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  Obstacles faced by Ecuadorian prisons, which fit into a 
general regional pattern, have reached a crisis point.  The 
state's increased emphasis on privatization could temporarily 
boost resources; however, the government will need to secure 
budget allocations for next year. 
BROWN