06STATE149059
LIST AND DESCRIPTIONS OF E.O. 13382 ENTITIES
Fri Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 082152Z SEP 06
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY CANBERRA IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 149059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KN KNNP KS NZ PARM PREL
 
SUBJECT: LIST AND DESCRIPTIONS OF E.O. 13382 ENTITIES 
 
REF: A. STATE 136495 
     ¶B. WELLINGTON 000665 
 
¶1. (U) Action request: Department requests that Post deliver 
points in paragraph 3 to appropriate host-country officials, 
including New Zealand,s MFAT Director for North Asia David 
Taylor.  The text in paragraph 3 should be left as a 
non-paper.  End action request. 
 
¶2.  (U) Background:  Following our demarche on UNSCR 1695 
(reftel A), New Zealand, Australia and the UK requested 
further information about entities designated under the 
United States E.O. 13382, including an unclassified list to 
share with its financial institutions.  That information is 
provided below.  End background. 
 
¶3.  (U) Begin points/non-paper for New Zealand, Australia and 
the UK: 
 
-- Below is a list of the 13 entities (12 groups and 1 
individual) designated under E.O. 13382, the location of 
their headquarters and branches, and a summary of their 
involvement in proliferation activities. 
 
E.O. 13382 Designated Entities 
------------------------------ 
 
-- Tanchon Commercial Bank (f.k.a. Korea Changgwang Credit 
Bank; a.k.a. Changgwang Credit Bank), Saemul 1-Dong Pyongchon 
District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Tanchon Commercial Bank, headquartered in Pyongyang, 
inherited from the Korea Changgwang Credit Bank Corporation 
(KCCBC) the role as the main North Korean financial agent for 
sales of conventional arms, ballistic missiles, and goods 
related to the assembly and manufacture of such weapons. 
Since the late 1980s, Tanchon,s predecessor, KCCBC, 
collected revenue from weapons-related sales that were 
concentrated in a handful of countries mainly located in the 
Mid-East and several African states.  These revenues provide 
North Korea with a significant portion of its export earnings 
and financially aid Pyongyang,s own weapons development and 
arms-related purchases. 
 
-- Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation (a.k.a. 
External Technology General Corporation; a.k.a. Changgwang 
Sinyong Corporation; a.k.a. North Korean Mining development 
Trading Corporation; a.k.a. &KOMID8), Central District, 
Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation (KOMID) is 
Pyongyang,s premier arms dealer and main exporter of goods 
and equipment related to ballistic missiles and conventional 
weapons.  KOMID offices are located in multiple countries 
with the main goal of facilitating weapons sales while 
seeking new customers for its weapons.  U.S. sanctions for 
trading in missile technology have been repeatedly applied to 
the KOMID organization in the past ten years. 
 
-- Korea International Chemical Joint Venture Company (a.k.a. 
Chosun International Chemicals Joint Operation Company; 
a.k.a. International Chemical Joint Venture Corporation; 
a.k.a. Choson International Chemicals Joint Operation 
Company), Hamhung, South Hangyong Province, North Korea; 
Mangyongdae-kuyok, Pyongyang, North Korea; Mangyungdae-gu, 
Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea International Chemical Joint Venture Company is a 
subsidiary company of Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, 
designated in the annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Korea Ryonha Machinery Joint Venture Corporation (a.k.a. 
Korea Ryenha Machinery J/V Corporation; a.k.a. Chosun Yunha 
Machinery Joint Operation Company; a.k.a. Ryonha Machinery 
Joint Venture Corporation), Central District, Pyongyang, 
North Korea; Mangungdae-gu, Pyongyang, North Korea; 
Mangyongdae District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Ryonha Machinery Joint Venture Corporation is a 
subsidiary company of Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, 
designated in the annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Hesong Trading Corporation, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Hesong Trading Corporation is a subsidiary company of Korea 
Mining Development Corporation (KOMID), which was designated 
in the annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Korea Complex Equipment Import Corporation, Rakwon-dong, 
Pothonggang District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Complex Equipment Import Corporation is a subsidiary 
company of Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, designated in 
the annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Korea Kwangsong Trading Corporation, Rakwon-dong, 
Porhonggang District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Kwangsong Trading Corporation is a subsidiary company 
of Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, designated in the 
annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Korea Pugang Trading Corporation, Rakwon-dong, Pothonggang 
District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Pugang Trading Corporation is a subsidiary company of 
Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, designated in the annex 
of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Korea Ryongwang Trading Corporation (a.k.a. Korea 
Ryengwang Trading Corporation), Rakwon-dong, Pothonggang 
District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Ryongwang Trading Corporation is a subsidiary company 
of Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, designated in the 
annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Korea Ryonbong General Corporation (a.k.a. Korea Yonbong 
General Corporation; f.k.a. Lyongaksan General Trading 
Corporation), Pot,onggang District, Pyongyang, North Korea; 
Rakwon-dong, Pothonggang District, Pyongyang, North Korea 
- Korea Ryongbong General Corporation is a North Korean 
defense conglomerate that specializes in acquisition for 
North Korean defense industries and support to Pyongyang,s 
military-related sales.  It is identified in export control 
watch lists in the United States and among U.S. allies.  The 
Ryonbong trade group has been a focus of U.S. and allied 
efforts to stop the proliferation of materials and weapons 
related goods controlled on national lists and by 
multilateral regimes, particularly ballistic missiles. 
 
-- Tosong Technology Trading Corporation, Pyongyang, North 
Korea 
- Tosong Technology Trading Corporation is a subsidiary 
company of Korea Mining Development Corporation (KOMID), 
which was designated in the annex of E.O. 13382. 
 
-- Kohas AG, Route des Arsenaux 15, Fribourg, FR 1700, 
Switzerland; C.R. No. CH-217.0.135.79-4 (Switzerland) 
- Kohas AG is an industrial supply wholesaler located in 
Switzerland that has been designated as a result of its ties 
to Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, which was identified 
by President Bush in the annex of E.O. 13382 on June 29, 
¶2005.  Nearly half of Kohas AG,s shares are owned by a 
subsidiary of Korea Ryonbong General Corporation known as 
Korea Ryongwang Trading Corporation, which was previously 
designated under E.O. 13382 on October 21, 2005. 
 
-- Jakob Steiger: ADDRESS c/o Kohas AG, Fribourg, FR, 
Switzerland; DOB 27 April 1941; POB Altstatten, SG, 
Switzerland. 
- Jakob Steiger, a Swiss national, is the president of Kohas 
AG and owns the remainder of the company,s shares. 
 
End points for New Zealand, Australia and the UK. 
 
¶5. (U) ISN deeply appreciates Post,s assistance.  Please 
slug responses for EAP, EUR and ISN. 
RICE 
 
 
NNNN