06TAIPEI1432
Visit to Taiwan by Senior Advisor for Agricultural
Tue Apr 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXRO3496
RR RUEHCHI RUEHFK RUEHHM RUEHKSO RUEHPB
DE RUEHIN #1432/01 1150758
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250758Z APR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC 2534
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9872
RUEHZU/APEC COLLECTIVE
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0088
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1736
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0100
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS BEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 001432 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FAS FOR BIOTECH GROUP 
USDA FAS FOR ITP/AAD 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT/BTT 
STATE PASS AIT/W 
ROME FOR US MISSION BRAKEL 
GENEVA FOR USTR 
PARIS FOR USOECD RECINOS 
USEU FOR DASTIN 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID ECON SENV OTRA ETRD TW KPAO OIIP TBIO
 
SUBJECT: Visit to Taiwan by Senior Advisor for Agricultural 
Biotechnology Highlights Need for Biotechnology Communications 
Strategy 
 
Ref: A)SECSTATE 44180, B)TAIPEI 00830 
 
¶1. Summary: Madelyn Spirnak, the State Department Senior Advisor for 
Agricultural Biotechnology, visited Taipei from March 29 - April 1, 
¶2006. She discussed U.S. agricultural biotechnology policy with a 
wide range of officials.  It became clear that Taiwan authorities do 
not have a long term strategy (also see REFTEL B) or an effective 
communications plan to talk with the public about agricultural 
biotechnology. While public opinion is relatively favorable, the 
lack of a risk communication strategy threatens the currently 
favorable environment. End Summary. 
 
¶2. During her visit, Ms. Spirnak met with authorities from the 
principle regulatory agencies, reporters, industry representatives, 
and the president of one of the most influential NGOs on Taiwan. 
 
¶3.  The Department of Health (DOH) is responsible for food safety, 
and conducts, with a committee of 16 outside experts, the food 
safety evaluation of biotech products. Madelyn Spirnak met with 
Director Hsiao Tung-Ming and Senior Scientist Lin Hsin-Tang from the 
Bureau of Food Safety and Director General Chen Shu-Kong from the 
Bureau of Food and Drug Analysis.  While twelve events have been 
approved for imported products (eleven corn and one soybean event), 
and four additional applications are in process, no domestic events 
have been approved.  Under an informal policy, it is not necessary 
to get approval for stacked events if the components of the event 
have already been approved.  This arrangement does not inspire 
confidence, and several firms have made voluntary submissions for 
stacked events. The DOH is one of several agencies working on a 
draft biotech basic law that might help resolve some of these 
issues, but this law is unlikely to be finished anytime soon. 
Separately, DOH is considering forming a consultative center to 
communicate with Taiwan researchers as they develop biotech 
products.  Taiwan officials indicated their interest in obtaining US 
assistance to help train members of the GM Food Risk Advisory 
Committee. 
 
¶4.  The DOH has posted its review procedures and a list of approved 
products on the Internet. Both DOH and the Council of Agriculture 
(COA) have websites on biotechnology.  The officials noted that 
while Taiwan does label biotech products, most consumers don't pay 
attention to the labels.  They said that consumer groups raise the 
potential long-term safety of biotech crops primarily to get press 
coverage, and they noted that the back-to-nature position of 
environmental organizations does not necessarily improve food safety 
or the environment.   DOH officials said they currently do not have 
regular contact with U.S. FDA on agricultural biotechnology food 
safety issues and would welcome the opportunity to work with FDA 
experts. 
 
¶5.  The Consumer Foundation is one of the most influential NGOs on 
Taiwan, and often makes comments - sometimes inaccurate - on food 
safety issues. In a meeting with Ms. Spirnak, Chairman Jason Lee 
indicated that while the Foundation is aware of the benefits of 
biotechnology, it will also pay close attention to both food and 
environmental safety issues.  Mr. Lee stressed the importance of 
consumer choice and transparency and welcomed all information, 
positive and negative, about the technology.  Foundation officials 
also indicated that local consumers are concerned about food safety, 
are paying increasing attention to health, and that organic products 
are becoming more popular.  Spirnak also met with members of the 
press, who asked questions on Taiwan competitiveness in agricultural 
biotechnology, biotechnology in developing countries, biotechnology 
and its relationship to globalization, food aid, labeling, US 
pressure on other countries, and China.  The Central News Agency, a 
local wire service owned by Taiwan authorities, participated in the 
meeting and published a print article.  The article was neutral in 
tone and accurately presented what Spirnak said. 
 
¶6.  At the Council of Agriculture (COA), Spirnak met with a large 
group of COA officials that was led by Vice Minister Lee Jen-Chyuan 
and Yeh Ying the Deputy Director of BAPHIQ - the Taiwan equivalent 
of APHIS.  Vice Minister Lee said that a new regulatory framework - 
the new basic law - is required for commercialization, but that the 
existing administrative order is sufficient for now.  He also noted 
 
TAIPEI 00001432  002 OF 002 
 
 
that under a proposed reorganization, authority to conduct 
environmental risk assessments might be placed in a newly created 
Ministry of Environmental Affairs.  His concept of a domestic 
regulatory approval process was sequential, rather than parallel as 
in the United States, with laboratory control under the National 
Science Council, field trials controlled by COA, and product 
approvals controlled by DOH.  The Taiwan delegation inquired about 
how the United States coordinates the interagency process, tolerance 
levels for biotech products in organic food, and the possibility of 
the US assisting with monitoring.  Spirnak indicated that the US has 
assisted other countries in developing and/or improving risk 
assessment methods; if the risk assessment is done properly, 
monitoring should be less of a priority. 
 
¶7. Taiwan has developed ring spot virus resistant biotech papaya, 
and several other virus and insect-resistant crops.  The papaya is 
in open field trials, but DOH has not completed its food safety 
assessment.  In response to a question, Vice Minister Lee said that 
when farmers seek out new varieties they do not necessarily prefer 
transgenics, but that papaya producers are pushing for 
commercialization of biotech papayas.  When Spirnak noted that the 
Philippines might commercialize their biotech papaya in 2007, the 
Vice Minister said that they suspect that Philippines might not have 
followed all of the assessment procedures.  Spirnak then noted that 
we have found the Philippines to be a good regulatory model for 
Asian countries and have been impressed with their effective methods 
of risk communication. 
 
¶8. On the Biosafety Protocol (BSP), Vice Minister Lee asked how the 
US will be able to segregate bulk commodities, and said that some 
countries have decided not to commercialize biotech products because 
of the BSP discussions. Spirnak noted that US Officials are studying 
the agreement reached at the BSP meeting in Brazil, but that the 
agreement doesn't apply to non-parties such as the US and Taiwan. 
The Vice Minister also brought up the topic of religion and 
biotechnology, noting that some religious leaders are opposed to 
animal genetics in crops. 
 
¶9. At the Council for Economic Planning and Development (CEPD) 
Spirnak met with Vice Chair Fadah Hsieh, and Kao Shien-Quey, the 
Deputy Director of the Overall Planning Department.  Mr. Hsieh noted 
Taiwan suffers from inefficient resource allocation in the farming 
sector, as farmers comprise 10% of the population but use 24% of 
arable land.  He also said that Taiwan captures and uses 18% of its 
rainwater, and while industry also requires high quality water, 
agriculture uses 74% of that high quality water. 
 
¶10. Taiwan has goals for agricultural biotechnology, but they are 
not specific or particularly quantifiable. In order to avoid 
potential food safety concerns, their primary focus is on flower 
development (particularly orchids).  The lack of a risk 
communication strategy was apparent when the Vice Chair said that 
the Prime Minister had responsibility to talk to the public about 
the safety of biotech products.  The Vice Chair also noted the 
importance of a stable supply of food, and lamented that several 
traditional varieties of foods had disappeared since Taiwan entered 
the WTO.  (Comment.  These changes are probably related to improved 
seed varieties rather than trade effects, and mostly preceded entry 
into the WTO. However, public perception is that WTO accession has 
harmed farmers. End Comment.)  The Vice Chair also commented on the 
difficulty of farm reform. 
 
¶11. Comment: Ms. Spirnak's timely and useful visit highlighted and 
reaffirmed the apparent interest of Taiwan authorities to adopt 
agricultural biotechnology as a means to improve overall 
agricultural productivity and competitiveness.  It also confirmed 
that a clear strategy is not in place to reach that goal (REFTEL B). 
 AIT and a variety of partners are coordinating a number of 
activities with Taiwan authorities to address this shortcoming. In 
particular, we should look at ways to bring Taiwan and US regulatory 
officials together to build professional relationships and 
confidence in the area of risk assessment.  End Comment. 
 
YOUNG