06THEHAGUE1797
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DR. MARY WARD
Wed Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy The Hague
VZCZCXRO1746
RR RUEHAT
DE RUEHTC #1797 2281138
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161138Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6560
INFO RUEHAT/AMCONSUL AMSTERDAM 1234
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1300UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001797 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO KSCA TPHY OTRA FR NL
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DR. MARY WARD 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 134095 
 
¶1.  The Hague grants country clearance for Dr. Mary Ward, 
staff scientist, National Cancer Institute, NIH, to travel 
to the Netherlands on September 7-9, 2006. The purpose of 
the visit is to meet with collaborators at the Department of 
Health Risk Analysis and Toxicology, University of 
Maastricht. 
 
¶2.  As per reftel, no assistance is required. 
 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶3.  Since July 9, 2004, the Dutch Government has implemented 
heightened security measures in response to concerns of 
terrorist activity.  U.S. citizens in the Netherlands are 
encouraged to monitor media reports, and are reminded to 
maintain a high level of vigilance and to take appropriate 
steps to increase their security awareness. 
 
¶4.  Tensions in the Netherlands are high, sparked by the 
November 2, 2004 murder of a Dutch film producer known for 
his outspoken criticism of Islam; and by the November 10, 
2004 raid on a home of suspected terrorists, which led to an 
all-day standoff and ended with the arrest of three 
individuals and non-fatal injuries to the suspects and the 
police.  Subsequent arrests were made in connection to this 
raid and further investigation revealed that these suspects 
had ties to known terrorist groups.  These events initiated 
a GoN-wide overhaul of its Counter-Terrorism measures, 
including providing more resources to combat violent Islamic 
radicalism.  There have been a series of protests and arson 
attacks directed at mosques and Islamic schools in the 
Netherlands, plus retaliatory actions against several 
churches.  American citizens should bear in mind that even 
demonstrations intended to be peaceful can turn 
confrontational and possibly escalate into violence. 
American citizens are therefore urged to avoid the areas of 
demonstrations if possible, and to exercise caution if 
within the vicinity of any demonstrations. 
 
¶5.  The U.S. Government remains deeply concerned about the 
heightened possibility of terrorist attacks against U.S. 
citizens and interests abroad.  As noted in the Department 
of State's Worldwide Caution of September 10, 2004, 
terrorists do not distinguish between official and civilian 
targets.  Such targets may include facilities where U.S. 
citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, including 
residential areas, clubs, restaurants, places of worship, 
schools, hotels and public areas.  Terrorist actions may 
include, but are not limited to, suicide operations, 
assassination, hijackings, bombings or kidnappings.  These 
may involve aviation and other transportation and maritime 
interests. 
 
¶6.  An area of concern for visitors to the Netherlands is 
crime.  Most crimes against official Americans are limited 
to pick-pocketing and purse and luggage theft.  Theft from 
automobiles and hotel rooms are not unknown.  Recently, 
theft of laptop computers has increased, especially at 
Schiphol Airport and major train stations.  The thieves 
operate in small groups that target travelers.  They are 
determined and well-practiced at distraction theft. 
Official travelers have been victimized, losing personal or 
unclassified government computers, software and data. 
 
SIPDIS 
Travelers are reminded that regulations require the use of 
the diplomatic pouch for shipment of classified equipment 
and information. 
 
¶7.  Streets can be walked in relative safety but, as in any 
U.S. urban area, caution and vigilance should be exercised 
especially after dark in the more populated cities of The 
Hague, Amsterdam and Rotterdam.  Red-light districts and 
public transportation hubs are common locations for 
incidents of street crimes. 
 
¶8.  For the latest security information, Americans living 
and traveling abroad should regularly monitor the 
Department's Bureau of Consular Affairs Internet web sit at 
http://travel.state.gov, where the current Worldwide 
Cautions, Public Announcements, and Travel Warnings can be 
found.  Up-to-date information on security can also be 
obtained by calling 1-888-407-4747 toll free I the U.S., 
line at 1-317-472-2328.  These numbers are available from 
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday through Friday 
(except U.S. federal holidays). 
 
BLAKEMAN