06TUNIS423
NIH DIRECTOR ZERHOUNI ASSESSES POSSIBILITIES FOR
Mon Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0423/01 0581543
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271543Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9902
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 7147
RUEHNM/AMEMBASSY NIAMEY PRIORITY 0089
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8077UNCLAS TUNIS 000423 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE), OES/H 
HHS PLEASE PASS TO NIH (JUDY LEVIN) AND OGHA/DHHS (JANE 
COURY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM TBIO KPAO SOCI NIH OVIP MEPI
TS 
 
SIPDIS 
SUBJECT: NIH DIRECTOR ZERHOUNI ASSESSES POSSIBILITIES FOR 
RESEARCH IN TUNISIA 
 
REF: TUNIS 161 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  National Institute of Health (NIH) Director Dr. 
Elias Zerhouni accompanied by a multi-disciplinary team, 
visited Tunis January 19-21 to understand research priorities 
and related GOT commitment.  The team was impressed with the 
state of care and research in Tunisia; found the involved 
ministries and institutions to be willing partners for 
collaborations and development toward higher global standards 
of research; and identified possible individuals for future 
exchanges and collaborations.  The group summarized the 
Tunisian experience by stating that the country has excellent 
human capital, close research ties with France that could be 
built upon by U.S. researchers, and a patient population and 
health care system that would support clinical trials. 
Tunisia could also be an important collaborator in 
South-South activities associated with women's health, due to 
its embrace of equality for women, excellent access to family 
planning, and the past effort made to bring women fully into 
all levels of the Tunisian educational system.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  The National Institute of Health (NIH) team included NIH 
Director Dr. Elias Zerhouni and members from three of the 27 
institutes that fall under the NIH aegis:  The National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID), and the Fogarty International Center (FIC).  Both 
NICHD and NIAID have a history of providing funding to low 
and middle income countries, while FIC's primary focus is 
international capacity building.  The group concentrated 
their attention on infectious diseases and child/maternal 
health, but also investigated crosscutting issues, such as as 
bioethics, infectious diseases, newborn screening, 
consanguinity and general capacity building.  (NOTE:  In 
Tunisia, there is an incidence of consanguinous marriages as 
high as 60 percent in many rural areas.  This practice, which 
causes genetic abnormalities, was a major focus of the visit 
and has implications for further study as a regional 
initiative.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶3.  The overarching goals for the trip were to establish 
contacts; evaluate the state of scientific research 
capabilities; learn about research priorities in Tunisia and 
assess the government's commitment to those priorities; 
determine current sources of funding; and promote 
possibilities for further exchanges and collaboration.  The 
visitors met with Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi, who 
stressed GOT commitment to biotechnology and the development 
of a world-class research facility in the southern city of 
Sfax.  The team also met with ministers of Public Health; 
Scientific Research, Technology and Promotion of Skills; and 
Education and Training.  The group visited medical research 
institutes, training facilities, and public hospitals in 
Tunis where research is being done and consulted with a wide 
spectrum of working-level scientists. 
 
¶4.  Overall, the group had positive impressions of the state 
of medical research in Tunisia, and they were impressed with 
the general care of patients in those facilities.  The group 
summarized the Tunisian experience by stating that the 
country has excellent human capital, close research ties with 
France that could be built upon by U.S. researchers, and a 
patient population and health care system that would support 
clinical trials.  They also felt that it would be valuable 
for Tunisian institutions to begin development of 
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) that oversee the 
protection of human subjects in clinical trials, and any 
other necessary structures to be able to meet "Federalwide 
Assurance" and U.S. Human Protection requirements.  Both of 
these standards are necessary to establish clinical trials 
supported by NIH funding. 
 
¶5.  Tunisia could also be an important collaborator in 
South-South activities associated with women's health, due to 
its embrace of equality for women, excellent access to family 
planning, and the past effort made to bring women fully into 
all levels of the Tunisian educational system.  The Ministry 
of Public Health has done fine work promoting family planning 
options, effectively reducing population growth to 1.2 
percent.  As a consequence, the Ministry is now addressing 
more comprehensive women's health issues, including breast 
and cervical cancer screening, reproductive health, as well 
as behavioral interventions to reduce sexually-transmitted 
diseases and prevent HIV/AIDS.  Notably, the success within 
 
 
Tunisia has resulted in Tunisia developing a South-South 
pilot program on women's health issues for Niger, jointly 
funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the UNDP. 
 
 
¶6.  Dr. Zerhouni's visit clearly indicates that visits by 
high-profile Arab Americans reduce the cultural dissonance 
that challenges our outreach efforts (see reftel).  This is 
particularly true when such interlocutors are engaged in 
mutually beneficial areas, such as science, technology, and 
medical cooperation -- areas which in themselves support 
increased transparency, creativity and modernization in the 
Arab world.  Dr. Zerhouni's natural grace and in-depth 
knowledge of this part of the world make him a natural 
interlocutor to promote the American values of diversity, 
tolerance, openness, and the role of merit in our society. 
HUDSON