06TUNIS2170
Beywatch: Are You Really American?
Mon Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #2170 2330933
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210933Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1649UNCLAS TUNIS 002170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/MAG (M.HARRIS); HR/EL DIVISION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI SCUL ECON TS
SUBJECT:  Beywatch: Are You Really American? 
Tunisians Want to Know! 
 
 
¶1.  The following is one of a series of reporting 
cables drafted by Post's entry level officers, which 
have the "Beywatch" caption.  We believe the 
perspectives offered in the following vignette will 
give the reader a look into everyday life in Tunisia 
that may not be central to more formal reporting.  For 
more information about Tunisia or the Embassy Tunis 
Entry Level Officer Development initiative, see our 
Siprnet website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/tunis/index.c fm. 
 
¶2. A recent trip to Djerba, an island off the coast of 
Tunisia, revealed a funny thing about tourists:  it's 
not just Americans who travel the globe to find what 
they left at home.  Conoff and CAO took a last minute 
four-day trip to this tourist destination island at the 
height of the summer season.  Arriving at the SprinClub 
hotel on a Sunday morning, they were enthusiastically 
greeted in Italian.  Taken aback, but ever ready to 
adapt to the situation at hand, Conoff reached into the 
back of her brain and responded in Italian.  One look 
at the proffered diplomatic identification cards and 
the staff quickly turned to English, but they were the 
first of many incredulous interlocutors to express 
surprise that their guests were Americans. 
 
¶3. For Tunisia, "Tourism is by far the largest services 
sector contributor," claims an on-line report of Oxford 
Business Group.  The World Travel and Tourism Council 
(WTTC) report on Tunisia for 2006 estimates that "T&T 
Economy employment is 510,000 jobs in 2006, 17.0 
percent of total employment, or 1 in every 5.9 jobs." 
It estimates an increase by 2016 to 618,000 jobs, or 
one in every 5.8 jobs." It also notes that "the 271,000 
T&T Industry jobs account for 9.0 percent of total 
employment in 2006 and are forecast to total 337,000 
jobs or 9.4 percent of the total by 2016." And it 
estimates the amount of tourism-generated economic 
activity at about $6.5 billion for 2006.  Tunisian 
tourism, however, has not typically reached out to 
Americans. According to the U.S. Country Commercial 
Guide on Tunisia, in 2005 only 15,700 of the 6.3 
million tourists traveling to Tunisia were American. 
The overall total included more than a million each of 
French, and Libyan tourists, almost a million 
Algerians, and more than half a million Germans, so 
it's no surprise that there was a dearth of American 
tourists in Djerba.  However, the reaction to Emboffs' 
presence was truly surprising in its depth of 
astonishment.  The imported Italian staff largely 
ignored them, but word that Americans were about in 
this Italian hotel (even the restrooms were indicated 
with signs in Italian!) spread like wildfire, and soon 
the entire Djerbian staff addressed them with a "hello" 
or "good morning."  They were marked. 
 
¶4.  The same conversation repeated itself wherever 
Emboffs went.  They would address someone in French and 
the person would immediately want to know if they were 
French.  No?  Swiss? Belgian? Czech? Polish?  Well, 
what then?  The response "American" would immediately 
elicit an incredulous look and another question: "Des 
vraies americaines?"-"Real Americans?"  From what 
origin, they would want to know.  The most amusing 
interaction was with a hotel retail store owner who 
told Emboffs they were the first Americans he had ever 
met!  The same conversation was repeated again and 
again in the souk, in taxis, in the airport, and in 
restaurants.  Though incredulous, the Djerbians 
appeared to be genuinely pleased to meet Americans. 
 
¶5. Reports like "Cultural Diplomacy: The Linchpin of 
Public Diplomacy," published in September 2005, make it 
clear that interpersonal interaction is key to mutual 
understanding.  Tourism can play an important, albeit 
uncontrolled, role in this endeavor.  While an increase 
in American visitors would certainly help Tunisian 
tourism in general, it could also serve as a conduit 
for intercultural dialogue that is much needed in this 
part of the world.  In the meantime, Embassy staff will 
do its part exploring nooks and crannies off the beaten 
American tourist path to show our faces, make 
connections, and expose Tunisians to "les vrais 
americains." 
 
BALLARD