06USUNNEWYORK536
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN SOMALIA: PROSPECTS FOR PEACE
Fri Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3817
OO RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #0536/01 0762300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 172300Z MAR 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8364
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PGOV PREL SO UNSC KPKO XW
SUBJECT: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN SOMALIA: PROSPECTS FOR PEACE 
 
¶1. Summary:  Recent developments in Somalia have improved the 
prospect for peace, however the process remains vulnerable, 
and the pressing humanitarian crisis demands immediate 
international attention.   The signing of the Aden 
Declaration and subsequent convening of the Parliament are 
important steps on the long road to peace.  Many problems 
remain however, including a violent political power struggle 
and extremist activity in Mogadishu, a severe drought and 
famine, and violent clashes over scarce water, land, and 
grazing rights.  Piracy continues to impede humanitarian 
relief efforts, and the overall lack of security threatens to 
derail the peace process.  The international community is 
needed to address security concerns, enforce the arms 
embargo, combat piracy, and continue humanitarian relief 
efforts as 1.7 million people are facing starvation.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  In his March 10 briefing to the United Nations Security 
Council, Special Representative of the Secretary-General 
(SRSG) Francois Fall noted a number of positive developments 
that improved the prospect for peace and reconciliation in 
Somalia.  On January 5, President Abdullahi Yusef Ahmed and 
Speaker Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden signed the Aden 
Declaration, agreeing to end their differences, abide by the 
Transitional Federal Charter, and hold a meeting of the 
Transitional Federal Parliament, for whose convening in 
Baidoa an official announcement was made on January 30.  The 
President, the Speaker, and Prime Minister Gedi issued a 
Memorandum of Understanding in which they agreed to work 
together to implement the Aden Declaration. 
 
¶3.  The opening of the session of Parliament took place on 
February 26, 2006, attended by 211 of the 275 Members.  SRSG 
Fall acknowledged a great deal of support from the 
international community.  At the session, President Yusef 
outlined an agenda which included issues related to national 
security and confidence building; support for international 
agreements and treaties, and internal revenue generation.  At 
the request of the President, the members adjourned to 
conduct informal consultations, and when Parliament 
reconvened on March 6th, 230 members were in attendance. 
Fall opined that the opening session had the potential to put 
Somalia,s political process on track; however collective 
efforts of the international community were needed to address 
the priority issues facing the country -- national security, 
reconciliation, revenue collection, and the establishment of 
basic social services for the population. 
 
Mogadishu 
 
¶4.  SRSG Fall reported that increased tensions in Mogadishu 
were the most serious security concern presently facing 
Somalia.  Groups of faction leaders and prominent businessmen 
formed the &Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and 
Counter-Terrorism8 with the stated goal of restoring peace 
and fighting international terrorism by eliminating those 
they considered &foreign terrorists and their supporters.8 
Between February 18th and 20th, confrontations between this 
&Alliance8 and the Islamic Shariah Court militias resulted 
in heavy loss of life, including civilians.  According to 
Fall, there has been an increase in extremist activity, 
including assassinations, and the power struggle in Mogadishu 
has had serious political and security implications.  In 
addition to clan and sub-clan disputes, Fall noted there 
remained drought-related clashes over scarce water, land, and 
grazing rights. 
 
Other Issues: 
 
¶5.  SRSG Fall highlighted the concern over Somali piracy, 
with attacks inhibiting international relief efforts, and 
noting that over 50 vessels were attacked in 2005. 
Trafficking in persons remains an issue, as well as 
abandonments and drownings at sea.  The current drought in 
the region is the most serious in a decade, according to 
Fall, with 1.7 million Somalis in need of urgent humanitarian 
assistance, especially in Southern Somalia where malnutrition 
rates exceed 20 percent.  The Donor community has ensured 
funding for 66 percent of this need, but there remains an 
estimated shortfall of 20,000 metric tons of food, at a 
projected cost of $15 million USD. 
 
¶6.  Fall concluded by noting that the Transitional Federal 
Institutions (TFIs) must find ways to address these issues 
within the framework of a national security and stability 
plan (NSSP), and a national Demobilization, Disarmament, and 
Rehabilitation (DDR) plan.  The Inter Governmental Agency on 
Development (IGAD) is scheduled to meet on March 17 - 18, 
followed by a summit in support of the peace process in 
Nairobi on March 20.  The purpose of these meetings is to 
review the situation in Somalia, and recommend concrete 
measures to support the political process. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000536  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Intervention: 
 
¶7.  At the conclusion of Fall,s presentation, Qatari 
Ambassador Al-Nasser offered a brief intervention in his 
capacity as the new Chair of the Somalia Sanctions Committee 
on the report of the Monitoring Group of Somalia.    The 
Group,s report noted that despite the embargo, violations 
and the resulting militarization of Somalia continue, largely 
due to three groups: the Transitional Federal Government 
(TFG); the Mogadishu-based opposition groups; and the 
militant fundamentalists.   There is increasing evidence 
Member States are involved in violations of the arms embargo 
as well: Yemen has admitted involvement in arms shipments to 
Somalia, while Ethiopia has denied involvement despite 
increasing evidence to the contrary.  In reference to the AU 
Summit in January, the Group noted that the AU had adopted a 
resolution calling for the Security Council to consider a 
waiver of the arms embargo to allow for the deployment of an 
AU peace support mission.  The Group opined that an exemption 
to the AU mission would cause further hostility and undermine 
ongoing peace efforts. 
 
¶8.  Of continuing concern to the Group are the ongoing acts 
of piracy.  The Chair mentioned Committee members, questions 
about the involvement of a U.S.-based company (TopCat) in 
combating this problem, and that the U.S. government was 
looking into the matter and did not have any affiliation with 
the company.   The Qatari PermRep further noted the piracy 
was occurring in international waters, and was the 
responsibility of the International Maritime Organizations 
(IMO).   The 24th session of the IMO Assembly had adopted a 
resolution in January on &piracy and armed robbery against 
ships in waters off the coast of Somalia8 which had been 
submitted to the UN for consideration. 
 
Member Comments of Note: 
 
¶9.  Members of the Council commented on the SRSG briefing, 
raising specific issues of concern.  All Members supported a 
PRST, with the only criticism from some being that the draft 
was not strong enough, and did not go far enough.  The 
Council also universally endorsed the urgent need for an 
NSSP. 
 
¶10.  Most Members, as well as the SRSG, agreed the lack of 
security was the overriding concern and the most pressing 
issue in Somalia.  Ambassador Mahiga of Tanzania noted its 
negative effect on the &fragile human situation.8  In his 
view, the international community was not moving fast enough, 
and the Council should demand concrete recommendations in the 
next Secretary General,s Report -- a view endorsed by 
Ambassador de Rivero of Peru.  Greek Ambassador Vassilakis, 
cautiously optimistic in regard to the Aden Declaration and 
subsequent meeting of Parliament, noted the need to address 
security concerns, enforcement of the arms embargo, piracy, 
and the ongoing problems in Mogadishu   France and the UK 
both voiced their concern over the tenuous security situation 
noting the looming &specter of warlords.8  Specific trouble 
spots were highlighted ) most notably Mogadishu, where 
Ambassador Apenteng of Ghana addressed the increase in 
terrorism, as well as the increase in extremism, both there 
and in lower Juba.  Ambassador Al-Nasser noted that 
conditions in Somalia provided &fertile ground for 
terrorism8 ) a view shared by the Slovakian PermRep. 
 
 Political Progress/NSSP 
 
¶11.  Ambassador Al-Nasser noted his country was 
&disheartened8 at the deteriorating situation in a sister 
Arab state, and by the relative neglect of the international 
community. 
The Danish Representative noted that it was difficult to be 
optimistic about the prospects for peace given the failure of 
14 prior peace initiatives.  He welcomed AU and IGAD 
initiatives, which he stated must be coordinated with TFI,s. 
  U.K. Representative Johnston agreed that the establishment 
of an NSSP was critical so the containment of the militias 
can be addressed.  Russian Representative Dolgov spoke in 
support of the need to insure the inclusive nature of the 
political process.  Argentinean Representative Mayoral 
acknowledged the Somalis had taken an important first step 
towards peace, but stated that there must be an NSSP and 
improvement of the human situation. 
 
IGAD/AU Peace support Operations: Waiver of the Arms Embargo 
 
¶12.  Council Members were divided on the issue of a waiver of 
the arms embargo for the AU.  While many, including the SRSG 
and Somalia Monitoring Group were opposed, Ambassador Ikouebe 
of Congo voiced his hope that the AU would have greater 
involvement, and noted specific support for a waiver.  Ghana 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000536  003 OF 003 
 
 
and Japan were willing to consider a waiver, but only after 
an NSSP was in place.  The Russian PermRep went further, 
stating a waiver of the arms embargo for the AU had already 
been discussed, and that it would be considered in the 
Security Council only when the Council received a detailed 
plan from the AU and IGAD ) a plan worked out with the 
TFI,s,  and in conjunction with an NSSP.  Tanzanian PermRep 
Mahiga was willing to consider a waiver &with due 
safeguards; 8 stating that the AU and IGAD would be able to 
provide a detailed peace plan &in due course.8 
 
Humanitarian Conditions 
 
¶13.  All were in agreement that the deteriorating 
humanitarian conditions needed to be addressed by the 
international community, with the Chinese appealing to Somali 
leaders to improve the security situation, and permit 
desperately needed relief efforts access.  In this context 
the ongoing problem of piracy was raised, and its significant 
impact on humanitarian relief efforts.  The Japanese 
Ambassador emphasized that safety and security were mandatory 
for providers of assistance. Ambassador Apenteng of Ghana 
argued that more attention should be paid to the drought 
situation, while the Peruvian PermRep challenged the Security 
Council to ensure the situation of drought and famine did not 
deteriorate further.  He suggested that Under Secretary 
General for Humanitarian Affairs Jan Egeland brief the 
Council on how to get humanitarian aid into the country, and 
noted that although he supported it, the PRST was not enough. 
 Ambassador Mayoral of Argentina stated that the Somali 
government must address the immediate needs of the people, 
voicing concern over the drought, and that 1.7 million people 
are facing starvation. 
 
Conclusion: 
 
¶14.  In response to Member comments, SRSG Fall noted that in 
his view, all issues raised by Council Members came down to 
security, and restoring State authority throughout the 
country.  Once established, all other issues could be 
resolved.  Necessary reconciliation among faction leaders 
must go down to the district level.  He added that major 
figures are now talking, and trust is gradually being 
established.  He acknowledged growing extremism is a problem 
that initially kept some ministers away from Baidoa, &but 
they are there now.8  Islamists still feel they are not 
adequately represented, and continue to resort to violence. 
A national police unit has been formed (trained in Uganda) 
and a police academy established in Puntland.  Still, there 
remains a problem of access to those in greatest need.  The 
AU, IGAD and TFG must be encouraged by the international 
community to move the process forward.  Progress has been 
made. 
BOLTON