06USUNNEWYORK1225
UN SECURITY COUNCIL REVIEWS MANDATE FOR THE
Fri Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2107
OO RUEHAST
DE RUCNDT #1225/01 1672116
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 162116Z JUN 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9359
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: UN SECURITY COUNCIL REVIEWS MANDATE FOR THE 
MULTINATIONAL FORCE-IRAQ (MNF-I) 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001225  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  The UNSC held public and private sessions on 
June 15 to review the mandate of the Multinational Force-Iraq 
(MNF-I) as well as to review Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) 
and International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB) 
arrangements.  Council members voiced unanimous support for 
the continued role of MNF-I and, with the exception of Qatar, 
unanimous support for sustaining the DFI/IAMB arrangements. 
During the meeting, Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari 
called for an increased UN role in his country, increased 
international support for Iraq by means of an International 
Compact, and discussed the challenges facing the 
newly-elected government in Iraq.  Several delegations 
expressed concerns about the human rights situation in Iraq 
and called on MNF-I and the Iraqi security forces to act in 
full accordance with international human rights and 
humanitarian law.  At the end of the meeting, the Council 
adopted the draft press statement previously approved by the 
Department.  End Summary. 
 
MNF, DFI / IAMB Review 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) There was unanimous support for the continued role of 
MNF-I and, with the exception of Qatar, unanimous support for 
sustaining the DFI/IAMB arrangements.  Many countries 
specified that MNF are still critical in building Iraqi 
Security Forces (ISF) capacity. ISF capacity, in turn, would 
be critical for addressing the security issues in Iraq, which 
have negatively affected economic development, sectarianism, 
and human rights.  During the closed session, Iraqi Foreign 
Minister Zebari, in an apparent effort to display Iraqi 
"ownership," commented that while MNF-I presence is currently 
&essential8 it will not be &indefinite.8 Additionally, a 
fully functioning and capable ISF will allow Iraq to take 
ownership of both its domestic and foreign affairs. 
Regarding DFI/IAMB, Qatar commented that &the situation had 
changed8 and that &it was time to put an end to the mandate 
of IAMB,8 but noted that it would be for the Security 
Council to decide. 
 
Iraqi Foreign Minister Zebari 
On the International Compact 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) In both public and private UNSC sessions, Zebari 
provided a participatory framework for an International 
Compact, including the P-5, UN, World Bank, the Arab League, 
and regional neighbors to build international support.  He 
also noted that Iraq was, in part, a regional security issue, 
which requires the international community to increase its 
shared responsibility.  Because of this, an International 
Compact would be necessary and appropriate. To show existing 
support for such an initiative, he noted that he had 
discussed it with EU foreign ministers and that they were 
receptive.  The UK and Tanzania also voiced support for the 
Compact in their remarks. 
 
¶4.  (U) Zebari,s main theme was to internationalize both 
security and economic assistance efforts in Iraq.  At the 
outset, Zebari noted recent security and political 
developments (e.g. Zarqawi and the recent ministerial 
appointments) and cited the continued challenges faced in 
achieving domestic reconciliation and economic development. 
Zebari called for an increased UNAMI role in Iraq, to its 
&maximum capacity,8 noting that hesitancy from UN members 
to &engage fully in Iraq only encourages the insurgency.8 
Furthermore, Zebari cited the UN,s contributions to the 
constitutional process, humanitarian and electoral 
assistance, and donor coordination.  In his concluding 
statements, he again called on states to fulfill their donor 
pledges from Madrid and Amman. Drawing on his 
"internationalization" theme, Zebari noted a recently agreed 
upon reconciliation conference, which will be hosted by Iraq 
and the Arab League in August (Note: This was pushed back 
from an original date of June 21-22. End Note.).  Numerous 
other speakers supported an Arab League role, led by China 
(who had requested an Arab League reference in the UNSC press 
statement) as well as by Denmark, Ghana, Congo, and Peru. 
 
Human Rights Concerns 
--------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Numerous speakers voiced concern over human rights 
issues, including the UN, Japan, Slovakia, Argentina, Ghana, 
Congo, and Tanzania.  Speaking in the open session, Assistant 
Secretary General Angela Kane tied human rights violations to 
 
SIPDIS 
security challenges and sectarianism, and noted a growing 
problem of displaced persons.  She stated that there are a 
total of &approximately 1.3 million IDP,s countrywide.8 
Without mentioning specific incidents, Ms. Kane noted that 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001225  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) and MNF-I have a &particular 
responsibility to act in full accordance with international 
human rights and humanitarian law.8  Furthermore, she called 
upon the ISF and MNF-I to ensure &full, transparent and 
effective investigations of all such incidents8 of human 
rights violations.  To address the human rights and IDP 
issues, Ms. Kane also called upon the establishment of an 
Independent National Human Rights Commission and a Center for 
Missing and Disappeared Persons. This initiative was later 
supported by Congo. 
 
UNAMI 
----- 
 
¶6. (U) There was unanimous support for a strong UN role in 
Iraq.  Besides fulfilling the UN mandate as stipulated in 
UNSCR 1546, A/SYG Kane noted the UN,s intention to 
strengthen its activities in reconstruction and development. 
Additionally, she noted that the Iraqi government could 
advise the UN on how it could best fulfill its mandate.  The 
UN again noted logistical and security concerns making it 
more difficult for them to fulfill their mandate.  Denmark 
called for an increased UN role, noting that the UN could 
uniquely contribute to the issue of national reconciliation. 
Denmark also noted their recent authorization to provide 
UNAMI with a dedicated aircraft.  The UNAMI mandate will be 
reviewed this August. 
 
¶7. (U) The UK laid out seven areas for which the UN could 
increase its role in Iraq, including the following: 
promoting inclusiveness and a rejection of sectarianism; 
supporting the Constitutional Review process; ensuring 
effective relations between provinces and Baghdad; assisting 
successful provincial elections and electoral reform; working 
to deliver the rule of law and improved human rights; 
increasing its reconstruction and development activities; 
promoting greater international support and coordinating 
donor contributions. 
BOLTON