06WELLINGTON55
NEW ZEALAND NOMINATION FOR FSN POLITICAL
Fri Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FSINFATC FOR SPAS/POL - BILL INGRAM AND HAITHAM AL-MUSSAWI 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP - DAN RICCI 
 
E.O. 12985:  N/A 
TAGS: AFSI AFSN PGOV PREL NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND NOMINATION FOR FSN POLITICAL 
TRAINING COURSE, APRIL 3 - 14, 2006 
 
REF: (A) STATE 02153; (B) 05 WELLINGTON 549 
 
¶1.  Embassy Wellington submits the following nomination 
for the FSN Staff Political Training Course to be held in 
Washington from April 3 - 14, 2006. 
 
¶2.  Name:  Craig Brian Greaves 
Grade:  9 Step 2. 
Length of Service:  Start date - May 16, 2005. 
English language ability:  level 4 (native speaker). 
 
Time spent in the U.S.: 
November 1998:  Washington DC.  Purpose:  Brief period 
before travelling to Bosnia to work for a DC-based 
research and polling firm (Greenberg Research Inc). 
 
December 1998 - March 1999:  Washington DC.  Purpose: 
Internship with lobbying firm. 
 
February 2000:  San Francisco.  Purpose:  One week 
personal vacation. 
 
Previous training in the U.S.:  None. 
 
Previous nomination for political training course:  July 
14, 2005. 
 
¶3.  Narrative: 
 
Craig Greaves has demonstrated exceptional talent and 
skills as a Locally Employed Staff member (LES) who covers 
political issues for Embassy Wellington's Political- 
Economic Section.  Craig reported on New Zealand's 
political parties and leaders in advance of national 
elections on September 17, 2005, as well as on the four 
weeks of complex negotiations that followed, leading to 
the formation of a coalition government.  Having worked 
previously in the New Zealand Parliament, he has provided 
us with invaluable insights into the government and access 
to leading decision makers.  He has helped advise and 
support our new Ambassador.  He has served as the control 
officer for a visit by a Congressional staff delegation. 
Craig has exceeded expectations for an incoming LES and is 
expected to deliver bigger dividends to the Embassy's 
mission in the years to come. 
 
Political training would build upon Craig's considerable 
skills by refining his drafting and interviewing 
techniques -- essential to doing his job.  In particular, 
training would help Craig understand the needs of U.S. 
government policymakers and would allow him to make 
informed choices on what political developments in New 
Zealand should be reported to Washington.  While U.S.-New 
Zealand relations are good overall, the two governments 
differ on many issues of concern to the United States. 
Meeting with the desk officer and other U.S. government 
representatives would give Craig a broader understanding 
of the U.S. perspective on such issues. 
 
We also expect Craig will widen his contact with key New 
Zealand decision makers, and training would help him 
better represent U.S. policy here. 
 
Training would help Craig fill a gap in Embassy 
Wellington's reporting capabilities.  Our reporting load 
has increased significantly with the elimination of SEP. 
We increasingly are relying on Craig to produce our 
political reports.  In fact, Craig's position was created 
in recognition of the increased burden on the three- 
officer Political-Economic Section.  While an FTE has been 
approved for a new mid-level officer for the section, we 
plan to drop this request, given our good fortune of 
hiring Craig.  Craig is the first Embassy LES to perform 
this extensive reporting role, and no Wellington LES has 
ever taken this training course.  Craig is hard working, a 
fast study and unfailingly considerate.  We think he would 
be a great asset to the class.  He works closely with 
other LES who support the Ambassador and our Public 
Affairs Section:  For example, he collaborated with our 
Public Affairs LES in fashioning our response to negative 
reports in the New Zealand media and in writing a speech 
for the Ambassador.  We know that he would share with them 
the knowledge and skills gained from this training. 
 
In quick fashion, Craig has become an indispensable part 
of Embassy Wellington's Political-Economic Section.  The 
Ambassador and the DCM strongly support his nomination and 
firmly believe Craig's immediate participation in this 
course will significantly advance the Mission's 
objectives. 
 
Burnett