07AITTAIPEI863
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS
Tue Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0863/01 1070905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170905Z APR 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4926
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6649
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7897UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000863 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Several of Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave 
front-page coverage April 17 to the mass shooting in a U.S. college 
Monday, while the others continued to focus on the 2008 presidential 
elections and other local political issues.  In terms of editorials 
and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
criticized the Taiwan government's attempt to apply for membership 
for the World Health Organization (WHO) under the name "Taiwan" as a 
show simply for domestic campaign purposes.  An op-ed piece in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times," however, argued that "this is the correct course for Taiwan 
to pursue."  With regard to Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao's 
recent visit to Japan, an editorial in the limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" said 
both China and Japan "should work together to head off any attempts 
by the ultra-nationalists to sour bilateral feelings."  An editorial 
in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language 
"Taiwan News" urged Beijing to join the international system as a 
responsible stakeholder."  End summary. 
 
¶2. Taiwan's WHO Bid 
 
A) "Does [Taiwan] Really Want to Join the WHO, or It Has Simply Put 
On a Show Aimed at Manipulating Campaigning?" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (4/17): 
 
"... The problem is that we really cannot tell what powerful 
bargaining chips or channels Taiwan has obtained recently that are 
capable of increasing the island's chances to participate in this 
year's World Health Assembly (WHA), let alone the more difficult 
attempt to become a member of the World Health Organization (WHO). 
... Frankly speaking, not only is this year's situation no different 
from that of last year, but it has also become more unfavorable for 
Taiwan's participation [in the WHA].  Other than the fact that the 
United Nations only recognizes China's fundamental policy, Beijing 
also signed a memorandum of understanding with the WHO in 2005, 
which specifies that, should experts from Taiwan want to participate 
in WHO conferences, they must apply using city names such as Taipei 
or Kaohsiung.  Also, Taiwan's name will become 'Taiwan, China,' 
meaning that Taiwan is part of China.  Such an adverse framework has 
restricted any possible status that Taiwan could use to attend the 
conferences, let alone the possibility of becoming a full member [of 
the world body]. 
 
"Second, the United States has been a major driving force that 
protects Taiwan's security and assists Taiwan in terms of the 
latter's room for maneuver in the international community.  But as 
we recall what has happened [between the two sides], [we need to ask 
the questions:]  Have U.S.-Taiwan relations improved or deteriorated 
in the wake of the campaigning manipulative moves such as the 'one 
country on either side of the Taiwan Strait' remarks and the 
controversy over the 'cessation of the National Unification 
Council'?  Has the United States become more enthusiastic or 
dispirited in supporting Taiwan's participation in the international 
activities? ... 
 
"To put it bluntly, this is just another political move for domestic 
consumption only.  After a series of name change campaigns for 
state-owned enterprises, now [the government] is saying out loud 
that [we] want to join the WHO under the name 'Taiwan.' In 
September, it will say even louder that [we] want to join the United 
Nations under the name 'Taiwan,' which will be followed by a move 
'to bundle a referendum with the election' during the year-end 
elections, or even a referendum to see if the name of the nation 
needs to be changed.  Only one thing matters for all these beautiful 
dreams woven with the name of 'Taiwan' to lure Green voters and to 
antagonize ethnic confrontations:  victory in the elections.  It 
really does not matter whether Taiwan can enter the WHO or UN. ..." 
 
 
B) "Membership Bid for the WHO Is the Correct Way" 
 
Chen Lung-chu, chairman of the New Century Foundation and director 
of the Taiwan United Nations Alliance, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (4/17): 
 
"... The WHO charter stipulates that membership is open to all 
countries, not just those in the UN.  For Chen to use his position 
as head of state and representative of Taiwan's 23 million people to 
apply for membership is an extremely important first step in the 
nation's bid to join the WHO.  Not only does it highlight that 
Taiwan is a sovereign and independent nation, but it also makes it 
clear that Taiwan wants to participate fully in the WHO, and that it 
is willing and determined to contribute to improving the health of 
all the world's people.  In consideration of its fundamental and 
long-term interests, this is the correct course for Taiwan to 
pursue. ... 
 
 
"All WHO members are countries, whereas that is not necessarily true 
of observers.  Fighting for an observer spot could easily mislead 
the international community into thinking that Taiwan is not an 
independent and sovereign state. ...  In the past we sought to 
become WHA observers, but we have now entered a new stage of 
actively pursuing full WHO membership.  As long as we choose the 
right direction, and people work closely together with the 
government with trust and resolve, our shared determination will see 
us through to success." 
 
¶3. China-Japan Relations 
 
A) "No United Nation's Security Council Seat for Japan" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (4/17): 
 
"Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao scored more points than his Japanese 
host, Prime Minister Shintaro [sic] Abe, from his two-and-a-half-day 
visit to Japan last week.  The visitor showed his big heart, but his 
host didn't get what he wanted.  Wen's message: China won't allow 
Japan to join the U.N. Security Council this year, or in later 
years, if Japan does not renounce militarism.  And the U.S. can do 
little to change the Chinese mind. ... 
 
"2007 marks the 70th anniversary of the Marco Polo Bridge Incident 
and the Nanking Massacre.  Both countries should work together to 
head off any attempts by the ultra-nationalists to sour bilateral 
feelings. ...  A key sign of further warmth will be Abe's return 
visit to Beijing later this year, followed by a possible visit to 
Tokyo by China's President Hu Jintao." 
 
B) "Taking a Long View on Sino-Japan Ties" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (4/17): 
 
"... From Taiwan's standpoint, the most noteworthy aspect of Wen's 
visit was the refusal of the Japanese government to budge on its 
policy toward Taiwan and its retaining a stance of 'strategic 
ambiguity' on Taiwan's status by acknowledging the PRC as the 'one 
China' but not bowing to Beijing's pressure to specify that Taiwan 
was part of the PRC.  Moreover, Tokyo continued to align itself with 
Washington's call for direct dialogue between the PRC and Taiwan 
governments and peaceful resolution of cross-strait disputes. ... 
 
"As long as the PRC does not begin to respect the values of 
democracy, fundamental civic and social liberties and human rights 
but continues to insist on seeing itself as the center of the world 
and refuses to abandon its ambition to annex Taiwan, there will 
remain the danger of regional conflict.  However, if the PRC can 
join the international system as a responsible stakeholder and 
accept the prevailing values of the global system and respect the 
free will of the 23 million people of Taiwan, and an Asia featuring 
democracy, peace and progress, it will have the potential to 
complement if not supplement the U.S. and Europe as a driver of 
global development. ..." 
 
YOUNG