07AITTAIPEI1285
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1285/01 1582240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 072240Z JUN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5559
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6887
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8142UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001285 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 7 on the 2008 presidential election; on the 
government's proposed minimum wage hike starting July 1 and its 
impact on local businesses; on a car accident involving a local 
singer; and on an alleged corruption scandal involving the Air Force 
Academy.  The pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran a banner headline 
on page seven that said "Bush Praises Taiwan's Democracy and 
Criticizes China for Its Failure to Reform [Itself]." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, in response to an op-ed 
in Wednesday's "Liberty Times" saying that President Chen Shui-bian 
misunderstands the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA), President Chen argued 
personally in an op-ed in today's "Liberty Times" that he does not 
misunderstand the TRA.  Chen said as a head of state elected by his 
people, he needs to put Taiwan's national interests and his people's 
well being as top priority and will strive for the most favorable 
conditions for Taiwan.  A "Liberty Times" editorial criticized 
China's tyrannical nature and said there is "a big gap between its 
role in the international community and the so-called 'responsible 
stakeholder.'"  An editorial in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" lashed out at the DPP administration for its criticism of the 
white paper published by the American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) 
recently.  The article said the DPP government should view AmCham's 
warnings as honest and sincere advice in terms of Taiwan's role in 
international trade and economics.  End summary. 
 
A) "A-Bian Does Not Misunderstand the TRA" 
 
President Chen Shui-bian wrote in an op-ed in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] (6/7): 
 
"... First, my interpretation of the 'Taiwan Relations Act' (TRA) 
might differ from that of Professor Chiang, but [he] cannot simply 
determine that 'A-Bian misunderstands the TRA.'  I cited Section 
4(b)(1) of TRA on May 29:  'Whenever the laws of the United States 
refer to or relate to foreign countries, nations, states, 
governments, or similar entities, such terms shall include and such 
laws shall apply with respect to Taiwan.'  I therefore believe that 
this statement should be interpreted as 'the TRA clearly regards 
Taiwan as a country.'  Such interpretation was not created by me 
alone.  Ambassador Harvey Feldman, who personally joined in the 
formulation of the TRA then also held the same view, which was also 
accepted by other scholars who have been paying long-term attention 
to Taiwan-U.S. relations, such as Professor John Tkacik.  Each 
person may have different comprehension and understanding of the 
TRA, but A-Bian definitely does not misunderstand the TRA. 
 
"Second, according to the 'three communiques' between the United 
States and China - namely, the 'Shanghai Communique,' the Joint 
Communique on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the 
United States of America and the People's Republic of China,' and 
the 'August 17 Communique' - the United States has always indicated 
that it 'recognizes' Beijing's position that 'there is only one 
China, and Taiwan is part of China;' that it [i.e. the United 
States] does not acknowledge that 'the People's Republic of China's' 
sovereignty claim on Taiwan. ...  Third, my remarks that day had 
another key point -- namely, the Section 4(d) of TRA says '[N]othing 
in this Act may be construed as a basis for supporting the exclusion 
or expulsion of Taiwan from continued membership in any 
international financial institution or any other international 
organization.'  Thus, based on the TRA, Taiwan is entitled to 
participate in the international organizations, including the World 
Health Organization and the United Nations. 
 
"The triangular relationship among the United States, China, and 
Taiwan is very complex and full of vagueness and ambiguity.  Also, 
given China's continued military intimidation and shutting out 
Taiwan diplomatically, Taiwan, as a nation, is in very difficult 
circumstances.  But [we] must not take various [instances of] unjust 
and unreasonable treatment as a given and thus limit ourselves or 
flinch simply because we have been under constant suppression. 
Provisions in a law are alive and not dead; it all depends on how to 
interpret and explain them.  One should not put the equal sign 
between the lack of diplomatic relations or acknowledgement between 
the two countries, Taiwan and the United States, and the matter of 
whether Taiwan is a country and whether it is entitled to all the 
rights and interests a country deserves.  This is the important 
spirit that has been constantly emphasized and revealed by the TRA. 
While someone who is engaged in academic research may feel free to 
adopt the strictest criteria to 'discuss laws from the perspective 
of law,' as a state leader directly elected by his people, I must 
put the nation's interests and the people's well being as my 
priority concerns at all times, and I must try the best I can to 
strive for the most favorable conditions for Taiwan. ..." 
 
B) "Steadfastness and Determination Are the Only Way to Confront 
China" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] 
 
 
editorialized (6/7): 
 
"...  Indeed, neither UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon nor U.S. 
State Department Spokesman Sean McCormack supported the idea of 
linking the crisis in Darfur with the Beijing Olympic Games.  But as 
long as China refuses to change its tyrannical nature, the pressure 
from the international community demanding human rights and 
humanitarianism will surely swarm [to Beijing] until the time when 
the Olympic Games are held in August, 2008. 
 
"The Olympic Games in Beijing will become a new point of pressure 
for the international community to push for [China's] peaceful 
transformation.  History has shown that, ever since the 1970s, the 
United States' policy of hoping to use engagement to induce China to 
change has never succeeded.  Without a doubt, major changes have 
happened in China over the past three decades.  But the 
authoritarian rule of the [Chinese] Communist Party remains 
unchanged; China never gets lenient in its persecution of 
dissidents, and its human rights record has been notorious.  There 
is even a big gap between its role in the international community 
and the so-called 'responsible stakeholder.' ..." 
 
C) "How Does the United States Intervene in Taiwan's Domestic 
Affairs?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (6/7): 
 
"... The desperate and low-spirited tone in such discourse of the 
American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) was evident, but most of the 
basic thinking in it has been 'talked about for fifteen years.' 
What differed this year from the previous ones was that our 'ranking 
officials from the Council of Economic Planning and Development' 
(CEPD) were furious [at AmCham's white paper] and replied in a rare 
tone that 'the remarks by U.S. businesses have crossed the line 
expected of foreign businesses, and they sound allegedly like 
intervention in [Taiwan's] domestic affairs!' 
 
"Intervening in [Taiwan's] internal affairs?  What a strong 
accusation!  In fact, is this the only time that the United States 
has 'interfered' in Taiwan's 'domestic affairs?' ...  Taiwan's 
'domestic affairs' have indeed been under strong 'intervention' of 
the United States.  To find out the reasons why, [one can find] 
three factors inter-working and influencing each other:  First, 
Taiwan is aware that it must accept the United States' 
'intervention,' because with intervention comes protection.  Second, 
the United States must 'interfere with' Taiwan, or it will not know 
how to maintain Taiwan's safety, and it will be difficult to 
estimate the price for keeping Taiwan safe.  Third,  the mutual 
trust between Washington and Taipei has been deteriorating starting 
from [the reign of] Lee Teng-hui to [that of] Chen Shui-bian, and 
the level of U.S. intervention has been growing as well.  Now even 
the contents of [Taiwan's] constitutional re-engineering needs to be 
approved by the United States. 
 
"Given the trend of deteriorating relationship of 
'interference/trust' between Taiwan and the United States, it seemed 
that the CEPD authorities did not find out until now the new 
offences of 'the U.S. intervention in Taiwan's internal affairs.' 
Isn't it ridiculous?  Isn't it pathetic?  Those high-ranking CEPD 
officials should be aware that since 'U.S. interference in Taiwan's 
internal affairs' is inevitable, why not [try to] improve Taiwan's 
role in international trade and economics via the U.S. 
'intervention,' in the hope of improving and strengthening Taiwan's 
conditions for self-reliance?  It would be [much better] than 
striving to purchase weapons from the United States in exchange for 
its 'intervention.' 
 
"Indeed, the United States hopes that Taiwan can build up its 
armaments so that the island can establish its self-defense 
capabilities.  But on the other hand, Washington hopes that Taiwan 
can improve its role in international trade and economics, in 
particular, improving the cross-Strait trade relations by means of 
[opening] direct links, in an attempt to strengthen the conditions 
for Taiwan's survival.  It is a widely known fact that armaments are 
'hard defense' while trade and economics are 'soft defense.' 
Judging by Taiwan's internal and external situations, military 
buildup is just a factor contributing to a small part of maintaining 
[Taiwan's] national defense, while the sustainable development of 
trade and economics is the main structure that holds up the major 
part of [the island's] 'national defense.' 
 
"AmCham's tone sounded like interfering in [Taiwan's] internal 
affairs, but the warnings it offered, such as 'Taiwan will get into 
a big trouble as early as next year' and 'it will likely be game 
over [for Taiwan]' are actually remarks out of its compassion for 
fear that 'someone might get in trouble.'  They can also be viewed 
as an honest and sincere advice for Taiwan's 'national defense of 
trade and economics.' 
 
 
"The DPP government has been behaving obsequiously when it comes to 
arms procurements, but it scolded and called AmCham's advice on 
trade and economics as 'interfering in [Taiwan's] domestic affairs.' 
 Is it really so that the DPP government is only aware of spending a 
humongous amount of money busying the U.S. missiles to defend Taiwan 
(and allowing this part of its 'internal affairs' to be 'interfered' 
by the United States), while it has no idea that it should improve 
Taiwan's role in international trade and economics through 
U.S.-Taiwan cooperation so as to create [more favorable] conditions 
for the island's survival (shutting down and disallowing the United 
States to 'interfere in) this part of its 'internal affairs')? 
 
"The United States expects Taiwan's 'cross-Strait policy' to be 
'defensive in politics but open in economics.'  Taiwan will not be 
able to defend itself if it fails to keep defensive in politics, and 
it will not be able to survive if it is not open in economics.  The 
DPP administration only sees that the United States can sell weapons 
to Taiwan, but it purposely overlooks the fact that the United 
States can also play a proactive role in building a win-win trade 
and economic relationship across the Taiwan Strait. ..." 
 
 
YOUNG