07AITTAIPEI2601
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2601/01 3470151
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130151Z DEC 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7580
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7527
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8805UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002601 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language and English-language 
dailies gave significant reporting and editorial coverage December 
12 to AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt's press briefing Tuesday, in 
which he severely criticized Taiwan's UN referendum and urged 
President Chen Shui-bian to keep his pledge.  News coverage also 
focused on Taiwan's Legislative Yuan, which on Tuesday passed the 
budget to purchase four PAC-3 missile systems and the budget for 
assessing the possibility to procure diesel-powered submarines.  The 
pro-unification "United Daily News" front-paged a banner headline 
that said "Raymond Burghardt Slams  'UN Referendum as Going through 
the Back Door; [the Referendum] Appears to Have Dodged But Actually 
Has Violated the Four Noes and Caused Trouble."  The newspaper also 
ran a banner headline on page four that said: "The United States 
Discloses Its Bargaining Chips: Will Not Allow Bian to Do What He 
Pleases."  The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" also ran a banner 
headline on page four that read "Raymond Burghardt: UN Referendum is 
a Clever Way Which Goes through the Back Door." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" urged Washington to respect and 
affirm Taiwan's UN bid because it is aimed at expressing the Taiwan 
people's desire to make Taiwan into a normal country.  An editorial 
in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said that AIT Chairman 
Burghardt's remarks Tuesday fully indicated Washington's mistrust 
and doubts about President Chen's integrity.   End summary. [Ed. 
Note: Public Affairs staff was released early today to attend AIT's 
annual Christmas party.  More media reaction on Burghardt visit will 
follow tomorrow.] 
 
A) "'UN Bid' Is Aimed at Expressing the Voice of [the Taiwan] 
People's Hearts, and the United States Should Respect and Affirm 
It" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (12/12): 
 
"... Even though the United States has made many comments on 
Taiwan's UN referendum lately, its position remains the same when it 
talks about Taiwan's defense issues.  While criticizing the UN 
referendum as 'neither necessary nor helpful' in early December, AIT 
Taipei Director Stephen Young also reiterated that, under the 
'Taiwan Relations Act,' the United States will continue close 
cooperation [with Taiwan], assist Taiwan to address security 
challenges from China, and will approve the sales of appropriate 
defensive weapons [to the island] that are aimed at ensuring 
Taiwan's self-defense capabilities.  It is obvious that China can 
hardly get what it wishes when it exerts pressure on the United 
States regarding this issue. ... 
 
"During November alone, the military relationship between China and 
the United States has dropped from its highest point of establishing 
a hotline to the lowest point, when USS Kitty Hawk sailed through 
the Taiwan Strait.  All these developments indicated that [building] 
mutual trust between Chinese and the U.S. militaries is not an easy 
matter.  Over the past few years, the rapid growth of China's 
defense budgets and its low military transparency have long aroused 
concerns in the region.  In addition, China's evident intent to seek 
hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region has challenged the United 
States' strategic interests in the region; as long as China's [evil] 
ambition remains, the chances are slim for China and the United 
States to live together in peace.  But a look back at Taiwan shows 
that the island is trying to express in a democratic way the voice 
and desire of its 23 million people to make Taiwan a normal country. 
 Such a move is fully consistent with the UN's principles and 
procedures of peace, and it deserves the United States' respect and 
affirmation." 
 
B) "It is Bian's Integrity that Raymond Burghardt Questions" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (12/12): 
 
"AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt said yesterday that the UN 
referendum has violated the Four Noes pledge, and he hopes that 
President Chen will 'ensure that Taiwan's new president will have an 
opportunity to deal with cross-Strait relations; that the new 
president can make his own decisions without his hands being tied; 
and that there will be a peaceful change of leadership.'  Burghardt 
used a series of negative sentences and doubtful tones in his talk, 
which fully indicated the United States' mistrust of President Chen. 
 What is worse is that such mistrust does not come from 
[Washington's] objective assessment of Taiwan's environment but from 
its understanding of Bian's personality and character; [Washington] 
believes that Bian may well act recklessly, and this is certainly a 
disparagement of Bian. 
 
"Burghardt said that, even though it appears that the UN referendum 
does not violate the Four Noes pledge, the United States believes 
that it has done so and said that the Taiwan government did it 
 
through the back door.  Judged from the perspective of [Taiwan's] 
sovereignty, Burghardt has indeed rudely interfered with Taiwan's 
internal affairs.  But the UN referendum under the name Taiwan has 
indeed had the intent to perpetrate a hoax; it is a referendum 
intended to change [Taiwan's] national name in disguise, which has 
violated the second of the 'Four Noes' pledge -- that [Taiwan] 'will 
not change its national name.'  This is what Burghardt meant by 
'through the back door.'  Why did the United States openly interfere 
with Taiwan's domestic affairs then?  Besides the fact that 
Washington did not interfere with [Taiwan's] internal affairs since 
the U.S. government does not recognize Taiwan as a sovereign state, 
the United States is legally obliged to defend Taiwan, so it surely 
has the right to intervene and stop Taiwan from starting a war, 
which will result in the sacrifice of U.S. soldiers.  The Bian 
administration must realize that. 
 
"Burghardt's [open] opposition to the UN referendum was also aimed 
at showing it to Beijing.  But the most extraordinary and sternest 
part of his talk this time was his warning to Bian that he must not 
tie the new president's hands and his demand that Bian ensure a 
peaceful change of leadership.  In terms of diplomacy, [Burghardt's 
remarks] indicated overwhelming mistrust and humiliation against the 
president of a host country and were thus extremely rude. ...  How 
come Chen Shui-bian has caused such worries, doubts and given 
Taiwan's major ally such an impression?  Bian must clarify this 
himself. ..." 
 
YOUNG