07AITTAIPEI622
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0622/01 0780922
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190922Z MAR 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4514
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6487
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7731UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage March 17-19 on the DPP government's decision to appoint 
Mainland Affairs Council Chairman Joseph Wu as the new TECRO chief; 
on the drafting of a constitution for a "Second Republic"; and on 
the 2008 presidential elections.  The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" ran a banner headline on page five that read "Major Task for 
Joseph Wu's Appointment to the United States is to Stabilize the 
Relationship among the Three Sides."  The pro-unification "United 
Daily News" also ran a banner headline on page two that said "Joseph 
Wu, the First DPP Representative to the United States." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorial and commentaries, a column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said it will be Taipei's own wishful 
thinking if it treats Washington as a shortcut to Beijing by sending 
its official in charge of cross-Strait affairs to Washington D.C.  A 
"Liberty Times" analysis said Wu's strength is that he is able to 
comprehend the DPP administration's policy.  An analysis in the 
pro-status quo "China Times" said it is solely incumbent on the 
TECRO chief to communicate precisely with the United States about 
President Chen Shui-bian's "Four Wants and One Without" policy.  A 
"United Daily News" column said Wu's appointment is also aimed at 
adding fuel to the already widely spreading name-change campaign. 
An editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post," on the other hand, 
refuted Assistant Secretary of State Glyn Davies's remarks before 
the House Thursday, in which he said that China's and Taiwan's 
"checkbook diplomacy" is distorting the democratic process in the 
Pacific Island nations.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "The Load Is Heavy for Joseph Wu, but the Course Will Not Be 
Long" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang commented in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (3/19): 
 
"... Because of the impact of Taiwan's political development, many 
clashes have occurred in the relations between Taipei and Washington 
over the past few years.  As substantive changes happened in the 
triangular relationship among Taipei, Washington, and Beijing, the 
previous and incumbent TECRO chiefs became the scapegoats.  The 
Green camp felt that they had worked perfunctorily and doubted their 
loyalty [to the DPP government], while the Blue camp criticized them 
with sarcasm and mockery for hanging onto men of influence and 
seeking the patronage of the enemies.  Sometimes the Americans also 
had doubts about whether they had a reliable channel to communicate 
problems faithfully.  This is a job that looks magnificent from the 
outside but whose hardships few people really understand. ... 
 
"Since it came into power [a few years ago,] the DPP has been 
criticized as lacking real talent in foreign relations, national 
defense, finance and economics.  In fact, the real problem lies in 
the leader's ability to know his people and employ them to the best 
advantage.  Now that A-Bian is about to complete his term, and he 
has just started to learn how to manage his people, it is already 
too late to really achieve anything.  Taipei-Washington relations 
and cross-Strait relations are two birds that can be killed with one 
stone.  Beijing has long treated Washington as a shortcut to Taipei, 
but it would be Taipei's wishful thinking if it wanted to follow 
suit and treat Washington as a shortcut to Beijing by sending the 
chairman of its Mainland Affairs Council to be stationed in 
Washington D.C." 
 
B) "Diplomats Ought to Work for Their Country Rather Than for Their 
Own Political Party" 
 
Washington correspondent Nadia Tsao noted in an analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] (3/19): 
 
"... Washington in general has a very favorable opinion of the DPP 
administration's decision to send Joseph Wu to serve as Taiwan's 
representative in the United States.  In addition to his excellent 
qualifications, the main point is that he can truthfully comprehend 
the DPP government's policies.  David Lee's appointment to Canada 
has also set an example for diplomats, showing that all talents work 
for their country and any political party can rely on them as long 
as they have ability." 
 
C) "To Convey Bian's Ideas to the United States, Joseph Wu Steps up 
to the Battlefront" 
 
Journalist Chiang Hui-chen noted in an analysis in the pro-status 
quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (3/19): 
 
"... Ever since the beginning of 2007, Bian's administration has had 
its campaign strategy for 2008 ready.  At first, it was the National 
Security Council that, in a big move, invited the retired heads of 
five foreign states to Taiwan to unveil the topic of 'transitional 
 
justice.'  Then, followed by the warm-up activities to the 2-28 
Incident commemoration and the storms to get rid of anything related 
to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, Chen Shui-bian tossed off the 
"Four Wants and One Without" remarks in early March, which has 
formally stated his four main focuses - namely, 'independence, name 
change, new constitution, and development.' 
 
"While the Blue camp was using what was left of its energy following 
the 'battle between Wang Jin-pyng and Ma Ying-jeou' to attack the 
'independence and name change' parts of Bian's "Four Wants," they 
overlooked the fact that 'new constitution and development' are the 
real campaign focus for Bian.  It all hinges on the tactical 
promotion of [Taiwan's] cross-Strait policy in order to work out 
tactfully the plan for a 'new constitution and development,' and to 
accomplish this goal, it is solely incumbent on the TECRO chief to 
stabilize the pressure from the international community and to 
communicate precisely [with the United States]. 
 
"The authorities pointed out that the idea of the new constitution 
that Bian is about to toss off will be carried out step-by-step in 
the direction of systemic reform with appeals for a 'Second 
Republic' and a 'Cabinet [i.e., parliamentary] system.'  As for the 
call for 'development,' this has subtly implied that the candidate 
for the 2008 presidential election that Bian will support will 
adjust the government's cross-Strait policy to make it meet the 
major economic interests that concerns people's livelihood.  This 
was the main reason why Washington did not react as harshly as it 
before when it learned of the 'Four Wants and One Without.' ...  The 
reason why the international community had paid close attention to 
Joseph Wu was the same as why he was appointed to head the TECRO. 
Wu will act and deliver Chen's messages on his behalf about the new 
constitution and the opening cross-Strait policy in the most precise 
way and most favorable terms for Bian during his remaining year in 
office." 
 
D) "David Lee, the Departed" 
 
The "Black and White" column in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] wrote (3/19): 
 
"Taiwan's representative to the United States David Lee will be 
replaced by Joseph Wu.  The move symbolized that the Bian 
administration has decided thoroughly to abandon the course of using 
career diplomats, and it is also aimed at adding fuel to the name 
change campaign which is already spreading like wildfire. ...  Over 
the more than two years during which Lee headed the TECRO office, 
there have been constant rumors that he would be replaced.  This 
situation reflected that he has failed to gain the trust he deserves 
as a career diplomat with over 20 years of experience in the 
Blue-Green politics.  Now that he will be transferred to Canada, he 
can finally get rid of this 'infernal' diplomatic career in which 
he, as a 'Blue person,' can hardly speak on behalf of the Green 
camp. ..." 
 
E) "Checkbook Diplomacy Is Much the Same, No Matter Who Pays" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (3/19): 
 
"... Glyn Davies told Congressmen both Taiwan and China are trying 
to outdo each other by throwing huge sums of money at the Pacific 
leaders, and the United States remains uneasy about the competition 
for recognition in the South Pacific.  'To the extent that (China) 
and Taiwan engage in 'checkbook diplomacy' to gain favor with 
Pacific leaders,' he was quoted as saying, 'the political process in 
those countries will be distorted.' ... 
 
"But it's unfair for Davies to claim Taipei's checkbook diplomacy is 
distorting the democratic process in the Pacific Island nations. 
Uncle Sam himself extended aid in grants and financial assistance in 
other forms to keep or win over diplomatic allies against the Soviet 
Union during the Cold War.  Didn't Washington aid Saddam Hussein in 
his war on Iran?  What's the Contra scandal all about?  Of course, 
that assistance was not called checkbook diplomacy, albeit no one 
can see where it differed fundamentally from what Taipei and Beijing 
are said to engage in.  Besides, the diplomatic war between Taiwan 
and China little affects the political process of the island nations 
in the South Pacific.  Washington wants all of them to be free and 
democratic.  Democracy evolves.  It cannot be bought.  Nor can it be 
handed over on a sliver plate just as the United States has been 
trying to do to post-Hussein Iraq." 
 
YOUNG