07AITTAIPEI1501
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, U.S.-ROK FTA
Mon Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1501/01 1832253
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 022253Z JUL 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5871
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6989
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8238UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - BROOKE SPELLMAN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, U.S.-ROK FTA 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 30-July 2 on the 2008 presidential election; on Hong 
Kong's commemorating a decade of Chinese rule; on the island-wide 
university entrance exam; and on a Taiwan High Court ruling last 
Friday, which handed down the death penalty on three convicts in a 
1991 murder case.  In addition, all papers carried news reports on a 
decision by the Cabinet's referendum review committee last Friday, 
which rejected the DPP's proposal to hold a referendum on Taiwan's 
bid to join the United Nations under the name "Taiwan." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" criticized the United States' 
intervention in Taiwan's democracy and urged the U.S. executive 
branch to follow a House committee resolution to remove its 
restrictions on the visits to the United States by high-ranking 
Taiwan officials.  An op-ed in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" also said "the people of Taiwan are 
waiting for Washington to change its view on the status of Taiwan, 
and for it to view Taiwan as a country that can participate in 
international affairs and have its share of international rights and 
obligations."  An op-ed in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
discussed the U.S.-ROK free trade agreement (FTA) and said the rapid 
economic and trade integration in East Asia and the formation of 
FTAs among China, Japan and South Korea will produce a much bigger 
impact on Taiwan than an FTA signed between the ASEAN and China. 
End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "It Is about Time That U.S. Executive Branch Allows High-ranking 
Taiwan Officials to Visit the United States" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (6/30): 
 
"U.S. House Committee on International Affairs [sic -- House 
Committee on Foreign Affairs] recently passed a resolution urging 
the Executive Branch to remove its long-standing restrictions on 
visits to the United States by high-ranking Taiwan officials, 
including its elected leaders.  This is not the first time that such 
an initiative has been raised, but the fact that this resolution was 
passed at a time when the U.S. executive branch expressed opposition 
to Taiwan's holding a referendum on 'its UN bid under the name 
Taiwan' still carried symbolic significance. 
 
"In fact, such a resolution happened to show that there is a huge 
blind spot in the U.S. government's one-China policy, which has 
deviated from its diplomatic strategic idea of promoting democracy 
all over the world.  Congressman Steve Chabot pointed out that the 
current U.S. policy is a humiliation for Taiwan, because elected 
Taiwan officials are not allowed to visit the capital of the United 
States, while leaders of authoritarian China can enjoy treatment as 
state guests [in the United States].  Indeed, such a wrong message 
[sent by the United States] has reinforced Beijing's aggressiveness 
to annex Taiwan, including China's moves to target nearly a thousand 
missiles at Taiwan and increase its military threats against the 
island, and has thus greatly increased the United States' costs to 
maintain peace in the West Pacific. 
 
"Democracies in the world all follow the lead of the United States, 
and the U.S. deeds and its attitude toward Taiwan can thus be viewed 
as a trial balloon.  Over the past decade, the U.S. president has 
sent two carrier battle groups to the Taiwan Strait to [help Taiwan] 
cope with the crisis of Chinese test-firing missiles at Taiwan; he 
has also referred to the island publicly as the Republic of Taiwan 
and reiterated [U.S.] commitments toward Taiwan. ...  One can say 
that, on the level of actual action, the United States has been 
treating Taiwan as a sovereign state. ...  Now the Taiwan people 
want to abolish the [name] Republic of China (ROC), which neither 
the United States nor the international community believes still 
exists.  But the United States says it does not support the Taiwan 
people's decision made out of a democratic process.  It is really 
confusing that neither the United States nor the international 
community acknowledges the existence of the ROC, yet they disallow 
the name ROC to be changed.  Isn't such inconsistency weird? 
 
"Over the past few years, the United States has more than once 
reiterated that it does not support Taiwan's moves to uphold its 
sovereignty, resulting in this absurd situation whereby 'the [name] 
ROC can neither be used or changed.'  Such an approach has created a 
negative impact on Taiwan's democracy and is thus worth the 
attention of the United States.  The United States' intervention in 
Taiwan's democracy now is akin to establishing a limit for Taiwan's 
democracy.  It is thus imaginable how the Taiwan people are 
disappointed with the United States. ... 
 
"Even though the United States' 'one-China policy' differs from 
China's 'one-China principle,' it has after all become incoherent in 
its the current status. ...  For the constructive development of 
 
Taiwan-U.S. relations, now is indeed the time for the U.S. executive 
branch to abolish its restrictions on visits to the United States by 
high-ranking Taiwan officials." 
 
B) "History Creates Present Problems" 
 
Chen Hurng-yu, a professor at Tamkang University, opined in the 
pro-independence "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (7/2): 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian recently expressed his support for holding 
a referendum to decide whether to apply for UN membership under the 
name Taiwan.  The US State Department said it opposed this plan. 
This was not the first time the State Department had said it was 
against a referendum in Taiwan, but while in the past it said it did 
not support a referendum, this time around it clearly opposes it. 
As the US is a democratic country, surely the State Department knows 
that this statement is a brazen meddling in the internal affairs of 
another country. ... 
 
"Yet, if we look closely at the State Department's statement, Chen 
supposedly breaking his pledge is surely only an excuse.  What the 
US really means is in the second part of the statement, when it 
says: 'The United States opposes any initiative that appears 
designed to change Taiwan's status unilaterally.  This would include 
a referendum on whether to apply to the United Nations under the 
name Taiwan.  Such a referendum would have no practical impact on 
Taiwan's UN status, it would increase tensions in the Taiwan 
Strait.' ...  But the 'status quo' the US talks about is not Taiwan 
as neither independent nor a part of China, but Taiwan's status 
remaining undetermined.  The US opposes any unilateral move that 
would change the 'status quo' from undetermined to determined. ... 
 
"If it is US strategy to view Taiwan's status as undetermined, it 
should make a public appeal to all the peace-loving people in the 
world, especially China's government and its people, to respect the 
Taiwanese people's will.  As long-term, US allies, the people of 
Taiwan are waiting for Washington to change its view on the status 
of Taiwan, and for it to view Taiwan as a country that can 
participate in international affairs and have its share of 
international rights and obligations." 
 
¶4. U.S.-ROK FTA 
 
"U.S., ROK Sign the Free Trade Agreement; Will There Be a Stage for 
Taiwan?" 
 
Chinese National Association of Industries Deputy Secretary-General 
Tsai Hong-ming opined in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
 
SIPDIS 
[circulation: 400,000] (7/2): 
 
"... For Taiwan, the Ministry of Economic Affairs' initial 
estimation showed that a U.S.-ROK free trade agreement will impact 
Taiwan's exports to the United States to as high as US$2 billion, 
and the island's high-tech businesses will also face the problems of 
market and technology loss.  In fact, what's more noteworthy is that 
the rapid economic and trade integration in East Asia and the 
formation of free trade agreements among China, Japan and South 
Korea, will produce a bigger impact on Taiwan than the 'free trade 
agreement signed between ASEAN and China.' ..." 
 
YOUNG