07BAGHDAD3550
WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT IDPS
Fri Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0112
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3550/01 2991012
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261012Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4042
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE FOR USAID 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UN EAID PREF PHUM PREL ECON IZ
SUBJECT: WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT IDPS 
 
 
(U) 1. SUMMARY: USAID obtains data on internal displacement and 
returns in Iraq through several sources that include the United 
Nations (UNHCR), the International Organization for Migration (IOM), 
the Government of Iraq and implementing partners. Though mostly 
reliable, the information is incomplete due to factors such as the 
security environment, lack of access, and the rapid movement of the 
displaced.  This is common in many displacement situations, which 
are rarely conducive to comprehensive surveys. In the Iraq context, 
many IDPs do not stay when they return to their place of origin, but 
merely return to pick up financial incentives, personal belongings 
or to conduct private affairs. USAID has not yet received nor 
tracked reliable IDP returns statistics. END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------- 
How Data is Collected 
--------------------------------- 
 
(U) 2. Different organizations have different approaches to data 
collection.  The members of UNHCR Cluster F - the UN umbrella group 
focused on IDPs in Iraq - have relied on questionnaire data gathered 
by IOM, UNHCR and Iraqi Ministry of Displacement and Migration 
(MoDM) during interviews with and registration of IDPs.  The 
three-page, Rapid Assessment questionnaire used by IOM consists of 
48 questions on topics such as family profile, place of origin and 
property, humanitarian and security situations in the current 
location, intentions, documentation and freedom of movement, food, 
healthcare, water and sanitation, and capacity and needs. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Different Sources, Different Numbers 
--------------------------------------------- - 
(U) 3. The primary purpose of the data collection is needs 
assessment to determine appropriate emergency assistance and 
community needs.  IOM does not collect names of IDPs or ask to view 
official documents to verify place of origin and displaced status. 
As such, IOM methods are not designed to track secondary 
displacements or returns at this time. 
(U) 4. UNHCR Cluster F data reveals that approximately 56 percent of 
IDPs are renting housing, 19 percent live with host families, 24 
percent live in public buildings or former military barracks and 1 
percent are in tented camps. Of these, many do not register as IDPs 
in their new region of residence.  As a result, the IDP populations 
in some areas are scattered and perhaps even inconspicuous in their 
new communities, making it difficult to reach out to the group as a 
whole. 
(U) 5. The International Medical Corps (IMC) uses door-to-door 
interviews to gather data.  This labor-intensive process is 
inherently limited in scope but allows for collection of more 
detailed information about a wider variety of issues.  IMC is able 
to reach out to Iraqis who may be considering fleeing (potential 
IDPs) and therefore to estimate with slightly more precision future 
displacement and intended destinations.  Data from all five USAID 
implementing partners focuses on displacement after the Samarah 
bombing in February 2006, as the sheer size of this group (currently 
estimated at more than 1.2 million) and the rapid rate at which they 
have been displaced has overloaded the capacity of local 
infrastructures and posed the additional challenges of settling down 
and integrating into communities. 
(U) 6. We are also aware that the Iraqi Red Crescent Society (IRCS) 
publishes estimates of Iraq's overall displaced population by 
region.  While each IDP source publishes slightly different data on 
IDP totals, the numbers are useful to gain a sense of order of 
magnitude of the problem and the rate at which displacement is 
growing relative to the existing displaced population.  USAID policy 
has been to use the UNHCR Cluster F numbers to give us the most 
reliable sense of needs. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Ministry Of Displacement and Migration/Ministry of Trade 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
(U) 7. MoDM currently employs between 300 and 400 staff, including 
those at Headquarters and in the Ministry's 16 Branch Offices.  Many 
of these additional staff are working at the Ministry on temporary 
contracts. We understand that MoDM expects its 2008 budget, once 
approved, to cover the salaries of an additional 200 to 300 staff at 
Headquarters and in the Branch Offices. 
(U) 8. USAID understands MODM is reporting some returns are 
occurring and that some registered IDPs have submitted returnee 
claims. USAID is attempting to verify this information through its 
implementing partners and through the PRTs and is in discussion with 
its NGO implementing partners to determine how to best assist with 
return assessments, monitoring and assistance should returnee 
numbers increase, 
(U) 9. It is worthwhile to note that the only official statistics on 
displaced populations are published by the Ministry of Trade (MoT), 
which manages the Iraq's Public Distribution System of rations. 
Some argue that the MoT underestimates the problem, as many IDPs do 
not or cannot register with PDS in their new communities and local 
groups manipulate numbers for political reasons. 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00003550  002 OF 002 
 
 
CROCKER