07BAGHDAD3833
Baghdad Services Committee
Sat Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4422
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3833/01 3280930
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 240930Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4489
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003833 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  Baghdad Services Committee 
 
REF: BAGHDAD #3708 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The Baghdad Services Committee chaired by Dr. Ahmed 
Chalabi pressed forward on November 20th with a high number of 
attendees, including representatives from the city administration 
and the Baghdad Operations Command (security). Given the number of 
participants representing various interests, discussions were 
equally as varied. Specific decisions were reached and reports 
ordered. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Baghdad Services Committee Reaches Several Decisions 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. The Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) agreed to remove any 
unnecessary traffic barriers in Adnon Square to ease traffic 
congestion. The BOC also agreed to set up at least two check points 
between Adnon Square and Adimiyah Bridge. The Amanat announced that 
the first Saturday of every month will be designated as Baghdad 
Clean up Day and requested assistance from all ministries including 
vehicles and equipment. Finally, the Ministry of Electricity(MoE) 
promised three continuous days of power per week to specific 
irrigation pumping stations, commencing next week. The MoE also 
promised to replace a broken power line to the suburb of Sab al 
Bor. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Good Attendance Results in Lots of Discussion 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. Attendance was high at this week's meeting, with representatives 
from the Ministries of Defense, Health, Electricity, Oil, 
Transportation and Trade and Commerce. Representatives from former 
Deputy Prime Minister Zobai's office, the Baghdad Amanat, the 
Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) and several local councils also 
attended. 
 
¶4. Unlike previous meetings, the Baghdad Amanat played a central 
role in this meeting, including the recommendation for two of the 
three suggestions adopted. The Amanat reported that they delivered a 
list of school supplies needed throughout Baghdad to the Ministry of 
Education (MoEd), but have not yet received a response. Chalabi 
suggested that the Amanat and the MoEd work together to conduct this 
inventory. (Note: Not a single representative from the MoEd has yet 
attended Chalabi's weekly meetings. This is even after Chalabi 
reported their absence to Prime Minister Maliki at the Friday, 
November 16 I-ESC. End Note) The Committee charged the Amanat with 
conducting a review of bus terminals in Baghdad, working in 
cooperation with the BOC and the Ministry of Transportation to 
remove trespassers, provide security and to get them fully 
operational. 
 
¶5. A representative from the Reconciliation Committee had several 
questions for the Amanat, particularly on waste drainage trucks. The 
Amanat noted that they received 50 new trucks and will provide the 
Reconciliation Committee with use of 10 of those trucks. They 
emphasized that Amariyah and Assaleyah are in great need of these 
trucks. The Amanat also responded to inquiries about the Tayji 
landfill noting that they are in communication with a company that 
will separate the hazard waste. Dr. Chalabi raised the issue of 
needed emergency lighting in Baghdad stating that if funding is not 
secured through the governorate, then the Baghdad Amanat will be 
responsible for funding. Finally, the Amanat and the Ministry of Oil 
(MoO) are to provide a report on the supply of empty gas cylinders 
for the residents of Baghdad at the next Services Committee meeting. 
 
 
¶6. The Inspector General of Health discussed several issues, and 
requested that the MoEd work cooperatively with the MoH to ensure 
quality drinking water for schools. The IG announced that three 
doctors were named as representatives to the subcommittee 
established at last week's services committee meeting to work on the 
transfer of Al Karkh hospital to the MoD. Primary Health Centers 
(PHCs) were also discussed, particularly the transfer of the 
Nahrawan Center which is 100% complete. Dr. Adel requested that a 
team from MoH and a team from the USM-I meet to review PHCs before 
handover.  Dr. Chalabi suggested that an engineer from the Amanat 
conduct the inspection of PHCs in Baghdad on behalf of both teams. 
ITAO Director Mark Tokola agreed that he and the Embassy Health 
Attach will meet with the MoH regarding the Nahrawan Center 
handover. Dr. Chalabi asked the MoH for a plan to staff PHCs. Other 
issues briefly discussed included the re-employment of previously 
dismissed MoH personnel and the creation of a plan to give 
apartments to returning doctors. 
 
¶7. Running out of time, the Ministry of Trade and Commerce 
representative discussed only a few specific food ration shortages, 
rather than the detailed report requested by Dr. Chalabi at the 
previous meeting. She particularly noted that baby milk has been 
delayed since July. Baghdad is currently short 65 tons. The delay 
was blamed on increasing prices of baby milk, but Chalabi quickly 
dismissed that as inexcusable. Chalabi requested that the 
representative provide the detailed food shortage list as well as 
possible solutions to existing bottlenecks in the distribution 
 
BAGHDAD 00003833  002 OF 002 
 
 
process at the next meeting. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Chalabi Champions Banking Reform and Real Estate Development 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. Dr. Chalabi stated that there are 216 operating bank branches in 
Baghdad, which is less that one bank for every 200,000 Iraqis. 
Cashing checks presents a real problem, but not one that warrants 
opening more banks. Rather, he suggested improvements to loan 
procedures and sought other recommendations. He requested a meeting 
with the Ministry of Finance and asked if the Embassy's Treasury 
Attach could present specific recommendations to the committee at 
next week's meeting. 
 
¶9. Chalabi noted that 5 million housing units are needed over the 
next two years. Currently, the Government of Iraq employees or pays 
pensions to 60% of Iraqi's working age population and cannot, 
according to Chalabi, absorb more people. However, a real estate 
development initiative would provide employment opportunities, 
create a base for the Iraqi economic sector and provide needed 
housing.  He suggested the establishment of a real estate bank. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. For the past four weeks, Dr. Chalabi has presented his services 
committee's recommendations and updates at the weekly I-ESC. Last 
week, Chalabi and some of the other service committee members 
attended the Joint Planning Commission (JPC), to receive an overview 
of Baghdad projects, including unfunded projects. As an early sign 
of inter-committee relationship development, Chalabi's staff intends 
to have a representative attend the JPC. Also, the JPC coalition 
leaders hope to send a representative to Chalabi's committee, 
pending Chalabi's approval. Moreover, at this week's Deputy I-ESC 
meeting, a request was made for a JPC representative to attend that 
meeting, reconnecting the I-ESC and JPC. (Note: Less than a month 
ago, the I-ESC Secretariat uninvited former DPM Zobai's staff to the 
I-ESC and Deputies I-ESC, terminating the then-link between the JPC 
and the I-ESC. End Note) 
 
¶11. Initial steps have been taken to institutionalize Chalabi's 
services committee. Questions remain regarding this committee's 
official role, the complete link between other entities addressing 
service delivery and, of course, their efficiency. We particularly 
are encouraged when the GoI independently not only initiates and 
completes service projects, but creates institutional mechanisms and 
relationships to address service delivery and maintenance. 
 
 
Crocker