07BASRAH6
REO BASRAH CHALLENGES LOCAL MEDIA
Wed Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO4519
RR RUEHBC RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0006 0101632
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101632Z JAN 07
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0103
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0498
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0016
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 0014
RUEHKUK/REO KIRKUK 0014
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0518UNCLAS BASRAH 000006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO IZ PGOV MOPS EAID ENRG
SUBJECT: REO BASRAH CHALLENGES LOCAL MEDIA 
 
REF: BASRAH 002 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The Regional Embassy Office (REO) in Basrah hosted 
a luncheon on January 3 for four journalists from Basrah and 
Maysan provinces.  The journalists focused on the security 
situation and expressed a desire to maintain frequent contact. 
The REO director stated that he wants to build a long-term 
relationship with the local media that goes beyond discussing 
problems and focuses on solutions.  He challenged the 
journalists to play a role in developing civil society.  Plans 
are under way to organize press briefings on U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineer and British-led Multinational Force Division - 
Southeast (MND-SE) operations.   End Summary. 
 
¶2.  On January 3, 2007, REO Basrah invited three journalists 
from Basrah and one from Maysan province to a luncheon in the 
first step of our new public outreach program.  The journalists 
-- Majed al-Braikan of Radio Sawa; Abbas al-Fayad of Iraqiya TV; 
Nathem Jawad of al-Basrah, the provincial council newspaper; and 
Nazar Abdul Wahed of al-Sabah newspaper and other publications 
in Maysan province -- engaged in an animated and frank 
discussion with the director, deputy, and public diplomacy 
officer (PDO).  A British military press officer also 
participated in part of the conversation. 
 
¶3.  The candid, off-the-record discussion focused on security 
and economic issues besetting Basrah and Maysan.  Jawad 
criticized the recent disbanding of the Serious Crimes Unit 
(SCU) and the demolition of the SCU headquarters building by 
British forces.  (Note:  The SCU was infested by JAM and other 
militia members who carried out assassinations, kidnappings and 
extortion.  Following the raid, Jawad's employer, the Basrah 
Provincial Council disengaged from MND-SE in protest against the 
attack.  In contrast, the people of Basrah expressed support for 
the raid.  End note.)  (See reftel.)  Al-Braikan and al-Fayad 
defended the operation, saying it freed scores of detainees who 
had been tortured and probably would have been killed by the 
SCU.  The journalists complained that the lack of security was 
impeding economic growth and fueling the militias.  They also 
complained about electricity shortages, receiving at times, only 
four hours a day.  They asked what is the Coalition going to do 
about these problems. 
 
¶4.  The director stated that he is interested in developing a 
long-term relationship with the media that would not focus on 
the problems but instead on solutions.  He dispelled the myth 
that the Coalition alone is capable of solving all the problems 
in southern Iraq.  He said the U.S. government has sent 
representatives to Basrah to help the people, but instead we are 
subjected to daily mortar and rocket attacks. He talked about 
the role of the media in democratic societies and challenged 
them to speak out against militia violence and corrupt police, 
acknowledging the risks they face.  For our next meeting, he 
asked the journalists to devise solutions, and said we would 
discuss our respective roles in this process. 
 
¶5.  The journalists expressed a need to maintain regular contact 
with the REO and with British forces.  They noted the public is 
out of touch with the efforts of the Coalition.  The director 
expressed his intention to hold regular roundtable discussions 
and press conferences to convey information about Coalition 
efforts in southern Iraq.  The PDO pointed out that the United 
States has spent huge sums on electricity and other 
infrastructure projects, some of which are sabotaged by the 
militants.  The PDO offered to arrange press conferences with 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and British military officials 
on Coalition reconstruction projects.  The PDO also raised the 
prospect of training programs for regional journalists.  Both 
offers were welcomed. 
 
¶6.  Comment.  The current security environment has made it 
difficult for us to maintain outside contacts.  Nonetheless, we 
plan on pressing ahead with a vigorous outreach program, and the 
media luncheon was the first successful step.  The guests said 
they were delighted by the effort to renew regular contact with 
U.S. officials.  Jawad requested an interview with the director, 
which the director agreed to schedule in late January.  In a 
similar vein, the PDO has scheduled a joint press conference by 
British and Iraqi brigade commanders on Operation Sinbad, a 
joint UK-Iraqi reconstruction operation funded by U.S. dollars. 
End Comment. 
 
BONO