07BAGHDAD3793
Baghdad Services Committee
Mon Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO9515
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3793/01 3230457
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 190457Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4415
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003793 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  Baghdad Services Committee 
 
REF: BAGHDAD #3708 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Attendance at Dr. Ahmed Chalabi's meeting was down this 
week, lacking representation from the Ministries of Oil, Electricity 
and Education. The committee heard for the first time from the 
Ministry of Trade and Commerce as well as the Ministry of 
Transportation. The committee did review and further develop several 
recommendations, many of which were previously discussed. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Services Committee Reviews Previous Recommendations 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. The Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) will designate several 
forces for the protection of electric stations in Russafa and Al 
Karkh districts. The Ministry of Electricity (MoE) and the BOC will 
meet to discuss the details of such an arrangement, including 
providing the BOC with names of authorized personnel. A second 
recommendation included installing emergency power lines from the 
electrical networks to floating pumping stations at the expense of 
Baghdad Amanat: a report will be submitted at the next Services 
Committee meeting. 
 
¶3. The Al-Karkh Al-Jamhuri hospital will be handed over to the 
Ministry of Defense (MoD) to primarily treat the Iraqi Armed Forces 
and other MoD personnel, the Ministry of Interior (MoI), 
intelligence personnel and FSP. Civilian access to the hospital is 
still in discussion, but it appears as though they will at least 
have access to emergency services. Chalabi ordered a committee from 
the MoD and the Ministry of Health (MoH) to be assigned to resolve 
additional issues, including whether the hospital will be staffed by 
MoD or MoH and who will pay the salaries of those personnel, pay for 
treatment and medical equipment. MoH offered to partially staff the 
hospital, but requested that any services rendered to MoD personnel 
be paid for by the MoD. MoH, in turn, would pay the salaries of 
their personnel and continue to pay for civilian services. 
 
¶4. The MoH also requested authority to contract with the private 
sector, as needed, to procure facilities management for housing 
services, such as food and cleaning services.  Chalabi suggested 
that the MoH approach the Ministerial Committee of Contracts. 
 
¶5. Recommendations for the Baghdad Amanat included repairing the 
Zublin line of the sewage network until the construction of a new 
line; importing tools and equipment to clean-up the sewage system; 
and establishing related operations and maintenance training 
courses. The Amanat also emphasized that a "Clean-up" day in Baghdad 
should be a coordinated effort between ministries. 
 
¶6. Oil recommendations reviewed from the previous week included 
exploring alternative fuel transportation methods to include rail 
and additional tankers. The MoO is expected to meet with Dr. Chalabi 
to discuss other issues, giving priority to fuel supplies in 
Baghdad. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
A Ministry of Transportation Representative Attends 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  The Ministry of Transportation (MoT) delivered a report to the 
Services Committee noting security and fuel as their greatest needs. 
The rail from Basra to Baghdad is working; however, it is slowed due 
to a weak unloading process in Baghdad. This process takes on 
average eight days, according to the MoT representative. Rails north 
of Baghdad are capable of moving fuel into the city, but the MoT 
representative requested that MNF-I and MoD inquire about a 
particular bridge's status for rail transport as opposed to 
vehicular transit. The MoT stated that they cannot currently operate 
a train from Kirkuk to Doura to alleviate the crude shortage at that 
refinery. In terms of tanker capabilities, the MoT needs additional 
tankers as well as security in hot areas for such transport. 
 
¶8. Passenger services, particularly bus services in Baghdad, are 
routinely hindered by road blocks, concrete barriers, military 
operations, and construction and infrastructure improvement. MoT 
noted that 90 of 190 new buses ordered have arrived and there are 
currently 4,000 drivers; however, it is not clear if that number is 
nation-wide or Baghdad specific. The MoT representative noted that 
the ministry will be launching a Haj campaign to encourage bus 
transportation during the holiday. 
 
¶9. Chalabi asked for a more detailed report from the MoT, to include 
the status of existing bus terminals. He also inquired about the 
Amanat's role in Baghdad's transportation infrastructure.  The MoT 
rep said that one impediment to bus service is that the private, 
minibus drivers intimidate city bus drivers, ordering them not to 
drive their routes. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
A Ministry of Trade and Commerce Representative Attends 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10. According to the representative, corruption continues to be a 
 
BAGHDAD 00003793  002 OF 002 
 
 
problem in the public food distribution system, PDS. There are more 
ration cards issued than Iraqis registered in the program. Despite 
adequate food orders, Iraqis do not receive complete rations and 
food is sometimes expired. Other problems include specific supply 
shortages, delays at borders and ports, including Turkey and Um Qasr 
and supply chain problems, including trucking companies, storage and 
distribution. The MoH requested that all food contained in the 
rations be inspected and certified by the MoH. The Inspector General 
noted that a fully equipped lab was available in Basra. 
 
¶11. The Ministry wants to compensate citizens with cash for 
incomplete rations, and also to compensate people living in areas 
that were not stable enough to allow delivery of rations. The 
Ministry of Finance would cut the checks and give them to the local 
ration agents to distribute. 
 
¶12. Dr. Chalabi requested a detailed report on specific supply 
shortages to be delivered at the next Services Committee meeting. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Other Topics of Discussion 
- - - - -- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13. Prior to the formal commencement of the meeting, Dr. Chalabi 
announced his idea to create a Service Emergency Center in Russafa. 
This center would be staffed with representatives from each ministry 
to provide teams of experts to address service problems throughout 
the districts and provide services to hot areas. No vote was taken 
on this recommendation, although Dr. Chalabi did present it at the 
Friday, I-ESC. 
 
¶14. The MoH discussed a draft incentives package for doctor 
recruitment. The package includes secure accommodation with the 
option of ownership. This may contain a time in service requirement. 
A second incentive would allow doctors to set up and run private 
practices within MoH facilities and hospitals without charge. The 
package also contained a tiered increase in compensation to include 
hazard pay. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶15. In addition to his weekly Services Committee meeting, Chalabi 
has traveled with the USG and Iraqi Army to several areas in and 
around Baghdad to see service delivery improvements and challenges 
firsthand. He meets independently with ministries to address various 
issues and recently attended the Joint Planning Commission (JPC), 
along with some of his committee members, where they received an 
overview of projects throughout Baghdad. Through the JPC, local 
leaders from each city district raise issues and discuss priorities 
with officials from the various service institutions, including the 
national ministries, provincial government, Amanat Baghdad, district 
area councils (DACs) and neighborhood councils (NACs), Gulf Region 
Division, Multi-National Division Baghdad and the Provincial 
Reconstruction Development Committee of Baghdad. As Chalabi Services 
Committee gets off the ground, it is critical that these service 
entities coordinate their work. 
 
 
Crocker