07BEIJING7127
NOVEMBER 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, U.S.-CHINA
Thu Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7237
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #7127/01 3191002
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151002Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3472
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0368
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3228
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0476
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4199
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1654UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 007127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KOLY CH IR AF JA FR UK MX
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, U.S.-CHINA 
ECONOMIC AND SECURITY REVIEW, AFGHANISTAN 
 
 
BEIJING 00007127  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 15 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- Foreign Minister Yang in Teheran urged Iran to "show 
flexibility and keep positive contact" with the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the European Union (EU). 
 
-- China has seen the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
and noted its "extensive contents."  China does not undermine 
the economies of other countries and in fact cooperates with 
other countries in a "fair way."  China and the United States 
have a "fundamental common interest in sound long-term 
cooperation" on trade. 
 
-- High-level exchanges with Afghanistan will include 
"non-traditional security areas." 
 
-- MFA is not aware of the UK Olympic Minister's claims that 
international news sites are blocked in China for "technical 
reasons," but is willing to discuss them with her. 
 
-- VISITS: French President Nicolas Sarkozy will visit China 
from November 25-27.  Mexican Foreign Minister Patricia 
Espinosa will visit China from November 21-24. 
 
FM Yang Visit to Iran 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  Asked for a readout on Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi's 
visit to Iran, MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao said at the regular 
press briefing on November 15 that Yang met with Iranian 
President Mahmoud Admadinejad, Foreign Minister Manouchehr 
Mottaki, and chief nuclear negotiator Saeed Jalili.  China's 
friendship with Iran has a long history.  China believes Iran 
has the right to use nuclear energy for civilian purposes and 
appreciates that Iran has said it will not develop nuclear 
weapons.  China urges Iran to continue working with the IAEA. 
 China supports a peaceful resolution of the nuclear issue 
through diplomatic channels and the IAEA.  Yang added that 
Iran should "show flexibility and keep positive contact" with 
the EU and other partners.  Liu said China supports 
non-proliferation and Iran has reiterated to China that it 
too supports that goal.  Iran and the United States should 
communicate country-to-country based on the principles of 
mutual respect and "equivalent principles." 
 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. The MFA has seen the Congressional panel's recent 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review report and notes that 
its contents are extensive.  Liu said China does not 
undermine the economies of other countries and in fact 
cooperates with other countries in a "fair way."  As for 
trade disputes, China and the United States have a 
"fundamental common interest in sound long-term cooperation." 
 Discussions should be conducted on an equal basis. 
 
Regrets Over Dalai Lama Visit to Japan 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Expressing China's regret over the Dalai Lama's visit to 
Japan, Liu said China opposes any country's providing a venue 
for the Dalai Lama to espouse his separatist ways.  China 
does not criticize the spiritual philosophy or the world view 
of the Dalai Lama.  However, China does not approve of the 
Dalai Lama's stance against the principle of China's unity or 
his support for Tibet's independence.  China stresses that 
the Dalai Lama has long been involved in separatist 
activities. 
 
Chinese Sailors on Cosco Busan 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Alluding to the oil spill by San Francisco's Bay Bridge, 
Liu said there is no Chinese relationship to the Cosco Busan 
ship or company.  The oil spill was an "unfortunate incident" 
and China hopes that it will be "quickly resolved" and that 
the oil spill's environmental impact will be limited.  The 
MFA understands that there were Chinese nationals aboard the 
ship and the Chinese Consulate in San Francisco has been in 
touch with the relevant United States authorities regarding 
their status. 
 
China Supports Afghanistan 
-------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00007127  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. China supports the efforts of the Afghanistan government 
to promote stability in the region.  China takes an active 
part in the economic reconstruction of Afghanistan. 
Afghanistan President Karzai has called China "a good 
neighbor."  China believes there is consensus between both 
sides to continue high-level exchanges between government 
officials, the two countries' militaries, and ordinary 
people.  China hopes to deepen cooperation in trade, 
agriculture, public health, and "non-traditional security 
areas." 
 
UK Olympic Minister Claims Internet Blockage 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Noting United Kingdom Minister for Olympics Tessa Jowell's 
remarks during her recent visit to China that some 
international news sites are being blocked for technical 
reasons, a reporter asked why, given China's ability to send 
a spacecraft to the moon, was it so difficult for the Chinese 
to repair such "technical difficulties."  Liu answered that 
he had not heard Jowell's comments, but that Internet 
regulations have been discussed previously at MFA briefings. 
He added that the relevant authorities would be willing to 
discuss the matter with the Minister. 
 
East China Sea Consultative Conference 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. China reiterated its interest in promoting cooperation and 
in safeguarding the stability of the East China Sea.  Liu 
said China hoped Japan would meet China halfway as both are 
key countries in the region.  China welcomes Japanese Prime 
Minister Yasuo Fukuda to visit as soon as possible. 
High-level visits are extremely important in the improvement 
of bilateral relationships. 
 
Wang Qingqian 
------------- 
 
¶9. In response to a question, Liu said competent authorities 
are handling the case of Wang Qingqian, a PLA Colonel who 
recently received a suspended death sentence for espionage, 
per Chinese law. 
 
Upcoming Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶10. VISITS: French President Nicolas Sarkozy will visit China 
from November 25-27.  Trade between the two countries from 
January through July of 2007 increased by 29 percent.  The 
visit will consolidate China's "comprehensive and strategic" 
relationship with France. 
 
¶11. Mexican Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa will visit 
China from November 21-24.  The spokesman noted that both 
China and Mexico are large countries within the developing 
world and have had a strong 35-year relationship.  The visit 
will deepen mutual trust in the strategic relationship and 
will cover exchanges of technology, culture, energy, and 
tourism. 
PICCUTA