07BEIJING750
JANUARY 31 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: POSSIBLE VISIT  OF
Wed Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3476
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0750/01 0311127
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311127Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4356
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000750 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON KOLY CH TW
SUBJECT: JANUARY 31 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: POSSIBLE VISIT  OF 
KMT OFFICIAL, TAIWAN TEXTBOOKS, CHARTER FLIGHTS AND 
TOURISM, MEDIA CENSORSHIP AND EXCHANGE 
 
 
 Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 31 Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- TAO spokesperson Yang Yi would not confirm a 
possible visit by "President of the Legislative Yuan" 
Wang Jin-pyng in connection with the establishment of 
a national-level Taiwan Business Association. 
 
-- Yang condemned changes to Taiwan textbooks and 
removal of references to China in the Palace Museum as 
"stunts" that go "against the will of the people." 
 
--  The path of the Olympic torch will be announced in 
April of this year. 
 
--  The TAO denied restricting access to Taiwan 
websites and hopes that the Taiwan authorities can 
take real steps to promote cross-Strait news media 
exchange. 
 
-- Yang would not comment on reports of comments made 
by Lee Teng-hui stating that he has not advocated 
Taiwan independence. 
 
--  Beijing supports the attendance of Taiwan 
compatriots at the 2007 meetings of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC). 
End Summary. 
 
KMT Deputy Chairman Wang Jin-pyng to Mainland? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  TAO spokesperson Yang Yi was asked multiple 
questions at the January 31 TAO press briefing about 
Kuomintang Vice Chairman Wang Jin-pyng's possible 
visit to the Mainland in conjunction with 
establishment of a national-level Taiwan Business 
Association, including under what title Wang would 
come and what topics would be discussed.  Yang did not 
confirm the visit and said news about the Association 
would be released when preparations currently underway 
are complete.  Yang reiterated the Mainland's 
consistent willingness to meet and discuss developing 
cross-Strait relations and peaceful reunification with 
any department or individual who accepts the One China 
principle and the "1992 Consensus." 
 
Taiwan Textbooks, Museum Changes Promote Independence 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶3. Yang said that the Taiwan authorities are trying to 
turn Taiwan education into "Taiwan independence 
ideological education" in reference to the recent 
revisions of history texts which substitute "China" 
for "the Mainland."  Yang noted the Taiwan public's 
fervent condemnation of this attempt, reiterating that 
Taiwan is an inseparable part of China and that no 
stunt of any kind by Taiwan independence forces can 
change this fact. 
 
¶4.  Yang also denounced as "against the will of the 
people" efforts of the Taiwan authorities to "remove 
China" from the Taipei Palace Museum by referring to 
cultural relics of the Ming and Qing dynasties as 
"artifacts from home and abroad." 
 
Internet Censorship and News Media Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. In a lengthy response to a question about Taiwan's 
"Mainland Affairs Commission" welcoming Xinhua News 
Agency and the People's Daily to open offices in 
Taiwan, Yang said that the Mainland has continuously 
encouraged news media cooperation between the two 
sides since opening up to Taiwan news agencies in 
¶1993.  It is the Taiwan authorities who have prevented 
such exchange and cooperation, said Yang.  Yang voiced 
hopes that the Taiwan authorities can take real steps 
to promote cross-Strait news media exchange instead of 
"spouting empty words." 
 
¶6. In response to a question about reports from 
Taiwan's "Mainland Affairs Committee" that some Taiwan 
websites that were previously inaccessible have been 
unblocked on the Mainland, Yang stated that the 
Mainland regulates the internet in accordance with 
laws and regulations to promote its orderly and 
healthy development.  It does not have specific 
 
BEIJING 00000750  002 OF 003 
 
 
policies for certain websites, he stated. 
 
2008 Olympics: Journalists, Tickets and the Torch 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. Yang repeated details of new regulations governing 
the interviews and travel permits of Taiwan 
journalists during the period leading up to and during 
the Olympics.  The path of the Olympic torch will be 
announced in April of this year in accordance with the 
requirements of the International Olympic Committee, 
said Yang.  On the question on how and when Taiwan 
residents can buy tickets for the 2008 Olympics, Yang 
replied only that Taiwan compatriots can consult the 
ticket-seller agents appointed by the China Olympic 
Committee. 
 
Direct Charter Flights and Mainland Tourists 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Responding to questions about demand for increasing 
Spring Festival charter flights and normal weekend 
charter flights, Yang said that China hopes Taiwan 
agrees to a moderate increase in Spring Festival 
charter flights and destinations.  The total of 96 
round-trip flights this year to six destinations is an 
increase of 24 over 2006.  Yang pointed out that the 
Taiwan side has been reluctant to increase flight 
destinations.  On the issue of normal weekend cross- 
Strait charter flights, Yang believes there are no 
technical obstacles, but gave no timeline for their 
operation to begin saying it depended on the 
discussion between both sides' private trade 
organizations. 
 
¶9. When asked if there was progress in recent cross- 
Strait negotiations between Tourism Associations to 
allow Mainland tourists to travel to Taiwan Yang said 
this was the fourth round of discussions.  Consensus 
has been reached on many issues and China hopes for 
good news to be released soon, but Yang would not 
confirm a timetable for agreement. 
 
Lee Teng-hui's Comments 
----------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked by a Taiwan reporter for comment on former 
"President" Lee Teng-hui's anti-independence comments 
in an interview, Yang said only that they are paying 
attention to the relevant reports.  Lee reportedly 
clarified that he has never advocated "Taiwan 
Independence" nor is he the "Godfather of Taiwan 
Independence," adding that he no longer has any 
"government" identification and hopes to visit the 
Mainland. 
 
Taiwan Attendance at CPPCC 
-------------------------- 
 
¶11. The Mainland supports the request for the 
participation of Taiwan compatriots in the 2007 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 
(CPPCC), said Yang when asked for comment on reports 
that Taiwan citizens, including three businessmen from 
Dongguan, Guangdong Province and a famous Phoenix TV 
journalist, will face retribution from Taiwan 
authorities upon returning to Taiwan. 
 
Crime-fighting Cooperation and Lee Han-yang Case 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶12. According to "incomplete statistics," the cross- 
Strait Red Cross Organization has carried out 
repatriation acts 286 times since the signing of the 
"Kinmen Agreement" (1990), repatriating 37,790 people 
between the two sides, Yang said.  The Mainland has 
repatriated to Taiwan 266 suspects, fugitives and 
illegal border-crosser, including Lee Han-yang whose 
case was mentioned by a reporter. 
 
Cross-Strait Trademark Cooperation 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶13. A reporter asked for comment about the recent 2007 
cross-Strait Trademark Forum held in Taiwan and two 
recent trademark disputes involving "Ali" and "Sun 
Moon Lake."  Yang responded that both sides had agreed 
to set up a mechanism for cooperation between related 
departments and to increase communication and 
exchanges to promote intellectual property rights.  By 
order of the Trademark Assessment Committee, trademark 
 
BEIJING 00000750  003 OF 003 
 
 
registration was cancelled in both cases mentioned. 
 
Consensus Sought on Sand Exports to Taiwan 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶14. Yang was asked to clarify the Mainland's natural 
sand export policy toward Taiwan in light of a recent 
notice by the Commerce and Customs Administration 
limiting exports starting March 1.  Yang replied that 
despite natural sand scarcity, the Mainland will make 
all efforts to continue exporting to Taiwan and hopes 
Taiwan will take measures to support a cross-Strait 
non-governmental mechanism to reach consensus on this 
issue. 
RANDT