07BEIJING2443
APRIL 12 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, BDA,
Thu Apr 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0023
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #2443/01 1021021
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121021Z APR 07 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6792
INFO RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK PRIORITY 1286
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM PRIORITY 0077
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3110
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA PRIORITY 0020
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI PRIORITY 4311UNCLAS BEIJING 002443 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MNUC KN KS VM JA KG CD IN SU
SUBJECT: APRIL 12 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, BDA, 
JAPAN, SOUTH CHINA SEA, SUDAN, INDIA BALLISTIC MISSILE, 
SPRATLY ISLANDS, CHAD FM VISIT, TERRORIST ATTACKS, 
KYRGYZSTAN, UK VISIT 
 
 
¶1. Key Points at the April 12 MFA Press Conference by 
MFA Spokesman Qin Gang were: 
 
-- Asked repeatedly about BDA, Qin said China hopes 
the situation can be properly resolved as soon as 
possible, that the handling of the BDA issue will be 
conducive to the social and financial stability of 
Macau and that it will advance the Six-Party Talks. 
 
-- China hopes to contribute to the economic and 
social development of the DPRK and the well-being of 
its people, the spokesman said when asked about the 
selection of the DPRK's new premier. 
 
-- Premier Wen and PM Abe had a "frank" exchange and 
signed an important agreement on energy during Wen's 
ongoing visit to Japan. 
 
-- China welcomes the UN and AU agreement on Sudan, 
noticed India's launch of a ballistic missile, 
expressed condolences to victims of terrorism in 
Algeria and Morocco and is concerned about protests in 
Kyrgyzstan, Qin said. 
 
-- Vietnam's territorial claim to the Spratly Islands 
violates China's rights and interests, the spokesman 
said. 
 
-- Chad's Foreign Minister and the UK Deputy PM will 
visit Beijing on April 18-20 and April 19-25, 
respectively. 
 
China Hopes BDA Issue Can Be Solved ASAP 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  During the regularly scheduled biweekly MFA press 
briefing on April 12, MFA spokesman Qin Gang responded 
to three questions regarding the Banco Delta Asia 
(BDA) issue.  The first asked for a response to the 
Macanese government announcement that the DPRK funds 
had been freed.  Qin responded by saying that China 
had taken note that the Macau SAR government had 
issued a statement and that the United States Treasury 
Department had also issued a statement. China is 
communicating with all of the parties involved and 
hopes that the situation regarding the money in BDA 
can be properly solved as soon as possible and that 
the handling of the issue will be conducive to the 
social and financial stability of Macau as well as 
conducive to pushing forward the Six-Party Talks. 
 
¶3.  A reporter from the Kyodo News Agency followed up 
with a request to confirm the statement that China 
does not consider the BDA issued resolved.  Qin 
reiterated the Chinese principals: that the solution 
be conducive to the social and financial stability of 
Macau as well as conducive to pushing forward the Six- 
Party Talks.  He said the parties involved have their 
own concerns and interests.  China and the Macau SAR 
government also have their own legitimate concerns and 
interests and that all legitimate and reasonable 
concerns and interests should be seriously considered 
so that a proper solution can be found as soon as 
possible. 
 
¶4.  A third reporter requested confirmation regarding 
China's position on the BDA issue, prompting Qin to 
announce that this would be the last time he addressed 
the issue.  He said that Macau is a special 
administrative region of China and on financial 
administration matters it has a high degree of 
autonomy.  He said that decisions should be made by 
the financial authorities of Macau.  He urged those 
asking questions to get a thorough and complete 
understanding of the Macau government statement in 
which the government says the situation can be 
resolved properly.  He said that Macau has its own 
concerns according to its international obligations 
and responsibilities proscribed by international law 
and China supports the Macau government in its efforts 
to resolve the issue according to law. 
 
DPRK Elects New Premier 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  A reporter asked for comment on the DPRK's recent 
 
 
 
election of Premier Kim Yong Il, in which all members 
of the Supreme People's Assembly voted as opposed to 
previously unilateral decisions by Kim Jong Il and 
drew connections to China's landmark Party Congress in 
¶1978.  The spokesman declined to comment, noting that 
this involved the DPRK's internal affairs, but 
expressed hope that China can contribute to the 
economic and social development of the DPRK and the 
well-being of its people. 
 
Japan, China Sign Energy Agreement 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  During Premier Wen's ongoing visit to Japan, the 
two sides reached "an important consensus" on energy 
development as formalized in a joint communique, said 
Qin.  He pointed out that Japan's superior expertise, 
technology and experience can contribute much to 
China's efforts to enhance energy conservation and an 
environmentally friendly economy.  China's National 
Development and Reform Commission Chairman Ma Kai 
accompanied PM Wen on the trip, Qin noted.  PM Wen 
held a "frank" exchange of views with PM Abe, in which 
the two agreed to seek joint development in disputed 
waters of the East China Sea and to resolve disputes 
through consultation and dialogue. 
 
China Welcomes Sudan Agreement 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  China welcomes an agreement reached by Sudan, the 
African Union and UN and hopes they can implement the 
plan through dialogue and cooperation so as to realize 
the peace and stability of the Darfur region at an 
early date, Qin said. 
 
India Launches Ballistic Missile 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  The MFA "noticed" India's launching today of an 
Agni-III medium-range ballistic missile and hopes 
India can make positive contributions and play a 
positive role in the region. 
 
Vietnam Claim to Spratlys Infringes China's Rights 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9.  Vietnam's claim that the Spratly Islands fall 
under Vietnam's territory violates China's rights and 
interests in its own sovereign territory, said the 
spokesman.  He added that the leaders of both 
countries had previously reached consensus on this 
issue and reiterated that the Spratly Islands and 
adjacent waters have been indisputably part of China 
since ancient times. 
 
North Africa Terrorist Attacks, Kyrgyzstan Unrest 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10.  Qin expressed China's solemn condolences to the 
families of the victims of the terrorist bombings in 
Algeria and Morocco.  He also expressed China's deep 
concern over intensified protests in Kyrgyzstan.  Qin 
hopes for the stability of its friendly neighbor and 
fellow member of the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization, adding that Kyrgyzstan's stability is in 
the interests of the entire region. 
 
Visits: Chad FM, UK Deputy PM to Beijing 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  At the invitation of FM Li, FM Allam-mi of Chad 
will visit Beijing April 18-20 to celebrate the re- 
opening of Chad's Embassy to China and to exchange 
views on issues of regional and international 
interest.  China-Chad relations have been recovering 
and developing steadily since the restoration of 
diplomatic ties in August 2006.  UK Deputy Prime 
Minister and Head of the UK's China Task Force John 
Prescott will visit China April 19-25 at the 
invitation of State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan. 
RANDT