07BEIJING6919
OCTOBER 31 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: 17TH PARTY CONGRESS
Wed Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4092
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #6919/01 3041149
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311149Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3174
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1882UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 006919 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON MASS MNUC CH TW
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 31 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: 17TH PARTY CONGRESS 
REPORT, TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM, OPPOSITION TO TAIWAN NUKES, 
PERSONNEL QUESTIONS, INTERNET SPYING 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the October 31 Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) 
press briefing were: 
 
-- The spokesman gave a summary of the "guiding ideology" and 
"overall requirements" for Taiwan-related work revealed in 
General Secretary Hu Jintao's political report at the recent 
17th Party Congress. 
 
-- The spokesman expressed the PRC's hope for a return to 
"equal" (pingdeng) negotiations with the 1992 Consensus as a 
basis. 
 
-- The Mainland will be forced to take "necessary measures" 
to "protect national sovereignty, territorial integrity and 
the country's core interests." 
 
-- The spokesman expressed clear opposition to the 
"referendum on UN membership promoted by Chen Shui-bian." 
 
-- In response to a question, the spokesman said the PRC 
firmly opposes development of nuclear weapons or nuclear 
capabilities in any form by the Taiwan authorities.  End 
Summary. 
 
17th CCP Congress: Peace Agreement, Necessary Measures 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2. At the October 31 regular Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) 
press briefing, spokesman Yang Yi led off with a summary of 
the "guiding ideology" and "overall requirements" for 
Taiwan-related work revealed in General Secretary Hu Jintao's 
political report at the recent 17th Party Congress.  Yang 
stressed the importance of the "one China" principle as the 
political basis for the peaceful development of cross-Strait 
relations, the sameness in blood and heritage of Chinese 
compatriots on both sides of the Strait and opposition to 
"splittist" forces, "de jure Taiwan independence" activities 
and Chen Shui-bian's referendum on UN membership.  The 
report's call for an end to the "state of hostility" and a 
"peace agreement" marks a "new developmentin the Party's 
negotiating position" and "prospects for peaceful development 
in cross-Strait relations," Yang said. 
 
¶3.  The spokesman voiced hope for a return to "equal" 
(pingdeng) negotiations with the 1992 Consensus as a basis, 
when asked if moving in the direction of a "peace agreement" 
could mean restarting the dialogue mechanism between the 
Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and the Association for 
Relations Across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS).  Asked if after 
Taiwan's upcoming election in March there could be a positive 
"turning point" toward a "peace agreement," the spokesman 
repeated the intention, as expressed in the political report, 
to build a "framework" for cross-Strait peace and a "new 
situation" (xin jumian) in the peaceful development of 
cross-Strait relations. 
 
¶4. Yang concluded the conference by affirming that in the 
case of "Taiwan independence" forces' obstinacy and the risk 
of "Taiwan independence," the Mainland will be forced to take 
"necessary measures" to "protect national sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and the country's core interests." 
When asked if "necessary measures" could include military 
action or implementation of the Anti-Secession Law, Yang said 
the Mainland will "unswervingly" promote the development of 
cross-Strait relations "in the direction of peace and 
stability," while at the same time making "necessary 
preparations for the threat of Taiwan independence." 
 
Opposition to Taiwan's "Referendum on UN Membership" 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5. Yang repeatedly expressed China's "clear opposition" to 
the "referendum on UN membership promoted by Chen Shui-bian," 
in response to multiple questions on the topic.  Reporters' 
questions included references to KMT support for the 
referendum and "increasingly aggressive" momentum behind the 
"UN membership" movement. 
 
Mainland Opposes Nukes in Taiwan 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The spokesman said the TAO has "noticed relevant reports," 
when asked about Chen Shui-bian's statement that though the 
DPP would not seek to develop nuclear weapons, Taiwan must 
strengthen its "national defenses" to combat PRC military 
forces arrayed against it.  The TAO firmly opposes 
development of nuclear weapons or nuclear capabilities in any 
 
BEIJING 00006919  002 OF 002 
 
 
form by the Taiwan authorities, Yang added. 
 
ARATS, TAO Personnel Questions 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. Asked to confirm that former United Front Department 
Director Yan Minggfu will become the next head of ARATS, Yang 
replied that he does not know anything regarding "Hong Kong 
newspaper reports."  Yang deflected questions on personnel 
changes within the TAO. 
 
Internet Spying 
--------------- 
 
¶8. The TAO has "noticed relevant reports" on Internet 
security, Yang said, in response to a request for 
confirmation that the Mainland's Ministry of State Security 
(MSS) had sent out an arrest warrant for Internet "spy" Lee 
Fang-rong.  Yang pointed out the "odious influence" 
(yingxiang shifen elie) of large-scale Internet spying 
operations carried out by Taiwan's spying and intelligence 
organs for many years.  He added that those who undertake 
destructive activities against the Motherland will be 
investigated and punished according to law. 
 
Other Issues Covered 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. The spokesman also took questions on Taiwan business on 
the Mainland, repatriation of economic criminals, 
cross-Strait cultural exchange, charter flights, tourism, the 
20th anniversary of allowing Taiwan residents to visit family 
on the Mainland and reports from Taiwan businessmen of TAO 
neglect of an agricultural cooperation project. 
Randt