07BEIJING3291
MAY 16 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: FRANK HSIEH  CANDIDACY;
Wed May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6738
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3291/01 1361039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161039Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7960
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003291 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: MAY 16 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: FRANK HSIEH  CANDIDACY; 
NEW PM CHANG; CROSS-STRAIT TOURISM; OLYMPIC  TORCH ROUTE; 
DIRECT LINKS 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 16 Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- TAO Spokesman Li deflected questions on DPP 
Presidential Candidate front-runner Frank Hsieh and 
the newly appointed Premier Chang Chun-hsiung. 
 
-- The fifth round of "technical consultations" on 
cross-Strait tourism have stalled and Li did not 
respond to a reporter's suggestion that the Mainland's 
addressing Taiwan as "Taiwan, China" in consultation 
documents was the obstacle. 
 
-- Claims that Beijing is bullying Taiwan in regards 
to the Olympic torch issue are groundless, said Li. 
End summary. 
 
No Comment on DPP Hsieh or New Premier 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Asked at the May 16 Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) 
press briefing about the DPP front-runner for the 2008 
"Presidential" election, Frank Hsieh, TAO spokesman Li 
Weiyi deflected saying that "scholars have their own 
opinions on the matter."  In response to a reporter's 
question of what the effect the new Premier Chang 
Chun-hsiung, who recently replaced Su Tseng-chang, 
would have on cross-Strait relations and issues such 
as tourism and the Olympic torch route, the spokesman 
simply commented on the current situation in these 
areas without mention of the new appointment.  On 
whether Chang's new position would affect the ability 
of the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) to carry on 
work related to particular issues, such as mutual 
recognition of university degrees, Li said that the 
ability of the SEF to play a role in cross-Strait ties 
remains predicated on the important political 
foundation of the "1992 consensus." 
 
Cross-Strait Tourism: "Taiwan, China" an Obstacle? 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3.  After achieving consensus and partial results 
through four rounds of technical consultations on the 
issue of opening up cross-Strait tourism to Mainland 
residents, Li said the Taiwan side has not responded 
to Mainland proposals prepared for the fifth round of 
consultations.  Li declined to comment on a reporter's 
suggestion that progress was hindered by the 
Mainland's insistence on referring to Taiwan as 
"Taiwan, China" in consultation documents. 
 
Olympic Torch 
------------- 
 
¶4.  On the issue of the Olympic torch route, the 
Beijing Organizing Committee for the 2008 Olympic 
Games (BOCOG) made it very clear at an April 26 press 
briefing that Beijing carried out fair consultations, 
respected the views the Taiwan side and reached four 
important points of consensus which were confirmed by 
Taiwan's Tsai Chen-wai on March 27, said Li.  He added 
that claims that the Mainland is bullying Taiwan on 
the Olympic torch issue were groundless. 
 
Taiwan Politics Hinders Direct Links 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  Chen Shui-bian's claim that direct transportation 
links cannot be realized by 2008 because of Mainland 
insincerity shows his own lack of sincerity in 
promoting these links and suggests Chen might take new 
action to impede progress in the matter, said Li when 
asked for comment.  The success of charter flights 
demonstrates there are no business-related or 
technical issues to direct links and the Mainland's 
sincerity has been shown by its consistent, active 
promotion of links including new policies and measures 
announced at the Third Cross-Strait Economic and 
Cultural Forum in April 2007.  Li agreed with a 
comment by Penghu Cross-Strait Exchanges Federation 
Chairman Li that the first direct cargo transport 
between Fujian and Pengu on May 15 was a small step in 
cross-Strait links, but very important for Penghu. 
 
Kidnapped Taiwan Businessman Released 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00003291  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6.  Lin Wen-tung, a Taiwan resident kidnapped in 
Guangzhou on May 5 was rescued two days later by local 
police, Li said when questioned about the case and the 
possibility that suspects will be extradited back to 
Taiwan.  The spokesman stated that further matters 
related to the case would be handled in accordance 
with relevant laws.  Five suspects are in custody and 
police are looking for Hsu Chia-min, a Taiwan resident 
allegedly behind the kidnapping, added Li. 
 
Mainland Ready for Consultation and Student Exchange 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶7.  China hopes to consult with Taiwan authorities on 
cross-Strait exchanges, said Li responding to recent 
comments coming from the Taiwan "Mainland Affairs 
Council" that the Mainland should not avoid 
interaction with Taiwan.  These remarks evidence 
Taiwan's refusal to implement measures that are in its 
own interests, he added.  Many common proposals to 
expand cooperation and promote the peaceful, stable 
development of relations were approved at the Third 
Cross-Strait Economic and Cultural Forum.  Asked about 
a Mainland proposal at the Forum to allow Mainland 
students to study in Taiwan, Li said the 
implementation may be difficult because Taiwan has 
given no response and still does not recognize 
Mainland university degrees. 
 
RANDT