07BEIJING3761
JUNE 5 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TIANANMEN ANNIVERSARY,
Tue Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5438
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3761/01 1560930
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050930Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8610
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1579
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 0036
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0081UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003761 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM GE BM KS CH
SUBJECT: JUNE 5 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TIANANMEN ANNIVERSARY, 
MISSILE DEFENSE, PM WEN RUMORS, G-8 COOPERATION, SPYING, NE 
ASIA FM TRILATERAL, PRE-OLYMPIC DEMOLITIONS, ENVIRONMENT, 
VISITS 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 5 MFA Press Conference were: 
 
-- When asked about the anniversary of Tiananmen the 
spokesperson noted China's progress over the past 20 years 
and slammed comments by American officials as "groundless 
attacks on China's internal affairs." 
 
-- China believes a United States missile defense system will 
negatively impact the strategic balance, is not conducive to 
regional stability and will increase weapons proliferation. 
 
-- A Japanese media report that Premier Wen would not seek a 
second term was dismissed as rumor. 
 
-- Cooperation between the G-8 and China is conducive to 
peace and stability of the world. 
 
-- Spying charges about China raised in the United States are 
groundless and rooted in ulterior motives. 
 
-- Visits: Suriname's Vice President will visit June 10-15. 
A Cuban Parliament delegation and a high-level Burmese 
delegation are currently in Beijing. 
 
Tiananmen Anniversary: MFA Highlights Progress 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. At the June 5 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson 
Jiang Yu responded to questions about the 1989 Tiananmen 
Square incident saying, "There has already been a clear 
conclusion to the turmoil of the late '80s."  She added that 
over the past 20 years China has made great progress in 
social stability, economic development, democracy and legal 
systems.  The Chinese people enjoy all kinds of rights and 
freedoms and the Chinese Government and people will 
unswervingly follow the road of socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, she said.  Asked about the freedom of 
Chinese journalists to report the events of 1989, Jiang 
replied that the Constitution protects the freedom of all 
Chinese citizens and Chinese media can report within the 
framework of the Constitution and relevant laws.  Asked about 
Speaker of the House Pelosi's comments on the June 4 
anniversary, Jiang called the remarks "irresponsible, 
groundless attacks on China's internal affairs," and urged 
the United States to undertake a deep review of its own human 
rights abuses both domesticlly and internationally. 
 
Negative on U.S. Missile Defense Moves 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  China is gravely concerned about the United States' 
promotion of a missile defense system, said Jiang replying to 
questions on the recent defense ministers meeting in 
Singapore and the possibility of China's introducing a 
similar system.  China believes missile defense will 
negatively impact the strategic balance, is not conducive to 
regional stability and will increase weapons proliferation. 
China maintains a consistent position and hopes relevant 
parties will act cautiously. 
 
Premier Stepping Down "Completely a Rumor" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  Jiang said a June 3 report in the Japanese media that 
Premier Wen would not seek a second term was "completely a 
rumor," when asked about the matter. 
 
China-G-8 Cooperation Conducive to Global Peace 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  Cooperation between the G-8 and China is conducive to 
both sides and good for the peace and stability of the world 
and China is ready to conduct equal dialogue on the basis of 
equality and mutual benefit, stated the spokesperson.  Jiang 
expressed hope for practical cooperation and a long-term, 
stable, equal partnership in establishing a "north-south 
dialogue."  Issues of innovation, IPR protection, trade 
liberalization, energy, climate change and aid to Africa will 
be discussed at the upcoming G-8 meeting which will open June 
8 in Germany, she added. 
 
Spying Charges Are "Groundless" 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Asked about three individuals in the United States who 
have recently pleaded guilty to spying for China, Jiang 
responded that such spying charges are groundless and rooted 
 
BEIJING 00003761  002 OF 002 
 
 
in ulterior motives. 
 
Trilateral FM Meeting in ROK 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  China, Japan and ROK foreign ministers exchanged ideas on 
future areas of cooperation and issues of common interests 
during trilateral meetings June 3, Jiang said.  China 
believes the three countries have common responsibilities and 
will handle differences through consultation.  China would 
like to grasp the opportunity to join hands and map the 
future of Asia, Jiang added. 
 
Pre-Olympics Evictions and Demolitions 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Responding to a question on a report by a Geneva-based 
NGO claiming that that there have been 1.25 million evictions 
in Beijing because of Olympic preparations, Jiang refuted the 
numbers and asserted that 6,037 households had been 
demolished since 2002 with all evictees receiving just 
compensation and none being forced to move from Beijing. 
 
International Environment Day, China's Plan 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The spirit of the Third International Environment Day is 
that everybody has responsibility to protect the environment, 
Jiang said replying to allegations that China hides behind 
per capita emissions numbers and a question on details of the 
recently announced climate change plan.  China places 
importance on environmental protection and has set relevant 
goals in the 11th Five-Year Plan, said Jiang, adding that the 
recently issued plan demonstrates that China is a developing 
country responsibly dealing with climate change within the 
framework of sustainable development and in line with UNFCCC 
guidelines.  Developed countries have greater responsibility 
for climate change and the problem cannot be effectively 
addressed without their efforts to limit emissions and 
provide clean technology transfer to the developing world. 
 
Visits: Suriname VP, Cuba Parliament Head, Burma 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10.  At the invitation of VP Zeng, Suriname VP Sardjoe will 
visit June 10-15.  A delegation including the Cuban 
Parliament President is visiting Beijing at the invitation of 
the National People's Congress and information has been 
released, said Jiang when asked for details.  A high-level 
Burmese delegation currently in Beijing is not being hosted 
by the MFA.  Whether China will move its Embassy in Burma to 
the new capital is an internal affair of Burma, replied Jiang 
responding to a follow-up question. 
PICCUTA