07BEIJING7383
DECEMBER 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY
Thu Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5208
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #7383/01 3401130
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061130Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3870
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 007383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY 
TALKS, NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE (NIE) ON IRAN, 
UN CLIMATE CHANGE CONFERENCE, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS, 
AFRICA INVESTMENT, DALAI LAMA 
 
¶1. Key points at the December 6 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- China believes the date for the next round of Six- 
Party Talks must be reached by consensus. 
 
-- China will "earnestly study" the NIE on Iran with 
relevant parties so as to push forward the proper 
settlement of the issue. 
 
-- On climate change, China believes countries should 
not break away from the framework established by the 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and the 
Kyoto Protocol. 
 
-- The PRC is willing to work together with Japan to 
keep and push forward the good momentum of improvement 
and development of bilateral relations. 
 
-- China welcomes some Western countries' recent 
remarks indicating that they intend to strengthen 
their input in Africa. 
 
-- The PRC views the Dalai Lama as a "splittist" 
intent on separating the Motherland. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. Responding to questions regarding Assistant 
Secretary Christopher Hill's visit to Beijing and the 
 
SIPDIS 
future of the Six-Party talks, Qin confirmed that A/S 
Hill met with Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei on the 
morning of December 6 and exchanged views on the 
current situation and the next stage of work for the 
Six-Party Talks process.  VFM Wu took note of A/S 
Hill's recount of his visit to the DPRK and his 
relevant remarks.  China hopes that the six parties 
will maintain cooperation and consultation in order to 
maintain a good momentum, so as to push forward the 
relevant work on the denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula as scheduled. 
 
¶3. Another reporter commented that A/S Hill had said 
he did not know why the Six-Party Talks had been 
delayed and asked whether the PRC knew the reason for 
the delay.  Qin responded that the six parties are 
conducting consultations on the exact date for the 
next Heads of Delegation meeting.  He added that the 
next meeting was not up to the will of any one party, 
but would be a consensus reached by the six parties. 
The relevant parties should "cherish and maintain" the 
good momentum so as to implement the consensus reached 
in a all-around and balanced way in order to realiz 
the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
 
National Intelligence Estimate on Iran: PRC Response 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. On China's response to the recently-released U.S. 
National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) on Iran, Qin said 
that he had addressed the issue during the December 4 
regular press briefing and did not wish to complicate 
the matter.  He said China is willing to work together 
with other parties to strengthen communications and 
consultations for a peaceful settlement to the Iranian 
nuclear issue through negotiations. 
 
¶5. China's position on the Iranian nuclear issue is 
that China supports the international nuclear non- 
proliferation regime, opposes the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and upholds a peaceful and stable 
Middle East, and, as a result, upholds a peaceful 
settlement of the issue through consultations.  Any 
move taken by the UN Security Council on the Iranian 
nuclear issue should be conducive to realize these 
goals. China will adopt a positive and constructive 
attitude to take part in relevant discussions.  As to 
the NIE, China will "earnestly study" the report and 
communications with relevant parties so as to push 
forward the proper settlement of the issue. 
 
PRC Views on the UN Climate Change Conference 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Responding to a question regarding China's views of 
the Climate Change conference in Bali and the 
proposals put forth by Canada, Japan and the United 
States, Qin said that the Chinese delegation is taking 
a constructive and positive view in its attendance at 
the conference.  The relevant parties have exchanged 
 
BEIJING 00007383  002 OF 003 
 
 
views on how to handle climate change, especially on 
goals for emissions reductions after 2012.  China 
believes under current circumstances, countries should 
not break away from the framework established by the 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and 
the Kyoto Protocol, and should not abandon the common 
but differentiated responsibilities that are 
principles in those agreements. 
 
¶7. Nations should make due efforts to combat climate 
change based on their different development levels, 
national conditions and capabilities, Qin continued. 
In particular, developed countries should take the 
lead in emissions reductions and provide more capital 
and technological support to developing countries so 
as to help them raise their capability to handle 
climate change.  Developing countries should take an 
active part in the process, based on their own 
development levels.  For its part, China will make its 
due effort to strengthen international cooperation 
based on its own conditions and strategic development 
strategies.  China will hold an open attitude to any 
move or proposal that is conducive to promoting the 
principles put forth in the UNFCCC and the Kyoto 
Protocol as well as the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibility. 
 
China-Japan Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked why President Hu Jintao did not raise any 
"sensitive" issues in bilateral relations with Japan 
during the recent China-Japan Senior Economic Dialogue, 
but instead stated his hope that Japan would express 
opposition to Taiwanese referendum on UN membership, 
Qin said the Chinese government is willing to work 
together with Japan to keep and push forward the good 
momentum of improvement and development of bilateral 
relations.  The most important issue is to follow the 
principle of mutual respect and mutual benefit, to 
take into consideration each other's concerns and to 
properly settle major issues including historical 
issues and the Taiwan issue so as to consolidate a 
foundation for political relations.  Therefore, the 
opposition to Taiwan separatist activities, including 
the referendum on UN membership will be conducive to 
consolidating the political foundation of bilateral 
relations and the sound and rapid development of 
bilateral relations. 
 
¶9. Asked about China-Japan relations in the face of 
the upcoming 70th anniversary of the Nanjing Massacre, 
Qin said that while developing bilateral relations 
with Japan, China "has taken history as a mirror and 
looks into the future."  To remember lessons from 
history is to cherish the precious hard-won momentum 
of improvement and development so as to create a 
better future.  As such, China always follows this 
guidance to educate the Chinese people to view 
bilateral relations with Japan from an objective 
prospective.  China hopes that Japan will follow this 
spirit and make its due efforts to push forward the 
development of bilateral relations. 
 
PRC Welcomes More Investment in Africa 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. The Chinese government highly values Africa and 
its solidarity and cooperation with Africa, which is 
based on mutual respect and benefit and is conducive 
to the peace, stability and common development of 
Africa and the world at large.  It is not targeted at 
any other third parties.  China has taken note of and 
welcomes some Western countries' recent remarks 
indicating that they intend to strengthen their input 
in Africa.  China and other countries share common 
interests in Africa, and as such, China is willing to 
strengthen dialogue, cooperation and exchanges with 
those countries. If countries increase their input in 
Africa just because of China that is a good thing, if 
the whole international community could work together 
to make contributions for poverty alleviation and 
stable development and the benefit of the African 
people China would be happy to see that. 
 
Dalai Lama Visits Italy 
----------------------- 
 
¶11. Responding to an inquiry regarding the Dalai 
Lama's trip to Italy, Qin said that the Dalai Lama is 
 
BEIJING 00007383  003 OF 003 
 
 
not a purely religious figure, but is a political 
exile engaged in activities intended to split China. 
His issues are not ones of culture or religion, but of 
China's territorial integrity and the separation or 
"anti-separation" of the Motherland.  No matter how or 
where the Dalai Lama conducts his activities, it is 
not in an individual or religious capacity. Rather, he 
represents separatist forces aimed at splitting China 
and advocating Tibetan independence.  Qin said China 
hopes that relevant countries will be clearly aware of 
these attempts at separatism and not provide venues or 
support for these activities. 
 
¶12. In a follow-on question the reporter asked for 
examples of the Dalai Lama's "splittist" activities. 
Qin suggested that the reporter review the Dalai 
Lama's activities, deeds and words since fleeing China. 
He has never given up his attempts to separate China 
and is still actively engaged in separatist activities. 
Qin said these words and deeds are very common and 
believes that there are many cases to which the 
reporter could refer.  Qin added that the Dalai Lama 
continues to maintain an exile government. 
 
RANDT