07BRASILIA401
BRAZIL TO INTRODUCE NEW BIOPIRACY LEGISLATION
Wed Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO8405
PP RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0401/01 0661323
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071323Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8294
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 3970
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 9360
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 6326UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/PCI/LPOULTON, LSPERLING; OES/CDAWSON; WHA/BPOPP, 
ARADETSKY 
 
PLEASE PASS TO LHIRSCH AT SMITHSONIAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TBIO KSCA BAIO BR
SUBJECT:  BRAZIL TO INTRODUCE NEW BIOPIRACY LEGISLATION 
 
REF: 06 BRASILIA 2686 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The Government of Brazil (GOB) is preparing new 
legislation to address biopiracy in Brazil, which the GOB believes 
fuels a USD 100 million a year market for chemical, pharmaceutical 
and cosmetics industries worldwide.  The new legislation will 
feature electronic registration for researchers seeking government 
authorization and may also require payment into a "conservation and 
development" fund, for use by the Ministry of the Environment.  If 
passed, the new law would seek to help combat biopiracy while at the 
same time improve bureaucratic efficiency for scientific research 
requests and encourage foreign investment in biotechnology.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On September 28, 2007, SCI officer met with Eduardo Velez, 
Director of the Brazilian Ministry of Environment's Genetic Heritage 
Department (CGEN) to discuss biopiracy in Brazil.  Velez said that 
for the GOB, biopiracy remains a constant threat to Brazil's natural 
resources and poses problems regarding access to and benefits from 
those resources for indigenous and local communities. 
 
Biopiracy in Brazil Defined 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Velez explained that the GOB sees biopiracy as the act of 
transferring genetic resources (animal or plant) and/or traditional 
knowledge associated with those genetic resources from Brazil 
without the prior authorization of the GOB.  Such an act, Velez 
stated, violates not only local law, but the laws established by the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).  Perhaps just as important 
to the GOB, according to Velez, biopiracy involves the unfair and 
unequal sharing (between the GOB, local communities and 
bio-prospectors) of the financial benefits that come from the 
commercial exploitation of these resources and traditional 
knowledge. 
 
¶4. (U) At the moment, the Brazilian Ministry of Environment (MMA) is 
investigating approximately 1,200 patents and/or patent requests in 
the United States, European Union and Asia, involving substances 
related to 40 species of Brazilian plants and animals that are 
suspected of involving biopiracy.  In Brazil, the most commonly 
discussed incidents of biopiracy involve food and medicinal 
products.  For example, the brand curpulate (chocolate made with the 
seeds of the cupuacu fruit) was registered by Japanese company Asahi 
Foods in 2002.  EMBRAPA (Brazilian Agricultural Research Authority) 
also claims that it holds the patent for this brand and has brought 
a case against Asahi before the WTO.  In the medical field, Merck 
laboratory holds the patent for the isolation of an enzyme, the 
policarpina, from the jaborandi plant.  Merck uses the enzyme to 
produce medicine for treatment and control of glaucoma.  According 
to Velez, the plant has also been used for centuries by local 
Indians to make medicinal teas yet the Indians receive no benefits 
from the Merck patent. 
 
Legislation - Old and New 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) The current Brazilian regulatory system for access to genetic 
resources and associated traditional knowledge requires 
bio-prospectors or scientific researchers to reach a contractual 
agreement with the land owner where the activities would take place. 
 Both parties then go to the GOB for approval of the agreement and 
benefit sharing.  The administrative requirement to approach the GOB 
second, and other flaws in the law such as lack of transparency, 
Velez explained, has led to an inefficient authorization process, a 
lack of monitoring and enforcement, and has also scared away 
bonafide foreign investment in the development of Brazil's 
biotechnology sector. 
 
¶6. (U) The proposed new legislation, which is being drafted with 
input from local scientific, private sector and non government 
organization communities, will attempt to improve bureaucratic 
efficiency, Velez said. Velez added that with this new law, the GOB 
hopes that it can also reach the type of success in attracting 
foreign investing in biodiversity/biotechnology that, e.g., Costa 
Rica has been able to achieve, while at the same time, create more 
efficient channels for scientific research. 
 
¶7. (U) The new law will institute, inter alia, an online 
registration for research and bio-prospecting authorization 
requests.  Authorization requests would be directed to CGEN prior to 
reaching an agreement with the local land owner.  The new law would 
also seek to better establish benefit sharing contracts, which will 
now have to be negotiated directly with the MMA and not with the 
owner of the land where the research or bio-prospecting takes place. 
 Moreover, the new law may include a fund that researchers and 
 
BRASILIA 00000401  002 OF 002 
 
 
bio-prospecting companies would be required to pay into that would 
be used to support sustainable development and conservation 
activities in Brazil.  Velez said that the GOB had not yet 
determined how the conservation fund would be managed.  While the 
current idea is that the funds would be under the control of the MMA 
for use in sustainable development and conservation activities, he 
could give no guarantees or plans for transparent use of the money. 
 
 
¶8. (U) Comment: The GOB is keen to end biopiracy in Brazil as shown 
through its support of local and international efforts.  For 
example, at the Common Agenda for the Environment meeting in Brazil 
in December 2006, Brazil reiterated its interest in including 
biopiracy in the scope of Coalition Against Wildlife Trafficking 
(CAWT), most likely due to its view that biopiracy includes plant 
and animal species.  Moreover, at a recent meeting of the Trade 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Council, 
Brazil reiterated its support of an amendment to the TRIPS Agreement 
that would entail incorporating a requirement to disclose the origin 
of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge in patent 
applications along with evidence of prior informed consent and 
benefit sharing.  Perhaps most importantly, however, the proposed 
new national legislation that would require a contractual agreement 
be negotiated directly with the GOB, may appear to mean that 
contrary its commitments under the CBD, the GOB may have interest in 
entering into bilateral agreements for conducting bio-prospecting in 
Brazil. End comment. 
 
Chicola