07DAMASCUS82
Syria/Belgium, Syria/Iraq, Syria/Iran, Syria/Pakistan,
Tue Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0082/01 0231413
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231413Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2852
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6523
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4303
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2913
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7478
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1527
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4868
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1086
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7210UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Belgium, Syria/Iraq, Syria/Iran, Syria/Pakistan, 
Palestinian Territories, Iraq, Lebanon (1/23) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Jan. 23 reported President Asad's 
meeting on Jan. 23 with Anne-Marie Lizin, Chairwoman of the Belgian 
Senate.  Talks centered on bilateral relations and regional 
developments.  President Asad reiterated the importance of 
continuing Euro-Syrian communication and Belgium's active role in 
enhancing this communication. 
Ms. Lizin hailed Syria's pivotal role in establishing stability in 
the region, pointing out the European vision regarding the situation 
in the region.  Ms. Lizin also met with Gen. Bassam Abdul Majeed, 
Minister of Interior, who voiced Syria's readiness and keenness to 
cooperate with all brotherly and friendly countries in order to 
combat terrorism and pointed out Syria's efforts in this regard. 
Gen. Abdul Majeed also talked about the procedures taken by his 
Ministry to control the borders with Iraq.  He underlined the 
importance of the European role in this regard, indicating that 
Syria has requested many sides to provide it with modern equipment 
for controlling and monitoring borders but has so far received no 
response. 
 
On Syrian-Iraqi relations, papers reported that VP Shara received on 
Jan. 22 a delegation representing the Arab tribes in Iraq.  Talks 
dealt with the ordeal the Iraqis are passing through and Syria's 
role in achieving national reconciliation there.  In this regard, VP 
Shara confirmed Syria's concern about the unity of the Iraqi people 
and land and confirmed Syria's work to overcome the current 
situation, expressing readiness to do whatever possible in this 
regard. 
 
On Syrian-Iranian relations, papers reported FM Walid Mouallem's 
visit to Iran and his meeting with Iranian FM Manouchehr Mottaki. 
FM Mouallem is expected to deliver a message from President Asad to 
President Ahmadinejad. 
 
Papers also reported that Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf will 
pay a working visit to Syria on Jan. 23 for talks with President 
Asad on developments in the Middle East.  The visit is part of a 
regional tour including Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan and the UAE. 
Talks in Syria will center on developments in the Palestinian 
territories, Iraq and Lebanon, bilateral relations, and a number of 
issues in connection with the Organization of Islamic Conference 
(OIC). 
 
As for the Palestinian issue, papers reported that Fatah and Hamas 
will resume talks today on forming a national unity government. 
Papers also reported that Palestinian President Mahmud Abbas held a 
meeting with a delegation from the Popular Front for the Liberation 
of Palestine-General Command [PFLP-GC] headed by Deputy Secretary 
General Talal Naji.  Talks focused on a number of Palestinian issues 
and the need to overcome the differences that harm Palestinian 
national unity. 
 
A number of articles of interest appeared in the January issue of 
the independent English-language monthly magazine "Syria Today." 
One is by Ibrahim Hamidi, entitled "The West Has Fallen in Love with 
Syria Again."  Hamidi charts Syria's tumultuous relationship with 
the West and its success in dealing with regional developments and 
confronting increasing pressures.  Hamidi says that "[w]hile the 
picture that is beginning to come into view seems rosy for Syria, 
there is a possibility that Syria might face civil wars on three 
fronts, namely, Iraq, Lebanon and Palestine," which "would spell 
disaster for the region and Syria in particular."  Another article, 
by Ziad Haidar, is entitled "Steps Towards a Liberated Media 
Sector," in which he maintains that 2006 was supposed to herald a 
new age in independent media, but reform of Syria's media sector 
still lacks focus as well as a collective will.  Haidar notes that 
"limits on official media are tighter and the threat of punishment 
is more serious,"  and that "the independent media is tightly 
controlled by the government."  A third article, entitled "Between a 
Rock and a Hard Place," by Dalia Haidar, maintains that NGOs have 
had notable influence on Syrian social and political life, but that 
many NGOs are trapped in the rift between a secular state and a 
growing Islamic wave. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
 
"President Asad to Chairwoman of Belgian Senate Lizin: Instability 
in the region affects Europe negatively.  Ms. Lizin:  Syria has a 
pivotal role in stability in the region" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"President Asad and Iranian President Ahmadinejad exchange messages. 
 Ahmadinejad:  No limits to our relations with Syria.  FM Mouallem 
discusses regional developments and bilateral relations with FM 
Mottaki" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/23) 
 
"VP Shara to Iraqi tribes' delegation:  Syria is concerned about 
Iraq's territorial integrity and sovereignty" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 1/23) 
 
"Brazilian President Da Silva receiving Information Minister Bilal: 
We support Syria's right to restoration of the occupied Golan" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"President of Pakistan Musharraf arrives today in Damascus" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/23) 
 
"A general strike in Lebanon to topple Feltman and his satellites. 
Hizbollah leader Nasrallah:  The government seeks international 
forces to salvage itself" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"Positive atmosphere following the meeting in Damascus of 
Palestinian President Abbas and Chairman of the Politburo of Hamas 
Movement Mishaal.  Talal Naji, Deputy Secretary General of the 
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command 
[PFLP-GC]:  The gap between Fatah and Hamas is narrowing" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"Three US soldiers killed in al-Anbar and Ninwa;  scores of Iraqis 
killed and injured in various explosions in Iraq" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 1/23) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------- 
 
"Syrian Vision" 
 
--------------- 
 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra wrote (1/23):  "In its actions and policies, Syria 
proceeds in the higher interest of the Arab nation and the need to 
protect it from external and internal threats.... 
 
"In his meetings with Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and Palestinian 
President Mahmoud Abbas in Damascus recently, President Asad 
reaffirmed this national Syrian position when he announced that 
Syria is ready to do everything it should to render the Iraqi 
national reconciliation process successful and when he stressed the 
need for the Palestinian people to demonstrate cohesion at this 
delicate juncture and to adopt dialogue as the only language among 
the Palestinian factions to form a national unity government. 
 
"For Syria, Iraqi national reconciliation and Palestinian unity are 
the only way out of the Iraqi and Palestinian crises....  The threat 
that Iraqis and Palestinians are facing is the same, a threat that 
ultimately targets Arabs' national security and common future. 
 
"In Iraq, the people's political, geographic, and spiritual unity is 
threatened because undermining this unity is the only guarantee for 
the occupation to stay, dominate Iraq, and continue to loot the 
country's resources and control its strategic location. 
 
"In Palestine, national unity is also targeted because it is the 
solid ground on which the struggle of the Palestinian people has 
been based and is the guarantee for foiling Israel's expansionist 
plans....  Without national unity in Iraq and Palestine the threat 
to the two peoples and the entire Arab nation will grow and expand." 
 
---------------- 
 
"Reconciliation" 
 
---------------- 
 
Umar Jaftali, a commentator in government-owned Tishrin, wrote 
(1/23):  "All Palestinian factions are expected to resume talks on 
forming a national unity government.... 
 
"There is an opportunity to heal the rift and put an end to all 
signs of sedition among Palestinians....  National Palestinian unity 
is the only way to confront the siege, starvation, and daily crimes 
that the occupation government and forces are practicing against 
Palestinians.... 
 
"It is no secret that the international pressure on the Palestinian 
people and their elected government is intended to subject them to 
American and Zionist diktats....  Any political position that does 
not serve the real Palestinian interest or help Palestinians unify 
their efforts and renounce their differences would be a gratuitous 
gift to the Israeli enemy.... 
 
"Israel does not really want peace....  It is using the time factor 
and the available opportunities to perpetuate the occupation and 
further tighten the noose on the Palestinian people.  This is why 
national unity remains a guarantee for the Palestinian cause." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"Will Bush Deem It Right, Even Though Late?" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (1/23):  "Early answers from Iraq prove that there is no 
chance for the success of President Bush's strategy.  The growing 
losses among US soldiers and the deteriorating security situation in 
that country are the result of the implementation of President 
Bush's new strategy.... 
 
"President Bush is not likely to enjoy his vacation. The bad news 
from Iraq will deprive him of sleep and drive his adversaries to 
escalate their attacks on him.... 
 
"Americans, headed by legislators in the Congress, believe that 
their national and ethical duty dictates that they confront Bush's 
war plans and bring their troops back from Iraq.  Opposition to the 
Iraq war, as shown by opinion polls, has reached a level that Bush 
did not expect, exceeding 68 percent.  And America's wise men, 
represented by the Baker-Hamilton committee and the military 
experts, presented written advice, did what they should when they 
stressed the need to stop the war on Iraq, and cleared their 
conscience before their people. 
 
"Yet, President Bush insists on continuing and escalating the war, 
leaning on the advice of the remaining neoconservatives, who became 
shameless after losing the sense of national loyalty and took it 
upon themselves to turn the US Administration into an Israeli 
tool...." 
 
Corbin