07DAMASCUS384
Syria/Russia, Syria/Qatar, Syria/Indonesia, Iraq, Lebanon,
Mon Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0384/01 1131255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231255Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3354
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6750
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4483
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3102
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7629
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1701
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5037
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1244
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7369UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000384 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Syria/Russia, Syria/Qatar, Syria/Indonesia, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Palestinian Territories, Sudan 
(4/20-23) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Apr. 20 reported President Asad's 
meeting on Apr. 19 with the Russian President Putin's Special Envoy, 
Alexander Sultanov, who conveyed a message from Putin about 
bilateral relations and the situation in the region.  Talks focused 
on the situation in Iraq, and on the necessity to ensure security 
and stability there, and also to encourage the Lebanese parties to 
reach national accord and solve their differences on various issues. 
 Talks also centered on ways to revive peace efforts in the region 
to cement a just and comprehensive peace. 
 
Papers on Apr. 23 reported FM Mouallem's meeting on Apr. 22 with 
Qatari Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem 
bin Jabr al-Thani, focusing on bilateral relations and the latest 
developments in Iraq, Palestine, and Lebanon, in addition to efforts 
to achieve security and stability in the region.  Mouallem 
reiterated the importance of continuing consultation, cooperation 
and coordination on all issues that concern both countries. 
 
Papers on Apr. 23 reported Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Miqdad's 
meeting on Apr. 22 with Andi Mapata Hang Fatwa, Deputy Chairman of 
the Indonesian Consultative Council.  Miqdad described 
Syrian-Indonesian relations as "important and deep," hailing 
Indonesia's positions and its support of just and fair causes 
through its membership on the UN Security Council.  Talks also 
touched on bilateral relations and means of boosting them, in 
addition to the latest developments in the region.  Mr. Fatwa 
emphasized that "Indonesian positions regarding the situation in the 
Middle East are identical to those of Syria."   He renewed his 
country's support of Syria in its efforts to liberate the occupied 
Golan, and condemned Israeli practices against Syrian citizens in 
Golan. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Foreign Minister Mouallem reviews latest developments and 
Syrian-Qatari relations with Qatari Foreign Minister Sheikh Hamad 
bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/23) 
 
"President Asad receives a message from Putin. Sultanov: 
Russian-Syrian points of view are identical" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 4/20) 
 
"A message to President Asad from Indian Prime Minister received by 
VP Shara" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/20) 
 
"Italian Prime Minister Prodi:  Syria has an important role in 
achieving peace in the region" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/22) 
 
"US Department of State does not rule out a Syrian-American meeting 
during the Sharm al-Shiekh Conference" (Independent al-Watan, 4/23) 
 
 
"Generals of war:  Failure of the security plan in Baghdad is 
possible.  Killing of three US soldiers and scores of Iraqis in 
various areas in Baghdad" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/23) 
 
"Palestinian bloodshed in Jennin.  Scores of Palestinians killed and 
injured in Israeli assaults.  The Palestinian Authority calls for 
severing contacts with Israel" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 4/23) 
 
"President Bush and the Congress head towards confrontation" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/23) 
 
"$65 million (US) worth of American bombs to Israel" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/22) 
 
"Will the high walls and time wasting strategy succeed in Iraq?  One 
US soldier killed, two others wounded during the visit of US Defense 
Secretary Gates to Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/21) 
 
SIPDIS 
 
"Assistant UN Secretary General Michel continues his meetings in 
Lebanon amid Israeli airspace violations. Lebanese Opposition:  The 
governing team seeks internationalization and mandating" 
 
 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/21) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------- 
 
"Why This Rush?" 
 
----------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned 
al-Thawra, wrote (4/20):  "Why this US and French pressure and rush 
to endorse the law on the International Tribunal on the al-Hariri 
assassination in its current formula and outside the constitutional 
frameworks in Lebanon...? 
 
"This shows that the ruling team in Lebanon, supported by Paris and 
Washington, and behind them Israel, is determined to politicize the 
tribunal to achieve political purposes that have no connection 
whatsoever with the objective of finding al-Hariri's killers.... 
 
"Israel wants to take revenge on the resistance and push Lebanon 
toward a civil war, while France has personal and other objectives 
linked to its new colonialist ambitions.... 
 
"As for the United States, it sees Lebanon in general and the 
tribunal in particular as the way to its new Middle East plan 
despite the failure that accompanies this plan in the region...." 
 
--------------------- 
 
"Regrettable, Indeed" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (4/20):  "The United Nations acknowledged, in the Geneva 
conference on helping Iraqi refugees, that Iraqis are experiencing 
tragedies around the clock.... 
 
"The United States raises a hue and cry over an individual or a 
group of individuals it likes if they are aggrieved in some way or 
another.  It makes threats and mobilizes the United Nations, the 
Security Council, and Chapter Seven.  It legitimizes the 
illegitimate and violates the sovereignty of countries and the 
freedom of nations and individuals.  But when it comes to its 
victims, the millions of humans in Iraq, no one has the right to ask 
why this is happening, although it has reached the level of a human 
tragedy. 
 
"The United States and Britain occupied Iraq using formidable 
military power.  They destroyed the country's infrastructure and 
opened the doors wide for acts of killing and looting.  So they 
alone are legally and ethically responsible for the human tragedies 
and the heinous crimes that take place in the country.  This 
dictates that everyone tell them loudly:  You deliberately destroyed 
Iraq and you have to mend what you spoiled and atone for the crimes 
you committed against a people and an independent country member of 
the United Nations.  It is really regrettable that they have not 
been told this...." 
 
--------------------------- 
 
"Words that Have No Credit" 
 
--------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Ali Buzah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (4/20):  "Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's talk about 
negotiations over the Arab peace plan was meant for consumption and 
to remarket Israel and polish its image, which hit rock bottom 
against the background of its bloody terrorism, crimes, and 
violations.... 
 
"Israeli leaders are used to maneuvers and deception, and Israel has 
 
 
always been a factor of chaos, tension, and wars, not a factor of 
peace and stability.... 
 
"It is an illusion to count on Israel's talk about peace.... The 
road to peace is known, and international resolutions and the 
Security Council are the shortest and easiest way to achieve it.... 
"Without this, there will be no stability and the situation in the 
region will remain open to all possibilities and disastrous 
repercussions...." 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Insistence on Failure" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned 
al-Thawra, wrote (4/22):  "The US Defense secretary warned the Iraqi 
government that the security responsibility of the American troops 
will not run forever.... 
 
"The American secretary suggests that his country has nothing to do 
with the lack of security and other  elements of life in Iraq.... 
 
"If US occupation forces refuse to withdraw from Iraq and at the 
same time refuse to control security, then what are they doing?  Why 
are they staying in Iraq, especially since their presence is a 
factor of division and friction among the Iraqis...?" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"Iraqis Do not Look for Repatriation; 
 This Is no Solution" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Muhyi al-Din al-Muhammad, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishrin, wrote (4/22):  "It was not surprising for the 27 members of 
the European Union to declare their opposition to the idea of 
repatriating a number of Iraqis who had been forcibly displaced and 
are now present in Jordan, Syria, and neighboring countries.... 
 
"Everyone, including the Americans and Europeans, has returned to 
open a dialogue with Syria on the problems of Iraq and the problems 
of the region.  This return is not to exchange benefits and to 
conclude deals as some suspect politicians like to portray it.  This 
return is due to the fact that these politicians have become 
convinced of the soundness and correctness of the Syrian stand and 
of the farsightedness that Syria's policies enjoy.  Syria does not 
spare any effort to strengthen national security as well as Arab and 
regional security.  Its opposition to the occupation of Iraq before 
it took place and its opposition to the continuation of the 
occupation or the division of Iraq are not meant to achieve narrow 
gains.  They are meant to safeguard the interests of the Iraqi 
people and the interests of the peoples of the region.  They are 
meant to safeguard Arab, regional, and international security as 
well as the security of the people of the United States itself who 
are plagued with an extremist administration...." 
 
---------------------------------- 
 
"Bush Is not Entrusted with Sudan" 
 
---------------------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, a commentator in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, commented (4/22):  "President Bush stated that his 
patience toward Sudan has limits and that he is giving the Sudanese 
president a last chance to comply with the demands of the 
international community.... 
 
The US president used arrogant imperial language and encroached upon 
a sovereign and independent country..... Regardless of the situation 
in Darfur, no one in the world can accept this language, which goes 
 
 
beyond all bounds of tact and diplomacy.... 
 
"No one can believe that the perpetrator of crimes in Iraq has 
compassion for the people of Sudan and Darfur...." 
 
Corbin