07DAMASCUS33
Syria/Iraq, Syria/US, Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian
Wed Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0033/01 0101249
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101249Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2769
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6490
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4272
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2877
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7447
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1494
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4835
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1054
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7178UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Syria/Iraq, Syria/US, Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian 
Territories (12/28) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:   Syrian papers on Dec. 28 reported that President Asad 
received a message from Iraqi President Jalal Talabani.  The message 
was handed by the Iraqi President's special envoy Fakhri Karim 
during a meeting with Asad.  Talks dealt with developments in Iraq 
and bilateral relations. 
 
Papers also reported that Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal 
emphasized, in an interview with al-Jazeera satellite channel on 
Dec. 28, that Syria's positions on the region's issues are firm and 
will never be changed, adding that "those who called for wars, 
re-mapping the region and establishing the so-called New Middle east 
have changed."  "All attempts to isolate Syria have failed," Bilal 
said, pointing to the European and US governmental and parliamentary 
officials who have been visiting Syria for consultations.  "Syria 
has always called for dialogue and peaceful solutions," the Minister 
noted, adding that the problem with the US is to find just solutions 
for the region's problems.  As for the Baker-Hamilton report, 
Minister Bilal pointed out that the report confirms Syria's correct 
position.  On President Asad's latest visit to Russia, the Minister 
described the visit as very successful, referring to the historic 
friendship connecting Syria and Russia. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a message from Iraqi President Talabani 
through VP Shara" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/28) 
 
"Information Minister Bilal:  All attempts to isolate Syria have 
failed.  The problem of the US is in finding just solutions" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/28) 
 
"The popular sit-in continues.  Lebanese opposition prepares 
parliamentary petition to bring Al-Saniora to trial.  MP Saed:  The 
aim of persistence in the International Tribunal is to retaliate 
against the resistance" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/28) 
 
"Abbas awaits Secretary Rice's visit to revive 'back channels' for 
talks between Palestinians and Israelis.  Olmert gives orders to 
launch limited military operation in the West Bank.  Israel defers 
tension-easing measures on Palestinians" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
12/28) 
 
"Five US soldiers, three Latvians killed in Iraq.  The Al-Sadr 
movement announces the killing of one of its leaders by US fire" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/28) 
 
"Italian police capture a Mossad agent" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
12/28) 
 
"The Arab League demands that Ethiopia withdraw from Somalia" 
(Government-owned Tishren, 12/28) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
"Will the Bush Administration Listen to Sensible People?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, commented 
(12/28):  "Day after day visitors to Damascus come to learn the 
solid fact that Syria plays a basic and important role in the issues 
of the region and to discover Syria's sincere willingness to 
establish a just and comprehensive peace in a region that has 
suffered wars and tragedies for more than a century.... 
 
"Senator Specter believes that dialogue with Syria is necessary and 
that Congress must confront President Bush if he insists on not 
opening a dialogue with Damascus.... 
 
"Specter's statements offer new proof of the failure of American 
policy toward the issues of the region, from Iraq to Lebanon to the 
desired Middle East peace on which the Bush administration has 
 
turned its back over six long years.... 
 
"Instead of using its political, military, and economic weight as a 
factor of stability, working for calm, peace, and prosperity, the 
United States used its influence and strike force to escalate 
conflicts, ignite wars, and feed sectarian and ethnic chauvinism in 
this region.... 
"Is it not time the US Administration listen to the sensible people 
of the world, including Americans, and reconsider its reckless 
policies, which have brought tragedies upon the world and disgrace 
upon Americans?  We hope the Bush administration will listen to the 
wise people.  It is still not too late, and better late than 
never." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"We Are Ready For Peace, But..." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (12/28):   "The Syrian people are convinced that Israel 
has never been serious about or ready for peace.  If the calls 
coming from Israel are indeed responsive to the desire for peace, it 
is easy to prove sincerity through actions, simply returning the 
Golan and the occupied Arab territories.... 
 
"Current calls for dialogue and peace reflect a real need to take 
tangible steps in this regard.  Such steps must be made under a main 
headline:  the return of the occupied Golan and the occupied Arab 
territories and the achievement of a settlement providing for the 
establishment of an independent Palestinian state.... 
 
"Peacemaking needs wisdom, and we wonder if there are wise people in 
Israel and its backer, the United States...." 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"Too Difficult to Be Treated" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Khalid al-Ashhab, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(12/28):  "Despite all its foolish political and ideological acts 
and its bitter defeat in the midterm elections, the US 
Administration continues to act as if it were a political master, 
not only in the concepts of democracy but also in international 
relations. 
 
"Nations of the world, the American people in the lead, have come to 
realize that the Bush administration is the most unsuccessful 
teacher and practitioner of democracy and the worst model of 
relations among countries and societies, as it has brought upon the 
United States and the American people tremendous world hatred and 
hostility.... 
 
"It is not easy for a political mind used to stupidity and blunder, 
wrapped in arrogance and haughtiness, suddenly to become smart and 
shrewd and to turn against itself and its components only because it 
has seen its mistakes with its own eyes. 
 
"This explains the response that the US Administration gave to the 
initiative for dialogue that Syria launched through President Asad 
in Moscow.... 
 
"We might find some excuse for the Bush administration when it shows 
some inflexibility, as this is in harmony with much of its policy. 
But we find no excuse for it when it threatens people with a big 
stone it has grown too weak to budge, let alone carry!" 
 
--------------------- 
 
"Somalia, a New Iraq" 
 
--------------------- 
 
 
Hanan Hamad, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(12/28):  "The soft Arab League statement on the Somali war reflects 
a state of weakness that dominates the Arab order.... 
 
"Instead of working to activate dialogue among Somali parties and 
achieve reconciliation and stability in the country, Arabs allowed 
one of the Somali parties to draw strength from foreigners. 
Neighbor Ethiopia came to clone Washington's experience in Iraq: 
'An act of self defense' but on the land of others.  A flagrant 
interference in the domestic affairs of an independent country and a 
member of the Arab League and the United Nations continues until 
'the accomplishment of the mission' under the pretext of supporting 
'legitimacy' and promoting democracy and 'international law....' 
 
"Once again the Arab order fails to defend an Arab country against 
foreign invasion, feeling content with appeals and expressions of 
concern. The rest is known." 
 
Corbin