07DAMASCUS157
Iran/Syria, Syria/Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian Territories
Tue Feb 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0157/01 0511001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201001Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2980
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6581
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4349
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2963
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7519
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1577
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4915
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1128
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7252UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000157 
 
SIPDIS 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Iran/Syria, Syria/Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian Territories 
(2/16-19) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The major topic in Syrian papers over the weekend was 
President Asad's state visit to Iran, which commenced on Feb. 17. 
All papers reported Asad's talks with Iranian President Mahmud 
Ahmadinezhad;  Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei, Supreme Leader of 
Iranian Islamic Revolution;  Ali Larijani, Secretary of the Iranian 
Supreme National Security Council;  and Foreign Minister Manouchehr 
Mottaki.  Banner headlines on Feb. 19 featured a joint statement by 
Asad and Ahmadinejad at the end of the visit.  Both Presidents 
expressed satisfaction with all meetings and praised their 
"friendly, cooperative and constructive atmosphere."  The statement 
condemned the continuing, aggressive Israeli expansion policy in the 
region, voicing total support for restoration of the Golan to Syria. 
 They also condemned Israeli's attempt to destroy parts of the 
al-Aqsa Mosque.  The joint statement welcomed the Mecca accord on 
formation of a Palestinian national unity government, expressing 
full support for Palestinian unity. 
 
Both sides expressed support for the Iraqi government and Iraq's 
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty and for the 
efforts of the Iraqi government and others aimed at achieving 
national reconciliation, rejecting sectarian sedition and 
challenging conspiracies. 
 
The statement confirmed the importance of boosting Lebanese national 
unity and concordance and supporting all that the Lebanese may agree 
upon in a way that ensures Lebanon's stability, security and 
territorial integrity. 
 
Both Presidents emphasized Iran's right to possess peaceful nuclear 
technology and said that the issue must be dealt with through the 
International Atomic Energy Agency.  They said that the "issue must 
be handled by dialogue and diplomatic means without preconditions". 
Both sides reiterated the importance of ridding the Middle East of 
WMD. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"The Tehran Summit confirms solid Syrian-Iranian relations. 
President Asad:  Playing the last card on the Arab and Islamic 
streets will fail.  President Ahmadinejad:  Syria and Iran are 
influential players in the region.  The final communique:  We 
support what the Lebanese agree upon....  We call for ending Israeli 
occupation of Arab territories....  We support maintenance of Iraq's 
unity and identity....  We call for ridding the region of WMD.... 
We are satisfied with economic cooperation" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 2/19) 
 
"Syrian-Iranian summit is held in Tehran.  President Asad and his 
Iranian President Ahmadinejad discuss boosting economic and 
investment cooperation, confirm support for Iraq's territorial 
integrity and the Iraqi political process and welcome the Mecca 
Accord among Palestinians" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/18) 
 
"The Palestinian Authority calls for giving a chance to the 
forthcoming government" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/18) 
 
"Bush disappoints Abbas' hopes and aborts Rice's initiative:  No 
dialogue with the new Palestinian government-Al-Ba'th, 2/18) 
 
"US Secretary of State Rice arrives on a surprise visit to Baghdad 
to discuss the new security plan. The total of US soldiers killed in 
Iraq estimated at 3132" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/18) 
 
"US presidential candidate Richardson calls on the US Administration 
to hold dialogue with Syria" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/18) 
 
"The US Senate endorses non-binding resolution objecting to Bush's 
plan on Iraq.  Democrats:  First step to cut financing for Iraq war" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/18) 
 
"The Lebanese opposition rejects foreign interference in Lebanon's 
affairs.  AL Secretary General:  The Arab initiative to solve the 
Lebanese crisis still valid" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/18) 
 
"Hizbollah SecGen Hasan Nasrallah:  What is taking place now is a 
continuation of the Israeli war against Lebanon....  There are some 
powers of the February 14 team sacrificing this country for their 
personal interests.  Hizbollah:  We were victorious militarily and 
will be politically as well" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/17) 
 
"US Defense Secretary Gates and Chief of Staff Gen. Pace:  No 
evidence of Iran's involvement in attacks against US troops... US 
Congress today vetoes Iraq strategy" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
2/17) 
 
"Lebanese prisoner al-Kintar:  Junblat is a small agent" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/17) 
 
"A Republican Congressman calls for real dialogue with Syria" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/17) 
 
"President Asad urges Palestinians and Iraqis to adhere to national 
unity.  President Asad to Iraqi Parliament Speaker:  We support the 
political process in Iraq.  President Asad to Khaled Mishaal, Hamas 
Politburo:  We support what Palestinians agree upon. 
President Asad to Iraqi Minister of State for National 
Reconciliation:  It is important to achieve national reconciliation" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/16) 
 
"In two phone calls to President Asad, Hanieh and Abbas thank Syria 
for its efforts to achieve a national unity government" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/16) 
 
"Discourse of insults causes Lebanese disgust.         Talal Arslan, 
President of the Lebanese Democratic Party:  It is absolutely an 
Israeli discourse.  Fathi Yakan, President of the Islamic Action 
Movement in Lebanon:  It is the discourse of hopelessness and 
despair" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/16) 
 
"Lebanese professor of international law al-Ghatit: The 
International Tribunal threatens Lebanese sovereignty" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/16) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
"Solid Relations and a Friendship Unshakable by Threats" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Ilyas Murad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al-Ba'th, wrote 
(2/18):  "President Asad's visit to Iran is not as some people are 
trying to portray it through misleading leaks and reports.  Syria 
and Iran are key countries in the region and the world.  They are 
bound by close and important relations and identical positions on 
many international issues in general and regional issues in 
particular.... 
 
"There are attempts to weaken Arabs, especially Syria and the 
Palestinians, in their confrontation against and opposition to the 
Israeli plan, and to weaken Syria in any forthcoming peace 
negotiations. 
 
"Perhaps some people are not pleased that we are adopting this 
logic, the logic of cooperation between Arabs and Iran, because they 
are involved in the American plan in the region.  Our question to 
these people is:  Where is the Arab interest in an Arab-Iranian 
dispute or conflict?  What is the national interest in promoting 
hostility between Arabs and Persians?  And where is the interest of 
Islamic countries in a conflict of a denominational nature between 
countries or groups in the region...? 
 
"At any rate, some of these parties know the dangers of the plan 
that is designed for the region but are still involved in it and 
constitute a link in its chain.  Others are helpless.  Yet others 
are, regrettably, being used as tools that will be thrown away when 
they have expired...." 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
"Catastrophic Dependence on Assumptions" 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(2/18):  "The US Administration, in its disregard for the House of 
Representatives' resolution on Iraq, and before it for the 
Baker-Hamilton committee's recommendations, appears as if 
deliberately threatening US national interests.... 
 
"Democrats appear determined to curb the escalatory plans of 
President Bush, who has not yet realized the disastrous nature of 
his foreign policy.... 
 
"Unrealistic US assumptions on Iraq have produced a disaster in that 
country.... It will be catastrophic to believe unrealistic American 
assumptions and claims regarding Iran, as this might pose a greater 
threat to the security and stability of the region and the whole 
world...." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"Fruits of Constructive Chaos" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(2/18):  "Violence has continued in Baghdad and other Iraqi regions 
after the start of the Baghdad security plan. 
 
"The US Congress endorsed a new resolution against President Bush's 
strategy....  There are conflicting American statements about the 
involvement of Iraq's neighbors in the violence in that country. 
 
"All this proves once again that Bush and his team do not really 
have a new strategy to end the security chaos in Iraq, just as they 
do not have a plan for withdrawal from that disaster-stricken 
country.  What is happening is nothing but attempts to mislead 
people...." 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"The Merchants of Blood and Politics" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (2/18):  "That is what the leaders of the 14 
February forces in Lebanon are:  merchants of blood and politics.... 
 
 
"They offered yet another proof that they trade in blood and 
politics when they exploited the anniversary of the martyrdom of 
former Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri to escape from their political 
defeats and cover them by a double assault.  First, they targeted 
the nationalist forces, primarily the resistance, for their 
rejection of the conspiratorial plan that seeks to move Lebanon away 
from its historical position and turn it into a fertile soil for 
plots and pressure against Syria and Arab forces that reject the 
plans of American, Israeli, and Western hegemony in the region. 
Second, they targeted Syria because it adheres to its national and 
pan-Arab principles.... 
 
"Those leaders, and with them the foreign forces, from which they 
draw strength, resented the fact that the Lebanese people rallied 
around their nationalist forces and dispelled the illusion that 
those leaders represented the majority.  They found no other way to 
express their resentment, hatred, ignobility, and rancor than 
launching vicious campaigns against anyone who played a role in 
exposing their conspiratorial roles and hired connections with 
foreigners as designed by [US] Ambassador Feltman and the hints of 
Olmert.  Through these campaigns they want to mislead the people 
about the crisis they created in the country, a crisis they hope 
will push Lebanon once again to domestic fighting in keeping with 
and in response to the policy of targeted chaos to which the United 
 
States turned to compensate for the failure of its Middle East 
plan...." 
 
-------------- 
 
"US Blackmail" 
 
-------------- 
 
Samir al-Shibani, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote on (2/17):  "As much as the Mecca agreement between Fatah and 
HAMAS caused satisfaction and left a positive climate in the 
Palestinian and Arab arenas, it angered Americans and Israelis 
because it foiled their plans for and bets on a Palestinian civil 
war.... 
 
"The US Administration is practicing blackmail against Palestinians 
by setting conditions for dealing with their national unity 
government.... 
 
"It wants the upcoming government to recognize Israel as a gesture 
of goodwill.  It forgets that the party that needs to show goodwill 
is Israel, which has offered nothing over the past six decades but 
death, crimes, and the assassination of trees, stones, air, and 
peace.... 
 
"Through its position, the US Administration shares with Israel its 
crimes against Arabs, humanity, and the United Nations.... 
 
"To confront this blind bias, the national unity government must be 
formed and the Mecca agreement must be protected.  Also, effective 
Arab solidarity must be built to confront the numerous challenges 
and dangers that target the nation from the Gulf to the Ocean.  This 
solidarity is an objective that all Arabs must work to realize." 
 
Corbin