07DAMASCUS21
US/Russia, Syria/Israel, Syria/Iraq, Syria/EU, HAMAS,
Tue Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0021/01 0090518
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 090518Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2752
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6481
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4263
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2868
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7438
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1485
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4826
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1045
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7168UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000021 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  US/Russia, Syria/Israel, Syria/Iraq, Syria/EU, HAMAS, 
Lebanon, Bush's Strategy on Iraq (1/5-7) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers over the weekend reported that the 
Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has criticized the latest US 
sanctions against Russian arms firms for "selling arms to Syria," 
describing these sanctions as "groundless."  The Ministry said in a 
statement that "yet once again, the United States is embarking on 
this vicious circle." "As a result of its politicized actions, the 
American state also denies itself and US firms the right to 
cooperate with our advanced companies," Russia's Foreign Ministry 
said. "In business language, this is called 'lost opportunities'," 
the statement added. 
 
Papers also reported that Israeli security chiefs recommended to 
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert that he open a secret channel of talks 
with Syria. Yedioth Ahronot quoted a security official as saying 
Israel believed Asad was truly interested in renewing peace 
negotiations with Israel. 
 
On the execution of former Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, Syrian 
papers reported Syria's astonishment at the timing the execution and 
its hope this would not destabilize Iraq. In an interview with 
Al-Jazeera, Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal said the execution 
of the former Iraqi President was "painful and catastrophic" since 
it came on the first day of Eid Al-Adha and with Eid's prayers as 
well as with Muslim pilgrims' visit to Mecca where there is safety, 
peace and fraternity. "Making public the fearful photos of Saddam 
Hussein's execution is considered a breach of the simplest 
principles and international agreements," Dr. Bilal said voicing 
Syria's hope this would not "inflame the situation in Iraq nor 
contribute to destabilizing Iraq again." Dr. Bilal also expressed 
Syria's hope that this execution would not destabilize the political 
process that Syria wants to go ahead to build an integrated and 
independent Iraq who is an active member in the international 
community and the Arab League. 
 
Papers also reported that the Arab-British Organization announced 
that a delegation including European and British MPs will visit 
Syria and Lebanon to be briefed on the situation in the region.  In 
a statement issued Jan. 6, the organization said the delegation will 
be informed about the aftermath of the recent Israeli aggression 
against Lebanon and the latest developments in the region.  The 
source said that the delegation will include former president of the 
EU commission Jacques Santer, Lord David Steel, former British 
Secretary of State for International Development Clair Short, and 
 
SIPDIS 
British parliament members John Grogen and John Mann in addition to 
others. 
 
Government-owned Al-Thawra on Jan. 5 reported that HAMAS political 
bureau Chief Khalid Mish'al delivered a speech in Al-Zahra Mosque 
after Friday prayers, which were attended by thousands of 
worshippers. The paper said that Mish'al discussed the message of 
jihad in Palestine and the nation's duty of protecting mujahidin. It 
said Mish'al stressed the need to prevent infighting in Palestine 
because it serves Israel's objectives. Mish'al answered questions 
from worshippers on HAMAS's policy in the government and parliament 
and the efforts that are being made to prevent civil war among the 
Palestinians. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Russia protests US sanctions on some Russian companies for selling 
arms to Syria:  We work according to our international legislations 
and international commitments" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/7) 
 
"Israeli security chiefs recommend to Prime Minister Ehud Olmert to 
open a secret channel of talks with Syria" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/7) 
 
"Lebanon:  A massive laborers' strike on Tuesday in Beirut.  Berri 
warns the governing team: The team will regret foiling Arab 
initiatives on reconciliation. Aoun: We call for early 
parliamentarian elections. Al-Hoss:  Israel is our real enemy. 
Arslan:  The February 14 group is the godfather of a US agenda" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/7) 
 
"Israel reiterates rejection to release the Lebanese prisoner Samir 
Qentar" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/7) 
 
"Israel deeply penetrates the Gaza Strip. Palestinian President 
Mahmoud Abbas decides to consider the executive authority as 
illegal.  The Palestinian government describes the decision as 
hasty, resulting from provocation" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/7) 
"Washington and Paris object to announcing names of countries that 
failed to cooperate with the UN investigating commission's new chief 
Serge Brammertz" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/7) 
 
"The Iraqi People Conference warns against silence on armed groups. 
Assaults in Baghdad following the new security plan" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/7) 
 
"British-European Parliamentary delegation visits Syria" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/6) 
 
"A US writer: The July war has surprised decision- makers in 
Washington" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/6) 
 
"Egyptian President Mubarak: America blocks peace between Syria and 
Israel" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/6) 
 
"President Bush to send more troops to Iraq" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/6) 
 
"A lady to purify the US Congress! Nancy Pelosi calls on Syria and 
Iran to join a regional dialogue over Iraq" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/6) 
 
"Mike McConnell is named as new Director of US Intelligence and John 
Negroponte becomes Rice's Deputy" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/6) 
 
"Four Palestinians martyred, 20 injured in an Israel incursion into 
Ramallah.  Abbas and Hanieh meet to halt confrontations in the Gaza 
Strip" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/5) 
 
"Former Lebanese PM Al-Hoss: Lebanon is at a critical juncture. 
Hizbollah depicts meeting with Saudi king as frank" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/5) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------- 
 
"Bush's New Strategy" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jammali, a commentator in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (1/5):  "President Bush's new strategy in Iraq will 
apparently be based on two factors: rejecting withdrawal from Iraq 
and continuing war in that country for eight, ten, or more years.... 
 
 
"The Bush administration refuses to accept the logic that withdrawal 
from Iraq is the only way for an honorable exit from the crisis and 
for the restoration of the United States' international standing and 
prestige. Rather, it insists on achieving a victory it knows more 
than others will never come. The evidence is that the harvest of 
four years of war was a miserable failure to turn Iraq into a model 
of the American plan in the Middle East, and a military and 
strategic impasse for the United States similar or even worse than 
Vietnam.... 
 
"The strategy of a continuous war in Iraq would only mean further 
American and Iraqi losses.... President Bush might be planning to 
fight until the last American soldier...." 
----------- 
 
"Civil Strife" 
 
----------- 
 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (1/6):  "They wanted Saddam Hussein's hanging to provoke 
civil strife par excellence. It would be naivety bordering on 
stupidity for anyone to rule out that the timing of the execution 
was booby-trapped and preplanned. 
 
"Although it is not useful to focus on the timing as if it were the 
problem, the timing, added to the events that led up to the 
execution and to what happened during and after the hanging, proves 
beyond a doubt that the aim was to open a new door to civil strife, 
to be added to the many doors that the presence of the occupation 
opened and inflamed in many ways. 
 
"The execution is part of a general scheme that is no longer secret 
to anyone, a scheme planned and implemented very carefully by the 
occupation. 
 
"The sympathy Saddam Hussein won while on the gallows was definitely 
not sympathy for Saddam Hussein as Saddam Hussein. Rather, it was a 
manifestation of anger and outrage at the policies of the US 
Administration. 
 
"The Bush administration did everything in its power to make Saddam 
Hussein's image better than it was before the occupation. It simply 
made Iraq's situation much worse than it was during Saddam's rule. 
 
"It is ridiculous for Bush to say that he was hoping to see the 
execution carried out in an appropriate manner! 
 
"The timing, the reason, the holding of the trial under occupation, 
and then the leak of images that stir sentiments of strife were the 
last things that the Iraqis needed at this stage. 
 
"This takes place just before Bush's announcement of a new strategy. 
The parts that have been leaked of this strategy so far give a 
strong impression that the Bush administration has not learned from 
its previous lessons. While we expect correction of mistakes, the 
United States surprises the world with its ability to continue to 
commit follies.... 
 
"At any rate, the steps before the announcement of Bush's new 
strategy do not indicate that the US Administration has learned the 
lessons it received in the recent years. 
 
------------- 
 
"First Signs" 
 
------------- 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(1/6): "President Bush's political movement is extremely restricted 
now that the Democratic Party controls Congress.... 
 
"Democrats now insist on opening the thorny files the Bush 
administration has embroiled Americans in and through which it has 
brought disasters, bad reputation, and world public hostility upon 
the American people and the United States.... 
 
"The discussion of Guantanamo, the Iraq war, secret prisons, and 
other issues will constitute a de facto trial of the 
neoconservatives' policy and extremist doctrine...." 
 
Roebuck