07DUSSELDORF22
A TALE OF TWO MOSQUES:  A SNAPSHOT OF MUSLIM INTEGRATION IN
Mon Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Dusseldorf
VZCZCXRO5172
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHDF #0022/01 1761553
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251553Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL DUSSELDORF
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0083
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHDF/AMCONSUL DUSSELDORF 0096UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DUSSELDORF 000022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KISL GM
SUBJECT: A TALE OF TWO MOSQUES:  A SNAPSHOT OF MUSLIM INTEGRATION IN 
GERMANY 
 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000022  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified -- Not for Internet Distribution 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The ongoing dispute surrounding the 
construction of a new mosque in Cologne in North 
Rhine-Westphalia (NRW), the "capital of Islam" in Germany, has 
become a symbol for the challenges that continue to exist 
between Muslims and mainstream German society.  While all the 
main political parties and most leading civic organizations 
support the mosque, the plans have sparked a controversy that 
continues to make national headlines.  In contrast, a mosque in 
Duisburg, another major center of Muslim life in the state, is 
nearing completion and has gone up virtually without 
controversy.  This dichotomy illustrates that Muslim integration 
in NRW is moving forward, but not without a few bumps along the 
road.  End Summary. 
 
Out of the Factory and into the Limelight 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) A new mosque, which will be Germany's largest when 
completed, is scheduled to be built in the Ehrenfeld district of 
Cologne.  The mosque will replace one that grew out of an old 
factory and that has been a place of worship for Muslims for 
over 20 years.  It has also served as the national headquarters 
of the Turkish Islamic Union of the State (Turkish) Agency for 
Religious Affairs (DITIB).  Described by Marlis Brederhorst, 
Cologne's senior integration official, as something "the Muslim 
community can be proud of," current plans include a dome at over 
113 feet and two minarets at 180 feet each, 1/3 the size of the 
Cologne Cathedral -- the most important monument in NRW.  With a 
capacity of 2,000 worshipers (almost ten times as many as now), 
it will accommodate a large community center, shops, and 
continue to house DITIB headquarters.  The largest Muslim 
organization in Germany, DITIB (which operates approximately 900 
mosques in Germany), will fully fund its construction.  All 
mainstream political parties, including Lord Mayor of Cologne 
Fritz Schramma (CDU) and NRW Minister-President Juergen 
Ruettgers (CDU), have unanimously supported the plans for the 
mosque.  Plans had moved forward virtually without conflict or 
controversy -- until recently. 
 
Far-Right Political Group Tries to Highjack Debate 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3.  (U) A small, vocal, far-right populist group "Pro Koeln," 
(which won five seats on the Cologne City Council with an 
anti-immigrant platform in the 2004 local elections) has stepped 
up its opposition to the mosque in recent months, exploiting the 
concerns of local residents about traffic and noise problems and 
trying to frame the mosque as an "attack on German cultural 
values."  Pro Koeln has organized various forms of protest, 
including a petition, collecting 23,000 signatures against the 
mosque (of which some 7,000 signatures were fraudulent), trying 
(unsuccessfully) to disrupt a recent town hall meeting, and 
holding a demonstration in Cologne on June 16 (which suffered 
from low participation (ca 150 participants)).  In response, 
supporters of the mosque, including political parties, church 
groups, and trade unions, have mobilized various forms of 
support, including a counter demonstration June 16 which drew 
more than three times as many participants as the anti-mosque 
procession. 
 
Angry Rhetoric Makes National Headlines 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) While Pro Koeln has not succeeded in stopping the 
project, Ralph Giordano, a Holocaust survivor and well known 
liberal German author, has joined opponents, bringing the 
controversy further -- and national -- attention.  His strong 
criticism of the project has demonstrated that not all mosque 
opponents are on the right margins of society.  Giordano has 
managed both to offend Muslims and to call into question his 
credibility within the German intellectual community.  Calling 
the project "a false signal of successful integration," he has 
charged that it represents "liberal western values being put on 
the defensive."  His message, however, has been clouded by 
offensive comments, including a reference to women wearing 
burkas as "human penguins," for which he has also received death 
threats.  Political and religious leaders have condemned these 
threats.  NRW Minister for Family, Women, and Integration Armin 
Laschet (CDU) has said publicly that he disagrees with Giordano 
on these points "but he should be able to criticize the mosque 
without threats to his life." 
 
Some Local Citizens say they are Overlooked and Overshadowed 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Neighborhood residents have criticized politicians and 
DITIB for not involving them in the proposal and decision-making 
process from the start.  A senior Integration Ministry official 
described DITIB as being "arrogant" in this case, telling us 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000022  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
"Because DITIB wants to build the new mosque at the site of its 
present headquarters they didn't see the need to involve local 
residents.  It was a major mistake made by a group that should 
know better."  A senior Turkish diplomat in Cologne recently 
conceded to the CG that "the consultation process began very 
late."  DITIB only recently informed neighbors about the plans, 
immediately prompting concerns about traffic and noise.  While 
these concerns have been dwarfed by the publicity around the 
statements from Pro Koeln and Giordano, attempts have been made 
to address the more practical concerns, including a town hall 
meeting at a local school and public relations campaigns.  A 
recent meeting drew approximately 800 citizens -- many more 
spoke in favor of the mosque than against it. 
 
The Numbers Have It:  Idea of Mosque Supported, its Size 
Questioned 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
¶6.  (U) The residents' criticisms have also resonated within the 
district and city CDU, whose leaders support the mosque in 
principle, but unlike the state party leadership, do so with 
reservations.  In an effort to placate their constituents, local 
CDU leaders have drafted a list of demands, in particular about 
the dimensions of the mosque, to be presented at a local party 
convention to be held in August.  Faced with the growing public 
awareness and concern about the size of the mosque, Lord Mayor 
Fritz Schramma, who initially supported the mosque without 
reservation, recently stated that the size of the mosque ought 
to be reconsidered.  A recent poll in Cologne showed that 35.5% 
of respondents support the mosque without reservation, with an 
additional 27% in support of the mosque if it is built on a 
smaller scale. 
 
Muslim Community Tries to Address Concerns 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Mehmet Guenet, a lawyer and spokesman for DITIB, told 
the press recently that the organization understands the traffic 
concerns and is willing to work to resolve them.  He also stated 
that sermons will be in Turkish, but that a German summary will 
be given at the end and that on special occasions there will be 
simultaneous translations.  Furthermore, a senior Turkish 
diplomat in Duesseldorf told the CG that in an effort to address 
noise concerns there will not be a call to prayer, adding that 
he would not be surprised if the dimensions of the mosque were 
reduced. 
 
The Selection of the Architect -- an Open and Transparent Process 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) While DITIB and city politicians neglected to inform 
local residents of their plans and solicit their feedback early 
in the process, local media have reported that the architect was 
selected in an open and transparent manner.  DITIB followed the 
procedures for the erection of public buildings without being 
required to do so, and an architectural competition was held 
with a prominent and representative selection committee, 
including an individual from the Cologne Cathedral.  The 
committee selected the famous German architect Paul Boehm whose 
progressive design symbolizes openness and transparency.  Boehm 
has traditionally designed churches and this is his first mosque 
design.  The senior Turkish diplomat in Duesseldorf observed 
that the committee wanted to send a strong message to the host 
city and host culture by choosing a German architect. 
 
Duisburg Mosque:  A Mosque Without Controversy ... 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Just forty-five minutes away by car from the proposed 
mosque site in Cologne, another DITIB mosque is being 
constructed in Duisburg, home to over 100,000 Muslims.  When 
completed (est Dec 2007), this mosque will be the largest in 
Germany, at least until the Cologne site is complete.  This 
project, however, has experienced notably less controversy, 
despite its size.  In fact, the only major news surrounding this 
project followed reports that the construction company building 
the mosque is partly owned by a sympathizer of the right wing 
extremist NPD party.  Several senior officials at the Ministry 
of Integration attribute this lack of controversy to the fact 
that DITIB did its due diligence and involved the community.  In 
addition, of the estimated 7.7 million Euro construction cost, 
NRW and the EU are funding 3.2 million to finance the large 
attached community center. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Despite the controversy, few observers doubt the 
Cologne mosque will be built.  The right to build a mosque at 
this site is undisputed, the decision cannot be appealed, and 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000022  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the project has overwhelming political support.  It remains to 
be seen, however, whether the mosque will be built as designed. 
The debate surrounding this mosque is not unique; mosques in 
other parts of Germany have experienced them as well.  Of the 
over 750 operating mosques (many of which have been converted 
from previous buildings) in NRW, virtually all have been 
established without dispute.  Aside from the lack of 
consultation in the Cologne case, location has also been a 
factor in the different public reactions in these two cases. 
The mosque in Duisburg is being built in a predominantly 
industrial neighborhood on the outskirts of town, while the 
mosque in Cologne (though not in the city center) will occupy a 
much more prominent site in a district of the Rhineland's 
ancient capital.  These cases demonstrate that Muslim 
integration is moving forward in NRW, but not without bumps 
along the way. 
 
¶11.  (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
BOYSE