07FRANKFURT171
NATIONAL FDP MEETS IN STUTTGART, SEEKS TO REPRESENT "THE
Fri Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO6710
OO RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #0171 0121210
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121210Z JAN 07
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9087
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS FRANKFURT 000171 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV GM
SUBJECT: NATIONAL FDP MEETS IN STUTTGART, SEEKS TO REPRESENT "THE 
FORGOTTEN MIDDLE CLASS" 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: At this year's annual "Three Kings" gathering of the 
national Free Democratic Party (FDP) on January 6 in Stuttgart, 
party leader Guido Westerwelle used the occasion to stake out a 
middle-of-the-road course for his party -- seeking to change the 
reputation of the FDP as a party for the well-to-do elite who lack a 
social conscience to a party which represents the interests of 
Germany's middle class.  At the same time, he revived his vision of 
turning the FDP into Germany's third "Volkspartei" (major political 
party).  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
FDP Reaches Out to Germany's "Forgotten Middle Class" 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2.  The FDP continued a 141 year tradition of German liberals 
(forebears of the modern FDP) meeting on "Three Kings Day" 
(Epiphany) to kick off the political year.  In his policy speech, 
Westerwelle criticized the national government for having lost its 
inner compass.  He complained that, while politicians address the 
needs of upper and lower income groups, as well as fringe elements 
on the left and right of the political spectrum, inadequate 
attention is given to the middle class.  Striking a populist tone, 
Westerwelle argued that the middle class pays the lion's share of 
taxes and other social costs, and that German society is based upon 
ordinary citizens who get up in the morning, raise their children, 
go to work, and save money to pay the mortgage.  "The FDP wants to 
be the advocate for this forgotten middle class" Westerwelle 
proclaimed.  Referring to the recent public exchange between 
national SPD leader/Rheinland-Pfalz Minister-President Kurt Beck and 
unemployed Hartz IV recipient Henrico Frank, Westerwelle stated that 
people who refuse several job offers should not be supported by 
others' taxes.  Westerwelle also sharply attacked the 30% pay 
increase for Siemens management while, at the same time, thousands 
of Siemens employees are threatened with the loss of their jobs. 
"This behavior does not represent the social market economy; it is a 
slandering of the social market economy." 
 
----------------------------- 
Too Many German Troops Abroad 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3.  On foreign policy and engagement abroad, Westerwelle criticized 
the lack of an overall foreign affairs strategy from the national 
government.  He believes Germany's strengths in the world are its 
economic importance, its humanitarian assistance, and its discrete 
diplomacy.  Westerwelle repeated his position that military force 
should be the last resort rather than a starting point.  Westerwelle 
called upon the Grand Coalition not to cave in to pressures from 
abroad for expanded use of the German military.  In the case of 
Afghanistan, he said that Germany has fulfilled its obligation and 
done what they were sent there to accomplish.  In a thinly-veiled 
critique of coalition forces in southern Afghanistan, Westerwelle 
said "it is not our problem, if others have failed with their 
strategy of dropping bombs." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
FDP - A People's Party - Revival of an Old Project 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  Westerwelle announced that the FDP will continue to fight for a 
change of government and to work for a fairer and simpler tax 
system, less bureaucracy and a reform of the social system. 
Reminding the audience that 2006 was an extremely successful year 
for the Liberals in all four state elections, Westerwelle pointed 
out that, after the CDU and the SPD, the FDP is only the third 
German party that is successful in both East and West in contrast to 
the west-based Greens, the eastern PDS, and the Bavaria-only CSU. 
"What the CDU and SPD are losing will be absorbed by the FDP," he 
concluded, saying that the FDP must reach out to new groups within 
the German electorate. 
 
¶5.  COMMENT:  Westerwelle's goals of changing the image of the FDP 
and to turn it into a third "Volkspartei" are not new.  He broached 
similar ideas several years ago under the slogan "Project 18" 
(meaning at least 18% for the FDP), but without success.  The 
situation has changed since then.  Westerwelle has established the 
party as the most prominent opposition voice.  The Greens are still 
struggling with their role as an opposition party and have not yet 
recovered from the departure of former Foreign Minister Fischer from 
politics.  The Linkspartei.PDS has not been able to gain widespread 
acceptance in the west.  The FDP hopes to profit from a growing 
number of voters who are disappointed with the performance of the 
Grand Coalition.  It remains to be seen how successful the FDP will 
be in attracting these voters in future elections.  In the meantime, 
Westerwelle will continue his attempt to recast the FDP as the party 
of Germany's "forgotten" middle class.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶6.  This cable has been coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
POWELL