07HALIFAX81
LITTLE SUSPENSE IN THE DYING DAYS OF THE
Thu Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
VZCZCXRO6918
RR RUEHGA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHHA #0081 2771651
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041651Z OCT 07
FM AMCONSUL HALIFAX
TO RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0482
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1222
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHHA/AMCONSUL HALIFAX 1301UNCLAS HALIFAX 000081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV CA
SUBJECT: LITTLE SUSPENSE IN THE DYING DAYS OF THE 
NEWFOUNDLAND-LABRADOR PROVINCIAL ELECTION 
 
REF: HALIFAX 0077 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  In a campaign that has seen no direct U.S. 
interests emerge, Newfoundland-Labrador Premier Danny Williams 
appears to have sewn up solid support going into the October 9 
provincial election. Given that election-watchers believe there 
will be no stopping Williams and his Tory party, the consensus 
is the opposition forces will do well just to hold on to their 
slight representation in the legislature.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  Despite the best efforts of his opposition foes, Tory 
Premier Danny Williams appears destined to roll to an easy 
victory in the October 9 Newfoundland-Labrador provincial 
election (Reftel).  Williams, who entered the contest with a 
75-plus percent approval rating from the electorate, has been 
focusing his re-election campaign on his government's record 
since he scored an upset victory over the previous incumbent 
Liberal government in the 2003 provincial election.  High on his 
achievement list is the Premier's boast that the province has 
seen a momentous turnaround in its economy.  This, according to 
Williams, has not only seen a corresponding improvement in the 
province's fiscal health, but has brought new prosperity and 
inspired a new sense of pride and can-do attitude across the 
province. 
 
¶3.  The foundation for the Premier's successful campaign to date 
is his commitment to continue the fight to see his province gain 
all it can through development of its rich resources, 
particularly from offshore oil and gas projects.  While the 
Premier's get-tough approach has brought unprecedented benefits 
to the province, his stance has caused much angst among the 
large international oil companies, particularly U.S. energy 
giants such as Exxon Mobil and Chevron.  But as the pundits 
note, the bottom line is that these polices have resonated very 
well with the electorate and the voters seem more than willing 
to give the Premier a resounding vote of confidence on election 
day. 
 
¶4.  Given that background, election-watchers are united in their 
predictions that the Opposition Liberals and the third-place NDP 
will do well just to hold on to their seats.  At the time of the 
election call, the Liberals held only 11 of the 48 seats; the 
New Democratic Party had one, leaving the governing Tories with 
the remainder, minus two vacancies.  Liberal leader Gerry Reid 
acknowledged early on that there is little he could do to 
counter the premier's strong record. Instead, he has accusated 
the Tories of not ensuring that all areas of the province have 
shared equally in the province's various resource windfalls. 
 
¶5.  Likewise, the NDP, led by rookie leader Lorraine Michael, 
has zeroed in on this inequality theme, but Michael has also 
been accusing the Williams government of neglecting health care 
and services for seniors and failing to address rural poverty. 
Interestingly, while Michael is the lone NDP member in the 
legislature, pundits and the premier himself, give her high 
marks for effectiveness and political acumen, which they contend 
distinguish her from Reid, who is often accused of being too 
aggressive and bellicose.  The problem for the NDP is cashing in 
on Michael's image and translating it into new seats.  Because 
of its relative weakness, the party has always been in 
third-place and this time out, only had the resources to run 
candidates in 34 of the 48 districts. 
 
¶5.  COMMENT:  In an election campaign with no apparent direct 
U.S. interests, our contacts tell us the excitement among 
election-watchers is not over whether Williams will be 
victorious, but rather what his margin of victory will be. 
Barring any last-minute fumbles, we can find no one who believes 
that Premier Williams and his Tories won't be right back to work 
on October 10, laying the groundwork for mandate number-two. 
END COMMENT 
 
FOSTER