07HALIFAX12
MAPPING THE BORDER: MAINE-NEW BRUNSWICK CROSSINGS FROM FORT
Wed Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
VZCZCXRO5610
PP RUEHGA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHHA #0012/01 0732055
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 142055Z MAR 07
FM AMCONSUL HALIFAX
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1150
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHHA/AMCONSUL HALIFAX 1221UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HALIFAX 000012 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, CA/PPT/IA/WHTI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CPAS PTER PGOV PREL PHUM ELTN WHTI CA
SUBJECT: MAPPING THE BORDER: MAINE-NEW BRUNSWICK CROSSINGS FROM FORT 
KENT-CLAIR TO HOULTON-WOODSTOCK 
 
REF: (A) TORONTO 93; (B) 06 OTTAWA 3205; (C) 05 HALIFAX 158 
 
HALIFAX 00000012  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY: 
-------- 
 
¶1. Uncertainty over the exact requirements and precise 
entry-into-force date of the Western Hemisphere Travel 
Initiative (WHTI) land and sea rule are the main concerns of 
nearly everyone we met during a recent visit to border 
communities and border crossing points in northwestern New 
Brunswick.  The questions most asked by the people we met were: 
(1) When will the passport requirement for entering the U.S. 
over the land border actually enter into force; and, (2) What 
other documents besides the passport can travelers use to enter 
the country? Local officials and citizens in Edmundston and 
Woodstock were pleased to hear that the proposed land and sea 
rule would include language exempting children 15 and under from 
the passport requirement. Community leaders also suggested an 
exemption for the elderly. We heard at length about arrangements 
between U.S. and Canadian municipalities to provide emergency 
services (including medical, fire, and infrastructure recovery) 
to each other in times of need.  The communities hope that the 
new land rule will permit these vital cross-border arrangements 
to continue. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. From February 26 - March 1, Consul General traveled to 
northwestern New Brunswick as part of Mission Canada's efforts 
to raise awareness of the WHTI among communities along the 
border and to gather information for the Mission-wide "Mapping 
the Border" reporting exercise.  CG participated in two 
productive WHTI roundtable discussions hosted by the mayors of 
Edmundston and Woodstock, NB. And, with excellent collaboration 
and cooperation from the regional office of the Canadian Border 
Services Agency (CBSA) and their U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP) counterparts, CG visited eight of the nineteen 
border crossing points along the Maine-New Brunswick border. The 
eight were: 
 
Clair, NB - Fort Kent, ME 
Edmundston, NB - Madawaska, ME 
Saint Leonard, NB - Van Buren, ME 
Grand Falls, NB - Hamlin, ME 
Gillespie, NB - Limestone, ME 
Perth Andover, NB - Fort Fairfield, ME 
Centreville, NB - Bridgewater, ME 
Woodstock, NB - Houlton, ME 
 
 
We plan to visit the remaining crossing points in the weeks 
ahead. 
 
------------------------- 
ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSIONS... 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. The roundtable discussions in Edmundston and Woodstock 
included a broad cross-section of their respective communities. 
In addition to the mayors of both towns, other participants 
included city managers, fire chiefs, police chiefs, emergency 
management specialists, health authorities, and local business 
leaders. The town manager of Madawaska, ME, and a former Maine 
State Senator from the region also participated in the 
Edmundston meeting. Officials from Houlton, ME, were invited to 
participate in the Woodstock meeting but were unable to attend. 
 
------------------------ 
...FOCUS ON PASSPORTS... 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. The roundtable format was the same in both locations. The CG 
began by briefing the participants on the genesis of the WHTI, 
highlighting the smooth implementation of the WHTI air rule, 
describing the current status of the WHTI land/sea rule, and 
making the pitch for everyone to prepare for the land rule by 
getting their passports or NEXUS cards as soon as possible.  The 
mayors then opened the floor to questions and comments. The main 
recurring themes throughout the discussions were the 
uncertainties surrounding the entry into force of the land rule 
and the types of documents in addition to passports that would 
or would not be accepted at the border. The former Maine State 
Senator was happy to hear about the proposed passport card as an 
affordable alternative to the passport. While she and everyone 
else was encouraged by Secretary Chertoff's announcement that 
the upcoming proposed land rule would exempt children aged 15 
and under from the passport requirement, many also suggested 
that the U.S. exempt the elderly from the rule. Given the deep 
and pervasive family ties that span the border, exempting the 
elderly, they argued, would help ensure that the aging 
population of the region continued to be able to attend funerals 
 
HALIFAX 00000012  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
of friends and relations on either side of the border. "Folks 
who are over 70 years of age are reluctant to invest in a 
passport," said one town councilor. 
 
--------------------------- 
...AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. Cross border emergency management was also an important theme 
of the discussions, especially considering the need to ensure 
that any new documentation requirement does not hinder either 
side's ability to come to the aid of the other. Maine and New 
Brunswick signed a Memorandum of Understanding on 
Intergovernmental and Cross Border Cooperation on May 8, 2004. 
That MOU includes a section reaffirming their commitment to 
supporting the Conference of New England Governors and Eastern 
Canadian Premiers' International Emergency Management Assistance 
Memorandum of Understanding from August 2002. Maine and New 
Brunswick also have a separate Letter of Understanding on Civil 
Emergency Planning and Cooperative Emergency Arrangements dating 
back to September 1975, which provides a formal framework for 
emergency management cooperation between the state and the 
province. 
 
¶6. All along the border we saw and heard about examples of how 
the communities have developed arrangements to support each 
other in times of crisis. For example, the town of Madawaska 
relies on the Edmundston fire department's aerial ladder truck 
for dealing with large structure fires. Both Saint Leonard, NB, 
and Van Buren, ME, rely on volunteer firefighters to protect the 
lives and property of their citizens. Whenever there is a 
structural fire in one community, firefighters from the other 
community also respond. The current procedure for expediting the 
crossing of emergency vehicles entails calling ahead to the 
border to advise the relevant border authorities that the 
vehicles are en route. Assuming the border crossing is clear 
when the vehicle arrives, it is allowed to pass unimpeded. 
 
¶7. A similar situation prevails for health care emergencies. 
Whereas the vast majority of healthcare services are delivered 
to patients in their own country, there are occasions when a 
heart attack victim or other acute medical emergency case needs 
to be taken across the border to the nearest hospital. For 
Americans living in Madawska, ME the nearest hospital is in 
Edmundston, NB. For the inhabitants of Clair, NB, the nearest 
hospital is in Fort Kent, ME. Fortunately, the communities have 
developed procedures with CBP and CBSA to facilitate emergency 
cases transiting the border. 
 
¶8. In addition to fire and acute health emergencies, border 
communities have worked together to prepare for other crises 
such as major disruptions to water, sewage, and power 
distribution systems, and large-scale industrial accidents. 
Health officials in Edmundston described how they were working 
with counterparts in Madawaska to prepare for an eventual 
influenza pandemic. CBSA officers at Grand Falls, NB, showed us 
maps detailing cross-border evacuation routes for people should 
the ammonia tanks at the McCain food processing plant near the 
border rupture, discharging toxic fumes into the valley. 
 
------------------------ 
THE VIEW FROM THE BORDER 
------------------------ 
 
¶9. Not surprisingly, discussions with CBP and CBSA officers at 
the various border crossing revealed support for the impending 
passport requirement; but, they also expressed frustration with 
the uncertainty and confusion surrounding the when and what of 
the WHTI land/sea rule. CBP officers said they are asked every 
day about passports and when the rule will enter into force. 
Each of the border crossings had passport applications 
prominently displayed on their counters for people to take. 
 
¶10. However, the number one complaint that CBP officers are 
hearing right now is the wait time at the border resulting from 
the 100% ID check that CBP officers conduct. Since most people 
are still traveling without machine readable documents, the 
officers must type in the information on each traveler, which is 
both time consuming and error prone. Wider use of machine 
readable documents (e.g., passports) would help speed up CBP 
processing times and reduce errors. 
 
¶11. Except for the large commercial crossing point at 
Woodstock-Houlton (linking the Trans-Canada Hwy and I-95) 
implementing other border facilitation programs such as NEXUS or 
FAST would have marginal payback at most of the crossing points 
along this part of the border. The two-lane roads at these 
crossing points would need extensive capital improvements in 
order to add the extra lanes that make these systems work. 
 
HALIFAX 00000012  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Furthermore, the relatively low level of traffic through these 
crossings does not warrant such investments at this time. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12. Echoing the sentiments expressed by the travel and tourism 
industry representative at their recent meeting in Niagara Falls 
(ref A), the folks living along the Maine-New Brunswick border 
voiced their frustrations at the ongoing uncertainty surrounding 
the incipient WHTI land and sea rule. This uncertainty continues 
to spawn confusion and misapprehension on both sides of the 
border. For our part, we continue to urge people to get their 
passports now regardless of the uncertainty of the start-date 
for the land rule. Still, after visiting these communities along 
this stretch of the border--where the people feel a closer 
attachment to each other through family and social ties than 
they do to either Washington or Ottawa, and where driving across 
to the other side to visit family or to buy milk and gas or to 
take in a movie used to be a matter of simply hopping in the car 
and driving--it is easy to see why they are reluctant to embrace 
the new reality of this post-9/11 world. END COMMENT. 
FOSTER