07ISTANBUL417
ISTANBUL BRINGS NGO EXPERT TO ADDRESS TRANSPARENCY,
Wed May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIT #0417 1361322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161322Z MAY 07
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7034
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 6581UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000417 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/PPD:JRICKERT, EUR/SE:PMALICK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SCUL KPAO KDEM TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL BRINGS NGO EXPERT TO ADDRESS TRANSPARENCY, 
VOLUNTEER MANAGEMENT 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: As part of mission's ongoing support of Turkish NGO 
development, PAS Istanbul designed an April 30 - May 7 program with 
U.S. Speaker Alan Kumamoto, Partner of Kumamoto Associates and board 
member of NCIV Los Angeles.  Kumamoto reached a wide variety of 
grassroots organizations, civic society groups as well as 
municipalities through a series of workshops and lectures, providing 
examples from the U.S. on operations, fundraising, volunteerism, 
networking and strategic planning.  In addition, Kumamoto addressed 
the leadership and 30 members of Deniz Feneri, Turkey's largest 
Islam-oriented relief and charity organization.  The presentation on 
transparency in fundraising proved to be particularly timely since 
the Deniz Feneri office in Germany was raided in mid-April and is 
currently under financial investigation.  Turkey's Deniz Feneri 
denies any "organic" affiliation with the Germany-based 
organization.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Kumamoto's April 30 - May 7 visit came during one of the most 
politically turbulent weeks in Turkey in recent memory.  On April 
29, the day before his arrival, well over one million secularists 
demonstrated against the Islam-oriented Justice and Development (AK) 
party in Istanbul. On May 1, police clashed with protestors 
commemorating the thirtieth anniversary of "bloody" May Day, which 
had resulted in the deaths of 34 civilians.  On May 3, the 
Government announced that early parliamentary elections would be 
held on July 22.  The fact that our NGO and municipality contacts 
were able to pull themselves away from their television screens and 
- especially on May 1 - spend hours in traffic trying to circumvent 
police barriers to get to the Consulate, was a strong testament to 
the NGO community's interest in learning from the U.S. experience. 
 
¶3.  The two workshops organized at the U.S. Consulate were 
particularly important in bringing together 75 representatives from 
many NGOs - both secular and Islam-oriented - and in providing an 
opportunity for networking and experience sharing, resulting in 
several joint project ideas.  Given the political events of the 
previous two weeks, the tension between the secularists and the 
pro-government supporters was palpable, but the discussions were 
nevertheless respectful and productive. 
 
¶4.  Kumamoto also addressed the leadership and 30 members of 
Turkey's largest Islam-oriented relief and charity organization, 
Deniz Feneri.  Coincidentally, German police in mid-April raided the 
Deniz Feneri office in Frankfurt on the suspicion of money 
laundering.  We therefore asked Kumamoto to stress in his remarks 
the importance of transparency and controls.  Deniz Feneri Turkey 
issued a press release denying any "organic" affiliation with the 
Germany-based organization.  It does, however, admit to having 
received funds from the German group and distributing them to needy 
Turkish families --- with, the press release emphasizes, the 
permission of the Turkish Interior Ministry.  Kumamoto delivered 
another lecture on the fundraising at Koc University, one of the 
most prominent private universities in Turkey. 
 
¶5.  In addition to the NGO programs, the Istanbul Beyoglu and Bursa 
(an industrial city 235 kilometers south of Istanbul) municipalities 
organized lectures on "Neighborhood Associations and Community 
Outreach" looking at U.S. examples of public, private and NGO 
partnerships.  NGOs as well as the representatives of other 
municipalities in the provinces of Istanbul and Bursa also attended 
the events.  The Beyoglu mayor, a recent International Visitor 
Leadership Program participant, organized the event in his 
municipality after learning about Los Angeles's Neighborhood 
Associations during his IV program. The turnout of 45 or so 
municipality and NGO representatives in Bursa was somewhat 
disappointing as we had been told to expect an audience of around 
¶150.  However, the director of the organizing body, Agenda 21, told 
us that several anti-American NGO representatives had urged others 
to avoid the event, as the speaker was funded by the U.S. Consulate. 
 Nevertheless, the smaller format was successful, as it allowed the 
group to ask detailed questions about specific issues of interest to 
them. 
 
¶6.  Comment:  Apart from supporting the development of civil society 
in Turkey and stressing the importance of transparency and controls, 
the program was important in reaching diverse groups and introducing 
them to U.S. culture.  Kumamoto proved to be an excellent and 
professional speaker, very warmly received by our NGO and 
municipality contacts. 
JONES