07JOHANNESBURG311
SOUTH AFRICA: CHINA DEVELOPMENT BANK OUTLINES AFRICA
Fri Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Johannesburg
VZCZCXRO6585
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHJO #0311/01 3061407
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 021407Z NOV 07
FM AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6027
INFO RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0044
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 0001
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0017
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2778UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JOHANNESBURG 000311 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EAGR ECON EINV SF CH
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: CHINA DEVELOPMENT BANK OUTLINES AFRICA 
STRATEGY 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000311  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  At an October 31 seminar on emerging powers and 
their impact on global economic governance hosted by the South 
African Institute for International Affairs (SAIIA), the 
international advisor of the China Development Bank (CDB) 
provided a readout of the CDB's strategy and strengths in making 
loans to African nations.  Dr. Gu Yang noted the importance of 
mining and energy to China, but reserved her greatest enthusiasm 
for loans in assisting agriculture.   Professor Li Anshan, of 
Peking University, defended China's "no-strings attached" policy 
on aid and loans at the same conference.   End Summary. 
 
China Development Bank History and Structure 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶2.  Dr. Gu Yang, the International Advisor to the China 
Development Bank (CDB), outlined its history, goals and strategy 
at an October 30 seminar on the impact of emerging powers on 
global economic governance hosted by SAIIA.   Created in 1994, 
the CDB is one of three policy lending banks created after a 
financial crisis in the early 90's caused by high rates of 
non-performing loans within the Chinese banking system, which 
Dr. Gu ascribed to the mingling of politically-driven with 
commercial lending.   It is 100 percent owned by the Ministry of 
Finance and legally reports directly to the State Council.   The 
CDB is used to finance strategic infrastructure projects and 
projects to support government objectives.  She described the 
CDB as primarily focused on domestic development needs. 
 
¶3.  According to Dr. Gu, the CBD finances its operations from 
liquidity provided by the government and from capital raised in 
domestic and international markets, based on its Moody's credit 
rating of A minus.  At the end of 2006, the bank had $252.2 
billion in loans outstanding, primarily in mining, oil, 
infrastructure, and urbanization.  Its priority areas within 
China are power, public facilities, and telecoms and transport, 
with 52 percent of loans going to the eastern part and 17 
percent to the western part of China.   More than 50 percent of 
its loans were medium and long-term loans. 
 
International Loan Portfolio 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Of the CDB loan portfolio, 92 percent was domestic and just 
over 7 percent was foreign lending.   Dr. Gu listed the CDB's 
rating criteria for its overseas operations, which included both 
standard criteria such as the borrowing history and "other 
relevant factors" that were not further specified.   In 2006, 
the bank's operating capital was $289 billion which produced a 
$3.5 billion profit.   By end 2006, the CDB has $33.29 billion 
in foreign loans, of which 70 percent were long-term loans.   Of 
its foreign loans, 71 percent were in energy and mining.   The 
CDB has seven working teams in Africa, including in Egypt, 
Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe, and the DRC.  Dr. Gu 
said the bank would be increasing the number of working teams 
soon, and was also approached on a regular basis to increase its 
cooperation with African financial institutions.   The CBD loan 
terms were six months LIBOR rate plus a margin.   She noted the 
close cooperation of the CDB with the African Development Bank, 
with a first conference between the two institutions held in 
Shanghai this year. 
 
¶5.  Dr. Gu also commented on the Africa Development Fund, which 
had $5 billion in financing available for loans up to 50 years, 
in the areas of energy, mining and agriculture.  The fund was 
there to support Chinese companies investing in Africa, but 
joint ventures could also apply for support.  She noted that 
funding through the Africa Development Fund was flexible 
throughout the timeline and value-chain of a project. 
Dr. Gu noted that there had been some confusion among African 
countries about the CDB's function and aid, which was managed by 
the Ministry of Commerce. 
 
CDB Priorities in Africa 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.   Dr. Gu said that improving infrastructure was the key to 
Africa's development and would allow the continent to lift 
itself from poverty.   She said that the CDB offered project 
finance, information sharing and staff exchanges in this as in 
other areas.    She said she had been impressed by the EU/NEPAD 
blueprint which took a holistic approach to the continent, and 
would promote internal trade among African countries.   She had 
had several conversations with EU and Commission leaders, and 
with the European Investment Bank, on priorities and 
coordination of an infrastructure plan.   A steering committee 
had been set up, and a budget process.  She noted that one of 
the strengths of the CDB in providing finance for projects was 
that it came with "no strings attached" and through an open 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000311  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
bidding process.  This did not mean that China would disrespect 
labor or environmental laws since these concerns could be built 
into the contract, according to Dr. Gu. 
 
¶7.  She noted that China has low cost labor and capacity with 
very relevant experience and appropriate technology for African 
infrastructure projects.  An engineer working on an African 
hydropower station had recently been in charge of the Three 
Gorges Dam project, while the UK had completed its underground 
system 130 years ago.   To achieve the Millennium Goals would 
require an annual investment of around $40 billion in Africa 
each year until 2015.   Transport costs were three times 
production costs for agricultural commodities in landlocked 
African countries.  Infrastructure investment would also provide 
spin-offs of electricity for schools and hospitals, creating a 
win-win situation. 
 
¶8.  The CDB's experience in the west of China, according to Dr. 
Gu, had given it skills relevant to working in Africa.   Among 
the skill sets transferred was in assessing the credibility of 
borrowers who had no credit history and were in poverty.   While 
this experience was not entirely transferable, Dr. Gu 
nevertheless though it was helpful.   The bank's value-added 
also included being the experts in infrastructure.   She 
described Africa today as being where China had been 20 years 
ago.   The CDB had direct relevant experience.  Moreover, in 
cases where China had need of minerals and energy, deals to 
exchange these commodities for infrastructure construction did 
not have to involve any loans at all.   Dr. Gu said such deals 
would prevent the Dutch disease and resource curse.  She also 
noted that China and the CDB were committed to a long-term 
timetable; 80-90 percent of the bank's 7 percent foreign lending 
was committed to 5-20 year terms.  She said this was an 
expression of the CDB's confidence and sincerity in African 
development. 
 
¶9.  Agriculture was another priority area, Dr. Gu noted, 
especially given that both African countries and China were 
dependent on food imports.   She noted that although China had a 
population of 1.4 billion, only 16 percent of its land was 
arable, while Africa had much unused arable land.   The bank had 
"many good ideas" on how to help African countries set up food 
production to feed their own populations and then export the 
surplus to China.   She enthusiastically described this as a 
deal that would benefit both sides. Gu emphasized that the CDB 
was committed to long-term projects and would be establishing 
technical demonstration centers under a program run by the 
Ministry of Agriculture.  These had started to experiment with 
labor intensive tropical crops that had a high value added. She 
was working on a strategy to develop capacity and 
competitiveness in food supply and food export for the CDB. 
(Comment:  Dr. Gu was much more enthusiastic and emotionally 
engaged in describing plans for lending in agriculture than any 
other sector.  She was passionate about this topic and its 
potential benefits to China.  End Comment.) 
 
Defense of Unconditional Lending 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  Professor Li Anshan of Peking University defended China's 
willingness to lend without conditions at the seminar and in 
private conversations.   According to a German contact who had 
attended the closed session the previous day, Professor Li 
rejected any linkage for Darfur and said that China had a human 
rights problem but everyone still wanted to trade with and 
invest in China, so why should the Chinese apply pressure?   In 
a conversation on the margins of the seminar, Professor Li 
advocated in favor of "no strings attached" lending, noting 
Africa's history of colonialism made it especially sensitive to 
pressure.   He agreed that China was becoming more vulnerable to 
grass-roots pressures, and noted that the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs had established an office dealing with NGOs.   Li also 
said that China did offer advice quietly, but reiterated that it 
would resist any changes to its "no-strings-attached" lending 
policies. 
COFFMAN