07KHARTOUM1296
SUDAN - USAID FLOOD ASSESSMENT IN KASSALA STATE
Sun Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4054
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1296/01 2311406
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191406Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8242
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROMEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001296 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/SPG, PRM, AND ALSO PASS USAID/W 
USAID FOR DCHA SUDAN TEAM, DCHA/OFDA, AND AFR/SP 
NAIROBI FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA, USAID/REDSO, USAID/SFO AND FAS 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NSC FOR PMARCHAM, MMAGAN, AND TSHORTLEY 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
USUN FOR TMALY 
BRUSSELS FOR PBROWN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI UN SU
SUBJECT: SUDAN - USAID FLOOD ASSESSMENT IN KASSALA STATE 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001296  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  From August 6 to 9, USAID/SUDAN staff traveled to 
Kassala State to assess the effects of recent flooding, following 
unseasonably heavy rainfall in early July.  Flooding has affected an 
estimated 40,000 people, destroyed more than 2,600 homes, and 
resulted in 10 deaths and extensive damage to agricultural lands. 
Current response measures are considered adequate and well 
coordinated.  However, with rains expected to continue through the 
wet season in September, aid organizations and government agencies 
remain concerned about the potential for additional flooding.  End 
summary. 
 
---------------- 
Flood Assessment 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  While Sudan is prone to annual flooding, the early onset of the 
2007 rainy season has been characterized by excessive rainfall and 
flash floods, resulting in widespread displacement and damage.  In 
Kassala State, flooding along the Gash River in Kassala town and 
surrounding rural areas, including Atbara River and Gash localities, 
has affected an estimated 40,000 people, and damaged homes, crops, 
and infrastructure.  In the New Halfa area of Atbara River locality, 
rains and run off from surrounding hills have affected 18 villages 
and nearly 15,000 people.  Aid agencies report an additional 21,000 
flood-affected people in Kassala town and more than 5,000 in Gash 
locality.  In the rural areas outside of Kassala, USAID staff 
observed large numbers of displaced families that have relocated to 
higher ground along the Kassala-Aroma highway, including families 
who have lost their homes and others who have moved due to fears of 
additional flooding. 
 
¶3.  A UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) assessment reported 
extensive damage to the agricultural sector, including the loss of 
an estimated 4,000 fruit trees, 2,000 acres of vegetable crops, and 
350 metric tons (MT) of dry fodder.  In addition, flooding collapsed 
625 wells and eroded more than 900 acres of fertile land. 
 
¶4.  With rains expected to continue through September, the potential 
for additional flooding remains a significant concern, as does the 
risk of disease epidemics resulting from the floods.  The Sudanese 
Red Crescent Society and USAID partner GOAL reported 19 cases of 
acute watery diarrhea, including 5 confirmed cases of cholera in 
flood-affected villages of Atbara River locality.  GOAL is working 
on establishing a base in the area. 
 
--------------------- 
Humanitarian Response 
--------------------- 
 
¶5.  Relief efforts to date have been well coordinated between the 
government, UN Resident Coordinator's Office (RCO), and 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) through the Joint Emergency 
Committee, facilitating a rapid and organized response.  The UN 
State Team-Crisis Management Team and partners are working in four 
main locations, and emergency distribution points have been 
established in five locations that are perceived to be at greatest 
risk.  State authorities continue to implement repairs and reinforce 
the banks of the Gash River in Kassala. 
 
¶6.  The UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) and NGOs have distributed 
emergency relief supplies, including tents, plastic sheeting, 
sleeping mats, mosquito nets, blankets, and health kits.  UNICEF has 
provided medical kits for 101 health facilities to serve a 
population of 100,000 through September.  In addition, the UN Joint 
Logistics Center has established an emergency stock of relief 
supplies stored in UN World Food Program (WFP) facilities. 
 
¶7.  Humanitarian organizations are also focusing on chlorinating 
water sources, spraying standing water, and implementing other 
activities to mitigate the spread of waterborne illnesses as the 
rainy season continues in August and September.  UNICEF has provided 
a supply of water purification tablets for Kassala town through 
October, in addition to erecting water bladders and tankering water 
to rural flood-affected populations.  In Kassala town, state 
authorities are coordinating vector control efforts through aerial 
spraying. 
 
¶8.  WFP and state authorities have coordinated closely to ensure 
adequate coverage of food assistance and to avoid duplication of 
efforts, dividing coverage between rural and urban areas.  On July 
12, WFP distributed 159 MT of food assistance as part of an initial 
15-day ration to 18,550 flood-affected people in rural areas of 
 
KHARTOUM 00001296  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Kassala.  Kassala State authorities provided food distributions from 
Red Sea and Gedarif states to populations in Kassala and Aroma 
towns.  In response to reports of newly displaced populations along 
the Kassala-Aroma highway, WFP conducted an assessment on August 9, 
and is preparing a second 15-day ration distribution of 186 MT of 
food assistance to 20,000 people.  The 1,500 increase in 
beneficiaries reflects the identification of additional displaced 
populations north of Aroma who have relocated from low-lying areas 
due to fears of additional flooding. 
 
¶9.  In response to a critical shortfall of plastic sheeting within 
the UN common non-food item pipeline for the north and east, USAID 
airlifted 1,300 rolls of plastic sheeting, from its warehouse in 
Dubai to Khartoum on August 8 and 9.  Consigned to UNICEF, a portion 
of the USAID contribution, valued at more than USD 500,000, is 
helping to provide shelter to flood-affected populations in Kassala 
State. 
 
¶10.  In addition, USAID partners operating in Kassala, including 
International Rescue Committee (IRC), GOAL, and FAO, are 
contributing to the flood response through the provision of relief 
commodities, health, and water, sanitation, and hygiene services. 
GOAL has distributed emergency relief supplies to nearly 30,000 
flood-affected people, and established a mobile clinic in Kassala 
town to provide primary health care to 20,000 people.  IRC health, 
sanitation, and hygiene promotion activities target more than 9,000 
people in Kassala town.  In addition, FAO is providing vaccinations 
for animals, as well as seeds, tools, and sacs and has pledged USD 
450,000 to support flood-affected agriculturalists. 
 
¶11.  In meetings with USAID staff, government officials, including 
the state wali, expressed their appreciation for the role of the UN 
and NGOs in containing the disaster and assisting affected 
households. 
 
--------------------------- 
Preparedness and Mitigation 
--------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Current response measures are considered adequate, although 
government and relief agencies remain concerned about the likelihood 
of renewed flooding.  In meetings with USAID staff, the RCO 
identified the need to improve state preparedness and mitigation 
efforts.  Recommendations included securing tents and emergency 
relief supplies for 50,000 households, implementing water, 
sanitation, and hygiene and environmental activities, such as 
spraying stagnant water, intensifying sanitation and hygiene 
awareness, and ensuring the provision of clean water.  In 
collaboration with the UN Development Program, the RCO is also 
preparing a crisis management capacity building program with the 
state government.  In addition to RCO recommendations, the state 
wali proposed the construction of dykes along the Gash River bank as 
a long-term engineering solution to protect Kassala from future 
flooding. 
 
POWERS