07KHARTOUM328
SUDAN - LAUNCH OF SUDAN HUMANITARIAN POLICY 2007
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3186
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0328/01 0611136
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021136Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6336
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROMEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/SPG, PRM, AND ALSO PASS USAID/W 
USAID FOR DCHA SUDAN TEAM, AFR/SP 
NAIROBI FOR SFO 
NSC FOR PMARCHAM, MMAGAN, AND TSHORTLEY 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
USUN FOR TMALY 
BRUSSELS FOR PLERNER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI SU AU
SUBJECT: SUDAN - LAUNCH OF SUDAN HUMANITARIAN POLICY 2007 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00000328  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  On February 1, the USAID Senior Humanitarian Advisor (SHA) and 
two USAID/Sudan officials attended the launch of the Sudan 
Humanitarian Policy 2007 by the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs in 
Khartoum.  The policy document disseminated to attendees included 
general goals of improving coordination, bureaucratic processes, and 
security for humanitarians, but did not propose concrete actions to 
achieve those goals.  During the launch event, Sudanese government 
representatives announced the extension of the moratorium on 
bureaucratic impediments until January 31, 2008, and outlined their 
vision of the role of the UN and non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) in Sudan's recovery.  The UN Deputy Special Representative of 
the Secretary General (DSRSG) and Humanitarian Coordinator/Resident 
Coordinator (HC/RC) acknowledged the excellent collaboration between 
the government and the UN and appealed for the security of 
humanitarian workers.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
Highlights from the Addresses 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On February 1, three USAID officials attended an event to 
introduce the Sudan Humanitarian Policy 2007.  Speakers included the 
Government of National Unity (GNU) Minister of Humanitarian Affairs, 
the Khartoum State Minister of Humanitarian Affairs, and the GNU 
Humanitarian Aid Commissioner.  DSRSG and HC/RC Manuel da Silva 
represented the UN, and Paul Barker, CARE Country Director, 
represented international non-governmental organizations (NGOs). 
 
¶3.  Minister for Humanitarian Affairs Kosti Manibe stated that the 
new policy has three purposes:  to set national priorities for 
humanitarian aid in Sudan in 2007; to better coordinate humanitarian 
work and organize roles and responsibilities, duties, and tasks of 
all partners; and to ensure that all actors work together in 
conformity with the government's five-year plan for 2007 through 
¶2011.  (Note:  The plan for 2007 reportedly will be posted on the 
same website as the government's five-year plan.  End note.) 
Additionally, Manibe emphasized that the GNU has extended the 
moratorium on bureaucratic impediments to January 31, 2008, rather 
than December 2007 as agencies previously believed.  Manibe also 
pledged to bring the security concerns of the humanitarian community 
to the attention of the appropriate agencies. 
 
¶4.  Manibe stressed the need for fast-track government procedures to 
approve the work and travel of NGOs; the accelerated voluntary 
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees according 
to the joint GNU, UN, and Government of Southern Sudan returns 
program; humanitarian assistance free of any political motivation; 
and wider inclusion and capacity-building of national NGOs.  In this 
context, he noted the need to shift the majority of humanitarian 
procurement to Sudan, particularly for food items.  He further 
stressed the need for NGOs to establish technical agreements with 
the government to outline where and in what sector an NGO can work, 
as well as the strict adherence to these agreements.  He warned the 
NGOs not to work outside of an assigned area or sector without first 
requesting a modification of the technical agreement.  (Comment: 
These statements caused concern among humanitarians in the audience 
because of the potential for involuntary returns of displaced 
persons and the reference to the assigned area and sector of NGO 
involvement.  Manibe likely made the latter statement to put on 
notice NGOs that couch protection work in ambiguous language.  End 
comment).  The minister closed his remarks with an appeal for NGOs 
to observe and respect local customs and sensitivities. 
 
¶5.  The DSRSG stressed that the excellent collaboration among the 
government, the UN, and UN partners in developing the UN Work Plan 
2007 was reflected in the Sudan Humanitarian Policy 2007.  He added 
that it remained UN policy to attempt to purchase goods locally or 
regionally to the extent possible.  The DSRSG joined Manibe in 
calling for continued strong collaboration between the Sudanese 
government and the UN, and added that security was a necessary 
condition to achieve development.  He stated that while there were 
three separate peace agreements in place, they were a long way from 
implementation.  He noted significant progress made in Southern 
Sudan and the Three Areas, adding that now recovery should be the 
focus.  He further emphasized the need to broaden the Darfur Peace 
Agreement and acknowledged the efforts underway to do so. 
 
¶6.  DSRSG da Silva ended his address with a strong appeal for the 
government to restore the lost humanitarian space and improve 
security for civilians and humanitarian workers.  He noted that many 
 
KHARTOUM 00000328  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
humanitarian workers were killed in 2006.  He stressed the excellent 
collaboration in preparing for the return of IDPs and refugees to 
the Three Areas and Southern Sudan and noted the outstanding work of 
the International Organization of Migration in registering more than 
500,000 persons.  He closed his remarks by thanking the 
international community for extremely generous pledges and 
commitments, noting that Sudan received 25 percent of worldwide 
humanitarian assistance in 2006. 
 
¶7.  Aldo Adjo Deng, chairman of the Humanitarian Committee of the 
National Assembly, emphasized that poverty was pervasive throughout 
Sudan and assistance is needed everywhere.  Deng also noted that 
only a limited amount of food aid was necessary, and only during a 
certain period of the year.  Deng proposed small model towns in 
which the government would provide water, sanitation, health care, 
and education.  Deng expressed concern that many displaced people 
who had not been farming during their displacement are no longer 
accustomed to the rural way of life.  He also noted that there were 
areas in the country where the returnees could become tenant 
farmers.  In his closing remarks, Deng assured the audience that the 
National Assembly was fully aware of the need for security in order 
for displaced persons to return to their areas of origin and that 
the National Assembly fully supported the return program. 
 
¶8.  Dr. Amna Abdelrahman, Secretary General of the Association to 
Combat Harmful Traditional Practices, asked to take the floor and 
passionately appealed for gender equality.  She noted that not one 
of the speakers was female and that agencies did not adequately 
consult women in the design and implementation of assistance 
programs.  She appealed for the greater participation of national 
NGOs and stated that the Sudanese should be taking the lead in 
humanitarian assistance and recovery.  In addition, she proposed the 
integration of beneficiaries so that they will have true ownership 
of the programs.  She closed her remarks by stating that the 
beneficiaries "will bring the peace themselves." 
 
HUME