07LIMA1710
CHILEAN BROADCAST ON PACIFIC WAR MEETS MEASURED
Fri May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
VZCZCXYZ0015
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPE #1710/01 1311550
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111550Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY LIMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5411
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 4645
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 7332
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0367
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ MAY QUITO 1204
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 1267
RUMIAAA/CDR USCINCSO MIAMI FLUNCLAS LIMA 001710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PHUM VE PE
SUBJECT: CHILEAN BROADCAST ON PACIFIC WAR MEETS MEASURED 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: LIMA 1588 
 
-------- 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1.  Reaction in Peru to the first installment of "The Epic," 
a Chilean-produced documentary on the War of the Pacific 
between Chile and Peru-Boliva (1879-1884) that aired May 6, 
was measured and anticlimatic.  After the right-wing tabloid 
press's advance portrayal of the work as a distortion of 
history designed to intimidate Peru in its maritime dispute 
with Chile, the first part of the film itself was praised by 
many Peruvian commentators for its relative objectivity. 
President Garcia derided those who'd beat the war drums in 
the months leading up to the broadcast as having created a 
"bogey man" that the screening had dispelled.  Peru's mature 
reaction to the broadcast augurs well for its continued 
constructive relations with Chile.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  The long-awaited broadcast of the multi-part, 
Chilean-produced documentary on the War of the Pacific 
between Chile and Peru-Boliva (1879-1884), "The Epic" 
(Epopeya), took place on Sunday, 5/6.  Since March, elements 
in the right-wing, nationalist press, led by the pro-Fujimori 
tabloid "La Razon," have decried the documentary as 
everything from Chilean propaganda and a savage and brutal 
portrayal of Peruvians to a veiled warning that Peru had to 
yield to Chile in their ongoing maritime border dispute (Ref) 
or face another military conflict.  Tensions over the pending 
documentary grew to such a level that both the Peruvian and 
Chilean Foreign Ministries moved to delay its showing, for 
fear of aggravating Peru-Chilean tensions as Peru pursues 
solutions to its maritime boundary disagreement with Chile. 
 
¶3.  The reaction to the actual broadcast in the mainstream 
press has provided a welcome anti-climax to the somewhat 
hysterical build-up.  Samples follow: 
 
--Catholic University Historian Christobal Aljovin praised 
the documentary as "relatively well done."  He noted some 
oversights but praised the efforts of the producers to take 
into account Peruvian and Bolivian viewpoints on the 
conflict.  He characterized the work as, in part, an attempt 
to improve the image of the Chilean military with the 
country's own people.  (Note: Aljovin has participated 
constructively in PAS-sponsored U.S. History programs as a 
commentator.  End Note.) 
 
--Sociologist Sinesio Lopez said the work was "better than 
expected" and, while presenting a Chilean view of the war, it 
also revealed that people in all three countries had much to 
learn about this historic conflict. 
 
--Major Lima Daily "La Republica" stated that "too many 
(negative) expectations" had accompanied the broadcast, and 
praised Chilean National Television (TVN) for "searching for 
balance" between the viewpoints of the three parties in the 
conflict. 
 
--President Alan Garcia, who stated that he had yet to see 
the program, lauded its broadcast as "a good thing" because 
it would allow Peruvians to escape from "the bogey man" (i.e. 
the exaggerated controversy) that had been stoked in the 
film's anticipation.  Garcia said that there was nothing in 
the documentary that would endanger Peru's positive relations 
with Chile. 
 
-------- 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶4.  Anti-Chilean feelings always remain latent in Peru, and 
both right and left-wing interests are always eager to stir 
them.  Nonetheless, the anti-climax to Epopeya's broadcast 
reinforces the moderate course of sustained, constructive 
engagement that the Garcia Administration has followed with 
Chile.  In addition, the quality of the documentary itself 
appears to be sending an important message: that even painful 
historical events can be treated in an even-handed and 
dispassionate manner.  The measured reaction to the first 
installment of the film reflects a growing maturity on the 
part of Peruvian audiences.  According to Chilean Embassy 
officials, this maturity will be further tested in the next 
two installments. 
 
STRUBLE