07MASERU214
SADC EXTRAORDINARY SUMMIT READOUT BY MFA
Thu Apr 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Maseru
VZCZCXRO5989
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHRN
DE RUEHMR #0214/01 0951303
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 051303Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MASERU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2860
INFO RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM PRIORITY 0019
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 0015
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA PRIORITY 0005
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 0017
RUEHMR/AMEMBASSY MASERU 3213UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MASERU 000214 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/S - DAN MOZENA AND LINDA MUNCY; ADDIS FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR SA ZI CG LT
SUBJECT: SADC EXTRAORDINARY SUMMIT READOUT BY MFA 
 
REF: (A) MASERU 192 AND PREVIOUS   (B) MASERU 191 AND PREVIOUS 
 
MASERU 00000214  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
---------- 
Summary 
---------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Minister of Foreign Affairs Tsekoa invited the 
diplomatic corps for an April 4 briefing on the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC) Extraordinary Summit held in 
Tanzania March 29.  The Minister opened the meeting with an 
overview of political developments in Lesotho and specifically 
pointed out how the U.S. Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) 
would assist the country in key sectors; the Irish AID was 
supporting education; and the Chinese government (PRC) was 
contributing through construction of a new Parliament.  He 
emphasized the importance of these partners in Lesotho's 
political and economical maturization.  Regarding the internal 
political status quo, Tsekoa stated that Prime Minister Mosisili 
had requested the SADC Summit to send a delegation to Lesotho in 
order to facilitate the dialogue between all relevant entities 
and stakeholders.  Concerning the DRC, the Foreign Minister 
revealed that SADC was expected to intervene to assist in order 
to seek resolution of the conflict between rebel military forces 
and the government. 
 
¶2.  (C) According to the Foreign Minister, Zimbabwean President 
Mugabe wanted SADC to help present "the whole story" as he felt 
the United Kingdom and others were too harsh in their criticisms 
of the situation in his country.  According to Tsekoa, it was 
agreed by the Summit attendees that President Mbeki of the 
Republic of South Africa should be the interlocutor/negotiator 
with Mugabe since he had previously tried to have talks with the 
Zimbabwe President.  (Comment:  The Republic of South Africa's 
new High Commissioner to Lesotho, Happy Mahlangu, had just told 
the Ambassador in a one-on-one conversation 20 minutes prior to 
the briefing, that Mbeki was perceived as "aloof" in both 
domestic and external situations.  He seemed doubtful of how 
fruitful Mbeki's interventions would be.  End Comment.) 
Finally, while the media was still present, Foreign Minister 
Tsekoa thanked all members of the diplomatic corps for their 
 
SIPDIS 
participation and promised that such briefings would be 
scheduled on a regular basis.  There was not much additional 
information during the briefing that had not been contained in 
the SADC communiqui.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
Basotho History and Overview 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Foreign Minister Tsekoa opened his briefing by saying 
that he felt obligated to provide information on the SADC Summit 
to the diplomatic corps and, for a period of time, to the media. 
 He took special pains to recognize South Africa's new High 
Commissioner Mr. Mahlangu.  Tsekoa presented a discourse on 
Lesotho and its important relationship with the development 
partners because it was not an island and, therefore, must have 
an ongoing dialogue with other countries.  He believed such 
exchanges would nurture better relationships.  He then focused 
on the government's goal and, in the process, referred to 
Finance Minister Thahane's March 30 budget address.  He cited 
the development of an environment conducive to growth and 
development as essential, particularly since it would buttress 
the democratic gains made since independence 40 years ago. 
Within Lesotho's political history, he asserted that the country 
had faltered in 1970, had suffered throughout the military 
regime in 1986, but since 1993, the country had returned to 
democratic rule.  He acknowledged that in 1998, unfortunately, 
the country had overcome violent conflict requiring the 
intervention of SADC military forces.  Lesotho's decision to 
move to a Mixed Member Parliament (MMP) in conjunction with a 
first past-the-post electoral system, he considered a major step 
on the ladder toward a fully functioning democracy, despite the 
challenges that the MMP presented. 
 
¶4.  (C) Thirdly, Tsekoa focused on Lesotho's desire to graduate 
from the category of Least Developed Countries (LCDs).  The 
nation and the government are presently overly-occupied with 
poverty reduction, including agricultural development, soil 
reclamation, and cessation of erosion, especially since the 
country had suffered hard from drought.  The GOL must insure 
timely development, he said, in concert with major jobs creation 
and implementation of development programs.  He used the MCA as 
an example of how this goal would be achieved and thanked the 
U.S. Ambassador and the U.S. Government for their deep 
involvement and sincere support for Lesotho's development.  He 
identified areas in which the MCA would, once finalized, assist 
Lesotho:  via the harvesting of Lesotho's white gold, i.e. 
water, strengthening the health infrastructure, wetlands 
 
MASERU 00000214  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
protection, providing sector development and capacity building 
development in the business community, and the fight against 
HIV/AIDS. 
 
¶5. (C) He then recognized the Irish Ambassador and thanked the 
Republic of Ireland for its support of education at the 
secondary and interciary levels.  He included Japan, which does 
not have a resident mission in Lesotho, but covers it from 
Pretoria, for its role in building new schools across Lesotho. 
He gave a nod to South Africa and the joint bilateral 
cooperation they enjoyed along with the good bilateral 
relationship with India.  Finally, he recognized the importance 
of overall infrastructural development in the areas of roads, 
water and construction, citing the new Parliament being built by 
the People's Republic of China (PRC).  On the whole, all 
partnerships are moving from strength to strength in his view. 
 
----------------------------- 
Internal Post Election Issues 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Turning to the February 2007 national elections, the 
Foreign Minister thanked the international community and the 
Ambassadors present for either supporting observers and/or 
trainers as well as serving as observers themselves.  Most 
Basotho citizens believed the elections were free, fair and 
transparent; this had also been cited at the March 15 Opening of 
Parliament by his Majesty King Letsie III.  Unlike previous 
years, this opening was marred by skirmishes even after the King 
approached and went through the Guard of Honor.  Tsekoa 
obliquely blamed the oppositions, headed by the All Basotho 
Convention (ABC) party leader Thomas Thabane, for the 
unprecedented noise that prevailed even through the national 
anthem, a situation Lesotho had never before experienced.  He 
alluded to the statements on Parliamentary sit-ins and 
dissatisfaction that continued into the night, but did not go 
into detail since he observed that all present were aware of the 
situation.  Tsekoa praised the budget speech of Finance Minister 
Thahane, which had laid out clearly the emphasis on Lesotho's 
national goals and next steps.  Debates on the budget in 
Parliament would continue.  Next would follow development of a 
specific strategic plan sector by sector.  In concluding this 
portion of his address, Minister Tsekoa said when all is said 
and done, "it is in the hands of the Government of Lesotho and 
the people to exert leadership in uniting the nation."  He 
called on the development partners to offer a helping hand in a 
timely manner to achieve all of the goals previously outlined. 
He then dismissed the press. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Action of the SADC Summit? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) With only the diplomatic corps and a few senior members 
of government present, the Foreign Minister said that the 
question of Zimbabwe had arisen during the SADC Ministerial 
Council here in Maseru.  The Summit in Dar es Salaam, as 
indicated by the communiqui, was to address the issues of 
political situations in Lesotho, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo and Zimbabwe.  Concerning Lesotho in Dar es Salaam, Tsekoa 
continued, Prime Minister Mosisili was called upon to brief that 
body.  The main points presented were that the election had been 
peaceful and had been deemed free, fair and transparent by the 
international observers.  However, the Prime Minister elaborated 
on the fact that opposition parties had a number of 
administrative complaints, for example the alliance between the 
ruling Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD) and the National 
Independent Party (NIP).  The Prime Minister argued that 
explanation of the alliance had been generally presented by the 
Speaker of the House during the opening session of Parliament 
when she said to opposition leaders that she was bound by law to 
respect the list presented under the rubrics of the Independent 
Electoral Commission (IEC).  The opposition insisted that Mr. 
Anthony Manyeli, the deposed leader of the NIP, was invalid 
since his name did not appear on any electoral lists.  Mr. 
Manyeli's case, according to the Prime Minister, had been 
appealed by his own party, which ruled in favor of the "new" NIP 
and its relationship with the LCD.  The Prime Minister did say, 
according to Tsekoa, that the GOL will await the court decision 
since Mr. Manyeli had also entered a protest.  Mosisili added 
that the opposition leaders had seen some of the SADC leaders as 
well as the SADC Executive Secretary and had knowledge of the 
procedures necessary to address any complaints they may have. 
Since the Council of Minister had deferred to the SADC Summit 
for action, there would be a three minister delegation that 
would travel to Lesotho for further discussion.  The purpose of 
the trip is to listen to "grievances" of the opposition and to 
 
MASERU 00000214  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
facilitate dialogue.  The GOL is awaiting confirmation from SADC 
of the delegation's exact timing so the Government will be able 
to notify all parties, churches and other stakeholders.  Tsekoa 
reported that the Prime Minister had told the Summit gathering 
that the GOL has nothing to hide and that the delegation will 
have access to any and all documents related to the February 16 
elections. 
 
¶8.  (C) Tsekoa spoke briefly about the Summit consideration of 
the situation in the DRC.  President Kabila had requested SADC 
to send a delegation to assist the DRC post elections.  The 
emphasis, he said, was on handling the army assembled by 
opposition candidate Bemba, which will not integrate with 
government forces.  Tsekoa mentioned the terrible violence that 
had occurred in the DRC and that the government there was eager 
to reabsorb any rebellious elements.  Tsekoa described the 
Summit analysis of Zimbabwe as "a very uncomfortable issue which 
comes up every where;" the question is how to move Zimbabwe 
forward.  He reported that President Mugabe had called upon the 
Summit to present a clearer and more accurate picture of what he 
deemed the violence caused by the MDC movement (in other worlds, 
blame the victim).  Mugabe reportedly said that his country is 
suffering economically and that sanctions are adversely 
affecting the population.  Tsekoa, observed that there were 
three million Zimbabweans who sought sanctuary in South Africa, 
and other countries as well such as Botswana, Zambia and 
Mozambique.  Mugabe's overall reaction was that the media had 
mistakenly portrayed him and his actions.  Because the issue is 
so difficult, the SADC Summit named President Mbeki to 
facilitate dialogue in Zimbabwe.  Attendees believed that Mbeki 
was able to handle the Mugabe problem because he was acceptable 
to all parties within SADC.  SADC Ministers, according to 
Tsekoa, are very concerned about Zimbabwe because of its impact 
 
SIPDIS 
on the views of the United Kingdom and other countries and 
because of its potential to impact adversely on their 
relationships with the international community.  Importantly, 
the Foreign Minister said that Mosisili had to push SADC to send 
a delegation as soon as possible; other members wanted SADC to 
wait until all court cases had been resolved.  When Tsekoa asked 
if there were any questions about his presentation, we asked if 
there were other specifics of the delegation's trips that he 
could share with the assembled group.  He responded that he did 
not have the timetable, but that the underlying purpose was to 
keep the dialogue going between the opposition leaders, other 
parties and the GOL.  Tsekoa emphasized that Lesotho's desire 
was to find a way forward during the SADC phase and then to come 
up with concrete next steps.  He added that the NIP's elderly 
President, Mr. Manyeli, had, before the election, stated his 
wishes to retire from the party, a fact which had not been 
revealed in public on previous occasions.  The Irish Ambassador 
wanted to know if there had been "straight talk" with President 
Mugabe.  The response was that there had been "protracted" 
talks, but that they were very frank. 
 
¶9.  (C) The Foreign Minister then adjourned the meeting after 
inviting the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, the Chinese 
Ambassador, to offer comments. The Dean thanked the Minister for 
the read-out and agreed that the diplomatic community would also 
find such regular meetings very useful. 
 
----------- 
Comment 
----------- 
 
¶10.  (C)  Comment:  We concurred with the PRC representative's 
points that such meetings were important, especially if they can 
be held every month or so as promised.  It appears that the 
opposition parties in Lesotho have accepted the fact that as 
long as SADC is somehow engaged, they will not try to promote 
further stay-aways or other direct action, and, in fact, have 
made a number of statements on the radio to that effect.  It was 
difficult to discern from Tsekoa's comments on Zimbabwe how 
strong, or weak, the SADC's designated negotiator, President 
Mbeki, would be.  There have been rumors that Mbeki, with the 
backing of the other SADC country leaders, would encourage 
Mugabe simply to step down, despite his declaration that he 
would run again.  The bravado exhibited by Mugabe during his 
arrival and departure at the Summit, has been viewed here as a 
face saving gesture.  We would characterize the mood expressed 
as cautiously optimistic and hardening against Mugabe, not only 
by Lesotho as Chair of SADC, but by the entire region.  Post 
will provide details of the delegation talks in Lesotho as soon 
as  the schedule becomes firm.  End Comment. 
PERRY