07PARIS798
SEVENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT
Thu Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  03/02/2007 10:08:19 AM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        PARIS 00798

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: POL
    INFO:   AMB DCM PAO DAO ECON

DISSEMINATION: POLIN
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: A/DCM:TJWHITE
DRAFTED: POL:CRDAVIS,POL: MLA
CLEARED: CLEARED: BITURNER, JROSENBLATT

VZCZCFRI336
RR RUEHC RUEHUJA RUEHBK RUEHBJ RUEHBR RUEHBM
RUEHLM RUEHDK RUEHFN RUEHJA RUEHML RUEHME RUEHNE RUEHPF
RUEHRB RUEHSJ RUEHDG RUEHTI RUEHYD
DE RUEHFR #0798/01 0601601
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011601Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5268
INFO RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 1143
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0325
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1426
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 1778
RUEHBM/AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST 0493
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0269
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 1328
RUEHFN/AMEMBASSY FREETOWN 0453
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 0612
RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA 0229
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0419
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 1069
RUEHPF/AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH 0214
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 1008
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 0233
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 0524
RUEHTI/AMEMBASSY TIRANA 0163
RUEHYD/AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 1051UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 PARIS 000798 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, EUR/PGI, EUR/WE 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
SUBJECT: SEVENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
FOR FRANCE, PART TWO OF TWO 
 
REF: 2006 STATE 202745 
 
 INVESTIGATION/PROSECUTION - Question 29. 
------------------------- 
 
¶A.  French law specifically forbids trafficking in human 
beings -- defined as "the recruitment, transport, transfer, 
accommodation, or reception of a person in exchange for 
remuneration or any other benefit or for the promise of 
remuneration or any other benefit, in order to put him at the 
disposal of a third party, whether identified or not, so as 
to permit the commission against that person of offenses of 
procuring, sexual assault or attack, exploitation for 
begging, or the imposition of living or working conditions 
inconsistent with human dignity, or to force this person to 
commit any crime or misdemeanor" - for both sexual and 
non-sexual purposes (French penal code, Book II, Title II, 
Chapter V, Sec 1bis, Article 225-4-1 and following). 
 
Two laws forbid subjecting a person to working and living 
conditions which infringe on human dignity: Article 225-13 of 
the Penal Code notes that "obtaining the performance of 
unpaid services or of services against which a payment is 
made which clearly bears no relation to the importance of the 
work performed from a person whose vulnerability or 
dependence is obvious or known to the offender is punished by 
five year's imprisonment and by a fine of 150,000 euros;" 
Article 225-14 notes that "subjecting a person whose 
vulnerability or dependence is obvious or known to the 
offender to working or living conditions incompatible with 
human dignity is punished by five years' imprisonment and by 
a fine of 150,000 euros." Further, subsequent articles 
(225-15 and 225-15-1) provide for stiffer penalties for 
persons who conduct either of the two previous activities 
against more than one person (seven year's prison and 200,000 
euros); against a minor (seven years' prison and 200,000 
euros; or against several persons, of whom one is a minor (10 
years' prison and 300,000 euros). 
 
There is no law that specifically forbids slavery in the 
French penal code, although, as a signatory to the European 
Convention on Human Rights, article 4 of which forbids 
slavery, France forbids slavery.  A senator and a 
parliamentarian from the centrist party have introduced a 
bill that would criminalize slavery and servitude in France, 
though neither the Senate nor the National Assembly has yet 
taken up the measure. 
 
¶B. and C.  Penalties are the same for sexual and labor 
exploitation trafficking, as the French legal definition of 
trafficking covers both (see para above).  Trafficking in 
persons is punishable by up to seven years in prison and a 
fine of up to 150,000 euros (Art. 225-4-1).  The penalty 
rises to 10 years' imprisonment and a 1.5-million-euro fine 
if the trafficking involves a minor, pregnant woman, or other 
"vulnerable persons"; a person "upon his arrival on (French) 
territory;" if threats are used; or if the perpetrator holds 
a position that requires him/her to fight against human 
trafficking or in any of several other aggravating 
circumstances (Art. 225-4-2).  If an organized gang 
perpetrates the trafficking, it is punishable by 20 years' 
imprisonment and a 3-million-euro fine (Art. 225-4-3), and if 
the trafficking is committed with "recourse to torture or 
acts of barbarity," the perpetrator(s) incurs life 
imprisonment and a 4.5-million-euro fine (Art. 225-4-4). 
 
¶D.  Sexual assault is punishable by up to five years in 
prison and a 75,000-euro fine (Art. 222-27), seven years and 
100,000 euros if the victim is under 15 years of age or if 
there are aggravating circumstances (Arts. 222-28 and 
222-29).  Convicted rapists can receive up to 15 years in 
prison (Art. 222-23); if the rape was committed against 
someone under 15 years of age, the penalty increases to up to 
20 years (Art. 222-24). 
 
¶E.  Prostitution itself is not illegal, but exploiting 
someone to prostitute him or herself (e.g. pimping, or 
"procuring" someone else) is illegal, as is solicitation. 
Prostitutes can be arrested for 'passive' solicitation (as 
determined by the police; the law is vague on what 
constitutes 'passive conduct,' and this can include even the 
manner of dress or having a large number of condoms on one's 
person).  The age of majority in France is 18.  Anyone 
soliciting, accepting, or obtaining a person of less than 18 
years of age for sexual services in exchange for remuneration 
or the promise of it is subject to three years' imprisonment 
and a 45,000-euro fine (French penal code Article 225-12-1), 
more for aggravating circumstances (Article 225-12-2), and 
even more (seven years' prison and a fine of 100,000 euros) 
if the child is less than 15 years of age (Art. 225-12-3). 
Solicitation can bring up to two months in jail and up to 
3,750 euros in fines (Art. 225-10-1).  Pimps are punished 
under laws prohibiting  procuring," defined as when a person 
"in any manner 1) helps, assists, or protects the 
prostitution of others; 2) makes a profit out of the 
prostitution of others, shares the proceeds of it, or 
receives income from a person engaging habitually in 
prostitution; and/or 3) hires, trains, or corrupts a person 
with a view to prostitution or exercises on such a person 
pressure to practice prostitution or to continue doing so." 
(Art 225-5)  Procuring is punished by seven years' 
imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 euros.  The law also 
criminalizes acting as an intermediary between a prostitute 
and a pimp; facilitating the justification of a pimp's 
fictitious resources; being unable to account for one's 
income when one lives with a prostitute; and obstructing 
prevention, control, assistance, or re-education efforts for 
prostitute(s).  Under aggravating circumstances (including 
where the prostitute is a minor), procuring is punishable by 
ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 1.5 million euros (Art. 
225-7), and if the prostitute is under 15 years old, it is 
punishable by 15 years' imprisonment and a 3-million-euro 
fine (Art. 225-7-1).  If an organized gang does the 
procuring, the punishment is 20 years' prison and a 
3-million-euro fine (Art 225-8), and if the procurer(s) 
resort to torture or acts of barbarity, it is punishable by 
life imprisonment and a 4.5-million-euro fine (Art 225-9). 
 
¶F.  As of the end of February, France has not yet compiled 
its official statistics for 2006; OCRETH finalizes and 
presents each year,s statistics at the end of April. 
However, OCRETH has provided us preliminary numbers for 2006. 
Given the relative weight of the sex trade in slavery in 
France, post believes it appropriate to examine pimping and 
solicitation arrests in addition to trafficking data, as the 
former are likely also reflective of convictions of persons 
running trafficked persons (mostly women) in the sex trade. 
 
The Ministry of Interior released preliminary figures showing 
that in 2006, 746 persons were charged with pimping, of whom 
55 percent were foreign and 40 percent  women. In comparison, 
the final OCRETH assessment of 2005 figures, 880 persons were 
charged with pimping, of whom 55 percent were foreign, but 
only 30 percent were women.  As with the total number of 
victims (see paragraph A.), the percentage of Esatern 
Europeans charged with pimping fell significantly from 2005 
to 2006, from about 30 percent to about 20 percent.  OCRETH 
said that authorities identified 1,219 victims in 2006, up 
from 1,189 in 2005.  Although OCRETH Acting Director Emile 
Lain said the number of minors charged with pimping has 
dropped into the single digits, he could not furnish an exact 
number at this stage. 
 
In September, the Justice Ministry shared its statistics on 
convictions for pimping, solicitation, and trafficking for 
¶2005.  According to its figures, in 2005, there were 1,603 
convictions for pimping and aggravated pimping (some of which 
could have been the same person convicted on multiple 
counts).  Post's NGO contacts believe, and OCRETH's Emile 
Lain concurs, that prosecutors continue to apply the 
anti-pimping laws in place of the anti-trafficking provision 
with regard to sex slaves because the anti-pimping laws are 
so strong, and prosecutors are accustomed to using them. 
However, more than 50 people charged in a Bulgarian Roma 
baby-selling ring busted by OCRETH and local police officials 
in Lille and Marseille in October, 2005 were charged on the 
basis of the anti-trafficking law, resulting in convictions 
for all but one defendant. 
 
In any event, in 2005 there were 346 convictions on the basis 
of the two basic anti-pimping laws; 245 aggravated pimping 
convictions for those instances with a plurality of authors 
or accomplices; and 507 aggravated pimping convictions for 
those cases in which there was more than one victim.  There 
was one conviction for aggravated 
pimping of a victim of less than 15 years of age. 
 
The government provided information on the penalties imposed 
ONLY for those cases in which the pimping count in question 
was the sole infraction for which the individual was 
committed.  In many cases, persons were convicted on several 
different counts, so we have only a kind of anecdotal sample 
as regards penalties.  (NOTE: Government officials were 
trying to give the most accurate picture possible of the 
sentence received for the specific pimping infraction.  For 
that reason, they did not/not provide the penalty if the 
pimping infraction was only one among two or more convictions 
that a person received. For example, if the person had been 
convicted of murder in addition to pimping, the penalty would 
obviously be much higher, and there would be no way to know 
how much of the penalty applied to the pimping conviction. 
END NOTE) 
 
With this caveat in mind, we learn that, for example, on code 
10495, "aggravated pimping in which the vulnerability of the 
victim was apparent," there were 12 convictions in 2005. In 
five of those cases, the conviction was only one of the 
convictions for which the person was sentenced; in four cases 
it was the FIRST of a list of convictions, and in three cases 
it was the ONLY conviction the person received.  In these 
three cases, the people convicted on this count, and ON NO 
OTHER COUNT, received firm prison terms (without suspension 
or possibility of parole) averaging 16 months.  However, for 
the nine other persons convicted of that particular 
infraction in 2005, we have no information on the penalty 
received. 
 
Of the 55 persons convicted of "aggravated pimping involving 
a minor from 15 to 18  years of age," only eight were 
convicted solely on this count; seven of those persons 
received a firm prison term, serving an average of  little 
more than 25 months each. 
 
Of the 118 persons for whom "aggravated pimping because the 
case involved multiple victims" was their SOLE conviction 
(out of the 507 total convictions for that infraction), 107 
received prison terms, 85 of them firm.  The average prison 
term was three years and six months. 
 
Of the 37 persons convicted solely of "aggravated pimping in 
the case where there were multiple authors or accomplices" 
(of the 245 total convictions for the infraction), 31 
received prison terms, 26 of them firm; the average time 
served was just under 18 months.. 
 
Of the 309 persons convicted in 2005 on the basis of the 
basic anti-pimping law that prohibits aiding, assisting, or 
protecting the prostitution of another, for 53 it was the 
sole infraction. Of those 53, 36 received prison sentences, 
17 of them firm; the average time served over 18 months. 
Thirteen of the 53 received fines, the average of which was 
843 euros. 
 
In the case of the one 2005 conviction for "aggravated 
pimping because the victim was less than 15 years old," we 
have no information on the penalty received, because the 
person was convicted on one or more other counts. 
 
Post can provide more detail on convictions relative to other 
pimping infractions; here we have provided a random sample. 
 
As regards domestic forced servitude, the Committee Against 
Modern Slavery (CCEM) helps victims bring claims against 
their "employers" (one-fifth of which claim diplomatic 
immunity as members of the diplomatic corps) on the basis of 
Penal Code Articles 225-13 and 225-14 (see above).  In 2006, 
the victims won several cases.  According to CCEM officials, 
their judicial service is currently working on the cases of 
89 victims at various stages of the judicial process, 39 of 
which are new cases that they took on in 2006. 
 
¶G.  In 2006, according to OCRETH, French authorities 
dismantled 34 international trafficking networks and several 
(OCRETH could not yet provide this number) France-based 
trafficking networks. There are large and small networks 
operating in France, and often, the chiefs of the networks do 
not enter France, but stay out in the country of origin, or 
sometimes a third country.  There is no indication that any 
French government officials are involved in trafficking. 
 
¶H.  The French government actively investigates trafficking 
cases, using surveillance, telephone taps, and a wide range 
of investigative techniques.  In addition, French law 
encourages the testimony of trafficking victims by providing 
residency cards for victims who file a complaint or testify 
in cases that end in a conviction, but French police can also 
proceed (on an investigation, or with taps, etc.) without a 
victim's complaint or testimony. 
 
¶I.  OCRETH has organized with Fondation Scelles (see NGO 
descriptions in Part II) a National Day of Cooperation that 
will bring together magistrates, prosecutors, police, 
academics, and NGO representatives. The conference, scheduled 
for March 13, 2007, will provide training especially to 
police representatives to sensitize them to the 
vulnerabilities and appropriate treatment of trafficking. A 
2005 effort to raise awareness among the police forces, and 
to encourage attacking the &small hands8 ) the ground 
level ) of trafficking networks, has continued with meetings 
and training sessions.  The results of this effort can be 
seen in increased arrests for soliciting seen (2542 
convictions in 2005 versus 1893 in 2004.)  In addition, 
OCRETH hosts various police officials or judicial magistrates 
for rotations, in which the officials learn more about 
OCRETH's work and the French government's aims.  OCRETH 
invites NGOs to facilitate at these training sessions. 
Recently these training sessions have been extended to the 
police academy and law school in Paris. Soon similar 
Awareness Seminars will be offered in Prefectures around 
France. 
 
¶J. The French government cooperates with other governments in 
investigating and prosecuting traffickers and in trying to 
prevent trafficking from occurring. 
 
OCRETH has an officer posted in the French Embassy in Sofia, 
Bulgaria, to serve as a liaison with Bulgarian officials to 
combat the trafficking of Bulgarian nationals to France.  The 
officer is attached to the French police attach's office. A 
program debuted in 2005 to bring Bulgarian police to France 
for exchanges continued in 2006, with 3 Bulgarian police 
serving alongside OCRETH officials.  In Bucharest, Romania, 
the French Embassy has a large cell that works closely with 
local police to address the trafficking issue; the OCRETH in 
Paris works with the Romanian police attach here; and the 
French MFA recently led a mission comprised of officials and 
NGOs to Romania to share best practices with their 
counterparts and to set up contact networks. 
 
In the summer of 2006, the Ministry of Tourism instituted a 
program to combat sex tourism (by French citizens and 
residents). As of September 2006, anti-trafficking police 
officials were assigned to 12 French embassies in countries 
with well-known sex tourism trades (Brazil, Cambodia, Costa 
rica, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Mexico, the Philippines, The 
Dominican Republic, Senegal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand) in an 
attempt to prosecute offenders, and raise official awareness 
and cooperation in those countries. 
 
After years of poor cooperation, OCRETH and Nigerian law 
enforcement officials have begun planning a collaboration, to 
be instituted in 2007, to fight Nigerian recruitment 
networks. The French will send personnel to Nigeria to 
provide information gleaned from victims found in France, and 
to develop a program of interdiction with Nigerian officials. 
Police officers involved in the fight to combat trafficking 
travel regularly to source countries to work with their 
counterparts, although they have had problems finding willing 
counterparts in Sierra Leone, and Cameroon. 
 
¶K. France can extradite persons suspected of trafficking to 
other countries, and the process can be expedited when the 
seeking country is a fellow party to the European arrest 
warrant.  In the case of a country such as Bulgaria or 
Romania, extradition is subject to the Council of Europe 
extradition treaty.  France does not extradite its own 
citizens. 
 
¶L. There is no evidence of French government involvement in 
or tolerance of trafficking on either a local or national 
level.  Governmental authorities do not facilitate or condone 
trafficking, nor are they otherwise complicit in such 
activities. 
 
¶M. Punishments for any official person whose post requires 
him/her to participate in the fight against human trafficking 
who is found guilty of trafficking are more severe than the 
penalties for traffickers (French penal code, Article 
225-4-2), and the law provides for a seven-year imprisonment 
and fine of up to 750,000 euros if someone "cannot account 
for resources corresponding to one's lifestyle while being in 
close contact with one or more (trafficking) victims or 
perpetrators" (Art. 225-4-8). 
 
¶N. France's child sex tourism laws have extraterritorial 
coverage.  Sex with minors can be punished under French law 
if the act is committed by a French national or by a person 
habitually resident on French territory (i.e., the person 
need not be a French citizen to be subject to the law). 
(Penal Code, Art. 225-12-3). 
 
In May 2005, 20 leading tourism professionals signed a 
charter with Tourism Minister Bertrand pledging to increase 
their efforts against child sex tourism.  Under the charter, 
the companies agree to conduct several actions to aid in the 
fight.  Currently, nearly 20 companies are enlisted, 
including Accor hotels, Air France, Carrefour, Thomas Cook, 
Corsair, and others. Together they produce awareness raising 
ads in guidebooks and magazines, on in flight videos (Air 
France) and in hotel literature. 
 
¶O.  France has signed and ratified all the referenced 
instruments 
ILO Convention 182 - Ratified 9/11/01 
ILO Convention 29 - Ratified 6/24/37 
ILO Convention 105 - Ratified 12/18/69 
Optional Protocol to CRC - Signed 2/6/00, Ratified 2/5/03 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish TIP supplementing UN 
Convention against Transnational OC - Signed 12/12/00, 
Ratified 10/29/02 
 
 
 VICTIM PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE - Question 24 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶A.  A trafficking victim who files a complaint against 
his/her trafficker(s) or who testifies against him/her is 
eligible for a temporary three-month card providing residency 
status and a work permit.  If the police can corroborate the 
victim's report (with reference to names, locations, etc.), 
the temporary card can be renewed for another three months 
for a total of six months, and then again for an additional 
six months.  If the trafficker against whom the victim made 
the complaint or testified is convicted, the victim is 
eligible for a permanent residency card (Article 76 of Law on 
Internal Security, Official Journal of March 19, 2003).  An 
association, the Accompaniment Places of Welcome (ALC), 
provides long-term shelter services for trafficking victims 
in metropolitan France and Corsica.  Thirty-three 
associations provide 42 places in 36 shelters across France 
for trafficking victims, and belong to the ALC.  The 
government funds three-quarters of the ALC budget, with the 
City of Paris funding the last quarter. In 2006, the ALC 
received notifications on 58 trafficking victims in need of 
shelter from French associations.  ALC placed 52 of the 
victims in 25 shelters, 6 of whom eventually returned to 
their country of origin. ALC-member shelters provide 
judicial, administrative, health, and psychiatric assistance; 
help in finding a job or getting new training; assistance to 
the victim to return to his/her country of origin if that is 
what he/she wants; and food and 
lodging. 
 
On October 31, 2005 the Interior Ministry issued a circular 
reminding police, prefecture, and departmental leaders of the 
means by which they can authorize temporary residence permits 
and encouraging them to consider disseminating them more 
broadly.  The text includes a specific reference to the 
residence permits that can be authorized in conjunction with 
the 2003 Law on Internal Security (LSI) for trafficking 
victims.  It clarifies that the temporary residence permit 
that can be offered to trafficking victims is for six months 
(rather than three) and encourages authorities to take into 
consideration the presentations that NGOs make on the 
victim's behalf when considering whether to grant a permit. 
The circular further reminds that a principal condition of 
the granting of the permit is the victim's total cutting of 
ties with the persons exploiting her or him.  The exact 
language of the circular reads (informal Embassy 
translation): "Beyond the hypotheses envisaged by the law 
(2003 LSI), other situations of distress can justify a 
humanitarian and benevolent examination.  In this regard, I 
ask you to give particular attention to all the victims of 
modern slavery who seek a temporary residence permit, alone 
or supported by an association, without having necessarily 
cooperated with the police or justice system nor immediately 
testified against their exploiters for fear of reprisals. In 
this case, I ask you to implement your power of appreciation 
to examine humanly sensitive situations, when there appear 
serious indicators letting one presume the quality of the 
asking victim, resulting from the realistic character of 
his/her story, of his/her having been taken in charge by an 
association and the proofs that he/she furnishes on behalf of 
his/her will to rejoin society." (Ministry of Interior, 
Circular NOR/INT/D/05/00097/C, October 31, 2005) 
 
¶B.  See above, the government provides the bulk of the budget 
of the NGO in charge of the shelter network. 
 
¶C.  Social services, NGOs, or police can call the ALC to 
request placement for a victim.  There are short-term 
emergency centers that host the victim while the long-term 
shelter is preparing to receive her/him.  The entry 
questionnaire for ALC is deliberately limited in order to 
protect victims in case they are collaborating with the 
police or serving as a witness. 
 
¶D.  Some prostitutes have been fined under the 2003 LSI. 
While the maximum fine under the law is 3,750 euros, OCRETH 
estimates that the average fine is about 340 euros.  The 
government believes that bringing the victims in off the 
street accomplishes two goals: 1) it is an opportunity for 
the police or an NGO to encourage him/her to file a complaint 
against his/her trafficker(s) and 2) taking the victim off 
the street for a night or a day deprives the trafficker of 
income. 
 
¶E.  See above, authorities encourage victim participation in 
trafficking investigations and prosecutions. 
 
¶F.  The GoF issues temporary, renewable residence permits of 
three and six months to victims of trafficking who make a 
formal complaint against their traffickers. The GoF does not 
provide information on how many of these permits it issues, 
as they are provided through mayor,s offices and not 
tabulated nationally.  The GoF does not/not have a witness 
protection program by which it could, for example, disguise 
the identity of victims for reinsertion into society. 
 
¶G.  The fight against child sex tourism is a mandatory 
element of the training that students in French tourism 
schools undertake to receive their degrees. 
 
¶H.  Post is not aware of any instances of repatriated French 
trafficking victims. 
 
¶I.  There are numerous NGOs in France that work with adult 
and child victims of trafficking, prostitution, child sex 
tourism, and forced labor.  A few of the more prominent are 
(organizations centered in Paris unless noted otherwise): 
 
Amis du Bus des Femmes - (Friends of the Women's Bus).  NGO 
that works with prostitutes, both trafficked and 
untrafficked, to provide care and to help reinsert them in a 
non-prostitute life.  The NGO drives its equipped bus to 
locations frequented by victims; it provides medical 
attention but also seeks to be a refuge for victims in hopes 
of helping them extricate themselves from slavery. 
 
Amicale du Nid -  Founded in 1946, NGO that works on the 
streets to aid prostitutes and provide shelter, training, and 
other assistance in Paris, Lyon, Toulouse, Marseille, 
Grenoble, and Montpellier.  Has a bus service, Intermede. 
 
Association Against Child Prostitution (ACPE) ) Supports 
shelters for child prostitution victims in the Philippines 
and Guatemala.  Provides training for French tourism students 
on sexual tourism involving children.  Supports legal cases 
against French nationals prosecuted for engaging in sexual 
acts abroad with minors. 
 
Association of Places of Accompaniment (ALC), Nice ) Created 
in 1913, ALC provides social services in the Alpes-Maritime 
department of France.  Its specialized Service for Prevention 
and Social Readaptation (SPRS) provides assistance to people 
in prostitution and victims of human trafficking.  It 
coordinates multiple preventative programs.  SPRS provides 
street work (social workers, public health workers, and 
cultural mediators go on the streets from 8 pm to 3 am), 
counseling, vocational guidance and follow-up, cultural and 
linguistic mediation (SPRS staff speak several of the 
languages of trafficked victims), awareness and information 
campaigns, professional training, and runs a national network 
of protection for victims of trafficking known as Ac.Se. 
(Secure Welcome).  SPRS Director Patrick Hauvuy works 
tirelessly to help trafficking victims and to raise the level 
of services available to victims both within France and 
within Europe broadly as well.  He is extremely active in 
visiting source countries and working with NGO personnel and 
authorities there. 
 
Committee Against Modern Slavery (CCEM) - Founded in 1994, 
the CCEM helps victims of domestic servitude.  Since its 
inception, the CCEM has helped about 300 victims; CCEM 
officials estimate they take on about 30 new cases each year. 
 In July 2005, the French state was found guilty in a 
CCEM-sponsored case at the European Court of Human Rights of 
having failed to adequately protect a young Togolese woman. 
 
ECPAT France - NGO that works to combat sex tourism involving 
children, affiliated with the international ECPAT network. 
ECPAT France was founded in 1992.  ECPAT works within an 
international network.  In France it is very active with Air 
France, which sells goods for which the proceeds go to Ecpat, 
and shows on its buses to Paris airports a video warning of 
the potential judicial consequences of engaging a minor for 
sex abroad (making the point that French nationals are bound 
by French law on the matter even outside French territory). 
 
Esclavage Tolerance Zero (Marseille) - Works with CCEM in 
Paris, but focuses also on sex slaves in addition to domestic 
slavery. 
 
Fondation Scelles - Founded in 1993, fights against 
prostitution and trafficking in persons. Has a very strong 
legal research team, which publishes on pan-European legal 
schema for combating trafficking.  Also works with NGOs in 
source countries. 
 
Mouvement du Nid - Part, along with Amicale du Nid, of Nid 
(Nest), which seeks to create a society without prostitution. 
 It is present in most regions of France, and in some other 
countries (Brazil, Portugal, Belgium, and Cote d'Ivoire). 
 
Terre d'Asile - Founded in 1971 to promote the daily use of 
the right of asylum, follow the evolution of legal 
dispositions and administrative measures relating to asylum, 
help welcome refugees and asylum-seekers, and advocate a 
policy of social and professional readaption. 
 
La Voix de l'Enfant - "Voice of the Child," Founded in 1981. 
Its goal is "To Listen to and Defend Childhood in Distress in 
France and in the World."  Works in several different fields, 
including combating sex tourism involving children.  Has 
several affiliate organizations as well. 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
STAPLETON