07PARIS3579
PRESIDENT SARKOZY'S AUGUST 27 FOREIGN POLICY
Tue Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO2366
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDIR RUEHFL
RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR
RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHFR #3579/01 2401813
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281813Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9751
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 PARIS 003579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR EUR/WE, INR/EUC, EUR/ERA, EUR/PPD 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (PUNCTUATION TYPOS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PINR FR
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT SARKOZY'S AUGUST 27 FOREIGN POLICY 
SPEECH -- HIGHLIGHTS AND MEDIA REACTION 
 
REF: A. 8/27 PARIS POINTS "SPECIAL EDITION" B. 8/28 
     PARIS POINTS 
 
PARIS 00003579  001.2 OF 006 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary and Comment:  On August 27 French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy delivered a major foreign policy 
address in Paris to the annual French Chief of Missions 
Conference.  He identified the building of Europe as "the 
absolute priority of France's foreign policy," and cited 
Iran as the "most serious crisis facing the international 
order today."  He stated that an Iran equipped with nuclear 
weapons was "unacceptable," called for "increasing 
sanctions, but also an opening up toward Iran should it opt 
to comply with its obligations."  The objective is to 
"enable us to escape a catastrophic alternative: the 
Iranian bomb or the bombing of Iran."  Sarkozy highlighted 
the importance of the French-U.S. friendship ("as vital as 
ever"), while still offering his now standard caveat that 
alliance does not equate with alignment of views, and 
friends must share their disagreements "without taboos." 
He emphasized the need to strengthen European defense, but 
not in competition with NATO:  "We need both."  He called 
for a new "European security strategy" to be drawn up 
during France's 2008 EU Presidency.  His speech included 
disapproval of the U.S.-led intervention in Iraq, along 
with a statement of French readiness to play a role in 
seeking a political solution.  Sarkozy depicted a timetable 
for troop withdrawal as a trigger for responsible action by 
all parties, first and foremost Iraqis, in the region. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Sarkozy had harsh words to say about Russia 
(asserting itself with a certain "brutality") and China 
("transforming its insatiable quest for raw materials into 
a strategy for control, particularly in Africa").  On 
Turkey, he agreed to open those chapters compatible with 
both EU membership and association, on the condition that 
the EU create, by the end of the year, a committee to 
address its future ("What Europe in 2020-30, and for what 
missions?").  Sarkozy pronounced himself in favor of 
increasing NATO's efforts in Afghanistan, including 
reinforced French training of the Afghan army; re-stated 
his friendship for Israel, while calling for reinforcement 
of the Palestinian Authority under Mahmoud Abbas; and, 
advocated finding a way for Muslim countries to gain access 
to nuclear-generated electricity.  Finally, Sarkozy 
identified three broad challenges facing the international 
community:  How to prevent a confrontation between Islam 
and the West; how to integrate into a new global order of 
the emergent global giants, China, India and Brazil; and 
how to deal with major global risks such as climate change, 
pandemics, and energy security. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Summary Ct'd:  Media analysis, both domestically 
and abroad, focused on Sarkozy's comments on Iran and 
Turkey.  Sarkozy's blunt comment on the twin catastrophes 
of a nuclear-armed Iran or an international attack against 
Iran was widely interpreted as stepped-up rhetoric. 
Sarkozy's conciliatory statement that France would not 
block enlarged dialogue between Turkey and the European 
Commission on membership also attracted media notice, but 
Sarkozy also restated his conviction that  Turkey and the 
EU must devise a partnership other than full membership. 
End Summary. 
 
¶4.  (U) This cable re-transmits post's initial reporting on 
the speech (see Embassy Paris SIPRnet reports for August 
27, 2007, Ref A), along with the media reaction in the 
hours following  the speech. 
 
SARKOZY EXTOLS IMPORTANCE FOR THE FUTURE OF U.S.-FRANCE 
ALLIANCE 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) A confident President Sarkozy, in an hour-long 
address at France's annual Chief of Missions Conference, 
mapped out the direction for France's foreign policy during 
his first term as president.  Sarkozy brought his 
characteristic activist style to the podium -- new 
initiatives and a call to action on all fronts -- to the 
long, Gaullist tradition of keeping France a player on the 
world stage.  He emphasized the importance of the 
U.S-France alliance for the future -- leadership in the 
global era -- rather than a duly remembered shared 
history.  "U.S-France friendship is more important now than 
ever before," Sarkozy said.  Yet "because this friendship 
is a given, we are free to speak frankly" and "without 
taboos" when there are disagreements. 
 
CRITICIZES IRAQ INVASION AND "UNILATERAL RECOURSE TO FORCE" 
 
PARIS 00003579  002.2 OF 006 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Sarkozy directly took the U.S. to task in regard 
to Iraq.  Sarkozy said, "in connection with international 
crises such as that of Iraq, it is clear today that 
unilateral recourse to force leads to failure."  When 
speaking specifically to what he called the Iraq dimension 
of the fusion of crises in the Greater Middle East (the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Lebanon and Iran are other 
three elements), Sarkozy underlined that France recognized 
the threat to its interests of the destabilizing 
consequences of "civil war" in Iraq and was ready to do its 
part to end the conflict.  Sarkozy called for a "political 
solution," adding that it required a "definite horizon 
for the withdrawal of foreign troops," because only then 
would "the actors fully face up to the consequences of 
their actions."  Sarkozy called an Iranian military nuclear 
capability "unacceptable," and termed "the catastrophic 
choice between an Iranian bomb and bombing Iran," "without 
a doubt the most serious crisis that faces the 
international community." 
 
THE FOUR CRISES IN THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Sarkozy asserted that the situation in the Middle 
East has clearly worsened over the past five years as the 
region's separate crises, though "very different" have 
tended "every day to become more inter-linked."  He ran 
through the region's main issues for France as follows: 
 
--Middle East peace process:  Despite the lack of headway, 
Sarkozy stated that the solution was well-known:  Israel 
and Palestine should coexist peacefully as two states with 
established and recognized borders.  Sarkozy unabashedly 
avowed his reputation as a friend of Israel and proclaimed 
his adamant refusal to compromise on Israel's security. 
Since his election, he had been visited in Paris by 
numerous Arab leaders, to whom he had conveyed his sincere 
friendship and respect.  France was ready to play a role, 
he said, but direct Israeli-Palestinian talks were the sole 
starting point toward lasting peace.  The Quartet and 
moderate Arab states should support the Palestinian 
authority, as represented by president Mahmoud Abbas. 
Relaunching a true dynamic of peace was imperative, Sarkozy 
warned, lest the establishment of "Hamastan" in the Gaza 
Strip prove the harbinger of the advent of radical Islamic 
control in the Palestinian territories. 
 
--Lebanon/Syria:  Sarkozy recalled France's long-standing 
ties to Lebanon and asserted a "passionate" commitment to 
Lebanese liberty, independence and sovereignty as demanded 
in UNSCRs 1559 and 1701.  Sarkozy linked FM Kouchner's 
initiative to convene Lebanese parties for talks with 
efforts to resolve the crisis by scheduling elections in 
accordance with the Lebanese constitution, stipulating that 
the next president should be able to work with all Lebanese 
communities.  Sarkozy called for Syria to support the 
approach, adding that constructive action by Damascus would 
permit renewed Franco-Syrian dialog. 
 
--Iraq:  Sarkozy underlined the continuity of policy 
between Chirac and himself in opposing "this war." Being 
right about the conflict, however, did not absolve France 
from dealing with the consequences, which included a 
merciless civil war, entrenched terrorist groupings, and 
global economic fragility due to oil production.  Iraq 
required a political solution, one involving the 
marginalization of extremists, a process of true national 
reconciliation, and guaranteed access to resources and 
institutions for all Iraqis.  Headway furthermore required 
the definition of "a clear horizon concerning the 
withdrawal of foreign troops" in order to push all actors 
-- Iraqi, regional and even international -- toward useful 
action.  France stood ready to play its part, a message 
that FM Kouchner had delivered in his visit to Baghdad. 
 
--Iran:  Sarkozy recalled France's determination, together 
with Germany and the UK, to work in concert with the U.S., 
Russia and China to prevent Iranian development of nuclear 
weapons.  An Iran in possession of nuclear arms is 
"unacceptable for me," he emphasized. While he underlined 
French support for a process of stepped-up sanctions, he 
also stated his willingness to engage with an Iran that 
respected its obligations.  Sarkozy declared bluntly that 
the alternatives to an international diplomatic approach 
were "catastrophic" -- either an Iranian bomb or the 
bombing of Iran itself.  He took heart however in the 
 
PARIS 00003579  003.2 OF 006 
 
 
headway, albeit slow, with the DPRK through the Six Party 
Talks, as well as in the Libyan abandonment of WMD 
programs.  France would spare no effort, Sarkozy said, to 
convince Iran of the benefits of serious international 
negotiations. 
 
A MEDITERRANEAN UNION TO PREEMPT A CLASH WITH ISLAM 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Sarkozy offered his vision of a Mediterranean 
Union as a centerpiece of the effort to stave off 
confrontation between Islam and the West.  A Mediterranean 
Union would involve concrete cooperation between European 
states and the Maghreb in four distinct spheres:  i) the 
environment and sustainable development; ii) cultural 
dialogue; iii)  economic growth/social development; and, 
iv) Mediterranean security.  Sarkozy claimed his 
Mediterranean initiative would be compatible with other 
extant approaches, chiefly the Barcelona Process, "5+5", 
and the Mediterranean Forum.  Informal dialogue was already 
underway, he suggested, including with Libya, a country he 
hoped would quickly rejoin the international community, now 
that the case of the Bulgarian nurses had been resolved. 
He announced planning for a formal meeting of heads of 
state in early 2008. 
 
A FRENCH PRESIDENT WHO EMBRACES NATO 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Sarkozy spoke about NATO in advocacy terms, rare 
for a French president, calling NATO "ours -- we founded 
it, we are one of its principal contributors."  Noting that 
France's security requires both NATO and a Europe Union 
defense policy, he hammered home that "opposing the EU and 
NATO makes no sense" since "the two are complimentary." 
Sarkozy called for the simultaneous strengthening of 
European Defense and the renewal of NATO.  Without 
providing specifics, he said that "France will put forward 
proposals for the renovation of NATO."  Sarkozy pointed to 
the structuring of the international force in Afghanistan 
as a model of NATO-EU synergy.  Kosovo, he said, provided 
another illustration of complementarity among the EU, NATO, 
and the UN.  Later in the speech, after addressing the 
threat of international terrorism (using the phrase "the 
threat of criminal attacks" and not "terrorism" per se), 
Sarkozy pledged to bolster the presence of French trainers 
working with the Afghan military, since "it has to take the 
lead in waging and winning the war against the Taliban." 
He also pledged that France would augment its 
reconstruction assistance in Afghanistan.  He voiced 
apprehension however that the campaign in Afghanistan could 
prove futile if Al Qaeda and Taliban elements continued to 
find refuge across the Pakistan border. 
 
THREE OVER-ARCHING CHALLENGES 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Sarkozy organized his overview of France's 
projected role in the world in light of three challenges: 
i) "preventing a confrontation between Islam and the West"; 
ii) "integrating the emerging giants, China, India and 
Brazil"; and, iii) "managing the first-ever, planetary 
challenges of climate change, sustainable energy 
consumption and pandemics."  Sarkozy placed Europe -- and 
through Europe, France -- at the center of international 
action on the specific issues linking these broad 
challenges.  The speech included a range of steps that 
France would be taking or advocating -- a commission on 
"Europe in 2020 - 2030;" a call to widen the G-8 to include 
the new giants, eventually evolving into a "G-13"; a summit 
of Mediterranean heads of state in early 2008 to advance 
the notion of a Mediterranean Union; a meeting of the UN 
Security Council on peace and security in Africa on 
September 25, which Sarkozy mentioned in the context of 
Darfur.  The French president underlined the need for 
international engagement on climate change.  He was sharply 
critical of the U.S. in this regard, saying that 
"unfortunately, in regard to protection of the environment, 
the U.S. doesn't show the leadership it claims for itself." 
 
PROMISES A STRONG, AND RELEVANT, EUROPE 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) "The construction of Europe will remain the 
absolute priority of our foreign policy" -- so begins the 
main body of the speech, in which Sarkozy tackles the main 
lines of direction of his foreign policy.  He projected 
France as the driving force of Europe, saying that "without 
 
PARIS 00003579  004.2 OF 006 
 
 
Europe France can't be strong, and without France Europe 
can't be strong."  He affirmed that Europe, because it had 
learned "through the long process of its construction," how 
to share sovereignty, brought "practical experience" to the 
interdependent world scene that "fits well with the demands 
of our times."  In previewing the French EU presidency for 
the second half of 2008, Sarkozy promised that he, or the 
Prime Minister, would visit by July 1, 2008 in order to 
listen to their priorities, as well as to propose those of 
France, namely in the areas of immigration, energy and the 
environment. 
 
TURKEY AND THE EU:  SARKOZY LEAVES THE DOOR AJAR 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Sarkozy struck a more conciliatory tone regarding 
EU dialog with Turkey on EU membership, suggesting France 
would set aside objections to opening those new chapters 
for negotiation between the EU and Turkey, compatible with 
the alternatives of either full membership or a close 
linkage that stopped of full membership.  He conditioned 
his willingness on the creation, by the end of 2007, of a 
committee of 10 to 12 "wise men" which would reflect on the 
European project and present their conclusions and 
propositions before the European parliamentary elections in 
June 2009.  Sarkozy nonetheless made clear his support for 
the second option, predicting with confidence that his view 
would gain traction over time. 
 
Russia and China:  Hard-nosed Descriptions 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶14. (SBU) Sarkozy offered blunt thumbnail assessments of 
contemporary Russia and China.  He sketched a Russia making 
an assertive return to the world stage by "brutally" 
wielding trump cards of oil and gas reserves, at a time 
when Europe had hoped for more positive and significant 
contributions.  China, while continuing an impressive and 
historic transformation, evinced an insatiable need for raw 
materials that translated into strategies of control, 
notably in Africa, Sarkozy judged. 
 
Africa:  Poised for Success 
---------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Sarkozy continued his public effort to recast 
perceptions of the French relationship to Africa.  Africa 
remained an "essential priority" in French policy and a key 
front for the EU.  Africa, however, was not the "sick man 
of today's world."  Africa did not need charity, he said, 
and its 5 percent average economic growth would grow 
further if staple products, such as cotton, were properly 
valued.  Africa was poised to succeed in a globalized 
world, yet too often remained marginalized, prone to 
exploitation, suffering from climatic changes, and unable 
to draw the full benefit of vast natural resources.  At the 
midpoint to the Millennium Development Goals, there was a 
need to redouble international commitment, yet this was not 
just a matter of monetary contributions, which Sarkozy 
noted in an allusion to 2008 budgetary stresses in France. 
There was a need for better results, more efficiency, and 
constant management. 
 
African Security Challenges and the Tragedy of Darfur 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶16. (U) Development depended on security, as well, and 
Sarkozy offered a nod to headway in resolving conflicts in 
the Great Lakes and West Africa. Yet Darfur was a clear-cut 
tragedy and the suffering of its people required a 
response.  France must play a part, and Sarkozy took 
comfort in the June 25 Darfur Ministerial in Paris and in 
the UNSCR 1769 authorizing UNAMID, the UN-AU Hybrid Force. 
To further mobilize international efforts to overcome 
challenges to peace and security in Africa, Sarkozy 
announced he would chair a September 25 UNSC meeting of 
heads of states. 
 
Premonitions of a Budgetary Battle? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) Sarkozy concluded his address by stating the MFA 
would need the means by which to fulfill its mission as 
well as interministerial recognition of its role at the 
heart of national policy in order that France could succeed 
in an age of globalization.  To that end, Sarkozy, together 
with the Prime Minister, was requesting the preparation of 
a "White Paper," that Sarkozy would study in connection 
 
PARIS 00003579  005.2 OF 006 
 
 
with a report forthcoming from former FM Hubert Vedrine. 
Sarkozy expressed confidence in the ability of FM Kouchner 
and the MFA to implement reforms.  (Comment: Sarkozy 
mentioned no specific reforms, but FM Kouchner's address to 
the Ambassadorial Conference later in the day called for a 
reorganization of diplomatic representation, with a more 
regional focus and realignment of resources that Kouchner 
referred to as "diplomacy in motion". Kouchner also called 
for greater transparency in ambassadorial appointments. 
Ref B). 
 
 
INITIAL MEDIA REACTION 
---------------------- 
 
¶18.  (U) Leading center-left daily Le Monde -- which hit 
the newsstands in the afternoon on August 27, the same day 
as Sarkozy's address  -- led off media reaction to the 
speech under the headline "Nicolas Sarkozy:  An Iran 
endowed with nuclear arms is unacceptable." The article 
contrasted Sarkozy's more Atlanticist tone, as well as a 
more critical attitude towards Russia and China, with 
Chirac.  The Le Monde reaction also noted that Sarkozy 
explicitly invoked a withdrawal of American troops from 
Iraq, and used the word "war" more than Kouchner did in 
conjunction with his recent visit.  The paper noted that 
Sarkozy's position seemed to have softened slightly with 
regard to Turkey (and the European Union).  It also 
observed that Sarkozy showed a break from Chirac on NATO -- 
calling for focused attention to NATO, and France's 
relationship to it, rather than simply mistrust.  In Le 
Monde's view, Sarkozy no longer looked skeptically at 
international engagement in Afghanistan, in contrast to his 
opinions during the presidential campaign.  Le Monde also 
noted several areas where Sarkozy echoed concerns of 
President Chirac:  preventing a "conflict between Islam and 
the West," climate change, new pandemics. 
 
¶19. (U) All major French newspapers on August 28 
highlighted SarkozyQs address (see Aug. 28 Paris Point 
special edition).  The lead story in Le Figaro ran under 
the headline "Sarkozy for an activist foreign policy" with 
the boxed quote "QA stronger France at home is conditioned 
on its influence overseas.Q"  Le Figaro also ran an 
editorial, "Diplomacy:  Rupture and Continuity," which 
concludes that SarkozyQs foreign policy differs 
dramatically from ChiracQs in tone and substance. 
Liberation, headlined "A Diplomacy of Firmness," and 
highlighted SarkozyQs emphasis on the European Union as the 
"first priority" for French foreign policy.  It also 
published an interview with think-tanker Francois Heisbourg 
who views Sarkozy's line on Iran as firmer and more 
determined than that of his predecessor.  Les Echos, a 
highly respected business daily, focused on SarkozyQs 
emphasis on European cooperation.  Whereas domestic media 
concentrated mostly on the broader outline of foreign 
policy, international coverage tended to focus on specific 
crisis issues, in particular, Iran. 
 
¶20. (U)  AP coverage included a report titled "Sarkozy 
boosting French force in Afghanistan" and an analysis 
titled "Sarkozy vs. Chirac:  Tougher on Russia, friendlier 
to Israel, United States."  AFP stories included "Sarkozy 
pleads before ambassadors for an increased role for France 
on the world scene" and "Sarkozy promises 'very strong 
initiatives' for European defense policy."  The Guardian 
(UK) headline read "From Iran to US, Sarkozy speech signals 
French diplomatic shift," while the Daily Telegraph 
telegraphed "Nicolas Sarkozy warns of Iran's Nuclear 
Crisis."  The International Herald Tribune featured "Tehran 
risks attack over atomic push, Paris warns," which included 
quotes from Heisbourg.  The NY Times carried the same 
Elaine Sciolino story, under the headline "French Leader 
Raises Possibility of Force in Iran," while the Washington 
Post took an opposite tack, with "Sarkozy Says Military 
Confrontation in Iran Would be 'Catastrophic,' Urges 
Diplomacy." 
 
¶21. (U) Electronic media also focused on Sarkozy's address, 
reporting that, while mentioning France's friendly ties 
with the United States, Sarkozy sent a message to the U.S. 
by making clear that the "Iraqis need a clear timetable for 
the withdrawal of foreign troops."  (Former PM Villepin, 
commenting the evening of August 27 on a leading television 
channel, said that it was fine to dispatch FM Kouchner to 
Iraq, but France needed to maintain its call for a definite 
timetable for the withdrawal of U.S. troops.)   TV channels 
TF1 and France 2 highlighted Sarkozy's tough language on 
 
PARIS 00003579  006.2 OF 006 
 
 
Iran, warnings to China and Russia, and his putative 
softening on Turkey's relationship with the EU.  France 2 
also noted Sarkozy's emphasis on the need to prevent "a 
confrontation between Islam and the West," while TF1 
focused on Sarkozy's issuance of "marching orders" to the 
French ambassadors.  As for radio coverage, Europe 1's 
senior commentator called Sarkozy's foreign policy 
"ambitious and courageous," while RTL's called Sarkozy's 
language on Iran "blunt." 
 
 
ENGLISH TEXT OF SPEECH 
---------------------- 
¶22.  (U) Sarkozy's speech, as prepared for delivery, 
translated into English, is available at 
http://opensource.dni.sgov.gov/cgi-bin/cqcgi/ @rware.env 
?CQ_CUR_DOCUMENT=1&CQ_USER_NAME=x&CQ_PASSWORD =h&CQ_ 
LOGIN=Y&CQ_DO_QUERY=Y&CQ_DTF_ORIG_DOC_TEXT=Y& CQ_ 
QUERY_STRING.DOCUMENT_ID=EUP20070827319001&CQ _CUR_ 
LIBRARY=ALL&TrackDocID=EUP20070827319001 
(Note:  Sarkozy's speech as delivered, differed in 
some significant respects from this text; it is the 
authoritative text but a transcript is not yet available.) 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
 
PEKALA