07QUITO2326
ECUADOR'S NEW MINISTER OF TRANSPORT ENTHUSIASTIC,
Mon Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #2326 2882045
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152045Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7911
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 3808
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 2929UNCLAS QUITO 002326 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON POL PGOV EAIR ELTN EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR'S NEW MINISTER OF TRANSPORT ENTHUSIASTIC, 
ECLECTIC 
 
REF: QUITO 2167 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  Ambassador met with new Minister of 
Transport, Hector Villagran Cepeda, on October 2 and learned 
more about his plans to rehabilitate the Ecuadorian railroad 
and promote the U.S. role in its initial construction, build 
a Manta to Manaus intermodal transport link, and make 
transport infrastructure improvements necessary for 
developing Ecuador's tourism potential.  Villagran studied in 
the U.S., and is a strong supporter of U.S.-Ecuadorian 
friendship.  End summary. 
 
Trains, Planes, Automobiles 
--------------------------- 
¶2.  (U) Villagran began the meeting by saying that his 
ministry took very seriously the idea of honoring U.S. 
citizens Arthur and John Harman  and former president Eloy 
Alfaro, the builders of the railroad line linking Ecuador's 
coastal and mountain regions, on the occasion of the 
railroad's 100th anniversary in June 2008.  Ambassador Jewell 
expressed enthusiasm for the project and Villagran replied 
that plans were in the works, and promised to be in contact. 
He said that he hoped to declare 2008 "a year of friendship 
between Ecuadorian and American people." 
 
¶3.  (U) Villagran noted that plans for the Manta to Manaus 
intermodal transport link were progressing, and that the GOE 
and government of Brazil were still seeking international 
investors for the project.  He said that work on the river 
port was under way and that improvements to regional airports 
were being studied (including at Vicente, Esmeraldas, Tena 
and Santa Rosa -- this echoes a request from Aviation Under 
Secretary Guillermo Bernal for technical assistance or 
 
SIPDIS 
equipment that might be useful in developing regional 
airports, see reftel).  Villagran said the GOE has been 
talking with U.S. cargo carrier Arrow Air about developing a 
Miami-Manta-Manaus route, noting that he expected to come to 
an agreement within 20 days (Brazilian Ambassador later 
confirmed these flights will begin in January 2008). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) When Ambassador inquired whether the Ministry had 
reached conclusions or had questions about our proposed Open 
Skies agreement, Villagran said cautiously that the GOE was 
still studying the model text, but that his Under Secretary 
for Aviation would be in touch with the Embassy.  Ambassador 
noted that Ecuadorian and U.S. carriers could both benefit 
from an Open Skies agreement. 
 
¶5.  (U) Villagran commented that something needed to be done 
about urban transport pollution, particularly with regard to 
buses.  He expressed enthusiasm about the U.S. "Adopt a 
Highway" program, and the Ambassador promised to provide more 
information about potential resources or technical assistance 
the embassy might provide to help Ecuador implement a similar 
program. 
 
Developing Ecuador's Tourism 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In discussing regional transport development, 
Villagran told Ambassador Jewell about an architectural site 
in Manabi that he described as an "Ecuadorian Macchu Picchu" 
where U.S. archaeologist Marshall Saville made important 
findings in the early 20th century.  He asked for assistance 
in recovering objects taken by Saville that are currently 
housed by the Smithsonian Institution.  He said he wants to 
encourage the GOE to preserve the site and better market it 
internationally as a tourism destination.  At the end of the 
meeting, Villagran introduced 13 of his advisors, one of whom 
works exclusively on tourism promotion. 
 
¶7.  (U) Bio notes:  Villagran, the son of the Director of the 
U.S.-Ecuadorian binational center in Guayaquil, was appointed 
Minister of Transport on July 9.  He studied law  at the 
Universidad de Guayaquil, business at Florida International 
University, and negotiation at the University of California 
Berkeley. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment: Minister Villagran is young, enthusiastic, 
and mentioned several times that he is concerned about 
operating transparently.  During the 90-minute meeting he 
touched upon a wide variety of topics, without giving the 
impression that he has established his priorities.  He did 
not seem to be well-informed about Open Skies, but we will 
continue to engage the Ministry of Transportation and 
encourage a bilateral discussion on the proposed agreement. 
End comment. 
JEWELL