07STATE152304
INSTRUCTIONS (PART TWO) FOR THE RESOLUTION ON
Sat Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2304 3070237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 030216Z NOV 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 152304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM MOPPS UN AF
SUBJECT: INSTRUCTIONS (PART TWO) FOR THE RESOLUTION ON 
"THE SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN" IN THE UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  Below continues the 
resolution text of the resolution "The Situation in 
Afghanistan" from PART ONE of this instruction sent by 
separate cable.  USUN is also instructed to use the points 
in para 3 in making our Explanation of Vote. 
 
¶2. Continue resolution text: 
 
¶27. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to continue to 
effectively reform the public administration sector in 
order to implement the rule of law and to ensure good 
governance and accountability at both national and local 
levels, and stresses the importance of meeting the 
respective benchmarks of the Afghanistan Compact, with 
the support of the international community; 
 
¶28. Welcomes the formal establishment of the Senior 
Appointments Panel and the finalization of the revised 
Public Administration Reform framework and encourages 
the Government of Afghanistan to ensure appointment of 
officials as required by the Afghanistan Compact; 
 
¶29. Encourages the international community, including all 
donor nations, to assist the Government of Afghanistan in 
making capacity-building and human resources development a 
cross-cutting priority; 
 
¶30. Encourages the Government of Afghanistan to 
vigorously pursue its efforts to establish a more 
effective, accountable and transparent administration at 
national, provincial and local levels of Government 
leading the fight against corruption in accordance with 
the Afghanistan Compact, and notes with concern the effects 
of corruption with regard to security, good governance, 
combating the narcotics industry and economic development; 
 
¶31. Stresses once again the need for further progress on 
a comprehensive judicial reform in Afghanistan, and 
urges the Government of Afghanistan and the international 
community to devote resources also to the reconstruction 
and reform of the prison sector in order to improve 
respect for the rule of law and human rights therein, 
while reducing physical and mental health risks to 
inmates; 
 
¶32. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to address, 
with the assistance of the international community, the 
question of claims for land property through a 
comprehensive land titling programme, including formal 
registration of all property and improved security of 
property rights, and welcomes the steps already taken by 
the Government in this regard; 
 
(Economic and Social Development) 
¶33. Notes the progress achieved in the elaboration of the 
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, underlines 
the need to finalize the Strategy by early 2008, and urges 
the international community actively to support this 
process; 
 
¶34. Urgently appeals to all States, the United Nations 
system and international and non-governmental 
organizations to continue to provide, in close 
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and in 
accordance with its national development strategy, all 
possible and necessary humanitarian, recovery, 
reconstruction, financial, technical and material 
assistance for Afghanistan; 
 
¶35. Urges the international community, in accordance 
with the Afghanistan Compact, to increase the proportion 
of donor assistance channelled directly to the core 
budget, as agreed bilaterally between the Government of 
Afghanistan and each donor, as well as through other 
more predictable core budget funding modalities in which 
the Government participates, such as the Afghanistan 
Reconstruction Trust Fund, the Law and Order Trust 
Fund and the Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund; 
 
¶36. Invites all States, intergovernmental and 
nongovernmental organizations providing assistance to 
Afghanistan to focus on institution-building in a 
coordinated manner and to ensure that such work 
complements and contributes to the development of an 
economy characterized by sound macroeconomic policies, 
the development of a financial sector that provides 
services, inter alia, to micro enterprises, small and 
medium-sized enterprises and households, transparent 
business regulations and accountability; 
 
¶37. Encourages the international community to support 
the local economy as a measure for long-term stability 
and countering narcotics, and in this respect explore 
possibilities for enhancing local procurement; 
 
¶38. Calls for strengthening the process of regional 
economic cooperation including measures to facilitate 
regional trade, to increase foreign investments and to 
develop infrastructure, noting Afghanistan's historic role 
as a land bridge in Asia; 
 
¶39. Reiterates the necessity of providing Afghan children 
with educational and health facilities in all parts of the 
country, welcomes progress achieved in the sector of 
public education and recalls the National Education 
Strategic Plan as a promising basis for further 
achievements; 
 
¶40. Recognizes the special needs of girls, strongly 
condemns terrorist attacks on education facilities, and 
encourages the Government of Afghanistan, with the 
assistance of the international community, to expand 
these facilities, to train professional staff and to 
promote full and equal access to them by all members of 
Afghan society, including in remote areas; 
 
¶41. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that 
continue to host Afghan refugees, acknowledging the huge 
burden they have so far shouldered in this regard, and 
re-minds them of their obligations under international 
refugee law with respect to the protection of refugees, 
the principle of voluntary return and the right to seek 
asylum and to allow international access for their 
protection and care; 
 
¶42. Urges the Government of Afghanistan, acting with 
the support of the international community, to continue 
and strengthen its efforts to create the conditions for 
the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return and 
reintegration of the remaining Afghan refugees and 
internally displaced persons; 
 
¶43. Welcomes in this regard the Tripartite Agreements 
between the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees, the Government of the Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan and the Governments of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran respectively; 
 
¶44. Calls for the provision of continued international 
assistance to the large numbers of Afghan refugees and 
internally displaced persons to facilitate their 
voluntary, safe, dignified and orderly return and sustainable 
reintegration into society so as to contribute to the 
stability of the entire country; 
 
(Counter Narcotics as a Cross-Cutting Priority) 
¶45. Expresses concern about the second successive 
increase in the cultivation of opium, notes that opium 
cultivation, the related drug production and trafficking 
and the increasingly strong nexus between drug trade 
and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and 
other extremist groups pose a serious threat to security, the 
rule of law and development in Afghanistan, urges the 
Government of Afghanistan, supported by the international 
community, to work to mainstream counter-narcotics 
throughout all the national programmes, and ensure 
counter-narcotics is a fundamental part of the 
comprehensive approach, commends the efforts of the 
Government in this regard, and urges it to increase its 
efforts against opium cultivation and drug trafficking, 
with the support of the international community; 
 
¶46. Welcomes the efforts to date of the Afghan 
Government to carry out the National Drug Control 
Strategy and urges the Government of Afghanistan and 
the international community to take decisive action, in 
particular to stop the processing and trade in drugs, by 
pursuing the concrete steps set out in the Strategy and in 
the Afghanistan Compact and through initiatives such as 
the Good Performers Initiative established to provide 
incentives for governors to reduce cultivation in their 
provinces; 
 
¶47. Calls upon the international community to assist the 
Government of Afghanistan in carrying out its National 
Drug Control Strategy, aimed at eliminating the 
cultivation, production, trafficking in and consumption of 
illicit drugs, including through increased support for 
Afghan law enforcement and criminal justice agencies, 
agricultural and rural development, demand reduction, the 
elimination of illicit crops, increasing public awareness, 
building the capacity of drug control institutions and 
creating alternative livelihoods for farmers; 
 
¶48. Encourages the international community to 
increasingly channel counter-narcotics funding through 
the Government of Afghanistan's counter-narcotics trust 
fund; 
 
¶49. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to promote the 
development of sustainable livelihoods in the formal 
production sector as well as other sectors, and to 
improve access to reasonable and sustainable credit and 
financing in rural areas, thus improving substantially the 
lives, health and security of the people, particularly in 
rural areas; 
 
¶50. Supports the fight against the illicit trafficking in 
drugs and precursors within Afghanistan and in 
neighbouring States and countries along trafficking 
routes, including increased cooperation among them to 
strengthen anti-narcotic controls to curb the drug flow; 
 
¶51. Recalls the outcome of the Second Ministerial 
Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan, 
organized by the Government of the Russian Federation 
in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime, held in Moscow from 26 to 28 June 2006, 
within the framework of the Paris Pact initiative, and 
therefore calls upon States to strengthen international 
and regional cooperation to counter the increasing threat 
to the international community posed by the illicit 
production of and trafficking in drugs; 
 
¶52. Welcomes recent initiatives to promote border 
management cooperation in drug control between Afghanistan 
and its neighbors; 
 
( Coordination and Monitoring/ UN) 
¶53. Stresses the central and impartial role of the United 
Nations in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan 
by leading the efforts of the international community, 
and endorses the key principles for cooperation between 
the Government of Afghanistan and the international 
community as referred to in the Afghanistan Compact; 
 
¶54. Acknowledges the central role played by the Joint 
Coordination and Monitoring Board in facilitating and 
monitoring the implementation of the Afghanistan 
Compact, stresses the role of the Board to support 
Afghanistan by, inter alia, coordinating international 
assistance and reconstruction programmes and welcomes 
further efforts to provide appropriate high level 
political guidance and promote a more coherent international 
engagement; 
 
¶55. Commends the continuing efforts of the signatories of 
the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly Relations of 
22 December 2002 to implement their commitments under the 
Declaration, and furthermore calls upon all other States 
to respect and support the implementation of those 
provisions and to promote regional stability; 
 
¶56. Welcomes efforts by the Governments of Afghanistan and 
its neighbouring partners to foster trust and cooperation 
with each other, and looks forward, where appropriate, to 
increasing cooperation between Afghanistan and all its 
neighbouring and regional partners against the 
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups and in 
promoting peace and prosperity in Afghanistan, in the 
region and beyond; 
 
¶57. Welcomes the holding of the Afghan-Pakistani Joint 
Peace Jirga in Kabul, 9-12 August 2007 and the collective 
determination expressed at the Jirga to bring sustainable 
peace to the region, including by addressing the terrorist 
threat; 
 
¶58. Welcomes the Ankara Declaration issued following 
the Trilateral Summit of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey 
held in Ankara on April 29-30, 2007, and expresses support 
to the continuation of this process; 
 
¶59. Also welcomes the joint statement adopted by 
Foreign Ministers of the G8 with the Foreign Ministers of 
Afghanistan and Pakistan in Potsdam, 30 May, 2007 on 
the promotion of cooperation and assistance through 
mutual consultation and agreement, including follow-up 
projects in areas such as refugees repatriation and 
economic development; 
 
¶60. Appreciates the efforts of the members of the 
Tripartite Commission, namely Afghanistan, Pakistan, the 
United States of America and ISAF to continue to address 
cross-border activities and to broaden its cooperation, 
welcomes the participation of the Assistance Force, and 
calls upon the international community to support those 
efforts; 
 
¶61. Emphasizes the need to maintain, strengthen and 
review civil-military relations among international 
actors, as appropriate, at all levels in order to ensure 
complementarity of action based on the different mandates 
and comparative advantages of the humanitarian, 
development, law enforcement and military actors present 
in Afghanistan, bearing in mind the central and impartial 
coordinating role of the United Nations; 
 
(Procedural References) 
¶62. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the 
General Assembly every six months during its sixty- 
second session on developments in Afghanistan, as well 
as on the progress made in the implementation of the 
present resolution; 
 
¶63. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its 
sixty-third session the item entitled "The situation in 
Afghanistan". 
 
End Resolution Text. 
 
¶3.  Begin discussion points: 
 
--  The United States is pleased to join the other member 
states who have co-sponsored this resolution on The 
Situation in Afghanistan.  This resolution details the 
progress the Afghan people and the international community 
have made in the process of freeing Afghanistan from the 
oppressive Taliban regime and its terrorist allies who 
held the country hostage. 
 
 -- We join in recognizing the Afghan government, the 
Secretary General, his Special Representative, the staff 
 
SIPDIS 
of UNAMA, and all of the forces participating in the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and 
Operation Enduring Freedom.  Every element of the combined 
effort to support the Afghan people in their quest for 
peace and prosperity is essential. 
 
-- This resolution also underlines the significant 
challenges that remain in completing Afghanistan's 
transition to a prosperous self-dependent state.  Foremost 
among those challenges are the security threats posed by 
Taliban and Al-Qaida forces wishing to reimpose their 
tyranny on the Afghan people.  These security threats have 
been recently exacerbated by the growth of the narcotics 
trade, which fuels continued terrorism and criminal 
violence. 
 
-- In light of these continued threats, we call on the 
international community to maintain its commitments to 
Afghanistan, in particular to implementing the Afghanistan 
Compact, and, as appropriate, to increase contributions to 
NATO's ISAF mission. 
 
-- Effective governance will play a pivotal role in 
achieving stability.  In particular, the United States is 
turning its focus to sub-national governance.  We must 
help the Afghan government to deliver services, security 
and good governance at the local level, where most Afghans 
interact with their government. 
 
-- Despite enormous efforts by the Taliban and Al-Qaida, 
the international community has succeeded in helping 
Afghans establishing representative government.  The 
Afghan economy shows continued signs of improvement. 
Afghan police and military forces are increasingly taking 
responsibility for establishing security for their own 
people.  The Afghan government has restored the basic 
human rights of millions of Afghans previously held 
virtual hostage by the Taliban, notably women and 
children.  Afghanistan is playing a constructive role in 
the region of South and Central and Asia with the 
potential to serve as a bridge in regional economic 
integration. 
 
-- The government of Afghanistan and the international 
community will succeed in establishing stability and 
prosperity if we maintain our commitments to the Afghan 
people.  They deserve no less, having made their choice 
for freedom and against terrorism and oppression. 
 
End Points. 
RICE