07SUVA80
EMINENT PERSONS GROUP MEETING WITH FOREIGN MISSIONS IN
Tue Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Suva
VZCZCXRO7876
PP RUEHNZ RUEHPB
DE RUEHSV #0080/01 0302205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 302205Z JAN 07 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY SUVA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3733
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0256
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 1557
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 0101
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0037
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0083
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0092
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0073
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 1138
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0086
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 1331
RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 0351
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0757
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0292
RHMFIUU/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RHHJJAA/JICPAC HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SUVA 000080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL MARR FJ CH EUN UK FR KS JA MY ID IN
SUBJECT: EMINENT PERSONS GROUP MEETING WITH FOREIGN MISSIONS IN 
FIJI 
 
REF: STATE 10593 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU)  Representatives from many foreign missions resident in 
Fiji condemned the military takeover in a meeting with the Pacific 
Island Forum's Eminent Persons Group 1/31 and called for a rapid 
return of democracy.  A notable exception was China, which hopes for 
a return of stability and continued friendly ties with Fiji.  The 
U.S., UK, the EU and the UN all called for stepped up international 
pressure against the widespread human rights abuses perpetrated by 
the military.  The UK challenged Asian countries to speak up more. 
Malaysia rejected that appeal, stating that its primary concern is 
the cost of this coup to Malaysia through its likely negative impact 
on Malaysia's aid programs.  End summary. 
 
EPG Meets Representatives of Foreign Missions 
--------------------------------------=------ - 
¶2. (SBU) The Eminent Persons Group (EPG) of the Pacific Island 
Forum, in Fiji to hold discussions about the military takeover with 
a broad cross section of the domestic and international community, 
met 1/31 with representatives of many foreign missions represented 
in Fiji.  These included the U.S., the UK, France, the European 
Commission, China, Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea and India.  The 
EPG is meeting separately with Forum member countries, including 
Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and the Pacific Island 
states resident in Suva.  The EPG consists of Vanuatu Deputy Prime 
Minister Sato Kilman, retired PNG Chief Justice Sir Arnold Arnet, 
Samoa's Minister of Environment Faumuina Liuga, and the retired 
Commander of the Australian Defense Force, Gen. Peter Cosgrove. 
 
Foreign Reps Condemn Takeover 
------------------------------ 
¶3.  (SBU)  Most missions represented condemned or "expressed regret" 
at the military takeover of Fiji's elected government: 
 
--The U.S. (Embassy Suva Charge) condemned the takeover,  and called 
for an immediate restoration of democracy and the rule of law in 
Fiji. 
 
--Speaking on behalf of Germany, the current President of the EU 
Council, the French representative condemned the takeover and 
insisted on a timely return to a democratically elected government. 
 
--The UK High Commissioner endorsed the above remarks and noted his 
government's unhappiness at the lack of progress by the interim 
government in setting out a timetable for a return to democracy. 
 
--The EC Representative said that the EC considers the coup a breach 
of Article Nine of the Cotonou Agreement, triggering provisions of 
Article 96 of that agreement, requiring consultations with Fiji. 
The European Council does not recognize the legitimacy of the 
current interim government. 
 
--Indonesia's Ambassador noted that his Foreign Minister had issued 
a statement expressing regret at the change of government in Fiji 
through un-democratic means. Indonesia adheres to a principle of not 
interfering in the "internal affairs" of Fiji. 
 
--The Indian High Commission representative said the GOI had issued 
a statement immediately after the coup calling on the military to 
restore democracy. 
 
--The Chinese Ambassador said his government had announced that it 
was following with concern the developments in Fiji.  China hoped 
for a return to stability based on mutual respect and "the five 
principles of coexistence."   There have been no further changes to 
that early statement, he said. 
 
--The Malaysian High Commissioner said her Foreign Minister had 
called for an immediate restoration of democracy based on 
Commonwealth principles. 
 
-- The Japanese Embassy representative said that in the immediate 
wake of the coup, the Japanese Foreign Ministry had condemned the 
 
SUVA 00000080  002 OF 003 
 
 
illegal overthrow and expressed its grave concern, calling for a 
quick return to democracy.  Since then, he said, more "normal 
relations" had resumed. 
 
--The head of the UNDP, who is also the senior UN resident 
coordinator, said there have been condemnatory statements from the 
UNSG and the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva. The UN 
office has suspended all contact and engagement with the higher 
levels of the interim government. 
 
--The representative of the Korean Embassy said that while his 
government had "been thinking about a response," he had no guidance 
from Seoul.  The EPG's Cosgrove suggested that he pass to Seoul the 
"broad sentiments" expressed by the other countries present. 
 
Aid Continuing? 
--------------- 
¶4. (SBU) A number of the representatives reviewed the status of the 
aid they give Fiji: 
 
-- The Representative of the European Commission noted that the EU 
has budgeted FJ$350 million in support of a sugar industry adaption 
strategy over the 2007-2013 period.  These funds are a key subject 
of the upcoming consultations with Fiji.  He said the EU was funding 
a F$44 million education project to upgrade 300 schools' 
infrastructure; a F$2 million voter education program; and a 
environmental project. 
 
--The Malaysian High Commissioner said that development cooperation 
with Fiji would not be affected. 
 
--Indonesia will continue to implement existing technical 
cooperation programs. 
 
--India has made no decision to suspend technical cooperation with 
Fiji, and previously scheduled visits related to existing projects 
in support of Fiji's sugar industry will go ahead. 
 
--Japan will continue providing "grassroots" assistance to Fiji. 
Larger scale projects are currently suspended.  The Japanese 
representative noted that Japan has stopped issuing visas to 
ministers in the interim government and to high-ranking military 
personnel. 
 
A Quick Return to Democracy? 
--------------------------- 
¶5. (SBU)  In response to a question from the EPG about the preferred 
timetable for a return to democracy, the UK High Commissioner said 
the timeframe should be "as short as possible."  He said the UK 
acknowledged the government's insistence that there needed to be a 
national census and an adjustment of electoral boundaries.  However, 
once those were completed (and it shouldn't take long) there should 
be an election.  The French representative also expressed concern 
about the lack of a timetable.  Embassy Suva Charge reiterated that 
the U.S. supports an immediate return to democracy.  He expressed 
concern that calls for a census, a boundaries commission, and other 
intermediate steps are being used by the interim government as a 
pretext for delaying the return of democratic rule. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  EPG member Luiga noted that if the interim government 
agreed to the international community's demand for a quick return to 
democracy, via a census and other prerequisites, the government 
would require resources.  The international community would have to 
provide them.  Only the EC representative responded, saying an 
answer would have to await the planned EU-Fiji consultations. 
 
Human Rights Abuses/Interference With Judiciary 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶7. (SBU) A number of missions raised concerns about human rights 
abuses perpetrated by the military and interference in the 
judiciary.  The U.S. condemned the widespread and ongoing violations 
of civil liberties and human rights.  These actions, together with 
the blatant interference by the military in the judiciary have 
severely undermined the rule of law in Fiji.  The UK High 
Commissioner said his government is very concerned about the many 
 
SUVA 00000080  003 OF 003 
 
 
reports of human rights abuses.  The same is true for the 
government's interference in the judiciary.  An immediate cessation 
of human rights abuses and the prosecution of abuse perpetrators was 
essential and achievable; the military was responsible for them and 
could stop them.   The French representative said the European 
Council had expressed deep concern about reports of human rights 
abuses and noted the suspension of the Chief Justice and the 
president's amnesty decree.  The UNDP representative said the UN has 
clear and credible reports of human rights abuses, but agreed with 
an EPG members' comment that abuse victims are afraid to complain to 
their government or the Fiji Human Rights Commission, fearing 
reprisals. 
 
Malaysia Rejects the UK Challenge to Speak Out Against Human Rights 
Violations 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶8. (SBU) The UK High Commissioner called upon the representatives of 
the Asian countries in the room to speak out more strongly against 
human rights abuses.  The Malaysian High Commissioner was the only 
representative of an Asian country to respond.  She said that, as 
much as Malaysia deplores the human rights abuses that have 
occurred, as a fellow developing country with limited assistance 
resources to aid Fiji's development, "our primary and immediate 
concern is the cost of this coup" to Malaysia, which will see its 
assistance programs delayed or derailed.  She also read a brief 
statement in support of the work of the controversial Fiji Human 
Rights Commission (FHRC), who's work she said was fair.  (Comment: 
Malaysia is either woefully misinformed about the work of the FHRC 
or FHRC Director Shaista Shameem has friends in high places in 
Malaysia.  The FHRC can best be described as a tool of the military 
regime.  End comment.) 
 
What Can the International Community Do? 
---------------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) Several EPG members expressed deep concern about continuing 
human rights violations and asked if the international community 
could be doing more to convince the military to stop its actions, 
including through "smart sanctions" if necessary.  The U.S., EC, the 
UN, and UK reiterated the need for the international community to 
continue voicing outrage at human rights violations.  They noted the 
important role the EPG might be able to play in this regard. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶10. (SBU)  The EPG members were well prepared and well informed.  In 
light of a number of comments EPG members made, we expect them to 
raise concerns about human rights abuses to the interim government. 
Their comments also indicate they are likely to urge a quick return 
to democratic rule.