07TELAVIV1783
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1783/01 1690954
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 180954Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1706
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2325
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9047
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2345
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3138
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2347
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0255
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3086
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9960
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0432
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7030
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4446
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9356
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3531
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5475
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 7146
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  US-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Among the main stories over the weekend were the formation by PA 
Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas of an emergency cabinet headed by 
Salam Fayyad, in defiance of Hamas; the flight of Palestinians from 
the Gaza Strip; and the expeditious nomination by PM Ehud Olmert of 
newly elected Labor Party Chairman Ehud Barak to the post of defense 
minister. 
 
The media quoted PM Ehud Olmert as saying on Sunday that Israel 
would work with the international community to meet the humanitarian 
needs of Gaza residents and would not intervene militarily, but at 
the same time, "we will not stand idly by and watch the execution of 
innocent people."  He did not explain what form Israel's refusal to 
"stand idly by" might take.  Olmert, who was meeting in New York 
with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, was responding to the UN 
official's fears of a humanitarian crisis in Gaza.  Israel Radio 
reported that the London-based daily Ash-Sharq Al-Awsat published an 
article by FM Tzipi Livni, in which she explains that Israel has no 
intention of ruling the Palestinians.  The Jerusalem Post quoted 
Internal Security Minister Avi Dichter as saying on Sunday that he 
told Olmert that if Egypt cannot assert its authority over the 
"Philadelphi Corridor" between the Gaza Strip and Sinai, Israel will 
have to take charge. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Abbas intends to demand that Israel 
immediately implement the American "benchmark" proposal for 
increasing Palestinian freedom of movement in the territories. 
Ha'aretz also quoted advisors to Abbas as saying on Sunday that he 
will ask Israel to release a massive number of Palestinian 
prisoners, first and foremost Marwan Barghouti.  The advisors 
contended that a significant prisoner release would vastly increase 
Abbas's popularity, while Barghouti in particular, as the most 
popular Fatah politician could do much to bolster the Chairman's 
standing in the West Bank and Gaza.  Barghouti is currently serving 
five life terms in prison for the murder of five Israeli civilians. 
In addition, the advisors were quoted as saying that Israel must not 
interfere with efforts to recruit, train, and arm Fatah's security 
forces: "Israel's operations completely destroyed these forces in 
the West Bank."   "[Israel] must allow freedom of movement to 
members of the Palestinian security services and not impede their 
training."  (The Jerusalem Post filed a similar report.)  Finally, 
the sources were quoted as saying that Israel must resume diplomatic 
negotiations with Abbas, in order to give the Palestinians a 
diplomatic horizon, and must hand over all the tax revenues it has 
collected on the PA's behalf, so that Abbas can pay the authority's 
employees.  Ha'aretz wrote that the Foreign Ministry is recommending 
against any violation of the Oslo Accords in response to Hamas's 
takeover of the Gaza Strip.  The ministry believes that any 
violation of an agreement by Israel would make it legitimate for 
Hamas not to recognize such deals, and would harm Israel's standing 
in the international community.  On Sunday Maariv (Ben Caspit) 
reported that on Saturday Olmert was in contact with Abbas.  The 
Palestinians told Olmert that for now he has to calm down the 
situation, not to descend upon them with gestures. 
 
Israel Radio quoted Jacob Walles, the US Consul-General in 
Jerusalem, as saying on Sunday in an interview with AP that the US 
will fully support Abbas's new government and at the same time work 
to avoid a humanitarian disaster in the Gaza Strip following Hamas's 
violent takeover there.  Over the weekend the media reported that 
the US and the Quartet stressed their support for Abbas.  On Sunday 
The Jerusalem Post reported that an Egyptian diplomatic official 
told the newspaper that a separation of the West Bank and the Gaza 
Strip under the rule of the two separate Palestinian factions would 
be a recipe for disaster. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted a source in Olmert's entourage as saying earlier 
that Israel would continue to supply water, electricity and medical 
supplies to Gaza, and would also allow food and other essential 
supplies to enter the strip through Israel.  Media also reported 
that Olmert promised that Israel would cooperate with the new 
government that Abbas appointed in the West Bank on Sunday. 
However, the PM added that Abbas must in turn take vigorous action 
against Hamas forces in the West Bank to ensure that the Islamic 
organization does not take over there as well.  In addition, he was 
quoted as saying that Israel will consider releasing the frozen tax 
revenues, amounting to some USD 562 million, to Abbas.  Ha'aretz 
also reported that Olmert told Ban that the Hamas takeover of Gaza 
proved that Israel's skepticism of the PA unity government had been 
justified.  Ha'aretz reported that on the plane en route to New York 
a source in Olmert's entourage told journalists that the idea of 
stationing an international force along the Gaza-Egypt border to 
prevent arms smuggling into Gaza is no longer on the agenda. 
According to the source, Egypt as well as Hamas oppose the idea 
making deployment of a force with a robust mandate (the only kind 
Israel would accept) highly unlikely.  The media reported that 
Olmert will fly to Washington today and meet with President Bush on 
Tuesday.  Maariv reported that Gaza residents in need of urgent 
medical treatment are not allowed to cross into Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Israeli economy is losing about 8 million 
shekels (around USD 1.9 million) a day in direct damages from the 
closure of the Gaza Strip as a result of the Hamas takeover.  The 
Jerusalem Post quoted John Ging, the head of the UN Relief and Works 
Agency, as saying that his organization returned to full operation 
on Sunday, but quoted him as saying that it had food stocks for only 
10 days to feed the 1.11 million people who are dependent upon it 
for survival.  Ha'aretz quoted people involved in trade with the 
Palestinians in Gaza as saying that supplies should last only two 
weeks at most.  Ha'aretz also said that Gaza Strip residents are 
completely dependent on Israel for electricity, fuel, and water. 
Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post reported that on Sunday the private 
energy company Dor Alon cut off supplies of fuel to Gaza. 
 
All media reported that on Sunday afternoon three Katyusha rockets 
fired from Lebanon landed in the Kiryat Shmona area in northern 
Israel.  No injuries were reported and the IDF believes that that 
further rocket attacks are unlikely.  Hizbullah published a 
statement denying responsibility, and quoting Lebanese and Israeli 
sources attributing it to a Palestinian organization.  Israel did 
not react.  Israel Radio quoted PM Ehud Olmert as saying in New York 
that Israel would have responded differently had there been 
casualties. 
 
Maariv reported that the UN's Special Coordinator for the Middle 
East Peace Process, Michael Williams, recently informed PM Olmert 
that Syrian President Bashar Assad is willing to start negotiations 
with Israel without preconditions. 
 
Major media reported that on Sunday three High Court Justices ruled 
that the state must inform the Court within 45 days if it is willing 
to establish an independent committee to investigate the 
assassination of leading Hamas militant Salah Shehadeh in July 2002, 
including the question of whether a criminal probe is justified. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post reported that Bank of Israel Governor 
Stanley Fischer has turned down an offer from PM Olmert to become 
 
finance minister. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that that UN has almost completed mapping of the 
Sheba Farms region, from which it expects Israel to withdraw. 
 
Ha'aretz published the results of a survey commissioned in April by 
The Israel Project (TIP), an organization that strives to improve 
Israel's image in America and the rest of the world.  TIP polled 500 
representatives of the "opinion elite": college graduates with 
annual incomes above USD 75,000, who vote in elections, and read 
newspapers and magazines.  They were asked, among other things, to 
rank their attitude toward Israel and Hamas, Syria, Iran and 
Hizbullah, on a scale of 1 to 100, with below 50 indicating a "cold" 
attitude and above it a "warm" attitude. Israel received a 66, while 
the others scored between 19 (Hizbullah) and 30 (Syria).  "Who is to 
blame for the instability in the Middle East?" the poll asked. 
Seventy-three percent blamed "Islamic extremism" and only 12 percent 
named "Israel and its policies."  According to Ha'aretz, the poll 
contains "some rather sad working assumptions": 57 percent "strongly 
agree" that "the Arab countries around Israel are hostile to its 
existence," and 85 percent overall said they "agree" with that 
statement.  Some 75 percent said they agreed that "the Arabs do not 
really accept Israel's right to exist."  But there are also findings 
that suggest a possible course of action.  For example, 70 percent 
cited the need to be "a leader in working for peace" as heading the 
list of 13 qualities required of an American "ally."  But only 16 
percent saw this among Israel's traits.  Sixty percent did not agree 
that "Israel is an obstacle for peace" -- but 38 percent did, and 29 
percent of them were Republican voters, while 42 percent said they 
were Democrats.  Ha'aretz noted that the findings among the general 
public constitute an "improvement" over a poll from October 2005, in 
which 50 percent said Israel is not an obstacle for peace, compared 
with 43 percent who believed that it was. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote on page one of 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The link between Gaza and 
the West Bank is a link of cooperation in the vision of Palestinian 
nationhood." 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "The line that must guide Israel's policy is 
that central Palestinian rule -- as weak and problematic as it may 
be -- is better for us than the transformation of the territories 
into a miniature Iraq." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "If the 
West continues to offer Palestinians nothing more than a choice 
between Hamas and a corrupt Hamas-lite, they are likely to continue 
to choose Hamas." 
 
Chief Economic Editor Sever Plotker wrote in the editorial of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "It is not very 
pleasant to admit it, but in the battle for control of the Gaza 
Strip, Hamas was in the right." 
 
Former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy wrote in the editorial of 
Yediot Aharonot: "The Defense Minister, Ehud Barak, will undoubtedly 
carry out all the necessary inquiries [regarding the posting of 
international forces in the Gaza Strip] and decide on a policy that 
takes into account all the angles and aspects of the situation that 
Israel has entered over the course of the past year of agony." 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "One State For One People" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote on page one of 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (6/18): "The victory shouts 
of Hamas in Gaza and the hastily established emergency government in 
the West Bank ostensibly strengthen the impression that the 
Palestinians' land will really be divided: the West Bank to Fatah 
and Gaza to Hamas.  This is also the reason for the haste with which 
Washington and Israel are willing to grant the emergency government 
favors it was not wise enough to give before the 2006 elections, not 
to mention afterward.  It is as if they too were hurrying to 
celebrate the division between 'heaven' and 'hell' and to show the 
citizens of Palestine how much they had lost by voting for Hamas. 
But it seems that the celebrations are premature because Gaza cannot 
disconnect from the West Bank.  Anyone who still sees Oslo as a 
basis for continued formal cooperation with the PA -- and such 
cooperation cannot exist without it -- must see Gaza and the West 
Bank as one unit.  The link between Gaza and the West Bank is a link 
of cooperation in the vision of Palestinian nationhood.  That is the 
basis on which Hamas built its struggle against Israel and its later 
partnership with Fatah." 
 
II.  "Who Will Give Us a Partner?" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (6/18): "The line that must guide Israel's 
policy is that central Palestinian rule -- as weak and problematic 
as it may be -- is better for us than the transformation of the 
territories into a miniature Iraq.... The Israeli government and the 
Quartet must resurrect the road map and present the Palestinians 
with a new and credible diplomatic agenda that will lead to the end 
of the occupation and a permanent status arrangement.... Together 
with the easing of restrictions on the civilian population in the 
West Bank and the bolstering of Fatah under the leadership of Abbas 
and Fayyad, the decline into humanitarian disaster in the Gaza Strip 
must be prevented.  As long as the Hamas leadership reins in Qassam 
rocket fire and prevents terror attacks, there is no reason not to 
coordinate with them the opening of the border crossings to allow 
supplies and merchandise in and agricultural produce out.  Starving 
children and distressing the elderly are neither just nor wise." 
 
 
III.  "Learn From Mistakes" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (6/18): 
"Fatah now claims it collapsed before the Hamas forces because it 
had been busy fighting Israel. Before pouring in assistance, the US 
and Israel must demand that Fatah end its absurd competition with 
Hamas over which faction is more anti-Israel and instead provide a 
real alternative to the Islamist movement.   This means giving 
Palestinians a true choice between building Palestine -- including 
settling refugees, ending incitement and instituting the rule of law 
-- and a fruitless war with Israel.  Perhaps Palestinians, given a 
choice between Hamas's perpetual war and leaders who demonstrate 
they are serious about ending the war with Israel in order to create 
a Palestinian state, will still choose the former.  Yet there is a 
chance that, given the opportunity, they are ready for peace. 
However slim that chance may be, we do know this: If the West 
continues to offer Palestinians nothing more than a choice between 
Hamas and a corrupt Hamas-lite, they are likely to continue to 
choose Hamas." 
 
IV.  "Burying One's Head in the Snow" 
Chief Economic Editor Sever Plotker wrote in the editorial of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (6/17): "Fatah, a 
corrupt and futureless organization, is one of a long list of 
'national liberation' movements which sprang up like mushrooms after 
the rain in the 1960s and 1970s.... With the disintegration of the 
Soviet Union, these national liberation movements also 
disintegrated, with the exception of that of the Palestinians, even 
though one could have anticipated its disintegration after the Oslo 
Accords were signed. Indeed that is what happened, but it took 14 
years.... It is not very pleasant to admit it, but in the battle for 
control of the Gaza Strip, Hamas was in the right.  Hamas is cruel, 
disgusting and filled with hatred for Israel, but it was victorious 
in democratic elections, and all it wanted was to reap the fruits of 
its victory.  Hamas did not 'seize control' of Gaza.  It took the 
action needed to enforce its authority, disarming and destroying a 
militia that refused to bow to its authority. Hamas aspires to 
realize the dream of 'one authority and one rifle' --  first in Gaza 
and later in the West Bank, all in it own good time.  Reality, when 
it is ignored, returns with greater force and punishes he who has 
suppressed it." 
 
 
 
¶V.  "Internationalization of the Conflict" 
 
Former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy wrote in the editorial of 
Yediot Aharonot (6/18): "Following the collapse of the joint policy 
of the US, Israel, and Fatah in Gaza, and the fall of the Gaza Strip 
into the hands of Hamas, one proposal that has arisen is to station 
an international force there.  What would the task of the force be? 
To 'protect' Israel against Hamas?  To prevent the firing of Qassam 
rockets and more accurate and lethal rockets at Israel?  To fight 
against Hamas alongside the IDF or instead of the IDF, and to cause 
its collapse?  And if such a force is stationed [in Gaza], when 
would a similar force be stationed in Judea and Samaria [i.e. the 
Wet Bank]?  The situation is much more complex than in the past, and 
it requires in-depth analysis and a long-term perspective. The 
Defense Minister, Ehud Barak, will undoubtedly carry out all the 
necessary inquiries and decide on a policy that takes into account 
all the angles and aspects of the situation that Israel has entered 
over the course of the past year of agony." 
 
------------------------ 
¶2.  US-Israel Relations: 
------------------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: "To a large extent, the Americans have 
regained confidence that [Ehud Olmert] is a leader who will be 
around for a while." 
 
Roni Bart of Israel's Institute for National Security Studies wrote 
in The Jerusalem Post: "Instead of asking [the US] for a 25 percent 
increase [in aid] over 10 years, Israel should suggest a weaning 
process: a 100 percent decrease over 25 years." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Olmert's Transformation in America's Eyes -- From Lame Duck to 
Winner" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (6/18): "[Condoleezza] Rice wanted to 
wait until the dust from the [Winograd Commission's] report settled, 
and see what type of Israeli government would emerge, and who would 
be its head.  Well, the dust has settled, and -- according to US 
assessments -- Olmert is firmly in place.... [Ehud] Barak's 
appointment as defense minister will, diplomatic officials say, 
restore a degree of confidence in Israel's military, because he is 
seen as 'supremely competent.'  And, like [Shimon] Peres, Barak is 
viewed as someone 'serious about wanting peace,' someone who in 2000 
both at Camp David and through his decision to with draw from 
Lebanon showed willingness to 'take chances for peace.'  From a 
political point of view, Olmert timed his visit to the US perfectly. 
 To a large extent, the Americans have regained confidence that he 
is a leader who will be around for a while.  What Olmert will now 
try to do is use the US trip, and President George W. Bush's 
support, to convince a skeptical Israeli public of the same." 
 
II.  "Should Israel Really Be Asking For an Increase in US Aid?" 
 
Roni Bart of Israel's Institute for National Security Studies wrote 
in The Jerusalem Post (6/18): "Israel's military needs are many and 
expensive, and the United States is generous.  However, American aid 
amounts to only 4 percent of Israel's annual budget. Israel can and 
should change its budgetary priorities to gradually decrease 
American aid.  Instead of asking for a 25 percent increase over 10 
years, Israel should suggest a weaning process: a 100 percent 
decrease over 25 years." 
 
CRETZ