07TELAVIV678
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0678/01 0611026
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021026Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9747
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 1748
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8502
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1662
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2540
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 1736
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9528
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2470
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9390
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 9865
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6484
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 3877
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 8753
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 2977
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 4891
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6113
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000678 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Iraq 
 
¶2.  Syria 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio quoted a State Department official in Washington as 
saying that no one in the US administration, including President 
Bush, can point out a date for the establishment of a Palestinian 
state. 
 
The Jerusalem Post's web site reported that a senior State 
Department official told the newspaper that the first meeting 
between the US and Israel to work out a new aid package for the 
latter was "extremely useful."  Israel Radio and The Jerusalem Post 
said that Israel is arguing that expanded strategic threats, such as 
a nuclear Iran, Hizbullah's capabilities and Hamas's influence, 
necessitate additional military assistance.  The current 10-year aid 
program expires this year and Israeli officials are looking to 
replace it with a new decade-long plan.  The official told the Post 
that the US agrees with Israeli security assessments.  "There's a 
general consensus about the problems we face, the threats that 
exist," he was quoted as saying, adding that Thursday's discussions 
were particularly helpful in terms of getting more perspective from 
the Israelis on how they've been affected by security issues such as 
the war on the northern front and the second Intifada.  "We're 
strategic partners, and in that sense it was extremely useful," he 
was quoted as saying.  "We got a greater level of granularity about 
the specifics."  He added, however, that the amount of aid to be 
given was not discussed.  "We did not talk about dollar figures. 
It's way too premature," he was quoted as saying. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that senior GOI sources told the newspaper on 
Thursday that Israel is expecting the Arab League to adopt an 
improved version of the Saudi peace plan at a summit meeting called 
for the end of this month in Riyadh.  "We understand that the 
intention is to improve the initiative and come up with a better 
offer," one was quoted as saying.  FM Tzipi Livni presented Israel's 
demands in an interview with Channel 10-TV on Thursday. First and 
foremost, she said, Israel objects to the document's section on the 
Palestinian refugees, which was not part of the initial Saudi draft, 
but was added at the 2002 Arab League summit in Beirut.  "A new 
summit is in the offing, and they ought to know which parts [of the 
plan] are acceptable to Israel and what seems to us like an absolute 
red line," she explained in the interview.  Livni was quoted as 
saying that the original draft presented by King Abdullah of Saudi 
Arabia "was, in my view, positive." That draft called for a full 
Israeli withdrawal to the pre-1967 borders in exchange for peace and 
normalization with the entire Arab world.  "Admittedly, the 
initiative spoke of the 1967 lines, but I only wish we were in a 
situation in which the conflict was just a border dispute," she 
added.  The new article inserted at the 2002 Beirut summit, however, 
demanded a "just solution to the Palestinian refugee problem, to be 
agreed upon in accordance with UNGA Resolution 194," and that 
resolution calls for allowing the refugees to return to Israel.  It 
therefore contradicts Israel's vision of a two-state solution, 
which, explained Livni, calls for a Jewish national homeland 
alongside a Palestinian national homeland, with the latter serving 
as the solution for the Palestinian refugees.  Livni was quoted as 
saying that she has presented this stance in conversations with 
Palestinian representatives with whom she met over the last month. 
Ha'aretz dubbed Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's National 
Security Adviser, "Israel's liaison to its neighbors." 
 
Yediot and The Jerusalem Post led with reports that Syria has been 
rearming.  The Jerusalem Post reported that senior Israeli defense 
officials have told the newspaper that Syria has spent the past few 
months constructing and moving infrastructure to its southern border 
that could be used to launch a war against Israel.  Yediot cited the 
concern of the Israeli defense establishment about the possible sale 
to Syria by Russia of advanced anti-tank weapons.  Israel Radio 
reported that GOI sources responded harshly to the planned sale, 
saying that such rockets have reached Hizbullah.  Yediot said that 
Russia has a "revolutionary" rocket based on radar technology that 
can penetrate any Western tank.  Israel Radio quoted Vice PM Shimon 
Peres as saying that the transfer constitutes an encouragement to 
Syria, which might turn to the path of war.  Maj. Gen. Wolfgang 
Jilke, the commander of the United Nations Disengagement Observer 
Force), deployed in Israel and Syria and responsible for maintaining 
the cease-fire between the two countries, was quoted as saying in a 
phone interview with The Jerusalem Post that he had not noticed any 
military changes on the ground. 
 
Ha'aretz cited the concern of Western intelligence agencies about a 
growing concentration of terror operatives associated with the 
global jihad movement in Lebanon.  The daily reported that recent 
intelligence indicates that hundreds of Sunni Muslim terrorists from 
various Arab countries are currently residing around Tyre, mainly in 
a Palestinian refugee camp near the city. Some of the terrorists are 
apparently from Sudan and Yemen.  Ha'aretz said that both Western 
and Israeli intelligence agencies fear that the jihadists' growing 
presence in southern Lebanon will lead to more attacks against 
Israel and a renewed escalation along Israel's northern border.  The 
UN forces deployed along the border following last summer's war with 
Hizbullah are also considered potential targets.  Israel Radio cited 
the London-based Al-Hayat as saying that Israel has announced to the 
UN that it will increase the number of its flights over Lebanon, 
because Hizbullah continues to boost its arsenal.  Hatzofe reported 
that Lebanese security forces are investigating a spying network 
that allegedly acted in Lebanon against Hizbullah at the service of 
a European country.  Hatzofe cited the belief of Lebanese sources 
that the Mossad recruited those men. 
 
Israel Radio quoted diplomats at the UN as saying that the five 
permanent members of the UN Security Council and Germany have 
achieved considerable progress regarding imposing stiffer sanctions 
on Iran, but that some issues are still in contention ahead of a 
possible Security Council vote.  Visiting British opposition leader 
David Cameron was quoted as saying on Thursday in an interview with 
Ha'aretz that the time has come for the international community to 
start exerting massive pressure on Iran over its nuclear program. 
Cameron was also quoted as saying in the interview that the 
British-American relationship should be "solid but not slavish." 
 
Hatzofe reported that on Thursday US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi 
promised Knesset Speaker and Acting President of Israel that she 
will use her influence to obtain information about the abducted IDF 
soldiers. 
 
Ron Dermer, the outgoing Israeli Economic Attache in Washington, was 
quoted as saying in an interview with The Jerusalem Post that he is 
using the last stretch of his unexpectedly shortened tenure to 
receive what he hopes will be Israel's last "welfare check" and to 
promote divestment from Iran. 
 
Media reported that on Thursday an Israeli civilian was lightly 
wounded in a shooting attack in the West Bank and that the IDF 
halted its large-scale operation in Nablus despite failing to 
capture senior militants.  Israel imposed complete closure on the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip at midnight last night after Defense 
Minister Amir Peretz consulted with defense chiefs.  The closure, 
imposed due to terror alerts, is to last until midnight on Monday, 
at the conclusion of the Purim holiday. 
 
Yediot quoted Olmert as saying on Thursday that Israel will boycott 
all Palestinian cabinet ministers -- even those from Fatah -- as 
long as the Palestinian government does not recognize Israel. 
 
All media reported that an Israeli Jew who transported a terrorist 
is expected to be sentenced to 20 years in jail. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday about 1,000 people attended a 
demonstration in Hebron to demand that stolen Jewish property be 
returned.  The property was stolen by Arabs in 1929, following an 
Arab pogrom that killed 67 Jews and drove the rest of the Jewish 
community out of the city. 
 
Citing AP, The Jerusalem Post reported that Iran's level of 
participation in the announced regional conference in Baghdad 
remained uncertain on Thursday. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a team of Israeli aid workers has 
been in Kenya this week to distribute humanitarian aid supplies and 
determine the needs on the ground ahead of future missions.  The 
newspaper said that the team helps Somali refugees. 
 
The media quoted Attorney General Menachem Mazuz as saying on 
Thursday that he will examine the allegations reported by Channel 
10-TV on Wednesday that PM Ehud Olmert provided political favors to 
115 members of the Likud's Central Committee when he headed the 
Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Labor. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Hatzofe reported that a delegation of 
high-tech trade executives from the State of Ohio will arrive in 
Israel in the coming days to conduct a conference in Tel Aviv in 
order to acquaint leading Israeli companies with the benefits of 
establishing their main US offices in cities such as Akron or 
Cleveland.  Over 75 companies have expressed interest in attending 
at least part of the conference and any companies that are seriously 
relocating will be invited to the Ohio-Israel Investment Forum this 
summer. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a coalition of 31 American Jewish 
organizations has launched a new three-year initiative to bring 
Israel studies to American college campuses. 
Yediot reported that, following a ruling by the High Court of 
Justice, an Israeli consul in Boston registered two lesbians -- an 
American and an Israeli -- as a married couple. 
 
--------- 
¶1.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner and diplomatic correspondent 
Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Iraq is 
the key around which US policy will revolve, certainly in the months 
ahead. Every other problem will be shunted aside, as far as 
possible." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The White House, Like the White Paper" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner and diplomatic correspondent 
Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/2): 
"Anyone looking for the reasons that prompted the [US] 
administration to talk to Iran and Syria will not have to work very 
hard.  The coalition the Americans created is pressing from the 
outside, but in the domestic arena one can take a well-paved, very 
American path that suits almost every situation: Follow the money. 
It wasn't by chance that Rice chose the arena of the announcement: 
the Senate Appropriations Committee.  She came there with Defense 
Secretary Gates to solicit for the budget that will fund the 
 
SIPDIS 
continuation of the war in Iraq.  Iraq is the key around which US 
policy will revolve, certainly in the months ahead. Every other 
problem will be shunted aside, as far as possible. Every obstacle, 
real or imagined, on the road to success in Iraq, will be 
neutralized. This is also what happened to the administration with 
regard to the talks with Iran." 
 
---------- 
¶2.  Syria: 
---------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote on 
page one of the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "We need to 
think like the Turks: Despite everything, it is preferable to have 
Bashar Assad sitting in Damascus -- rather than the Muslim 
Brotherhood." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Some Serious Thoughts on Syria" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote on 
page one of the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/2): "In 
principle, no country should declare itself unwilling to explore the 
possibility of peace.  The question is how this exploration should 
be carried out.  Secret contacts are of the utmost importance.  Our 
major precondition is that Syria end its involvement in terror 
against Israel.  At the same time, it is unreasonable to believe 
that Syria will sever its ties with Iran.  Coordination with 
Washington is also an issue, and in this area, things are changing. 
Previous Israeli contacts with the Arabs were usually secret and 
were not coordinated with the Americans.  This was the case with 
Egypt, at Oslo with the Palestinians, and with Jordan. Israel's 
interest lies in preventing war and reaching an agreement with 
another Arab state in a manner that will also impact on Lebanon.  We 
need to think like the Turks: Despite everything, it is preferable 
to have Bashar Assad sitting in Damascus -- rather than the Muslim 
Brotherhood." 
 
--------- 
¶3.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "It seems 
that in spite of the praise it is reaping from the policy jet-set, 
the Bush administration would do well to reexamine its new policy 
toward Iran." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"If Iran Gets the Bomb" 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (3/2): "It 
seems that in spite of the praise it is reaping from the policy 
jet-set, the Bush administration would do well to reexamine its new 
policy toward Iran.  It should accept their criticism and revert to 
basing its policy toward the nuclear-proliferating, 
terror-supporting rogue state on what is known rather than on what 
is unknown.  Since Iran not only wants nuclear weapons, but has an 
active nuclear weapons program, the question that should be guiding 
policymakers is not whether Iran should be negotiated with, but 
rather, whether the US is willing to accept any of those scenarios, 
then it should be asking itself what must be done to prevent Iran 
from becoming a nuclear power.  While Europe may be willing to sit 
on the sidelines of the fight, just as it sat on the sidelines of 
the Cold War, and did little to prevent the Nazi conquest of the 
continent in World War II, Israel has no such luxury.  In light of 
this, it is deeply disturbing that this week the Olmert-Livni-Peretz 
government reacted to the US move toward appeasement by claiming 
that it will have no impact on Israel.  Rather that trying to gloss 
over the dangers, Israel should be actively engaging the many forces 
in Washington and elsewhere who understand the dangers of a 
nuclear-armed Iran.  Together we should be working tirelessly to 
ratchet up support for a policy based on the understanding that the 
world cannot abide a nuclear-armed Iran." 
 
CRETZ