07TELAVIV3341
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0018
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #3341/01 3301251
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261251Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4285
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3041
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9717
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3196
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3823
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3068
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1154
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3792
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0656
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1125
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7698
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5151
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0071
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4212
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6151
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8456
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 003341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Annapolis Conference 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The Jerusalem Post banners: "Peace Summit around the Corner, but 
Deep Rifts Still Remain."  All media (banners in Ha'aretz and 
Maariv) quoted PM Ehud Olmert and Defense Minister Ehud Barak as 
saying on the eve of the Annapolis conference that a joint 
declaration with the Palestinians is not needed.  Ha'aretz quoted 
sources close to Olmert as saying that the theme of Olmert's address 
on Tuesday at Annapolis will be the necessity of the implementation 
of the Roadmap and terminating terrorist activity in the Gaza Strip, 
as it is an inseparable part of the plan's first stage.  The sources 
were quoted as saying that Olmert will also say that the time has 
come to move forward with peace talks and reach an agreement. 
According to the sources, Olmert will call on the Arab nations to 
establish diplomatic relations with Israel as Jordan and Egypt have. 
 He will also call on them to actively advance negotiations between 
Israel and the Palestinians.  Leading media reported that on Sunday 
the Palestinian delegation abruptly ended a meeting with FM Tzipi 
Livni at the residence of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. 
 
Commenting on Syria's decision to send a delegation to the 
conference -- all media reported that it is sending its Deputy FM, 
Faisal Mekdad -- sources close to PM Ehud Olmert told Ha'aretz that 
the decision "is demonstrative of which camp the Syrians want to 
belong to: moderates, as opposed to radicals."  Maariv summed up 
Syrian President Bashar Assad's understanding with the U.S. that 
"the Syrians will talk and the Israelis -- shut up."  Maariv quoted 
the Iranian news agency as saying on Sunday that Assad and Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad agreed during a phone conversation 
that Annapolis will fail.  Leading media cited the belief of PM 
Olmert and FM Livni that Syria should attend the Annapolis meeting 
but that the word "Golan" should not be uttered at the conference. 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz quoted U.S. officials as saying that the Bush 
administration has decided to invite Syria to Annapolis due to 
Israel's September air strike on an alleged Syrian nuclear facility. 
 The officials were quoted as saying that the strike had weakened 
Syria. 
Banners read in Ha'aretz (English Ed.): "Olmert to Tell Bush: We 
Will Not Allow Iranians to Develop Nuclear Weapons" and Yediot: 
"Olmert: Let Us Unite against Iran." 
 
All media reported that the police and IDF forces have been placed 
on the highest Level of alert for the duration of the conference. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa as saying 
that the league's decision to send its foreign ministers to 
Annapolis does not mean normalizing relations with Israel. 
 
Yediot and other media reported that Shin Bet head Yuval Diskin and 
IDF Intelligence chief Amos Yadlin have recently warned the 
political echelon that the schedule they say the U.S. wants to 
dictate to Israel and the Palestinians -- reaching a 
permanent-status agreement within a year -- is dangerous for Israel. 
 Leading media quoted former IDF Chief of Staff Moshe Ya'alon as 
saying on Sunday before the right-wing group "One Jerusalem" that an 
Israeli concession of neighborhoods in Jerusalem would leave the 
Knesset building and the Western wall exposed to Qassam rocket 
fire. 
 
In an interview with The Jerusalem Post, Republican presidential 
candidate Mitt Romney criticized the timing of Annapolis and said 
the Palestinians have not taken the steps necessary for peace. 
 
On Sunday Channel 10-TV reported that former Labor Party head and 
former defense minister MK Amir Peretz twice visited imprisoned 
Fatah leader Marwan Barghouti.  The TV station reported that Peretz 
spoke to him about the Annapolis conference and a possible peace 
agreement with the Palestinians. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that four Palestinians were killed in clashes with 
the IDF on Sunday in the territories. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted the Egyptian newspaper Al-Masri Al-Yawm 
as saying that in recent days Russia, Iran, and the U.S. have 
offered Egypt help in developing a nuclear program. 
 
On Sunday Yediot reported that Israel's credit rating by Standard & 
Poor's and Fitch, two of the biggest international credit rating 
companies, will almost certainly be raised at the beginning of 2008, 
for the first time in 13 years.  Yediot and Maariv reported on a 
predicted 6.1% growth in Israel's economy for 2007 (6.6% in the 
business sector) -- the largest growth in the West. 
--------------------- 
Annapolis Conference: 
--------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote on page one of the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The main message of this week's 
summit at Annapolis will be that the United States is back as a 
leader in the Middle East.... Now Israel is once more on the side of 
the powerful." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "The Annapolis conference is already 
behind us.  George Bush can put a check mark in his diary, a lone, 
rare diplomatic victory in a miserable, unproductive presidential 
record." 
 
Deputy diplomatic correspondent Uri Yablonka wrote in Maariv: 
"[Annapolis] will be a conference at the end of which the good old 
Roadmap will be waiting, because anything beyond that will only tie 
Israel's hands in the future." 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: " If the so-called 
'moderate' Arab states now consider blocking Iran an existential 
matter, they must fundamentally change their attitude towards 
Israel." 
 
Washington correspondent Orly Azolai wrote in Yediot Aharonot: "On 
Tuesday the United States will declare the end of the conflict: The 
conflict between it and the Arab world, which has lasted for almost 
all of Bush's term of office.  The other conflicts can wait, as far 
as they are concerned." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "The inclusion of Syria [in the Annapolis 
conference] under Arab pressure is an important move, and so is the 
necessity of viewing the Arab countries as holding a promise of a 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "Syria is still skillfully 
sitting on the fence, likely to benefit from just coming to the 
conference, but at the same time not going to the conference in a 
manner that would cut it off from their friends in Gaza City, Beirut 
and -- most importantly -- Tehran." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Back on the Block" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote on page one of the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (11/25): "The main message of 
this week's summit at Annapolis will be that the United States is 
back as a leader in the Middle East.  When President George W. Bush 
stands before an audience of representatives of Middle Eastern 
countries at a summit he is hosting to promote Israeli-Palestinian 
peace, the message will be that when the U.S. calls, the world sides 
with it.  Only a year ago, a pessimistic theory of America's decline 
as a leading power in the Middle East dominated Washington.... Now 
Bush is launching a counterstrike.... If [Syria] shows up [at 
Annapolis], this will be a major victory for U.S. diplomacy, which 
will have restored Syria to legitimacy after several years of 
pressure and isolation.  From Israel's point of view, the impressive 
representation of the Arab states and international community at 
Annapolis is encouraging.  Israel is supremely interested in America 
appearing as the strongest power in the region, not Iran.  The 
American losses in the Middle East reflected badly on Israel, which 
suddenly appeared weak and exposed to Iranian threats.  Now Israel 
is once more on the side of the powerful." 
 
 
 
II.  "Bush Has Already Won" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv (11/26): "The Annapolis conference is 
already behind us.  George Bush can put a check mark in his diary, a 
lone, rare diplomatic victory in a miserable, unproductive 
presidential record.... All eyes here are turned to the President's 
speech, on Tuesday at 6 P.M.  Will he utter the 'rude words' that 
everybody is talking about inside the room but not outside?  Will he 
explain what he meant when he spoke about 'two states,' will he 
define the Palestinian state, will he desecrate the holy and declare 
that 'greater Jerusalem will be the capital of two states?'  It is 
reasonable to assume that at the last minute the President of the 
U.S., a true and deeply-rooted sympathizer of Israel, will not 
overly embarrass Olmert.... The person who has been making great 
efforts over the past few days to create a joint declaration 
nonetheless is Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni.  As this is her 
mission, she is trying to fulfill it.  Ehud Olmert and Ehud Barak 
have been saying for some time that no one has to rack their brains, 
or break up the coalition, for such a declaration.  They care more 
about Bush's speech -- what it will include, and mainly what it 
won't.  Therefore, the declaration is almost extraneous." 
 
III.  "Israel: Back to the Roadmap" 
 
Deputy diplomatic correspondent Uri Yablonka wrote in Maariv 
(11/25): "The Palestinians demanded a peace conference in Annapolis 
where they would hear about far-reaching, historic concessions which 
would make it possible for the conflict to be ended within six 
months.  Olmert and Livni, who saw this as a threat to eliminate 
Israel itself, preferred to stay at home in Jerusalem. In the end 
the two sides met in the middle of the road. Israel and 39 other 
states will take part in the meeting with the Palestinians in 
Annapolis, but in practice it has been ensured that the event will 
be of a purely declarative nature,  without unconditional 
commitments and without signing of papers.  It will be a conference 
at the end of which the good old Roadmap will be waiting, because 
anything beyond that will only tie Israel's hands in the future. 
Official Israel is participating in Bush's festivity, but in effect 
all it wants is to return home safely." 
 
IV.  "Annapolis, the End of all Ends" 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the late prime 
minister Yitzhak Rabin, opined on page one of the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (11/25): "A glance at the files in the 
cellars of history will reveal that we could have remained with a 
reasonable, moderate and friendly regime, albeit Jordanian, in Judea 
and Samaria [i.e. the West Bank], and with all of Jerusalem Jewish, 
or almost all of it, and with a full peace with Syria (probably 
without the Golan Heights, or with the Golan Heights leased for 
generations) and so on and so forth.  Many questions will then be 
asked, and the hardest question of all will be: If this is what we 
have accomplished in 40 to 45 years, for what purpose did we kill 
and -- in particular -- get killed?  Why did we waste so much of the 
resources of two generations in human capital and money?  What 
appears today to a substantial part of the population as a 'national 
tragedy,' will be the heart's desire of the same population in one 
year, five years or a decade.  That is what Menachem Begin, Shimon 
Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, and Ehud Barak understood, and apparently Bibi 
Netanyahu and Arik Sharon also, that same Arik Sharon, the 'greatest 
of all' in the eyes of many, who created the 'settlement miracle,' 
and that is what Ehud Olmert also understands today, and that is 
what everybody understands when he sits in that high throne at 
number 3 Balfour Street, Jerusalem.  And therefore Annapolis this 
week is another step up, just one, in the multi-storey building, 
where the dead bodies of the holy and pure are lying on each step, 
illuminating and warning like the glow of the heavens." 
 
¶V.  "Djellabah Chase"  [NB: A djellabah is a robe worn by men in the 
Middle East and North Africa.] 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (11/26): "The most 
important state at the Annapolis conference is the one that is not 
participating: Iran.... The consent of several dozen Arab and Muslim 
governments to participate in the conference is less related to the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and much more to their fear of the 
Iranian nuclear program and the threat of Islamic movements to their 
regimes.... In the past, the Saudis, like other regimes in the oil 
states, preferred to buy off their enemies rather than fight 
them.... Iran cannot be bought by the Saudis.  In order to block it, 
they need America.... Israel does not need such empty gestures.  If 
the so-called 'moderate' Arab states now consider blocking Iran an 
existential matter, they must fundamentally change their attitude 
towards Israel.... When they need to, the Saudis know how to show 
flexibility.... The time has come for them to openly acknowledge 
Israel's existence, its status in the region and its balancing power 
against Iran.  If they do not do so -- it is their problem.  There 
is no need, and no point, to the Israeli djellabah chase." 
 
VI.  "Condi's Party" 
 
Washington correspondent Orly Azolai wrote in Yediot Aharonot 
(11/26): "Now, after all the invitees have confirmed their 
attendance, the Bush administration can take pride in the show of 
strength it has put together.  Washington considers the conference a 
real achievement: Annapolis has returned the US to the center of the 
map as a strong world power that cannot be disregarded.  On Tuesday 
the United States will declare the end of the conflict: The conflict 
between it and the Arab world, which has lasted for almost all of 
Bush's term of office.  The other conflicts can wait, as far as they 
are concerned." 
 
VII.  "The Price of Arab Inclusion" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (11/26): "The inclusion of the Arabs [in the 
Annapolis conference] requires Israel to deal seriously with the 
Syrian track.  This is a significant Arab attempt to pull Syria out 
 
of the circle of 'rejectionist states,' as the U.S. administration 
calls them, and bring it into the fold of nations ready to team up 
with moderate Arab states, against the Iranian threat.  It is 
advised not to mix these two matters.... The Annapolis summit per se 
may not produce more than a declaration of intent.  But placing it 
firmly on the Arab agenda, and not only on the Israeli-Palestinian 
agenda, is essential for it to continue.  The invitation of the 
parties to carry on the dialogue in Egypt is a proper first step. 
The inclusion of Syria under Arab pressure is an important move, and 
so is the necessity of viewing the Arab countries as holding a 
promise of a comprehensive peace in the Middle East." 
 
VIII.  "Syrian Mugwumps in Chesapeake Bay" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (11/26): "By sending 
[Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal] Mekdad [to Annapolis], Damascus is 
trying to dance at all weddings. Syria is signaling to the U.S. that 
it wants to be within the mainstream Arab consensus and should be 
taken off the 'axis of evil' list.... But the Syrians are also 
sending a message to the Iranians, to Hamas and Hizbullah -- all of 
whom did not want to see the Arab countries attend the Annapolis 
conference -- that by sending a lower-level representation, their 
heart is really not in the conference.  In other words, a day before 
the long-awaited Annapolis event, Syria is still skillfully sitting 
on the fence, likely to benefit from just coming to the conference, 
but at the same time not going to the conference in a manner that 
would cut it off from their friends in Gaza City, Beirut and -- most 
importantly -- Tehran." 
 
MORENO