07USUNNEWYORK946
WESTERN SAHARA: SECURITY COUNCIL RENEWS MINURSO
Thu Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0946/01 3051758
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011758Z NOV 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2946
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS IMMEDIATE 1421
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 6265
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT IMMEDIATE 0094
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 1047
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA IMMEDIATE 0495UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC WI AG MO
SUBJECT: WESTERN SAHARA: SECURITY COUNCIL RENEWS MINURSO 
MANDATE FOR SIX MONTHS 
 
REF: STATE 150711 
 
¶1.  The Security Council October 31 adopted a resolution 
extending the MINURSO (United Nations Mission for the 
Referendum in Western Sahara) mandate for a further six 
months to April 30, 2008.  The resolution takes note of the 
two rounds of negotiations held under the auspices of the 
Secretary-General during the mandate period and calls upon 
 
SIPDIS 
the parties "to continue to show political will and work in 
an atmosphere propitious for dialogue in order to engage in 
substantive negotiations."  The resolution asks the 
Secretary-General to report on the status and progress of the 
 
SIPDIS 
negotiations by 31 January 2008.  UNSCR 1783 (2007), based on 
a draft developed and co-sponsored by Friends of Western 
Sahara (U.S., UK, France, Russia and Spain), was adopted by a 
15-0 vote. 
 
¶2. Only South Africa delivered an explanation of vote (EOV). 
Speaking prior to the vote, South African PermRep Dumisani 
Kumalo expressed his disappointment in the continued absence 
of any reference to human rights violations in the draft 
resolution despite references to human rights problems in the 
Secretary-General's last three reports on the situation in 
 
SIPDIS 
Western Sahara.  He said that the Council's silence on the 
issue of human rights in Western Sahara was especially 
regrettable in light of its very vocal stance on human rights 
violations in other parts of the world.  Such a "double 
standard," he said, affected the credibility of the Council. 
Kumalo also complained about the "relentless attempts" by 
some Council members to tilt negotiations in favor of the 
Moroccan proposal by describing the Moroccan proposal as "a 
serious and credible effort to move the process forward 
towards resolution."  He said that such language was nothing 
more than a unilateral attempt to prevent the Saharan people 
from exercising their right of self-determination.  In fact, 
he said, there were two plans, one from Morocco and one from 
the Polisario Front and both were on the table. 
Nevertheless, he said, South Africa would vote for the 
resolution in the hope that support for MINURSO and for the 
negotiations would lead some day to self-determination and 
human rights for the people of Western Sahara. 
 
¶3. Comment: The fifth preambular paragraph repeats verbatim 
the text of the fifth preambular paragraph of Resolution 
¶1754.  This textual repetition reflects a fundamental 
division among the Friends of Western Sahara and within the 
wider group of Council experts regarding the best way to 
advance the negotiating process.  In the negotiations leading 
to the  adoption of the text, France and the U.S. argued that 
this was best done by strengthening the Council's support for 
the Moroccan efforts and plan, while Russia, the UK and Spain 
(later joined by experts from the other 11 Council 
delegations) insisted to varying degrees that the needs of 
the negotiating process required the Council to give the 
Moroccan plan and the Polisario proposals equal weight.  In 
the absence of consensus, the Friends fell back on the 
previously agreed language of Resolution 1754. End Comment. 
 
¶4. Text of UNSCR 1783 (2007) follows: 
 
Begin Text: 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling all its previous resolutions on Western Sahara, 
 
Reaffirming its strong support for the efforts of the 
Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Reaffirming its commitment to assist the parties to achieve a 
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, 
which will provide for the self-determination of the people 
of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements consistent 
with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United 
Nations, and noting the role and responsibilities of the 
parties in this respect, 
 
Reiterating its call upon the parties and States of the 
region to continue to cooperate fully with the United Nations 
and with each other to end the current impasse and to achieve 
progress towards a political solution, 
 
Taking note of the Moroccan proposal presented on 11 April 
2007 to the Secretary-General and welcoming serious and 
credible Moroccan efforts to move the process forward towards 
resolution; also taking note of the Polisario Front proposal 
presented on 10 April 2007 to the Secretary-General, 
 
 
 
Taking note of the two rounds of negotiations held under the 
auspices of the Secretary-General; welcoming the progress 
made by the parties to enter into direct negotiations, 
 
Taking note that the parties have agreed to continue the 
process of negotiations through United Nations sponsored 
talks, 
 
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 19 
October 2007 (S/2007/619), 
 
¶1. Reaffirms the need for full respect of the military 
arrangements reached with MINURSO with regard to the 
ceasefire; 
 
¶2. Calls upon the parties to continue to show political will 
and work in an atmosphere propitious for dialogue in order to 
engage in substantive negotiations, thus ensuring 
implementation of resolution 1754 and the success of 
negotiations; 
 
¶3. Calls upon the parties to continue negotiations under the 
auspices of the Secretary-General without preconditions and 
in good faith, taking into account the efforts made since 
2006 and developments of the past months, with a view to 
achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political 
solution, which will provide for the self-determination of 
the people of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements 
consistent with the principles and purposes of the Charter of 
the United Nations, and noting the role and responsibilities 
of the parties in this respect; 
 
¶4. Invites Member States to lend appropriate assistance to 
these talks; 
 
¶5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a report by 31 
January 2008 on the status and progress of these negotiations 
under his auspices, and expresses its intention to meet to 
receive and discuss this report; 
 
¶6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a report on the 
situation in Western Sahara well before the end of the 
mandate period; 
 
¶7. Calls on Member States to consider voluntary contributions 
to fund Confidence Building Measures that allow for increased 
contact between separated family members, especially family 
unification visits, as well as for other confidence building 
measures that may be agreed between the parties; 
 
¶8. Decides to extend the mandate of the United Nations 
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 
30 April 2008; 
 
¶9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the 
necessary measures to ensure full compliance in MINURSO with 
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual 
exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council informed, and 
urges troop-contributing countries to take appropriate 
preventive action including predeployment awareness training, 
and other action to ensure full accountability in cases of 
such conduct involving personnel; 
 
¶10. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
End Text 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khalilzad