08AITTAIPEI806
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Mon Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0806 1610947
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090947Z JUN 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9126
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8348
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9581UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000806 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  During June 7-9, controversy over the foreign permanent 
residency status of officials in the Ma Ying-jeou administration 
continued to remain in the spotlight of the Taiwan media.  In the 
meantime, news coverage also focused on the upcoming talks between 
Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and China's Association 
for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS), on the tuition 
increase at local universities, the fertilizer price hike around the 
island, and on agricultural losses caused by the recent heavy rains 
in central and southern Taiwan.  The centrist, KMT-leaning "China 
Times" ran a banner headline on June 9 on page three reading "For 
the First Time in SEF and ARATS Dealings, Vice-Ministerial Level 
[Taiwan] Administrative Officials Will Sit down at the Negotiation 
Table [with China]."  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
op-ed in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said the real challenges 
for the KMT administration are to ask China to remove its missiles 
aimed at Taiwan and to relax its efforts in squeezing  Taiwan out of 
the international community.  End summary. 
 
"[Asking] China to Remove Missiles [Aimed at Taiwan] Will Not Be 
Easy" 
 
Dr. Lin Cheng-yi, research fellow at the Institute of European and 
American Studies, Academia Sinica, opined in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (6/9): 
 
"... President Ma Ying-jeou has said more than once that China's 
removal of its missiles aimed at Taiwan is a pre-condition for both 
sides of the Taiwan Strait to clinch a peace accord.  Both sides of 
the Taiwan Strait are about to launch direct charter flights over 
the weekends, and it will be an ironic and dissonant scene if China 
continues to increase its missiles deployed in Fujian, Guangdong, 
Jiangxi, Zhejiang and Anhui provinces.  As a result, not only the 
KMT, but also the DPP, the United States, Japan and European Union 
should all join in demanding that China remove, and not just freeze 
or reduce, all its missile deployment aimed at Taiwan. 
 
"If China only removes the missiles targeting Taiwan without 
destroying or dismantling their warheads, it will still be able to 
deploy those missiles at Taiwan if the DPP resumes power or if 
tension rises across the Taiwan Strait again in the future.  How to 
kill several birds with one stone will be the focal point for 
Beijing when it ponders altering the missile deployment aimed at 
Taiwan.  It is the United States that Beijing will appeal to when it 
reduces the missiles targeting Taiwan, even though the move will 
also create a certain political and psychological impact on Taiwan. 
If Beijing wants to extend a goodwill gesture, it can remove those 
missiles in a low-profile and unilateral manner or do it with some 
publicity.  But if it insists on negotiating with the United States 
[over the issue], it will mean that it has a hidden agenda. 
Different voices have arisen now in the United States with regard to 
whether or not Washington should sell F-16 fighter jets to Taiwan or 
help Taiwan get the submarines.  Such a debate will become more 
complicated once Beijing decides to remove the missiles aimed at 
Taiwan.  It will also become a focus of discussion among major 
European countries whether the EU should lift its weapons embargo on 
China. ... 
 
"The KMT administration is about to fulfill its promises on direct 
flights across the Taiwan Strait and opening Taiwan to Chinese 
tourists.  But how to ask Beijing to remove the missiles and relax 
its efforts to squeeze Taiwan out of the international community are 
the real challenges.  Should both sides engage in talks over the 
[removal of] missiles, a written agreement will be more assuring 
than China's [oral] announcement that it will remove the missiles. 
...  Deeds are more important than words when it comes to China's 
removal of missiles.  No matter whether Beijing reduces, removes or 
destroys the missiles [targeting Taiwan], it will be conducive for 
the future development of cross-Strait relations.  But what is 
important is that prior to Beijing's announcement that it will 
renounce the use of force against Taiwan, Taipei must show its 
determination to defend itself, and Washington must continue 
assisting Taiwan to defend itself based on the 'Taiwan Relations 
Act.'  It is fine for Taiwan to welcome China's move to remove the 
missiles, but Taipei should not optimistically believe that the 
shadow of war across the Taiwan Strait will be gone and that both 
sides will live in peace forever." 
 
WANG