08AITTAIPEI1528
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Wed Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1528 3030810
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290810Z OCT 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0207
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8675
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0122UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001528 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused October 29 
news coverage on the upcoming visit to Taiwan by China's Association 
for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS) Chairman Chen Yunlin 
and the planned talks between ARATS and Taiwan's Straits Exchange 
Foundation (SEF); and on a DPP Tainan City councilor, who claimed 
Tuesday that he was the victim of an assault by pro-China gangsters 
after having allegedly mobbed ARATS Vice Chairman Zhang Mingqing 
along with other DPP supporters last week.  In terms of editorials 
and commentaries, an op-ed piece in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" said that President Ma Ying-jeou's 
planned meeting with ARATS Chairman Chen next week will "severely 
damage Taiwan's democracy and sovereignty" because, according to 
Ma's characterization of cross-Strait relations, "the international 
community will inevitably think that Taiwan is a part of China."  An 
editorial in the pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
also chimed in, saying that Chen's visit will be "a political act of 
global importance manifesting the PRC's suzerainty over Taiwan. ..." 
 End summary. 
 
A) "No Peace at the Cost of the Nation's Sovereignty" 
 
Liu Shih-chung, a member of the Advisory Committee at Taiwan 
Thinktank and a visiting scholar at the Center for Northeast Asian 
Policy Studies at the Brookings Institution, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (10/29) 
 
"... The major pro-US countries are pleased to see cross-strait 
tensions thawing and cross-strait talks resuming. The outgoing 
administration of US President George W. Bush and US Democratic 
presidential candidate Senator Barack Obama have both recognized the 
Ma administration's efforts to promote cross-strait reconciliation. 
However, just because the international community looks forward to 
cross-strait peace does not mean that the Ma government should curry 
favor with Beijing by compromising Taiwan's sovereignty and national 
interests.  This is an extremely risky move.  The US may ignore the 
malicious intent hiding behind China's smiles, but Ma, as the 
president who won more than 7.6 million Taiwanese votes, must not 
abuse the powers entrusted to him to achieve his own ends. 
 
"Ma said in an interview with an international media outlet that the 
relationship between Taiwan and China was a "region-to-region 
relationship" and that he would try to sign a peace agreement with 
China. If Ma really does meet with Chen, the international community 
will inevitably think that Taiwan is a part of China.  It is 
unnecessary to say that Beijing always does one thing to Taiwan 
while saying another to the international community. The 
international impression of reconciliation on the surface - but 
unification in reality - constructed by the Ma administration and 
China will severely damage Taiwan's democracy and sovereignty. ... 
The Taiwanese people need to unite to let the international 
community understand that the future of our nation can only be 
decided in a democratic way by the 23 million people of Taiwan. No 
single party or individual should sacrifice Taiwan in order to 
achieve their own goals." 
 
B) "PRC Envoy to Display Suzerainty over Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (10/29): 
 
"... Chen Yunlin might not engage in 'political talks' but his visit 
be [sic] a political act of global importance by manifesting the 
PRC's suzerainty over Taiwan and by ensuring Ma's compliance with 
Beijing's March 2005 'Anti-Secession Law' and the five-point Lien-Hu 
April 2005 communique and put Taiwan squarely on an irreversible 
path toward unification as scant more than a tributary state.  Given 
the unwise decision of the electorate March 22 to give the KMT 
complete control over all branches of government, the only option 
now open to Taiwan citizens who cherish their democracy, 
independence and prosperity is to take every opportunity to make 
their voices heard in demonstrations or other nonviolent actions 
during Chen's stay." 
 
YOUNG