08AITTAIPEI1741
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT LINKS
Tue Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0011
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1741/01 3510929
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160929Z DEC 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0577
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8800
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0260UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT LINKS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused December 
16 news coverage on the formal launch of the three links -- namely, 
air, sea and postal services -- between Taiwan and China Monday; on 
the prosecutors' decision to appeal former President Chen 
Shui-bian's release without bail; and on the slowdown in local 
economy.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in 
 
the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" hailed the launch of cross-Strait 
links but urged the Ma Ying-jeou administration not to forget to 
safeguard Taiwan's sovereignty.  An editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" also chimed in by 
saying the launch of three links represented the beginning of the 
normalization of cross-Strait relations, which will save significant 
costs while generating new business across the Taiwan Strait.  An 
editorial in the pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News," 
by contrast, cast doubts on the effect of the "big three links" to 
Taiwan's economy.  The article criticized the Ma Ying-jeou 
administration for failing to tell the general public the possible 
risks that the three links will bring to Taiwan.  End summary. 
 
A) "Three Links Are Wonderful, but [Taiwan] Must Safeguard and 
Secure Its Sovereignty" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (12/16): 
 
"Amid the sound of sirens sung from the cargo ships, the three links 
[across the Taiwan Strait] have turned a new page in the history. 
No matter whether such a development bodes well or ill, Taiwan 
cannot deny that this is an historical moment.  Judging from the 
viewpoint that the earth is flat, direct transportation between the 
two sides of the Taiwan Strait is an inevitable trend; there is no 
way Taiwan can isolate itself from its powerful neighbor, China. 
Like it or not, working with China will be one of the major ways to 
[push for] Taiwan's long-term development.  Judging from the 
perspective of culture and geopolitics, there is also no need for 
Taiwan to block all kinds of connection with China. ... 
 
"However, when it comes to cross-Strait reconciliation, Taiwan must 
stick to and safeguard its sovereignty and democracy.  Without 
sovereignty, [Taiwan] will be like a court eunuch, and it will 
remain so forever.  President Ma Ying-jeou has made contributions to 
peace and development in the Taiwan Strait, but he must not follow 
the steps of those historical figures who gave up the sovereignty of 
their countries." 
 
B) "Normal Direct Links Begin" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (12/16): 
 
"Sixteen passenger flights yesterday took off from the mainland and 
Taiwan on the first day of direct links, normalizing cross-strait 
air transport for the first time since 1949, when both had vowed to 
conquer the other.  The direct links are the beginning of a long 
process of normalization of relations.  The direct services will 
save costs and generate new business as both Taiwan and the mainland 
feel the pinch of the global economic slowdown. 
 
"Nine mainland airlines and five Taiwan operators will run a total 
of 101 flights during the first week of the new arrangements.  The 
new links mean tension between the two sides is finally eased, 
marking the beginning of more frequent civil and business exchanges 
as traveling time will be cut and the cost of transportation 
lowered. ..." 
 
C) "Links No Panacea for Taiwan Economy" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (12/16): 
 
"Taiwan's economic relations with the authoritarian People's 
Republic of China entered a new era yesterday with the initiation of 
regular cross-strait direct air and marine links even though four 
agreements signed between quasi-official agencies of both sides have 
yet to be approved by the Legislative Yuan. ...  Leaving aside Ma's 
pollyannish claim that direct links will end cross-strait 
antagonism, yesterday's celebrations left out any mention of 
economic risks, social costs or negative political side-effects, 
even though every economist or accountant realizes that any balance 
sheet that lists only benefits without mentioning costs is 
incomplete and misleading if not deliberately deceptive. ... 
 
"Deeper integration between Taiwan and China is thus likely to 
exacerbate polarization in Taiwan between large enterprises and a 
minority of professional strata able to take advantage of the new 
opportunities and small enterprises, the bulk of the working and 
farming population and locales in central and southern Taiwan face 
even more severe marginalization.  Instead of blindly touting the 
theoretical benefits of cross-strait integration, the Ma government 
 
should muster the courage to ensure in future talks that Taiwan is 
directly linked with the world and not simply with the PRC market as 
well as realize the only reliable strategic engine for Taiwan's 
economic development, especially in an era of external recession and 
likely turbulence in Chinese society, should be Taiwan's internal 
industrial and social upgrading." 
 
YOUNG