08ANKARA2172
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4702
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2172/01 3591452
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241452Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8306
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9366
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5147
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3469
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7027
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6881
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3460
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 24, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey and Iraq Discuss Strategic Cooperation against the PKK 
 
Media outlets report that Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki will 
meet with Prime Minister Erdogan in Ankara today in order to discuss 
Iraqi President Jalal Talabani's four-point plan for strategic 
cooperation against the PKK.  Talabani outlined his plan in an 
interview with CNN Turk on Monday evening, during which he called 
for a cessation of attacks launched against Turkey from Iraqi soil, 
PKK disarmament, the declaration of the PKK as an illegal 
organization, and amnesty for PKK members who wish to disarm and 
return home to Turkey.  Yesterday Prime Minister Erdogan responded 
to Talabani's plan by saying, "Amnesty is not a new approach to this 
issue," and "we've already discussed this plan during Talabani's 
visit to Ankara and during my visit to Iraq."  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports the pro-Kurdish opposition party DTP had positive responses 
to Talabani's statements on CNN Turk.  Mus DTP Deputy Sirri Sakik 
noted, "The proper place to address the Kurdish issue is in the 
parliament."  Siirt DTP Deputy Osman Ozcellik said, "We are hopeful 
and we believe the PKK is ready to disarm."  Sanliurfa Deputy 
Ibrahim Binici said, "Talabani's statement is a step closer to 
peace."  Meanwhile, opposition MHP Deputy Chair Oktay Vural called 
Talabani and the DTP, "The mediators between the AKP party and the 
PKK." 
 
Mainstream Sabah reports Erdogan emphasized, "Turkey's main goal is 
to end terror in Turkey," while leftist Taraf says "Erdogan's 
comments signal an openness toward a new amnesty law," for PKK 
members who disarm and want to return home.  In addition, Taraf 
reports "The PKK has extended the ceasefire that began during the 
Feast of the Sacrifice, despite the continued Turkish air strikes in 
northern Iraq." 
 
Editorial opinion on the Kurdish Issue; PKK 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in Liberal Radikal :  "During Interior Minister 
Besir Atalay's visit to Baghdat on November 19th, the Turkey-US-Iraq 
trilateral cooperation was established.  KRG representatives also 
attended these meetings and through this, KRG President Massoud 
Barzani showed that he won't be a part of the problem any longer but 
will exert efforts toward a solution regarding the PKK issue. 
Talabani's four-point suggestions, and Erdogan's response, signal a 
turning point in discussions between Turkey and Iraq regarding the 
PKK.   It should not be ignored that James Jeffrey, who coordinated 
the three-party mechanism on behalf of the US, was assigned as the 
Ambassador to Turkey during that time." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet :  "If a trilateral plan is 
agreed upon, the PKK must not be included in the negotiations. 
Ankara, directly or indirectly, cannot engage in political 
bargaining with the PKK.  The strong ties between the PKK and the 
DTP indicate the PKK will not decide to lay down their arms until 
after they reach their political targets." 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Following the US 
timetable for a troop withdrawal from Iraq, efforts have increased 
in the region to eliminate terror.  Talabani's recent messages 
indicate that the pressure against the PKK to disarm will increase. 
It is an important step for the Iraqi Administration to stand by 
Turkey against terrorism.  But Turkey should realize that the 
Southeast region faces more challenges than terrorism, and the state 
must take necessary steps to address these challenges. 
 
TESEV Report on Kurdish Issue 
 
Mainstream Sabah and liberal Radikal report that the Turkish 
Economic and Social Studies Foundation (TESEV) released a report 
concluding "The Kurdish issue in Turkey should not be linked to the 
PKK issue."  The goal of the report, according to Sabah, was to 
 
ANKARA 00002172  002 OF 003 
 
 
"voice the views of the Kurds," who want the state to take measures 
regarding language and cultural rights.  In addition, the report 
notes that the state must reform its approach to the village guard 
system, mine sweeping, and discrimination against Kurds.  Liberal 
Radikal points out the report's key messages are "there is no 
military solution to the Kurdish issue," and "Turkey needs a new 
civilian constitution that adopts the Venice Criteria regarding 
banning political parties."  TESEV official Dilek Kurban said that 
the root of the Kurdish problem is the state's inability to 
recognize the Kurdish identity, and the PKK emerged as a result of 
this.  Kurban also noted that the Kurdish issue would remain even if 
the PKK were liquidated, and the state must differentiate between 
the PKK and the Kurdish issue.  Finally, she pointed out that the 
government's policy of isolating the DTP in parliament only fuels 
political tensions.  Sabah notes that influential journalist Cengiz 
Candar called the report, "a milestone in understanding Kurdish 
demands."  In Candar's column in Radikal today, he says, 
"Recognizing the Kurdish language is vital to recognizing the 
Kurdish identity." 
 
Editorial Opinion on the Neighborhood pressure 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak :  "People who are 
disturbed by neighborhood pressure can start to change the 
atmosphere they created themselves.  A democratic country requires a 
free public." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "People who don't fast, 
who smoke in public, and who keep their restaurants open during the 
day during Ramadan definitely become the target of neighborhood 
pressure.  This shows how wrong the people are who think that 
political Islam and democracy can exist together." 
 
Turkish and Georgian Prime Ministers Discuss Caucasus Stability 
 
During a press conference in Ankara on Tuesday, Prime Minister 
Erdogan and his Georgian counterpart Grigol Mgalobishvilli 
emphasized the need to resolve the conflicts in Abkhazia and South 
Ossetia within a framework that respects Georgia's territorial 
integrity.  Erdogan noted, "The stability of the South Caucasus 
region is of great importance to stability to the entire Eurasia 
region."  Erdogan also noted the bilateral discussions addressed 
other issues such as trade and energy security. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
? Former chief prosecutor Sabih Kanadoglu says political parties can 
request the annulment of a regulation that led to a suspicious 
increase in the number of newly-registered voters. 
? 3.7-magnitude quake is reported in Sanliurfa. 
? Security officials seize a vehicle carrying PKK bombs and 
explosives in Diyarbakir. 
? The opposition party CHP's administrative board will hold a 
meeting to discuss the fate of CHP deputy Canan Aritman. 
? Georgian Prime Minister Grigol Mgaloblishvili urges Turkish 
businessmen to make investments in his country. 
? Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan will wait to see the results 
of public opinion polls before nominating an AKP candidate for the 
post of Ankara Mayor. 
? President Abdullah G|l plans to go to Baghdad in January 2009. 
? Culture Minister Ertugrul G|nay joins the opening of Alevi 
Institute, and apologizes for the massacre of Alevis in Madimak, 
Maras and Gorum. 
? Many PKK activists are taken into custody in during operations in 
Britain. 
? The head of DTP branch in Y|ksekova, Vahit Sahinoglu, is taken 
into custody regarding a top-secret investigation. 
? The AKP seeks support to increase the number of female candidates 
 
ANKARA 00002172  003 OF 003 
 
 
running in the municipality elections. 
 
 
International News 
 
? Austrian, German and Swiss export insurer offices announce they 
will stop offering export risk insurance for the Ilisu dam project 
for 180 days because the project is not fulfilling World Bank 
requirements in the areas of environment, relocation and the 
protection of cultural heritage. 
? A Turk and four other Muslim men are convicted by a US federal 
jury for plotting to kill soldiers at Fort Dix Army base in New 
Jersey. 
? The founder of an investment fund that lost millions to Bernard 
Madoff was found dead at his office of a possible suicide. 
? One person was killed during a youth demonstration in Senegal. 
? Officials in Kirkuk start to use the Turkish language as official 
language together with Kurdish and Arabic. 
? Arabs and Iranians should sit together to try to resolve regional 
disputes, including the Persian nation's nuclear ambitions, the head 
of the Arab League says. 
? The Malaysian government decides to recognize Kosovo passports. 
? A 5.3-magnitude earthquake strikes near the Italian city of Parma, 
but is felt in cities from Milan to Florence. 
? The West African state of Guinea plunges into turmoil when a 
senior army officer declares the dissolution of all state 
institutions, hours after the death of veteran President Lansana 
Conte. 
? The Iraqi parliament's speaker resigns, opening the way for the 
approval of a resolution allowing thousands of British and other 
non-US troops to stay until 2009. 
 
 
JEFFREY