08ANKARA452
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8573
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0452/01 0671402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071402Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5514
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8734
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3968
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2756
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6460
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6295
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2874
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, MARCH 7, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
White House Reacts to US Generals' Statements on Turkey and the PKK 
All papers cover the White House's reaction to the statements of Lt. 
General Ray Odierno and Centcom Commander William Fallon concerning 
negotiations with the PKK.  Mainstream Vatan writes that Fallon 
promotes compromise between Turkey and the PKK, but that late 
yesterday the White House announced that Turkey was not expected to 
negotiate with terrorists.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes 
under the headline "The White House Silences the Commanders" that 
Spokesperson Dana Perino said the US has not suggested Turkey should 
negotiate with the PKK. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says the US was willing to work out a 
compromise between Turkey and the PKK in order to block the 
increasing influence of Iran in the region.  Admiral Fallon 
reportedly said Turkey will have to seek "some kind of compromise" 
with the PKK to work out a real solution to the problem. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman's headline reads, "American Commanders 
Insist that Turkey Negotiate with the PKK."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
quotes diplomatic sources as saying the American generals' 
statements have no impact on US-Turkey ties. 
 
Gates: Non-Violent PKK Elements Could be Moved to Political Arena 
All papers report Secretary of Defense Robert Gates told a press 
conference at the Pentagon the real target in the solution to the 
PKK problem is to "separate the ferocious terrorists from the 
elements who can be comprised and brought back in the system." 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that during Gates' meetings in Ankara, 
President Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan unveiled steps to be taken 
to ease the concerns of the Kurds and cut support for the PKK. 
 
Talabani Due in Ankara Friday Evening 
All papers report Iraqi President Jalal Talabani is to visit Ankara 
on March 7 on a one-day working visit, one week after the Turkish 
troops ended an eight-day ground offensive against the PKK in 
northern Iraq.  Talabani will meet President Abdullah Gul and Prime 
Minister Erdogan to discuss PKK terror and Turkish cross-border 
incursions as well as the status of Kirkuk.  President Abdullah Gul 
will host a dinner in honor of Talabani; Ambassadors of Arab 
countries, businessmen, and politicians will attend.  Mainstream 
Milliyet reports that the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) claims, 
"Turkey should deal with the leader of the Kurdish Regional 
Administration (KRA) Massoud Barzani, and should recognize the 
Kurdish administration will tackle all problems, including the PKK, 
with Barzani."  The paper notes there is not a KDP representative in 
the delegation accompanying Talabani to Ankara.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet writes Ankara expects "a powerful message" from Talabani 
against the PKK, and notes that Talabani has referred to the PKK as 
"a common plague."  Cumhuriyet says Ankara would open a Turkish 
consulate in Basra soon, but not in Erbil. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Talabani's Turkey Visit 
 
Dialogue with the Kurds 
Ihsan Dagi commented in Islamist-oriented Zaman (3/7):  "Iraqi 
President Celal Talabani is coming to Ankara today.  Even though 
this is a belated meeting, it is very important.  Establishing 
dialogue with Iraqi Kurds, right after the land operation, could be 
a sign of a new approach.  It wasn't coherent policy for Turkey to 
emphasize Iraq's territorial integrity while avoiding the president 
of the country.  Moreover, following the Talabani visit, certain 
circles in Turkey should stop referring to Iraqi Kurds as a 'tribal 
community.'  Since the only administration that is able to prevent 
the PKK from using northern Iraq as a base is the Regional Kurdish 
Administration, it is inevitable that Turkey must establish a 
dialogue with them.  As a matter of fact, Iraqi Kurds desperately 
need such cooperation.  The stability and the prosperity of northern 
Iraq depends on cooperation between Turkey and Iraq.  Turkey should 
not be an enemy for the Kurds.  Instead, we should be partners. 
Talabani's visit might be a turning point for the stability and 
 
ANKARA 00000452  002 OF 003 
 
 
cooperation in the region.  Such a dialogue might open the way for 
dialogue within Turkey.  If Turkey normalizes relations with 
northern Iraqi Kurds, it could ease Ankara's hand in economic and 
political initiatives for Kurds within Turkey." 
 
Is Talabani Going to Say "the PKK is a Common Enemy?" 
Bilal Cetin wrote in mainstream Vatan (3/7):  "There are two issues 
which will be on the top of the agenda during Talabani's visit: 
First is PKK terrorism and Turkey's recent cross border operations; 
and second is the status of Kirkuk.  These two issues are highly 
critical and agreements reached on these two issues will determine 
the future of the relations between Turkey and Iraq.  Will Talabani 
behave differently from Massoud Barzani?  Will he be able to repeat 
President Bush's remarks and say "Yes, the PKK is a terrorist 
organization and our common enemy?"  This is the most critical 
issue.  Turkish Diplomatic sources stress that during the Turkish 
delegation's recent visit to Baghdad, Talabani told them that "the 
PKK is the common enemy and we have to coordinate in the fight 
against it."  Well, these remarks are the key formula to improving 
relations with the central government and with the regional Kurdish 
Administration.  Most likely, Talabani will say "I agree on 
cooperation" behind closed doors, but, for the sake of his own 
public opinion and for the Barzani factor he may use a different 
style in front of the media." 
 
Talabani's first stop in Ankara is Anitkabir 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal Radikal (3/7):  "After he is greeted 
at the airport, Talabani will go to pay his respects at Anitkabir. 
He made a special request to do this.  Talabani comes to Ankara one 
week after the land operations in northern Iraq ended.  The MFA gave 
a short and simple answer as to why the visit is not official: 
bilateral relations are not at the level where an official visit is 
appropriate.  The bottom line is the PKK is still in Iraq.  It is 
hoped that Turkish investments in energy will take an important 
place in 2008, the year of Turkey's energy investment in Iraq. 
Talabani was not opposed to an official visit, but then the new 
Iraqi flag would have to fly in Ankara for the first time.  Ankara 
has opposed this flag due to the incorporation of symbols for 
Kurdistan. Also, an official visit would include the military.  Some 
in the military still see Talabani as a Peshmerge fighter with a 
history of contacts with PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan.  But with a 
working visit, the military is under no obligation to attend the 
events.  Finally, Ankara is praying Talabani won't say anything at 
the press conference to make the Turkish public feel uncomfortable. 
" 
 
Police Kills Kurdish Demonstrator, DTP MPs to be Tried 
All papers report pro-Kurdish DTP protestors clashed with police in 
Ercis town in the eastern province of Van during the funeral of 
Mehmet Deniz, who died from injuries sustained during a protest 
earlier this week.  At least 14 were injured and 101 were detained 
after clashes with police. 
 
Meanwhile, liberal Radikal reports a prosecutor has launched an 
investigation into the pro-Kurdish DTP lawmakers Fatma Kurtulan and 
Sevahir Bayindir under article 302 of the Turkish penal code, which 
covers crimes against the unity of the state.  If convicted, 
Kurtulan and Sevahir could be sentenced to life without parole.  In 
addition, the prosecutor is requesting sentences between five and 
ten years in prison for DTP lawmakers Kurtulan, Osman Ozcelik, and 
Aysel Tugluk for their role in bringing back the Turkish soldiers 
abducted by the PKK in the Daglica attack. 
 
State Body Criticizes High Court's Decision against Compulsory 
Religious Classes 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report the 
head of religious affairs (Diyanet), Professor Ali Bardakoglu, 
defended compulsory religious classes and said they must continue to 
be taught on a mandatory basis in primary and high schools. 
Bardakoglu denounced the decision of the Council of State 
 
ANKARA 00000452  003 OF 003 
 
 
(Danistay), which ruled the religious instruction was 
unconstitutional.  Education Minister Huseyin Celik said the 
Danistay decision would be a violation of the constitution, which 
stipulates the continuation of religious classes.  The AKP deputy 
chairman Dengir Mehmet Firat said Danistay went beyond its authority 
in its decision.  Turkey's Alevis object to compulsory religious 
classes and criticize Diyanet for favoring Sunni Islam in school 
curricula and textbooks.  Alevis feel this violates their religious 
rights. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Constitutional Court has accepted the application from the 
opposition CHP and DSP to examine the recent constitutional 
amendments regarding headscarf reforms. 
 
- Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis will attend a meeting 
organized by the ruling AKP's women's branch to celebrate 
International Women's Day on March 8. 
 
- Investment bank ABN Amro expects macro-economic indicators in 
Turkey to improve next year and the year-end inflation to stand at 
7.5 percent. 
 
International News 
 
- Armenian forces violate the ceasefire on the contact line between 
Azerbaijan and Armenia. 
 
- Secretary Rice said Palestinian and Israeli leaders will resume 
the peace talks that were suspended after Israel launched a military 
offensive in the Gaza Strip. 
 
- On Thursday, Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomeos I met Pope 
Benedict XVI at the Vatican. 
 
WILSON