08ANKARA564
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4027
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0564/01 0851517
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251517Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5687
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8773
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4038
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2804
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6496
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6335
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2911
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, MARCH 25, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Cheney Meets Turkish Leaders in Ankara 
All media outlets report Vice President Dick Cheney met with 
President Abdullah Gul, Prime Minister Erdogan, and the Chief of 
General Staff (TGS) General Yasar Buyukanit during Cheney's second 
visit to Turkey in six years.  According to papers, the topics 
addressed included terrorism, Iran, Iraq, Syria, Pakistan, and 
Afghanistan.  Mainstream Sabah says Cheney asked for support against 
Saddam Hussein during his 2002 visit to Turkey; this time he asked 
Turkey to support efforts to rebuild Iraq.  Cheney said U.S. 
presence in Iraq would continue and he stressed that Turkey's 
support was important to Iraq's stability.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports, "Cheney urged Turkey to establish ties with the 
Kurdish regional administration in northern Iraq and he praised 
Turkish business investments in northern Iraq."  Gul said once the 
PKK problem is resolved, Turkey would have no problems meeting with 
Iraqi Kurds.  Papers report Cheney promised that U.S. cooperation in 
the fight against the PKK would continue.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports Cheney responded to two controversial comments from U.S. 
generals, who recently suggested negotiations with the PKK.  Cheney 
called such suggestions, "against U.S. policy." 
 
Most papers, including mainstream Milliyet, mainstream Sabah, 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet, and mainstream Vatan, report Cheney 
did not ask Turkey to send combat troops to Afghanistan.  However, 
liberal Radikal and mainstream Hurriyet claim Cheney asked Turkey to 
send troops to Afghanistan.  Radikal says the Turkish government did 
not reject Cheney's demand, but rather gave the message that Turkey 
was ready to give all necessary support.  Erdogan reportedly said 
Cheney did not table Afghanistan demands in their meeting.  Papers 
report General Buyukanit said sending troops to Afghanistan would be 
a "state decision" and not only a military decision. 
 
Cheney also expressed discomfort about Iran's uranium enrichment and 
Turkey's energy cooperation with Iran.  Mainstream Milliyet reports 
Erdogan told Cheney Iran should work with the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) and that the problem should be resolved in a 
way easing the concerns of the international community. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Turkey did not support Cheney's 
demands concerning Iran. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Cheney's Turkey Visit 
 
"The Key Point in Turkish-American Relations" 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet (3/25): "First of all, 
Cheney's request for a tte-`-tte with General Buyukanit reflects 
the importance Cheney places on military issues at this time.  The 
main topics of Cheney's visit included Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq and 
the PKK.  The U.S. has requested combat troops for Afghanistan and 
this issue was brought up during Secretary Gates' visit to Ankara. 
Turkey has made its position clear based on two arguments.  First, 
the Turkish army is preoccupied with the southeast and PKK-related 
operations.  Second, sending Turkish troops to the combat zones in 
Afghanistan is not in line with NATO legalities.  It is unlikely 
that General Buyukanit will change his opinion on this matter, even 
after his meeting with Cheney.  The PKK issue, on the other hand, is 
the key issue in Turkish-American relations.  Recent 
anti-Americanism in Turkey stemmed from the view that the U.S. was 
not taking enough action against the PKK.  After the U.S. gave 
Turkey support for the recent cross border operation into northern 
Iraq, Turkish public opinion concerning the U.S. has improved. 
While it is important for the U.S. to stand with Turkey in the fight 
against terrorism, it is also important for the U.S. to clarify what 
it means by finding a 'political solution' to the Kurdish issue. 
Bilateral mistrust can be reshaped by the American government's 
approach to the fight against PKK terrorism.  If the U.S. ties its 
support in the fight against the PKK to some vague political 
conditions, it is possible that public mistrust of the U.S. will 
increase again." 
 
ANKARA 00000564  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
"Cheney in Ankara" 
Yilmaz Oztuna wrote in conservative Turkiye (3/25): "Cheney's short 
visit is very important.  His messages to us and our messages to him 
have the potential to shape American policy in this region.  It is 
no secret that the U.S. wants Turkey to fully comply with U.S. 
policy on Iran.  The U.S. will bring this to Ankara's attention as a 
necessary condition for a successful strategic partnership.  Iran is 
the dominant issue on Cheney's agenda.  In addition, the U.S. plans 
to deploy missiles in Turkey after discussions at the NATO summit. 
While the demand for Turkish combat troops for Afghanistan's south 
is unacceptable, Turkey can contribute to efforts in Afghanistan's 
north.  However, Turkey should bear in mind the consequences of 
being on bad terms with the U.S. The trump cards that can be played 
against us include the Kurdish problem, Armenian genocide claims and 
the PKK.  Turkey is heading toward an era where internal political 
developments are leading toward a regime crisis.  If Turkey does not 
cooperate with Washington, the U.S. will play its game in the region 
with these factors in mind." 
 
 
Erdogan: Mr Cheney, are these missiles meant for defense? 
Cheney: Yes Mr. Tayyip, Bingo! I hope we are not too late for your 
party closure case. 
Hurriyet front page, March 25, 2008 
 
 
The 'Ergenekon' Investigation Continues 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni 
Safak and others continue coverage of the "Ergenekon" investigation. 
The investigation is focused on the possible ties between the 
shadowy "deep state" terrorist organization and figures from the 
bureaucracy, military, and academia.  The investigation began when 
security forces seized explosives and weapons in an Istanbul house 
in June 2007.  The "Ergenekon" network allegedly sought to create 
chaos through various terror attacks, including plans to murder 
Nobel Laurate Orhan Pamuk and plans to overthrow the ruling AKP 
government in 2009. 
 
On Friday, Ilhan Selcuk, columnist of leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet, Dogu Perincek, the leftist-nationalist Workers' Party 
leader, and Kemal Alemdaroglu, former rector of Istanbul University, 
were taken into custody.  Selcuk and Alemdaroglu were released on 
Sunday, but Perincek remains in custody because police allegedly 
found plans for an attack against the Court of Appeals in his 
computer.  Perincek was charged with being a high-level leader of 
the Ergenekon terrorist organization as well as holding confidential 
documents about the state.  Ilhan Selcuk was accused of being the 
intellectual leader of the Ergenekon network.  Selcuk criticized the 
detentions in today's Cumhuriyet, saying the real targets of the 
probe are the judiciary and the army. 
 
AKP and Labor Unions Agree on Social Security Bill 
All papers report Social Security Minister Faruk Celik said on 
Monday an IMF-sought social security bill will be presented to 
parliament this week for approval after a partial agreement with 
labor unions.  Celik said the AKP government and labor unions agreed 
on setting a threshold for blue-collar employees to retire at 7,200 
working days instead of the current threshold of 7,000 days.  The 
government had previously set a target of 9,000 working days but had 
to ease the requirement due to recent strikes and criticisms from 
unions and opposition parties.  No agreement was reached on a key 
part of the package, which seeks to raise the retirement age to 65. 
In Turkey, the current retirement age for men is 48 and for women is 
44; retirement at 65 would be introduced after 2036. 
 
AKP Works on Constitutional Reforms; TUSIAD Issues Warning against 
Polarization 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Vatan , Zaman and others: 
Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet quote AKP deputy chairman Nihat Ergun 
 
ANKARA 00000564  003 OF 003 
 
 
as saying "by the end of this week the AKP might present 
constitutional amendments to the parliament to protect political 
parties from closure."  Ergun noted that they want compromise under 
the roof of parliament.  If that doesn't happen, then a nationwide 
referendum is an option.  Mainstream Milliyet reports that MHP, 
which has been working on a constitutional amendment to protect 
political parties from closure, suggested amending article 69 and 
¶83.  If MHP's amendment is accepted, 71 AKP members, including PM 
Erdogan, will face a life-time ban from politics versus the 
five-year ban demanded by the Court of Appeals Chief Prosecutor. 
 
Meanwhile, all papers report that Turkish Industrialists and 
Businessmen's Association (TUSIAD) issued a statement saying, 
"constitutional amendments prepared in a hasty manner in order to 
overcome daily problems will only deepen Turkey's problems."  TUSIAD 
urged the government to focus on welfare and peace, and to avoid 
interpreting democracy through majority rule and a narrow political 
understanding. 
 
Nevruz Protests Continue 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, Zaman, Cumhuriyet and others:  Papers 
report that post-Nevruz tensions have resulted in new clashes 
between protesters and security forces.  This time, clashes in 
Yuksekova broke out during the funeral of Ikbal Yasar, who was 
killed during clashes with security forces during Nevruz.  There 
were protests in Van as well.  Hurriyet reports that shopkeepers in 
Hakkari, Yuksekova and Semdinli remained closed due to fears of 
unrest.  Meanwhile, the police made an official announcement, 
"during Nevruz celebrations in Turkey, 176 demonstrations were held, 
two people died, 187 people were injured, and 653 people were 
detained." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Monday, Turkmenistan's Head of State Gurbanguli Berdimuhamedov 
met with President Gul in Ankara during an official visit. 
 
- Pro-Kurdish DTP MP Pervin Buldan faces investigation for praising 
crime and inciting propaganda in a speech she delivered in Igdir 
during Nevruz celebrations. 
 
- Turkey invites local and foreign companies to bid on the 
construction of the country's first nuclear-power plant. 
 
International News 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Demetris Christofias told CNN-Turk television 
they were ready to accept a bi-zonal federation based on political 
equality. 
 
- In a new audiotape released Monday, al-Qaeda No. 2 Ayman 
al-Zawahiri encouraged Muslims to attack Jewish and American targets 
in response to Israeli strikes in the Gaza Strip. 
 
- Yousaf Raza Gilani, a former parliament speaker and aide to 
murdered opposition leader Benazir Bhutto, has become Pakistan's 
next prime minister. 
 
WILSON