08ANKARA2051
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9265
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2051/01 3301459
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251459Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8127
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9335
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5081
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3427
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7001
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6854
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3429
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
A New Step in Turkish-Armenian Relations 
Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Vatan, Yeni Safak, 
Hurriyet and others:   Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports that 
Armenian Foreign Minister Nalbandian came to Istanbul yesterday to 
attend the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) meeting; after the 
meeting Nalbandian held a press conference and called for the 
normalization of Turkey-Armenia relations and the opening of the 
border crossing between Turkey and Armenia.  Mainstream Sabah 
reports that the Turkish and Armenian Foreign Ministers held a joint 
press conference following a two-and-a half hour meeting.  FM 
Babacan said "We evaluated our bilateral relations, The Caucasus 
Cooperation and Stability Platform and other regional issues at the 
meeting.  We concluded our meeting in a very positive atmosphere. 
Our communication will continue in the political and technical 
fields.  Our aim is full normalization in ties."  FM Nalbandian, in 
return, said, "We opened a new page without any pre-conditions." 
Sabah adds that Nalbandian repeated his call for the immediate 
opening of the Turkey-Armenia border crossing and Babacan asked for 
the Baku-Yerevan dialogue to be speed up.  Nalbandian also stressed 
that Armenian President Sargsyan will come to Turkey in October 2009 
to watch the football game between the two countries' national 
teams.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Nalbandian said that 
Yerevan was optimistic about Turkey's proposal to set up a joint 
committee of historians regarding the 1915 incidents. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Relations between Turkey and Armenia 
 
Can Dundar wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Approximately 11 years 
ago, the Turkish and Armenian Foreign Ministers would not even talk 
to each other over the phone.  Therefore, yesterday's meeting 
between the two FMs attracted attention.  In 1991 there were 
indirect contacts between the two countries, but even those contacts 
were made rather secretly.  During those days, delegations from 
Yerevan had to wear dark sunglasses in order not to be recognized 
while they were in Turkey.  During Nalbandyan's visit yesterday, no 
one needed to hide behind sunglasses.  Officials from both countries 
are optimistic regarding efforts toward an improved bilateral 
relationship.  This is a small step for the world, but a big one for 
the region.  One should not ignore Washington's role in this 
dialogue.  The only way to prevent Obama's recognition of the 
Armenian Genocide claims is to improve dialogue between Ankara and 
Yerevan." 
 
Mustafa Balbay wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "While 
Turkey's main target is EU accession, it must not be forgotten that 
Turkey's strong influence in Asia and the Black Sea region will have 
a direct impact on Brussels.  All regional alliances around the 
world are built on economic foundations.  The European Economic 
Community is headed toward becoming The United States of Europe. 
Turkey, while trying to overcome a series of problems in the 
beginning of the 21st century, is missing lots of opportunities. 
Armenian FM Nalbandyan, who visited Turkey to participate in the 
Black Sea Economic Cooperation summit talks, drew an optimistic 
picture regarding ties between Turkey and Armenia.  Without third 
countries interfering, Turkey can resolve all problems with its 
neighbors, including Armenia." 
 
Turkey to Host a New Summit for Afghan and Pakistani Leaders 
Mainstream Sabah and Islamist-oriented Zaman report that the 
government is preparing to host Afghan and Pakistani leaders for a 
summit in Istanbul on December 6.  Zaman quotes Afghan Foreign 
Minister Rangin Dadfar Spanta as saying, "President Gul will meet 
with Afghan President Karzai and Pakistani President Zardari on 
December 6 in Istanbul.  Sabah reports that Turkish mediation 
between Afghanistan and Pakistan will mark an important step in 
mending ties between the two nations. 
 
Citibank Rescue Brings Relief 
 
ANKARA 00002051  002 OF 003 
 
 
Media outlets cover the bailout of Citigroup in a positive manner, 
while noting the need for bailout after bailout for American 
corporations.  Columnist Hadi Uluengin of mainstream Hurriyet writes 
"Is Marx Going to Make a Comeback?" Mainstream Sabah reports, "The 
Rescues Aren't Stopping," as "Citigroup is the latest member to join 
the caravan."  Meanwhile, the paper also reports, "The World 
Rejoices as Citigroup is Saved."  On the same page, Sabah carries 
photos of protests by socialist groups in India against rising 
prices, while another headline on the same page says "Country for 
Sale: Iceland," as "The country is on the brink of bankruptcy" and 
last week the Parliament "voted to seek IMF assistance in order to 
reduce the prices of tomatoes, eggs and toilet paper."  Mainstream 
Milliyet carries the front page banner headline, "The Largest 
Bailout" as, "The $306 billion Citigroup bailout is the most 
government support a company has ever received in history." 
Milliyet also reports, "The Rescue Packages Give Hope and the 
Markets Quickly Rose."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The World 
Sighs a Breath of Relief as Citigroup is Saved." 
 
Hillary Clinton: Neither Hawk, Nor Dove 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says in a news-commentary if Hillary Clinton 
accepts the post of Secretary of State, she would lose her chances 
of running against Barack Obama in the next race for president of 
the U.S.  Obama, by picking Clinton as Secretary of State, will play 
"good cop-bad cop" in international arena -- Clinton will pursue a 
tough tone which will be moderated in the White House.  Obama and 
Clinton were known for their support for the Armenian question. 
Turkey expects the U.S. will display the necessary sensitivity while 
approaching the Armenian problem, so that Washington will not harm 
the fresh opening between Ankara and Yerevan, comments Zaman. 
 
Survey on Life Patterns of Women in Slums 
Liberal Radikal carries a survey conducted by Konda research company 
on lifestyles and attitudes of people living in slums in major 
Turkish cities.  "The Slums: The Destitute and Deprived of 
Metropolitan Cities" survey shows people living in slums continue 
their lifestyle habits even after once they move to new 
neighborhoods in shantytowns.  The survey indicates 49 percent of 
women in slums have never worn make up, 71 percent never wore 
bathing suit, and 60 percent never put on sleeveless shirts.  Social 
and cultural activities are rare, as shown by 37 percent who have 
never went out dining with friends, 52 percent have never been to 
plays or movies, and 51 percent have never celebrated new years. 
According to the survey, 20 percent of men pay constant visits to 
'coffeehouses.'  Forty-four percent never went on vacation, and 
those who go on vacation usually go to their hometowns.  Of the 
people living in slums, 65 percent watch more than three hours of 
television every day, mostly soap operas.  Those who live in slums 
are concerned over the lack of education for their children, behind 
that concerns lies the concern over the lack of social security 
guarantees and growing poverty.  The survey says "slum people" share 
the same fears with other segments of people in the society, only on 
a much more intense level.  The survey's conclusion emphasizes that 
living in metropolitan cities does not necessarily lead to 
modernization. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Economy 
 
Erdal Saglam wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "The AKP government 
continues to make mistakes regarding guarantees for deposit 
accounts.  The government could have followed the lead of European 
countries two months ago in establishing a full guarantee to all 
deposit accounts.  Instead of being angry with the banks for 
increasing their interest rates, PM Erdogan should evaluate his own 
decisions.  By not giving full guarantees to deposit accounts at the 
right time, he forced the banks to increase rates.  The quality of a 
country's economic administration reveals itself during hard 
times..." 
 
Editorial Commentary on State's Role re Religion 
 
ANKARA 00002051  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Ihsan Dagi in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Society does not and should 
not need the state's intervention regarding religious services. 
Does Islam need the state?  Religious faiths and groups prefer to 
exist through their own dynamics and voluntary contributions.  If 
the obstacles in front of Alevi and Sunni groups, communities and 
sects are removed, society will produce services necessitated by its 
religious beliefs.  Whether the state supports a company, a religion 
or a religious group, the state doesn't do so without anything in 
return.  Thus, the state should not interfere in religion, and 
Muslims should not ask for anything from the state except 
non-interference." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Iraqi government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh said in a statement the 
Iraqi Council of Ministers decided to open an Iraqi Consulate in 
Turkey's southeastern city of Gaziantep. 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP MP Osman Ozcelik has submitted to parliament a 
draft for opening a Kurdish language and literature department in 
Istanbul University. 
 
- The energy ministers of Turkey, India and Israel will meet this 
month on building an oil pipeline connecting the three countries. 
 
International News 
 
- Iraqi government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh said his government has 
no objection to Kurdish authorities purchasing weapons and 
ammunition to arm their security forces, but the Baghdad government 
wants to be informed of arms purchases. 
 
- "We have agreed on the principle that oil remains for all Iraqi 
people," Iraqi Oil Minister Hussain al-Sharistani said at a joint 
news conference with the Kurdish Regional Government PM Nechirvan 
Barzani. 
 
- Russia said it has evidence that "mercenaries" from the United 
States, Turkey, Ukraine and Chechnya fought for Georgia in the 
five-day August 2008 war with Russia. 
 
SILLIMAN