08ANKARA1762
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2820
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1762/01 2840423
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 100423Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7639
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9219
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4820
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3283
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6903
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6747
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3319
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001762 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 9, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Terror Attack Kills 5 in Diyarbakir 
All media outlets report that on Wednesday, five policemen were 
killed and 19 other people were injured when a police shuttle bus 
came under attack by terrorists in the southeastern province of 
Diyarbakir.  Terrorists attacked the police bus with grenades and 
long range rifles.  Mainstream Sabah comments the attack was a 
"provocation" which came on the eve of Thursday's Counter Terror 
High Board meeting where a proposal will be discussed regarding the 
declaration of emergency rule in east and southeast Turkey.  Papers 
note that the attack came as parliament extended the mandate 
authorizing the military to carry out cross-border incursions 
against PKK targets in northern Iraq.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
underlines that the terror continues to rise on the eve of the first 
hearing of the 'Ergenekon' case October 20. 
 
Parliament Renews Military Authorization for Operations into 
northern Iraq 
Media outlets report that yesterday the Turkish Parliament approved 
a government proposal to extend the military's authority to carry 
out cross border operations into northern Iraq by a vote of 511 to 
¶18.  The pro-Kurdish DTP and leftist ODP voted against the decree. 
Papers note the voting came at a critical time in the struggle 
against terror as the PKK carried out a deadly attack on Hakkari's 
Aktutun military outpost, killing 17 soldiers and injuring 20 others 
over the weekend. 
 
Ahead of yesterday's voting, CHP MP Sukru Elekdag slammed the AKP 
government and the local administration in northern Iraq.  Elekdag 
said the AKP government has a "weakness" in combating terror, adding 
the ruling party was acting within the limits drawn by the U.S. 
Elekdag called on PM Erdogan to acknowledge that Iraqi Kurdish 
Regional Government President Massoud Barzani was "Turkey's enemy," 
and called the Kurdish leader "a chief supporter of terror," who 
"should be forced to choose between Turkey and the PKK."  Opposition 
far right MHP MP Deniz Bolukbasi called on the government to take 
concrete steps, such as implementing sanctions, on the 
Barzani-headed local administration in northern Iraq. 
 
Papers report Prime Minister Erdogan, commenting on a MHP proposal 
to set up a buffer zone along the Iraqi border, said only the 
military could make a decision on the matter.  On Thursday, the 
Counter Terror Board will hold a critical meeting to discuss the 
measures to be taken against the PKK, including incursions into 
northern Iraq as well as a proposal for the formation of "buffer 
zones" between the two neighboring countries. 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports the DTP cancelled a march 
scheduled for Friday from Diyarbakir to Lice to protest the 
parliamentary adoption of the decree.  The cancellation comes due to 
fears of "provocative" attacks following the killing of five 
policemen in Diyarbakir. 
 
Editorial Commentary on PKK/Kurdish Problem 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Time is running out in 
Turkey's efforts to find a concrete Kurdish policy.  The Aktutun 
attack demonstrates serious political and military weakness.  Turkey 
must immediately formulate a comprehensive Kurdish policy that 
includes all elements, including the Kurds, the Iraqi Kurdish 
Regional Government, and the PKK." 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "The U.S., 
which is the AKP government's strategic partner, said in a statement 
about the latest PKK attacks that the U.S. wants 'to see the terror 
organization eliminated.'  The U.S. makes statements to please the 
Turkish public while it conducts open or secret diplomatic maneuvers 
to protect the PKK from the Turkish military.  The U.S. also 
prevents Turkey from destroying the traitors.  The U.S. can only 
 
ANKARA 00001762  002 OF 003 
 
 
fool the AKP with their friendship, and no one else." 
 
Sedat Sertoglu wrote in mainstream Aksam: "TGS Chief General Ilker 
Basbug said at least one third of the PKK militants in the mountains 
are Syrians.  According to him, an estimated 1,500 Syrians currently 
fight in the ranks of the PKK.  I don't understand why PM Erdogan 
doesn't talk to his friend, Syria's President Bashar Assad, about 
this problem.  Turkey complained to Tehran regarding Iranian PKK 
fighters even during the days of Ayatollah Khomeini.  Turkey should 
do the same with Syria in order to work with Damascus to prevent new 
militants from joining the PKK." 
 
Poll: Popular Support for AKP Declining 
Mainstream Vatan carries the results of a public opinion survey 
conducted by the A&G Company according to which undecided voters 
constitute the largest group of voters in Turkey (30.8 percent).  If 
elections were held today, support for the political parties after 
the undecided votes are distributed would be as follows: AKP 41.3 
percent, CHP 21, MHP 18.6, and DTP 6.6.  Support for the AKP one 
month ago stood at 48.3 percent, and CHP at 19.7 percent.  Vatan 
says the fighting between Prime Minister Erdogan and the Dogan Media 
Group, the bribery charges that led to the resignation of the AKP 
deputy chairman Saban Disli, and irregularities in the 
Germany-based, Islamist Deniz Feneri charity have negatively 
affected the ruling AKP over the last one month.  The poll canvassed 
the views of 1834 persons in 27 provinces on October 4-5. 
 
Greece Grants Asylum to a PKK Member 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports in a flashy front page story that Greece 
granted asylum and residence privileges to PKK member Ahmet Gulabi 
Dere, who is listed on Interpol's Red Bulletin.  Questioning the 
integrity and sincerity of European Union regarding the fight 
against PKK terrorism, Hurriyet reports some details such as "Ahmet 
Gulabi Dere acts as PKK's foreign relations representative and 
travels to European countries, attends meetings at the Council of 
Europe and European Parliament by using his travel document issued 
by Greece." 
 
Despite the Interpol bulletin, Gulabi Dere also resides in Greece as 
a resident political asylee.  The residence permit was first issued 
until 2005 and later extended to 2010.  Turkey made a series of 
demarches to have him extradited but Greece denied the extradiction, 
Hurriyet adds.  Ahmet G. Dere has various PKK-related pending court 
cases in Turkey. 
 
Hurriyet also listed some of the PKK members freely living in Europe 
despite Ankara's efforts, adding "There are many Gulabi Dere cases 
in Europe which is strong proof that Europe is not helping Turkey in 
its fight against the PKK, and moreover Europeans are protecting 
those PKK members." 
 
President Gul Reaffirms EU Commitment 
All papers report President Gul's stated that Turkey's EU process 
does not stand in the way of its fight against terror. He said, "EU 
membership is a state strategy for Turkey, and successfully 
completing the process is a top priority."  Emphasizing the 
importance of clinging to democracy during anti-terrorism campaigns, 
Gul said, "We will fight attacks perpetrated with weapons through 
weapons, but we will never lose our faith in democracy because it is 
democracy that isolates terrorists." 
 
The Turkish President also asked EU countries to show more support 
for Turkey in its fight against the PKK.  Finnish President Halonen 
said the issue would be "a key subject during the talks between 
Turkey and the EU."  Reiterating Turkey's commitment to reform 
process, President Gul noted, "Our membership process is marked by 
deep-rooted reforms, and it will continue. This is the 
transformation process of Turkey." 
 
Collective Efforts Fail to Contain Global Economic Crisis 
 
ANKARA 00001762  003 OF 003 
 
 
Media outlets report on the continuing economic crisis as it spreads 
from the U.S. and Europe to Asia, despite the efforts of several 
countries to cut interest rates.  CNN Turk reports, "The U.S. rescue 
measures are not enough to stop the crisis in the U.S. economy." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The U.S. Federal Reserve's 
interest rate cut is not enough to extinguish the raging fires in 
the markets," as "increasing volatility in U.S. and European markets 
spreads to Asia."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the 
headline, "Markets are Paralyzed," as "joint interest rate cuts are 
not working."  Mainstream Milliyet asks, "How Far Will This Go?" as 
"The U.S. package and the EU measures fail to contain the crisis." 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "The World Unites to Fight the Global 
Economic Crisis," as "seven major central banks slashed interest 
rates in a joint effort to curb the global financial crisis." 
Mainstream Vatan writes, "A Red Alert for the Global Crisis: Central 
Banks Cut Interest Rates and the UK Launches a $870 Billion Rescue 
Package," but "such measures are failing to bring a halt to the 
panic."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye reports, "Volatility in 
the World Markets Continues," despite a number of countries' 
efforts. 
 
Papers report that in Turkey, the Lira weakened to 1.42 against the 
Dollar.  Interest rates jumped to 21 percent, and the stock exchange 
index dropped 2.5 percent.  Economic-political daily Referans says 
"Turkish industrial output figures turned out to be the worst in 31 
months, which is an indication that unemployment might rise."  Prime 
Minister Erdogan said yesterday the fluctuations were temporary, and 
Turkey was "doing fine" compared to other countries stricken by the 
meltdown.  Mainstream papers say markets do not share the PM's 
confidence, and note that the weakening of the Lira and the fall of 
the stock market were indicators of a looming crisis.  Mainstream 
Sabah says the AKP government would tighten its belt while drafting 
the 2009 budget, and state-owned banks would curb interest rates. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Financial Crisis 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Even though 
the new American administration will have to deal with the worst 
economic crisis since 1929, there is still room for optimism. 
Barack Obama will likely be the new U.S. president and the U.S. 
system will be reformed, which is enough to lead to a call for 
optimism.  But when it comes to Turkey, it is still not clear 
whether Turkey's leaders are really aware of the global economic 
crisis, and more importantly whether they have a vision for 
future." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Constitutional Court President Hasim Kilic said the court's 
justification regarding the case for banning the AKP would be ready 
next weekend. 
 
- On Wednesday, Prime Minister Erdogan met former British Prime 
Minister Tony Blair in Ankara. 
 
International News 
 
- U.S.Defense Secretary Robert Gates has urged his counterparts from 
southeast Europe to send more troops to Afghanistan. 
 
- Iran urges Iraq to reject a proposed U.S.-Iraqi security deal, 
calling the agreement a "disgrace." 
 
- The UN General Assembly approves Serbia's request to ask a UN 
court if Kosovo's secession was legal. 
 
WILSON