08ANKARA700
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6948
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0700/01 1051211
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141211Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5897
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8820
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4117
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2852
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6535
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6376
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2951
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000700 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, APRIL 14, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Murder of Italian Peace Activist in Turkey 
All news outlets report over the weekend and today the murder of 
Giuseppina Pasqualino di Marineo, an Italian artist and peace 
activist also known as, "Pippa Bacci."  Marieno was hitchhiking from 
Italy to Palestine in order to promote world peace, but went missing 
on March 31 south of Istanbul.  Over the weekend, her body was 
discovered and a Turkish truck driver has been arrested for her rape 
and murder.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries the banner 
headline, "We Are Ashamed." Sunday's mainstream Sabah carries the 
headline, "Forgive Us Pippa," and Islamist-oriented Zaman wrote, 
"Her murder shocked all of Turkey."  Mainstream Vatan carries a 
photo of the murder suspect with the headline, "Here's the Pervert." 
 Mainstream Aksam's banner headline reads, "Disgrace."  Prime 
Minister Erdogan expressed regret for the murder of Pasqualino, and 
offered his condolences to her family.  Erdogan said, "I believe the 
Turkish justice system will reach the fairest verdict."  Meanwhile, 
Marineo's family insists they hold nothing against Turkey or Turks; 
her sister told the press, "Things like this can happen anywhere." 
 
Oral Calislar wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet (4/14): "Male 
aggression in a society coordinates to the society's level of 
development.  In developed countries, male aggression is less 
common.  In under-developed countries, male aggression is more 
common.  On that note, the murder of this Italian artist is quite 
shameful for Turkey.  While ultimately the murderer is responsible 
for this heinous crime, Turkey's culture of male aggression carries 
some of the blame." 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (4/14): "The Bacca murder is 
the result of a culture of violence against women.  In this country, 
women's issues are overlooked as the problems of women.  On paper 
there is gender equality, but there is no law enforcement or 
cultural guarantee.  It's not enough to feel ashamed of this crime. 
This event should be a starting point for all artists in Turkey to 
advocate a culture of peace and gender equality." 
 
Can Dundar wrote in mainstream Milliyet (4/14):  "The rape and 
murder of an Italian peace activist created deep shame among the 
Turkish public.  Why do such things happen in Turkey more than 
elsewhere in Europe?  We have to realize that the system in Turkey 
indirectly protects such criminal acts.  Rapists, even in cases of 
incest, can enjoy certain deductions in their punishments due to an 
archaic macho mentality that exists in Turkish culture and in the 
Turkish judicial system.  Even honor killings fall within a legal 
category of 'being provoked by the victim.'  Our cultural and legal 
history favors the harassment of women, rape and domestic violence 
against women.  We are doomed to see more stories like this one 
unless we change our laws and then change our mentality." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet (4/14): "Given the quantity 
as well as the nature of crimes, including rape and murder, it is 
hard to claim that the brutal murder of Italian artist Pippa Bacci 
is an isolated incident.  The series of events that led to this 
murder, unfortunately, indicate a serious social pathology in 
Turkey.  Turkey has a long way to go to reach contemporary 
civilization.  Poor Pippa should have done a little research on 
Turkey before coming here.  At least she could have decided to skip 
Turkey after understanding the hate-and-fight culture among people 
here." 
 
Barroso Visits Istanbul before Departing Turkey 
All papers reported this weekend the president of the European 
Commission Jose Manuel Barroso, visited the Greek Orthodox 
Patriarchate and the Mufti's Office in Istanbul.  Barroso spoke to 
reporters at Istanbul's Ataturk Airport before he departed.  He 
said, "Turkey is debating political, economic and social reforms." 
In addition, he said, "The EU is committed to full membership 
negotiations with Turkey.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes, 
 
ANKARA 00000700  002 OF 003 
 
 
"Barroso said it was the responsibility of the EU to follow 
developments in Turkey."  Mainstream Sabah reports Barroso pointed 
out to Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, "The European Commission 
closely follows economic, social and political developments in 
Turkey.  Observations should not be seen as interventions into 
Turkey's domestic affairs." 
 
Meanwhile, criticisms of Barroso's visit came from many sides of the 
political and social spectrum.  Right-wing Tercuman pointed out 
that, "21 other countries have joined the EU during Turkey's 
fifty-year EU bid."  In addition, the paper notes, "Barroso forgot 
the European Human Rights Court ruling regarding headscarves," and 
"Barroso wants to clear the way for insulting Turkishness." 
Mainstream Milliyet's Saturday edition reports, "Women's groups were 
infuriated by Barroso's insistence that women should make their own 
decisions about wearing a headscarf."  Milliyet says the 
organizations insist, "Barroso does not understand the reality of 
Turkey," where, "many women are forced to wear the headscarf and 
thus the headscarf is not an expression of individual freedom." 
Mainstream Milliyet columnist Meral Tamer pointed out, "There is a 
rapid increase in the number of women who are forced to cover their 
heads," and "this pressure comes from their families and/or their 
neighbors."  Tamer also emphasized, "The headscarf does not 
represent women's freedoms.  The headscarf is a symbol that offends 
secularism."  Milliyet columnist Semih Idiz expressed his 
disappointment that, "Barroso did not extend any messages to women 
who are not willing to wear the headscarf," and "this could be 
interpreted as Barroso's support for the headscarf." 
 
PM Erdogan Accuses Opposition 
All papers carry excerpts from AKP's "Youth Branch" meeting in 
Ankara this weekend where Prime Minister Erdogan accused the main 
opposition party CHP for hiding behind Ataturk and doing nothing for 
politics.  Erdogan invited CHP Leader Baykal to recognize that, "The 
Turkish Republic was founded by the people under Ataturk's 
leadership."  He added, "Secularism entered into our constitutions 
not with the CHP's imposition but by our people's will." 
 
Meanwhile, the largest pro-secularist and anti-AKP rally since last 
year's July elections was held in Ankara on Saturday.  According to 
papers, between 25,000 and 50,000 secularist protestors attended the 
rally.  All papers note the protestors accused the ruling AKP of 
undermining secularism.  Protestors carried banners saying, "Turkey 
is secular and will remain secular" and, "No Fundamentalist 
Movements." 
 
Justice Minister: Article 301 in Parliament's Hands 
Radikal, Yeni Safak, Hurriyet, Milliyet and other major new outlets 
carried excerpts from an interview by Kanal 24 television station 
with Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin.  The minister said the 
revision in Penal Code Article 301 will be sent to parliament's 
Justice Committee this week.  Reports note that Justice Minister 
Sahin wanted the Justice Minister to be the authority who decided on 
whether or not a 301 case could proceed.  However, in the current 
proposal this authority lies with the president.  Minister Sahin 
said he understands that some in Turkey criticize such authority for 
the presidency, but added, "Apparently when the draft was shown to 
the president, the president did not object." 
 
Turkey-Iran Discuss Measures against PKK, PJAK 
Yeni Safak reports a five-day meeting between Turkey and Iran in 
Ankara begins today.  The bilateral discussions include security 
measures against the PKK and PJAK. The last meeting of this nature 
was held in Tehran on February 2006 and concluded with a signed 
memorandum of understanding on active cooperation against 
terrorism. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
 
ANKARA 00000700  003 OF 003 
 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish security forces carried out operations against PKK 
terrorists in the province of Sirnak.  Six terrorists fleeing from 
the PKK surrendered to the security forces at the Habur border 
crossing. 
 
- Turkish Cyprus leader Mehmet Ali Talat will visit Turkey April 24 
to discuss the developments in the divided island with President 
Abdullah Gul. 
 
- The Turkish government is trying to prevent the execution of a 
Turk charged with blasphemy in Saudi Arabia. 
 
International News 
 
- The Iraqi government has sacked 1,300 soldiers and policemen for 
refusing to fight against Shiite militias in the south of the 
country. 
 
- Twelve people are killed and 202 injured in an explosion at a 
mosque in Iran's southern city of Shiraz. 
 
- The Public Committee Against Torture in Israel (PCATI) says Israel 
uses psychological torture against some Palestinian detainees. 
 
DEBLAUW